Catalysis for CO 2 conversion: a key technology for rapid introduction of renewable energy in the value chain of chemical industries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE00056G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE00056G
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711-1731Catalysis for CO2 conversion: a key technology for rapid introduction of renewable energy in the value chain of chemical industriesGabriele Centi*a, Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli*b and Siglinda Perathoner*aaDept. of Electronic Engineering, Industrial Chemistry and Engineering, Section Industrial Chemistry, University of Messina and INSTM/CASPE (Laboratory of Catalysis for Sustainable Production and Energy), V.le F. Stagno D'Alcontres 31, 98166 Messina, Italy. E-mail: centi@unime.it; perathon@unime.itbCPE Lyon and CNRS, Université de Lyon, ICL, C2P2 UMR 5265 LCOMS (CNRS – CPE Lyon – Univ. Lyon 1), Ecole Supérieure de Chimie Physique Electronique de Lyon, 43 Bd du 11 Novembre 1918, 69616 Villeurbanne, France. E-mail: quadrelli@cpe.frReceived 7th January 2013, Accepted 3rd April 2013First published on 3rd April 2013AbstractReplacement of part of the fossil fuel consumption by renewable energy, in particular in the chemical industry, is a central strategy for resource and energy efficiency. This perspective will show that CO2 is the key molecule to proceed effectively in this direction. The routes, opportunities and barriers in increasing the share of renewable energy by using CO2 reaction and their impact on the chemical and energy value chains are discussed after introducing the general aspects of this topic evidencing the tight integration between the CO2 use and renewable energy insertion in the value chain of the process industry. The focus of this perspective article is on the catalytic aspects of the chemistries involved, with an analysis of the state-of-the-art, perspectives and targets to be developed. The reactions discussed are the production of short-chain olefins (ethylene, propylene) from CO2, and the conversion of carbon dioxide to syngas, formic acid, methanol and dimethyl ether, hydrocarbons via Fischer–Tropsch synthesis and methane. The relevance of availability, cost and environmental footprints of H2 production routes using renewable energies is addressed. The final part discusses the possible scenario for CO2 as an intermediary for the incorporation of renewable energy in the process industry, with a concise roadmap for catalysis needs and barriers to reach this goal.Gabriele CentiGabriele Centi completed his industrial chemistry studies at the University of Bologna (Italy) and is currently Professor of Industrial Chemistry at the University of Messina (Italy). He is a former President of the European Federation of Catalysis Societies, and was Co-ordinator of the European Network of Excellence on catalysis IDECAT. He is co-Chairman of the Editorial Board of ChemSusChem and Chief Editor of the book series Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis (Elsevier) and Green Energy (De Gruyter). His research interests lie in the development of industrial heterogeneous catalysts for sustainable chemical processes, environmental protection, and clean energy.Elsje Alessandra QuadrelliElsje Alessandra Quadrelli earned her undergraduate Laurea degree in chemistry from Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa (Italy) and her Ph.D. from the University of Maryland (US). She is currently a confirmed CNRS researcher in the field of catalysis and organometallic chemistry and head of the sustainable development chair of École Supérieure de Chimie Physique Électronique de Lyon (CPE Lyon, France), a sponsored chair by the DOW France Chemical company. She co-chairs the decarbonated energies workgroup of the French competitive cluster AXELERA. Her current research interests are N2 and SiH4 activation by silica-supported organometallic complexes and by novel functional materials such as metal–organic frameworks. She founded and chairs the “CO2 Forum (Large volume CO2 recycling)” in Lyon.Siglinda PerathonerSiglinda Perathoner received her degree in Chemistry at the University of Bologna (Italy) in 1984 and her Ph.D. in Chemical Science in 1988 working on photophysics and photochemistry of supramolecular systems. In 2001 she joined the University of Messina and is associate professor of Industrial Chemistry presently. Her recent research interests include nanostructured zeolites, catalytic membranes, catalysts for waste water purification and remediation, photo(electro)catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide, and fuel cells.Broader contextThe chemical industry has a key role in creating a sustainable, resource-efficient, low-carbon economy and society. A strategic element to seize such an opportunity consists of effectively introducing renewable energy in the chemical production chain. Presently, over 95% of the industrial processes still use thermal energy. Electrical energy use in the chemical industry is still quite low although electrical energy is the main output of the actual renewable energy sources (with the exception of biomass conversion). This perspective article shows how the conversion of CO2 into feedstock for the chemical/process industry is the most efficient way to rapidly introduce renewable energy in this value chain and discusses the various options possible to proceed in this direction, in particular from the perspective of the state of the art of catalysis. While these two issues—CO2 management and the use of renewable energy (RE)—have been usually considered as separate aspects, we will show here how they are tightly interconnected. The paper defines also the needs and possible roadmap for catalysis in order to enable the chemical conversion of CO2 to become the key component towards a resource and energy efficient future for the chemical industry.IntroductionChemical industry is an energy-intensive industry: it the second-largest industrial energy consumer since it uses fossils fuels both as raw materials and as power and fuel, accounting for about 14% of the total industrial energy consumption. In the US the chemical industry is the largest energy-intensive branch, with 25% of industrial consumption in 2009, and the highest energy consumption per unit of value added.1 Moreover, its energy intensity has increased by 0.8% per year since 1990, whereas it has decreased in the case of almost all other main producers. China's energy intensity is also high. The cost of energy represents from 8% up to 50% in the cost structure of materials produced from the chemical industry. It is therefore evident that the chemical industry has a key role in creating a resource-efficient, low-carbon economy and society.2 The chemical industry is also a pillar for essentially all manufacturing sectors, and it provides enabling technologies and materials to improve resource efficiency throughout the value chain (e.g. increase of bio-based feedstock share, production of more performing products, end-of-life feed-streams management, recycling within and between value-chains towards zero-waste processes, etc.).3While progress in chemical production has continuously lowering its impact, the challenge of sustainability requires a step-forward in addressing the use of fossil fuels as both raw material and energy source. It is necessary to increase the share of use of renewable energy (RE) and valorise alternative raw materials. In other words, it is necessary to develop processes and technologies for a resource- and energy-efficient process industry.2,3It will be shown here how the conversion of CO2 into feedstock for the chemical/process industry is an efficient—and in some cases, already close to market—way to introduce RE in this value chain. Some of the possible routes involved in this approach will be discussed here, with a special focus on the catalytic aspects underpinning them.Many reviews have discussed the conversion of CO2,4–14 mostly from the perspective of using a waste and/or a cheap readily available raw material, and not necessarily from that of the relevance of this reaction for the introduction of RE in the chemical industry, with the notable exception of Olah and co-workers15 who discussed in their book and articles how the conversion of CO2 to methanol can be the basis for a new economy.The issue of introducing renewable energy in the chemical production chainThe various approaches ultimately leading to production of chemicals powered by renewable energy can broadly be subdivided in three families:- direct RE → chemical routes;- 2-step RE → chemical routes – that is, for example, routes going through the intermediate production of electricity;- 3-step RE → chemical routes, where a further intermediate step consists of the production of a ‘sacrificial’ energy vector (such as typically H2 production from electricity) and subsequent use of this energy vector to yield the desired chemical (for example, by using H2 to produce methanol).The direct RE → chemical routes are essentially limited to: (i) biological or (ii) abiological catalytic pathways, and (iii) solar thermal conversions. Nature has indeed chosen CO2 as its vector molecule to inject solar energy into the plant growing processes. Several strategies are being pursued to expand these metabolic cycles to the tailored production of fuels and other chemicals. For example, genetically modified cyanobacteria have been recently reported to consume carbon dioxide in a set of steps to produce a mixture of isobutyraldehyde (primarily) and isobutanol.16,17 Artificial metabolic pathways involving enzymes or cyanobacteria have been proposed to use NADPH and ATP from photosynthesis for the synthesis of n-butanol (UCLA) or isobutene (Global Bioenergies) directly from carbon dioxide and water.4 However, the data available on these biocatalytic routes are still preliminary and productivities are low. Their relevance in the context of introducing massive quantities of RE in a large-scale chemical production chain are thus long-term. We do not consider here the routes using biomass to produce chemicals and fuels. Although some of them are already close to commercialization, and in the short–medium term they will play a role to introduce RE in the chemical production chain, many steps are necessary and life-cycle assessments indicate the high environmental footprint.18A long-term approach is also the abiological production of solar fuels, e.g. related to the vision of developing artificial leaves. Such a vision is inspired from the highly complex machinery of natural leaves using solar light and water to convert CO2, but in an intensified process and with the ability to tailor the type of products obtained. The conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons and alcohols using radiation alone or in combination with electrons (photo- and photoelectro-catalytic methods) is indeed actively investigated worldwide.19,20 The results are at the level of proof-of-the-concept with productivities still quite low indicating that the applicability of these discoveries will occur eventually only in a long-term perspective.The other possible direct RE → chemical approach is based on high-temperature solar heat (concentrated solar panel – CSP) which is used in some thermochemical cycles to produce solar fuels. For example, CeO2- or ferrite-based ceramics reduce spontaneously at high temperature, and can be reoxidized (at lower temperatures) by H2O or CO2 producing H2 and CO, respectively.21 However, problems of stability, productivity, scalability, etc. indicate that this also is a long-term solution.The 2-step RE → chemical routes, that is the ones, for example, based on the intermediate production of electrical energy as an output, can rely on renewable energies other than solar power. Hydropower, geothermal energy, wind and solar energy (photovoltaic cells, PV) produce electrical energy. Conversion of electrical energy to other forms to be used in the chemical industry is then needed, because electrical energy does not integrate well into chemical production, except as utility. Nearly all the industrial chemical processes are based on the use of heat as the source of energy for the chemical reaction,22 apart from very few processes using electrical energy (chlorine and soda production, for example). In the chemical sector, on an average only 20% of the input energy is used as electrical energy (including that generated on-site) to power the various process units and for other services.23a This value nearly halves if we include that the feedstocks for the chemical sector are also derived mostly from fossil fuels. In the petroleum refining sector only about 5% of the input energy is used as electrical energy,23b and this value becomes low if we consider the raw materials. A further compounding difficulty for the use of RE in the chemical production is the discontinuity of electrical energy production from wind, PV solar cells, etc. since chemical production typically requires a constant power supply. Furthermore, the amount of RE produced by PV, wind and other RE sources amounts to around a few percentages of the total energy consumption, and yet, in some cases (typically in off-peak times), the modest quantity of electrical energy thus produced already exceeds the grid capacity. By increasing the total production of renewable electrical energy the need for storage of the excess of electrical energy will become a more relevant issue.24–26Conversion of renewable to chemical energy can help integration of RE in the chemical production chain; it can be achieved by RE-powered synthesis of molecules which can be easily stored and transported, as well as used as raw materials in the chemical industry. Some base chemicals can be directly obtained from CO2 by electrolysis, as will be discussed hereafter. It was shown, for example, that it is possible to reduce electrocatalytically CO2 to formic acid or to long-chain alcohols (isobutanol and butanol) both in gas phase27 and liquid phase.28 Issues related to productivity, overpotential and electrode stability, inter alia, need to be addressed before such a strategy becomes industrialized.Finally, the most established technology for storage of electrical energy as chemical energy is H2 electrochemical production (see the dedicated paragraph below). H2 is ill-adapted to serve as the ultimate fuel given its unfavourable volumetric density, compressibility, flammability, overall lack of compatibility with the current energy infrastructure and other issues. A further reaction consuming H2 to yield a chemical which can be (more) easily stored, transported and used is desirable. Typically, a liquid fuel with adequate gravimetric and volumetric energy density can meet such requirements, albeit systems related to gaseous fuels, such as syngas, are also within the scope of this chemical-based strategy. Such a 3-step (RE → electricity → H2 → chemical) conversion of RE in chemical energy are the one closest to industrial deployment.Goal, scope and limitsThe goal of this perspective article is to show that the use of RE to convert CO2 to some valuable base materials for the chemical industry, is an effective—and, when 3-step (RE → electricity → H2 → chemical) strategies are taken into account, also short-term—way to smoothly integrate RE into the chemical production chain. Such an approach also preserves the actual infrastructure and thus limits the massive costs related to a change in the process and raw materials often necessary when switching to alternative raw materials such as biomass. Carbon dioxide has been identified as one such potential vector molecule (through reduction to syngas, methanol, methane, formic acid, DME, etc. as will be reviewed hereafter) with the added benefit with respect to other possible energy vectors (H2, ammonia, etc.) of directly contributing to inject RE into the energy chain while contributing to closing the carbon cycle connected to CO2 emissions (under the hypothesis that such CO2 comes from captured CO2 emissions).29 In addition, the products of CO2 conversion can be easily inserted in the chemical production chain. The specific focus of this contribution is on the catalytic aspects of CO2 conversion with RE, since catalysis is the enabling technology for achieving the efficient chemical conversion of CO2. The goal is to outline the state of the art and define the needs and possible roadmap for catalysis to enable the chemical recycles of CO2 as a key component towards substantially increasing the RE vs. fossil fuel usage.We focus the discussion on the abiological pathways of CO2 conversion by incorporating RE in the final molecule. Attention is particularly dedicated to base chemicals, because they are large volume products and thus with higher effective (fossil) fuel consumption. We will hence not discuss the use of CO2 in fine chemical production, because in general they do not incorporate RE, or when this happens it is through the intermediate formation of chemicals such as methanol, which is discussed as a base chemical. In addition, fine chemical production is rather limited in terms of volume of products, and will thus have a minor impact in terms of introduction of RE. We still distinguish between the production of fuels (also often indicated as solar fuels),20,29–31 which can be used in the chemical industry for the production of the heat necessary in the processes and the production of base raw materials for the chemical production chain (such as short-chain olefins). Methanol is classified in the 1st class, although it is also a raw material widely used in the chemical industry, and is a possible intermediate to produce olefins, as discussed later. Given the originality of using CO2 for synthesis of intermediates (such as short-chain olefins) this part will be discussed in more detail. An overview of the different possibilities and routes is presented in Fig. 1a, while Fig. 1b reports a more detailed view of the different possible routes towards synthesis of short-chain olefins (as a raw material to incorporate RE in the chemical production chain) from CO2 and renewable H2. Fig. 1  (a) Schematic overview of the CO2 conversion routes to incorporate renewable energy in the chemical and energy chains. The renewable energy is used either directly (in the solar thermal production of syngas) or indirectly, according to two main possibilities: (i) production of renewable H2 or (ii) production of electrons, or electrons/protons (by water photo-oxidation), used in the electrochemical routes. (b) Detail of the different possible routes to synthesize light olefins (as raw material to incorporate RE in the chemical production chain) from CO2 and renewable H2. Finally, since the main gap in the catalytic routes of CO2 conversion is still economic, with the cost of production of renewable H2 as the key factor for the rapid short-term 3-step routes, we start discussion with an analysis of cost and perspectives in producing renewable H2.The origin of CO2 (and purity, as well as how to recover in a cost-efficient way) is certainly a critical aspect of the possible large-volume use of CO2, because it determines costs and type of technologies to be used. However, we believe that this will be a later issue, when the use of CO2 will be above some significant threshold, because there are many large-volume sources of rather pure CO2 in refinery and chemical processes (ammonia production, ethylene oxide production, gas processing, H2 production, liquefied natural gas, Fischer–Tropsch synthesis of coal)32 as well as from biorefineries (ethanol production).33 At least in an initial phase of these technologies for the introduction of RE in the value chain of chemical industries it is not necessary to recover CO2 from the flue gases of combustion processes, with the related problems of purification from contaminants.We will also not discussed here the problem of CO2 activation, because this aspect is relevant in the production of fine chemicals, and particularly in relation to improving mechanisms of homogeneous catalysts, but it is not typically an issue in most established heterogeneous catalysis processes discussed in this contribution for large-scale introduction of RE in the chemical production chain.H2 production using renewable energyAs outlined in Fig. 1a, various products (syngas, methanol and DME, methane, formic acid, short-chain olefins, etc.) can be produced from CO2 and H2. When hydrogen is originated directly from renewable energy, r-H2, hydrogen becomes the key for connecting renewable energy and basic chemicals production, i.e. novel 2-step routes for RE injection in the chemical industry (RE→ r-H2 → chemical), in complement of the 3-step RE-to-chemical strategy outlined in the introduction (RE → electricity → r-H2 → chemical), based on hydrogen production through RE electrolyzers and PEM cells,34 or solid-state high-temperature electrolyzers.35,36 Recent reviews have examined approaches to produce r-H2 by other approaches than electrolysis: (i) producing H2 through the use of cyanobacteria37 and other bacteria38 (bio-H2), (ii) use of photocatalysis,39,40 (iii) H2 from biomass41 and microbial electrolysis,42 (iv) use of wind power43 for H2 production, and (v) of solar energy (low and high temperatures approaches).44 All these routes are attractive and under active research. The maturity of r-H2 production routes, their respective GHC impact and their costs therefore all become relevant in the context of assessing RE injection in the energy or in the production chains through CO2 recycling. A brief overview of these aspects will therefore be included hereafter.GHG impact of H2 production routes from REA sustainable route for the introduction of RE through reduction of CO2 requires that the whole process is sustainable also in terms of GHG emission impact.45 r-H2 may be produced from biomass-derived products through different methods,46 either via aqueous phase catalytic reforming47 or through thermocatalytic methods,48,49 but due to both the impact of biomass cultivation on GHG emissions and the significant energy consumption in harvesting, transport and processing biomass, the net impact on GHG emission per mole of H2 is significant, although lower than from fossil fuels. Methane steam reforming is the main current commercial method to produce H2.50 Four moles of H2 are produced per mole of CO2, i.e. 5.5 kg of CO2 per kg of H2, but considering the life-cycle of production this value rises to about 8.9 kg of CO2 per kg of H2.51 We feel that it is more appropriate to only consider hydrogen producing methods using directly RE sources. Fully reliable estimations do not exist or are highly dependent on the specific case. On average, the estimated values are about 5–6 kg of CO2 per kg of H2.52,53 For the production of H2 using direct RE sources, the current most consolidated methodology is to produce electrical energy using photovoltaic panels, wind turbines or other similar options (geothermal, waves, etc.), and then use an electrolyzer. LCA data are not reliable, because all technologies are still at the stage of development. For wind/electrolysis, a value below 1 kg of CO2 per kg of H2 was estimated.54 Utgikar and Thiesen55 reported life-cycles of CO2 emissions for various hydrogen production methods and indicated values for H2 from hydroelectric/electrolysis or solar thermal conversions of around 2 kg of CO2 per kg of H2. Higher values (around 6 kg of CO2 per kg of H2) were reported for the photovoltaic (PV)/electrolysis combination, but this estimation was based on an old PV technology. Taking into consideration the fast progresses in the field, a more reasonable estimate is 1–2 kg of CO2 per kg of H2.Therefore, although the lack of detailed comparisons and analyses do not allow us to make conclusive estimations, it may be indicated that direct routes of producing r-H2 have an impact on CO2 emissions tallying to about one third of that of producing r-H2 from biomass conversion routes and about one fifth that of the current methods to produce H2. Since this step of producing r-H2 is the most relevant in terms of energy accounting for the entire process of conversion of CO2 to chemicals by hydrogenation, it is evident that direct methodologies using RE to produce H2 are preferable to those relying on the use of biomass in order to introduce RE in the chemical production chain.Cost of production of r-H2The economic perspectives of converting CO2 largely depend on the cost of producing r-H2. We limit our discussion here to the production of electrical energy using RE sources, and the production of H2 using these energy sources, that is the 3-step strategy, which are currently the most mature. Cost is clearly the critical factor to enable the possibility to use RE to produce H2. The production of H2 by electrolysis with the electrical energy deriving from photovoltaic (PV) cells, wind turbines, etc., may be considered as an established technology, even if further improvements are possible. Efficiencies of up to about 12% could be obtained on optimized PV-electrolysis systems.56 Modern electrolyzers produce H2 under pressure, differently from other routes, and this is a relevant cost-advantage. PEM water electrolysis technology is considered today to be the safer and preferable way to produce renewable H2. Stack efficiencies close to 80% have been obtained operating at high (1 A cm−2) current densities using low-cost electrodes and high operating pressures (up to 130 bar).34 The absence of corrosive electrolytes, and the better integration with solar and wind power can be cited among the advantages of PEM electrolyzers over the well-established alkaline technology. Recent developments in terms of catalyst optimization, optimized design of electrolyzer cell and cost reduction of the membrane-electrode assembling have already led to significant stack capital cost reductions. Reduction of the overpotential in H2 production remains a still relevant problem to solve, but this will require better understanding of the fundamental aspects of the reaction mechanism.A hydrogen cost ranging from 2 to 4 $ per kg of H2 was considered competitive by DoE (US Department of Energy) for distributed water electrolysis, although this cost does not take into account the carbon taxes for producing H2 using fossil fuels present in some countries (Europe). Considering the incidence of electricity on H2 production cost and that off-peak electrical energy at competitive costs is available, it is possible to estimate future renewable H2 at around 8–10 $ per kg of H2 decreasing to 5–6 $ per kg of H2 in year 2020 and possibly below.29 Currently, as discussed in the previous section, methanol can be produced commercially from CO2 using H2 deriving from the use of geothermal electrical energy in Iceland, with an estimated H2 cost in the 2 to 4 $ per kg of H2 range.Together with the improvements in technology of production of RE and of electrolyzers, it is likely to produce H2 at a cost below about 4–5 $ per kg of H2 in the near future. Using a combination of solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC) and thermal solar technologies it is also possible to produce renewable H2 at competitive costs. For low temperature electrolysis a larger quantity of electrical energy is necessary to overcome the endothermic heat of reaction, while at high temperatures the primary electric energy demand is considerably reduced and the electrical losses in the cell decrease due to lower ohmic resistance in the electrolyte and lower polarisation losses from the electrode reactions, the kinetics of the electrolysis reactions being faster. H2 costs from high-temperature electrolysis have been estimated in the 1.5–2.6 $ per kg of H2 range,57 although it appears to be an optimistic estimation.Economic perspective of CO2 conversion processes with r-H2H2 production from renewable sources may be estimated to have a cost in the 2–10 US $ per kg of H2 range. H2 using PEM electrolyzers can be already produced on a small–medium scale. There are relevant possibilities for further decrease in the cost, particularly in terms of optimization of the electrocatalysts (the key issue), electrodes and device configuration. H2 production from biomass transformation products (bio-oil, byproducts, etc.) also falls in the same range, but as discussed before, the impact on GHG emissions is significantly higher. BioH2 using cyanobacteria or green algae, and photo(electro)chemical water splitting or photoelectrolysis have larger potential for the future large-scale production of renewable H2 at competitive costs, but intense R&D efforts are necessary to realize this potential. Available (low-cost) sources of r-H2 already exist which make production of some fuels from CO2 already viable. Mitsui Chemicals and Carbon Recycling International are two companies which are running pilot plant projects to exploit the conversion of CO2 to methanol (see above), while Mantra Venture Group and DNV are exploring at pilot plant scale the electroreduction of CO2 to formic acid.4 A recent techno-economic assessment58 has evidenced that it is possible to produce methanol from CO2 at a competitive cost with respect to the market (about 300–350 € per ton) when the cost of H2 production by electrolysis is as low as 0.140 € per Nm3 of H2, a value possible by producing electrical energy using hydropower in some remote areas. CO2 may be shipped to these areas, and methanol can be sent back using the same ships, realizing thus an interesting and economic alternative to CCS.CO2 as raw material to introduce renewable energy in the chemical production chainSyngas and short-chain olefins (C2–C3), together with aromatics, are the main raw materials for petrochemistry and thus of the entire value chain of the chemical industry.22 As remarked in the introduction, the objective of resource and energy efficiency in the chemical industry2,3 or a low-carbon footprint production, is not only a defined political objective in Europe which agreed to reach an 80% reduction in CO2 emissions by 2050,59 but also a key element for the innovation strategy of the chemical industry.3 To meet this objective, the use of CO2 together with biomass (and waste) is necessary. We will discuss here the production of syngas and short-chain olefins from CO2 using RE sources, mainly used to produce r-H2. Today this is the only feasible solution, but alternatives will be possible in the future. The other products indicated in Fig. 1a (CH4, HCOOH, hydrocarbons, etc.) are not suited as raw materials for the chemical production chain: i) methane for its difficult activation, ii) HCOOH because the products of further transformation are limited, etc.Production of syngas using renewable energy (RE)There are different possible routes towards syngas (Fig. 1a), the main two involving (i) RWGS reaction (using r-H2; eqn (1)) and (ii) dry reforming with hydrocarbons (DR, eqn (2) for reaction with methane). Other possibilities, include bioroutes (for example, using (1) a hybrid enzyme–TiO2 system for CO2 reduction to CO using visible light,60 (2) concentrated (high-temperature) solar energy,21 (3) photo- and electro-catalytic reduction of CO2).61–63 However, these routes are still far in terms of performances for possible large-scale applications. CO2 + r-H2  CO + H2O(1) CO2 + CH4  2CO + 2H2(2)CO2 reforming. The potential advantage of the DR route is that it can be applied directly to flue gases11 (even if technical problems exist), while all the other routes require a first step of separation of CO2 from the flue gases. However, DR is an endothermic reaction occurring at high temperature (about 900–1000 °C) and in equilibrium with side reactions of methane cracking (eqn (3)) and the Boudouard reaction (CO disproportionation, eqn (4)). CH4  C + 2H2(3) 2CO  C + CO2(4)Eqn (3) and (4) both lead to carbon formation and are hence responsible for coke formation, which causes catalyst deactivation, reactor pressure build up and decrease of heat transfer. A second challenge of the DR approach is due to the current high temperature of operation involved, due to the unfavourable thermodynamic (ΔG > 0 kcal mol−1) at temperatures below 600 °C and the related mediocre overall efficiency of the processes. Achieving systems capable of operating at a lower temperature – and hence with lower energy consumption – could also allow heat integration with the highly exothermic FT reaction, typically operating at a much lower temperature. Therefore the current research direction is to develop low-temperature dry reforming technologies for the recycling of waste carbon (CO2 and CH4 in the FT tail gas) to be integrated into FT fuel production plants. Given the unfavourable thermodynamics, the required catalytic development has to be coupled to further technology development such as membrane reactors for continuous H2 removal to achieve higher conversions.64,65 The cost of membranes, their limited range of pressure and thermal stability (typically about 550 °C) are some of the current challenges of membrane technology in this context.A different approach to limit the external energy consumption necessary to power the DR reaction can be the combination with the wet reforming of methane (with H2O, eqn (5)) and its oxidation (eqn (6)), leading overall to the so-called tri-reforming.11,66,67 It was shown by Minutillo and Perna68 that the tri-reforming process utilizing flue gases to generate a synthesis gas suitable in chemical industries for production of chemicals (methanol, in particular) is an attractive solution to introduce near zero-emission technologies in vehicular applications. An integrated tri-reforming power plant for co-generation of electrical power and synthesis gas shows advantages in terms of energy and environmental sustainability, but only when the exhausts contain low oxygen concentrations (i.e. flue gases from steam cycle power plants). Doped metal catalysts supported on rare-earths have helped us to develop high resistance to carbon formation.69–72 Guczi et al.73 showed that carbide-type species are first formed, while then a graphitization process occurs with the formation of carbon nanotubes. The support and doping, for example with gold, inhibits this graphitization process. CO2 + H2O  CO + 3H2(5) CH4 + ½O2 → CO + 2H2(6a) CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O(6b)In terms of introduction of RE energy in the chemical process chain, the net energy balance of using methane oxidation reactions (eqn (6)) to produce the energy necessary for the endothermic reactions of dry (eqn (2)) and wet (eqn (5)) reforming is not favourable. Conversely, when the heat of reaction for the endothermic process is provided from thermal solar radiation (Concentrated Solar Power, CSP), DR is preferable to tri-reforming for higher productivity.74 Halmann and Steinfeld66 estimated that combining tri-reforming with the use of CaO (to adsorb and transfer CO2 from the flue gas) CO2 emission avoidance of up to ∼59% and fossil fuel savings of up to ∼75% may be attained when concentrated solar energy is supplied as a high-temperature process heat for the calcination step, all relative to conventional H2 production by coal gasification.These estimations do not consider the major issue of scaling-up a catalytic reaction coupled to CSP: (i) large fluctuations in temperature with an inhomogeneous distribution of the temperature, related to the difficulty of irradiating in an homogeneous way (in space and time) the whole catalyst, (ii) continuous severe cycling in temperature leading to easy sintering and catalyst deactivation, and (iii) large area of CSP panels required per catalyst volume to heat to the necessary temperature to drive the reforming reaction.The International Energy Agency75 in its roadmap on CSP concluded that today this technology is not competitive and requires high capital investments, but may become attractive in the future is some areas to generate electricity. CSP also allows the production of hydrogen with future costs (for year 2025) competitive with the combination of photovoltaic + electrolysis, even though estimations appear optimistic. Solar-assisted steam or wet reforming of natural gas would become competitive with natural gas (as an energy source) at prices of about 11 US $ per MBtu and thus with limited possibilities to be implemented.A better application with respect to the use in producing syngas by conversion of CO2 in flue gases through tri-reforming of methane (eventually assisted by CSP) would be the application of this concept to the production of syngas from biogases (produced by the anaerobic digestion of biomass), which already contain methane and CO2. Fierro and coworkers76 have reviewed recently the dry reforming of biogas showing, in particular, how Ni-based catalysts (the most used reforming catalysts) are prone to carbon deposition and how their stability can be improved by incorporation of a second metal, for example trace of noble metals.77 It was shown recently, however, that for the effective utilization of biogas (in terms of carbon present in the final syngas mixture) DR is even slightly worse with respect to the alternative of removing CO2 from the biogas, and then use methane for steam reforming or partial oxidation reactions.33 Both these works have not considered the integration of CSP in the biogas reforming process which can be well integrated with CSP technology given their usual small scale. Although solar-heated fermenters for biogas production is an established technology,78 the use of solar energy to drive the production of syngas from biogas has been not analysed in terms of techno-economic and environmental feasibility. There are, however, various recent technical papers on the development of catalysts for biogas reforming.79–82RWGS. The catalysts active in methanol synthesis or FT reactions are active also in RWGS.83,84 Therefore this step is integrated in these processes and will be discussed in the related sections, although in terms of process, it may be preferable to separate the reactors of RWGS from those of methanol synthesis, or FT reactions. In fact, the water formed in RWGS (eqn (1)) decreases the reaction rates of these reactions and it is thus convenient to have a process scheme based on two staged reactors with an intermediate water separation stage (Fig. 2, for methanol synthesis). Short-chain olefins can be then produced from methanol in a separate stage, as discussed below in an alternative to the direct synthesis from syngas using the modified FT process. Methanol is also feedstock for various chemicals such as formaldehyde and acetic acid, and from there into products as diverse as plastics, plywood, paints, explosives, and permanent press textiles. Fig. 2  Simplified process flow diagram for the RWGS reactor and methanol synthesis system. Conversion of CO2 to methanolThe possible pivotal role of methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) in the energy scenario has been extensively discussed under the “methanol economy” concept.15 Methanol synthesis from syngas is a well-known commercial process occurring on Cu–Zn-oxide based catalysts.85 The same catalysts may be applied also starting from CO2.83,86 The traditional approach consists of a two-catalyst system such as Cu/oxides to catalyze the RWGS (eqn (1)) followed by CO reduction to methanol catalyst (eqn (7)) CO + 2r-H2 → CH3OH(7)A typical catalytic system is Cu/ZnO/Al2O3, possibly with additives such as ZrO2, Ga2O3, and SiO2.87,88 A multicomponent system such as Cu/ZnO/ZrO2/Al2O3/SiO2 displays high productivity (600 gCH3OH/lcat h at 250 °C) and stability. Nevertheless, the complex equilibria involving CO, CO2, H2O, and CH3OH make catalysts comparison difficult, since the performances are critically dependent on the feed composition. This said, Ga2O3 appears to favor specific activity, while alumina, zirconia or silica appears to improve Cu dispersion.83 While direct H2:CO2 = 3:1 is a slow reaction, a higher CO/CO2 ratio leads to increased productivity. Further decrease of CO2 concentration in syngas can also reduce the rate, showing a complex mechanistic profile, since CO2 can also be formed by steam addition to the syngas stream. Water, in fact, can be an inhibitor. A partial solution resides in continuous water removal through distillation or membranes, such as hydrophilic nano-pore zeolites (NaA).89 In the CAMERE process for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol via a RWGS reaction90 it was shown that the two-step process (with intermediate water removal) allows a three times higher productivity than the single-stage process, due to the removal of the inhibition by water and the shift of the equilibrium.The alternative solution is the design of a new type of catalysts, specific for methanol synthesis from CO2, not sensitive to water inhibition and possibly involving a different type of mechanism not passing through the first stage of the RWGS reaction, e.g. syngas formation. For this reason, there is increased interest on the reaction mechanism of this (old) reaction.91–94 In parallel to these mechanistic studies, other recent advances regarding the nature of the active sites and the in situ dynamic behavior of the catalyst. Worth noting are the results of Schlögl et al.95 showing the presence of lattice strain in the copper particles as the result of an advanced Cu–ZnO interface. Complementarily, a highly defect rich nature of both Cu and ZnO has been found in the short-range order structure. The twinning, fault defects, and strain in the Cu lattice were related to increased activity in methanol synthesis via the WGS reaction of CO, CO2, and H. Lattice strain in the copper nanoparticles were an index for a homogeneous microstructure of superior Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts for methanol synthesis.These studies give a new perspective to the issue of the direct methanol synthesis from CO2, but still very limited novel and conceptually different catalytic systems have been developed. A recent DFT study on methanol synthesis from H2 and CO2 on a Mo6S8 cluster (the structural building block of the Chevrel phase of molybdenum sulfide) suggests that alternative materials could be developed.96 Pd–ZnO on carbon nanotubes can be also considered as a new type of catalyst.97 The peculiarity of carbon nanotubes is the ability to reversibly adsorb a greater amount of hydrogen.An alternative approach to the use of solid catalysts and a gas phase process is the use of the so-called low-temperature methanol synthesis (LTMS).98,99 LTMS is based on the catalytic hydrogenation of methanol to HCOOH with subsequent etherification to methanol formate (alternative to methyl formate from syngas) and the subsequent hydrogenation of formate to two methanol molecules using a pincer-type ruthenium(II) catalyst.99–102These homogeneous catalysts are able to hydrogenate efficiently organic carbonates, carbamates and formates under mild conditions, offering thus new routes to produce methanol by hydrogenation of these compounds which can be produced from CO2 and CO. Huff and Sanfort101 have demonstrated recently the homogeneous hydrogenation of CO2 to CH3OH via cascade catalysis using three different homogeneous catalysts: (PMe3)4Ru(Cl)(OAc), Sc(OTf)3, and (PNN)Ru(CO)(H), which operate in sequence to promote this transformation (Fig. 3). Hydrogen should be produced using RE sources also in this case. Fig. 3  Cascade reactions in the catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to CH3OH in a homogeneous phase via three different catalysts (adapted from Huff and Sanford101). These atom-efficient reactions proceed under neutral, homogeneous conditions, at mild temperatures and under mild hydrogen pressures, and can operate in the absence of solvent with no generation of waste, representing the ultimate ‘green’ reactions. However, from the practical perspective, the effective catalyst productivities per unit volume of reactor are still too far from those which can be obtained using the conventional gas-phase methanol catalysts. Catalyst recovery and product separation are also more costly making the process for the synthesis of methanol from either CO or CO2 still un-economic. Interestingly, copper–zinc-oxide catalysts active in the gas-phase conversion of syngas to methanol are also active in liquid phase methyl formate synthesis.103,104 Ma and coworkers10b have recently discussed in more detail these aspects in a review on the catalytic hydrogenation of carbon dioxide.Conversion of CO2 to short-chain olefinsShort-chain olefins (ethylene and propylene) are produced worldwide in an amount of about 200 Mt per year and their synthesis is the single most energy-consuming process in the chemical industry.105 They can be produced from different sources, the main process being the steam cracking of oil or of natural gas fractions. Steam cracking accounts for about 3 × 1018 J of primary energy use, not counting the energy content of the products.106 Due to their high energy of formation, C2–C3 olefins represent an excellent opportunity to store solar energy and incorporate it in the value chain for chemical production.107There are different possible routes to produce short-chain olefins from CO2 and renewable H2 (Fig. 1b). The reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) is typically present, being often promoted from the same catalysts for the consecutive steps. However, it would be preferable to develop direct routes of converting CO2 (e.g. not involving the RWGS reversible reaction), to overcome thermodynamic constraints related to the RWGS equilibrium reaction. Short-chain olefins could be directly produced from syngas (CO + H2) using modified Fischer–Tropsch (FT) catalysts or indirectly, via the formation of methanol (using conventional commercial methanol catalysts) and then converting methanol to short-chain olefins using the methanol-to-olefin (MTO) process based on small-pore zeolites. In the presence of an acid catalyst, two methanol molecules could be dehydrated to dimethyl ether (DME), which can be also converted to short-chain olefins (it is an intermediate in the process).It is also possible to combine the catalysts for methanol to the zeolite for MTO to have direct one-step formation of short-chain olefins from CO2 and H2. Until now, all catalysts tested are based on catalysts for syngas (CO/H2) adapted to operate with CO2 and H2, but not specifically developed to work with carbon dioxide. It would be desirable, for example, to have a novel FT catalyst that is able to directly and selectively convert CO2 and H2 to short-chain olefins, or novel methanol catalysts that are able to directly convert CO2 without the presence of the RWGS reaction. Therefore, even if methanol, MTO and FT catalysts are well-established, and current methanol and FT processes operate in the presence of some CO2 (typically around 3%) which promotes the reaction rate, converting pure CO2 would require to develop novel or improved catalysts. Maximizing selectivity to short-chain olefins, and possibly also their relative ratio of formation (currently it is preferable to form propylene over ethylene) is another challenge.The conversion of syngas to short-chain olefins has been reviewed recently.108 While the earlier reviews on this topic date back to 1987 (ref. 109) and 1990,110 there is still significant industrial interest currently ongoing,111 mostly driven by the goal of producing high-octane gasoline components (by oligomerization/isomerization of short-chain olefins from FT), in contrast with the middle distillate (diesel) produced with the conventional process, as seen for example in the synthol process by Sasol in South Africa. Production of short-chain olefins for the petrochemical market has even more strict requirements with respect to the use as feedstock to produce gasoline components. The FT catalyst should be modified in order to minimize the formation of alkanes (especially CH4), and increase selectivity to C2–C3 olefins.Some of the underpinning fundamental open issues regarding the selectivity to short-chain olefins through FT are still not solved, although progress in mechanism proposals and understanding112–115 the structure–activity relationship related to, for example Fe or Co catalysts, nanoparticle size116–118 and reactor design considerations119,120 are being addressed. Better understanding of the overall mechanistic aspects would be relevant to control the chain growth and maximize the selectivity to short-chain olefins, even if all the actual studies have not attempted to identify the catalyst designing factors to maximize the selectivity towards short-chain olefins. Due to the presence of many competing reactions, there is no linear dependence between any single parameter and the observed catalytic performances. For FT reactions there is thus an intermediate optimal window, which depends on the fraction desired, as shown in Fig. 4. Based on this distribution, selective synthesis of short-chain olefins (C2–C4) without the significant formation of methane and >C4 hydrocarbons is apparently not possible. It is thus necessary to limit the chain growth or circumvent the propagation reaction. Fig. 4  Schematics of the changes in the reaction rates of key reaction steps as a function of metal–carbon interaction energies (adapted from ref. 112). Overall, yields up to over 55% in C2–C4 olefins have been observed, but together with C2–C4 alkanes, methane and C5+ products (Table 1).120–128 These conditions are still not satisfactory to produce olefins for the chemical sector. A further significant improvement using the same approach is unlikely. Therefore, either a step forward in understanding the reaction mechanism to determine how to control more effectively the chain growth, or exploration of new pathways to convert syngas to olefins is necessary.
Table 1 Selection of relevant recent results in syngas to light olefins FT conversion

CatalystOptimal reaction conditionsCO conv., %Selectivity, %Yield, %C2–C4Ref.H2/COTemp., °CGHSV, h−1P, atmCH4C2–C4 olefinC2H4C3H6C4H8C2–C4 olefinAlkene/alkanea 28 g mol h−1.b 2000 ml per g of catalyst per h.c 1st bed FT catalyst, 2nd bed selective cracking of long chain hydrocarbons. FT = 6K/100Fe–6Cu–16AlOx; cracking = ZSM-5 (SiO2/Al2O3 = 280).d Cracking at 500 °C with 0.15 g of catalyst.Co40Zn6/TiO222401100165.29.346.5   30.32.7120aNanosized Co3Fe1-K2%22602200163.810.254.418.61619.834.73.2120bFe20/SiO22380a14122.620.25.21238.31.7122Core (Fe/SiO2)–shell (silicalite-1)2380a121.220.63011.814.93.36.41.5122Fe50Mn50-K6%22801400364.46.148.921.114.113.731.52.6120cFe/SBA-15 (reduc. H2)24301176120.118.416.9   3.4 123Fe40Ni60 (6%)/Al2O322602600364.120.240.119.215.35.625.71.9120eFe40Ni60 (40%)/Al2O32360360077814.173.937.819.616.557.614.2120dFe–Cu–K/ZSM-5 (Si/Al = 25)2300b180.718.324.9   20.1 124Fe/CNT1300218000.511.217.941.6   4.77.1125Fe/carbon black1300218000.58.82138.1   3.45.6125Fe/SBA-15 (reduc. H2)1300218000.52.325.539.5   0.94.3125Fe/SiO21300218000.5425.838.1   1.56.4125Fe–Cu–Al + ZSM-5 (dual bed)c2300d36001096.98.734.45.419.19.933.33.7126Fe50Mn50 (5%)/Al2O31360270068419.859.240.113.25.949.7 127Mn–Co/H-5A zeolite4300–400 140.90.285.8   35.1 128Catalysts for olefins synthesis from CO2 through a FT-type reaction. Starting from CO2 + H2 to produce short-chain olefins instead of from syngas, would require the presence of a bifunctional catalyst that combines reverse water–gas-shift (RWGS) and Fischer–Tropsch chain growth activity.129 U.S. military are actively investigating this direction of research to produce jet fuel.130 Dorner et al.129a showed that using a Fe/Mn/K FT catalysts deposited over Ce-modified alumina it is possible to obtain in one-step about 62% selectivity to C2–C5+ hydrocarbons (an olefin/paraffin ratio of 4.4) at about 50% CO2 conversion (290 °C, H2:CO2 ratio of 3:1, 13 atm). Yields in short-chain olefins are thus still low in comparison with the best data for short-chain olefins from syngas reported in Table 1 as well as in earlier reviews.109,110,131 There is thus ample space to improve the performances. Also in this case better understanding of the surface chemistry is necessary.There are two main differences between the use of a CO2 + H2 feed and a syngas feed, besides the need for centers for RWGS or sites that are able to directly dissociate CO2 to form “C1” type species as those involved in the FT mechanism.Sai Prasad et al.132 used a Fe/Cu/Al/K catalyst at 300 °C and one atmosphere to convert a CO/CO2/H2 syngas. About 85% selectivity to alkene in the C2–C4 fraction (about 40% of the whole hydrocarbon fraction) was observed. Zhao et al.133 studied the kinetics of short-chain alkene syntheses by CO2 hydrogenation over Fe–Ni catalysts, observing that the presence of CO2 in the feed stream has a negative effect on catalyst stability and on the formation of heavy hydrocarbons. The data cannot be extrapolated to the case of the conversion of CO2 to short-chain olefins and used to optimize this reaction. Specific studies on these aspects are necessary to consider this reaction pathway to be feasible.Catalysts for olefins synthesis from CO2 through alternative paths. Short-chain olefins may be obtained also via conversion of methanol/DME on multifunctional catalysts instead of through the FT mechanism. Introducing Rh centers in the zeolite leads to the selective synthesis of lower olefins, particularly ethylene.134 Ethanol forms through both the DME isomerization and methanol homologation catalyzed by Rh and then ethanol can be easily dehydrated (on controlled acidity zeolites) to ethylene. This is an interesting pathway that potentially avoids the problems of selectivity as discussed in the FT mechanism. Since this pathway can use MeOH or DME obtained from CO2, it is tantamount to a CO2 → olefins conversion route avoiding the FT mechanism.Methanol-to-olefin (MTO) or the variation of methanol-to-propylene (MTP) are also known processes, since the first discovery of methanol-to-hydrocarbon reactions in the early 1970s using ZSM-5 (MFI) catalysts and the significant step forward in the 1980s by the scientists at Union Carbide that discovered narrow-pore zeo-type material SAPO-34 showing excellent behavior for the conversion of methanol to ethylene and propylene.135 The process was developed commercially by UOP/Norsk Hydro. The advanced MTO process integrates an Olefin Cracking Process (Total/UOP) to increase the carbon selectivity from methanol to C2–C3 olefins to about 85–90%. With the integrated process, C4 to C6+ olefins generated as by-products from the MTO unit can be fed to the olefin cracking (OC) unit to convert them to the C2–C3 olefins. The combined process has great flexibility to adapt the propylene/ethylene ratios. Nearly an 80% reduction in C4+ by-product formation and a 20% increase in short-chain olefin yield can be achieved (Fig. 5).136 Fig. 5  Performances of UOP/Hydro MTO process and their integration with the Total/UOP olefin cracking (OC) unit using two types of zeolites, the second tailored to enhance propylene formation (adapted from ref. 136). The methanol-to-propylene (MTP) process developed by Lurgi was recently put into commercial operation for the first time at two facilities in China. It is based on the use of a ZSM-5 based zeolite catalyst that was able to give about 70% yield (97% selectivity) at about 425 °C and nearly atmospheric pressure. Gasoline-range by-products are recycled. Periodic regeneration after about 20–25 days of operation is necessary.The conversion of CO2 to short-chain olefins via methanol (DME) formation therefore has the advantages over the modified FT route of (i) being at least partly already commercially established and (ii) giving rise to a more tuned and narrow distribution of short-chain olefins. However, several further improvement steps are necessary, with a consequent increase in the costs. Results on the development of multifunctional catalysts able to combine the characteristics necessary for the various steps are still limited and not very successful until now.Techno-economic assessment. Regarding the assessment of the production of short-chain olefins from CO2, the process flow-sheet is based on the first step of production of H2 by electrolysis, either using PEM electrolyzers or high-temperature SOEC, and electrical energy deriving from RE.107 The core of the process is the combination of RWGS and modified FT reactions with inorganic membranes permeo-selective to water integrated in the reactors to improve the performances of the process and concomitant recycling CH4, short-chain alkanes, >C5 hydrocarbons produced, while CO and CO2 are recycled to the rWGS unit. A techno-economic analysis of this possibility107 indicates that for a predicted renewable H2 cost as target for the year 2020 (2–3 US $ per kg of H2), the process is economically viable. The current r-H2 cost is still higher, but nevertheless in a range that makes the possibility to produce short-chain olefins from CO2 as an interesting one.Comparison of the routes and outlooks. The production of short-chain olefins from CO2 + H2via syngas and then modified FT catalysts is potentially simpler, but gives rise to a broader distribution of olefins which appears challenging to further improve. The route passing through methanol (DME) and MTO/MTP processes is more complex, but it is based on already established catalysts/processes, whose economics are interesting for very large scale plants. The use of CO2 + H2 instead of syngas causes lower rates and selectivities in both cases. It would be thus necessary to develop novel and more specific catalysts containing selective sites for short-chain olefins directly by hydrogenation of CO2. An interesting route, still largely not explored, involves the possibility to have a mixed mechanism between that present in methanol synthesis137 leading to the formation of formate (HCOO) surface species from chemisorbed CO2 and H, and that for the FT reactions previously discussed, with a key step of C–C bond formation between the surface formate and “C1” type species deriving from CO dissociation. A similar mechanism was proposed originally from Izumi et al.138 to explain the selective synthesis of ethanol from CO2 + H2 on [Rh10Se]/TiO2 catalysts. Rh/SiO2 and Rh–Fe/SiO2 are active in the hydrogenation of CO2 to ethanol, although selectivities to ethanol are 30% at the best. In CO2 hydrogenation over supported [Rh10Se] clusters, selectivity of up to over 80% was observed, even if the conversion was not given. The ethanol may be then easily dehydrated to selectively form ethylene.Although further improvements in catalysts, reactor design and process operations are necessary, these results show that it should be possible to modify FT or methanol catalysts to selectively form short-chain olefins, or even develop new types of catalysts based on a novel reaction. It is reasonable to consider further optimization with a target in selective synthesis of short-chain olefins over 80% at higher productivity.Solar fuels from CO2: a complementary route to introduce renewable energy in the chemical production chainThe chemical industry is energy intensive, but as discussed in the introduction, the use of electrical energy from RE sources is not the optimal approach to lower the carbon footprint. In contrast, the use of fuels which incorporate RE sources (here briefly indicated as solar fuels from CO2) is a complementary valuable approach to the use of low carbon footprint raw materials. However, fuels have a lower added-value with respect to raw materials for petrochemistry, and thus is even more critical the cost-competitiveness with fossil fuels. With the progressive shortage of fossil fuels (the great impact on the environment of shale gas and coal production puts a great question mark on their long-term use), we expect that the cost differential between fossil and solar fuels will decrease. Thus, solar fuels from CO2 will become progressively cost-competitive in a medium-long term perspective, but it is expected that raw materials deriving from CO2 will be earlier introduced commercially in the chemical industry value chain.Conversion of CO2 to DMEExtension of methanol systems to DME (dimethyl ether, a potentially valuable liquid fuel, substitute of LPG) can be obtained by shifting the equilibrium with hybrid catalysts (eqn (8)): 2CH3OH  CH3OCH3 + H2O(8)In the presence of acid sites, DME could be easy formed from methanol by water elimination on mild acid sites. DME could be preferable to methanol for the consecutive step of short-chain olefin formation. It is possible also to develop core–shell catalysts, with a methanol catalyst core and a zeolite shell with controlled acidity to synthetize directly DME from syngas.139 Other types of bifunctional catalysts recently investigated include CuO–ZnO–Al2O3/γ-Al2O3,140 CuO–ZnO–Al2O3–ZrO2 + HZSM-5141 and CuO–ZnO–Al2O3/HZSM-5.142Conversion of CO2 to FT liquid productsAlthough Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FT, eqn (9)) has been known for over a century, the need to produce fuels from alternative raw materials has recently renewed the interest on this process to produce middle distillate from natural gas (gas-to-liquid process, GTL), coal (coal-to-liquid process, CTL) and biomass (biomass-to-liquid, BTL).143 A number of reviews have been published recently on the various aspects of FT reactions, from the reaction mechanism144–148 to the catalyst and process design149–154 and the effect of water and CO2 on the reaction155–159 or the development of novel types of catalysts based on homogeneous catalysts160,161 or zeolites and periodic mesoporous silicas162 in order to tune the selectivity. CO + H2 → CnH2n + CnH2n+2 + H2O + CO2 (n = 1, 2, …)(9)The FT mechanism it is known to be significantly influenced by the presence of CO2 and of water (formed from RWGS, eqn (1)). The effect of water was reviewed recently by Dalai and Davis,163 while Botes155 reviewed the effect of water and CO2 on the FT reaction kinetics, Srinivas et al.158 the use of CO2-rich syngas, and Blekkan et al.159 the effect of water on cobalt FT catalyst reactivity.A number of recent studies have been dedicated to the effect of CO2 on FT synthesis. A low K content is suitable for increasing the hydrocarbon yield.164–166 For cobalt and iron catalysts, a significant increase in methane formation was noted upon switching the feed from syngas to CO2 + H2.167–170 Similar results were observed for Fe/Co catalysts.170 It was also observed that CO and CO2 hydrogenation show different product distributions, e.g. Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) trends.171,172 There are conflicting indications on the role of CO2 and on the preferable conditions to hydrogenate CO2, in part because the effect of water is not accounted for, although water influences the rate of CO2 hydrogenation and inhibits the rate of FT reaction.It should be remarked that FT reactions may give rise to liquid fuels, lubricants and chemicals (in addition to short-chain olefins discussed in the previous section), depending on the catalyst, operative conditions and downstream processes. In terms of use of the FT reactions for introducing RE in the chemical production chain, the main limit of this process is the broad distribution of products formed, which determines large costs of separation (and downstream processes) and the need for large capacity plants. Even if there are commercial plants for the production of chemicals based on FT reactions, although based on syngas (for example, the Sasol FT refinery at Sasolburg, South Africa), the use of CO2via FT reactions should be focused either on the selective synthesis of short-chain olefins (as discussed before) or instead on the synthesis of hydrocarbons to be used as fuels for the energy needs in the chemical industry.Conversion of CO2 to methane (SNG)The reaction of CO2 methanation, that is the hydrogenation of CO2 to methane (eqn (10)), has been known for over a century as the Sabatier reaction, but has received renewed interest recently, for the use as chemical storage of the excess of electrical energy (used to generate by electrolysis the H2 necessary in the synthesis) produced overnight by wind factories.173,174 The wind to SNG concept (also called power-to-gas, P2G) is based on the use of existing gas grid infrastructures for storing and converting the generated fuel to electricity, and in particular the use of wind-generated electricity, the further expansion of which is currently restricted by the capacity of the electricity grids (Fig. 6).174 Solar electricity or any other type of renewable electricity can be also used for the process. RCO2 AS (Norway) has developed a pilot scale process based on the recovery of CO2 from flue gas and its conversion to methane using renewable H2.175 The estimated cost (US $ per mt of CO2) were in the 41–45 range with respect to costs to CO2 sequestration estimated in the 60–100 range. Although methane produced from CO2 according to the above routes is considered as a way to use off-peak excess RE or to increase the overall efficiency of the combustion process, this renewable SNG can be also used in the chemical industry to lower the carbon footprint. Due to the difficulty in the direct conversion of methane to chemicals (not via syngas), the use as raw material for the chemical industry is instead not convenient currently, at least up to when new breakthrough discoveries in the direct methane conversion to chemicals will change the game. Fig. 6  Wind to SNG (power-to-gas) concept for bidirectional coupling of the electricity and gas grids with a link to the mobility sector. See glossary for acronyms (adapted from ref. 174). The Sabatier reaction requires a 4:1 = H2:CO2 ratio, thus higher than the conversion of CO2 to formic acid, methanol or FT products. CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O(10)Although catalysts have been known for a long time, renewed interest in their improvement is fostered by the need to develop catalysts active at lower temperatures and suitable for compact devices to be used in the electrical-to-energy conversion strategy outlined in Fig. 6. The need for a fast start and shutdown, the enhanced resistance to deactivation due to these fast cycling modes, and the need to be integrated into microreactors are among the additional constraints necessary for the development of compact devices for a distributed use.The catalysts used have some similarities to those for CO2 reforming. 10 wt% Ni/CeO2 shows a high CO2 methanation activity and high CH4 selectivity at low temperatures.176 Rh/γ-Al2O3 catalysts, another good catalyst in reforming, also show good performances in CO2 methanation at low temperatures.177 Operando-DRIFTS experiments showed that CO2 is readily dissociated on the latter catalysts at 50 °C giving rise to different Rh carbonyls and formate species.177 There is thus a link between CO2 and CO methanation catalysts, the latter being often based on supported Ru catalysts,178 for which CO2 methanation similarly proceeds via dissociation to COad, and subsequent methanation.179Ru-doped ceria also shows interesting performances in CO2 methanation.180 A conversion of 55% of CO2 with 99% selectivity for methane at a temperature of 450 °C was observed over the Ce0.95Ru0.05O2 catalyst.180 The performances are quite similar to those of Pd–MgO/SiO2 catalysts, even if probably there are differences in the reaction mechanism.181 A recent result showed that on very narrow Ru particles supported on TiO2 (mean diameter 2.5 nm) it is possible to realize the methanation of CO2 with a 100% yield at very low temperatures (ca. 160 °C), about 200 °C lower than a similar catalyst having a broader and larger Ru nanoparticles distribution.182 Particle size is thus a key parameter to control the development of highly active catalysts, although an effective mechanism for the long-term stabilization of very small nanoparticles must still be found.Conversion of CO2 to formic acidFormation of formic acid from CO2 and H2 (see Fig. 1a) to store (and eventually transport) H2 in liquid form183,184 extends the portfolio of possible reactions for using H2 deriving from renewable sources, and hence the RE share, in the chemical industry. There are scarce reports of direct attempts of producing formic acid by direct CO2 electroreduction at the pilot scale.4 Homogeneous catalysts have been the most successful in the reduction of CO2 to formic acid derivatives, such as formamides or formates. While the first hydrogenation of CO2 into formamides dates back several decades,185 use of supercritical CO2 (ref. 186) and chelating phosphine have dramatically improved the rates of formates to turnover numbers as high as 350000 (TOF = 73000 h−1) with Ir(III) trishydride PNP ligands catalysts.187 Non-precious-metal Fe based homogeneous catalysts have also been developed.188 New recent developments include:- the development of cyclometalated organoiridium complexes as efficient catalysts for the interconversion between hydrogen and formic acid at ambient temperature and pressure (depending on pH),189 allowing the use of a single one-pot solution for the reversible storage of H2;- the use of a homogeneous Ir catalyst with a proton-responsive ligand,190 also for the reversible and recyclable hydrogen storage under mild conditions.Obtaining formates or formamides derives from the necessity to add a base such as KOH or amine to drive the endergonic (even if exothermic) reduction of CO2 to HCOOH, through the further formation of salts/formamide. The successive step of formic acid recovery has been recently described,191 with further development of continuous-flow hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to pure formic acid in a single processing unit.192 Zhao and Ferenc193 instead reported that free formic acid was produced in hydrogenation of carbon dioxide dissolved in aqueous sodium formate solutions under H2 and CO2 pressure with the water-soluble rhodium–phosphine complex [RhCl(mtppms)3] (mtppms = monosulfonated triphenylphosphine) as a catalyst.There are some new interesting alternative approaches under development for the hydrogenation of CO2 to HCOOH.- The use of tandem photoelectrocatalytic reactions, in particular the concurrent reduction of CO2 and photo-oxidation of methyl orange using nitrogen-doped TiO2.194- The coupling of a photocatalyst and an enzyme, in particular for the reoxidation of NAD+ to an NADH cofactor, the latter used by a formate dehydrogenation enzyme active in the reduction of CO2 to formic acid.195 It is used a graphene-based photocatalyst with a covalently bonded chromophore (anthraquinone substituted porphyrin) as an electron donor, and a rhodium complex supported on graphene (acting as an electron conductor) to mediate the transfers electrons and a hydride to NAD+, which gets converted to NADH.- The development of advanced photoelectrodes, in particular that of the AlGaN/GaN photoelectrode.196 Light illumination of a GaN photoelectrode creates separation of the electron–hole pairs that drive water oxidation and CO2 reduction reactions. The doped AlGaN acts as a photoabsorption layer promoting the production rate of formic acid by CO2 conversion.- The application of ionic liquids to promote the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formic acid.197- The use of a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC) driven by a microbial fuel cell (MFC).198 The electrodes were based on multi-walled carbon nanotubes, MWCNT, and Co tetra-amino phthalocyanine (CoTAPc) composite. The new electrodes significantly decreased the overpotential of CO2 reduction and as cathode successfully reduce CO2 to formic acid (production rate of up to about 21 mg L−1 h−1) in an MEC driven by a single MFC. The MWCNT/CoTAPc composite electrode reached the maximum Faraday efficiency at the cathode potential of about −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The coupling of the catalytic electrode and the bioelectrochemical system allows the reduction of CO2 in the absence of external energy input.There are also interesting developments in the photochemical and photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 recently reviewed by Kumar et al.63 An issue is the reduction of the overpotential, but it was shown that modified Cu electrodes (resulting from the reduction of thick Cu2O films) allow CO2 reduction at low overpotentials.199 There are thus exciting novel routes to produce formic acid, but still to consolidate in terms of effective practical applicability. The homogeneous catalysts described before appear to be the only applicable ones for now to the reversible storage of H2. However, several open questions still remain regarding cost, stability, safety, productivities and time response for the practical applicability of devices for H2 storage based on this concept.The other approaches described above are suited for the synthesis of formic acid, although this is not a product for large scale use and the development of formic acid fuelled fuel cells still shows a number of challenges.200 It is thus preferable to use conventional H2 fuel cells, and use formic acid for the storage and transport of renewable H2.201 This is an option interesting to couple with other direct sources of renewable electrical energy (photovoltaic, wind, etc.) to guarantee a constant in time supply of electrical energy, and favour in this way the use of RE in the process industry. For safety and energy density aspects, the use of r-H2 for the conversion of CO2 to methanol (used then in direct methanol fuel cells, DMFC) rather than the H2 reversible storage as formic acid (with use in conventional PEM fuel cells) was preferred.29c However, further specific techno-economic assessment studies are necessary for a better analysis of this question. Worth noting, the recent market research report “Methanol: 2012 World Market Outlook and Forecast”202 indicated that methanol based fuel cells will be the most prominent growth segment for the methanol market.A roadmap for CO2 use in relation to REThe discussion of a detailed roadmap for the use of CO2 in relation to the issue of introducing RE in the chemical production chain is out of the scope and limits of this perspective paper. Nevertheless, it is useful to present an indicative timeline summarizing some of the main steps, which help us to define the future prospects in this field. Fig. 7 shows a graphical representation of this timeline and concise roadmap. Fig. 7  Indicative timeline for the use of CO2 and RE to increase resource and energy efficiency in the chemical production chain. The current situation requires the 3-step strategy: step (1) – the production of electrical energy through renewable sources, step (2) – the electrolysis of water to produce H2, and step (3) – the use of H2 for the catalytic conversion of CO2 to products such as methanol, methane, formic acid which could be used either as energy vectors or raw materials for the chemical industry. These processes are currently economical only when rather cheap electrical energy is available (below about 0.05 $ per kW h). This target is possible in some remote areas (where, for example, electricity may be produced by hydropower, but there is no local use and transport through the grid is impossible) or for “excess” electrical energy, e.g. unused sources (for example, in wind or nuclear power overnight). The main elements of these technologies are available, but there is still the need to develop improved catalysts (more productive catalysts for CO2 conversion to methanol or methane, heterogeneous and cheaper catalysts for the reversible synthesis of formic acid to store H2, etc.) as well related technologies (for example, compact devices using microreactors for power-to-gas or to methanol conversion). It is also necessary to improve current electrolyzers (efficiency is still low). In addition to improve cell engineering (aspects where research is most focused), there is the need for better electrocatalysts design, starting from the understanding on how to decrease the overpotential in H2 generation from water electrolysis. It may be reasonable to assume that at least 5–10 years could be necessary. Further improvements in electrolyzer technology and engineering (stack capital reduction by optimal design of electrodes and electrolyzer cells, cost reduction for larger scale production), however, could be achieved in shorter time (3–5 years) and this will also decrease the cost. Avoiding the use of noble metals in electrodes is another clear target, also reasonably requiring longer time (around a decade), given the need for basic research.A first major contribution to decrease the costs will be to eliminate one of the steps in the current 3-step RE → chemical approach. There are two possible options. The first solution is to integrate the catalysts for water oxidation (to O2, protons and electrons) and H2 generation (using the protons and electrons generated in the other step) in a photovoltaic cell. There are already advanced studies in this 2-step direction, solar → H2 → chemical (see the review19 for more details), but it is necessary to have a breakthrough in the productivities and cost/efficiency (more relevant than the generally studied factor of quantum efficiency). Physically separated productions of O2 and H2 in the device are necessary for safety and separation cost motivations. This aspect requires a different design from those often currently investigated, and the presence of a proton-conductive membrane to separate the reactions producing O2 and H2.19 There is the need to develop more productive and stable catalysts for water oxidation, while the catalysts for H2 evolution are less critical (note that several studies focus instead on this aspect). The hydrogen produced in these devices is then used for the catalytic conversion of CO2. It may be estimated than within a decade the production of r-H2 by this route at competitive costs should become available (less than 2–3 $ per kg), making in turn also potentially attractive to produce short-chain olefins and other chemicals from CO2.The other possible approach is based on inverse (methanol) fuels cells, another 2-step strategy (RE → electricity → methanol). In a direct methanol fuel cell, methanol is converted to CO2 at the anode with the production of protons and electrons which reduce oxygen to water at the cathode side. Electrical energy is produced. In an inverse methanol fuel cell the process is formally inverted, by feeding electrical energy and CO2 to produce methanol. However, the electrocatalysts on both sides of the cell are completely different and still have to be developed. There are thus common aspects in cell engineering, but different types of electrocatalysts. By tuning the CO2 reduction electrocatalyst, products other than methanol could be formed. This is a new area of development and only preliminary attempts are currently present in the literature in this direction. More than 10 years thus appear necessary to make this technology mature.The final, long-term objective should be to develop direct 1-step (RE → chemical) devices which perform all these steps in a single unit, acting as a kind of an artificial leaf,19 eventually also integrating the step of CO2 capture from the atmosphere. With respect to natural leaves, these man-made devices should allow an intensified production, be cost-competitive and be able to tune the conversion of CO2 to the specific type of required products (chemicals, fuels). Their use will allow a distributed energy (or chemical) production, but there are many challenges in terms of electrocatalysts, nanodesign of elements and interfaces, charge transport and separation, etc. It is thus still a vision, whose realization should be possible only through the development of the next-generation catalysts, nanomaterials and nanosystems for energy. The realization of this vision and related knowledge on materials, nanodevices and catalysts can thus become one of the driving factors for a sustainable future of the chemical industry, because this area has the potential to become a game changer for chemistry.Future prospects and conclusionsWith the global consumption of primary energy today approaching 500 exajoules (EJ), largely through the use of oil, natural gas and coal resources, it is imperative to diminish in the coming years this reliance on fossil fuels to meet two emerging pressures:- To reduce the dependence on fossil fuels, even taking into consideration the new opportunities deriving from shale gases, in order to decrease related geopolitical pressures (energy security).- To reduce the flow of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere (socio-environment security).A major shift in a vital underpinning technology such as power generation takes decades. The imperative necessity to accelerate the introduction of RE in the energy system is thus out of discussion.203 Chemical production and related value chains are thus facing the urgent need for increasing the use of RE, but current RE production systems (solar PV panels, wind power, etc.) generate essentially electrical energy which does not match well with the energy needs of the current chemical production, as discussed in the Introduction. Large storage of electrical energy and the discontinuous electrical energy production through RE devices are two main issues. The possibility of effective introduction of RE into the chemical production value chain thus requires the use of RE to produce chemicals and energy vectors which can be easily integrated into the actual chemical production. It is thus clear from this perspective that CO2 conversion is the natural option by which this task of introducing RE into the chemical production chain can be realized. In fact, the conversion of CO2 to products such as those discussed in the review (short-chain olefins, methanol, formic acid, methane, etc.) could be realized through the use of RE, and these products of CO2 conversion are all well compatible with the currently established chemical industry. The CO2 conversion is thus an effective link between needs and requirements in RE injection in the current energy infrastructure, even if this problem is only starting to be recognized.There clearly are numerous technical and economic barriers to overcome before reaching this objective. We have analysed here the status of research in this direction, with a focus on catalysis and the open problems to be solved, among which the related mechanistic aspects, because conceptually new catalysts could be developed only by a fundamental understanding of the catalytic chemistry.The catalytic chemistry of the RWGS reaction and the following transformation to methanol/DME, or hydrocarbons via Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis, and the subsequent production of gasoline (methanol-to-gasoline, MTG) or of diesel via hydrocracking of the alkanes produced in the FT process (using Co-based catalysts) are well established, even if there is still the need for development, due to the change of feed composition starting from CO2 instead of from syngas, as commented before. Also in terms of process development most of the knowledge necessary is available. Minor technological barriers to develop these routes are thus present. Only for the synthesis of formic acid, either catalytically or electrocatalytically, there still is need for development in terms of productivity and stability, even if relevant progress has been made recently in this field.204The use of CO2 as the carbon-source for the production of short-chain olefins (ethylene, propylene) is an effective way to introduce renewable energy in the chemical industry value chain, improve resource efficiency and limit greenhouse gas emissions. There are different possible routes, but in all cases there is the need for a significant progress in catalyst design.The key for all these short-to-medium term reactions is the production of r-H2 at competitive costs, and for this reason part of this review has been dedicated to analyse the technical, economic and environmental aspects of the production of renewable H2. Also in this case, a key enabling factor is the development of new electrocatalysts with ideally zero overpotential in the production of H2 from water. This requires a better fundamental understanding of this old, but still challenging question.The issue of introduction of RE into the chemical production chain thus opens new challenges and interesting research perspectives, with the development of conceptually new catalysts through their better understanding as the enabling factor.GlossaryASFAnderson–Schulz–Flory (distribution of products in FT reactions),ATPAdenosine-5′-triphosphate,B-CHPBlock-type combined heat and power station,BEVBattery electric vehicle,CCPPCombined cycle power plant,CCSCarbon capture and storage,CNG-VCompressed natural gas vehicle,CRICarbon recycling international,CSPConcentrated solar power,DFTDensity functional theory,DMFCDirect methanol fuel cell,DMEDimethyl ether,DRDry reforming,DRIFTSDiffuse reflectance IR Fourier transform spectroscopy,EOREnhanced oil recovery,EUEuropean Union,FCEVFuel cell electric vehicle,FTFisher–Tropsch,GHGGreenhouse gas,LCALife-cycle assessment,LTMSLow-temperature methanol synthesis,MECMicrobial electrolysis cell,MFCMicrobial fuel cell,MTOMethanol-to-olefin,MTPMethanol-to-propylene,MWCNTMultiwall carbon nanotubes,NAD+Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH is the reduced form of NAD+),NADPHNicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase,LPGLiquefied petroleum gas,PECPhotoelectrocatalytic,PEMProton exchange membrane (fuel cell),Plug-In HEVPlug-in hybrid electric vehicle,RERenewable energy,PNP2,6-Bis-(di-t-butylphosphinomethyl)pyridine,RMRenewable methanol,RWGSReverse water–gas shift,SNGSubstituted or synthetic natural gas,SRSabatier reaction,UCLAUniversity of California at Los Angeles,WGSWater–gas shift.AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank all members of the Cefic CO2 Initiative (in particular, Dr E. D'Hooghe) whose fruitful discussions have contributed to elaborate the concepts presented in this perspective paper. EAQ gratefully acknowledges the CPE Lyon sustainable development chair and its sponsor the DOW Chemical company.ReferencesABB, Overview of energy efficiency in industry and utilities, in Trends in global energy efficiency,  2011, accessed 28 March 2013, http://www05.abb.com/global/scot/scot316.nsf/veritydisplay/48d2bfc08d960244c1257864004caf9e/$file/the%20global%20report.pdf Search PubMed .European Commission, A Resource-Efficient Europe – Flagship Initiative Under the Europe 2020 Strategy, COM(2011) 21 (Brussels, 26.1.2011), accessed 28 March 2013, http://ec.europa.eu/resource-efficient-europe/pdf/resource_efficient_europe_en.pdf Search PubMed.SPIRE (Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and Energy Efficiency), accessed 28 March 2013, http://www.eu-nited.net/cms/upload//SPIRE__Sustainable_Process_Industry__October_2011.pdf.E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J.-L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta, Carbon Dioxide as Chemical Feedstock, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2010 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Dalton Trans., 2007, 28, 2975–2992 Search PubMed .
  (a) G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 1–8 CAS .
  (a) M. Peters, B. Köhler, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, P. Markewitz and T. E. Müller, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1216–1240 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Peters, T. Müller and W. Leitner, Tce, 2009, 13, 46–47 Search PubMed .M. Mikkelsen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC .T. Sakakura, J.-C. Choi and H. Yasuda, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2365–2387 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Ma, N. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 221–231 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .C. Song, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 2–32 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451–3458 Search PubMed .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884–890 RSC .Z. Jiang, T. Xiao, V. L. Kuznetsov and P. P. Edwards, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 3343–3364 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. Surya Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 487–498 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. Surya Prakash, Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .S. Atsumi, W. Higashide and J. C. Liao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 1177–1180 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, P. H. Opgenorth, D. G. Wernick, S. Rogers, T.-Y. Wu, W. Higashide, P. Malati, Y.-X. Huo, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Science, 2012, 335, 1596 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Stratton, H. M. Wong and J. I. Hileman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4637–4644 Search PubMed .S. Bensaid, G. Centi, E. Garrone, S. Perathoner and G. Saracco, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 500–521 Search PubMed .S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS .G. P. Smestad and A. Steinfeld, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 11828–11840 Search PubMed .F. Cavani, G. Centi, S. Perathoner and F. Trifirò, Sustainable Industrial Chemistry, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (Germany),  2009 Search PubMed .
  (a) US Department of Energy, Manufacturing Energy and Carbon Footprint, Sector: Chemicals (NAICS 325),  December 2010, accessed 30 March 2013, http://www1.eere.energy.gov/manufacturing/pdfs/chemicals_footprint.pdf Search PubMed ; 
  (b) US Department of Energy, Manufacturing Energy and Carbon Footprint, Sector: Petroleum Refining (NAICS 324110),  December 2010, accessed 30 March 2013, http://www1.eere.energy.gov/manufacturing/pdfs/petroleum_footprint.pdf Search PubMed .F. Gutiérrez and E. Atanes, Power management using electrolytic hydrogen, SciTopics,  2010, http://www.scitopics.com/Power_management_using_electrolytic_hydrogen.html Search PubMed .G. J. Kraaij and M. Weeda, Conversion of excess wind energy into hydrogen for fuel cell applications, Report E-08-063, ECN, The Netherlands,  2008 Search PubMed .J. R. Luoma, The Challenge for Green Energy: How to Store Excess Electricity, Yale Environment 360,  13 July 2009, accessed 30 March 2013, http://e360.yale.edu/feature/the_challenge_for_green_energy_how_to_store_excess_electricity/2170/ Search PubMed .
  (a) G. Centi, S. Perathoner, G. Wine and M. Gangeri, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 671–678 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Ampelli, G. Centi, R. Passalacqua and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 292–301 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Gangeri, S. Perathoner, S. Caudo, G. Centi, J. Amadou, D. Begin, C. Pham-Huu, M. J. Ledoux, J. P. Tessonnier, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, Catal. Today, 2009, 143, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) E. B. Cole, K. Teamey, A. B. Bocarsly, N. Sivasankar and Narayanappa, US Pat. Appl. Publ., US 20120132538 A1 20120531,  2012 ; 
  (b) K. Keets, A. Morris, E. Zeitler, P. Lakkaraju and A. Bocarsly, Proceedings of SPIE, Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology V,  2010, vol. 7770, p. 77700R Search PubMed .
  (a) G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 195–208 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 21–35 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Centi, S. Perathoner, R. Passalacqua and C. Ampelli, in Carbon-Neutral Fuels and Energy Carriers, ed. N. Z. Muradov and T. Veziroğlu, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL – USA,  2011, ch. 4, pp. 291–324 Search PubMed .W. Haije and H. Geerlings, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 8609–8610 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Cogdell, T. H. P. Brotosudarmo, A. T. Gardiner, P. M. Sanchez and L. Cronin, Biofuels, 2010, 1, 861–876 Search PubMed .United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), Global Technology Roadmap for Carbon Capture and Storage for Industry, COP 16 Report,  December 2010, accessed 28 March 2013, http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/Energy_and_Climate_Change/Energy_Efficiency/CCS/COP16%20_UNIDO_digitalversion.pdf Search PubMed .G. Centi and S. Perathoner, in The Role of Catalysis for the Sustainable Production of Bio-fuels and Bio-chemicals, ed. K. Triantafyllidis, A. Lappas and M. Støcker, Elsevier Science Pub., Amsterdam,  2013, ch. 16, pp. 529–576 Search PubMed .
  (a) P. Millet, R. Ngameni, S. A. Grigoriev and V. N. Fateev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4156–4163 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Millet, R. Ngameni, S. A. Grigoriev, N. Mbemba, F. Brisset, A. Ranjbari and C. Etievant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5043–5052 CrossRef CAS .C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 398–403 CrossRef CAS .A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2331–2340206 RSC .H. Bothe, O. Schmitz, M. G. Yates and W. E. Newton, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 2010, 74, 529–551 Search PubMed .G. Davila-Vazquez, C. B. Cota-Navarro, L. M. Rosales-Colunga, L.-R. A. de and E. Razo-Flores, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4296–4304 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhu and M. Zaech, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
  (a) D. B. Levin and R. Chahine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4962–4969 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. B. Levin, C. R. Carere, N. Cicek and R. Sparling, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 7390–7403 Search PubMed .N. Wrana, R. Sparling, N. Cicek and D. B. Levin, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18, S105–S111 Search PubMed .M. Korpaas and C. J. Greiner, Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 1199–1208 CrossRef .
  (a) R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sánchez-Sánchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, F. del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35–54 RSC ; 
  (b) R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, J. L. G. Fierro and S. M. Al-Zaharani, Hydrogen Production from Renewables, in Encyclopedia of Inorganic and Bioinorganic Chemistry, Wiley on line library,  2011,  DOI:10.1002/9781119951438.eibc0450 .A. Milbrandt and M. Mann, Potential for Hydrogen Production from Key Renewable Resources in the United States, Technical Report, NREL/TP-640-41134, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  February 2007 Search PubMed .G. Centi and R. A. van Santen, Catalysis for Renewables: From Feedstock to Energy Production, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. D. Cortright, R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, Nature, 2002, 418, 964–967 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. R. Davda, J. W. Shabaker, G. W. Huber, R. D. Cortright and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .D. Chen and L. He, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 490–511 Search PubMed .S. Sarkar and A. Kumar, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 7350–7361 Search PubMed .M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, N. Mota, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas, R. M. Navarro and J. L. G. Fierro, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 15–23 Search PubMed .J. Ruether, M. Ramezan and E. Grol, Life-Cycle Analysis of Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Hydrogen Fuel Production in the United States from LNG and Coal, DOE/NETL-2006/1227 Report,  November 2005, accessed 30 March 3013, http://www.netl.doe.gov/energy-analyses/pubs/h2_from_coal_lng_final.pdf Search PubMed .M. Marquevich, G. W. Sonnemann, F. Castells and D. Montane, Green Chem., 2002, 4, 414–423 RSC .S. N. Djomo and D. Blumberga, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 2684–2694 Search PubMed .P. L. Spath and M. K. Mann, Life Cycle Assessment of Renewable Hydrogen Production via Wind/Electrolysis, NREL/MP-560-35404 Report,  February 2004, http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy04osti/35404.pdf Search PubMed .V. Utgikar and T. Thiese, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 939–944 CrossRef CAS .T. L. Gibson and N. A. Kell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5931–5940 CrossRef CAS .A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2331–2340 RSC .L. Barbato, G. Iaquaniello and A. Mangiapane, Reuse of CO2 to make methanol using renewable hydrogen, in CO2: A Valuable Source of Carbon, ed. M. De Falco, G. Iaquaniello and G. Centi, Springer-Verlag London Ltd.,  2013, ISBN 978-1-4471-5118-0, in press Search PubMed .European Commission, A roadmap for moving to a competitive low carbon economy in 2050, COM(2011) 112 final, accessed 30 March 2013, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0112:FIN:EN:HTML Search PubMed.T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132–2133 CrossRef CAS .J. i. Hong, W. Zhang, J. Ren and R. Xu, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1086–1097 RSC .A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217–9233 RSC .B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 Search PubMed .P. Ferreira-Aparicio, I. Rodriguez-Ramos and A. Guerrero-Ruiz, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 237, 239–252 Search PubMed .F. Gallucci, S. Tosti and A. Basile, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 317, 96–105 Search PubMed .M. Halmann and A. Steinfeld, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 8061–8066 Search PubMed .S.-H. Lee, W. Cho, W.-S. Ju, B.-H. Cho, Y.-C. Lee and Y.-S. Baek, Catal. Today, 2003, 87, 133–137 Search PubMed .M. Minutillo and A. Perna, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7012–7020 Search PubMed .L. Pino, A. Vita, F. Cipiti, M. Lagana and V. Recupero, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 64–73 Search PubMed .J. M. Garcia-Vargas, J. L. Valverde, A. de Lucas-Consuegra, B. Gomez-Monedero, P. Sanchez and F. Dorado, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 431–432, 49–56 Search PubMed .D. Li, Y. Nakagawa and K. Tomishige, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 408, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .M.-S. Fan, A. Z. Abdullah and S. Bhatia, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 192–208 Search PubMed .L. Guczi, G. Stefler, O. Geszti, I. Sajo, Z. Paszti, A. Tompos and Z. Schay, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 375, 236–246 CrossRef .Y. Sun, T. Ritchie, S. S. Hla, S. McEvoy, W. Stein and J. H. Edwards, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 568–576 Search PubMed .International Energy Agency (IEA), Technology Roadmap – Concentrating Solar Power, IEA, Paris (France),  2010 Search PubMed .N. Mota, C. Alvarez-Galvan, R. M. Navarro and J. L. G. Fierro, Biofuels, 2011, 2, 325–343 Search PubMed .K. Takehira, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2009, 18, 237–259 Search PubMed .G. Kocar and A. Eryasar, Energy Sources, Part A, 2007, 29, 1513–1520 Search PubMed .A. F. Lucredio, J. M. Assaf and E. M. Assaf, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 102, 124–131 Search PubMed .G. Bonura, C. Cannilla and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 121–122, 135–147 Search PubMed .K. Parkhomenko, A. Tyunyaev, L. M. Martinez Tejada, D. Komissarenko, A. Dedov, A. Loktev, I. Moiseev and A.-C. Roger, Catal. Today, 2012, 189, 129–135 Search PubMed .G. Brus, Y. Komatsu, S. Kimijima and J. S. Szmyd, Int. J. Thermodyn., 2012, 15, 43–51 Search PubMed .M. Saito and K. Murata, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2004, 8, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .S. Srinivas, R. K. Malik and S. M. Mahajani, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2007, 11, 66–71 Search PubMed .S. A. French, A. A. Sokol, S. T. Bromley, C. R. A. Catlow and P. Sherwood, Top. Catal., 2003, 24, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .J. Strunk, K. Kaehler, X. Xia and M. Muhler, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1776–1783 CrossRef CAS .X.-M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z.-F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518 CrossRef CAS .R. Raudaskoski, E. Turpeinen, R. Lenkkeri, E. Pongracz and R. L. Keiski, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 318–323 CrossRef CAS .M. Kazemimoghadam and T. Mohammadi, Desalination, 2010, 255, 196–200 Search PubMed .
  (a) O.-S. Joo, K.-D. Jun and J. Yonsoo, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 67–72 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M.-J. Choi and D.-H. Cho, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2008, 36, 426–432 Search PubMed .Y. X. Chen, A. Miki, S. Ye, H. Sakai and M. Osawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 25, 3680–3681 Search PubMed .Y. Yang, C. A. Mims, R. S. Disselkamp, J.-H. Kwak, C. H. F. Peden and C. T. Campbell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17205–17211 Search PubMed .Y.-F. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Mims, C. H. F. Peden, J. Li and D. Mei, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 199–211 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 Search PubMed .
  (a) P. Kurr, I. Kasatkin, F. Girgsdies, A. Trunschke, R. Schlögl and T. Ressler, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 348, 153–164 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Kasatkin, P. Kurr, B. Kniep, A. Trunschke and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7324–7327 CrossRef CAS .P. Liu, Y. M. Choi, Y. Yang and M. G. White, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3888–3895 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) X.-L. Liang, X. Dong, G.-D. Lin and H.-B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88, 315–322 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Zhang, Y.-Z. Zuo, M.-H. Han, J.-F. Wang, Y. Jin and F. Wei, Catal. Today, 2010, 150, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .S. Ohyama, Curr. Top. Catal., 2006, 5, 1–15 Search PubMed .P. H. Dixneuf, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 578–579 Search PubMed .P. G. Jessop, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 259–272 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Huff and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18122–18125 CrossRef CAS .E. Balaraman, C. Gunanathan, J. Zhang, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 609–614 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Kerry Yu and S. C. Tsang, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 259–265 CrossRef .S. Lee and A. Sardesai, Top. Catal., 2005, 32, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Ren, M. Patel and K. Blok, Energy, 2006, 31, 425–451 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Ren, M. K. Patel and K. Blok, Energy, 2008, 33, 817–833 CAS .M. Neelis, Energy, 2007, 32, 1104–1123 Search PubMed .G. Centi, G. Iaquaniello and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4(9), 1265–1273 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) E. Schwab, A. Weck, J. Steiner and K. Bay, Oil, Gas (Hamburg, Ger.), 2010, 36, 44–47 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Schwab, A. Weck, J. Steiner and K. Bay, DGMK Tagungsber., 2009, 2, 25–30 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. Snel, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1987, 29, 361–445 ; 
  (b) R. Snel, Hydrogenation of Carbon Monoxide to Alkenes. A Critical Review of Theoretical Considerations and Processes, CSIR report CENG-598,  1986 Search PubMed .M. Janardanarao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1990, 29, 1735–1753 CrossRef .
  (a) M. J. F. M. Verhaak, Process for preparing olefins from synthesis gas using a cobalt and manganese containing catalyst, WO2012000883A1,  2012 ; 
  (b) G. H. M. Torres, J. H. Bitter and J. K. P. De Jong, Production of lower olefins from synthesis gas, EP2314557A1,  2011 ; 
  (c) J. Steiner, K. Bay, E. Schwab and A. Weck, Process for the selective preparation of light olefins, US20110118365A1,  2011 ; 
  (d) S.-H. Kang, J.-W. Bae, K.-W. Jun, Y.-J. Lee and H. J. Kim, Catalyst for direct production of light olefins and preparation method thereof, WO2011027921A2,  2011 ; 
  (e) C. Ferrini, Production of light olefins from synthesis gas, WO2011141374A1,  2011 ; 
  (f) L. A. Chewter, H. Henry and W. J. Van, Process for producing olefins, WO2011057982A2,  2011 ; 
  (g) G. Torres and M. Hirsa, Production of lower olefins from synthesis gas, EP2314557A1,  2011 ; 
  (h) C. L. Kibby, A. W. Burton Jr, A. Hass and S. Holz, Process for conversion of synthesis gas to hydrocarbons using zeolite-methanol catalyst system, US20100144907A1,  2010 ; 
  (i) M. C. M. Claeys, E. W. J. Van Steen, F. Roessner and A. K. Rausch, A process for the production of hydrocarbons including olefins from synthesis gas, WO2009127950A2,  2009 ; 
  (j) J. L. M. Dierickx, Process to prepare lower olefins from a Fischer–Tropsch synthesis product, US7517916B2,  2009 .R. A. van Santen, E. van Steen and I. Ciobica, Adv. Catal., 2001, 54, 127–187 Search PubMed .R. A. van Santen, M. Neurock and S. Shetty, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2005–2048 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Ahon, E. F. Costa Jr, J. E. P. Monteagudo, C. E. Fontes, E. C. Biscaia Jr and P. L. C. Lage, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 677–694 Search PubMed .J. Gaube and H.-F. Klein, in Advances in Fischer–Tropsch Synthesis, Catalysts, and Catalysis, ed. B. H. Davis and M. L. Occelli, CRC Press, Boca Raton (FL, USA),  2010, pp. 199–214 Search PubMed .G. L. Bezemer, J. H. Bitter, H. P. C. E. Kuipers, H. Oosterbeek, J. E. Holewijn, X. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3956–3964 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Saib, A. Borgna, J. van de Loosdrecht, P. J. van Berge and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8657–8664 CrossRef CAS .R. A. van Santen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, J. Hu, D. Rector and W. Liu, in Proceedings – Annual International Pittsburgh Coal Conference,  2007, vol. 24, pp. 441/1–441/9 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. Feyzi, M. M. Khodaei and J. Shahmoradi, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 93, 90–98 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Feyzi and A. Hassankhani, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 677–686 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Feyzi, M. Irandoust and A. A. Mirzaei, Fuel Process. Technol., 2011, 92, 1136–1143 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Feyzi, A. A. Mirzaei and H. R. Bozorgzadeh, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2010, 19, 341–353 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Feyzi and A. A. Mirzaei, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2010, 19, 422–430 Search PubMed .Anonymous, IP.com J.,  2011, 11, 2.N. Jiang, G. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Shi and N. Tsubaki, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 951–954 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Cano, M. V. Cagnoli, J. F. Bengoa, A. M. Alvarez and S. G. Marchetti, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 310–320 Search PubMed .S.-H. Kang, J.-W. Bae, K.-J. Woo, P. P. S. Sai and K.-W. Jun, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 399–403 Search PubMed .C. Wang, X. Pan and X. Bao, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2010, 55, 1117–1119 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Park, Y.-J. Lee, K.-W. Jun, J. W. Bae, N. Viswanadham and Y. H. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 847–853 Search PubMed .A. A. Mirzaei, S. Vahid and M. Feyzi, Adv. Phys. Chem., 2009, 1–12 Search PubMed .S. T. Hussain, M. Mazhar and M. A. Nadeem, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2009, 18, 187–190 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Catal. Commun., 2011, 15, 88–92 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 373, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .Petroleum Quality Information System Report, Defense Energy Support Center – DESC-BP, Fort Belvoir Virginia,  2008–2010.C. Wang, L. Xu and Q. Wang, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2003, 12, 10–16 Search PubMed .P. S. Sai Prasad, J. W. Bae, K.-W. Jun and K.-W. Lee, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2008, 12, 170–183 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, L. Wang, X. Hao and J. Wu, Front. Chem. Eng. China, 2010, 4, 153–162 Search PubMed .N. V. Kolesnichenko, T. I. Goryainova, E. N. Biryukova, O. V. Yashina and S. N. Khadzhiev, Pet. Chem., 2011, 51, 55–60 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. W. Kaiser, Production of light olefins, US pat., 4499327,  1985 ; 
  (b) S. W. Kaiser, Arabian J. Sci. Eng., 1985, 10, 361–366 Search PubMed .J. Q. Chen, A. Bozzano, B. Glover, T. Fuglerud and S. Kvisle, Catal. Today, 2005, 106, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 Search PubMed .
  (a) H. Kurakata, Y. Izumi and K. Aika, Chem. Commun., 1996, 389–390 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Izumi, Platinum Met. Rev., 1997, 41, 166–170 CAS .G. Yang, M. Thongkam, T. Vitidsant, Y. Yoneyama, Y. Tan and N. Tsubaki, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .J. Erena, I. Sierra, A. T. Aguayo, A. Ateka, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 174, 660–667 Search PubMed .X. An, Y.-Z. Zuo, Q. Zhang, D.-z. Wang and J.-F. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 6547–6554 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Naik, T. Ryu, V. Bui, J. D. Miller, N. B. Drinnan and W. Zmierczak, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 362–368 Search PubMed .G. Centi and S. Perathoner, in Nanoporous Materials. Advanced Techniques for Characterization, Modeling, and Processing, ed. N. Kanellopoulos, CRC Press (Taylor and Francis Group), Boca Raton, FL (USA),  2011, ch. 14, pp. 481–511 Search PubMed .V. Sage and N. Burke, Catal. Today, 2011, 178, 137–141 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. A. van Santen, M. M. Ghouri, S. Shetty and E. M. H. Hensen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 891–911 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Shetty and S. R. A. van, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 168–173 Search PubMed .Z.-j. Wang, Z. Yan, C.-j. Liu and D. W. Goodman, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 551–559 Search PubMed .J. Cheng, P. Hu, P. Ellis, S. French, G. Kelly and C. M. Lok, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 326–337 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Khodakov, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 251–257 CrossRef CAS .S. Abello and D. Montane, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1538–1556 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Calderone, N. R. Shiju, D. C. Ferre and G. Rothenberg, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1950–1959 RSC .E. F. Sousa-Aguiar, F. B. Noronha and A. Faro, Jr, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 22–37 Search PubMed .K. A. de Klerk, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1177–1205 RSC .Q. Zhang, J. Kang and Y. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 1030–1058 Search PubMed .J. L. Casci, C. M. Lok and M. D. Shannon, Catal. Today, 2009, 145, 38–44 Search PubMed .F. G. Botes, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2008, 50, 471–491 Search PubMed .P. S. S. Prasad, J. W. Bae, K.-W. Jun and K.-W. Lee, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2008, 12, 170–183 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Dalai and B. H. Davis, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 348, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .S. Srinivas, R. K. Malik and S. M. Mahajani, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2007, 11, 66–71 Search PubMed .E. A. Blekkan, O. Borg, V. Froeseth and A. Holmen, Catalysis, 2007, 20, 13–32 Search PubMed .D. L. Gerlach and N. Lehnert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7984–7986 CrossRef CAS .N. M. West, A. J. M. Miller, J. A. Labinger and J. E. Bercaw, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 881–898 Search PubMed .A. Martinez and G. Prieto, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 75–90 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Dalai and B. H. Davis, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 348, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .O. O. James, A. M. Mesubi, T. C. Ako and S. Maity, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .W. Ning, N. Koizumi and M. Yamada, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4696–4700 CrossRef CAS .L.-Y. Xu, Q.-X. Wang, D.-B. Liang, L.-W. Lin, W. Cui and Y.-D. Xu, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 1997, 6, 101–110 Search PubMed .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams, B. H. Davis and H. D. Willauer, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4190–4195 CrossRef CAS .Y. Q. Zhang, G. Jacobs, D. E. Sparks, M. E. Dry and B. H. Davis, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 411–418 CrossRef CAS .T. Riedel, M. Claeys, H. Schulz, G. Schaub, S. S. Nam, K. W. Jun, M. J. Choi, G. Kishan and K. W. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .F. Tihay, A. C. Roger, G. Pourroy and A. Kiennemann, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Visconti, L. Lietti, E. Tronconi, P. Forzatti, R. Zennaro and E. Finocchio, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 355, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yao, D. Hildebrandt, D. Glasser and X. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 11061–11066 Search PubMed .F. D. Doty, L. Holte and S. Shevgoor, Proceedings of the ASME 2009 3rd International Conference of Energy Sustainability (July 19–23, 2009, San Francisco, California US), ES2009-90182, 1-8, accessed 28 March 2013, http://www.dotyenergy.com/PDFs/ES09-Doty-1-windfuels-90182.pdf Search PubMed.M. Specht, J. Brellochs, V. Frick, B. Stürmer, U. Zuberbühler, M. Sterner and G. Waldstein, Erdoel, Erdgas, Kohle, 2010, 126, 342–345 Search PubMed .J. Ralston and E. Fareid, Catalytic CO2 Recycle (CCRTM) Technology, Proceedings 7th Power Plant Air Pollutant Control “Mega” Symposium 2008, Baltimore, US,  August 2008, vol. 1, pp. 1–12 Search PubMed .S. Tada, T. Shimizu, H. Kameyama, T. Haneda and R. Kikuchi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 5527–5531 Search PubMed .A. Karelovic and P. Ruiz, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 113–114, 237–249 Search PubMed .S. Eckle, M. Augustin, H.-G. Anfang and R. J. Behm, Catal. Today, 2012, 181, 40–51 Search PubMed .S. Eckle, H.-G. Anfang and R. J. Behm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1361–1367 CrossRef CAS .S. Sharma, Z. Hu, P. Zhang, E. W. McFarland and H. Metiu, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 297–309 CrossRef CAS .J.-N. Park and E. W. McFarland, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .T. Abe, M. Tanizawa, K. Watanabe and A. Taguchi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 315–321 RSC .
  (a) J. Ferenc, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 805–808 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1995, 34, 2207–2221 CrossRef CAS .M. Grasemann and G. Laurenczy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8171–8181 RSC .P. Haynes, L. H. Slaugh and J. F. Kohnle, Tetrahedron Lett., 1970, 365–368 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Jessop, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Nature, 1994, 368, 231–233 CrossRef CAS .R. Tanaka, M. Yamashita and K. Nozaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14168–14169 CrossRef CAS .C. Federsel, A. Boddien, R. Jackstell, R. Jennerjahn, P. J. Dyson, R. Scopelliti, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9777–9780 CrossRef CAS .Y. Maenaka, T. Suenobu and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7360–7367 RSC .J. F. Hull, Y. Himeda, W.-H. Wang, B. Hashiguchi, R. Periana, D. J. Szalda, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 383–388 CrossRef CAS .T. Schaub and R. A. Paciello, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7278–7282 CrossRef CAS .S. Wesselbaum, U. Hintermair and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8585–8588 Search PubMed .G. Zhao and J. Ferenc, Catal. Commun., 2011, 14, 74–76 Search PubMed .Y.-P. Peng, Y.-T. Yeh, S. I. Shah and C. P. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 414–423 Search PubMed .R. K. Yadav, J.-O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N.-J. Park, K.-j. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455–11461 Search PubMed .S. Yotsuhashi, M. Deguchi, H. Hashiba, Y. Zenitani, R. Hinogami, Y. Yamada and K. Ohkawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 243904 Search PubMed .B. C. M. Martindale and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6487–6489 RSC .H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Chang and Z. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 5198–5204 Search PubMed .C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS .S. Uhm, H. J. Lee and J. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9326–9336 RSC .B. Loges, A. Boddien, H. Junge and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 4026–4029 Search PubMed .Merchant Research and Consulting Ltd., Methanol 2012 World Market Outlook and Forecast up to 2017, Jan. 2013 Search PubMed.G. Centi and S. Perathoner, in The Chemical Element: Chemistry's Contribution to Our Global Future, ed. J. Garcia-Martinez and E. Serrano-Torregrosa, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2011, ch. 8, pp. 269–309 Search PubMed .A. S. Agarwal, Y. Zhai, D. Hill and N. Sridhar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1301–1310 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Gabriele Centi	Gabriele Centi completed his industrial chemistry studies at the University of Bologna (Italy) and is currently Professor of Industrial Chemistry at the University of Messina (Italy). He is a former President of the European Federation of Catalysis Societies, and was Co-ordinator of the European Network of Excellence on catalysis IDECAT. He is co-Chairman of the Editorial Board of ChemSusChem and Chief Editor of the book series Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis (Elsevier) and Green Energy (De Gruyter). His research interests lie in the development of industrial heterogeneous catalysts for sustainable chemical processes, environmental protection, and clean energy.
Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli	Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli earned her undergraduate Laurea degree in chemistry from Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa (Italy) and her Ph.D. from the University of Maryland (US). She is currently a confirmed CNRS researcher in the field of catalysis and organometallic chemistry and head of the sustainable development chair of École Supérieure de Chimie Physique Électronique de Lyon (CPE Lyon, France), a sponsored chair by the DOW France Chemical company. She co-chairs the decarbonated energies workgroup of the French competitive cluster AXELERA. Her current research interests are N2 and SiH4 activation by silica-supported organometallic complexes and by novel functional materials such as metal–organic frameworks. She founded and chairs the “CO2 Forum (Large volume CO2 recycling)” in Lyon.
Siglinda Perathoner	Siglinda Perathoner received her degree in Chemistry at the University of Bologna (Italy) in 1984 and her Ph.D. in Chemical Science in 1988 working on photophysics and photochemistry of supramolecular systems. In 2001 she joined the University of Messina and is associate professor of Industrial Chemistry presently. Her recent research interests include nanostructured zeolites, catalytic membranes, catalysts for waste water purification and remediation, photo(electro)catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide, and fuel cells.
Broader contextThe chemical industry has a key role in creating a sustainable, resource-efficient, low-carbon economy and society. A strategic element to seize such an opportunity consists of effectively introducing renewable energy in the chemical production chain. Presently, over 95% of the industrial processes still use thermal energy. Electrical energy use in the chemical industry is still quite low although electrical energy is the main output of the actual renewable energy sources (with the exception of biomass conversion). This perspective article shows how the conversion of CO2 into feedstock for the chemical/process industry is the most efficient way to rapidly introduce renewable energy in this value chain and discusses the various options possible to proceed in this direction, in particular from the perspective of the state of the art of catalysis. While these two issues—CO2 management and the use of renewable energy (RE)—have been usually considered as separate aspects, we will show here how they are tightly interconnected. The paper defines also the needs and possible roadmap for catalysis in order to enable the chemical conversion of CO2 to become the key component towards a resource and energy efficient future for the chemical industry.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic overview of the CO2 conversion routes to incorporate renewable energy in the chemical and energy chains. The renewable energy is used either directly (in the solar thermal production of syngas) or indirectly, according to two main possibilities: (i) production of renewable H2 or (ii) production of electrons, or electrons/protons (by water photo-oxidation), used in the electrochemical routes. (b) Detail of the different possible routes to synthesize light olefins (as raw material to incorporate RE in the chemical production chain) from CO2 and renewable H2.	 
CO2 + r-H2  CO + H2O	(1)
CO2 + CH4  2CO + 2H2	(2)
CH4  C + 2H2	(3)
2CO  C + CO2	(4)
CO2 + H2O  CO + 3H2	(5)
CH4 + ½O2 → CO + 2H2	(6a)
CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O	(6b)

 	Fig. 2  Simplified process flow diagram for the RWGS reactor and methanol synthesis system.	 
CO + 2r-H2 → CH3OH	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Cascade reactions in the catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to CH3OH in a homogeneous phase via three different catalysts (adapted from Huff and Sanford101).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematics of the changes in the reaction rates of key reaction steps as a function of metal–carbon interaction energies (adapted from ref. 112).	 



Co40Zn6/TiO2	2	240	1100	1	65.2	9.3	46.5	 	 	 	30.3	2.7	120a
Nanosized Co3Fe1-K2%	2	260	2200	1	63.8	10.2	54.4	18.6	16	19.8	34.7	3.2	120b
Fe20/SiO2	2	380	a	1	41	22.6	20.2	5.2	12	3	8.3	1.7	122
Core (Fe/SiO2)–shell (silicalite-1)	2	380	a	1	21.2	20.6	30	11.8	14.9	3.3	6.4	1.5	122
Fe50Mn50-K6%	2	280	1400	3	64.4	6.1	48.9	21.1	14.1	13.7	31.5	2.6	120c
Fe/SBA-15 (reduc. H2)	2	430	1176	1	20.1	18.4	16.9	 	 	 	3.4	 	123
Fe40Ni60 (6%)/Al2O3	2	260	2600	3	64.1	20.2	40.1	19.2	15.3	5.6	25.7	1.9	120e
Fe40Ni60 (40%)/Al2O3	2	360	3600	7	78	14.1	73.9	37.8	19.6	16.5	57.6	14.2	120d
Fe–Cu–K/ZSM-5 (Si/Al = 25)	2	300	b	1	80.7	18.3	24.9	 	 	 	20.1	 	124
Fe/CNT	1	300	21800	0.5	11.2	17.9	41.6	 	 	 	4.7	7.1	125
Fe/carbon black	1	300	21800	0.5	8.8	21	38.1	 	 	 	3.4	5.6	125
Fe/SBA-15 (reduc. H2)	1	300	21800	0.5	2.3	25.5	39.5	 	 	 	0.9	4.3	125
Fe/SiO2	1	300	21800	0.5	4	25.8	38.1	 	 	 	1.5	6.4	125
Fe–Cu–Al + ZSM-5 (dual bed)c	2	300d	3600	10	96.9	8.7	34.4	5.4	19.1	9.9	33.3	3.7	126
Fe50Mn50 (5%)/Al2O3	1	360	2700	6	84	19.8	59.2	40.1	13.2	5.9	49.7	 	127
Mn–Co/H-5A zeolite	4	300–400	 	1	40.9	0.2	85.8	 	 	 	35.1	 	128

 	Fig. 5  Performances of UOP/Hydro MTO process and their integration with the Total/UOP olefin cracking (OC) unit using two types of zeolites, the second tailored to enhance propylene formation (adapted from ref. 136).	 
2CH3OH  CH3OCH3 + H2O	(8)
CO + H2 → CnH2n + CnH2n+2 + H2O + CO2 (n = 1, 2, …)	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Wind to SNG (power-to-gas) concept for bidirectional coupling of the electricity and gas grids with a link to the mobility sector. See glossary for acronyms (adapted from ref. 174).	 
CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O	(10)

 	Fig. 7  Indicative timeline for the use of CO2 and RE to increase resource and energy efficiency in the chemical production chain.	 
ASF	Anderson–Schulz–Flory (distribution of products in FT reactions),
ATP	Adenosine-5′-triphosphate,
B-CHP	Block-type combined heat and power station,
BEV	Battery electric vehicle,
CCPP	Combined cycle power plant,
CCS	Carbon capture and storage,
CNG-V	Compressed natural gas vehicle,
CRI	Carbon recycling international,
CSP	Concentrated solar power,
DFT	Density functional theory,
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cell,
DME	Dimethyl ether,
DR	Dry reforming,
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance IR Fourier transform spectroscopy,
EOR	Enhanced oil recovery,
EU	European Union,
FCEV	Fuel cell electric vehicle,
FT	Fisher–Tropsch,
GHG	Greenhouse gas,
LCA	Life-cycle assessment,
LTMS	Low-temperature methanol synthesis,
MEC	Microbial electrolysis cell,
MFC	Microbial fuel cell,
MTO	Methanol-to-olefin,
MTP	Methanol-to-propylene,
MWCNT	Multiwall carbon nanotubes,
NAD+	Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH is the reduced form of NAD+),
NADPH	Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase,
LPG	Liquefied petroleum gas,
PEC	Photoelectrocatalytic,
PEM	Proton exchange membrane (fuel cell),
Plug-In HEV	Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle,
RE	Renewable energy,
PNP	2,6-Bis-(di-t-butylphosphinomethyl)pyridine,
RM	Renewable methanol,
RWGS	Reverse water–gas shift,
SNG	Substituted or synthetic natural gas,
SR	Sabatier reaction,
UCLA	University of California at Los Angeles,
WGS	Water–gas shift.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
