Photoelectrochemical water splitting  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE90047F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE90047F
(Editorial)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2809-2810Photoelectrochemical water splitting

        
          
            E. L. 
            Miller
          
        
      
Fuel Cell Technologies Office, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Ave. SW, Washington, DC 20585, USA. E-mail: eric.miller@ee.doe.gov

The recent emergence of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies in the transportation and power generation sectors offers the world important and potentially transformative environmental and energy security benefits. The International Energy Agency (IEA) in its recently released Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Technology Roadmap acknowledges that hydrogen is a flexible energy carrier with potential applications across all energy sectors, and is one the few energy carriers with the potential for near-zero carbon emissions.† Consistent with a number of recent respected studies, the IEA Roadmap concludes that the large-scale deployment of hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) in the transport sector could account for 14% or more of the annual carbon mitigation necessary to meet 2050 international targets for reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.‡
The commercial availability of FCEVs today is an exciting first step in this direction. In the near term, low-cost hydrogen from reformed natural gas can meet the demands of initial FCEV rollouts. In the long term, however, realizing the full environmental and security benefits of hydrogen and fuel cells will require low-cost, large-scale hydrogen production from renewable resources using low-carbon methods.
Of the varied options for generating clean and renewable hydrogen, the semiconductor-based photo-electrochemical (PEC) methods for direct solar water splitting are among the most promising, yet also the most challenging. While PEC hydrogen production has been demonstrated at the laboratory scale using a variety of materials and reactor schemes, viable systems with sufficient solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency and durability have remained elusive. To address the challenge, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) continues to support fundamental and applied research for overcoming the efficiency and durability barriers in PEC materials, processes and systems.
Research initiatives through DOE's Office of Basic Energy Science (BES), including the Solar Photochemistry Program and several of the Energy Frontier Research Centers, are advancing the state-of-the-art in fundamental understanding of semiconductor, membrane, catalytic and photo-electrochemical processes. The Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, BES's Solar Fuels Energy Innovation Hub, has expanded PEC research in new directions that bridge several technology-readiness levels (TRLs). The applied PEC hydrogen production research supported by the Fuel Cell Technologies Office (FCTO) in DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) has focused on higher-TRL materials as well as system-level R&D driven by techno-economic cost targets for commercial cost-competitiveness.
PEC hydrogen production is often dubbed “artificial photo-synthesis”; but the techno-economic reality is that PEC must significantly outperform natural photosynthesis to become a viable commercial process for hydrogen production. While STH conversion efficiencies up to 18% have been demonstrated in the laboratory based on a spectrum of particle, thin-film and crystalline semiconductor material systems, STH efficiencies >20% or even >30% may be needed to compete with other renewable hydrogen technologies. Such high efficiencies are theoretically achievable, but fundamental scientific and engineering challenges remain.
Inspired both by the great promise and the significant challenges, the ever-growing PEC R&D community has evolved into a dynamic and collaborative force ready to tackle the fundamental materials barriers using cutting-edge experimental and theoretical methods; and surmount the engineering barriers using techno-economic and life-cycle assessments in conjunction with new design and benchmarking standards.
Following the ground-breaking collaborative traditions of the PEC research community, the authors in this collection offer comprehensive and definitive summaries of important topics in photoelectrochemical hydrogen production. Included are expert reviews of the state-of-the-art in particle-based and photoelectrode-based water splitting technologies (Fabian et al., DOI: 10.1039/C5EE01434D; Ager et al., DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00457H); of new and advanced methods of PEC characterization and loss-mitigation (Esposito et al., DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00835B; Smith et al., DOI: 10.1039/C5EE01822F); and of PEC's important role in the broader context of solar fuels production (Coridan et al., DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00777A).
I would like to express sincere thanks to the authors for their exceptional work in this collection, and to the entire PEC research community for their creative ingenuity, scientific integrity, unflappable camaraderie, and selfless commitment to the “greater good”.
Footnotes† The International Energy Agency’s Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Technology Roadmap is publically available at: http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/technology-roadmap-hydrogen-and-fuel-cells.html.‡ Examples include Transitions to Alternative Transportation Technologies—A Focus on Hydrogen, a report by the National Research Council of the National Academies, 2008 (ISBN: 978-0-309-12100-2) which can be found at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12222/transitions-to-alternative-transportation-technologies-a-focus-on-hydrogen.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Footnotes
† The International Energy Agency’s Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Technology Roadmap is publically available at: http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/technology-roadmap-hydrogen-and-fuel-cells.html.
‡ Examples include Transitions to Alternative Transportation Technologies—A Focus on Hydrogen, a report by the National Research Council of the National Academies, 2008 (ISBN: 978-0-309-12100-2) which can be found at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12222/transitions-to-alternative-transportation-technologies-a-focus-on-hydrogen.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
