Nanostructured materials for electrochromic energy storage systems  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA07237D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA07237D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1179-1226Nanostructured materials for electrochromic energy storage systems

        
          
            Dhanaji S. 
            Dalavi
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Radhika S. 
            Desai
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Pramod S. 
            Patil
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics, Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Rethare Bk, India. E-mail: dhanuphysics@gmail.com
bDepartment of Physics, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India
Received 
      24th August 2021
    , Accepted 16th November 2021First published on 19th November 2021AbstractOver the last few decades, there has been a lot of focus on the development of electrochromic energy storage system (EESS) integrated technology, and numerous developments have taken place due to its reliable performance. It is an emerging and exciting field of research, which is making a significant contribution to the advancement of technology by embedding two different technologies in a single device for a wide range of applications. Meanwhile, overcoming barriers related to the development of EESSs and the goal of reliable efficiency has motivated new developments in energy storage systems (ESSs). Nowadays, a very important goal in research is to make daily life more comfortable by creating more convenient, excellent, and portable devices by incorporating greater functionality into energy-saving materials. To date, EESSs with many features such as high flexibility, stretchability, self-healing, photo-response, and self-charging have been extensively explored. With all the additional functionalities, they can be used in the advancement of various devices, such as in wearable electronics, as a power source for other small electronic devices, in smart electrochromic window (ECW) construction, in information display systems, etc. The development of multifunctional ESSs is required due to new objectives and high energy demand in line with existing and future energy-related requirements, and therefore, their research and development is always ongoing with excellent efforts. However, the active electrode materials studied so far and the various assembly techniques used for them need to be systematically reviewed so that they can be used for further study to develop more efficient EESSs. This report will give a brief overview of the existing literature along with performance statistics on the literature published so far in this field.Dhanaji S. DalaviDr Dhanaji S. Dalavi is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Rethare BK, M.S., India. He is Head, Department of Physics. He received his M.Sc. degree in Physics and PhD degree in “Electrochromic Smart Windows” from Shivaji University, Kolhapur in 2008 and 2013, respectively. He is a recipient of the prestigious Dr D. S. Kothari Post-Doctoral Fellowship, UGC, India. His research interest includes nanostructured materials for electrochromic smart windows, gas sensors and electrochemical supercapacitors. He has published 33 research papers in international journals of good repute, and 1 book and has received more than 1550 citations with an h-index of 23.Radhika S. DesaiMrs Radhika S. Desai is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Rethare BK, M.S., India. She received her M.Sc. degree from Shivaji University, Kolhapur in 2005. Now, she is pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Dr Dhanaji S. Dalavi. Her current research interests are focused on synthesis and characterization of nanocomposites for energy storage applications.Pramod S. PatilProf. Pramod S. Patil is currently working as the Pro-Vice Chancellor of Shivaji University, Kolhapur, M.S., India. He is a former Dean of Science and Technology. He has served as a former Founder Director of the School of Nanoscience and Technology, Former Head of the Physics Department and Coordinator of the Department of Energy Technology. Prof. Patil is a recipient of the DAAD fellowship, Germany and Brain Pool fellowship, South Korea. He has established the Center of Nanofabrics. After having received his PhD degree from Shivaji University in 1990, Prof. Patil has been zealously engaged in research in solar cells, electrochromic smart window materials, supercapacitors, sensors and nanotechnology. He has more than 450 research articles, 5 patents and several book chapters to his credit and has received more than 22500 citations with an h-index of 75.
1. Introduction
Non-renewable energy sources such as fossil fuels are responsible for the greenhouse effect and environmental pollution with the emission of harmful gases, and ultimately produce disastrous changes in the Earth's climate. Energy efficiency means using less energy to perform the same task by reducing energy waste, which is advantageous for reducing the growing energy demand, environmental pollution, and energy consumption cost. The development of techniques to enhance the energy efficiency of devices and the use of renewable energy sources are effective ways to generate sustainable and clean energy.1 Different conditions such as time, weather, and geographical location determine the availability of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar; hence, more efficient conversion and energy-saving systems are required to meet energy needs as per user demand. Energy plays a significant role in human progress. Efficient clean energy sources, energy storage techniques, and the development of advanced technologies associated with them have gained considerable attention around the globe. ESSs are a widely studied area in academic and industrial/manufacturing research.2
Although the energy hierarchy comprises energy efficiency, renewable energy consumption, low carbon production and emission, and conventional energy sources, according to the sustainable energy policies, energy efficiency and renewable energy are the two main pillars of the energy hierarchy.3 In 2050, the world's total energy consumption will be much higher than it is today. According to a report by the International Energy Agency, one of the key regulatory factors for controlling large-scale global greenhouse gas emissions is construction and its management, which could lead to significant energy savings.4 Electrochromic (EC) smart glass is being used as an energy-efficient technology in building construction. This technology serves as an important link between building construction and the natural atmosphere, with numerous benefits along with reduced electricity consumption for cooling and lighting systems with the aid of targeted solar radiation control, large glare blocks, bright sunlight control, and interior aesthetic appearance making the technology useful in today's worldwide energy crisis.5 Electrochromic windows require minimal external voltage for their operation. The last few decades have witnessed the rapid development of this electrochromic technology; however, due to limited practical benefits and applications, it has remained a challenging area in terms of development. The integration of EC technology with other advanced technologies has driven further development of multifunctional EC technology. Most importantly, the integration of energy storage technology with EC technology has contributed to a more efficient way to save energy today and reduce the energy crisis and environmental pollution. Therefore, researchers are continuously striving to synthesize more reliable and efficient EESSs without compromising on the individual quality parameters of both the electrochromic and supercapacitor technologies of the integrated device.
Hitherto, research in the field of EESS technology has been reviewed by several research groups; in particular, the report presented by Yang et al. and reports based on the integration of EC technology with other advanced technologies, including multifunctional EES devices, are remarkable.6–8 However, this review outlines the enormous progress made in the development of EESSs, including the brief and relevant description of new active materials, distinct assembly techniques, transparent conductive electrodes, and various approaches used for developing a more efficient EESS, which is at present more essential for further study.
2. Electrochromism
Electrochromism is a phenomenon observed in certain materials, in which they change their optical behavior in response to the applied external voltage. Electrochromic (EC) materials change their optical properties persistently, as the polarity of the applied potential changes. The electron release/uptake during the redox reaction process at the electroactive electrode is responsible for the EC properties. In the early days, various materials were investigated regarding the aforementioned characteristic. Although the concept of electrochromism was first introduced by Platt,9 Deb first studied and published the EC behavior of tungsten oxide in 1969 (ref. 10) and then in 1973.11 Subsequently, Estrada and coworkers studied the EC properties of nickel oxide in 1988.12 In 1970, EC properties were broadly studied for their application in information displays.13 The main function of an electrochromic device (ECD) is to conveniently control the effect of light glaze and heat inside buildings, aircraft, spacecraft, etc. So far, these materials have been widely used in many applications such as automobile rearview mirrors to reduce glare,14 electrochromic based sunglasses15 and helmet visors,16 and in thermal management of spacecraft,17 and have been most widely recognized as an energy-efficient arrangement in smart windows since 1984 to regulate the solar radiation gains of buildings.18
“Thermochromism” and “photochromism” are analogous to electrochromism which describes changes in color produced by heat and light, respectively.9,19 Various synthesized electrodes can display color variations in response to environmental stimuli like mechanical stress, chemicals, and organic vapor. Peng et al. studied the chromatic variations of carbon and polydiacetylene (CNT/PDA) based nanocomposite fibres with sensing applications.20 The operation of the ECD requires an external power supply which limits the development of technology. The development of Self-Charging Power System (SCPS) technology is a highly advantageous option for this. The working principle of an SCPS is based on the effective utilization of various energy forms such as thermal, solar, biochemical, and mechanical energy. Solar cells and TENGs work as excellent energy generators by using light irradiation and mechanical motions like human motions, rainwater droplets, wind flow, etc., respectively.21 These TENGs22,23 and solar cells22,24–26 are effectively integrated with electrochromic supercapacitor (ECSC) devices to provide a sustainable power supply for long-term operation. The present review is intended to outline the electrochromic supercapacitor; consequently, let us now focus specifically on the concept associated with it.
The three major configurations of ECDs are battery-like, solution phase, and hybrid designs, and the schematic diagram of their design is shown in Fig. 1a–c. The solution phase and hybrid designs represent the self-erasing type ECD, in which EC substances dissolve in a liquid/gel electrolyte, and they require a constant power supply to maintain the color condition.27 A battery-like ECD consists of five layers that are slotted between two transparent glass layers. This five-layer structure consists of two transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs), a counter electrode that acts as an ion storage layer (ISL) as well as an additional electrochromic layer (ECL), an ion-conducting layer (ICL) i.e. electrolyte, and a working ECL (configured as TCE/ISL/ICL/ECL/TCE)28 as shown in Fig. 2. With the application of an external voltage (<5 V), the ions are transferred from an ISL to the EC layer through an electrolyte that switches the device in its dark (colored) state. The clear position (bleaching) of the device allows the ions and electrons to return to their original position, which can be easily obtained by changing the polarity of the voltage. The color condition allows absorption of the sun's insignificant heat and light, and the bleached state supports the better use of sunlight.29
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of EC glass configurations: (a) solution phase, (b) battery-like and (c) hybrid; reproduced with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 1999 Elsevier; (d) cathodic and anodic electrochromic oxides. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the structure of an electrochromic device. 
There are two main types of electrochromic material, cathodic and anodic. Insertion of an ion changes the color of cathodically coloring EC materials and extraction of an ion changes the color of anodically coloring EC materials (refer to Fig. 1d).31 Vanadium is the only oxide material that changes its color upon insertion and extraction of ions, known as an intermediate electrochromic material.32 Titanium (Ti), niobium (Nb), molybdenum (Mo), tantalum (Ta), and tungsten (W) are cathodically coloring and chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), rhodium (Rh), and iridium (Ir) are anodically coloring materials.30 Most of the EC oxides switch from colorless to a colored state such as TiO2, NiO, WO3, etc., and others switch between two colors having different intensities like cobalt oxide, which is pale yellow in an oxidized state, and dark brown in a reduced state.19 Color neutrality can be effectively achieved by combining cathodic and anodic oxides, in which the applied voltage causes both the films to switch between colored and bleached at the same instant, giving a neutral visual appearance.33,34
While designing ECW/ECB, the most important task is to choose the correct counter electrode. The counter electrode provides charge balance during the redox reaction process in electrochromic devices. An absorptive/reflective display-type ECD reflector is used behind both the active electrochromic and charge balancing material (counter electrode). Regardless of the color-changing properties of the counter-electrode material, only its electrochemical compatibility with the active EC material is important. But the color properties of counter electrodes are highly important in absorbent/transmissible window-type devices, as these devices necessitate a high level of transparency and near colorlessness, in their bleached state. In absorbent/transmissible window-type devices, as per the device chromatic display requirements, counter materials that are complementary in their coloring, that exhibit a low coloration efficiency, or that remain colorless while undergoing the redox process are chosen. Complementary devices switch from a highly transmissive to a colored state at a given potential and vice versa in reverse bias, yielding a higher optical density of the device in the colored state. In many applications color purity of the active electrochromic material is required; in such a situation it is necessary to avoid color mixing of the two layers in the colored state. Therefore, a counter electrode with low coloration efficiency will be preferably used here.35–38
The counter electrode should be either complementary to the primary electrochromic/working electrode material or an optically passive material, which remains transparent in the oxidation and reduction states. V2O5, CeO2, mixed CeO2–TiO2,39,40 CeO2–V2O5 (ref. 41), Fe2O3,42 and LiFePO4 (LFP)43 are the optically passive counter electrode materials. But V2O5 and Fe2O3 have drawbacks as they both become less transparent in the low-wavelength region of the visible spectrum (∼550 nm).42 Wei et al. reported the CeO2–TiO2 nanoparticle film as one of the promising passive ion storage counter electrodes with an ion storage capacity of 19.99 mC cm−2 which is higher than that of pure TiO2 (11.52 mC cm−2).44
3. Energy storage systems (ESSs)
Different ESSs such as fuel cells, biofuels, batteries, capacitors, and electrochemical capacitors (ECs) or supercapacitors (SCs) are widely used to store energy. Capacitors have high specific power but experience low specific energy; comparatively, fuel cells/batteries have higher specific energy. As shown in the Ragone plot in Fig. 3,45 lithium-ion batteries have a specific energy of the order of 102 W h kg−1, which is greater than that of SCs,46 but they deliver limited discharge power. Nevertheless, SCs have a specific power that is about 10 to 100 times greater than that of batteries and the specific energy is much greater than that of capacitors.47 Consequently, SCs bridge the gap between the specific power and energy of the earlier well-known energy storage systems, fuel cells/batteries, and capacitors. Supercapacitors with high specific power (>10 kW kg−1) and low internal resistance are superior to a battery in terms of being able to store and deliver energy at relatively high rates. They are widely used in many devices such as mobile phones and digital cameras, and in solar cell power storage due to their features like long cycling stability (>105 cycles) and fast charge–discharge rates. Besides, they can be easily fabricated with additional features such as flexible, wearable, and stretchable supercapacitors with advanced procedures and low maintenance.22,48 All of the above features of supercapacitors enable them to provide high power in areas where current battery technology fails. But low energy density, despite all these features, greatly affects its commercial use.49 The low specific power of the battery compared to ECs is a consequence of slow diffusion-controlled redox reactions occurring in the bulk of electrode materials. The confinement of charges on the electrode surface resulted in a low energy density of ECs.50
 Fig. 3  Ragone plot showing the specific energy and specific power of electrochemical energy storage devices available at present. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Based on the charge storage mechanism, ECs can be classified into two types: electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors (PSCs). In EDLCs, charge is stored electrostatically, in which accumulation and separation of charge take place at the electrode and electrolyte interface (also known as Helmholtz's double layer). During the charging process, ions from the electrolyte get attracted toward the electrode having opposite charge polarity, and at the same time, the electrons move from the negative to the positive electrode through the external circuit. As a result, the ions and electrons get accumulated on the electrode surface to form Helmholtz's double layer and an exact reverse process takes place during discharging (Fig. 4a and b). In 1957, the first EDLC was designed by using activated charcoal that stored the charge electrostatically (non-faradaic). EDLCs have excellent chemical stability and good electrical conductivity but they suffer from low energy density. Carbon and its derivatives like graphene, activated carbon, etc. have been widely used as EDLC electrodes. In PSCs or faradaic capacitors, the charge is stored electrochemically, which occurs on the surface and near-surface of the electrode material and involves charge transfer (Fig. 4c). Conway introduced PSCs (faradaic charge transfer) into RuO2, in which the faradaic redox reaction process takes place at the surface and the interior of the electrode. The synthesized electrode has higher specific energy (Es) and specific capacitance (Cs) but suffers from low chemical stability during cycling due to faradaic redox reactions, low charge/discharge rates, and relatively lower power density compared to that of EDLCs.51Fig. 4c and d illustrate the two working mechanisms of PSCs as redox and intercalation PSCs, respectively. In the intercalation PSCs, ions are inserted deep inside the layers of the host material as shown in Fig. 4d.50
 Fig. 4  Schematic of energy storage mechanisms in supercapacitors (a) in an EDLC-electrode containing carbon nanoparticles and (b) in an EDLC-electrode containing porous carbon. (c) Redox pseudocapacitance. (d) Intercalation pseudocapacitance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2014, AAAS. (e) CV profile of a SC. (f) CV profile of a battery. (g) Schematic illustration of the electrochromic pseudocapacitance mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing. 
Transition metal oxides (TMOs) such as MnO2, RuO2, etc.,53 transition metal sulphides, and conducting polymers (CPs) such as polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene, polypyrrole (PPy), etc. have been widely studied for their PSC electrode applications.54 Electrode materials play a vital role in energy storage systems. The performance of the current electrode material is pleasing and yet in the future, high efficiency and environmentally friendly electrode materials should be studied to develop ESSs. As research was mainly encouraged by the ever-increasing demand for flexible portable devices with higher energy and power density. Considering the various electrode materials and device architecture strategies adopted in the fabrication of portable electronic devices, it is possible to develop portable EESSs very efficiently.55,56
Faradaically and capacitively controlled processes can be identified from the plot between log(ip) in ampere versus log(v) in mV s−1 and analyzing the data according to the relation given byip = avbor logip = b × logv + loga(1)where V is the sweep rate, ip is the peak current, and a and b are variables.
The value of “b” decides the process type and it can be determined from the slope of the graph between log(ip) and log(ν). Here, b = 0.5 indicates a diffusion-controlled process and b = 1 indicates a surface-controlled process. If the value of “b” lies between 0.5 < b < 1 and 1, then the total capacity is controlled by both capacitor- and diffusion-like behavior as in hybrid energy storage systems; b values near 0.5 indicate capacitive control and those near 1 indicate diffusion control. The Dunn method helps to realize the quantitative contribution of capacity- and diffusion-controlled processes.57
Recently, hybrid electrochemical supercapacitors (H-ECs) have gained considerable attention. In H-ECs, the device is fabricated to achieve a more synergistic performance by combining the properties of two constituents/charge storage mechanisms. H-ECs can be constructed in three ways: (1) using a composite electrode, in which a carbon-based material combines with either a TMO or polymer or with both; (2) in an asymmetric supercapacitor, in which faradaic and non-faradaic processes are combined, by coupling EDLC and PSC materials as the two distinct electrodes of the supercapacitor; and (3) in a battery-type supercapacitor, which uses two electrodes: one battery-type electrode and the other a supercapacitor-type electrode.
4. Electrochromic energy storage systems (EESSs)
The insertion/intercalation/uptake (or extraction/deintercalation/release) of ions/electrons into (or out of) electroactive/working electrodes during the coloring (or bleaching) process in electrochromic devices closely resembles the charging (or discharging) process of supercapacitive devices.58 Electrochromic and energy storage devices have similar five-layered structures as shown in Fig. 2. The reversible redox reactions are responsible for the color variation in response to externally applied potential in electrochromic materials and for charge storage in PSC supercapacitors. The only difference between them is that electrochromic devices are grown on a transparent conducting substrate. The color variation occurs during the uptake and release of charges, and at the same time boosts charge storage. Significantly, it's easy to integrate both technologies into a single device for its bi-functional use, such as electrochromic energy storage systems (EESSs) or electrochromic supercapacitors (ESCs) or electrochromic batteries (ECBs) (Fig. 5).59
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of an electrochromic energy storage system (EESS). 

Table 1 summarizes some information about energy storage systems and electrochromism to realize the similarities and differences between these two systems.
Table 1 Similarities and differences between energy storage systems and electrochromism




Electrochromism
Energy storage systems




The electrochromism properties are exhibited by some materials, which can display optical variation in response to the application of external voltage
The energy storage properties are exhibited by materials that can convert electrical energy into a form that can be stored and re-converted into electrical energy when needed


Materials can be classified as cathodic and anodic materials depending on whether they change color during insertion or extraction of ions
Materials can be classified based on the charge storage mechanism such as EDLC and pseudocapacitive materials


During oxidation and reduction, materials should display color variation
It is not required to display color variation during oxidation and reduction


Requires transparent substrates like FTO, ITO, graphene and CNT derivatives, and also metal nanowires and grids
Several substrates like metal substrates, and their nanowires, grids, carbon, graphene, and CNT derivatives, and also cotton fabrics, synthetic sponges, textiles and cable type electrodes with thin conducting layers, etc. can be used for energy storage device fabrication


It comprises a five-layered structure, configured as TCE/ISL or ECL/ICL or electrolyte/ECL/TCE
It comprises a five-layered structure, configured as a CE/anode or positive electrode/ICL or electrolyte/cathode or negative electrode/CE. Here, a separator is present between the two electrodes. The main function of this separator is to prevent physical contact between two electrodes during ion transport in the cell


Various nanostructuring pathways like doping, binary and ternary nanocomposites, and synthesis of nanorods, nanowires, nanoflakes, quantum dots, and so on are employed
Various nanostructuring pathways like doping, synthesis of binary and ternary nanocomposites, development of hybrid electrochemical supercapacitors, and various nanostructures like nanoflowers, nanorods, nanowires, nanoflakes, quantum dots, and so on are employed


Performance parameters include coloration efficiency, cycling durability, switching speed, and transmission modulation
Charging and discharging times, charge storage ability, energy and power density, and cycling stability are the main performance metrics of energy storage systems


Applications: automobile rearview mirrors, sunglasses, helmet visors, smart windows, etc.
Applications: hybrid electric vehicles, backup power supplies for portable tools, renewable energy power plants, etc.




There are many similarities between ECDs and energy storage systems such as materials used, structural design, and their working mechanism. Heckner et al. in 2002 compared the characteristics of ECDs and batteries. In batteries, high porosity (resulting in a high intercalation/deintercalation process), high open-circuit voltage (Vo), and low discharge (as it affects the lifetime of the device) are expected for their more reliable performance. But in ECDs, high porosity may result in light scattering, high Vo decreases the cycle life of the device and deep discharge increases transmittance in the bleached state.60 So, it is important to consider all these variances while synthesizing an integrated bifunctional device for electrochromic energy storage applications.
Batteries and supercapacitors have similar configurations and reversible electrochemical reactions but their working principle is based on different electrochemical characteristics.46 It can only be used for the synthesis of electrochromic devices if the active electrode material of the energy storage device can exhibit color variations during the oxidation and reduction processes. Electrochromic and energy storage devices (either supercapacitors or batteries) have the basic five-layered structure as explained above in Fig. 2, consisting of two electrodes as an ISL and ECL. But a new three-electrode design as shown in Fig. 20b can also be used to achieve higher cycling stability and multicolor performance that has been recently achieved.61 Inorganic materials such as WO3, V2O5, NiO, TiO2, Co3O4, MnO2, RuO2, etc., organic materials such as poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT), polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene, polypyrrole (PPy), PEDOT:PSS, etc., their various organo-inorganic composites and so forth have been mainly studied as active materials in the fabrication of EC supercapacitors. WO3, TiO2, PB, Al–tungsten oxide, and various nanocomposites such as W18O49/PANI, PANI/V2O5, rGO/Ni(OH)2, Zn/PPy, etc. have been studied for ECB application.
EESSs (ECBs/ESCs) can be charged in four different ways, including (1) with the help of an external applied potential, (2) with an H2O2 support, (3) with sunlight irradiation, and (4) by a self-charging process due to exposure to air. The schematic diagram of the four-charging strategy is illustrated in Fig. 6.62 The H2O2 assisted EC energy storage device achieves high storage performance but it reacts with the electrode and causes the stability of the device to deteriorate. Comparison between the exposure to air and H2O2 assisted strategy showed that the H2O2 assisted approach reduces the charging time from hours to seconds. Zhao et al. have also studied the effect of charging strategies on the first discharge capacity and the specific accumulative discharge capacity of the recovered synthesized energy storage device. It showed that the battery charged with the assistance of H2O2 displayed high discharge capacity.63 In the above-mentioned strategies, sunlight irradiation is environmentally friendly and cost-effective but it takes a longer time to charge the device.
 Fig. 6  The schematic illustration of the four-charging strategies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
While synthesizing the EESS, the choice of appropriate materials, which support each other for appropriate operation without interfering with two different functions of the synthesized device and device with a wide operating potential window, is the most important task. The integration of electrochromic and energy storage mechanisms provides a single bifunctional device, in which the additional functionalities such as flexibility, stretchability, energy storage level signal indicator system, self-healing properties, self-operating system, etc. make the extremely convenient devices available for everyday applications as shown in Fig. 7. The EESSs can be charged during the daytime and after sunset or as per user requirements and this stored charge can be utilized to control interior illumination or to operate low-energy electronic type devices such as electronic calculators, electronic timers, or temperature indicators for a certain time.64
 Fig. 7  Various applications of electrochromic supercapacitors. 
Various sophisticated methods are realized for designing electrochromic energy storage electrode materials. The extent of electron insertion and extraction right through the active electrochromic material in response to the applied potential and large electrochemically active surface area primarily determines the EESS performance. Many fabricated EESS devices allow quantitative screening of energy storage levels by displaying specific colors at various applied potentials. This is helpful in order to be aware of the amount of energy consumed as it eventually provides information about when the device will stop working.65 Each parameter has its specific realm of application, as an excellent optical modulation is expected for the display devices and a slow response will efficiently help to maintain good indoor lighting at the workplace. Researchers have not only created electrodes with dual-functionality but have also assembled devices from them for optimized performance and explained their applications systematically.
Several transparent stretchable (TS) current collectors were used in the synthesis of EESSs, with the purpose of the development of flexible devices. While selecting TS current collectors, there are certain primary requirements, e.g. their conductivity, and mechanical and atmospheric stability must be stable after several deformations, and they should be highly flexible and transparent. Table 2 depicts various used TS current collectors with their sheet resistance and optical transmittance.
Table 2 Some transparent stretchable current collectors used in EESS fabrication




Substrate
Used materials
Sheet resistance
Optical transmittance
Ref.




PET
Silver grid/PEDOT:PSS
0.62
70%

66



Cellulose fibers
Ag nanowire network
18
89%

67



PET
Graphene/CuS (G–CuS)
Approx. 20
85%

68



PET
Ag NWs
10
87%

69 and 70


Elastomer substrate
PEDOT:PSS/AgNWs
6
—

71



Flexible polycarbonate (PC)
PEDOT:PSS layer (with benzenesulfonic acid (BSA) treatment)
97
95%

72



Free-standing polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanofibers on an aluminium frame
Ag NNs
1.08
85%

58



PET
CuNW@alloy network
14.2
90.1%

73





5. Electrochromic and supercapacitor parameters
The performance of the synthesized smart electrode material for EESS application is precisely quantified with the help of performance parameters such as optical modulation, coloration efficiency, specific capacitance, ability to switch between different color states, its specific energy and power, and its durability based on maintenance of color modulation and initial capacitance, specific capacity, and also coloration efficiency of the synthesized material.74 Some important parameters of bi-functional electrochromic energy storage systems used to compare the various EC electrodes and devices are described below.
The response/switching time is the time required for a 90% change in the full transmittance modulation at a particular wavelength. Coloration efficiency (CE) is defined as the change in optical density (ΔOD) per unit of inserted charge (Q). The CE in cm2 C−1 is given by the formulae (2) (3)where Tb and Tc represent the transmittance of the bleached and colored states at a certain wavelength, and Q represents the amount of charge inserted per unit, which can be determined by the integral of current density vs. time.75
The specific energy (Es) in W h kg−1 and specific power (Ps) in W kg−1 of supercapacitors are calculated according to the following equations. (4) (5)C (in F) represents the capacitance, V (in V) is the potential, and ESR (in Ω) is the equivalent series resistance (ESR).76
The specific capacitance (Cs) of the electrode materials was calculated by using two methods: (1) galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) and (2) cyclic voltammetry (CV).
The formula to calculate Cs by using the GCD curve is: (6)
The formula to calculate Cs (in F g−1) by using the CV curve is: (7)where I (in A) represents the current of the discharging process, Δt (in s) is the total discharging time, m (in g) is the mass of the electroactive material in the electrode, ΔV (in V) is the potential window of the discharge process, and Δ represents the potential scan rate (in V s−1).77 While calculating interfacial/areal capacitance (Ca) instead of the mass of the electroactive material, the area of the active material dipped into the electrolyte has to be considered.
The specific capacity (Csp) is calculated based on the discharge curve using the following relation, (8)where Csp represents the specific capacity (in mA h g−1), I is the discharge current (in mA), t is the discharge time (in s) and m represents the mass of the active material (in g).78
High Cs, a wide potential window and low ESR are the key parameters that greatly affect the performance of the supercapacitor. The specific surface area (SSA), pore size distribution, morphology and structure of the synthesized electrode, the conductivity of the active material, used additives and binders, synthesis temperature and method, precursor composition, electrode–electrolyte contact resistance, and electrolyte concentration are the major factors that directly influence the Cs, cell voltage and the ESR of the device/electrode.79
This review is divided into three parts. The first part summarizes the study of synthesized electrochromic supercapacitors based on inorganic, organic, and organic–inorganic compounds, and the second part highlights the electrochromic batteries. The study of composite electrodes or devices that combine EDLC materials (carbon or its derivatives) and other organic–inorganic materials is summarized in the third part of the review under the electrochromic hybrid supercapacitors (EHSs). The EHSs combine faradaic and non-faradaic charge storage mechanisms. Although some electrodes do not use EDLC materials, they show hybrid energy storage behavior, and their b value lies between 0.5 and 1, which is why they have also been included in the EHSs.
Researchers have made many efforts to improve the performance of energy storage devices by developing hybrid materials that offer various opportunities to achieve more improved performance by involving various conducting substrates and different synthesizing techniques with the intent that the resulting device ought to improve morphology and porosity for improved specific energy without trading off its specific power, good rate capability, fast charging–discharging route, and specific capacitance.80
6. Electrochromic supercapacitors (ESCs)
The capacitance, charge storage, and chromatic variation in EESSs intimately depend on the electrode materials used and the electrode is the main component that affects the electrochromic and energy storage performance of EESSs. Therefore, it is significant to choose and build active electrode materials to offer high capacitance and improved performance relative to existing electrode materials for highly efficient EESDs. To enhance the energy storage and electrochromic properties of the electrode material, two main strategies such as the development of composite and tailored nanostructured morphologies have been used extensively. In early studies, the development of the ESC electrode was focused on bare TMOs and their composites with other TMOs. However, hybrid nanocomposites were later studied and developed extensively using a combination of CPs, TMOs, and carbon and their derivatives on various current collectors, which would further enhance the functionalities in electrochromic energy storage devices (EESDs) and increase their practical application.
6.1 Based on inorganic materials and their composites
Transition metal oxides (TMOs), their hydroxides, and Prussian blue (PB) are the most widely used inorganic substances for electrochromic energy storage (EES) purposes. These materials show high capacitance, as well as high energy densities. These devices are noteworthy for their stable and reliable EC performance. Lee et al. noticed that the synthesized amorphous hydrous ruthenium oxide (a-RuO2·nH2O) thin-film electrode would show an optical variation resulting in a reversible charging/discharging process. The synthesized ruthenium oxide film displayed capacitive performance with two redox peaks in the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.81 After that, many low-cost TMOs, which were excellent candidates due to their pseudo-capacitive behavior, were extensively studied for their EC characteristics. Many inorganic materials exhibit electrochromic energy storage properties; however, it has been observed that WO3 and NiO have been extensively studied for EESS applications.
In energy storage, proper evaluation of developed electrodes and their charge storage mechanisms plays a very significant role, and those findings are very important in further research. In a battery, the redox reaction takes place inside the bulk of the synthesized material which is a slow diffusion-controlled process, while in an SC charge is stored on the surface of the electrode. The CV profile of the battery has Faraday redox peaks (Fig. 4f) and in a SC its appearance is almost rectangular (Fig. 4e).50 Capacitance can be calculated from the ratio of the extent of charge acceptance (dQ) and the change of potential (dV), and within a fixed potential range this ratio is almost constant. Battery-type electrodes exhibit faradaic behavior and as the CV profile has faradaic redox peaks, for them the above ratio of dQ and dV is not constant. Therefore, the calculated capacitance of such materials does not give proper results.82 In such cases, “capacity” that reflects the charge storage ability of the electrode material, which is the true metric needs to be calculated.6 As reported by Brousse et al., some materials such as NiO, Co3O4 and their hydroxides, from their GCD and CV curves, demonstrated battery-like material behavior, and yet instead of calculating their capacity (Coulomb, C, or mA h), if their capacitance (F g−1 or F cm−2) is calculated, their true performance cannot be identified accordingly.83
NiO exhibits energy storage and EC properties with high CE and good cycling stability.84 Initially, Lee and coworkers synthesized NiO–Ta2O5 nanocomposite thin films by implanting polycrystalline NiO into amorphous Ta2O5 by reactive radio-frequency magnetron sputtering. Polycrystalline NiO nanoparticles within the NiO–Ta2O5 nanocomposite electrode play a role as an active electrochemical component, while a surrounding amorphous Ta2O5 matrix acts as a source of proton electrolyte, that balances the injected electrons from the current collector into the NiO nanoparticles during discharge (bleach) of the synthesized nanocomposite electrode. Fig. 4g illustrates the conceptual schematic of an electrochromic pseudocapacitor. This study demonstrated that increased concentration of Ta2O5 reduces the size of the NiO nanoparticle, and increases its surface area; however, a higher Ta2O5 concentration leads to reduced Cs of the nanocomposite. The optimized concentration of Ta2O5 in the synthesized NiO–Ta2O5 nanocomposite yielded Cs of approximately 50 F g−1 and CE of 19 cm2 C−1.52 Subsequently, the EC properties of the NiO films in aqueous solutions were studied by Abe et al. to combine NiO with other complementary electrode materials for high CE of the synthesized EC device. The study found that the interfacial capacitance of NiO films in aqueous KOH electrolytes was found to be higher than that of the (KCl + H2SO4) dilute acidic electrolytes, but the electrochromic CE of the NiO film was the same despite changes in O2 flow concentration during reactive sputtering in both electrolytes.85 Chen et al. developed NiO nanoflakes with excellent energy storage and electrochromic cycling stability, by using a facile hydrothermal route on the FTO substrate. The strong chemical bond between the synthesized structure and substrate helps to reduce the ion diffusion path during the electrochemical reaction as well as facilitating faster charge transfer. The porous structure of the synthesized nanoflakes resulted in an areal capacitance of 74.8 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and excellent cycling stability with almost 100% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles.86
High temperatures adversely affect the components of EESDs as well as diminishing the functionality of these devices. To overcome this difficulty and to create devices operating in the temperature range of 20 °C to 75 °C, an ultra-thin inorganic all-solid-state EESD based on NiOx/Ta2O5 and Ta2O5/WO3 electrodes was successfully synthesized by Liu et al. via a reactive magnetron sputtering technique. Although the synthesized EESD is repeatedly heated and cooled to the reported temperature, it still exhibits high temperature-resistant long-term cycling stability by retaining 95.3% of its initial volume capacitance after 2500 cycles.87 Later, the same group reported all-inorganic electrochromic power storage devices (EPSDs), comprising the two electrodes (NiOx/Ta2O5 and Ta2O5/WO3) mentioned above as clearly seen from cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 8a). The schematic of the seven-layer construction (left) and working principle of the EPSD during electrochemical processes (right) are shown in Fig. 8b. The EPSDs displayed an energy density of 0.36 W h cm−3 and a high power density of 71.6 W cm−3 that could retain 96.4% of the initial capacity after 5000 cycles. More significantly, the energy storage level of the EPSD could be estimated in time visually according to the color transition during the charge/discharge process (Fig. 8c).88 Luo et al. elucidated the charge storage mechanism of NiO in Li-based electrolytes by combining in-depth experimental and theoretical analyses and likewise thoroughly investigated the kinetic behavior of Li-ions to qualitatively reveal the contribution of surface capacitances and diffusion-related processes. The 50% optical modulation was observed at 500 nm between the colored and bleached states of NiO film.57 Recently, Kim and coworkers developed a Cu doped NiO and WO3 based ESC device by adjusting the thickness of both layers to create a stoichiometric balance between the cathodic and anodic materials (Fig. 8d). The doping of Cu boosted the sheet resistance of NiO, which was approximately 7 times lower than that of pure NiO thin film. The as-synthesized ESC device, with a wide operational temperature range, exhibited high charging/discharging cycling reliability for more than 10000 cycles and outstanding self-discharge durability. Also, the practical feasibility of the ESC device is successfully demonstrated by the simultaneous change in transmittance of the device synchronized with the galvanostatic charging/discharging curve by which the real-time energy storage status can be observed with the naked eye (Fig. 8e and f).89
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the EPSD. (b) Schematic of the seven-layer construction (left) and working principle of the EPSD during electrochemical processes (right). (c) Visual energy storage level of the EPSD. Optical images at several charge/discharge states, and the schematic drawings for the corresponding energy storage levels in the device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu-doped-7 film and the inset displays a top-view image. (e) GCD curve synchronized with the corresponding transient transmittance profile of the ECSC with Cu-doped-7. (f) Photographs of the device at nine different states designated in panel (c). (g) Optical photographs during practical utilization of ECSs to operate external devices in which (i–iv) six ECSs in series and 24 LEDs and (v–viii) five ECSs in parallel and the minimotor including a vane are included in the demonstration system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of charge transfer in QDs and bulk electrode. (i) the exchange of the pristine aliphatic amine ligand (left) with conductive pyridine (right). (j) Transmittance spectrum of the tungsten oxide QD electrode, showing high transparency at the bleached state (inset: optical images of the electrode at bleached (transparent) and colored states (dark blue)). (k) Plot of variation of optical density as a function of charge density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons. 
The pseudocapacitive performance of the metal oxide can be improved through incorporation of conducting nanoparticles which contribute to the enhanced ionic/electronic conductivity. Based on this, with the new approach hybrid nanocomposite, Au–NiO was synthesized by Jung et al. by incorporating Au nanoparticles into a NiO matrix. The incorporation of Au helps to improve the absorption characteristics and conductivity of the NiO surface. The synthesized Au–NiO film showed enhanced pseudo-capacitive properties at scan rates higher than 10 mV s−1 with 1.5 times higher specific capacity than that of the pristine NiO film.90
Tungsten trioxide (WO3) is a promising bifunctional electrode material, but the desirable performance of tungsten oxide-based EC and SC electrodes cannot be achieved due to the slow faradaic electrochemical reactions. However, employing a strategy for reducing the size of the electrode material can help to accelerate the faradaic process. Cong et al. developed WO3 quantum dots (QDs) (average size of 1.6 nm), in which a surface octylamine ligand is exchanged with short-chained pyridine (the schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 8h and i), resulting in a highly conducting and hydrophilic surface. The EIS study showed that the electrochemical and electrochromic performance of pyridine exchanged QDs was superior to the pristine QDs. The pyridine exchanged QDs yielded fast charge transfer, low ESR, low switching time (less than 1 s), and relatively high CE of 154 cm2 C−1 (Fig. 8j). The hydrophilic surface of conducting pyridine exchanged QDs provided rapid ion diffusion pathways as well as fast ion transport, resulting in an excellent electrochemical and electrochromic performance of the synthesized electrode.91
Later, Yang et al. synthesized WO3 films via facile thermal evaporation and electrodeposition methods, which exhibited Cs of 639.8 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The further large-scale symmetric electrode-based pseudocapacitive glass window of size (15 × 15) cm2 was fabricated by using H2SO4 as an electrolyte. The pseudocapacitive glass windows exhibit transmittance modulation of 63.7%, the specific capacitance of 160.1 F g−1 at a current density of 0.4 mA cm−2, and power density of 47.1 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 3.6 W h kg−1 that can power electronic devices, such as mobile phones, iPods, LEDs and sensors, and control the transmittance as per end-user requirements.92 The quantitative analysis of the charge storage process of WO3 (contribution of the diffusion-controlled process, EDLC, and PSC) was studied by Yang et al. The investigation revealed that the charge storage capacity of WO3 depends on the film thickness, and it was observed that the 100 nm thick WO3 film stores charges by both EDLC and pseudocapacitive (capacitive effect) mechanisms. In capacitive charge storage, the contribution of pseudocapacitance (around 70%) is much greater than EDLC. The highest charge capacity density reported for the 100 nm thick WO3 film is 242.1 C g−1 and the charge state can be simultaneously evaluated by varying the color from light blue to deep blue in response to the applied potential.93
An oxygen-rich nanograin WO3 thin film on an ITO substrate, in which the presence of oxygen offers large channels for ion transport, was synthesized by Inamdar et al. via the RF-magnetron sputtering and oblique angle deposition technique. Nanograin WO3 exhibited a CE of 170 cm2 C−1 at 630 nm wavelength with 82% optical modulation. Improved electrical conductivity with the nanograin morphology and faster Li− ion diffusion rate resulted in excellent reversible capacity and long-term cycling stability of the electrode. With a 1.4 V potential window, the SC electrode showed a Cs of 228 F g−1 at a current density of 0.25 A g−1.94 He et al. developed various nanostructured morphologies (nanospindles, nanopetals, nanosheets, and nanobricks) of WO3 thin films with the aid of hydrothermal synthesis by controlling the pH of the precursor solution and studied the effect of morphologies on the electrochromic and energy storage performance. The study showed that WO3 nanosheets lead to a large surface area and highly porous morphologies that increased the number of active sites for easy ion transport compared to other fabricated morphologies. The WO3 nanosheets achieved a remarkable enhancement in EC and energy storage performance compared to that of other morphologies, including wide transmittance modulation (64.5%), fast response time (6.6/3.8 s), great coloration efficiency (48.9 cm2 C−1), and high areal capacitance (14.9 mF cm−2).95 Later, Kumbhar et al. synthesized various morphologies of WO3 nanostructures by varying the pH of the hydrothermal solution. 2D vertically aligned WO3 nanoplates displayed excellent optical and charge-storage redox properties in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.5 M Na2SO4 solutions, respectively.96
In the kinetic spray technique, the temperature of the substrate affects the micro-structure of WO3 and Sb:SnO2 (ATO, antimony-doped tin oxide). Furthermore the presence of an ATO ion storage layer also has a great impact on the ion storage properties and EC performance of WO3, as it has the ability to control charge balance and capacity during color variation.97
Subsequently, a simple dual-function ESC device structure was developed by mixing anodic type species directly in the electrolyte to facilitate device assembly and to reduce the use of complex synthesis techniques. Yun and coworkers employed a Li-doped ion gel electrolyte containing nickel–carbonate–hydroxide as an alternative to the counter anodic layer in the ESC device. At optimized HQ concentration, the device achieved an excellent transmittance contrast of ∼91% and high coloration efficiency of ∼61.9 cm2 C−1 as well as 84% retention of the initial areal capacitance (Ca) after 10000 GCD cycles. The device showed dual function applications in a smart energy storage window that can monitor charge storage levels with color variation (Fig. 9a) and acts as an electrical energy source (Fig. 9b).98
 Fig. 9  (a) GCD profiles and corresponding in situ transmittance and photographs of the device at eight points during charging and discharging. (b) Circuit diagram of the ECS. Photographs of ECSs in energy storage mode: (i) before charging and (ii) after charging, in which only ECSs were connected with an external power supply. Photographs of ECSs in power source mode: (iii) during turning on the LED (discharging) and (iv) after full discharge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the PRF WO3 film. (d) Transmittance spectra under different applied potentials of PRF WO3 film. (e) Photographs of the PRF WO3 film at bleaching and coloring states; a red LED lit up by one PRF WO3 bi-functional device connected in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
The amorphous WO3 is beneficial to obtain high optical modulation and fast switching response but suffers from metastable structures and poor cycling stability. However, crystalline WO3 with a robust and dense structure has better chemical and structural stability but suffers from low diffusion kinetics of ions/electrons. The porous homogeneous amorphous WO3 film (Fig. 9c) prepared by pulsed radiofrequency (PRF) magnetron sputtering synthesized by Shi et al. showed large dual-band optical modulation (93.6% at 633 nm and 90.6% at 1500 nm) as evidenced by Fig. 9d, fast response time, and greater areal capacitance (Ca) compared to WO3 synthesized by a conventional direct current (DC) and radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering method. Also, a bi-functional PRF WO3 device connected in series can light up a 1.5 V red LED, which confirms the potential application of the device in energy-storage smart windows along with visual monitoring systems (Fig. 9e).99
Also, a reactive magnetron sputtered crystalline WOx thin film with huge oxygen deficiencies, developed by the same author, showed excellent dual-band optical modulation in both visible (VIS, 99.0% at 633 nm) and near-infrared (NIR, 94.2% at 1300 nm) regions and exceptional memory effect. Hence even if the applied voltage bias is withdrawn, due to the memory effect the device will be able to maintain its colored/bleached condition.100 Subsequently, Shi et al. combined the amorphous and crystalline WO3 to enhance the overall performance of the fabricated device. The porous bilayer of the amorphous/crystalline WO3 nanoarray device was synthesized via a combination of pulse electrodeposition and radio-frequency magnetron sputtering techniques. The synergistic effect of the upper amorphous and underlying crystalline WO3 layers resulted in superior EC performance with an optical contrast of 93.9% at 633 nm in the visible region and 89.6% at 1500 nm in the NIR region, retaining 95.4% optical contrast after 10000 cycles. The hybrid nanoarrays displayed a high areal capacitance of 47.4 mF cm−2 and retained 84% of their initial CA after 2000 cycles.101 Kim et al. developed mesoporous WO3 with small pores with an average diameter of approx. 30 nm with outstanding EC and energy storage properties. The optical microscopy (OM) and SEM images of the printed mesoporous WO3 are shown in Fig. 10e and f. The structure was developed via printing-assisted evaporation-induced self-assembly (PEISA). The device displayed an ultrafast response time and excellent charge–discharge stability. Fig. 10c gives information about the color variation of the synthesized electrode during the charging and discharging process. A schematic illustration of the ion intercalation in meso- and compact-WO3 is depicted in Fig. 10d. The complete charging and discharging process of the synthesized ECSDs is shown in Fig. 10g in which the pattern is colored during charging, and after powering an LED it returns to its original bleached state. The device can be used for dual functions as an electrochemical reflective display and an energy storage device.102
 Fig. 10  (a) Charging/discharging cycling stability of meso- and compact-WO3 ECSs. (b) GCD curve and the corresponding in situ transmittance profile for the meso-WO3 ECS. (c) Photographs of the meso-WO3 ECS during the charging and discharging process. (d) Schematic illustration of the ion intercalation in meso- (left) and compact-WO3 (right). (e) Optical microscopy. (f) SEM of meso-WO3. (g) Photographs of the ECSD during the reversible charging and discharging process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
The conductivity and transparency of the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) are the two important factors that influence the CE and energy storage properties of the ESC device constructed on it. Therefore, Jo et al. increased the F-doping concentration in the FTO films with the help of NaOH as a functional additive during ultrasonic spray pyrolysis deposition (USPD) to enhance the chromic properties of the FTO film. Thus, the reduction in sheet resistance of the FTO film led to an increase in the rapid response and higher Cs of the WO3 based ESC electrode.103 Chen et al. designed a Fabry–Perot (F–P) cavity-type ESC based only on a tungsten oxide material, which can change its color according to charge/discharge states. The device was fabricated with various designs and vivid colors, which demonstrated a multi-functional ESC device with high aesthetic visual designs. The synthesized device retains 92% capacitance after 3000 cycles and 87% capacitance after 1000 bending cycles.104
Bi et al. used a low-temperature facile one-step citric acid-assisted hydrothermal method to synthesize tungsten trioxide monohydrate (WO3·H2O) nanosheets. NH4Cl is used as the capping agent to help control the WO3·H2O nanosheet morphology and citric acid helps to enhance the grip of WO3·H2O nanosheets with the FTO substrate. The study showed that NH4Cl assisted WO3·H2O nanosheets yielded more transparent bleached states, large current density, high CE, and higher CV area compared to that of pure WO3·H2O nanosheets.105 Soon after, in addition to the above-mentioned properties, a new device with selected electrochromic near-infrared (NIR) modulation functionalities was developed to block the thermal energy based on the duration of the voltage pulse. The solid-state multifunctioning smart glass (MSG) based on crystalline nanosheets of hydrated WO3·H2O was fabricated using LiClO4 containing solid polymer electrolyte (SPE). The MSG, operated by photovoltaic cells, showed excellent bi-functional behavior with CE of approximately 97.8 cm2 C−1 at 650 nm, a volumetric energy density of 85.7 mW h cm−3 at a power density of approximately 3.57 W cm−3, and in addition, it can maintain approximately 87% of its primary storage capacity after one year.106
Subsequently, Wang et al. demonstrated that, as a consequence of enhanced water confined in the nano-interlayer space of WO3, there were changes in its behavior from battery-type to pseudocapacitive, which can be easily analyzed from cyclic voltammetry and “b” values (slope of the graph between log(i) and log(ν)). The as-synthesized WO3·2H2O nanoplates displayed high transmission modulation and high coloration efficiency of 322.6 cm2 C−1.107 Recently, Jo et al. synthesized a flexible electrochromic energy storage film using a-WO3·H2O with oxygen vacancies. The synthesized film showed good rate capability and fast switching response. The film also displayed Cs of 94.2 F g−1 at a 2 A g−1 scan rate.108
Considerable research has also been performed on how pristine WO3 can improve its characteristics when unified with other TMOs. Wei et al. developed a pair of bilayer film ZnWO4/WO3 and WO3/ZnWO4 composites by using the spin-coating technique. Methylene blue (MB) is used to realize the electron transfer process and their trapping between the bilayer films. At a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, the ZnWO4/WO3 and WO3/ZnWO4 layers reached specific capacitances of 140 and 230 μF cm−2, respectively.109 Afterward, Huang et al. electrodeposited WO3 on an FTO substrate and designed a solid-state SC. Further, the fabricated e-WO3//PPy and e-WO3//MnO2 solid-state SC study revealed that the areal capacitances of the e-WO3/PPy and e-WO3/MnO2 SCs (11.38 and 14.21 mF cm−2, respectively) are approximately 5 to 7 times higher than that of the pure e-WO3 based electrode at 20 mV s−1.110 A flexible Ag NWs/WO3 electrode synthesized by Shen et al. exhibited excellent flexibility and attained Cs of 138.2 F g−1 with a switching time of less than 2 s.111
Further, Bi et al. developed a nanorod-like composite structure of WO3/ZnO via combination of a poly-ethyleneimine (PEI)-assisted hydrothermal and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique. The flexible PET was sputtered with transparent conducting Al-doped ZnO (AZO) to develop flexible PET/AZO as schematically shown in Fig. 11a. The vertically aligned nanorod assembly of porous WO3/ZnO (Fig. 11b) on PET/AZO offers easy pathways for ion transport, large micro-channels, and a large specific surface area (SSA) which helps to boost the redox reaction activity. The reversible redox reactions between W6+ and W5+ in LiClO4/PC electrolyte displayed both EC and SC performance. The synthesized nanorod exhibited a wider optical contrast of 68.2% (Fig. 11c) upon switching from dark-blue to transparent, greater coloration efficiency (80.6 cm2 C−1), and higher areal capacitance (15.24 mF cm−2) compared with that of the dense WO3 film.112
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation process of WO3/ZnO nanocomposites, (b) top-view FESEM image of the final WO3/ZnO nanocomposites, (c) transmittance spectra and photographs of the WO3/ZnO nanocomposite electrode in colored and bleached states under potentials of 1.0 V and +1.0 V, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Scheme of the preparation process of core/shell WTNRAs. (e) SEM images of the WTi-0.050 sample. (f) Specific capacitances vs. various current densities of WTi-0.050. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Electroactive sites and more ion diffusion channels can be effectively enhanced by the amorphous metal-doped WO3 rather than the crystalline metal-doped WO3. The optimized metal doping percentage resulted in enhanced optical modulation of 83.3% at 633 nm and the highest pseudocapacitance of 117.1 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2. Further, bi-functional asymmetric devices with WO3 nanosheets and Prussian white (PW) films were prepared for their dual-functional application. The synthesized device with a working potential window of 2 V can be used in smart window applications to control the heat and daylight with color-changing properties or can be used as the power source for an LED screen and a series of two such devices can be combined to power up red LEDs.113
Subsequently, Xi and coworkers designed an energy storage smart window (ESSW) using a Mo-doped WO3 film electrode and MnO2 nanoflake film electrode with transparent-to-dark EC performance, achieving an areal capacitance of 19.1 mF cm−2, so that only one ESSW can power the red LED for 90 seconds.114 Later, molybdenum oxide (MoO2+x) films with oxygen vacancies via a colloidal electrodeposition method were successfully synthesized by Zhang et al., which displayed SC performance with 89 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2. The synthesized film can be used as the counter electrode in an ECD, as it lowers the value of the color activation potential of the single WO3 active layer from −2 to −0.5 V. The highest oxidation state of MoO2+x obtained at 573 K annealing temperature indicates the characteristics of the battery.115
Yin and coworkers developed Gd–WO3/Ag/Gd–WO3 (WGd–Ag–WGd) films, based on a multifunctional dielectric–metal–dielectric (DMD) strategy, with an ITO-free structure with gadolinium (Gd) doping, which is capable of achieving fast color-switching speeds and high rate capabilities. The synthesized WGd–Ag–WGd film retains 83.5% of its initial optical modulation after 2000 cycles and high specific capacitance of 124.7 F g−1 at 2 A g−1. This improvement in the EC and electrochemical performance is ascribed to the Gd doped WO3, which helped to enhance the charge capacity and interfacial contact for rapid reaction kinetics compared to that of undoped amorphous WO3 films.116
Later, Kim and coworkers used another strategy to reduce the charge transfer resistance and increase the electrochemically active surface area at the electrode–electrolyte interface by embedding nanofilament arrays (NFAs) in WO3 nanostructures by an electroforming process to improve the conductivity on the surface as well as in the bulk of the synthesized WO3 electrode. The synthesized NFA embedded WO3 displayed a specific capacity of 214 F g−1 and coloration efficiency of 128 cm2 C−1, which is much greater than that of the pristine WO3.117 Recently, Zhao et al. synthesized a porous hexagonal WO3/oriented TiO2 nanorods array based EESD with multicolor switching properties and Ca of 10.93 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2.118
Over the years, core–shell nanostructures have attracted a lot of attention due to their unique geometry. Core–shell nanostructures can be developed using a single or two different materials, which will act as a middle core and outer layers. Among the many proposed approaches, the core–shell microstructure is an effective way to obtain ESC electrodes with high optical and energy storage efficiency along with greater cycling stability. Although the results are remarkable, little work has been done so far on the core–shell microstructure technique for the bi-functional applications of electrodes. Based on this strategy, Mishra et al. designed heterostructure TiO2–Co3O4 core–shell nanorod arrays via a two-step hydrothermal process followed by an electrodeposition technique and studied their EC and energy storage properties. The vertically aligned crystalline TiO2 nanorods provided a highly porous surface and strong adhesion to the FTO substrate. As a consequence, the synthesized electrode exhibited highly power-efficient bias induced color variation from sky blue to dark brown states with reflectance variation of 40%, CE of ∼91 cm2 C−1, and high Cs of ∼342 F g−1 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, along with superior cycling stability and a fast switching response.119
Subsequently, a core–shell nanostructure was fabricated with hexagonal WO3 nanorod arrays (h-WNRAs) as the core and amorphous titanium dioxide (a-TiO2) as the shell (Fig. 11e). The schematic illustration of the EC mechanism of the synthesized core–shell structure is shown in Fig. 11d. The core/shell WTNRAs exhibited a large optical modulation of 78% at 682 nm, high Cs, and CE of 122.3 cm2 C−1 at 80 nm with good cycling stability and excellent specific capacitance at optimized TiO2 colloid solution concentration (Fig. 11f).120
More recently, by using the same synthesis route, a core–shell nanostructure based on hexagonal WO3 nanorod arrays as the core and amorphous WO3−x as the shell (h@a-WNRAs) was developed by Huo et al. via a two-step hydrothermal–spin-coating process. The synthesized h@a-WNRAs core–shell structure exhibited Cs of 716.8 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 current density at the optimized annealing temperature of the shell coating, as the temperature greatly influences the microstructure of the shell.121
To enhance the capacitive flow and raise the ion extraction–insertion speed, it is essential to design electrodes with a large active surface area as well as small ion diffusion pathways. Ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes possess a broad range of temperature stability, fast redox activity with fast switching time, and higher ionic conductivity.122 These properties of IL electrolytes in a conducting polymer (CP) based SC help to improve the cycling stability.123 Wei et al. successfully developed the first self-supporting double gyroid (DG) V2O5 for electrochromic supercapacitor applications by using an electrodeposition technique with the help of a voided block copolymer template. The resulting interconnected symmetrical bi-continuous DG morphology (Fig. 12a and b) offers a very high structural stability and extremely high active surface area. The room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) triethylsulfonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide ([SET3][TFSI]) electrolyte containing lithium salt exhibited a wide potential window, fast reaction kinetics and enhanced specific energy. The DG V2O5 electrode in its oxidized state displayed a vivid yellow color which turns into a green/gray color in the reduced state (Fig. 12c) and achieves the highest specific energy of 52 W h kg−1 at specific power greater than 1 kW kg−1 as clearly seen from the Ragone plot (Fig. 12d). The bi-functional electrochromic supercapacitor based on DG V2O5 demonstrates a variation in color during the charge and discharge process.124 Zhu et al. fabricated an ESC device based on a 2D-on-2D hierarchical architecture of a MoO3 nanobelt/Ni(OH)2 nanosheet composite. The 3D hierarchical architecture having numerous nanosheets on the nanobelt that extend radially outward provides a larger active surface area (Fig. 12g and h). Moreover, the bifunctional electrochromic supercapacitor displayed desirable electrochromic optical modulation (46%) (Fig. 12i), exhibited a coloration efficiency of 34.8 cm2 C−1 and could easily light up a commercial green LED after being charged (Fig. 12j).125
 Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM of mesoporous DG V2O5. (b) Schematic illustration of the DG V2O5 SC device. (c) Photograph of the fully transparent electrochromic supercapacitor with two laterally offset color variations in the oxidized and reduced states. (d) Ragone plot. (e) CV of the DG V2O5 based electrode supercapacitor with (a) RTIL electrolyte containing lithium salt and (b) Li-free RTIL as electrolyte. (f) Photographs of the developed electrochromic supercapacitor device displaying color in its oxidized and bleached states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (g) SEM images of MoO3 nanobelts. (h) SEM images of MoO3/Ni(OH)2. (i) Transmittance spectra of the coated FTO glass in the bleached and colored states. (j) Photographs of the electrochromic and charging process. The inset is the photograph of a green LED lit by the electrochromic storage device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, cathodic vanadate/polyvanadate materials of the form MV3O8 (where M = Li, Na, and NH4) with large capacity and stability have been widely used in lithium-ion battery electrode application. Zhou et al. fabricated (NH4)2V3O8 nanoflakes on nickel foam without using any binder or conductive agent, through a facile one-pot hydrothermal technique. The synthesized composite was utilized to fabricate an asymmetric SC using activated carbon, achieving a maximum specific energy of 20.1 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 0.7752 kW kg−1. Due to the semiconducting properties of the active material, Cs of the (NH4)2V3O8@Ni foam electrode improved by 32–44% under visible light illumination.126
Pure V2O5 for bi-functional application suffers from electrochemical invisibility, which hinders its practical use. Sajitha and coworkers tried to solve this problem by encrusting an ultra-thin layer of MnO2 onto V2O5 (V2O5/MnO2) nanowire mat films. The V2O5/MnO2 electrode showed enhanced Ca from 10.90 mF cm−2 to 13.70 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and also increased capacitance retention from 71% to 93.6% due to increased electrochemical stability, as compared to that of the bare V2O5 electrode.127 Lin et al. recently developed nickel-doped V2O5via the co-sputtering method. The charge storage capacity of pure V2O5 was enhanced from 42.58 mC cm−2 to 101.35 mC cm−2 when it was doped with nickel.128
Polyoxometalates (POMs) are inorganic compounds with excellent electronic and structural versatility. A multifunctional nanocomposite of polyoxometalates (POMs) and TiO2 nanowire arrays was developed by Qu et al., via a combined hydrothermal and layer-by-layer self-assembly method. Enhanced bi-functional properties of the nanocomposite were observed due to the 3D structure of the TiO2 NW arrays that benefited the fast charge transportation due to increased conductivity.129
WO3 has been widely used in the fabrication of EES electrodes. In addition to WO3, materials such as V2O5 and NiO have also been studied as target TMO materials for EES electrode purposes. Recently, polyvanadates and polyoxometalates have also been studied for dual-functional application purposes. However, the poor electronic conductivity of TMOs hinders achieving the theoretical capacitance value and consequently limits their rate capabilities. The full potential of electrochromic and energy storage parameters of many TMOs, such as switching response, capacitance, and its retention even after a large number of cycles is yet to be achieved. Further related improvements will play an important role in dual-functional EES device development technology. For example, as mentioned above, doping has greatly increased the cycling stability of ESC devices based on NiO and WO3. Various composites of TMO that have been discussed above such as WO3/ZnO, WO3/a-TiO2, TiO2/Co3O4, and NiO–Ta2O5 have exhibited various nanostructures such as core–shell structures which resulted in enhanced optical contrast and color performance, and higher efficiency of the composites as compared to individual components. Various synthesized electrodes displaying EC and SC properties based on inorganic materials and their composites are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Data analysis of the electrochromic and supercapacitive performance of various electrodes based on inorganic materials and their composites for EES application. Here, Ca is areal capacitance in F cm−2, CV is volumetric capacitance in F cm−3, Cs is specific capacitance in F g−1, CE is coloration efficiency in cm2 C−1, Tb is bleaching time in s, Tc is coloration time in s, ΔT is optical modulation, current density (ID) in A g−1 and scan rate (SR) in mV s−1




Electrodes
Substrate
Synthesis method
Morphology

T
b/Tc in s
ΔT @ wavelength
CE (cm2 C−1) @ nm

C
a (in F cm−2) @ ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)

C
S (in F g−1) @ ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention (cycles)
Ref.




NiO film
ITO
DC reactive magnetron sputtering
Crystalline grain
2.6/4.2
50% @ 500


173.6


50% (5 to 200 mV s−1)

57



NiO
FTO
Hydrothermal
Nanoflakes
1.8/2.7
40%
63.2 @ 632.8
74.8 @ 10 mV s−1
—
Approx. 100% (5000)

86



WO3
FTO
Facile thermal evaporation and electrodeposition
Nanoparticles
0.9/3.1
76.2% (−0.6 V)
54.8 @ 633
102.4
639.8 @ 10 mV s−1



92



WO3
ITO
Oblique-angle RF magnetron sputtering
Nanograins (<10 nm)
—
82%
∼170 @ 630
—
228 @ 0.25 A g−1
75% (2000)

94



WO3
FTO
Hydrothermal
Nanosheets (15 nm thick)
3.8/6.6


48.9
14.9


84.5% (1000) @ 0.22 mA cm−2

95



WO3
FTO
Pulsed radio frequency (PRF) magnetron sputtering
Thin films
5.6/3.2
93.6% @ 633 & 90.6% @ 1500
56.8
47.1 @ 0.14 mA cm−2


75.8% (2000)

99



WO3
FTO
Electrochemical deposition & reactive radio frequency magnetron sputtering
Bilayer hybrid nanoarrays
3.6/3.0
93.9% @ 633 & 89.6% @ 1500
92.3
47.4


84.0% (2000)

101



WO3/metallic tungsten
ITO/PET
Sputtering
—


—
Approx. 140
Approx. 23.4
—
92% (3000) GCD & 87% (1000) (bending cycles)

104



WO3·H2O
FTO
Citric acid-assisted hydrothermal
Nanosheets
6.1/10.1
79%
42.6 @ 633
43.30 @ 0.14 mA cm−2
—
—

105



WO3·2H2O
ITO
Spin coating
Nanoplates


90.4%
322.6 @ 1600


95.4
93.7% (500)

107



e-WO3//PPy
FTO
Electrodeposition, electrochemical polymerization
Nanoparticles






14.21 mF cm−2 @ 20 mV s−1





110



Ag NWs/WO3
PET/Ag NWs
Spin coating, facile thermal evaporation
Nanowires
1/1.7
44.1%
80.2 @ 633
13.6
138.2 @ 10 mV s−1
72.6% (5000) @ 100 mV s−1

111



WO3/ZnO
PET/AZO
Poly-ethyleneimine (PEI)-assisted hydrothermal
Nanorod-like
2.8/6.2
68.2%
80.6 @ 633
15.24 @ 0.14 mA cm−2
—
—

112



Mo-doped WO3
ITO/PET
Electrodeposition method
—
2/1.9
83.3%
86.1 @ 633
117.1 @ 0.25 mA cm−2
0.3346
83% (1500) @ 1 mA cm−2

113



WGd–Ag–WGd films
Soda-lime
DC/RF magnetron sputtering
52/12/42 nm-thick
3.2/1.6
49.6%
71.4 @ 633
—
124.7 @ 2 A g−1
97.8% (2000) @ 50 mV s−1

116



NFA-embedded WO3 film
ITO
Radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering, electroforming
—


67%
128 @ 630


214 @ 0.25 mA cm−2
∼92% (2000)

117



TiO2–Co3O4
FTO
Hydrothermal, electrodeposition
Core–shell


—
Approx. 91 @ 422.6
140 @ 100 mV g−1
Approx. 342



119



WO3/a-TiO2
FTO
hydrothermal–spin coating
Core–shell
12/15
78% @ 682 nm
122.3 @ 800
—
426.8 @ 1 A g−1
81%

120



WO3


Hydrothermal & spin-coating
Core/shell
10.5/14
83.2%
59.7


716.8 @ 1 A g−1



121



(NH4)2V3O8 @ NF
Ni foam
Hydrothermal
3D nanoflakes


—
—
—
465.5 @ 2 A g−1
61.5% (5000) @ 2 A g−1

126





6.2 Based on organic materials
Intrinsic CPs have low conductivity (10−10 to 10−5 S cm−1), but with doping, it can be improved up to 105 S cm−1 based on the dopant's properties and its concentration.130 Alternate single and double bonds along with the polymer backbone ease charge conduction in conducting polymers (CPs). Electrode materials based on CPs have the ability to utilize the entire bulk of the electrode during fast reversible redox reactions, making them suitable candidates for pseudocapacitors.131 An energy storage smart window was developed by Wang et al. using an ordered PANI nanowire array electrode that can be charged with the help of conventional solar cells, and the stored energy can be effectively utilized to power small power-consuming devices.132 To date, many attempts have been made to improve the electrode material by tailoring the surface morphology and pore structure. The porous structure of the thin film with nanoparticles assists electrolytes to enter deep into the bulk of the electrode and utilize the more active sites. Such highly porous PANI thin films on the ITO/PET substrate were achieved by combining galvanostatic (GS) and cyclic voltametric (CV) electrodeposition techniques. The synthesized flexible PANI resulted in a high CE of 80.9 cm2 C−1 at 630 nm and displayed a specific capacitance (Cs) of 473.3 F g−1 at a scan rate of 30 mV s−1.133 The development of various dimensional hollow nanostructures is also one of the best approaches to enhance the electrochemical and EC performance of electrodes to accomplish practical application. 3D polyaniline hollow fibers were successfully synthesized by Tabar et al. to achieve high SC performance.134 Surface morphology and type of electrolyte essentially influence the electronic and ionic conductivity of the synthesized film. Substantial transport of ions within the synthesized film is the elemental necessity that determines the fast charge/discharge rate of the redox process and as a result, it causes a rapid change in electronic and ionic conductivity. CPs experience poor cycling stability, as the mechanical stability of the synthesized film diminishes due to continuous insertion/extraction of ions and solvent constituents during a repetitive redox reaction.
Zhou et al. synthesized a single fiber based on PEDOT by a template method with the dual properties of optical modulation and energy storage. The synthesized flexible fiber showed a reversible color change with a fast response time (5 s). The PEDOT coated on the cathode part of the fiber turns from blue to gold in response to the applied potential from 0 V to 0.6 V; at the same time, PEDOT coated on the anode part remains transparent, and after that the reversed bias changes the color of PEDOT coated on the anode part only. After 1000 bending cycles, the synthesized single fiber retained 73% of its initial capacitance. The designed single fiber has the capability to accomplish both functions at the same time without any interference from each other.135 Subsequently, Hu et al. developed PEDOT hollow nanotubes, which exhibited superior EC performance compared to the unmodified PEDOT.136,137 Additionally, Hang and coworkers synthesized PEDOT hollow nanospheres (PEDOT-HS) which exhibited high optical modulation, higher CE, and large Cs compared to those of the dense PEDOT. The CE of the fabricated PEDOT-HS (153.4 cm2 C−1) is three times greater than that of the dense PEDOT (50.7 cm2 C−1). The improved energy storage performance is attributed to the hollow nanosphere structure, which helped to reduce the number of ion diffusion paths and provided a large active area for rapid ion transportation.138 Kim et al. developed a polymer from a selenophene derivative (PProDOS) that offers efficient visible to NIR electrochromism along with a photothermal effect under NIR light irradiation. The resulting film demonstrated a fast switching time and high coloration efficiency of 273 cm2 C−1.139
The poor cycling stability and moderate EC and SC performance of CPs and their derivatives can be effectively enhanced by producing their nanostructures. In addition, electrochemical performance degrades mainly related to capacitance and mechanical firmness due to dimensional modification, which occurs during the repeated doping/dedoping process throughout the redox reactions. As reported, vertical nanowire arrays help to improve the energy storage and chromatic properties, due to a reduced ion transport distance and stable interaction with the substrate, and the spacing between nanowires permits large volume changes without any cracks/modifications in the fabricated structure.140
Poly(indole-6-carboxylic acid) (PICA) vertical nanowire arrays (Fig. 13a) synthesized via a template-free galvanostatic method as an EC electrode exhibited a high CE of 142 cm2 C−1 at 490 nm which changes between yellow, green, and brown and those synthesized as an SC electrode retained 93% of their initial capacitance after 1000 cycles (Fig. 13b). In the reduced state, the as-synthesized symmetrical difunctional device appears yellow (at 0 V) (Fig. 13c) and after charging with an external solar cell, it turns dark green, converting to its oxidized state (Fig. 13d). A series assembly of two such synthesized difunctional devices can effectively harvest and store renewable energy from solar cells to light up an LED for 95 s. The difunctional device very efficiently stored and used the energy with color variation to specify the charged/discharged state of the device.141 The EC behavior of CPs is greatly affected by the multiple charge–discharge cycles and results in the reduction of transparency and low cycling stability. To design an EC capacitor with high color contrast and stability, Kim et al. proposed an EC capacitive window (ECC), with PANI as a transparent capacitive layer and poly-(3,3-bis(bromomethyl)-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine)) (PR-Br) and poly(3,4-di(2-ethylhexyloxy) thiophene-co-3,4-di(methoxy)thiophene) (Th-OR) as the EC polymers which is schematically shown in Fig. 13e. The morphology and porous structure of PANI, PR-Br and Th-OR are shown in Fig. 13f. The study showed that EC polymers PR-Br and Th-OR are highly stable with a high color contrast in non-aqueous electrolytes and in contrast, PANI showed high capacitance in acidic aqueous electrolytes. So, the EC and capacitive performances of the synthesized ECC window were simultaneously well-balanced using a non-aqueous electrolyte containing acetonitrile solution (SPAn) with NaClO4 and HClO4. The addition of poly-(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) into SPAn solution resulted in improved specific energy and specific power for both ECC windows PR-Br//SPAn-PMMA//PANI (13.5 W h kg−1 at 58.8 kW kg−1) and TH-OR//SPAn-PMMA//PANI (10.5 W h kg−1 at 51.6 kW kg−1). The self-discharge graph and corresponding transmittance change for blue EC PR-Br with PMMA (BECCP5) and BECC with SPAn electrolyte and those for the red EC Th-OR with PMMA (RECCP5) and RECC with SPAn electrolyte along with their photographic images for different potentials are included in Fig. 13g–i. As demonstrated in Fig. 13j approx. 98% coulombic efficiency is retained by all the polymers.142
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of PICA nanowires; (b) stability of the ESC at a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2. Working mechanism of the ESC device as a power source: (c) two ESCs in series in their reduced state displaying a yellow color; (d) after charging with a solar cell they turn dark green and can independently light up an LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of an electrochromic capacitive (ECC) window and chemical structure of polymers: (fi) PANI layer which was used as a highly capacitive layer, (fii) PR-Br (blue), and (fiii) Th-OR (red) layers which were used as a high color contrast layer. (g) Self-discharge graph and corresponding transmittance change for BECCP5 (solid line), and BECC with SPAn electrolyte (dashed line). (h) Self-discharge graph and corresponding transmittance change for RECCP5 (solid line) and RECC with SPAn electrolyte (dashed line). (i) Photographic image of the BECCP5 (above) and RECCP5 (below) for various voltages. (j) Coulombic efficiency (black), areal capacitance, and transmittance change. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Polymers containing triarylamine (TAA) units and their derivatives as their side-chains showed promising electrochromic properties and were studied extensively.143–145 For instance, three kinds of multifunctional polyurethane (PU) material with various triarylamine (TAA) units as the functional group have been reported with EC and memory storage properties by Zhang et al. The film-forming ability of the synthesized PU was effectively enhanced in the presence of urethane and TAA units. The synthesized PUs exhibited CE in the range of 84 to 198 cm2 C−1.146 Kim et al. reported a simple approach to synthesize solution-processable and patternable flexible large-sized electrochromic films based on π-conjugated polymers poly(3,4-alkylenedioxythio-phene)s (PXDOTs). The fabricated device showed long memory effects to yield energy-saving displays.147 Ming et al. synthesized dual performance electrodes poly (EDOT-BE-O) and poly (Th-BE-O) based on thiophene–benzene derivatives, which aid in accurately distinguishing between a partially and a fully charged state with the naked eye. In response to the applied potential in the range from 0 V to 1.2 V, poly (EDOT-BE-O) switches its color from red to gray to light blue and that of poly (Th-BE-O) switches from yellow to light gray to blue. The poly (EDOT-BE-O) exhibited better transmission modulation (27% at 530 nm), fast response time, and high Cs of 97 F g−1 compared to that of poly (Th-BE-O).148
In a donor–acceptor (D–A) type conjugated polymer (CP), an appropriate choice of donor and acceptor building blocks can help to adjust the bandgap of the material, including the varying color display. They have the ability to function both as a positive and negative charge storage material in SC devices. The stored energy can be increased by increasing the operating voltage window because energy is proportional to the square of the operating voltage. Therefore, the energy storage electrodes synthesized with a D–A type CP exhibited a wide potential window and high specific energy.149 Although this is an emerging electrode material, to date few electrode materials based on a D–A type CP have been fabricated for developing ESC devices. From research to date, asymmetric devices have displayed enhanced Cs, visual effects with high optical contrast, CE, and specific energy compared to symmetrical devices. For example, Guo et al. fabricated an all-polymer-based asymmetric supercapacitor from a new electrochromic D–A polymer based on poly[4,7-bis(3,6-dihexyloxy-thieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)]-benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (PBOTT-BTD), which served as the positive electrode and PEDOT served as the negative electrode. Here, 3,6-dialkoxythieno[3,2-b]thiophene is used as the donor building block in electroactive polymer PBOTT-BTD, which supported the redox activity and stability of PBOTT-BTD. The solution-processed spray-coated PBOTT-BTD on an ITO/PET flexible electrode (Fig. 14a) shows a twisted fibrous structure with porous morphology (Fig. 14b), which is beneficial for providing a larger contact area between the electrode material and electrolyte. Results showed that the asymmetric supercapacitor prepared from PBOTT-BTD//PEDOT (Fig. 14d) exhibited a specific energy of 5.7 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 1.2 kW kg−1, which is greater than that of the symmetric supercapacitor based on PBOTT-BTD because increasing the operating voltage (1.4 V) in an asymmetric supercapacitor will bring about a twofold increase in energy density compared to that of a symmetric supercapacitor (0.6 V). Simultaneously, besides the energy storage capacity, PBOTT-BTD//PEDOT also shows distinct electrochromic properties (Fig. 14c) with a color variation from green in its uncharged state (−0.4 V) to blue after charging (0.6 V). Further, it was observed that a two-fold increase in cell voltage of 2.8 V was achieved compared to that of a single device (1.4 V) when two asymmetric supercapacitors were connected in series (Fig. 14f). This cell voltage acts as a power source to light a red LED (Fig. 14e).150
 Fig. 14  (a) PBOTT-BTD/ITO/PET flexible electrode, (b) its SEM image, (c) color variation in the charged and discharged states, (d) CV curves of the PBOTT-BTD/ITO/PET and PEDOT/ITO/PET electrodes in 0.1 M TBAPF6/ACN, (e) two asymmetric SCs in series, and (f) CVs of single and two series asymmetric SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons. 
EC properties such as transparency and optical contrast of the conjugated polymer can be effectively boosted by the introduction of a π-spacer.151 Yao and co-workers utilized a 3,4-dialkoxythiophene π-spacer for the low potential polymerization of a precursor and high-quality film growth.152 The existence of acceptor and donor units along with the π-spacer highly affected the synthesized polymer film morphology. Following that, Ming et al. designed a high-performance D–π–A–π–D type conjugated polymer, poly(4,7-bis(5-(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-5-yl)-3,4-bis(hexyloxy)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole) (poly(BT-Th-EDOT)). The synthesized poly(BT-Th-EDOT) conjugated polymer in its neutral state appears green and turns blue in its oxidized state, exhibiting a CE of 271 cm2 C−1 at 720 nm (without the π spacer it was 130 cm2 C−1), a faster response time (less than 0.5 s), and excellent optical contrast of 46% in the visible region compared to other neutral green polymers. As reported, molecular structure modulation with a highly porous structure and increased ion transportation speed is the outcome of the existence of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) (donor unit), benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BT) (acceptor unit), and 3,4-dihexoxythiophene (as a π-spacer).153 Murto et al. synthesized highly stable indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT) based structures by copolymerizing the IDTT donor monomer with four donor–acceptor–donor (DAD) units for ESC applications depending on the added DAD units; each synthesized copolymer displays distinct colors.154
Electrical inhomogeneity, the amount of doping, and corrosion of the conductive substrate due to acid dopants in the CPs have a profound effect on the conductivity of a device fabricated based on doping-induced CPs.155,156 The subsequent thermal cross-linking of the solution-processable polymer film may be a good strategy to improve the morphological and mechanical stability of the CPs, as cross-linked polymers are harmoniously connected to give a better chain structure.157 Inspired by this, Sun et al. achieved a highly stable morphology along with enhanced solution processability and electrochemical stability by synthesizing stable novel cross-linking polymer PCBDTP-X. The solution-processable polymer used to obtain the highly uniform film followed by thermal cross-linking supported more mechanically and structurally stable film growth. As reported more ordered cross-linking reduced the ion diffusion length and enhanced the cycling stability. The PCBDTP-X//PEDOT as an all-polymer solid-state ESC device exhibited a wide working voltage window of 2.4 V, and achieved a high specific energy of 18.4 W h kg−1 with high 91.1% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles.158
A novel symmetric viologen (TPA-bpy) developed by Zhuang et al. demonstrated excellent electrochemical energy storage properties accompanied by color variation from purple to yellow and good cycling stability with 90% capacitance retention after 6000 charge/discharge cycles. Here, the presence of 3D triarylamine groups in the synthesized TPA-bpy helps to improve the response time and CE.159 Recently, Zhang and coworkers introduced a network of polysiloxane containing electroactive oligoaniline groups and aggregation-induced emission (AIE)-active cyanophenethylene groups (PSZT). They displayed good switching durability and optical contrast, and can be incorporated into SC devices for electrochromic/electrofluorochromic supercapacitor application with high performance and practical application purposes.160 Poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is the best TCE candidate and it is widely studied in EES application. The PEDOT:PSS polyelectrolyte complex of PEDOT and PSS is non-stoichiometric161 and can be a good choice to use for the synthesis of composite materials.161–163 In aqueous solutions like H2SO4, PEDOT:PSS does not show a noticeable color change but its color changes from deep blue (reduced state) to pale blue (oxidized state) in a non-aqueous solution.164 Barus et al. studied the effect of various chemicals on the optoelectronic and energy storage properties of PEDOT:PSS. Here, spin-coated benzenesulfonic acid-treated PEDOT:PSS on a flexible polycarbonate (PC) substrate demonstrated high stability, transmittance, and conductivity compared to those of the ethylene glycol treated PEDOT:PSS.72 Recently, two triphenylamine-triazine/ditrazine polymers (pTPATz and pTPADTz) were synthesized via electrochemical polymerization by Li and co-workers. They noticed that the charge capacity and optical contrast of the synthesized films decrease due to ion trapping behavior during the multiple reversible reactions and resulted in electrochemical and cycling instability. Electrochemical instability of the synthesized polymer films in electrolyte containing ClO4− anions was significantly decreased with the use of electrolyte containing BF4− anions.165
Conducting polymers such as PANI, PEDOT, PEDOT:PSS, and PICA have been found applicable for EES applications. CPs exhibit high color performance, ultrafast switching response, and multicolor modulation behavior. Multiple insertion and extraction of ions during the repetitive redox process diminish the cycling stability, film transparency, and overall EC and SC performance of CPs. Also, they suffer from low optical contrast and charge storage capacity due to ion trapping behavior during the multiple reversible reactions. As mentioned above, these parameters can be enhanced with the help of an improved morphology by developing various nanostructures such as hollow nanospheres, vertical nanowire arrays, etc. Various polymers, such as PB-OR, PB-Br, polyurethane with TAA units as functional groups, polymers based on thiophene and benzene derivatives, D–A type CPs, π-spacers in D–A type conjugated polymers, cross-linking polymer PCBDTP-X, etc., have been studied for dual-functional application. Most of the newly studied polymers have the strength to enhance the film-forming ability, consequently resulting in more mechanically and structurally stable film growth and overall EC and energy storage performance. Table 4 shows the electrochromic and supercapacitive performance of various organic material-based electrodes.
Table 4 Data analysis of the electrochromic and supercapacitive performance of various electrodes based on organic materials for EES application




Electrode
Substrate
Method of synthesis
Morphology

T
b/Tc
ΔT @ wavelength
CE (cm2 C−1) @ nm
EC stability

C
a (in F cm−2), Cs (in F g−1) @ ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention (cycles)
Ref.




PANI
PET/PEDOT:PSS
Spin coating, in situ polymerization
Nanowire arrays








17 mF cm−2 (400 F cm−3) @ 5 mV s−1
90% (1000), 100% (100) (bending cycles)

132



PANI film
ITO/PET
Combination of galvanostatic and cyclic voltametric electrodeposition
Nanoparticles
3.9/2.61
49%
80.9 @ 630
85% (500)
473.3 @ 30 mV s−1
—

133



PEDOT
Fibre
Sputter-coating, electrochemical deposition
Nanoparticles
4.2/3.6
—
360 @ 610
—
20.3
73% (1000 bending cycles)

135



PEDOT HS
ITO
Chemical oxidative polymerization and spray coating
Hollow nanospheres (HS)
1.2/1.1
35.6%
153.4 @ 480
56%
35.5 @ 8 A g−1 & 121.6 @ 0.5 A g−1
65.7% @ 8.0 A g−1 (500)

138



PICA
ITO
Electrochemical deposition
Nanowire arrays
1.7/0.7
43%
142 @ 490


16.20 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2
93% (1000) @ 0.1 mA cm−2

141



Poly(BT-Th-EDOT)
ITO
Reflux
Porous morphology
0.5/0.4
46% @ 467
271 @ 720
93% (100)
92 @ 1.0 A g−1
91% (1000)

153





6.3 Based on organo-inorganic composites
Generally, the hybrid composite material synthesis approach contributes to implementing the excellent ability of synergistic behavior and sophisticated qualities in terms of the quality of their specific components. Therefore, exploring such materials for dual EES applications with high performance is important in the field of research, and various solutions for building electrochromic energy storage devices with new device contours have been eagerly explored. CPs suffer from relatively poor cycle life and chemical stability though they have high coloration efficiency. TMOs suffer from long response time, single color visual effect and low energy density.166 The conductivity of CPs is more than that of inorganic electrode materials such as MnO2 and V2O5 (ref. 150) but the electrode's degradation occurs during the electrochemical charge/discharge process. The strategic combination of CPs with carbon and its derivatives, such as carbon nanofibers (CNFs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and also metal/organic nanoparticles like ZnO, WO3, RuO2, TiO2, and V2O5, resulted in the nanocomposite CPs achieving improved device performance.167,168 The synergistic effect of mixing TMOs with conducting polymers resulted in enhanced conductivity and Li+ ion diffusion in the synthesized composite electrode compared to that of pure TMOs.169
Huang et al. effectively incorporated hydrous RuO2 into the conducting template of PEDOT:PSS by using an electrochemical deposition technique. The homogeneous distribution of hydrous RuO2 particles (<400 nm) on the PEDOT:PSS matrix contributed to the increased conductivity and the formation of a large active surface area of the synthesized electrode. The PEDOT:PSS–RuO2 composite yielded a Cs of 1409 F g−1 at a scan rate of 30 mV s−1, which is much higher than that of RuO2 deposited on bare ITO (762 F g−1). A derivative cyclic voltabsorptometry (DCVA) study showed that the transition of RuO2 from Ru(III) to Ru(IV) is responsible for the EC behavior of the synthesized composite.164 In recent years, various nanocomposites based on PANI/metal oxide have been synthesized to optimize the properties of pristine materials. WO3 and PANI are widely studied as cathodically and anodically coloring materials, respectively. Both the materials change their color from blue to transparent due to their EC behavior. While designing WO3 and PANI-based devices for the purpose of EC and energy storage, their performance does not meet the criteria required for commercialization, as the bare WO3 has a high response time and PANI suffers from electrochemical instability. Wei et al. attempted to reduce both scarcities by synthesizing nanocomposites based on PANI and WO3via electropolymerization of aniline monomers onto a WO3 coated ITO substrate. The PANI/WO3 nanocomposite film achieved a low response time (<14 s), which is less than that of the pure WO3 film (>20 s), and higher durability compared to the PANI film, as well as showing a CE of 98.4 cm2 C−1, which is much higher than those of WO3 (36.3 cm2 C−1) and PANI (50.0 cm2 C−1) thin films31 employed for ESC applications. Later, Nwanya et al. synthesized WO3/PANI nanocomposite films via a chemical bath deposition on an FTO substrate. The synthesized electrode exhibits 98% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles, which is much greater than that of pristine PANI (38%).170 Zhong et al. designed an asymmetric SC window based on WO3 (negative) and PANI (positive) electrodes. The synthesized device appears dark blue and light green in the charged and discharged states, respectively. The synthesized device works in a ±1.4 V potential window in H2SO4/PVA electrolyte.171 Recently, 1,3,6,8-pyrenetetrasulfonic acid (1,3,6,8-Psas) as a dopant and crosslinking agent helped to improve the solution processability and enhanced the pore structure morphology of PANI. The presence of 1,3,6,8-Psas in the PANI–WO3 composite resulted in enhanced capacitance retention and also Ca of about 72.11 mF cm−2 which is approximately double that observed for the PANI–WO3 composite.172 To develop the PANI/MnFe2O4 nanocomposite, Wang et al. embedded manganese iron oxide (MnFe2O4) nanoparticles in a PANI matrix. Here, the rough morphology of the nanocomposite enhanced the CE to 92.31 cm2 C−1 and Ca to 4.46 mF cm−2, which are higher than those of the pristine PANI film, but the composite displayed poor stability compared to pristine PANI (69.3%) as it retains only 42.13% of the initial capacitance at high scan rates.173
Tian et al. designed a smart supercapacitor, including a “sign” pattern (Fig. 15a), comprising a W18O49 nanowire (Fig. 15b) on a PANI background (Fig. 15c), which will be useful in ESC application with additional functionality for displaying information through the color contrast of visual patterns. The energy storage performance of the fabricated electrodes was electrochemically characterized using cyclic voltammetry (CV) (Fig. 15e) in a 1 M aqueous H2SO4 electrolyte. All three electrodes exhibited excellent pseudocapacitive behavior with well-resolved anodic and cathodic peaks, reflecting superior reversibility of the relevant redox reactions. The embossed symbol and background undergo complementary color variations and also help to recognize the level of stored energy through color scheme variations of the pattern (Fig. 15f).174 Subsequently, Wu et al. synthesized an all-solid-state SC, with polyaniline (PANI) as the anode, WO3 as the cathode, and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)–LiClO4 as the solid electrolyte with engraved letters (Fig. 15g). However, as described in the previous report, the pattern cannot change color and shows the electrochromic behavior of the synthesized device. The CV curves of the solid-state device showed well-resolved redox peaks for PANI, WO3, and for the device owing to the superior performance of EESS as shown in Fig. 15h. The synthesized all-solid-state SC switches color from dark green and yellow to blue, in response to the applied potential and energy level indicating functionality (Fig. 15i).175
 Fig. 15  (a) A photograph of a smart supercapacitor electrode consisting of W18O49 nanowires and a PANI layer in the patterned and unpatterned parts, respectively. (b) An SEM snapshot of the logo on FTO glass, indicating that the structure of the nanowire networks has been retained during electrode fabrication. (c) SEM image of the background on FTO glass showing the formation of a uniform PANI layer. (d) SEM close-up of the boundary between the logo and background. (e) CV curves of the PANI film, W18O49 nanowire film, and hybrid smart supercapacitor electrode. (f) Schematic of a hybrid smart supercapacitor electrode composed of W18O49 nanowires and a PANI layer in the patterned and unpatterned regions and color variation in the synthesized electrode with indication of the stored charge level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of an all-solid-state ESC based on PANI–WO3 and SEM micrographs of WO3, PANI and the device cross-section. (h) CV curves of the PANI electrode, WO3 electrode and PANI–WO3 based device. (i) Color variation during the self-discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Inamdar et al. prepared an amorphous Ni-PANI hybrid electrode via a multistep electrodeposition technique, with a mesoporous cauliflower-like morphology. Compared to the pure PANI film, the fabricated hybrid composite exhibited increased CE and Cs, which is attributed to the nanostructured morphology that provided a high surface area and good electronic conductivity.176 Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) has a morphology that provides a high surface area and good electronic conductivity. Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) is an organic photoconductive material. Ouyang and coworkers, while synthesizing the CuPc–PANI composite film, used CuPc to enhance the interfacial adhesion between ITO and PANI. The as-synthesized composite showed higher optical contrast and high stability with enhanced EC behavior and a noticeable Ca improvement compared to that of PANI.177 MXene is a 2D transition metal carbide that is solution-processable, its optoelectronic and electrochemical properties present it as a suitable candidate for the production of EESDs and TCEs.178 Li et al. developed a PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx electrochromic micro-supercapacitor (MSC) electrode through an automated scalpel lithography method. The synthesized PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx MSC achieved a Ca of 2.4 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the bleaching (Tb) and coloring time (Tc) is 6.4 s and 5.5 s, respectively, and the electrode color varies from deep blue to colorless.179 To exactly recognize its state of charge (SOC) in situ, an inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite photodetector (PPD) was integrated into the ECSC device based on polyaniline (PANI)/WO3. The PPD can detect a small difference of 47.2 mV in voltage depending on the charging state of the ECSC device.180
Recently, Jamdegni et al. developed a black to transparent composite electrode with energy storage properties by using PANI and functionalized NiO nanoparticles. (3-Aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane (3-APTS) is the linking agent used for the functionalization of NiO, assisting the strong interaction between NiO and PANI, resulting in an extended dual-band electrochromism with high CE and fast response time. The Ca of the composite reaches 1.1 F cm−2.181 Subsequently, Wang et al. prepared the inorganic–organic bilayer composite film, based on electroactive tetraaniline-sulfanilic acid polysiloxane (TASA) and versatile Prussian blue (PB) via electrochemistry-assisted hydrolytic crosslinking reaction followed by an electrodeposition method. The oligoaniline-functionalized TASA/PB composite showed good multicolor electrochromic performance with high specific capacitance and charge storage visualization features.182 Pan et al. fabricated an EESD using a NiO/PB composite nanosheet film, which was used as the positive electrode, and hex-WO3 as the negative electrode (Fig. 16a). The NiO/PB electrode was prepared using a hydrothermal route followed by electrodeposition of PB, and a hex-WO3 thin film was prepared via a hydrothermal route. The NiO prepared by the hydrothermal route exhibited nanosheets having a porous structure and PB nanoparticles were successfully decorated on the wall of nanosheets as shown in Fig. 16b. The two series connected EESDs were used as the power supply, which has the ability to drive two parallel green LEDs and LCDs (Fig. 16c) along with excellent electrochromic performances.183 Recently, Peng and coworkers developed a solution-processable nanocomposite electrode based on the capacitive material barium titanate (BT) and PANI via an in situ chemical oxidative polymerization process for ESC application. The BT/PANI nanocomposite exhibited porous coral-like nanostructures (Fig. 16d). In response to applied voltage, it displays a reversible color variation from light grey to light green to light blue, and to dark blue during the charge/discharge process (Fig. 16e). This fabricated ECSC showed an output voltage of 3.27 V, which is sufficient to light up an LED bubble (Fig. 16f).184 Polyindoles and their derivatives are active materials in supercapacitor applications. Nanocomposite electrodes comprising WO3 and polyindole derivatives show relatively good Cs values, but when they are employed to synthesize ECDs containing PEDOT, they display excellent CE, but with reduced Cs values. Then, Guo et al. developed an asymmetric ESC based on PICA/TiO2 nanorod array nanocomposites (Fig. 16h and i) and PEDOT, which is schematically shown in Fig. 16g. The equivalent series resistance (ESR = 13.9 Ω) of the nanocomposites is much smaller than that of the pristine PICA, which results in enhanced capacitive performance with a Cs of 23.34 mF cm−2. The fabricated asymmetric ESC device based on the PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite and PEDOT showed good electrochromic performance, where the color can be switched from light green to dark blue (Fig. 16j), and a high areal specific capacitance value (9.65 mF cm−2). The two devices were connected in series and charged with the help of a solar cell that can light up a single LED for 108 s (Fig. 16k).185
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the process of preparing an EESD, (b) SEM image of NiO/PB composite nanosheets, (c) digital photos of colored and bleached states and powering of an LED and LCD with the EESD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) SEM image of the synthesized BT/PANI nanocomposite and (e) schematic illustration of the DEP model. (f) The voltage of the prepared ECSC device and the prepared ECSC device lighting up a LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Preparation procedure of TiO2 nanorod arrays, a PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite, and asymmetric ESD. (h and i) SEM images of the TiO2 nanorod arrays and PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite. (j) Photos of the color change of the device under different charging potentials. (k) Working photo of this electrochromic supercapacitor difunctional device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Subsequently, poly (indole-5-carboxylic acid)/WO3 (P5ICA/WO3) nanocomposites with Cs of 30.2 mF cm−2 were synthesized. The strong electron-withdrawing effect of the carboxyl group in P5ICA reduces the energy gap of the polymer and enhances electron transport, hence resulting in the improved performance of the synthesized ECD. Moreover, an all-solid asymmetric ESD based on the P5ICA/WO3 nanocomposite and PEDOT showed enhanced Cs compared to that of the PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite-based device and an excellent CE value of 608 cm2 C−1.65 A solid-state honeycombed porous poly-(5-formylindole) (P5Fin)/WO3 nanocomposite exhibited high coloration efficiency of 137 cm2 C−1 and retained 93% of its initial capacitance after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. Further, Guo et al. fabricated an electrochromic supercapacitor device (ESD) based on P5FIn/WO3 and PEDOT which showed an optical transmittance of 55% and CE of 627 cm2 C−1 at 610 nm.186 Afterward, a poly-(indole-6-carboxylicacid) (P6ICA)/WO3 core–shell nanorod nanocomposite structure was synthesized by Li et al. Further, the asymmetric ESC device based on P6ICA/WO3 (positive electrode) and PEDOT exhibited a CE of 763 cm2 C−1 and Cs of 13.69 mF cm−2.166 Recently, a WO3–poly-(5-cyanoindole) (P5ICN/WO3) electrode with dual EC and energy storage functionality showed a multicolor change from blue-green to yellow and green and Cs of 89.2 mF cm−2. Further, the synthesized asymmetric ECD displayed a reversible color change from yellow to dark green during the reversible redox process. The CE of the device was reached at 548 cm2 C−1 at a 600 nm wavelength and about 90% capacitance retention was observed after 3000 GCD cycles.187 Further, Nakayama et al. synthesized a layered film of a 2D manganese oxide (MnOx) and poly-(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) nanocomposite. The nanocomposite presented a Cs of 99.5 F g−1 at a 20 mV s−1 scan rate in KCl electrolyte.188 He and coworkers reported the low annealing temperature synthesis of a-Nb2O5, which can achieve higher cycling stability compared to a-Nb2O5 synthesized at relatively higher temperatures. They paired a-Nb2O5 (as a minimally color-changing counter electrode (MCC-CE)) and a p-type cathodically coloring electrochromic polymer (ECP), to fabricate a solid-state ECD that exhibited high contrast and CE.189
Ag NWs have many attributes as, their high conductivity and transparency, they form a uniform network with large openings, they can be easily collected on substrates, and their flexibility. All these features enable them to be used as conducting substrates in the electrode that can be involved in practical electronic device fabrication. Taking advantage of all these merits, flexible nanocomposites were developed using Ag NWs and CPs, which change their color from green to transparent during the charge/discharge process. An electrode with almost 100% coulombic efficiency maintained 100% capacitance after 20000 GCD cycles.70 Subsequently, Yuksel and coworkers developed an EC polymer, poly(4,7-bis(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-5-YI)-2-(2-octyldodecyl)-2H-benzo[d] [1,2,3] triazole) (P1C), and Ag NWs in the form of a flexible nanocomposite. The Ag NWs as a transparent scratchable (TS) current collector with a sheet resistance of 10 ohm sq−1 and 87% optical transmission helped the nanocomposite display better ESC properties with excellent capacitance retention of about 98% after 11000 galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) cycles. The Ag NW/P1C nanocomposite changes color from navy blue to transparent.69
Wearable electronics with aesthetic features along with energy conversion or storage functionality have also been a focused research area in the last few years. While synthesizing wearable skin-like electronic devices, there are some key requirements such as the device must be highly stretchable, soft, and skin compatible with strong attachment with the substrate. An and coworkers synthesized a second-skin-like energy storage device based on Au NWs and PANI. The randomly oriented fibrous nanowire network of electrodeposited PANI covering vertically grown conductive Au-NWs (v-AuNWs) having a thickness of 200 nm served as a current collector (Fig. 17a). The fibrous network of PANI nanowires covering v-AuNWs is advantageous for enhancing the contact between the electrode and electrolyte during the electrochemical reaction and plays the dual role of energy storage site and stored energy level indicator. Three supercapacitors connected in parallel configuration achieved three-fold current density; in series configuration, an operating voltage nearly three times that of single supercapacitors was obtained (Fig. 17b). Also, the supercapacitor revealed excellent stability with 93.6% retention of its original capacitance, which is suitable for high-current fast charge–discharge applications (Fig. 17c). The v-AuNW/PANI-based supercapacitors show quasi-rectangular CV curves with characteristic peaks of the PANI redox reaction, and it was observed that the capacitance of v-AuNW/PANI increases with an increase in deposition time of PANI, while pure v-AuNWs only exhibit limited electrical double-layer capacitance (EDLC). The v-AuNW/PANI-based supercapacitors can be easily mounted on the skin and the energy storage state can be easily monitored with the naked eye. The as-fabricated electrode has excellent mechanical flexibility as it retains 95% of the initial capacitance after 5000 bending cycles with a bending angle of 180° and areal capacitance (Ca) of 11.76 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. As shown in Fig. 17d, it is observed that CV curves recorded at 100 mV s−1 were not altered under hand clenching or significant arbitrary skin deformations.190 Low specific surface area and porosity are the main factors that affect the performance of conjugated polymers. Most of the developed microporous D–A type CPs are not solution-processable; the existence of a twisted structure in the polymer backbone benefits the development of microporous solution processible electrodes.191 Sun et al. developed a series of three p/n-dopable D–A type conjugated polymers PI-IDT, PI-BT, and PI-DPP for flexible ESC application containing a twisted spirobifluorene unit. The spectral characterization study demonstrated that the p/n doping site distribution of the polymer was highly affected by the twisted structure unit. The PI-IDT polymer based on electron donor indacenodithiophene (IDT) as the linker unit exhibited a high Ca of 6.2 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2 and CE of 155 cm−2 C−1. Furthermore, the asymmetric supercapacitor PI-IDT//W0.71Mo0.21O3−x with PI-IDT as the cathode material switched color from orange to blue and showed a specific energy of 3.89 W h kg−1 at 304.4 W kg−1 specific power.192
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM cross-sectional view of v-AuNW/PANI electrodes. (b) CV curves for three as-prepared supercapacitors arranged in parallel or series, in comparison with a single supercapacitor. (c) Stability tests for v-AuNW/PANI-based symmetric supercapacitors (the inset shows the GCD curves). (d) CV curves with various static and dynamic skin deformations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of a Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2–PEIE/PEDOT:PSS hybrid electrode based all-solid-state ESC device. (f) Capacitance retention of the device under flat and bent–flat conditions. (g) Photos of the hybrid electrode under bleached/coloration conditions. (h) Mechanical stability of the synthesized ESC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Lv et al. developed a nanostructured Er-containing titania-based electrode (Er@TiO2) by using a heterometallic polyoxotitanate cage [Ti8O7(OEt)21Er] precursor. Poly(4,4′,4′′-tris[4-(2-bithienyl) pheny]-amine) (PTBTPA), which is an anodic coloring material that displays high optical contrast with clear EC properties, was used to design an integrated ESC device. The charge storage capacity of the Er@TiO2 electrode was 119 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1. The integrated asymmetric ESC device based on Er@TiO2//PTBTPA electrodes and a LiClO4–PMMA gel electrolyte changes its color from yellow to dark gray, depending on the energy storage level, and shows excellent performance.193 Reddy et al. produced a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxypyrrole)–gold nanoparticle (Au)–tungsten oxide (PEDOP–Au@WO3) ESC electrode that displayed a specific discharge capacitance of 130 F g−1, which is greater than that of the pristine PEDOP electrode. It can be used as a counter electrode in the assembly of quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs), and with CdS/TiO2 as the photoanode, the designed QDSC device achieved a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.85 mA cm−2.194 Later, a silver grid/PEDOT:PSS flexible transparent electrode (FTE) with enhanced electrochemical stability and 0.62 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance was utilized to synthesize a hybrid electrode for its bi-functional applications, by coating a layer of WO3 nanoparticles on it. The synthesized electrode exhibited a high CE and fast response time.66
Subsequently, Yun et al. synthesized a wearable patch device on a Ag/Au embedded PDMS stretchable transparent current collector. The PEDOT:PSS/WO3 nanotube composite helps to boost the EC and SC performance of the synthesized device. The device displayed a Cs of 471 F g−1 and retained 92.9% of its initial capacitance after 50000 charge–discharge cycles. A polyacrylamide (PAAm)-based hydrogel electrolyte is employed to synthesize this all-transparent stretchable device, to resolve the evaporation and leakage problem during repeated bending.195
Ginting et al. developed hybrid TCEs of Ag NWs/PEDOT:PSS with a Ni(OH)2 and polyethyleneimine ethoxylated (PEIE) composite interlayer, with a sheet resistance of 45 Ω sq−1 and 86% transmittance, which exhibited a volumetric capacitance (CV) of 443 F cm−3. Further, the assembled symmetrical all-solid-state ESC device (schematic is shown in Fig. 17e) showed excellent EC and SC performance with ultra-fast response time with an excellent capacitance retention of 90% after 8000 bending cycles and 80% optical stability after 10000 GCD cycles (Fig. 17f) and 90% under flat and bent–flat conditions (Fig. 17h). Also, for the same device, the overall increase in electrochemical performance of the hybrid Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS electrode is due to addition of a Ni(OH)2-PEIE composite interlayer between Ag NWs and PEDOT:PSS. This increment in the electrochemical performance can be attributed to an improvement in the wetting properties of Ag NWs caused by addition of PEIE and increase in pore density of PEDOT:PSS on top of Ni(OH)2-PEIE which provides high surface area which could facilitate better contact between PEDOT:PSS and the electrolyte, thus giving rise to better ion transportation and diffusion pathways.196
Liu et al. have successfully developed a highly flexible and a stretchable tungsten trioxide/silver nanotrough network/poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS) multilayer hybrid sandwich-structured electrode with 1.08 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance and 85% transparency (schematically shown in Fig. 18a and b). The TCE and EC materials employed possess high chemical and mechanical stability and high transparency (Fig. 18c). The hybrid WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS/WO3 film fabricated on various substrates such as polyethylene (PE) cling wrap, polydimethylsiloxane, and Ecoflex can excellently preserve its EC properties after repetitive twisting, elongation, and even after strong kneading (Fig. 18f). The hybrid film synthesized on PE cling wrap is suitable for the development of color changing e-skin (Fig. 18d and e) that displayed excellent mechanical stability during repetitive bending cycles.58
 Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication procedure of the WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS transparent electrodes. (b) Schematic illustration of a cross-section of the WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS/WO3 hybrid EC film and (c) photograph (left) and corresponding SEM image of WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS/WO3 films (right). (d) Schematic illustration of the structure of the PE cling wrap-based hybrid EC film. (e) The color-changing e-skin (EC film) on one finger (top), and PE cling wrap (bottom). (f) Upon folding and strong kneading, the PE-based hybrid EC film still displays the ability of coloring and bleaching, indicating excellent mechanical flexibility. (g) With 50% tensile strain stretching, the hybrid EC film on a PDMS substrate could also sustain its mechanical stability and electrochromic properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Self-healing materials have the ability to restore and self-repair the mechanical/structural properties. Li et al. synthesized a hybrid flexible electrochromic supercapacitor electrode with an additional self-healing function. The self-healing properties of the hydrogel are attributed to the hydrogen bonds among hydroxyl side groups in the PVA network. Without any external stimulation, the fabricated device comprising the PANI/NW-WO2.72/Au NP electrode and novel self-healing hydrogel recovers its mechanical and energy-storage performances automatically after 9 cut cycles.197 Copper nanowires (CuNWs) have been considered a promising flexible transparent electrode (FTE) material due to their low cost, solution-processability, and excellent intrinsic electrical conductivity. However, they have poor chemical and electrochemical corrosion stability. However, recently, Zhang et al. found that after oxidization, the chemical and electrochemical stabilities of the CuNWs could be increased with co-electrodeposition of a uniform protective layer of Ag–Au alloy on the CuNW network. Fig. 19a shows a schematic representation of the core–shell CuNW@alloy. The reduced gold and silver atoms were electrodeposited onto the surface of CuNWs (core), which were deposited onto PET by a vacuum filtration system (schematic is shown in Fig. 19b), and a uniform alloy protective shell was obtained. The resulting CuNW@alloy FTE showed a sheet resistance of 14.2 ohm sq−1 at a high transmittance of 90.1% and exhibited high chemical and electrochemical stability. Based on the high chemical and electrochemical stability, a further bifunctional electrochromic supercapacitor was fabricated via electrochemical polymerization of PANI on a CuNW@alloy FTE. The response potential of the CuNW@alloy network remained stable after electropolymerizing the PANI layer for 2 h (as evidenced in the inset of Fig. 19d (right)) and for pristine CuNW FTE, the response potential rapidly increased beyond the measuring range (10 V) after 477 s electrodeposition (as evidenced in the inset of Fig. 19d (left)), which indicates that it has lost electrical conductivity. The fabricated CuNW@alloy FTE changes color with different input voltages and stores energy simultaneously, demonstrating its potential in multifunctional flexible electronics (Fig. 19c).73
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the CuNW@alloy core–shell structure. (b) SEM image and schematic illustration of the CuNW@alloy structure. (c) Optical images of color variation in the synthesized PANI@CuNW@alloy FTE electrode. (d) Potential vs. time variation during electro-polymerization (inset images showing the SEM images of the FTE and after electro-polymerization of PANI on the FTE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the processes of synthesizing G-CuS/PANI on the PET substrate; the optical and SEM images of the corresponding film are shown on the two columns on the right, respectively. (f) Color variation in the synthesized G–CuS/PANI SC electrode to indicate the stored energy level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In summary, tremendous work has been done on organo-inorganic composites for their dual-functional EES application compared to individual inorganic or organic materials. Most importantly, several such composites, as well as the organic and inorganic materials they comprise, have not yet been focused on for their individual EC and energy storage performance. In this regard, it is important to mention CuPc, MnFe2O4, Ti3C2Tx, TASA, derivatives of polyindole, and so forth. By overcoming the scarcities of individual materials, their developed nanocomposites with more synergistic behavior have displayed remarkable capacitance and high stability compared to those of bare films. Further, some additional performance parameters of various organo-inorganic composite electrodes for EES application have been outlined in Table 5.
Table 5 Data analysis of organo-inorganic composite electrodes for EES application




Synthesized electrode
Substrate
Method of synthesis
Morphology

T
b/Tc
ΔT @ wavelength
CE (cm2 C−1) @ nm

C
s (in F g−1) or Ca (in F cm−2) or CV (in F cm−3) at ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention (cycles)
Ref.




PANI/WO3
ITO
Spin coating, electropolymerization
—
9.9/13.6
35.3% @ 633
98.4
25 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1
1000

31



WO3 on silver grid/PEDOT:PSS
PET (silver grid/PET)
Spin coating, electrodeposition
Nanoparticles (10–40 nm)
2.8/1.9
81.9% @ 633
124.5
221.1 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1
54.6% (2000), 92.5% (1200) (bending cycles)

66



PANI//Cu@alloy
CuNW@Ag–Au alloy
Electrochemical polymerization, electrodeposition
Nanowires


61.43% @ 633
—
12.12 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2
—

73



e-WO3//PPy
FTO
Electrodeposition, electrochemical polymerization
Nanoparticles


—
—
11.38 mF cm−2



110



PANI/MnFe2O4
ITO
Spin coating and electropolymerization
Fiber-like
4.79/9.61
—
92.
4.46 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1
42.13% at a high scan rate

173



Ni–PANI film
ITO
Pulse potential electrodeposition technique
Mesoporous cauliflowers


55.66%
45.9 @ 630
543 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1
90% (5000)

176



PANI–fNiO
ITO
Hydrothermal synthesis & electrochemical deposition
Hexagonal nanoparticles
2/1.5
40% @ 680
138
1.1 F cm−2 @ 20 mV s−1
—

181



TASA/PB
Hydrophilic ITO
Electrochemistry-assisted hydrolytic crosslinking reaction, electrochemical deposition
—
6.6/3.2
50% @ 700
92.7
273.4 F g−1 @ 0.25 A g−1
68.5% @ 0.25 to 5 A g−1

182



PICA/TiO2
FTO
Hydrothermal, electrochemical polymerization
TiO2 nanoarrays
1.2/2.4
36%
124 @ 720
23.34 mF cm−2 @ 0.25 mA cm−2
91% (5000)

185



P5FIn/WO3
ITO
Hydrothermal synthesis and electrochemical polymerization
Honeycombed porous
1.6/0.9
46% @ 745
137
34.1 mF cm−2
93% (5000) @ 0.2 mA cm−2

186



v-AuNW/PANI
PET
Electro-polymerization
Fiber-like PANI


—
—
11.76 mF cm−2 @ 10 mV s−1
93.6% (2000) @ 1 mA cm−2

190



PEDOP–Au@WO3
FTO
Hydrothermal, electrophoretic deposition, electropolymerization
Fibrillar morphology


71% @ 476
707 @ 500
130 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1



194



WO3/PEDOT:PSS


Electrospinning
WO3 nanotubes, Ag nanowires


—
83.9
471 F g−1
92.9% (50000)

195



Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE
PEDOT:PSS
Spin coating
Porous structure
0.3/0.6
30%
517 @ 633
3.3 mF cm−2 @ 10 mV s−1
100% (10000) & 90% (8000) (bending cycles)

196





7. Electrochromic batteries (ECBs)
In the nineteenth century, the Honda Group developed Turnbull's blue–Nafion (TB–Nf) and Prussian blue–Nafion (PB–Nf) composite films, for rechargeable battery application. They observed a repetitive color change of these films in K3Fe(CN)6 during the redox reaction process; further, it was suggested that these films can be used in ECB fabrication.198,199 Afterward, a non-lithium Prussian blue (PB) and WO3 based ECB was proposed by Chen and co-workers in 2003.200 Poly-2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid (PAMPS) is a proton-conducting solid polymer electrolyte (SPE). The study showed that the addition of a hybrid K+/H+ SPE, with an optimized doping concentration of KCl into PAMPS, resulted in better coloration efficiency (CE), better cycle life, wide transmittance window, and fast response time as compared to the device fabricated using pure PAMPS.201 Afterward, this solid polymer electrolyte was successfully applied in Prussian blue and indium hexacyanoferrate (PB/InHCF)201,202 and PB/WO3 based ECD fabrication.200 Subsequently, Tung et al. assembled a thin-film rechargeable ECB for bi-functional application, based on InHCF–WO3 (IWECB), which changes color from blue to colorless to indicate the stored charge status.64 Subsequently, Béléké et al. synthesized a LiFePO4 (LFP) transparent thin film by a sol–gel method. The synthesized electrode exhibited 80–90% transmittance without any chromic behavior during the chemical reaction, which makes LiFePO4 a potential optical passive cathode electrode candidate in transparent lithium-ion batteries and ECDs.43
Verma and co-workers developed the CeO2–TiO2 composition and studied the effect of their varying concentrations on the storage capacity and switching response. The ion insertion capacity and the charge density of the film are highly affected by the presence of amorphous TiO2 and its concentration, respectively. For example, the study reveals that the film fabricated with 75% TiO2 achieved the highest cathodic charge density (CCD) of 23 mC cm−2 and further the ECD consisting of glass/SnO2:F/CeO2–TiO2/1 M LiClO4 + PC + PMMA + SiO2/WO3/SnO2:F/glass having 50% CeO2 in the CeO2–TiO2 thin film achieved a fast response time, optical modulation of 53% and a CE of 37.3 cm2 C−1 at 550 nm.40 Zhao et al. fabricated an Al–tungsten oxide ECB using a trace amount of H2O2. Due to the intrinsic effect of the highly unique structure and changes in the valence state of the tungsten oxide, the ECB delivered a high discharge capacity which is seven times higher than that reported for electrochromic batteries. A further comparative study showed that Al-tungsten oxide showed the highest discharge capacity in Al3+ ion-based electrolytes than other aqueous electrolytes, which can be charged in just 8 seconds and exhibited a specific capacity of 429 mA h g−1.63
The irreversible anode reaction and chemical instability with a reduced life cycle are the main drawbacks of ECBs based on Al as the anode material. To overcome this problem Zhang and coworkers developed a dual-band electrochromic energy storage (DEES) window by using prelithiated Al (PLAl) as an anode and a monoclinic WO3−x nanowire as a cathode. The fabricated DEES window has the ability to color itself and release energy that can be recycled.203 The typical schematic illustration of an Al anode-based ECB is shown in Fig. 20a. Although H2O2 causes a high specific capacity in ECBs, it fails to achieve good cycling stability. So further, an organic–inorganic electrode with EC properties for ECB application was synthesized using W18O49 and PANI, which is charged with sunlight irradiation. This green and cost-free chargeable ECB is based on the as-synthesized hybrid electrode and Al electrode in Al3+ ion-based electrolytes and displays a discharging capacity of 52.96 mA h g−1.62
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of (a) a two-electrode and (b) new Al-anode based three-electrode EES device design. (c) Optical transmittance spectra for the WO3 film and the Ti–V2O5 film at different applied potentials and corresponding digital photographs. (d) Energy level diagram of the Al-anode, the WO3 electrode and the Ti–V2O5 electrode. (e) Schematic illustration showing the three types of connection for released energy utilization. (f–h) Energy released by connecting the corresponding electrodes for discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Wang and colleagues designed an Al anode-based three-electrode EES device for electrochromic energy storage applications (schematic is shown in Fig. 20b), to overcome the cycling stability problem caused by multivalent metal ions and obstacles related to the improvement of energy capacity caused by a single EC electrode. Here, they have used WO3 and Ti-doped V2O5 as two electroactive cathode electrodes and Al as an anodic electrode. The electrochemical and electrochromic properties of the synthesized device were studied in LiClO4/AlClO4/propylene carbonate (PC) mixed electrolyte. The device showed a self-powered multicolor display, and also provides three open-circuit potentials with an overall 933 mA h m−2 areal capacity. The device provides three open-circuit voltages and high charge capacity for external utilization, which is demonstrated in Fig. 20f–h.61
Doping of metal helps to improve the physicochemical properties of the doped material. Zhou et al. developed bi-functional Mo-doped WO3 nanowire arrays as an electrochromic battery electrode by a sulfate-assisted hydrothermal method. The optimized doping amount enhanced the electrochromic behavior of Mo-doped WO3 nanowire arrays, with fast switching speed, high CE (123 cm2 C−1), and excellent cycling stability compared to pure WO3 nanowire arrays. Large redox peaks in the CV curve as a result of reversible redox reactions between W6+, W5+, and W4+ showed a battery-like behavior of the WO3 film.204 Zhang et al. synthesized an urchin-like bifunctional WO3@PANI composite, with applications in smart ECWs and lithium-ion batteries. This unique morphology reduces the stacking of nanolayers, and enhances the kinetics of the ion insertion/removal process, during large reversible cycles.205 Tungsten oxide hydrates (WO3·xH2O) have a highly controlled structure stability, and can be easily processed, and they provide a large number of channels for ion/electron transport during the insertion/extraction process, which is beneficial for improvement in chromatic and energy storage performance of the synthesized electrode.206
Consequently, a niobium (Nb) doped WO3 mesoporous film was synthesized via a sol–gel route on an FTO substrate by Wang et al. The Nb doping facilitates more defect states in active sites without producing lattice strain, which is beneficial for the enhanced optical–electrochemical properties. Then, low crystallinity and enhanced oxygen vacancies caused by optimized Nb-doping concentration deliver a fast switching response, improved specific capacity, and high rate capability of the Nb-doped WO3 mesoporous film.207 Wang and coworkers assembled an EESW based on a mesoporous WO3 film electrode synthesized via a dip-coating sol–gel approach as the cathode and a PANI electrode as the anode. The mesoporous WO3 electrode displayed a CE of 79.9 cm2 C−1 and a specific capacity of 75.3 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1. The developed EESW resulted in large optical modulation and a fast switching response (less than 1.5 s).78 Shao et al. introduced a high-performance flexible battery PANI/V2O5 composite electrode via layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly. The LBL assembly is reasonably suitable for mixing both materials in a more synergetic way. Further, the storage capacity and overall efficiency of the LBL composite electrode are affected by multiple parameters (pH, the molar mass of PANI, LBL of various thicknesses).169 Tong et al. synthesized TiO2 mesoporous nanotube arrays (MNTAs) by a facile sacrificial template-accelerated hydrolysis (STAH) method on an FTO substrate and ZnO nanorod arrays as the template. The TiO2 MNTA electrode provides a high electrode/electrolyte contact area and reduced diffusion channel distance, which furthermore increases the Li-ion insertion speed. The TiO2 ion insertion-type transition metal oxide helps to achieve high energy density of the synthesized ESC device. The synthesized bifunctional energy storage smart window exhibits a stable specific capacity of 60 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1.208 Afterward, doped nano-TiO2 showed the ability to independently control the visible and NIR transmission with high optical modulation of 89.1% at 550 nm for visible light and 81.4% at 1600 nm for NIR light, and also delivered high charge-storage capacity. Further, Cao et al. developed a dual-band EESD, which is based on a Ta-doped nano-TiO2 nanocrystal film (SEM shown in Fig. 21a) as the working electrode and NiO as a counter electrode, that delivered a charge-storage capacity of 466.5 mA h m−2 at a 150 mA m−2 current density. The charge stored in the DEES device can be used to color and bleach the same or another EES device, or to power another electronic device (photograph of powering a red LED shown in Fig. 21e), and the device has the ability to work in one of three operating modes, bright, cool, and dark, depending on the user's needs (Fig. 21c).209
 Fig. 21  (a) SEM of a Ta-doped nano-TiO2 film. (b) Optical transmittance spectra and (c) digital photos of the DEES device. (d) Galvanostatic charging curves of the DEES device at different current densities. (e) An optical image of a DEES device (in the dark state) powering a red LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of a nickel–carbonate–hydroxide (NCH) nanowire thin film. (g) Transmittance spectra of the NCH films in the bleached and colored states. (h) Schematic illustration of a sustainable energy system incorporating an EES device, and photographs of a prototype EES device in (State I) bleached and (State II) colored states, and a strip of LED lights being powered by the EES device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The lower lattice density monoclinic phase of TiO2 exhibits high ion insertion/extraction properties as compared to its anatase and rutile counterparts. Consequently, the anisotropic TiO2(B) nanocrystals synthesized with a surfactant-assisted nonaqueous sol–gel route revealed a charge capacitance of 222 mA h g−1 and CE of 130 cm2 C−1 at 800 nm wavelength.210 Cobalt oxysulphide/hydroxide nanosheets were developed by Kalasina et al. The as-synthesized electrode in 1 M KOH showed EC properties by changing its color from yellow-brown to black during the reversible redox reaction process and specific capacity of 112.4 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 current density as well as 100% capacity retention after 10000 cycles.211 The combined effect of the dense seed layer and a porous nanowire layer while developing the nano-structured nickel–carbonate–hydroxide (NCH) film for its bi-functional application to enhance both electrochromic and energy storage properties was studied by Yin et al. They synthesized a color-switching energy storage device with NCH film as a cathode and Zn foil as an anode, which displayed an areal energy density of 4.4 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 17.5 μW cm−2. The low cost and environmentally friendly device fabrication method reported can be utilized to grow the NCH film on both rigid and flexible substrates for its wide applications. Photographs in Fig. 21h demonstrate the coloring–bleaching process, and show the strip of LED powered by the as-synthesized EES device.212
Neiva and coworkers synthesized a thin and homogeneous rGO/Ni(OH)2 nanocomposite as a promising multifunctional electrode for alkaline batteries and ECDs via a liquid–liquid interfacial route. The strong interaction between the nanocomposite is ascribed to the oxygenated groups in the rGO, which help the developed rGO/Ni(OH)2 nanocomposite to display an excellent specific energy of 43.7 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 4.8 kW kg−1 compared to neat Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles.213 An Fe(II) based metallo-supramolecular polymer (polyFe) film with a large area (up to 810 cm2) was fabricated by Cai et al. via an electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) technique. The resultant flexible film is highly homogeneous with a rake-like nanowire structure. The as-synthesized polyFe films exhibit high stability against high temperature (393 K) and UV light (365 nm) illumination and retain almost 100% of the initial optical modulation after 10000 cycles with an ultrahigh CE of 750.3 cm2 C−1. But the gravimetric capacity of the polyFe film is only 18.24 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.75 A g−1. Further, Cai et al. assembled a quasi-solid-state EESD with TiO2 as the ion storage level and LiClO4/PMMA-based electrolyte, achieving an ultrafast response time (less than 1 s) and high CE of 728.7 cm2 C−1.214
Wang et al. demonstrated a PB/Al device for dual application, as it does not require external power to operate the EC window and can also work as a self-rechargeable transparent battery. The PB and aluminum electrodes are connected to reduce the Prussian blue (PB) into Prussian white (PW), which turns the device into its transparent state. Further, the device recovers its oxidized state (oxidation of PW into PB) (self-charged) when the two electrodes are disconnected (Fig. 22a). The coloration and bleaching of the synthesized PB/Al EC (from blue to transparent) device correspond to the charging and discharging of the self-rechargeable battery, respectively, with high output voltage (Fig. 22b and c). Two PB/Al cells in series can supply a voltage of 2.52 V and light up an LED. The as-prepared device retains 81% of its initial capacity after 50 cycles.59
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the working mechanism of the synthesized PB/Al self-rechargeable and self-powered EC battery, optical photograph of (b) the bleached and (c) colored (charged) states, and (d) powering an LED with the synthesized EC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
Afterward, PB (as a cathode) and magnesium metal (as an anode) were used to synthesize a self-powered EC display and self-rechargeable battery (self-charged and recharged within 50 s) by Zhai et al. The synthesized high power density output device can light up an LED for about 2 hours. ECD can be used for visual detection of reactive oxygen species (ROS) sensing application.215 Afterward, Wang and coworkers introduced a flexible rechargeable Zn/PPy battery with a PVA-based gel electrolyte. The fabricated battery achieved a capacity of 123 mA h g−1 at 1.9 A g−1 current density and simultaneously helped the user to recognize the charge storage level with a short circuit chromatic warning (schematic shown in Fig. 23a). Uniform growth of Zn nanospheres (Fig. 23b) resulted in fast electrochemical kinetics due to increased surface area. At 1.2 V, in the fully charged state the flexible battery becomes black and in the fully discharged state at 0.4 V it turns bright yellow (Fig. 23c). After charging the battery powers a clock and when it gets discharged it turns yellow to warn of a short circuit condition (Fig. 23e and f).216 Al plating of an anode in an aqueous solution introduces major challenges due to high redox potential Al3+/Al (−1.68 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)). To reduce the drawback of Al plating on the anode, Li et al. demonstrated a rechargeable aqueous Zn-ion ECB, using a novel Ti-substituted tungsten molybdenum oxide (MTWO) electrode-based Zn2+ ion intercalation cathode. Schematic illustration of the rechargeable Zn/MTWO battery system and possible Zn2+ ion intercalation is demonstrated in Fig. 23g and h. The in situ self-coloring process due to Zn2+ ion intercalation of the MTWO cathode is shown in Fig. 23i. The Zn2+ ions are promising alternatives for aqueous ECBs because of their low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. SHE). The fabricated ECB exhibited excellent optical contrast (76%) and an areal capacity of 260 mA h m−2. Further developed Zn-ion electrochromic batteries (ZIEBs) that possess a 1.23 V open-circuit potential can power an LED for more than 40 min (photographs shown in Fig. 23j).217 Subsequently, Eric and coworkers synthesized a rechargeable dual ion (Zn2+/Al3+) ECD with Zn and WO3 as the anode and cathode. To improve the ion conductivity and transparency and overcome the short lifetime of the flexible EESSs, dimethyl-sulfoxide (DMSO) modified polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel was employed in the synthesized ECB.218
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematics of fabrication and demonstration of the short circuit chromatic warning function of the EC Zn//PPy battery. (b) SEM image of electrodeposited Zn. (c) Chromatic transition at various voltages. (d) UV-vis spectra at various voltages. (e) The battery powering an electronic clock in a normal electric circuit. (f) The short circuit chromatic battery warning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the rechargeable Zn/MTWO battery system. (h) Schematic illustration of possible Zn2+ intercalation/deintercalation tunnels in MTWO. (i) In situ self-coloring (discharge) process of the MTWO cathode. (j) Schematic configuration of the prototype ZIEB and digital images of an LED powered by the ZIEB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. 
Another flexible and rechargeable ECB employing WO3 as an anode, aluminium (Al) as a cathode electrode, aluminum trichloride (AlCl3) aqueous electrolyte, and the absorptive glass mat (AGM) as the electrolyte carrier and separator was developed by Sun et al. (Fig. 24c). The device demonstrated a specific capacity of 142 mA h g−1 with good flexibility while switching from transparent to blue during charge/discharge cycling. The SEM image of WO3 shows a large number of small clusters (Fig. 24a). The fabricated single ECB could only deliver an open-circuit potential of ∼0.8 V due to the low redox potential difference between Al and WO3, which limits its practical application. This drawback was overcome by connecting two ECBs in series internally delivering an open-circuit potential of 1.6 V and gravimetric energy density of 112 W h kg−1, which is almost the same as that (113.6 W h kg−1) of the single ECB. The two tandem ECBs connected in series have the ability to deliver enhanced open-circuit potential, without affecting their specific energy and they can also power a digital watch for more than 60 minutes by presenting a simultaneous color variation during the discharging process (Fig. 24e).219
 Fig. 24  (a) SEM image of PET/ITO/WO3. (b) Transmittance spectra of the PET/ITO substrate and PET/ITO/WO3 in colored and bleached states. (c) Schematic of the structure of internal tandem ECBs and photographs of (c1) two ECBs and (c2) a single ECB. (d) GCD curves of a single ECB and two ECBs connected internally in series. (e) Photos showing the power ability of two tandem ECBs with corresponding color variations during its discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Transmittance spectrum of the prototype device under different states. (Inset: open circuit voltage (OCV) of the device). (g) Photographs of the prototype device demonstrating the power ability along with an obvious self-bleaching phenomenon. (h) Charging process of the self-bleached device. (i) Optical transmittance spectra of the prototype device. (j) Round-trip energy densities of the prototype device during the dynamic test (the green region). The inset shows the current and potential evolution during the dynamic test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With the aim of net-zero energy consumption, the aqueous Zn-PB ECB was developed by Li et al. The as-assembled device delivers an open circuit voltage of ∼1.46 V, that has the ability to light up an LED for 1 h. The dual ion-based ECB demonstrated an excellent memory effect and self-rechargeability in its colored and bleached states, respectively (Fig. 24g). The device during the charging process switches from transparent to blue within 15 s as demonstrated in Fig. 24h. The efficiency of the synthesized ECB was characterized by its ability to partially recover the energy exhausted during its coloration. The synthesized ECB achieved an attractive energy recovery of 35.7 mW h m−2 and fast self-bleaching with 83% optical contrast at a 632.8 nm wavelength.220
The PB/Zn-based battery type ECW using KCl + Zn(CH3COO)2 aqueous electrolyte (dual-ion K+/Zn2+), synthesized by Wang and coworkers, displayed long-term cycling stability by maintaining 92.7% of the initial optical modulation after 7000 cycles.221 Kimura et al. composed a silver deposit-based EC device with PB as a counter redox reaction material that can maintain its mirror state for about 2 hours in the open-circuit state. The two-electrode ECD was constructed by inserting a PVB-based gel electrolyte comprising AgNO3 (EC material), LiCl (supporting electrolyte), PVB (host polymer) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).222
In electrochromic batteries, the performance of WO3, TiO2, hydroxides of TMOs, Zn-PB-based electrodes, etc. is noticeable. As mentioned above, various ECBs have demonstrated excellent memory effects, self-rechargeability, ability to power various electronic devices for hours, etc., which are superior to EC supercapacitors. Some of the electrochromic and electrochemical properties that benefitted from the synthesized nanostructures for electrochromic battery application have been pointed out in Table 6.
Table 6 Data analysis of various electrodes for electrochromic battery application




Synthesized electrode
Substrate
Synthesis method
Morphology

T
b/Tc
ΔT @ wavelength
CE (cm2 C−1) @ nm
EC stability
Specific capacity Csp (in mA h g−1) at ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention (cycles)
Ref.




WO3
FTO
Dip-coating sol–gel
Mesoporous
—
—
79.7
—
75.3 mA h g−1 @ 2 A g−1
—

78



Mo-doped WO3
FTO
Spin coating, sulfate-assisted hydrothermal
Nanowire arrays
2.6/3.2
56.7% @ 750
123.5
57.3% (3500)
55.89 mA h g−1 @ 1 A g−1
38.2% (5500) @ 4 A g−1

204



Nb-doped WO3 (NWO)
FTO
Sol–gel
Mesoporous films with nanoparticles
3.6/2.1
61.7%
49.7 @ 633
76.2% (1000)
74.4 mA h g−1 @ 2 A g−1
75.8% (1000) @ 6 A g−1

207



TiO2
FTO
Electrodeposition, sacrificial template accelerated hydrolysis
Mesoporous nanotube arrays
23.1/3.9
30.4% @ 700
—
99% (200)
60 mA h g−1 @ 1A g−1
—

208



Monoclinic TiO2(B) phase
FTO
Surfactant-assisted nonaqueous sol–gel
Nanorods




131 @ 800


Discharge capacity of 222 mA h g−1
90% (100)

210



Cobalt oxysulphide/hydroxide
FTO
Electrodeposition
Nanosheet


—
—
—
112.4 mA h g−1 @ 5 A g−1
100% (1000) @ 5 A g−1

211



polyFe
ITO/PET
Electrostatic spray deposition (ESD)
Rake-like nanowires
1.7/1.4
73.6% @ 581
750.3
100% (10000)
Gravimetric capacity 18.24 mA h g−1 @ 0.75 A g−1.
91.4% (from 0.75 F g−1 to 7.5 F g−1)

214



pPHBT film
ITO
Electrochemical deposition
Microporous
1.44/2.89
60% @ 673
—
—
96.7 mA h g−1
—

223





8. Electrochromic hybrid supercapacitors (EHSs)
Grote et al. presented the one-step electrochemical deposition method, which can simultaneously reduce GO and deposit nickel–cobalt hydroxide on reduced graphene oxide (rGO). Ni(OH)2 shows a battery-type storage behavior which occurs due to the phase transformations and reduces the kinetics and also it suffers from low conductivity. Here, Grote developed an approach for depositing cobalt and nickel hydroxide simultaneously. This self-stacked nanosheet electrode showed a Cs of 1359 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 current density and retained 72% of the initial capacitance after 7000 charge/discharge cycles at 20 A g−1.224 The mechanical and electrochemical properties of CP-based electrodes can be effectively enhanced with the support of EDLC materials. Wei et al. fabricated PANI/GO nanocomposites which demonstrated rapid and reversible multicolor transitions between light yellow, pale green, blue, and dark blue in response to an applied potential range from −0.2 V to 1 V. Hydrogen bonding between GO and PANI prevented the degradation of the polymer matrix during reversible contraction and expansion in the redox reaction process and thereby increased the stability of the synthesized composite.225
A device with high bending and stretching competence, and high stability was developed by Chen et al. based on a PANI and CNT composite. The as-synthesized device can be woven into fabric to create various design patterns that demonstrate multicolor properties (Fig. 25a). The SEM images of the synthesized CNTs and CNT/PANI composite on elastic fibers at low and high (inset) magnifications are shown in Fig. 25b and c. Furthermore, the fabricated fiber-shaped supercapacitor appears green and exhibits chromatic transitions during the charge–discharge process as demonstrated in Fig. 25d. Even after stretching, the chromic fiber-shaped supercapacitor thus developed preserves its energy storage capability as well as display performance. Moreover, the synthesized fiber-shaped CNT/PANI composite achieved an energy density of 12.75 W h kg−1 and power density of 1.494 kW kg−1.74 Afterward, Yuksel and coworkers reported single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) and CP-based devices with rapid multicolor electrochromic energy storage. The UV-Vis spectra of the SWNT/CP nanocomposite electrodes provided in Fig. 25e show that the charge transfer between the SWNTs and CP is attributed to the absorption peaks at 530 nm and 465 nm. Here, the absorption band decreases with the increase in applied potential. The low absorbance values arose due to the presence of an SWNT thin film. The multiple color changes from purple-red to black and blue in response to the applied potential are shown in Fig. 25f. The synthesized all-organic nanocomposite electrode displayed a specific power of 1.5 kW kg−1 at a specific energy of 48.9 W h kg−1 and was able to provide information about the remaining capacity within the device to the user via color variation. The electrode has the capacity to maintain 82% of its initial capacitance and 100% coulombic efficiency after 12500 cycles (Fig. 25g).226 Hydrogel-based electrodes help to accomplish improved interaction between the bulk electrode material and electrolyte, which results in easy diffusion of electrolyte ions into the electrode, as compared to solid electrodes. Xiang et al. designed a flexible and smart electrode by direct immobilization of PANI hydrogel onto porous CNTs. The resulting fluffy and highly cellular structure of CNT/PANI increases the penetrable area of the electrolyte (Fig. 25h). Optical photographs and SEM images of porous CNTs and CNT/PANI are shown in Fig. 25 i3 and i4. The all-solid-state symmetric flexible ESC constructed using the CNT/PANI hydrogel-based electrode and PVA-H3PO4 as a gel electrolyte achieved a Cs of 315 F g−1. The gradual reduction in the capacitance with increase in current density is depicted in Fig. 25j. The smart and flexible SC retains almost 92% of its initial capacitance after 1500 charge/discharge cycles and 93% after 150 bending cycles (Fig. 25k).227
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and designed pattern of the EC, wearable fiber-shaped supercapacitor. SEM images of an aligned (b) CNT sheet and (c) CNT/PANI composite on an elastic fiber. (d) Chromatic transition of the synthesized fiber during the charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons. (e) UV-Vis spectrum of SWNT/CP nanocomposite electrodes. (f) Photograph of the fabricated SWNT/CP electrodes at different charged states. (g) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the SWNT/CP nanocomposite electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226, Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd. (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a smart flexible SC. (i) Optical photographs (i1, i2) and SEM images (i3, i4) of the fabricated porous CNT and CNT/PANI hydrogel film electrodes. (j) Variation of CS with current density. (k) Capacitance retention after bending cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Subsequently, Xinming et al. reported a hydrogen-bonded graphene/polyaniline (HbG/PANI) composite with a uniform lamellar-structured HbG morphology in PANI and stable hydrogen bonding of the composite which resulted in Cs of 598 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 current density which retains 95% capacitance after 5000 cycles.228 Afterward, Zhang et al. prepared a GO/PANI composite nanoflake film by in situ chemical oxidative polymerization, exhibiting Ca that is 3 times greater than that of the pure PANI film.229
Synthesis of a periodic mesh/grid structure is an effective strategy to enhance the transparency of a less transparent conductive material without lowering its conductivity. P-type conducting copper sulfide (CuS) suffers from low transmittance. However, Yao et al. synthesized a TCE by using CuS grids with graphene (G-CuS) on a PET substrate (optical and SEM images with schematic illustration of G-CuS/PANI synthesis shown in Fig. 19e). The synthesized G-CuS as a TCE exhibited a sheet resistance (Rs) of ∼20 Ω sq−1 at ∼85% transmittance. PANI/G-CuS as an ESC achieved an areal capacitance of 17.3 mF cm−2 at 0.025 mA cm−2 and optical modulation of 40.1% at 620 nm. Fig. 19f demonstrates the color variation in the synthesized G-CuS/PANI SC electrode, which signifies the level of stored energy during the charge–discharge process.68
Nowadays, a new-generation micro-sized power source, the micro-supercapacitor (MSC), is attracting much attention. Zhang et al. demonstrated a flexible stimulus-responsive MSC (SR-MSC) with a reversible electrochromic window based on viologens, 1D V2O5 nanoribbons and 2D exfoliated graphene (EG) nanosheets. The SEM image (Fig. 26a) and digital photo of the synthesized SR-MSC device on a PET substrate is shown in Fig. 26b. The enhanced current density of EG/V2O5-MSC compared to those of EG-MSC and V2O5-MSC is demonstrated in Fig. 26c. The Ragone plot in Fig. 26d demonstrates the overall performance. The stability of the synthesized SR-MSC (Fig. 26e) and the reversible electrochromic effect of the device during charge–discharge cycling are shown in Fig. 26g. The SR-MSC showed a high volumetric energy density of 20 mW h cm−3 at a volumetric power density of 235 W cm−3 and a fast response time.230 Later, Narayanan et al. developed C@V2O5 hybrid nanobelts via a facile hydrothermal route, and demonstrated that post-annealing temperature influences the quality of the C@V2O5 nanobelts to effectively boost the characteristics for its EC and SC application.231Table 7 illustrates some of the electrochromic and electrochemical outcomes obtained with hybrid nanocomposite-based supercapacitors.
 Fig. 26  (a) SEM image of a glass-supported EG/V2O5 nanopaper profile. (b) Digital photo of an SR-MSC device on a PET substrate. (c) CV curves of the fabricated MSCs. (d) Ragone plot. (e) Cycling stability of EG/V2O5-MSC. The inset shows the first eight and the last eight GCD curves of EG/V2O5-MSC. (f) SR-MSC under various bending angles. (g) Photograph of the reversible EC effect in EG/V2O5-MSC in the charging and discharging states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons. 
Table 7 Data analysis of hybrid supercapacitors




Synthesized electrode
Substrate
Method of synthesis
Morphology and film properties

T
b/Tc
CE (cm2 C−1) @ nm
EC stability

C
s (in F g−1) or Ca (in F cm−2) or CV (in F cm−3) @ ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention (cycles)
Ref.




CNT/PANI
Elastic fibers
Electrodeposition & CBD
—
—
—
3000
255.5 F g−1 (0.1890 mF cm−2)
93.8% (1000 bending cycles) & 69% (10000) GCD @ 1 A g−1

74



PANI/GO
ITO
Spin coating, electropolymerization
125 nm thick film
15.8/15.3
59.3 @ 633
—
25.7 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1
53.1% (1000)

225



HbG/PANI
ITO
Electrochemical polymerization
Lamellar structure
—
—
96.3% (5000)
598 F g−1 @ 1.0 A g−1
95% (5000)

228



GO/PANI
ITO
Chemical oxidative polymerization, drop-coating
Nanoflakes
2.9/2
41 @ 700
69% (5000)
137 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1
51.7% (1000)

229



EG/V2O5
PET
Electrochemical exfoliation & hydrothermal
Nanosheets
—
—
—
130.7 F cm−3 @ 10 mV s−1
93% (6000) @ 0.04 mA cm−2

230



C@V2O5
FTO
Hydrothermal
Nanobelts
—
—
(1000) 2 A g−1
260 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1 @ 523 K
94% (5000) @ 523 K

231



a-WO3/CH@WHNP
FTO
Spin coating & hydrothermal
Nanoparticles on films
0.8/4
62.4
91.5% (1000)
154.0 F g−1 @ 2 A g−1
—

232



PANI@CNT
ITO
Spin coating, electrochemical polymerization
Nanoparticles
5.8/7.9
Approx. 120 @ 650
—
276.8 F g−1
—

233



WO3/graphene/PANI
ITO
Electropolymerization, spin coating
∼33 nm thick film
—
67.47
—
11.267 mF cm−2 @ 0.08 mA cm−2
—

234





NiV2O6/C nanoribbons having a sponge-like morphology were synthesized by Zhou et al., by using a nickel–vanadium-based coordination polymer precursor at a low annealing temperature. The NiV2O6/C composite exhibited reversible electrochromism from blue to reddish-brown and showed a specific capacitance of 745.6 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Furthermore, the NiV2O6/C//AC asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) exhibits excellent cycling stability with 77.8% capacitance retention after 12000 charge/discharge cycles at 2 A g−1 current density.235 Later, Huang et al. developed a colorful ECW using a Co3O4 nanoflake electrode and carbon as a counter electrode, which operated on the basis of pseudocapacitive-reaction-derived pH changes, resulting in color variation of the dissolved pH indicators in the electrolyte.236 Recently, a hybrid film based on WO3·H2O nanoparticle (WHNP) embedded chitosan thin films on amorphous WO3 (a-WO3) (a-WO3/CH@WHNP) was synthesized by Koo and coworkers. The chitosan is an organic material, and is the key component that is utilized to enhance energy storage performance. The robust chemical cross-linking between chitosan and WHNPs facilitated enhanced EC properties with fast response time and electrochemical stability of the active film compared to the bare a-WO3 and a-WO3/CH.232
Ye and coworkers reported solution-processable polymer–multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) and a conjugated polymer-based composite electrode material. Furthermore, a symmetrical ESC device developed with a PMMA-based solid electrolyte and the as-synthesized composite electrode displayed a specific energy of 174.7 W h kg−1 with an extremely wide working potential window of 4.8 V, reversible color transition from black-brown (discharged state) to light gray (charged state), and outstanding cycling stability.237 Wang et al. developed a water-soluble nanocomposite based on functionalized MWCNTs and PANI. The optimized amount of functionalized MWCNTs in PANI reduces the resistance of the active layer which results in strong interfacial interaction between MWCNTs and PANI and enhances the conductivity.238
Afterward, Xu et al. synthesized PANI@CNT films by electrochemical polymerization of PANI on spin-coated CNTs onto an ITO substrate, in order to enhance the electrochemical performance and structural stability of bare PANI. 3D porous structured PANI@CNT films provided large ion transport channels, and also facilitated more charge injection/extraction during doping–dedoping processes when compared with compact PANI. Here, PANI@CNT delivered a CE of approximately 120 cm2 C−1 at 650 nm and Cs of 336.9 F g−1, which is greater than that of the compact PANI.233 The solution-processable poly-(tris[4-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)phenyl]amine) (PTEPA) was prepared via chemical-oxidative polymerization of tris[4-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)phenyl]amine (TEPA) monomers. Lv et al. in their work reported a green synthetic route to produce TEPA monomers. Further, they synthesized an all-solid-state ESC device by employing a synthesized electrode and nanoporous graphene, showing chromatic variation with a reversible color change from yellow-green to steel-blue. A high energy storage capacity of about 13.3 mF cm−2 at 0.015 mA cm−2 current density was reported for the developed all-solid-state ESC.239
The transfer efficiency of a metal-based transparent stretchable (TS) electrode with a polymer matrix (elastomer substrate) can be improved by increasing its conductivity with the help of a SiO2 nanoparticle coating and correspondingly the spin-coated PEDOT:PSS buffer layer can be further utilized to enhance the compatibility of the active layer and the elastomer substrate (silver nanowires (Ag NWs)/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)). The synthesis of printable devices depends on the formulation of functional inks and printable electrode materials.240 Inkjet-printed metal oxide nanoparticles on an elastomer for strain-adaptive transmissive electrochromic energy storage were developed by Cai et al. Here, the PEDOT:PSS layer helps to improve the mechanical stability and corrosion resistance of Ag NWs. The fabricated ST asymmetric EESS energy storage device based on hybrid WO3/PEDOT:PSS/AgNWs as an anode and the PANI/MWCNT composite as a cathode material can maintain its EC and storage properties even after deformation and two such series devices with 50% tensile strain can light an LED.71 The functionalized Ni(OH)2 hexagonal nanosheets when crosslinked with PEDOT:PSS help to enhance the poor conductivity and restacking tendency of Ni(OH)2, which restrict its performance. Here, a Ni(OH)2/PEDOT (P-Ni(OH)2) composite achieved a CS of 502 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is greater than that of the bare Ni(OH)2. Further, the asymmetric ECD based on the P-Ni(OH)2 composite and activated carbon (AC) showed excellent mechanical stability and energy density of 19.96 Wh kg−1 at a high power density of 3750 W kg−1.241 Subsequently, Liu fabricated various double and triple-layer nanocomposite films to study the effect of PANI on pre-coated ITO films based on WO3, graphene, and WO3/graphene.
Studies have shown that graphene/PANI composites exhibited the highest CE and WO3/graphene/PANI triple-layer nanocomposites exhibited the highest CA, which is larger than those of other developed nanocomposites. The incorporation of nanofillers into the PANI produced the rough morphology of the nanocomposite, and as a result, a composite consisting of PANI has a positive effect on the EC and energy storage properties.234 As explained in the ESS section above, based on the ‘b’ value many electrode materials have shown mixed capacitive and diffusion charge storage-controlled processes. The overall performance of the energy storage system can be effectively enhanced by designing a hybrid storage system, which combines the effect of battery and supercapacitor-type properties. Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) are appropriate for both supercapacitor and battery performance. In the microporous structure, the oxidation/reduction states of polymers and their constancy play a dynamic role in energy storage applications.140 Triazine and peripheral triphenylamine units were used as building blocks to synthesize a novel donor–acceptor type air-stable triphenylamine–triazine-based conjugated microporous polymer (pTTPATA) CMP by Dai and co-workers. The fabricated air-stable CMP is a yellow-colored neutral polymer in its oxidized state, which turns red in color upon oxidation, and remains stable in that oxidized state for 10 h without any external potential. The specific capacity of approx. 81 mA h g−1 was reported for a synthesized microporous pTTPATA polymer.242 Subsequently, a p-doped CMP quadruple thiophene-based polythiophene derivative (pPHBT) exhibited a highest specific capacity of 96.7 mA h g−1. With fast switching time (Tc = 2.89 s and Tb = 1.44 s) and high optical contrast, the pPHBT film displayed symmetrical charge–discharge curves and better stability compared to poly(-bithiophene) pBT film.223 A 2D orthorhombic MoO3 nanosheet and PEDOT:PSS-based composite electrode with a hybrid battery–supercapacitor behavior was utilized in the fabrication of a flexible all-solid-state patterned microsupercapacitor (MSC). The high electrical conductivity and large SSA of the device resulted from the sulfuric acid doped PEDOT:PSS and a fibrillar highly phase-separated morphology of 2D MoO3 nanosheets. The synthesized transparent (>70% at 550 nm) MSC displayed fast redox reaction kinetics and a high CA of 2.99 mF cm−2 (specific capacity of 79.2 C g−1).243
Eisenberg et al. combined completely different materials to create an EHS device and explored their synergistic effects. The EHS was assembled on the basis of a metallo-organic layer, which simultaneously helps to achieve the goal of both electrochromic and battery-type electrodes with the MWCNT/PEDOT:PSS (PPC) as a capacitive electrode. Schematic illustrations of the synthesized EC electrode and battery electrode, and the structure of the synthesized electrochromic hybrid supercapacitor (EHSC) and its operation are demonstrated in Fig. 27a–d. The CV curve of EHSC in Fig. 27e shows an increased flow due to the use of capacitive electrodes. The EHSC device in its discharged state has a purple color (Fig. 27f(i)); after charging at 1.8 V it becomes transparent (Fig. 27f(ii)).
 Fig. 27  (a–d) Schematic illustrations of the development of the EC electrode and battery electrode, and the structure of the synthesized electrochromic hybrid supercapacitor (EHSC) and its operation. (e) Cyclic voltammograms of three devices. (f) Photographs of the EHSC (i) before charging, (ii) during charging, (iii) during discharging, and (iv) after discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 
In the power source mode, it is used as an energy source for a diode having a threshold voltage of 1 V; during this the synthesized EHSC becomes discharged with color variation from light purple (Fig. 27f(iii)) to purple (Fig. 27f(iv)). The synthesized hybrid SC, with a short charging time, displayed a high specific energy of approximately 2.2 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 2529 W kg−1.244 Liu et al. synthesized an all-solid-state electrochromic Li-ion hybrid supercapacitor (ELHS) with LiMn2O4@LiNbO3 as the high-performance battery-type electrochromic positive electrode and WO3 as the capacitor type negative electrode. The synthesized device with a wide operating potential window of 2.3 V displayed an energy density of 106.1 W h kg−1 at 574.7 W kg−1 power density. The device developed by Liu et al. has the ability to operate under varying temperature ranges with excellent electrochromic and storage performance.245
Here, in the hybrid technique, the high energy density of the EDLC material, and the high power density of the supercapacitor are incorporated to synthesize a single device with an electrochromic function. Various binary and ternary hybrid nanocomposites have been developed extensively using a combination of CPs, TMOs, and carbon and their derivatives. The presence of carbon derivatives has been found to effectively enhance the mechanical and electrochemical stability of composites comprising CPs, by reducing the resistance of the active layer and improving interfacial interaction between two different materials. Some of the electrochromic and energy storage performances of synthesized ECSC devices based on organic, inorganic, composite and hybrid electrodes are shown in Table 8 that distinctively indicates the extraordinary variation. The energy density and power density of the electrode materials and devices for EESS applications are highlighted in the Chart 1.
Table 8 Comparative study of various ECSC devices based on organic, inorganic and their composite and hybrid electrodes




Synthesized electrode
Substrate
Electrolyte
Color

C
sp (in mA h g−1) or Cs in F g−1 or Ca (in F cm−2) or CV (in F cm−3) @ ID (in A g−1) or SR (in mV s−1)
Capacitance retention
Specific energy @ specific power
Type of SC device (anode electrode//cathode electrode)
Ref.




WO3/PEDOT:PSS & PANI/MWCNT
AgNWs
H2SO4-PVA
Transparent to dark blue
—
85% (400)
0.61 μW h cm−2 @ 0.83 mW cm−2
WO3/PEDOT:PSS/AgNWs//PANI/MWCNT

71



WO3 & PANI
FTO
H2SO4-polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
—
23 mA h g−1 @ 1 A g−1
81.4% (2500)
—
WO3//PANI

78



NiOx & WO3
ITO
LiNbO3 electrolyte & Ta2O5 as a separator
Dark blue to transparent
322 F cm−3 @ 1 A cm−3
96.2% (2000) @ 75 °C
0.36 W h cm−3 @ 3.64 W cm−3
NiOx//WO3

87



Cu doped NiO & WO3
FTO
Li+-doped ion gel
Black to transparent
∼14.9 mF cm−2
82% (10000)
—
NiO//WO3

89



WO3
FTO
H2SO4
Deep blue to transparent
12.8 mF cm−2 (160.1 F g−1) at 0.4 mA cm−2
95% (5000)
3.6 Wh kg−1 @ 47.1 kW kg−1
WO3//WO3

92



WO3
ITO
Hydroquinone (HQ) containing ion gels
Blue to transparent
∼13.6 mF cm−2
84% (10000)
—
ITO/WO3//ITO

98



WO3·H2O
FTO
LiClO4 + PC (plasticizer) + PMMA
Dark blue (−2.5 V) to transparent (2.5 V)
5.5 F cm−3 @ 1.0 mA cm−2


12 mW h cm−2 @ 0.5 mW cm−2
Asymmetric FTO/WO3·H2O//FTO

106



Mo-doped WO3 & MnO2
FTO
LiClO4/PC
Transparent to dark
19.1 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2
93.8% (2000)
Areal energy density 0.11 W h m−2 @ 1.12 W m−2 areal power density
EESW:Mo-doped WO3//MnO2

114



V2O5/MnO2
FTO
LiClO4 in propylene carbonate
Orange (+3.0V), green (−2.5 V), & blue (−3.0 V)
13.7 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1
93.6% (1000) @ 50 mV s−1
—
V2O5/MnO2//FTO

127



PICA
ITO
LiClO4-PVA gel electrolyte
Yellow (0 V) & dark green
4.3 mF cm−2 @ 0.05 mA cm−2
93% (1000) from 0.05 mA cm−2 to 3.8 mA cm−2
—
Symmetric (PICA//PICA)

141



PBOTT-BTD
ITO/PET
TBAPF6 + PMMA in PC
Green (−0.4 V) to blue (0.6 V)
21 F g−1
—
5.7 W h kg−1 @ 1.2 kW kg−1
Asymmetric (PBOTT-BTD//PEDOT

150



PCBDTP-X
ITO
LiClO4-PC + PMMA based solid electrolyte
Brown yellow to gray blue
23 F g−1 at 0.1 mA cm−2
99.1% (5000)
11.6 W h kg−1 at 5.220 kW kg−1
Asymmetric PCBDTP-X//PEDOT

158



PSZT
ITO
HCl-PVA gel electrolyte
Green yellow (0 V), dark green (0.8 V)
82 F g−1 @ 0.25 A g−1
—
7.2 W h kg−1 @ 3.75 kW kg−1
Symmetric SC PSZT//PSZT

160



P6ICA/WO3
FTO
H2SO4-PVA
Yellow green (0 V) to blue black (1.4 V)
13.69 mF cm−2 at 0.05 mA cm−2
86% (3000)
—
P6ICA/WO3//PEDOT

166



NiO/PB
FTO
1 M LiClO4/PC
Transparent to dark blue
11.5 mF cm−2 at 0.05 mA cm−2
91.4% (4000)
—
NiO/PB//WO3

183



PICA/TiO2
FTO
LiClO4·3H2O, PMMA, CH3 CN + PC
Green (0 V) to dark blue (1.8 V)
9.65 F g−1 @ 0.1 mA cm−2
92% (5000)
—
PICA/TiO2//PEDOT

185



P5FIn/WO3
ITO


Yellow (0 V) to blue-black (1 V)
10.38 mF cm−2 at 0.025 mA cm−2
86% (5000)
—
P5FIn/WO3//PEDOT

186



PI-IDT
—
—
Orange to blue
1.38 mF cm−2 @ 0.05 mA cm−2
78% (300)
3.89 W h kg−1 @ 304.4 W kg−1
Asymmetric hybrid W0.71Mo 0.21O3−x//PI-IDT

192



Er@TiO2
ITO
LiClO4 PMMA gel electrolyte
Yellow to dark gray
16 mF cm−2 @ 1.0 mA cm−2
—
—
Asymmetric hybrid Er@TiO2//PTBTPA

193



Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS
—
PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte
—
3.3 mF cm−3 @ 10 mV s−1
90% (8000 bending cycles)
0.074 μW h cm−2 @ 3.2 μW cm−2
Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS//Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS

196



WO3
ITO/PET
AlCl3
Transparent to dark blue
142 mA h g−1 @ 0.5 A g−1
92.3% (40 bending cycles)
—
WO3//Al

219



PB & Zn
FTO
KCl + Zn (CH3COO)2
Transparent to dark blue
78.9 mA h m−2
60.7% (7000)


PB//Zn

221



CNT/PANI
Porous CNTs
PVA-H3PO4 gel electrolyte
Yellow (−0.8 V) to green-blue (0.8 V)
315 F g−1
92% (1500) GCD & 93% (150) (bending)
—
Symmetric hybrid ASSC(CNT/PANI//CNT/PANI)

227



PTEPA/graphene
ITO
PVA-H3PO4
Yellow-green (−0.8 V) and steel-blue (0.2 V)
13.3 mF cm−2 @ 0.015 mA cm−2
—
—
Asymmetric hybrid graphene//PTEPA/graphene

239





 Chart 1  The energy density and power density of the electrode materials and devices for EESS applications. 
9. Conclusions and future perspectives
In this review, we have provided a state-of-the-art review on recent progress in electrochromic energy storage systems, which is divided into three parts. The first part summarizes the study of synthesized electrochromic supercapacitors based on inorganic, organic, and organo-inorganic compounds, and the second part highlights electrochromic batteries. The study of composite electrodes or devices that combine EDLC materials (carbon or its derivatives) and other organo-inorganic materials is summarized in the third part of the review under electrochromic hybrid supercapacitors (EHSs). The insertion/intercalation/uptake (or extraction/deintercalation/release) of ions/electrons into (or out of) the electroactive/working electrode during the coloring (or bleaching) process in electrochromic devices closely resembles the charging (or discharging) process of supercapacitive devices. Therefore, it is easy to integrate both technologies into a single device for its bi-functional use, such as electrochromic energy storage systems (EESSs) or electrochromic supercapacitors (ESCs) or electrochromic batteries (ECBs). Although there are many similarities between electrochromic devices and batteries or supercapacitors, the main hurdle between ECs and SCs is charge density. EC devices show excellent performance in terms of coloration efficiency, response time, and optical density with minimum charge density. However, batteries or supercapacitors must show higher charge density. The main hurdle between these two devices can be overcome by taking two devices with moderate performance and combining them into a bi-functional electrochromic supercapacitor, which shows dynamic color displays in response to varying levels of stored energy. Also, various stretchable, transparent, and highly conducting current collectors, which are required to develop flexible EESSs are highlighted in this review.
Recent studies showed that inorganic transition metal oxides and their composites with other TMOs and conducting polymers exhibited excellent EES performance compared to their individual counterparts. Electrochromic devices and batteries or supercapacitors involve the insertion/extraction of ions into/out of electrode materials, and this can be achieved effectively by engineering the hierarchical morphologies with smaller dimensions and large specific surface areas, which offer faster insertion kinetics and thereby superior overall device performance. Therefore, various research groups focused their attention on the fabrication of nanostructured electrode materials with various morphologies such as nanoparticles, 3D nanoflakes, nanowires, nanorods, nanograins, nanosheets, nanopetals, nanobricks, nanobelts, core–shell nanorod arrays, double gyroid structure, etc. TMOs suffer from long response time, single color visual effect, poor coloration efficiency, and low energy density facing stiff competition from conducting polymers.
The conductivity of CPs is higher than that of inorganic electrode materials. Electrode materials based on CPs have the ability to utilize the entire bulk of the electrode during fast reversible redox reactions, revealing their suitability as candidates for EESSs. D–A type building blocks have a capacity to tailor the bandgap of CPs, including color variation, and act as negative as well as positive charge storage materials in ESC devices. Also, the performance of the EESS device can be boosted by the introduction of a π-spacer in D–A-type CPs. Although CPs have many advantages, such as low cost, high conductivity, and bandgap modification, and thereby multiple color variation, high coloration efficiency, rapid response time, and high charge density, as EESS devices, they suffer from relatively poor cycle life and chemical stability. The cycling stability of the CPs can be enhanced by non-aqueous electrolytes. Also, the mechanical stability of the CPs, greatly influenced by cross-linked polymers, has been highlighted.
The drawback of TMOs and CPs can be overcome by preparing a hybrid composite material to facilitate synergistic behavior and sophisticated features in terms of the quality of their specific components. Therefore, exploring such materials for dual EES applications with high performance is important in the field of research, and various solutions for building electrochromic energy storage devices with new device contours have been eagerly explored. Various nanocomposite electrodes have been reviewed for their applications in wearable electronics with aesthetic features such as stretchability and bendability, short circuit chromatic warning, self-powered and smart sunglasses, self-powered electrochromic supercapacitors, powering LEDs and LCDs, and self-healing.
The EESS device performance can be improved through the following strategies.
• Proper selection of active material and matching counter or ion storage electrode, which will have the ability to display color variation between uptake and release of charge, and at the same time provide the advantage of charge storage. Thus, the proper selection of active material will be beneficial to integrate the two technologies into a single device.
• Nanostructures and the resulting large surface area to volume ratio offer faster insertion kinetics and help to increase the overall efficiency of the device. Therefore, it is necessary to focus on the growth of various porous nanostructured morphologies.
• The doping method helps to lower the sheet resistance of electrodes, resulting in excellent charge storage capacity and interfacial contact for rapid reaction kinetics. It provides excellent cycling stability as compared to undoped films. Doping also facilitates more defect states in active sites without producing lattice strain, which is beneficial for the optical–electrochemical properties of EESSs.
• The composite material synthesis approach contributes to implementing multifunctionality by combining the relevant, desirable features of different materials to form a new material having a broad area of desired properties and revealing the excellent ability of synergistic behavior.
• Synthesizing hybrid devices in which battery-type faradaic and capacitive charge storage mechanisms can be combined to overcome defects associated with two storage mechanisms, and will emerge as the better substitute for the more synergistic performance of two different mechanisms along with better optical performance.
All these studies have shown that single electrodes with highly effective EC and energy storage efficiency have been developed, but the overall performance of the devices based on those single electrodes is relatively low. For practical use, the efficiency of the device is more important, so future electrochromic energy storage research should focus more on the assembly of electrochromic energy storage devices. To meet real-world application requirements such as high flexibility, stretchability, deformability, self-healing, low cost, and long-term durability in color and charge storage, future efforts should be focused on important features in electrochromic energy storage devices.
Author contributions
All author contributed equally to this work.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to especially thank Dr S. B. Sadale and Dr C. B. Salunkhe for their helpful suggestions.
Notes and references
P. A. Østergaard, N. Duic, Y. Noorollahi, H. Mikulcic and S. Kalogirou, Renewable Energy, 2020, 146, 2430–2437 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 RSC .
B. Prindle and M. Eldridge, Am. Counc. an Energy Effic. Econ., 2007, 74, 8–15 Search PubMed .

          S. Hebden, Scidev.net.
A. Cannavale, U. Ayr, F. Fiorito and F. Martellotta, Energies, 2020, 13, 1–17 RSC .
P. Yang, P. Sun and W. Mai, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 394–402 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, Y. Tian, H. Zhang, X. Li, J. Ji, H. Qu, N. Li, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 13–37 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100524 CrossRef .
J. R. Platt, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 34, 862–863 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, Appl. Opt., 1969, 8, 192 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Deb, Philos. Mag., 1973, 27, 801–822 CrossRef CAS .
W. Estrada, A. M. Andersson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 64, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Berets, G. Haacke and G. Castellion, Electrochromic information displays, US Pat., No. 3839857,  1974 Search PubMed .

          D. J. O'farrell and R. J. Gahan, Electrochromic rearview mirror for vehicles with constant light transmitting area,  1995, vol. 406 Search PubMed .
C. Ma, M. Taya and C. Xu, Wiley Online Libr., 2008, 48, 2224–2228 CAS .

          H. Demiryont and K. Shannon III, in Head- and Helmet-Mounted Displays XIV: Design and Applications,  2009, vol. 7326, p. 73260K Search PubMed .
971 JH Decanini – US Patent 5 305 and undefined 1994, Spacecraft control by electrochromic devices, 1992.
A. Azens and C. G. Granqvist, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 7, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Mortimer, D. R. Rosseinsky and P. M. S. Monk, Electrochromic Materials and Devices,  2015, pp. 1–638 Search PubMed .
H. Peng, X. Sun, F. Cai, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Liao, D. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Lu, Y. Zhu and Q. Jia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 738–741 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Yeh, L. Lin, P. K. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4757–4765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, X. Cheng, H. Chen, J. Huang, X. Chen, M. Han, Z. Su, B. Meng, Z. Song and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14298–14306 RSC .
J. H. Lee, K.-W. Kim, J. K. Kim and U. Jeong, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 2550–2557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, B. Sun, H. Huang, Y. Gan, Y. Xia, C. Liang, W. Zhang and J. Zhang, Materials, 2020, 13, 1206–1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Zhang and A. Y. Elezzabi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Cui, C. Xu, H. Li, H. Liu and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3421–3428 RSC .
R. D. Rauh, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 3165–3176 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53–56, 479–489 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 201–262 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Granqvist, Handbook of Inorganic Electrochromic Materials,  1995 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, X. Yan, S. Wu, Z. Luo, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25052–25064 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lim, S. J. Yoo, S. H. Park, S. U. Yun and Y. E. Sung, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 2069–2074 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Arvizu, G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2246–2253 CrossRef CAS .
F. Michalak, K. Von Rottkay, T. Richardson, J. Slack and M. Rubin, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 3085–3092 CrossRef CAS .
A. Danine, L. Manceriu, C. Faure, C. Labrugère, N. Penin, A. Delattre, G. Eymin-Petot-Tourtollet and A. Rougier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34030–34038 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gillaspie, A. Norman, C. E. Tracy, J. R. Pitts, S.-H. Lee and A. Dillon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, H328 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, J. Tian, W. K. Zhang, Y. P. Gan, X. Y. Tao, X. H. Xia and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4281–4286 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Knott, M. R. Craig, D. Y. Liu, J. E. Babiarz, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4953–4962 RSC .
A. K. Bhosale, S. R. Kulal, V. M. Gurame and P. S. Patil, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2015, 38, 483–491 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma, S. B. Samanta, A. K. Bakhshi and S. A. Agnihotry, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 171, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Dalavi, A. K. Bhosale, R. S. Desai and P. S. Patil, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 43, 2702–2706 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Hu, P. O. Käll and U. Helmersson, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1976–1983 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Béléké, C. Faure, M. Röder, P. Hovington, U. Posset, A. Guerfi and K. Zaghib, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 214, 81–86 CrossRef .
W. Wu, X. Liang, J. Wang, P. Chen, W. Zhang, K. Zhong, W. Sun, X. Fan and J. Li, Key Eng. Mater., 2017, 726, 276–281 Search PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11619–11635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef .
J. Xie, P. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Qi, Y. Lei and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, Q. Zhang, X. Yang, M. Liu, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Zheng, X. Xiao, L. Li, P. Gu, X. Dai, H. Tang, Q. Hu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 185–209 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Plenum Publishers, New York, Kluwer, Springer US,  1999 Search PubMed .
S. H. Lee, C. E. Tracy, Y. Yan, J. R. Pitts and S. K. Deb, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, 188–190 CrossRef .
C. Choi, D. S. Ashby, D. M. Butts, R. H. DeBlock, Q. Wei, J. Lau and B. Dunn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 5–19 CrossRef .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Liang and W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8099–8128 RSC .
J. Liang, C. Jiang and W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7041–7061 RSC .
Z. Luo, L. Liu, X. Yang, X. Luo, P. Bi, Z. Fu, A. Pang, W. Li and Y. Yi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 39098–39107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Xu, W. Qiu, C. Hou, Y. Wang, P. Yao, R. Yu, W. Guo and X. Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 18690–18697 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Jiao, H. Xie, X. W. Lou and X. Wei Sun, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 CAS .
K. Heckner and A. Kraft, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 153, 899–905 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Guo, J. Zhan, X. Jiao, D. Chen and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17098–17105 RSC .
X. Chang, R. Hu, S. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Lei, T. Liu, L. Dong and Y. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Tian, Z. Wang, S. Cong, D. Zhou, Q. Zhang, M. Yang, W. Zhang, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 7277–7281 CrossRef .
T. S. Tung, L. C. Chen and K. C. Ho, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 165, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, X. Zhao, Z. Li, B. Wang, D. Wang and G. Nie, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2727–2736 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. G. Yun, D. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. Park, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606728 CrossRef .
P. Yao, S. Xie, M. Ye, R. Yu, Q. Liu, D. Yan, W. Cai, W. Guo and X. Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29088–29095 RSC .
R. Yuksel, A. Ekber, J. Turan, E. Alpugan, S. O. Hacioglu, L. Toppare, A. Cirpan, G. Gunbas and H. E. Unalan, Electroanalysis, 2018, 30, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuksel, S. Coskun, G. Gunbas, A. Cirpan, L. Toppare and H. E. Unalan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A721 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, S. Park, X. Cheng, A. L. S. Eh and P. S. Lee, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 759–770 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Barus, K. Sebayang, J. Ginting and R. T. Ginting, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2018, 1116, 4–9 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Tian, S. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wen, C. Hang, Z. Zheng and C. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125075 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Lin, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8126–8132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Dalavi and P. S. Patil, Nanostructured Nio Thin Films for Smart Window Application, https://uk.bookshop.org/books/1605841234_nanostructured-nio-thin-films-for-smart-window-application/9783659648571, accessed 16 February 2021 Search PubMed.
C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal and O. S. Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 255–270 CrossRef .
F. Shi, L. Li, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
W. Q. Wang, X. L. Wang, X. H. Xia, Z. J. Yao, Y. Zhong and J. P. Tu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8162–8169 RSC .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–35 Search PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
S. H. Lee, P. Liu, M. J. Seong, H. M. Cheong, C. E. Tracy and S. K. Deb, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, 40–42 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
T. Brousse, D. Bélanger and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5185–A5189 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Zhu, W. Zhao, J. Ma, S. Mhaisalkar, T. L. Maria, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 643–652 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abe, S. H. Lee, E. O. Zayim, C. E. Tracy, J. R. Pitts and S. K. Deb, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2006, 45, 7780–7783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Sun, P. Yang, L. Du and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20614–20618 RSC .
L. Liu, K. Du, Z. He, T. Wang, X. Zhong, T. Ma, J. Yang, Y. He, G. Dong, S. Wang and X. Diao, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Q. Zhang, K. Du, Z. He, T. Wang, Y. Yi, M. Wang, X. Zhong, G. Dong and X. Diao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23028–23037 RSC .
S. Y. Kim, T. Y. Yun, K. S. Yu and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51978–51986 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Jung, S. J. Lee, D. Han, A. R. Hong, H. S. Jang, S. H. Lee, J. H. Mun, H. J. Lee, S. H. Han, D. Yang and D. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cong, Y. Tian, Q. Li, Z. Zhao and F. Geng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4260–4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, Z. Chai, L. Huang, X. Cai, S. Tan, J. Song and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11935–11939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, L. Du, Z. Liang, W. Xie, X. Cai, L. Huang, S. Tan and W. Mai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16483–16489 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Inamdar, J. Kim, Y. Jo, H. Woo, S. Cho, S. M. Pawar, S. Lee, J. L. Gunjakar, Y. Cho, B. Hou, S. N. Cha, J. Kwak, Y. Park, H. Kim and H. Im, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, X. Li, Z. Bi, Y. Chen, X. Xu and X. Gao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 2579–2586 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Kumbhar, J. Lee, Y. Choi, H. Lee, M. Ryuichi, M. Nakayama, W. Lee, H. Oh and K. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 709, 138214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. Kim, D. Choi, M. Lee, W. S. Chu, S. H. Ahn, D. M. Chun and C. S. Lee, J. Jpn. Soc. Precis., 2018, 5, 231–238 Search PubMed .
T. Y. Yun, X. Li, S. H. Kim and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43993–43999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Sun, W. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Shu, Y. Qin, X. Zhang, H. Shen and Y. Wu, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2020, 549, 120337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Cui, X. Shu, Y. Wang, Y. Qin, J. Liu, H. H. Tan and Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32658–32665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, M. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Cui, Y. Wang, X. Shu, Y. Qin, H. H. Tan, J. Liu and Y. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 212, 110579 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Kim, T. Y. Yun, S. H. You, X. Tang, J. Lee, Y. Seo, Y. T. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. C. Moon and J. K. Kim, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 1–10 CrossRef .
M.-H. Jo, B.-R. Koo and H.-J. Ahn, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 25066–25072 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, S. Cong and Z. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1915–1922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bi, X. Li, X. He, Y. Chen, X. Xu and X. Gao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 183, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. G. Gayathri, S. S. Shaiju, R. Remya and B. Deb, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 380–387 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, W. Gong, X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, J. Chen, H. Sun, G. Song, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33917–33925 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Jo, B.-R. Koo and H.-J. Ahn, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 149664 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, D. Ding, X. Yan, J. Guo, L. Shao, H. Chen, L. Sun, H. A. Colorado, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, W. Meng, Q. Gong, G. Li and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21321–21327 RSC .
L. Shen, L. Du, S. Tan, Z. Zang, C. Zhao and W. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6296–6299 RSC .
Z. Bi, X. Li, Y. Chen, X. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Z. Bi, Y. Chen, X. He, X. Guo, X. Gao and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 774–781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xi, Y. Chen, Z. Bi, S. Jia, X. Guo, X. Gao and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 1459–1466 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, H. Li, C. J. Firby, M. Al-Hussein and A. Y. Elezzabi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20378–20385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, T. Gao, Q. Xu, G. Cao, Q. Chen, H. Zhu, C. Lan and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10973–10982 RSC .
J. Kim, A. I. Inamdar, Y. Jo, S. Cho, A. T. Aqueel Ahmed, B. Hou, S. Cha, T. G. Kim, H. Kim and H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13459–13469 RSC .
L. Zhao, X. Huang, G. Lin, Y. Peng, J. Chao, L. Yi, X. Huang, C. Li and W. Liao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra, P. Yogi, P. R. Sagdeo and R. Kumar, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 790–798 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shen, X. Huo, M. Zhang and M. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146034 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huo, W. Shen, R. Li, M. Zhang and M. Guo, Scr. Mater., 2020, 174, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
M. Galiński, A. Lewandowski and I. Stepniak, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5567–5580 CrossRef .
A. M. Österholm, D. E. Shen, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13432–13440 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wei, M. R. J. J. Scherer, C. Bower, P. Andrew, T. Ryhänen and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1857–1862 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, C. K. Nuo Peh, T. Zhu, Y. F. Lim and G. W. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8343–8351 RSC .
Q. Zhou, Y. Gong and J. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 33–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sajitha, U. Aparna and B. Deb, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T.-C. Lin, B.-J. Jheng and W.-C. Huang, Energies, 2021, 14, 2065 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qu, Y. Fu, C. Ma, Y. Yang, D. Shi, D. Chu and X. Yu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 15475–15482 RSC .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis and A. G. MacDiarmid, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
C. Arbizzani, M. Mastragostino and L. Meneghello, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 RSC .
K. L. Zhou, H. Wang, J. T. Jiu, J. B. Liu, H. Yan and K. Suganuma, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Tabar, F. Sharif and S. Mazinani, Polymer, 2018, 154, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Fang and T. Lin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 110164–110170 RSC .
G. H. Moon and S. H. Foulger, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2154–2155 Search PubMed .
F. Hu, B. Yan, G. Sun, J. Xu, Y. Gu, S. Lin, S. Zhang, B. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3154–3160 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Zhang, H. Peng, S. Chen, F. Yang and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2020, 77, 105497 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, J. Kim and E. Kim, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 8791–8797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng and Z. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Guo, Y. Lu and G. Nie, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 113, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, M. Han, J. Kim and E. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2124–2133 RSC .
S. Wang, X. Wu, X. Zhang, H. Niu, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Bai, W. Wang and Y. Hou, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 93, 368–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, H. Wen, S. Wang, H. Niu, C. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Bai and W. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 332–342 CrossRef CAS .
G. Atakan and G. Gunbas, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25620–25623 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Lu, C. Yang, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Niu, P. Zhao, W. Wang and J. Fan, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1177–1185 RSC .
J. Kim, J. You, B. Kim, T. Park and E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4168–4173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ming, K. Lin, H. Zhang, F. Jiang, P. Liu, J. Xu, G. Nie and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5275–5278 RSC .
P. M. Dicarmine, T. B. Schon, T. M. McCormick, P. P. Klein and D. S. Seferos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8295–8307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Li, H. Yu, D. F. Perepichka and H. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2772–2776 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ming, Z. Li, S. Zhen, P. Liu, F. Jiang, G. Nie and J. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124572 CrossRef CAS .
P. Murto, S. Elmas, U. A. Méndez-Romero, Y. Yin, Z. Genene, M. Mone, G. G. Andersson, M. R. Andersson and E. Wang, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 11106–11119 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bryan, L. M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya and J. M. D'Arcy, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5989–5998 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Avlyanov, Y. Min, A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Epstein, Synth. Met., 1995, 72, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chu, X. Ju, X. Han, H. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao and J. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2019, 73, 43–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. Zhu, X. Zhao, W. Kang, M. Li, X. Zhang, H. Yang, L. Guo and B. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 215, 110661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuang, W. Zhao, L. Wang, F. Li, W. Wang, S. Liu, W. Huang and Q. Zhao, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1632–1644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, E. B. Berda, X. Jia, Z. Lu, M. Zhu and D. Chao, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 3024–3033 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1214–1218 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin and G. B. Sukhorukov, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 671–682 CrossRef CAS .
L. Adamczyk, P. J. Kulesza, K. Miecznikowski, B. Palys, M. Chojak and D. Krawczyk, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, E98 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Huang, T. C. Wen and A. Gopalan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3469–3476 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, F. Yuan, N. Xu, S. Mei, Z. Chen and C. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 138344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and B. Wang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 20584–20591 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu and C. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, K. H. Shin and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9186–9193 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shao, J. W. Jeon and J. L. Lutkenhaus, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Nwanya, C. J. Jafta, P. M. Ejikeme, P. E. Ugwuoke, M. V. Reddy, R. U. Osuji, K. I. Ozoemena and F. I. Ezema, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 128, 218–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, Z. Chai, Z. Liang, P. Sun, W. Xie, C. Zhao and W. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34085–34092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, C. Tao, G. Zhu, H. Zhang, B. Lin, X. Zhang, H. Yang, L.-X. Guo and Y. Sun, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 8786–8794 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Wei, J. Wang, J. Liu, J. Guo, X. Zhang, B. L. Weeks, T. D. Shen, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20778–20790 RSC .
Y. Tian, S. Cong, W. Su, H. Chen, Q. Li, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2150–2156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Q. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Wang and W. Chen, Synth. Met., 2016, 220, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Inamdar, H. S. Chavan, H. Kim and H. Im, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 201, 110121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ouyang, X. Hu, X. Shao, L. Chen, W. Li, R. Bai, L. Zhang, X. Lv, A. Tameev and C. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 34382–34388 RSC .
C. J. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702678 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, A. Levitt, N. Kurra, K. Juan, N. Noriega, X. Xiao, X. Wang, H. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 455–461 CrossRef .
P. Sun, Y. Liu, M. Qiu, Y. Tong and W. Mai, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. Jamdegni and A. Kaur, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Jia, M. Zhu, X. Liu and D. Chao, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 8138–8147 RSC .
J. Pan, R. Zheng, Y. Wang, X. Ye, Z. Wan, C. Jia, X. Weng, J. Xie and L. Deng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110337 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, B. Yan, M. Jiang, B. Liu, Y. Gu, G. Yao, Y. Zhang, L. Ye, X. Bai and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1669–1677 RSC .
Q. Guo, J. Li, B. Zhang, G. Nie and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6491–6501 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, X. Zhao, Z. Li, D. Wang and G. Nie, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Z. Li, Q. Guo, X. Yang and G. Nie, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 855, 157480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakayama, Y. Kashiwa and C. Iida, ECS Trans., 2019, 16, 81–89 CrossRef .
J. He, L. You, D. T. Tran and J. Mei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4169–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. An, Y. Ling, S. Gong, B. Zhu, Y. Zhao, D. Dong, L. W. Yap, Y. Wang and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
N. B. McKeown, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1023–1032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Zhao, G. Zhu, M. Li, X. Zhang, H. Yang and B. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 333, 135495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, W. Du, Y. Ren, Z. Cai, K. Yu, C. Zhang, Z. Chen and D. S. Wright, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 1119–1123 RSC .
B. N. Reddy, P. N. Kumar and M. Deepa, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 377–389 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D. H. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Ginting, M. M. Ovhal and J. W. Kang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 650–657 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, L. Gao, L. Li and L. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 786, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .
K. Honda, K. Chlba and H. Hayashi, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 1989, 26, 609–620 CrossRef .
K. Honda and H. Hayashi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1330–1334 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Chen, Y. H. Huang, K. S. Tseng and K. C. Ho, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2002, 5, 203–212 CAS .
Y. H. Huang, L. C. Chen and K. C. Ho, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 165, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Chen, Y. H. Huang and K. C. Ho, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2002, 7, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Cao, T. Zhang, Q. Yao, H. Lin, A. Fisher and J. Y. Lee, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
D. Zhou, F. Shi, D. Xie, D. H. Wang, X. H. Xia, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 465, 112–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, N. Li, Y. Wang, X. Ma, J. Zhao, L. Qiang, S. Hou, J. Ji and Y. Li, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 14803–14812 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, R. Hu, S. Sun, T. Lu, T. Liu, Y. Lei, L. Dong, Y. Yin and Y. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 185707 CrossRef .
W. Q. Wang, Z. J. Yao, X. L. Wang, X. H. Xia, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 535, 300–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tong, S. Liu, X. Li, L. Mai, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3254–3261 RSC .
S. Cao, S. Zhang, T. Zhang, Q. Yao and J. Y. Lee, Joule, 2019, 3, 1152–1162 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giannuzzi, M. Manca, L. De Marco, M. R. Belviso, A. Cannavale, T. Sibillano, C. Giannini, P. D. Cozzoli and G. Gigli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1933–1943 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalasina, K. Kongsawatvoragul, N. Phattharasupakun, P. Phattharaphuti and M. Sawangphruk, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 14154–14160 RSC .
X. Yin, J. R. Jennings, W. Tang, T. J. Huang, C. Tang, H. Gong and G. W. Zheng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1658–1663 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. C. Neiva, M. M. Oliveira, M. F. Bergamini, L. H. Marcolino and A. J. G. Zarbin, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cai, J. Chen, J. Xiong, A. Lee-Sie Eh, J. Wang, M. Higuchi and P. S. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1159–1166 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Li, H. Zhang, D. Yu, Z. Zhu, J. Sun and S. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28072–28077 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Liu, M. Hu, J. Zeng, Y. Mu, Y. Guo, J. Yu, X. Ma, Y. Qiu and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11113–11118 RSC .
H. Li, L. McRae, C. J. Firby and A. Y. Elezzabi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. Eric, H. Li and E. Adulhakem, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 32047–32057 RSC .
S. Sun, C. Tang, Y. Jiang, D. Wang, X. Chang, Y. Lei, N. Wang and Y. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110332 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and A. Y. Elezzabi, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 691–695 RSC .
B. Wang, M. Cui, Y. Gao, F. Jiang, W. Du, F. Gao, L. Kang, C. Zhi and H. Luo, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kimura, K. Nakamura and N. Kobayashi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 205, 110247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, W. Li, R. Zhao, Q. Huang, N. Xu, F. Yuan and C. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 322–332 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grote, Z. Y. Yu, J. L. Wang, S. H. Yu and Y. Lei, Small, 2015, 11, 4666–4672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, J. Zhu, S. Wu, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1820–1831 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuksel, S. C. Cevher, A. Cirpan, L. Toppare and H. E. Unalan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2805 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiang, W. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Guo, X. Zhang and Q. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24946–24951 RSC .
W. Xinming, W. Qiguan, Z. Wenzhi, W. Yan and C. Weixing, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 7731–7741 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Cao, F. Yang, H. Peng, B. Yan, H. Jiang, Y. Gu and M. Xiang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 13497–13508 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Zhu, F. Wang, J. Wang, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. Narayanan, A. Dewan and D. Chakraborty, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8596–8606 RSC .
B. R. Koo, M. H. Jo, K. H. Kim and H. J. Ahn, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 1–12 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Q. Zhang, Z. Hao, Y. Tang, H. Wang, J. Liu and H. Yan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110330 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lyu, Polymers, 2020, 12, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Y. Gong and J. Lin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 823, 80–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, C. Yang, B. Deng, C. Wang, Q. Li, C. De Villenoisy Thibault, K. Huang, K. Huo and H. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104200 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ye, Y. Sun, X. Zhao, B. Lin, H. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18994–19003 RSC .
Y. Wang, S. Xiong, X. Wang, J. Chu, R. Zhang, B. Wu, M. Gong, M. Qu, Z. Li and Z. Chen, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Lv, X. Yang, W. Du, P. Ma, H. Wang, A. Bonnefont, D. S. Wright, L. Ruhlmann and C. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3844–3854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, C. Jiang and W. Wu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 021319 CAS .
K. C. Lee, C. W. Chang-Jian, E. C. Cho, J. H. Huang, W. T. Lin, B. C. Ho, J. A. Chou and Y. S. Hsiao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Liu, R. Zhao, D. S. Wright, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16397–16405 RSC .
M. Yoonessi, A. Borenstein, M. F. El-Kady, C. L. Turner, H. Wang, A. Z. Stieg and L. Pilon, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4629–4639 CrossRef CAS .
O. Eisenberg, Y. M. Algavi, H. Weissman, J. Narevicius, B. Rybtchinski, M. Lahav and M. E. van der Boom, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 2000718, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, T. Wang, Z. He, Y. Yi, M. Wang, Z. Luo, Q. Liu, J. Huang, X. Zhong, K. Du and X. Diao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128892 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Dhanaji S. Dalavi	Dr Dhanaji S. Dalavi is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Rethare BK, M.S., India. He is Head, Department of Physics. He received his M.Sc. degree in Physics and PhD degree in “Electrochromic Smart Windows” from Shivaji University, Kolhapur in 2008 and 2013, respectively. He is a recipient of the prestigious Dr D. S. Kothari Post-Doctoral Fellowship, UGC, India. His research interest includes nanostructured materials for electrochromic smart windows, gas sensors and electrochemical supercapacitors. He has published 33 research papers in international journals of good repute, and 1 book and has received more than 1550 citations with an h-index of 23.
Radhika S. Desai	Mrs Radhika S. Desai is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Rethare BK, M.S., India. She received her M.Sc. degree from Shivaji University, Kolhapur in 2005. Now, she is pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Dr Dhanaji S. Dalavi. Her current research interests are focused on synthesis and characterization of nanocomposites for energy storage applications.
Pramod S. Patil	Prof. Pramod S. Patil is currently working as the Pro-Vice Chancellor of Shivaji University, Kolhapur, M.S., India. He is a former Dean of Science and Technology. He has served as a former Founder Director of the School of Nanoscience and Technology, Former Head of the Physics Department and Coordinator of the Department of Energy Technology. Prof. Patil is a recipient of the DAAD fellowship, Germany and Brain Pool fellowship, South Korea. He has established the Center of Nanofabrics. After having received his PhD degree from Shivaji University in 1990, Prof. Patil has been zealously engaged in research in solar cells, electrochromic smart window materials, supercapacitors, sensors and nanotechnology. He has more than 450 research articles, 5 patents and several book chapters to his credit and has received more than 22500 citations with an h-index of 75.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of EC glass configurations: (a) solution phase, (b) battery-like and (c) hybrid; reproduced with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 1999 Elsevier; (d) cathodic and anodic electrochromic oxides.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the structure of an electrochromic device.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ragone plot showing the specific energy and specific power of electrochemical energy storage devices available at present. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of energy storage mechanisms in supercapacitors (a) in an EDLC-electrode containing carbon nanoparticles and (b) in an EDLC-electrode containing porous carbon. (c) Redox pseudocapacitance. (d) Intercalation pseudocapacitance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2014, AAAS. (e) CV profile of a SC. (f) CV profile of a battery. (g) Schematic illustration of the electrochromic pseudocapacitance mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing.	 
ip = avb
logip = b × logv + loga	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of an electrochromic energy storage system (EESS).	 

The electrochromism properties are exhibited by some materials, which can display optical variation in response to the application of external voltage	The energy storage properties are exhibited by materials that can convert electrical energy into a form that can be stored and re-converted into electrical energy when needed
Materials can be classified as cathodic and anodic materials depending on whether they change color during insertion or extraction of ions	Materials can be classified based on the charge storage mechanism such as EDLC and pseudocapacitive materials
During oxidation and reduction, materials should display color variation	It is not required to display color variation during oxidation and reduction
Requires transparent substrates like FTO, ITO, graphene and CNT derivatives, and also metal nanowires and grids	Several substrates like metal substrates, and their nanowires, grids, carbon, graphene, and CNT derivatives, and also cotton fabrics, synthetic sponges, textiles and cable type electrodes with thin conducting layers, etc. can be used for energy storage device fabrication
It comprises a five-layered structure, configured as TCE/ISL or ECL/ICL or electrolyte/ECL/TCE	It comprises a five-layered structure, configured as a CE/anode or positive electrode/ICL or electrolyte/cathode or negative electrode/CE. Here, a separator is present between the two electrodes. The main function of this separator is to prevent physical contact between two electrodes during ion transport in the cell
Various nanostructuring pathways like doping, binary and ternary nanocomposites, and synthesis of nanorods, nanowires, nanoflakes, quantum dots, and so on are employed	Various nanostructuring pathways like doping, synthesis of binary and ternary nanocomposites, development of hybrid electrochemical supercapacitors, and various nanostructures like nanoflowers, nanorods, nanowires, nanoflakes, quantum dots, and so on are employed
Performance parameters include coloration efficiency, cycling durability, switching speed, and transmission modulation	Charging and discharging times, charge storage ability, energy and power density, and cycling stability are the main performance metrics of energy storage systems
Applications: automobile rearview mirrors, sunglasses, helmet visors, smart windows, etc.	Applications: hybrid electric vehicles, backup power supplies for portable tools, renewable energy power plants, etc.

 	Fig. 6  The schematic illustration of the four-charging strategies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Various applications of electrochromic supercapacitors.	 

PET	Silver grid/PEDOT:PSS	0.62	70%	
66

Cellulose fibers	Ag nanowire network	18	89%	
67

PET	Graphene/CuS (G–CuS)	Approx. 20	85%	
68

PET	Ag NWs	10	87%	
69 and 70
Elastomer substrate	PEDOT:PSS/AgNWs	6	—	
71

Flexible polycarbonate (PC)	PEDOT:PSS layer (with benzenesulfonic acid (BSA) treatment)	97	95%	
72

Free-standing polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanofibers on an aluminium frame	Ag NNs	1.08	85%	
58

PET	CuNW@alloy network	14.2	90.1%	
73

	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the EPSD. (b) Schematic of the seven-layer construction (left) and working principle of the EPSD during electrochemical processes (right). (c) Visual energy storage level of the EPSD. Optical images at several charge/discharge states, and the schematic drawings for the corresponding energy storage levels in the device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu-doped-7 film and the inset displays a top-view image. (e) GCD curve synchronized with the corresponding transient transmittance profile of the ECSC with Cu-doped-7. (f) Photographs of the device at nine different states designated in panel (c). (g) Optical photographs during practical utilization of ECSs to operate external devices in which (i–iv) six ECSs in series and 24 LEDs and (v–viii) five ECSs in parallel and the minimotor including a vane are included in the demonstration system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of charge transfer in QDs and bulk electrode. (i) the exchange of the pristine aliphatic amine ligand (left) with conductive pyridine (right). (j) Transmittance spectrum of the tungsten oxide QD electrode, showing high transparency at the bleached state (inset: optical images of the electrode at bleached (transparent) and colored states (dark blue)). (k) Plot of variation of optical density as a function of charge density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) GCD profiles and corresponding in situ transmittance and photographs of the device at eight points during charging and discharging. (b) Circuit diagram of the ECS. Photographs of ECSs in energy storage mode: (i) before charging and (ii) after charging, in which only ECSs were connected with an external power supply. Photographs of ECSs in power source mode: (iii) during turning on the LED (discharging) and (iv) after full discharge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the PRF WO3 film. (d) Transmittance spectra under different applied potentials of PRF WO3 film. (e) Photographs of the PRF WO3 film at bleaching and coloring states; a red LED lit up by one PRF WO3 bi-functional device connected in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Charging/discharging cycling stability of meso- and compact-WO3 ECSs. (b) GCD curve and the corresponding in situ transmittance profile for the meso-WO3 ECS. (c) Photographs of the meso-WO3 ECS during the charging and discharging process. (d) Schematic illustration of the ion intercalation in meso- (left) and compact-WO3 (right). (e) Optical microscopy. (f) SEM of meso-WO3. (g) Photographs of the ECSD during the reversible charging and discharging process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation process of WO3/ZnO nanocomposites, (b) top-view FESEM image of the final WO3/ZnO nanocomposites, (c) transmittance spectra and photographs of the WO3/ZnO nanocomposite electrode in colored and bleached states under potentials of 1.0 V and +1.0 V, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Scheme of the preparation process of core/shell WTNRAs. (e) SEM images of the WTi-0.050 sample. (f) Specific capacitances vs. various current densities of WTi-0.050. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM of mesoporous DG V2O5. (b) Schematic illustration of the DG V2O5 SC device. (c) Photograph of the fully transparent electrochromic supercapacitor with two laterally offset color variations in the oxidized and reduced states. (d) Ragone plot. (e) CV of the DG V2O5 based electrode supercapacitor with (a) RTIL electrolyte containing lithium salt and (b) Li-free RTIL as electrolyte. (f) Photographs of the developed electrochromic supercapacitor device displaying color in its oxidized and bleached states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (g) SEM images of MoO3 nanobelts. (h) SEM images of MoO3/Ni(OH)2. (i) Transmittance spectra of the coated FTO glass in the bleached and colored states. (j) Photographs of the electrochromic and charging process. The inset is the photograph of a green LED lit by the electrochromic storage device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

NiO film	ITO	DC reactive magnetron sputtering	Crystalline grain	2.6/4.2	50% @ 500	
	173.6	
	50% (5 to 200 mV s−1)	
57

NiO	FTO	Hydrothermal	Nanoflakes	1.8/2.7	40%	63.2 @ 632.8	74.8 @ 10 mV s−1	—	Approx. 100% (5000)	
86

WO3	FTO	Facile thermal evaporation and electrodeposition	Nanoparticles	0.9/3.1	76.2% (−0.6 V)	54.8 @ 633	102.4	639.8 @ 10 mV s−1	
	
92

WO3	ITO	Oblique-angle RF magnetron sputtering	Nanograins (<10 nm)	—	82%	∼170 @ 630	—	228 @ 0.25 A g−1	75% (2000)	
94

WO3	FTO	Hydrothermal	Nanosheets (15 nm thick)	3.8/6.6	
	48.9	14.9	
	84.5% (1000) @ 0.22 mA cm−2	
95

WO3	FTO	Pulsed radio frequency (PRF) magnetron sputtering	Thin films	5.6/3.2	93.6% @ 633 & 90.6% @ 1500	56.8	47.1 @ 0.14 mA cm−2	
	75.8% (2000)	
99

WO3	FTO	Electrochemical deposition & reactive radio frequency magnetron sputtering	Bilayer hybrid nanoarrays	3.6/3.0	93.9% @ 633 & 89.6% @ 1500	92.3	47.4	
	84.0% (2000)	
101

WO3/metallic tungsten	ITO/PET	Sputtering	—	
	—	Approx. 140	Approx. 23.4	—	92% (3000) GCD & 87% (1000) (bending cycles)	
104

WO3·H2O	FTO	Citric acid-assisted hydrothermal	Nanosheets	6.1/10.1	79%	42.6 @ 633	43.30 @ 0.14 mA cm−2	—	—	
105

WO3·2H2O	ITO	Spin coating	Nanoplates	
	90.4%	322.6 @ 1600	
	95.4	93.7% (500)	
107

e-WO3//PPy	FTO	Electrodeposition, electrochemical polymerization	Nanoparticles	
	
	
	14.21 mF cm−2 @ 20 mV s−1	
	
	
110

Ag NWs/WO3	PET/Ag NWs	Spin coating, facile thermal evaporation	Nanowires	1/1.7	44.1%	80.2 @ 633	13.6	138.2 @ 10 mV s−1	72.6% (5000) @ 100 mV s−1	
111

WO3/ZnO	PET/AZO	Poly-ethyleneimine (PEI)-assisted hydrothermal	Nanorod-like	2.8/6.2	68.2%	80.6 @ 633	15.24 @ 0.14 mA cm−2	—	—	
112

Mo-doped WO3	ITO/PET	Electrodeposition method	—	2/1.9	83.3%	86.1 @ 633	117.1 @ 0.25 mA cm−2	0.3346	83% (1500) @ 1 mA cm−2	
113

WGd–Ag–WGd films	Soda-lime	DC/RF magnetron sputtering	52/12/42 nm-thick	3.2/1.6	49.6%	71.4 @ 633	—	124.7 @ 2 A g−1	97.8% (2000) @ 50 mV s−1	
116

NFA-embedded WO3 film	ITO	Radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering, electroforming	—	
	67%	128 @ 630	
	214 @ 0.25 mA cm−2	∼92% (2000)	
117

TiO2–Co3O4	FTO	Hydrothermal, electrodeposition	Core–shell	
	—	Approx. 91 @ 422.6	140 @ 100 mV g−1	Approx. 342	
	
119

WO3/a-TiO2	FTO	hydrothermal–spin coating	Core–shell	12/15	78% @ 682 nm	122.3 @ 800	—	426.8 @ 1 A g−1	81%	
120

WO3	
	Hydrothermal & spin-coating	Core/shell	10.5/14	83.2%	59.7	
	716.8 @ 1 A g−1	
	
121

(NH4)2V3O8 @ NF	Ni foam	Hydrothermal	3D nanoflakes	
	—	—	—	465.5 @ 2 A g−1	61.5% (5000) @ 2 A g−1	
126


 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of PICA nanowires; (b) stability of the ESC at a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2. Working mechanism of the ESC device as a power source: (c) two ESCs in series in their reduced state displaying a yellow color; (d) after charging with a solar cell they turn dark green and can independently light up an LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of an electrochromic capacitive (ECC) window and chemical structure of polymers: (fi) PANI layer which was used as a highly capacitive layer, (fii) PR-Br (blue), and (fiii) Th-OR (red) layers which were used as a high color contrast layer. (g) Self-discharge graph and corresponding transmittance change for BECCP5 (solid line), and BECC with SPAn electrolyte (dashed line). (h) Self-discharge graph and corresponding transmittance change for RECCP5 (solid line) and RECC with SPAn electrolyte (dashed line). (i) Photographic image of the BECCP5 (above) and RECCP5 (below) for various voltages. (j) Coulombic efficiency (black), areal capacitance, and transmittance change. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) PBOTT-BTD/ITO/PET flexible electrode, (b) its SEM image, (c) color variation in the charged and discharged states, (d) CV curves of the PBOTT-BTD/ITO/PET and PEDOT/ITO/PET electrodes in 0.1 M TBAPF6/ACN, (e) two asymmetric SCs in series, and (f) CVs of single and two series asymmetric SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons.	 

PANI	PET/PEDOT:PSS	Spin coating, in situ polymerization	Nanowire arrays	
	
	
	
	17 mF cm−2 (400 F cm−3) @ 5 mV s−1	90% (1000), 100% (100) (bending cycles)	
132

PANI film	ITO/PET	Combination of galvanostatic and cyclic voltametric electrodeposition	Nanoparticles	3.9/2.61	49%	80.9 @ 630	85% (500)	473.3 @ 30 mV s−1	—	
133

PEDOT	Fibre	Sputter-coating, electrochemical deposition	Nanoparticles	4.2/3.6	—	360 @ 610	—	20.3	73% (1000 bending cycles)	
135

PEDOT HS	ITO	Chemical oxidative polymerization and spray coating	Hollow nanospheres (HS)	1.2/1.1	35.6%	153.4 @ 480	56%	35.5 @ 8 A g−1 & 121.6 @ 0.5 A g−1	65.7% @ 8.0 A g−1 (500)	
138

PICA	ITO	Electrochemical deposition	Nanowire arrays	1.7/0.7	43%	142 @ 490	
	16.20 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2	93% (1000) @ 0.1 mA cm−2	
141

Poly(BT-Th-EDOT)	ITO	Reflux	Porous morphology	0.5/0.4	46% @ 467	271 @ 720	93% (100)	92 @ 1.0 A g−1	91% (1000)	
153


 	Fig. 15  (a) A photograph of a smart supercapacitor electrode consisting of W18O49 nanowires and a PANI layer in the patterned and unpatterned parts, respectively. (b) An SEM snapshot of the logo on FTO glass, indicating that the structure of the nanowire networks has been retained during electrode fabrication. (c) SEM image of the background on FTO glass showing the formation of a uniform PANI layer. (d) SEM close-up of the boundary between the logo and background. (e) CV curves of the PANI film, W18O49 nanowire film, and hybrid smart supercapacitor electrode. (f) Schematic of a hybrid smart supercapacitor electrode composed of W18O49 nanowires and a PANI layer in the patterned and unpatterned regions and color variation in the synthesized electrode with indication of the stored charge level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of an all-solid-state ESC based on PANI–WO3 and SEM micrographs of WO3, PANI and the device cross-section. (h) CV curves of the PANI electrode, WO3 electrode and PANI–WO3 based device. (i) Color variation during the self-discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the process of preparing an EESD, (b) SEM image of NiO/PB composite nanosheets, (c) digital photos of colored and bleached states and powering of an LED and LCD with the EESD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) SEM image of the synthesized BT/PANI nanocomposite and (e) schematic illustration of the DEP model. (f) The voltage of the prepared ECSC device and the prepared ECSC device lighting up a LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Preparation procedure of TiO2 nanorod arrays, a PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite, and asymmetric ESD. (h and i) SEM images of the TiO2 nanorod arrays and PICA/TiO2 nanocomposite. (j) Photos of the color change of the device under different charging potentials. (k) Working photo of this electrochromic supercapacitor difunctional device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM cross-sectional view of v-AuNW/PANI electrodes. (b) CV curves for three as-prepared supercapacitors arranged in parallel or series, in comparison with a single supercapacitor. (c) Stability tests for v-AuNW/PANI-based symmetric supercapacitors (the inset shows the GCD curves). (d) CV curves with various static and dynamic skin deformations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of a Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2–PEIE/PEDOT:PSS hybrid electrode based all-solid-state ESC device. (f) Capacitance retention of the device under flat and bent–flat conditions. (g) Photos of the hybrid electrode under bleached/coloration conditions. (h) Mechanical stability of the synthesized ESC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication procedure of the WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS transparent electrodes. (b) Schematic illustration of a cross-section of the WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS/WO3 hybrid EC film and (c) photograph (left) and corresponding SEM image of WO3/Ag NN/PEDOT:PSS/WO3 films (right). (d) Schematic illustration of the structure of the PE cling wrap-based hybrid EC film. (e) The color-changing e-skin (EC film) on one finger (top), and PE cling wrap (bottom). (f) Upon folding and strong kneading, the PE-based hybrid EC film still displays the ability of coloring and bleaching, indicating excellent mechanical flexibility. (g) With 50% tensile strain stretching, the hybrid EC film on a PDMS substrate could also sustain its mechanical stability and electrochromic properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the CuNW@alloy core–shell structure. (b) SEM image and schematic illustration of the CuNW@alloy structure. (c) Optical images of color variation in the synthesized PANI@CuNW@alloy FTE electrode. (d) Potential vs. time variation during electro-polymerization (inset images showing the SEM images of the FTE and after electro-polymerization of PANI on the FTE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the processes of synthesizing G-CuS/PANI on the PET substrate; the optical and SEM images of the corresponding film are shown on the two columns on the right, respectively. (f) Color variation in the synthesized G–CuS/PANI SC electrode to indicate the stored energy level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

PANI/WO3	ITO	Spin coating, electropolymerization	—	9.9/13.6	35.3% @ 633	98.4	25 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1	1000	
31

WO3 on silver grid/PEDOT:PSS	PET (silver grid/PET)	Spin coating, electrodeposition	Nanoparticles (10–40 nm)	2.8/1.9	81.9% @ 633	124.5	221.1 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1	54.6% (2000), 92.5% (1200) (bending cycles)	
66

PANI//Cu@alloy	CuNW@Ag–Au alloy	Electrochemical polymerization, electrodeposition	Nanowires	
	61.43% @ 633	—	12.12 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2	—	
73

e-WO3//PPy	FTO	Electrodeposition, electrochemical polymerization	Nanoparticles	
	—	—	11.38 mF cm−2	
	
110

PANI/MnFe2O4	ITO	Spin coating and electropolymerization	Fiber-like	4.79/9.61	—	92.	4.46 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1	42.13% at a high scan rate	
173

Ni–PANI film	ITO	Pulse potential electrodeposition technique	Mesoporous cauliflowers	
	55.66%	45.9 @ 630	543 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1	90% (5000)	
176

PANI–fNiO	ITO	Hydrothermal synthesis & electrochemical deposition	Hexagonal nanoparticles	2/1.5	40% @ 680	138	1.1 F cm−2 @ 20 mV s−1	—	
181

TASA/PB	Hydrophilic ITO	Electrochemistry-assisted hydrolytic crosslinking reaction, electrochemical deposition	—	6.6/3.2	50% @ 700	92.7	273.4 F g−1 @ 0.25 A g−1	68.5% @ 0.25 to 5 A g−1	
182

PICA/TiO2	FTO	Hydrothermal, electrochemical polymerization	TiO2 nanoarrays	1.2/2.4	36%	124 @ 720	23.34 mF cm−2 @ 0.25 mA cm−2	91% (5000)	
185

P5FIn/WO3	ITO	Hydrothermal synthesis and electrochemical polymerization	Honeycombed porous	1.6/0.9	46% @ 745	137	34.1 mF cm−2	93% (5000) @ 0.2 mA cm−2	
186

v-AuNW/PANI	PET	Electro-polymerization	Fiber-like PANI	
	—	—	11.76 mF cm−2 @ 10 mV s−1	93.6% (2000) @ 1 mA cm−2	
190

PEDOP–Au@WO3	FTO	Hydrothermal, electrophoretic deposition, electropolymerization	Fibrillar morphology	
	71% @ 476	707 @ 500	130 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1	
	
194

WO3/PEDOT:PSS	
	Electrospinning	WO3 nanotubes, Ag nanowires	
	—	83.9	471 F g−1	92.9% (50000)	
195

Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE	PEDOT:PSS	Spin coating	Porous structure	0.3/0.6	30%	517 @ 633	3.3 mF cm−2 @ 10 mV s−1	100% (10000) & 90% (8000) (bending cycles)	
196


 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of (a) a two-electrode and (b) new Al-anode based three-electrode EES device design. (c) Optical transmittance spectra for the WO3 film and the Ti–V2O5 film at different applied potentials and corresponding digital photographs. (d) Energy level diagram of the Al-anode, the WO3 electrode and the Ti–V2O5 electrode. (e) Schematic illustration showing the three types of connection for released energy utilization. (f–h) Energy released by connecting the corresponding electrodes for discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) SEM of a Ta-doped nano-TiO2 film. (b) Optical transmittance spectra and (c) digital photos of the DEES device. (d) Galvanostatic charging curves of the DEES device at different current densities. (e) An optical image of a DEES device (in the dark state) powering a red LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of a nickel–carbonate–hydroxide (NCH) nanowire thin film. (g) Transmittance spectra of the NCH films in the bleached and colored states. (h) Schematic illustration of a sustainable energy system incorporating an EES device, and photographs of a prototype EES device in (State I) bleached and (State II) colored states, and a strip of LED lights being powered by the EES device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the working mechanism of the synthesized PB/Al self-rechargeable and self-powered EC battery, optical photograph of (b) the bleached and (c) colored (charged) states, and (d) powering an LED with the synthesized EC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematics of fabrication and demonstration of the short circuit chromatic warning function of the EC Zn//PPy battery. (b) SEM image of electrodeposited Zn. (c) Chromatic transition at various voltages. (d) UV-vis spectra at various voltages. (e) The battery powering an electronic clock in a normal electric circuit. (f) The short circuit chromatic battery warning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the rechargeable Zn/MTWO battery system. (h) Schematic illustration of possible Zn2+ intercalation/deintercalation tunnels in MTWO. (i) In situ self-coloring (discharge) process of the MTWO cathode. (j) Schematic configuration of the prototype ZIEB and digital images of an LED powered by the ZIEB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) SEM image of PET/ITO/WO3. (b) Transmittance spectra of the PET/ITO substrate and PET/ITO/WO3 in colored and bleached states. (c) Schematic of the structure of internal tandem ECBs and photographs of (c1) two ECBs and (c2) a single ECB. (d) GCD curves of a single ECB and two ECBs connected internally in series. (e) Photos showing the power ability of two tandem ECBs with corresponding color variations during its discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Transmittance spectrum of the prototype device under different states. (Inset: open circuit voltage (OCV) of the device). (g) Photographs of the prototype device demonstrating the power ability along with an obvious self-bleaching phenomenon. (h) Charging process of the self-bleached device. (i) Optical transmittance spectra of the prototype device. (j) Round-trip energy densities of the prototype device during the dynamic test (the green region). The inset shows the current and potential evolution during the dynamic test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

WO3	FTO	Dip-coating sol–gel	Mesoporous	—	—	79.7	—	75.3 mA h g−1 @ 2 A g−1	—	
78

Mo-doped WO3	FTO	Spin coating, sulfate-assisted hydrothermal	Nanowire arrays	2.6/3.2	56.7% @ 750	123.5	57.3% (3500)	55.89 mA h g−1 @ 1 A g−1	38.2% (5500) @ 4 A g−1	
204

Nb-doped WO3 (NWO)	FTO	Sol–gel	Mesoporous films with nanoparticles	3.6/2.1	61.7%	49.7 @ 633	76.2% (1000)	74.4 mA h g−1 @ 2 A g−1	75.8% (1000) @ 6 A g−1	
207

TiO2	FTO	Electrodeposition, sacrificial template accelerated hydrolysis	Mesoporous nanotube arrays	23.1/3.9	30.4% @ 700	—	99% (200)	60 mA h g−1 @ 1A g−1	—	
208

Monoclinic TiO2(B) phase	FTO	Surfactant-assisted nonaqueous sol–gel	Nanorods	
	
	131 @ 800	
	Discharge capacity of 222 mA h g−1	90% (100)	
210

Cobalt oxysulphide/hydroxide	FTO	Electrodeposition	Nanosheet	
	—	—	—	112.4 mA h g−1 @ 5 A g−1	100% (1000) @ 5 A g−1	
211

polyFe	ITO/PET	Electrostatic spray deposition (ESD)	Rake-like nanowires	1.7/1.4	73.6% @ 581	750.3	100% (10000)	Gravimetric capacity 18.24 mA h g−1 @ 0.75 A g−1.	91.4% (from 0.75 F g−1 to 7.5 F g−1)	
214

pPHBT film	ITO	Electrochemical deposition	Microporous	1.44/2.89	60% @ 673	—	—	96.7 mA h g−1	—	
223


 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and designed pattern of the EC, wearable fiber-shaped supercapacitor. SEM images of an aligned (b) CNT sheet and (c) CNT/PANI composite on an elastic fiber. (d) Chromatic transition of the synthesized fiber during the charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons. (e) UV-Vis spectrum of SWNT/CP nanocomposite electrodes. (f) Photograph of the fabricated SWNT/CP electrodes at different charged states. (g) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the SWNT/CP nanocomposite electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226, Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd. (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a smart flexible SC. (i) Optical photographs (i1, i2) and SEM images (i3, i4) of the fabricated porous CNT and CNT/PANI hydrogel film electrodes. (j) Variation of CS with current density. (k) Capacitance retention after bending cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) SEM image of a glass-supported EG/V2O5 nanopaper profile. (b) Digital photo of an SR-MSC device on a PET substrate. (c) CV curves of the fabricated MSCs. (d) Ragone plot. (e) Cycling stability of EG/V2O5-MSC. The inset shows the first eight and the last eight GCD curves of EG/V2O5-MSC. (f) SR-MSC under various bending angles. (g) Photograph of the reversible EC effect in EG/V2O5-MSC in the charging and discharging states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons.	 

CNT/PANI	Elastic fibers	Electrodeposition & CBD	—	—	—	3000	255.5 F g−1 (0.1890 mF cm−2)	93.8% (1000 bending cycles) & 69% (10000) GCD @ 1 A g−1	
74

PANI/GO	ITO	Spin coating, electropolymerization	125 nm thick film	15.8/15.3	59.3 @ 633	—	25.7 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1	53.1% (1000)	
225

HbG/PANI	ITO	Electrochemical polymerization	Lamellar structure	—	—	96.3% (5000)	598 F g−1 @ 1.0 A g−1	95% (5000)	
228

GO/PANI	ITO	Chemical oxidative polymerization, drop-coating	Nanoflakes	2.9/2	41 @ 700	69% (5000)	137 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1	51.7% (1000)	
229

EG/V2O5	PET	Electrochemical exfoliation & hydrothermal	Nanosheets	—	—	—	130.7 F cm−3 @ 10 mV s−1	93% (6000) @ 0.04 mA cm−2	
230

C@V2O5	FTO	Hydrothermal	Nanobelts	—	—	(1000) 2 A g−1	260 F g−1 @ 1 A g−1 @ 523 K	94% (5000) @ 523 K	
231

a-WO3/CH@WHNP	FTO	Spin coating & hydrothermal	Nanoparticles on films	0.8/4	62.4	91.5% (1000)	154.0 F g−1 @ 2 A g−1	—	
232

PANI@CNT	ITO	Spin coating, electrochemical polymerization	Nanoparticles	5.8/7.9	Approx. 120 @ 650	—	276.8 F g−1	—	
233

WO3/graphene/PANI	ITO	Electropolymerization, spin coating	∼33 nm thick film	—	67.47	—	11.267 mF cm−2 @ 0.08 mA cm−2	—	
234


 	Fig. 27  (a–d) Schematic illustrations of the development of the EC electrode and battery electrode, and the structure of the synthesized electrochromic hybrid supercapacitor (EHSC) and its operation. (e) Cyclic voltammograms of three devices. (f) Photographs of the EHSC (i) before charging, (ii) during charging, (iii) during discharging, and (iv) after discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

WO3/PEDOT:PSS & PANI/MWCNT	AgNWs	H2SO4-PVA	Transparent to dark blue	—	85% (400)	0.61 μW h cm−2 @ 0.83 mW cm−2	WO3/PEDOT:PSS/AgNWs//PANI/MWCNT	
71

WO3 & PANI	FTO	H2SO4-polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)	—	23 mA h g−1 @ 1 A g−1	81.4% (2500)	—	WO3//PANI	
78

NiOx & WO3	ITO	LiNbO3 electrolyte & Ta2O5 as a separator	Dark blue to transparent	322 F cm−3 @ 1 A cm−3	96.2% (2000) @ 75 °C	0.36 W h cm−3 @ 3.64 W cm−3	NiOx//WO3	
87

Cu doped NiO & WO3	FTO	Li+-doped ion gel	Black to transparent	∼14.9 mF cm−2	82% (10000)	—	NiO//WO3	
89

WO3	FTO	H2SO4	Deep blue to transparent	12.8 mF cm−2 (160.1 F g−1) at 0.4 mA cm−2	95% (5000)	3.6 Wh kg−1 @ 47.1 kW kg−1	WO3//WO3	
92

WO3	ITO	Hydroquinone (HQ) containing ion gels	Blue to transparent	∼13.6 mF cm−2	84% (10000)	—	ITO/WO3//ITO	
98

WO3·H2O	FTO	LiClO4 + PC (plasticizer) + PMMA	Dark blue (−2.5 V) to transparent (2.5 V)	5.5 F cm−3 @ 1.0 mA cm−2	
	12 mW h cm−2 @ 0.5 mW cm−2	Asymmetric FTO/WO3·H2O//FTO	
106

Mo-doped WO3 & MnO2	FTO	LiClO4/PC	Transparent to dark	19.1 mF cm−2 @ 0.1 mA cm−2	93.8% (2000)	Areal energy density 0.11 W h m−2 @ 1.12 W m−2 areal power density	EESW:Mo-doped WO3//MnO2	
114

V2O5/MnO2	FTO	LiClO4 in propylene carbonate	Orange (+3.0V), green (−2.5 V), & blue (−3.0 V)	13.7 mF cm−2 @ 5 mV s−1	93.6% (1000) @ 50 mV s−1	—	V2O5/MnO2//FTO	
127

PICA	ITO	LiClO4-PVA gel electrolyte	Yellow (0 V) & dark green	4.3 mF cm−2 @ 0.05 mA cm−2	93% (1000) from 0.05 mA cm−2 to 3.8 mA cm−2	—	Symmetric (PICA//PICA)	
141

PBOTT-BTD	ITO/PET	TBAPF6 + PMMA in PC	Green (−0.4 V) to blue (0.6 V)	21 F g−1	—	5.7 W h kg−1 @ 1.2 kW kg−1	Asymmetric (PBOTT-BTD//PEDOT	
150

PCBDTP-X	ITO	LiClO4-PC + PMMA based solid electrolyte	Brown yellow to gray blue	23 F g−1 at 0.1 mA cm−2	99.1% (5000)	11.6 W h kg−1 at 5.220 kW kg−1	Asymmetric PCBDTP-X//PEDOT	
158

PSZT	ITO	HCl-PVA gel electrolyte	Green yellow (0 V), dark green (0.8 V)	82 F g−1 @ 0.25 A g−1	—	7.2 W h kg−1 @ 3.75 kW kg−1	Symmetric SC PSZT//PSZT	
160

P6ICA/WO3	FTO	H2SO4-PVA	Yellow green (0 V) to blue black (1.4 V)	13.69 mF cm−2 at 0.05 mA cm−2	86% (3000)	—	P6ICA/WO3//PEDOT	
166

NiO/PB	FTO	1 M LiClO4/PC	Transparent to dark blue	11.5 mF cm−2 at 0.05 mA cm−2	91.4% (4000)	—	NiO/PB//WO3	
183

PICA/TiO2	FTO	LiClO4·3H2O, PMMA, CH3 CN + PC	Green (0 V) to dark blue (1.8 V)	9.65 F g−1 @ 0.1 mA cm−2	92% (5000)	—	PICA/TiO2//PEDOT	
185

P5FIn/WO3	ITO	
	Yellow (0 V) to blue-black (1 V)	10.38 mF cm−2 at 0.025 mA cm−2	86% (5000)	—	P5FIn/WO3//PEDOT	
186

PI-IDT	—	—	Orange to blue	1.38 mF cm−2 @ 0.05 mA cm−2	78% (300)	3.89 W h kg−1 @ 304.4 W kg−1	Asymmetric hybrid W0.71Mo 0.21O3−x//PI-IDT	
192

Er@TiO2	ITO	LiClO4 PMMA gel electrolyte	Yellow to dark gray	16 mF cm−2 @ 1.0 mA cm−2	—	—	Asymmetric hybrid Er@TiO2//PTBTPA	
193

Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS	—	PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte	—	3.3 mF cm−3 @ 10 mV s−1	90% (8000 bending cycles)	0.074 μW h cm−2 @ 3.2 μW cm−2	Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS//Ag NWs/Ni(OH)2-PEIE/PEDOT:PSS	
196

WO3	ITO/PET	AlCl3	Transparent to dark blue	142 mA h g−1 @ 0.5 A g−1	92.3% (40 bending cycles)	—	WO3//Al	
219

PB & Zn	FTO	KCl + Zn (CH3COO)2	Transparent to dark blue	78.9 mA h m−2	60.7% (7000)	
	PB//Zn	
221

CNT/PANI	Porous CNTs	PVA-H3PO4 gel electrolyte	Yellow (−0.8 V) to green-blue (0.8 V)	315 F g−1	92% (1500) GCD & 93% (150) (bending)	—	Symmetric hybrid ASSC(CNT/PANI//CNT/PANI)	
227

PTEPA/graphene	ITO	PVA-H3PO4	Yellow-green (−0.8 V) and steel-blue (0.2 V)	13.3 mF cm−2 @ 0.015 mA cm−2	—	—	Asymmetric hybrid graphene//PTEPA/graphene	
239


 	Chart 1  The energy density and power density of the electrode materials and devices for EESS applications.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
