The greenest solar power? Life cycle assessment of foam-based flexible floatovoltaics  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01823J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01823J
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1398-1413The greenest solar power? Life cycle assessment of foam-based flexible floatovoltaics

        
          
            Koami Soulemane 
            Hayibo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pierce 
            Mayville
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Joshua M. 
            Pearce
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Western University, ON, Canada. E-mail: Joshua.pearce@uwo.ca
bDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, USA
cIvey Business School, Western University, ON, Canada
Received 
      16th November 2021
    , Accepted 2nd February 2022First published on 2nd February 2022AbstractThis study presents a life cycle analysis (LCA) of a 10 MW foam-based floatovoltaics (FPV) plant installed on Lake Mead, Nevada, U.S. A material inventory of the flexible crystalline silicon (c-Si)-based module involved massing and determination of material composition of the module's encapsulation layers with ATR/FTR spectroscopy and electron microscopy. The LCA was performed using SimaPro and the results were interpreted in terms of cumulative energy demands, energy payback time, global warming potential, GHG emissions, and water footprint including negative values for reduced evaporation. A sensitivity analysis was performed on the lifetime of the modules and the foam-based racking. The results show that the 30 year lifetime foam-based FPV system has one of the lowest energy payback times (1.3 years) and the lowest GHG emissions to energy ratio (11 kg CO2 eq per MW h) in c-Si solar PV technologies reported to date. In addition, the foam-based FPV system also had 5 times less water footprint (21.5 m3 per MW h) as compared to a conventional pontoon-based FPV (110 m3 per MW h). The lifetime of the foam-based racking does not affect the result, while the lifetime of the modules has a significant effect on the lifecycle impacts of the foam-based FPV plant. Foam-based FPV has a net positive impact on the environment for CO2 emissions and energy consumption if its lifetime is above 7.4 years and the technology has the potential to become the greenest c-Si-based solar PV technology if the lifetime of the modules can be guaranteed for at least 26.6 years. Future work is needed to determine the lifetimes of these systems and expand them.
Introduction
Converting solar energy directly to electricity with photovoltaic (PV) technology is well-established as a green sustainable solution to humanity's energy needs.1 This has been determined by extensive life cycle analysis also known as life cycle assessment (LCA) studies, which have historically primarily focused on land-based ground or roof-mounted PV systems. LCA studies vary in terms of the system boundary, the impact assessment methods as well as the study location. The lifecycle impacts of PV systems vary rapidly with time because of the continuous improvement in device performance, manufacturing methods and material types.2 For example, a study conducted by Kreith et al. in 1990 investigated the energy use and the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of a ground mounted single crystalline (c-Si) PV system with a module efficiency of 8.5% in the United States (U.S.) for a lifetime of 30 years. The cumulative energy demand (CED) and the GHG emissions were estimated to be 6300 kW h m−2 and 280 kg CO2 eq per MW h, respectively.3 In 2012, another study by Fthenakis et al. was conducted in the U. S. using the same lifetime (30 years), and mounting system (ground-mounted) as Kreith et al., with substantially improved module efficiency (20.1%). According to Fthenakis et al., the system's CED was 1295 kW h m−2 and the GHG emissions was estimated to be 64.2 kg CO2 eq per MW h.4 This shows a respective reduction of 79% and 77% in the energy use impact and GHG emission impacts in 22 years due to technology improvement. In the time separating these two studies, other studies have examined the LCA of both c-Si and multi-crystalline (mc-Si) solar PV systems. Between 1990 and 2000, the life cycle analysis of first-generation solar PV systems resulted in GHG emission values ranging from 50 kg Co2 eq per MW h (ref. 5 and 6) to 280 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 3 and 7) for c-Si technologies, and 20 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 6 and 8) to 200 CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 7 and 9) for multi-crystalline systems. During the same period, studies found that the energy payback time (EPBT) for c-Si PV systems was between 2.5 years5–7 and 15.5 years,6,8 and was in the range of 1.7 years6,7,10 to 3.2 years5–7,10 for mc-Si technologies. During the following decade, with advances in life cycle analysis methodologies and availability of solar PV technology inventories due to PV becoming a mainstream energy generation technology, more detailed and elaborate LCAs were conducted on solar PV systems.11,12 Studies conducted from 2001 to 2010 have evaluated the GHG emissions of single crystalline PV systems between 29 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 6, 7 and 13) and 671 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 6, 7 and 14) while multi-crystalline PV systems had emissions of 12 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 6, 7 and 15) to 80 kg CO2 eq per MW h.7,16 In terms of energy consumption, the EPBT during the same period was 1.75 years6,7,13 to 8 years6 for c-Si systems while mc-Si PV systems had an energy payback time between 0.8 years7,17 and 7.5 years.7,18 The last decade (from 2010 to 2020) has seen a plethora of LCAs performed.11 For example, the GHG emissions for both c-Si and mc-Si PV systems were estimated to be as low as 12 kg CO2 eq per MW h,7,19–21 and the highest values were 67 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 22) and 88.7 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 7 and 23) for c-Si and mc-Si PV systems, respectively. On the other hand, the EPBT in that period was between 0.91 years7,19 and 4.65 years6,7,21,24 for c-Si, and mc-Si PV systems had an energy payback time ranging from 1.01 years7,21,25 to 6.05 years.26 It should be noted that amorphous silicon-based (a-Si:H) PVs showed even superior environmental performance, but have not gained market share because of lower efficiencies than c-Si and mc-Si that demand higher costs in the balance of systems.27,28
In order to prevent global temperatures on the planet from increasing over 2 °C from preindustrial levels it is crucial to transition towards renewable and sustainable energy sources29 since coal and other fossil-fuel-based energy sources are known to worsen climate change which is at the core of global temperature rise.30,31 One such energy source is solar PV which has become widely spread, accessible and has the potential to meet worldwide energy use by scaling.1,32 Although better than coal technologies in terms of land occupancy when carbon emission mitigation is considered,30 PV itself demands large surface areas to power society. This may cause a land use conflict with feeding an increasing world population. One method growing in popularity to alleviate land use conflicts is floating photovoltaics (or floatovoltaics (FPV)). FPV is not only deployed on un-used surface areas, but it also enjoys two primary synergies. First, water cools the PV increasing its power conversion efficiency33–41 and second, the FPV reduces water evaporation, which can be extremely valuable in semi-arid and arid regions.38,42–44 There are already some indications that FPV is environmentally superior to conventional land-based PV.45,46 One method of improving environmental performance is to simply use less materials. This is observed in the PV field, where for example, frameless PV modules outperform framed modules in LCA studies.25,47 The only study found in the literature that investigated the LCA of a conventional pontoon-based FPV has shown a high return on financial investment as compared to other PV systems.46
A new type of FPV has been developed that uses foam racking and completely eliminates the need for the conventional racking infrastructure in pontoon-based FPV.41,48 This has already been shown to be economically advantageous as with conventional land-based PV systems, the racking material makes up 8% of the total system cost for utility scale PV in the U.S.49,50 and a far higher percentage for smaller PV systems. Furthermore, racking in conventional ground-mounted PV represents 8 to 23% of the total environmental impacts.15,51 This offers the possibility that foam-based FPV are the greenest potential source of solar PV electricity. The environmental impacts of the newly developed foam-based FPV system are not known, so this study aims to determine the environmental impacts and to explore the possibility of foam-based FPV becoming the greenest PV system to date. Specifically, this study will use a cradle-to-grave LCA on a 10 MW foam-based solar FPV plant located on Lake Mead, Nevada, U.S. Detailed technical analysis including both spectroscopy for material identification and electron microscopy for material volumes was conducted on the flexible PV modules to determine the overall material makeup. Then, energy payback time, carbon dioxide (CO2) payback time, and a detailed water footprint using the water scarcity indicator (WSI) method, were calculated for the 10 MW foam-based FPV plant. A sensitivity of the lifetime of foam-backed FPV is run as the technology is newer than the expected lifetimes. The results are compared to prior LCAs for other PV technologies and discussed in the context of the overall environmentally superior technology. Finally, guidance is provided for improving the environmental performance further.
Materials and methods
Life cycle analysis
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a scientific tool that is used to evaluate the environmental impact of a product system throughout the entirety of its lifecycle.24,52 The lifecycle of a product system is made of several steps including the extraction of raw materials, the manufacture stage, the use stage, the disposal or end-of-life stage of the product system, and all transportation that is needed between the different stages. An analysis that covers the entirety of the lifecycle of a product is called a cradle-to-grave analysis.52 The LCA framework used in this study follows international LCA standards ISO 14040 and ISO 14044. According to these standards, an LCA study needs to include a definition of the goal and scope, an inventory analysis, and an impact assessment and interpretation.52,53 SimaPro 9 (ref. 54 and 55) has been used to execute the LCA simulation in this study.
Goal and scope
In the present study, an LCA is performed on the after-market assembled foam-based FPV module that was proposed by Mayville et al.41,48 The flexible PV with mounting holes is specifically intended for marine applications and eliminates the need for a nylon tarp-based material to connect one module to another as was the case in the original study. The cradle-to-grave LCA covers the complete life cycle of the modules, the floating racking (foam, adhesive, and zip-ties), the inverters and the electrical installation. The life cycle stages that are investigated are: the manufacture stage, the use stage, as well as the end-of-life stage.
The functional unit was chosen as 650.3 GW h delivered to the grid. This corresponds to the amount of energy generated by a 10 MW solar FPV plant, with a 30 year lifetime operation, using foam-backed flexible SunPower56 solar PV modules that are installed on the surface of Lake Mead, Nevada in the United States. This functional unit is obtained using an open-source energy production calculation sheet of a foam-based FPV developed in a recent study.41 The model uses an empirical temperature model that is tailored to foam-based FPV modules, and accounts for losses as well as the degradation rate of the modules.
The system boundary in this study begins with the extraction of raw materials for the manufacture of the flexible modules, the floating system, the inverters, and the cables for the electrical installation. The analysis also covers the operation of the plant and ends with the disposal of the equipment at the end of service life. The lifetime of the module used for the LCA is 30 years. According to the Solar Energy Industry Association (SEIA), a solar module's lifetime ranges from 20 to 30 years,57 and according to the flexible module's manufacturer, the modules can perform up to 40 years58 (although it should be noted that the warranty for the flexible modules sold for marine applications is only 5 years56). The system boundary starts with the raw material extraction. The assessment covers the manufacture and assembly of the plant's equipment, the operation of the plant, and the decommissioning at the end-of-life. The system boundary ends when the energy is transferred to the electricity grid as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  System boundary diagram of the foam-based FPV plant. 
After the environmental impacts of the 10 MW foam-based FPV plant have been studied, and quantified on a per MW h basis, it is compared to a conventional pontoon-based FPV analyzed by Cromratie Clemons et al.46 The pontoon-based FPV components are the modules, the mounting structures, the pontoon floating system, the anchors, the connection cables and the inverters.46 Finally, the environmental impacts of the two FPV systems are then compared to standard ground mounted fixed-tilt solar PV systems from the literature.
10 MW foam-based FPV plant design
The floating PV system in this study was designed using the open-source foam-based FPV temperature model proposed in a recent study.41,62 The spreadsheet was adapted to evaluate the energy production and the water conservation potential of a 10 MW foam-based FPV plant installed on Lake Mead during its entire lifecycle.59 The cooling effect of the water on the foam-based FPV is included in the temperature model. The data used for the simulation are historical hourly data collected in 2018 on Lake Mead by the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (US NOAA)63 and satellite data obtained from SOLCAST.64 The annual PV degradation rate was applied to the energy produced during the first operation year to estimate a realistic total energy production of the system throughout its lifecycle. The water preservation potential of the foam-based FPV was estimated first on an annual basis, and extended to the lifetime of the plant. It should be noted that this is a conservative assumption due to the trajectory of global temperatures created by anthropogenic climate change.65–69 The system parameters used in the study, the energy production, as well as the quantity of water saved are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Design parameters of a 10 MW foam-based solar floatovoltaic plant located on Lake Mead, Nevada, United States




Parameters
Value





a A sensitivity is run on the lifetime of FPV from 5 to 30 years in 5 year spans.





Power rating of the plant
10 MW (ref. 59)


Installation location
Lake Mead


Module make and model
SunPower SPR-E-Flex-110 (ref. 56)


Module STC power
110 W (ref. 56)


Number of modules
90910 (ref. 59)


Module degradation rate
0.50% (ref. 60 and 61)


Average PV efficiency year 1
20.90% (ref. 59)


Average annual energy production
21.7 GW h per year (ref. 59)


Lifetime of the system
30 yearsa (ref. 57)


Lifetime energy production
650.3 GW h (ref. 59)


Projected yearly water savings
115000 m3 (ref. 59)


Projected lifetime water savings
3.4 million of m3 (ref. 59)




Life cycle inventory analysis of a 10 MW foam-based FPV plant

Foam-based FPV modules. 
The foam-based FPV module proposed by Mayville et al.41,48 is made of a flexible SunPower SPR-E-Flex module,56 at the back of which polyethylene foam has been attached to ensure buoyancy of the module on the water surface. The modules were adhered to the foam surface using a rapid action waterproof polyurethane sealant. The modules are secured together by using stainless steel zip ties. The inventory used for the LCA of the 10 MW foam-based FPV system is shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Life cycle inventory of the LCA performed on the FPV system during its entire lifecycle




Material
Quantity




110 W flexible single crystalline photovoltaic modules
90910


Mass of solar PV modules
181820 kg


Polyethylene foam
10710 kg


Polyurethane marine sealant
25567 kg


Stainless steel zip-ties
982 kg


Anchoring concrete
450 kg


Metal chain
450 kg


Electric installation for 570 kWp open ground PV system
18


500 kW inverters
40




The flexible solar PV module consists of SunPower single crystalline silicon-based solar cells.56 The cells have an STC efficiency of 23%. The chain of production of the solar module spans across three different locations. The manufacture of the solar modules begins by the production of single crystalline silicon wafers. The wafers are obtained through two transformations of metallurgical grade silicon. Metallurgical grade silicon is transformed into solar grade silicon using the modified Siemens process which is less energy intensive as compared to the regular Siemens process.6 The solar grade silicon is further purified through the Czochralski process to yield single crystalline silicon ingots suited for photovoltaic cell manufacture.6,70,71 The single crystalline silicon ingots are cut into wafers. The location considered for the production chain of the wafers in this study is China because China holds the largest share of the worldwide silicon production as of 2020.72 The wafers undergo a metallization process to obtain single crystalline Si solar cells.73 In the case of SunPower flexible solar modules, the wafers are cut thinner (150 μm)74 than wafers used in rigid single crystalline solar modules (170 μm).75 The thinness of the wafers enables the modules to have a flexibility of 30°. The flexible solar module used in this study was assembled in France.56 The inventory data used for the manufacture of the flexible solar module originate from the 2020 report of the International Energy Agency (IEA) on the life cycle inventory data of solar PV systems.75 This report updates a previous report that was published in 2015.71 The new data are used to update the existing inventory in SimaPro. Transportation between the different process locations, and from the place of production (France) to the place of installation (Nevada, US) is included in the LCA.


PV module encapsulation layer analysis. 
The layout of the flexible module used in this study is made from top to bottom of a transparent layer, an ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) layer, single crystalline solar cells, another layer of EVA, and a white layer, as shown in Fig. 2. Flexible single crystalline solar PV modules are a rising technology, therefore there is no existing literature on the material inventory of the top and bottom layers of the module. In this analysis, the layers of the module have been examined using two different spectrometer techniques to acquire material data.
 Fig. 2  Exploded diagram of an after-market modified foam-based floating solar PV module. 
An attenuated total reflection (ATR) characterization has been run on a sample of the front transparent and back white layers in which the module is encapsulated. An iS50R (Thermo Scientific) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer was used for the analysis and was calibrated with the following parameters: 256 scans, 4 cm−1 resolution, and a wavenumber bandwidth of 4000–650 cm−1.76,77 The resulting spectra were compared to possible matches in the iS50R software database. The front transparent layer belongs to the polyurethane rubber family and the back white layer was identified as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) polymer as displayed in Fig. 3 and 4. Polyurethane rubber (PUR) was proposed in the literature as a polymer that can be used for the front transparent surface of solar modules.78
 Fig. 3  Spectral comparison of polyurethane rubber with the top clear layer of the flexible module. 
 Fig. 4  Spectral comparison of polyethylene terephthalate and the back white layer of the flexible module. 
After the material compositions of the two layers were determined, an FEI Philips XL 40 (ref. 79) environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) was used to measure the thickness of each layer as shown in Fig. 5. The thickness of the materials is combined with the dimensions of the module (116.5 cm × 55.6 cm)56 to calculate the volume of each material required for the assembly of a single module. The mass of the material used in the life cycle analysis is found by multiplying the volume of each material to the density of the material.
 Fig. 5  ESEM view of the thickness of the layers of the flexible module encapsulation. 
The life cycle inventory data of the module referenced in the international energy agency report describe the manufacture input for rigid single crystalline PV modules. The inventory data are updated using the measured data form the flexible module. The front glass, the aluminum frame, and the polyvinyl fluoride (Tedlar) used in a rigid solar PV module are replaced by polyurethane and polyethylene terephthalate. Additionally, the corners and the side of the module are pierced and hold stainless-steel grommets to simplify the installation procedure. The characteristics and mass balance of the different parts of a flexible solar module are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Characteristics and mass balance of the different layers of the flexible PV module




Material
Thickness (μm)
Density (kg m−3)
Mass (g)




Polyethylene terephthalate (bottom layer)
253
1380 (ref. 80 and 81)
226


Ethylene vinyl acetate (solar cell encapsulation)
1330
948 (ref. 82 and 83)
817


Polyurethane rubber (top layer)
527
1210 (ref. 78 and 84)
413


Monocrystalline silicon solar cells
150
—
224


Grommets
—
—
4


Junction box, cables, and electronics
—
—
316


Total
—
—
2000






Foam-based FPV racking. 
The racking used for the foam-based FPV modules is made of foam, a marine sealant, and zip ties. The foam and the marine sealant are applied after the acquisition of the solar PV module as shown in Fig. 6. The mass of all the FPV racking components was determined with an open source digital scale with a precision of 0.05 g.85
 Fig. 6  After-market modification of a flexible solar PV module by taping PE foam on the back layer of the modules using a polyurethane marine sealant. 
The foam used to make the modules float on the water surface is made of polyethylene (PE) 1.2 lb ½′′ (12.7 mm) and was assumed to be manufactured in the U.S. For each module, 40 pieces of foam were used, each being 50 mm by 240 mm, resulting in a volume of PE of 6096 cm3 to ensure the floatation of a single module.41 The density of the PE is 19.22 kg m−3.48 The total mass of PE needed for each module is 118 g.
The foam pieces are adhered to the back of the module using a polyurethane marine sealant.86 The quantity of marine sealant used for a single module was weighed and 281 g of adhesive was needed for each module. Polyurethane adhesive is manufactured by mixing in equal parts methylene-diphenyl-diisocyanate and polypropylene glycol.87 These two materials were used in SimaPro to create the manufacturing process of the sealant.
Stainless steel zip-ties are used to limit the relative movement between neighboring modules and secure the modules on the water surface. Each module requires 10 zip-ties, two per corner grommet and one per side grommet. A single zip-tie weighs 0.82 g, therefore 8.2 g of zip-ties is needed for one module. The zip-ties have been assumed to be manufactured through metal casting.


Electrical components and anchors. 
The electrical components of the plant that have been considered in this study are the inverters and the electrical installation of the cables. The native cables of the modules are waterproof because the modules are designed to be used in a marine environment. The native cable inventory is included in the module's inventory. Open ground installation inventory was used for the rest of the electrical installation connecting the string of modules to the inverter because there is no need to dig trenches for cabling in water. The open-ground electrical installation inventory that was used encapsulates the cables as well as the installation process. The material inventory used for the electrical installation and the inverters are found in SimaPro and originated from the Ecoinvent database.88 The lifetime of the electrical installation was assumed to be 30 years and the lifetime of the inverters was assumed to be 15 years.71 Therefore, the inverters need to be replaced halfway through the lifecycle of the system, and this was included in the LCA.
The anchoring of the system was considered to be a combination of concrete blocks and metal chain. The ratio of the anchor weight to the floating system weight is nearly 1:500 as found in boat anchors.89

End-of-life scenario of the 10 MW plant
The end-of-life of the different equipment that went into the assembly of the foam-based FPV plant was factored into the life cycle assessment. The disposal of the inverters and the electrical installation is included in their respective life cycle inventory. The default waste treatment process included in the inverters and the electrical installation profile is incineration.54
The current recycling process of crystalline silicon rigid solar modules consists of dismantling the modules and recovering materials such as glass, aluminum, and copper while the rest of the materials are landfilled or incinerated.90 The end-of-life process of rigid crystalline solar PV modules is adapted to the flexible modules. In the case of flexible modules, the recovered materials are the copper from the wiring as well as the stainless steel from the grommets. The PUR is landfilled because landfilling remains the most common way to dispose of polyurethane91 while the EVA, the PET, the solar cells and other electronic components are incinerated.
Regarding the foam-based racking of the FPV module, the polyethylene foam waste and the zip-ties are separated from the waste stream and recycled92,93 while the polyurethane sealant is landfilled.
Impact assessment methods
Three major indicators have been investigated in this study: (i) the energy payback time (EPBT), (ii) CO2 payback time (CO2PBT), and (iii) the water footprint.
When performing the LCA of an energy production system, it is important to evaluate the energy break-even time or energy payback time of the system. The energy payback time (EPBT) is defined as the period of operation time during which an energy production system will generate the same amount of energy as the primary energy that is required to manufacture, install, maintain, and decommission the system.5,24,25,71 The EPBT in the case of the foam-based FPV module is calculated by dividing the total energy consumed during the lifecycle of the module by the annual energy production of the module as shown in eqn (1): EPBT (years) = Econs (kW h)/Ean (kW h per year)(1)where Econs is the total energy consumed during the entire lifecycle of the floating FPV plant, from manufacture to disposal, and Ean is the average yearly energy production of the plant.
The cumulative energy demand (CED) impact assessment method evaluates the direct and indirect energy consumption throughout the entire lifecycle of a product or process.55,94 The CED has been used in this study to evaluate the energy consumption of the foam-based floatovoltaic plant.
Similar to the EPBT, the CO2 payback time (CO2PBT) is used to evaluate the number of operation years needed for a system to offset the total CO2 emission during its lifecycle by its annual CO2 emission reduction potential. It should be noted that substantial amounts of emissions occur at the end of the life cycle so care must be taken when using the CO2PBT to do dynamic carbon emission analysis.95 (2)
The CO2 emission reduction potential is location specific and depends on the electricity grid mix of the location of interest. In this study, the CO2 emission reduction potential is calculated by multiplying the annual energy production of the power plant by the U.S. grid mix CO2 emissions of 2019 (0.41 kg CO2 per kW h (ref. 96)). The life cycle CO2 equivalent (CO2 eq) emissions of the system are assessed by using the global warming potential over 100 years (GWP 100) method. The GWP 100 quantifies the effect of different greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in terms of kg of CO2 equivalent over a time period of 100 years.24,52,55,97–99 It provides a uniform way of evaluating the global warming potential of the different greenhouse gases that are released during the lifecycle of a product or process.55,97
Several studies have shown that floating solar PV modules have the potential to prevent water evaporation from lakes and reservoirs.38,42–44,100 In order to identify how the water evaporation mitigation factors into the environmental footprint of the foam-based FPV module, the water scarcity indicator (WSI) proposed by Hoekstra et al. has been used to quantify the water footprint of the module.55,101 This method has been preferred because it analyzes the depletion of safe water sources by combining socioeconomic and hydrological data55,101 and the FPV module is intended to be installed on a lake surface. After the water footprint of the module is determined, it is compared to the water saving potential.
Sensitivity analysis
Two major assumptions were made during the LCA of the foam-based FPV system: the lifetime of the flexible modules and the lifetime of the polyethylene foam. It is therefore crucial to analyze how the variation of these two parameters affects the life cycle impacts of the system. In the main analysis the lifetimes of both components were set to 30 years. The warranty provided by the module manufacturers on the flexible modules, however, is 5 years,56 even though conventional solar PV modules are known to last well-beyond 30 years.57,102 It is important to point out that the specific modules used in the FPV experiments in this study only had a 5 year warranty. There are, however, flexible PV modules in the same class that have more industry-standard 25 year warranties. For example, Renogy offers a long warranty based on output. It is at a 5 year/95% efficiency rate, 10 year/90% efficiency rate, and 25 year/80% efficiency rate.103 Here a 30 year timeline is used to represent the realistic lifetime of the modules and accounted for a 0.5% drop per year.
On the other hand, polyethylene is known to be able to remain intact in a marine environment for up to 15 years before the start of its degradation process,104 and water is known to accelerate the degradation as compared to air.105 Therefore, the lifecycle impacts have been reassessed by varying the lifetime of the modules and the lifetime of the PE foam with a 5 years increment. In the case of the flexible modules, their replacement is always also accompanied by the replacement of the marine sealant. The sensitivity analysis is performed independently between the lifetime of the modules and that of the PE foam. For each iteration of the lifetime of the PE foam, a simulation is run over the lifetime range of the combination of flexible modules and sealant while the lifetime of the PE foam is maintained at a constant value. When the modules are replaced after a short period of time, their degradation rate is reset. This reset provides a slight boost in the energy production and has been factored in the sensitivity analysis. For each iteration of the lifetime, the average annual energy production as well as the lifecycle inventory quantities for the modules, the sealant and the foam is displayed in Table 4. The stainless-steel zip-ties are releasable and reusable,106 therefore their inventory as well as the inventory of electrical installation and inverters remained the same as in Table 2 throughout the sensitivity analysis.
Table 4 Life cycle inventory of the flexible modules, marine sealant, and foam for different lifetimes ranging from 5 to 30 years






Lifetime (years)


5
10
15
20
25
30




Flexible PV modules (metric tons)
1091
545
364
273
218
182


Marine sealant (metric tons)
153
77
51
38
31
26


PE foam (metric tons)
64
32
21
16
13
11


Average annual energy generation (GW h per year)
23.1
22.8
22.5
22.2
21.9
21.7




Results
In all the three impact categories, the contributions of the concrete anchors as well as the metal chains were negligible compared to the other equipment of the system.
Energy payback time (EPBT)
The total energy consumption of the 10 MW floatovoltaic plant during its 30 years lifecycle (from natural resources extraction to disposal) is 28 GW h. The manufacture of the flexible solar PV modules involves the greatest energy consumption and amounts to 85.4% (24 GW h) of the total energy consumption of the plant. The second highest energy intensive part of the plant is the lifecycle of the inverter with a total energy consumption of 2.64 GW h. The electrical installation as well as the foam-based racking accounts respectively for 3.01% and 2.36% of the overall energy consumption. The energy consumption of the disposal scenario is negative (−50 MW h) because of the negative allocation of the energy collected during the incineration of the equipment at the end-of-life (see Fig. 7). Additionally, Fig. 7 shows a detailed view of the energy consumption of the foam-based racking. The total energy use of the foam-based racking is 663 MW h, of which the manufacture of the polyurethane uses 55% while the polyethylene foam and the zip-ties use respectively 41% and 4%. The results of the EPBT calculation show that the foam-based FPV plant will offset its lifetime energy consumption in 1.3 years.
 Fig. 7  Detailed energy use results (in GW h) of the life cycle assessment of the 10 MW FPV plant using the CED method. 
CO2 payback time (CO2PBT)
During the lifetime of the system, the total GHG emissions amount to 7403 metric tons CO2 eq. The life cycle stage that emits the most greenhouse gases is the manufacture, assembly, and transportation of the flexible solar PV modules. The GHG emissions of the modules are 6230 metric tons CO2 eq or 84% of the total GHG emission of the plant during its lifecycle as shown in Fig. 8. The inverters have the second highest emissions (572 metric tons CO2 eq) followed by the end-of-life, the electrical installation and the foam-based racking which respectively contribute 337, 161, and 104 metric tons CO2 eq to the total GHG emission of the system. Fig. 8 also displays a detailed emission contribution of the different parts of the foam-based racking. Of the 104 metric tons CO2 emitted by the racking, the polyurethane sealant accounts for 60% while the PE foam and the zip-ties respectively contribute 33% and 7%. The calculation of the CO2PBT shows that the system can offset the total GHG emissions in 0.82 years.
 Fig. 8  Detailed GHG emissions (in metric tons CO2 eq) of the 10 MW foam-based FPV plant using the GWP method. 
Water footprint
The water footprint simulation has shown that the total water usage during the life cycle of the system is 14 million m3. The manufacture of the flexible PV leads the water consumption of the entire lifecycle (11.5 million m3). The other notable components that consume a significant amount of water during its lifecycle are the inverters with a water use of 2.3 million m3 as displayed in Fig. 9. Fig. 9 also shows the detailed total water consumption of the foam-based racking (190000 m3) and the manufacture of the zip-ties is leading the water use (83%).
 Fig. 9  Detailed water footprint (in m3) of the 10 MW PV foam-based FPV plant using the WSI method. 
Sensitivity results
The sensitivity analysis has shown that the lifetime of the foam does not have a significant effect on the three impact categories considered in this study. Fig. 10 shows the results of the sensitivity analysis where the variations of the lifecycle metrics investigated in this study (GHG emissions, energy use, and water footprint) are plotted. The variations of the three metrics are plotted in groups, each group representing the effect of the lifecycle of the PE foam on the metric. Inside, each group is the variation of the metric regarding the lifecycle of the modules. As shown in Fig. 10, there is no visible change from one group to the other due to the foam lifecycle, while the lifecycle of the modules greatly impacts the metrics inside each group. As an example, for a 30 year lifecycle of the modules, the GHG emissions are 7480 metric tons CO2 eq, the energy use is 28.3 GW h and the water footprint is 14.1 million m3, when the lifetime of the foam is 5 years. On the other hand, when the lifetime of the foam is 30 years, and the lifetime of the modules is maintained at 30 years, the GHG emissions are 7400 metric tons CO2 eq, the energy use is 28.1 GW h and the water footprint is 14.1 million m3. Fig. 11 displays a detailed result of the effects of the lifecycle of the flexible modules on the GHG emissions to energy ratio (kg CO2 eq per MW h), the energy use (GW h), the final water footprint (m3 per MW h), the CO2 payback time (years), and the energy payback time (years). In Fig. 11, the sensitivity results of the effect of the module lifetime are shown for a PE foam lifetime of 15 years. According to the results, the lifetime of the modules has a significant influence on the lifecycle impact. When the lifetime of the modules is set to 30 years, the EPBT is 1.3 years, the CO2PBT is 0.83 years, the final water footprint is 16 m3 per MW h, and the GHG emissions to energy ratio is 11 kg CO2 eq per MW h. When the modules are disposed of and replaced every 5 years, the EPBT is 6.51 years, the CO2PBT is 4.29 years, the final water footprint is 105 m3 per MW h, and the GHG emissions to energy ratio is 59 kg CO2 eq per MW h.
 Fig. 10  Sensitivity analysis results of lifecycle metrics. The metrics results are shown in groups for variation of PE foam lifetime ranging from 5 to 30 years. Inside each group, the metric result is shown for module lifetime variation ranging from 5 to 30 years. (a) Energy use result using the CED method. (b) GHG emission results using the GWP method. (c) Water footprint results using the WSI method. 
 Fig. 11  Detailed results of the impact of the variation of the module lifetime (5 to 30 years) on the system lifecycle impact categories, for a PE foam lifetime of 15 years. 
Discussion
The life cycle analysis performed in this study has shown that over the course of 30 years, a 10 MW foam-based floating PV plant installed on the surface of Lake Mead would require a total energy input of 28 GW h, would emit 7403 metric tons CO2 eq of greenhouse gases, and would use up 14 million m3 of water when the lifetime of the flexible modules is 30 years. At the same time, the system generates 650.3 GW h of clean electricity while preventing the evaporation of 3.4 million m3 of water from the Lake reservoir.
Consequently, a foam-based FPV system installed on a water surface located in a tropical or subtropical climate zone, such as the climate zone where Lake Mead is located, would require 43 MW h of primary energy for every 1 GW h of clean energy generated, or an energy ratio between its primary energy use and its actual energy generation of 43 kW h per MW h. The energy payback time is evaluated at 1.3 years. This indicates that the foam-based FPV system will generate up to 23 times the energy it consumes during its entire lifecycle. Recent LCA studies during the past decade have shown that the EPBT for rigid c-Si solar PV plants ranged between 0.91 years and 6.05 years depending on the location and the encapsulation technology used for the modules.7,19,21,24,25,107,108 The EPBT obtained in the current study (1.3 years) is located on the lower spectrum of these values even though the tilt of the modules considered is not optimal for the specified location. The foam-based modules have a tilt angle of 0° since they are lying flat on the surface of the water, whereas the optimal tilt of a PV system located near Lake Mead in Nevada would be 30° (latitude of 28°). The foam-based FPV modules have an EPBT close to that of conventional rigid modules made with aluminum back surface field solar cells (1.11 years25) because they benefit from an energy boost provided by the cooling effect of the water surface. Even though the energy production of foam-based solar PV modules located far away from the equator is hindered by the inclination factor, a recent study has shown that they can produce 3.5% more energy than expected from a module with an inclination of 0° at higher latitudes.41
Similarly, for each GW h of clean energy generated, a foam-based solar FPV system located on Lake Mead will have a lifetime greenhouse gas emission of 11.38 metric tons CO2 eq, corresponding to a GHG emission to energy generation ratio of 11 kg CO2 eq per MW h. The CO2PBT is less than a year being estimated at 0.82 year. This indicates that the foam-based FPV plant will offset 36 times the amount of CO2 it generates during its lifetime. For comparison, the values of greenhouse gas emissions in the recent literature for rigid crystalline silicon modules were comprised between 12 kg CO2 eq per MW h and 88 kg CO2 eq per MW h.20,21,23,25,47,107–109 It is important to point out that in the study where the lower value of 12 kg CO2 eq was obtained, the authors did not perform a detailed life cycle assessment and the system boundary was not clearly specified.20 Also, a study by Kim et al. has estimated the CO2 payback time between 1.53 and 2.53 years which remains high compared to the result obtained in this study. Thus, the value of GHG emissions obtained in this study is the lowest value found in the literature to date. This indicates that 30 years lifetime foam-based flexible solar FPV is the greenest crystalline based solar PV system to date when the flexible module lifetime is 30 years. Cromratie Clemons et al. have estimated the CO2 emissions of a pontoon-based FPV installed in Thailand to be 73 kg CO2 eq per MW h.46 Several factors influence the GHG emissions of the foam-based FPV modules that were considered in this study. The mass of solar cells used to manufacture the flexible modules is lower than the mass required to manufacture a rigid module because the cells are cut thinner (150 μm for flexible module,74 170 μm for rigid modules75). Also, the manufacture process of the flexible modules does not involve the use of glass or aluminum. Moreover, the simplicity of the racking used in the case of a foam-based FPV system is a key factor in the reduction of the GHG emissions. There is no concrete foundation or metal support involved in the manufacture of the foam-based floatation supports. All these factors result in a lower material use by the foam-based FPV system as compared to conventional PV systems, therefore, contributing to a reduction in the carbon emissions from the foam-based FPV system.
According to the simulation results, the water used by a 10 MW foam-based FPV plant located on the surface of Lake Mead in Nevada during its entire lifecycle is 14 million m3. Therefore, the water footprint of a foam-based FPV plant installed on a water surface located in a tropical or subtropical climate zone is evaluated at 21.5 m3 per MW h. In comparison the water footprint of a pontoon-based FPV has been estimated to be 110 m3 per MW h by Cromratie Clemons et al.,46 making foam-based FPV 5 times less water-intensive than pontoon-based FPV systems. On the other hand, a recent study has demonstrated that covering the surface of Lake Mead with foam-based floating PV has the potential to prevent water evaporation;41 specifically, when the lake surface is covered by a 10 MW foam-based FPV, the system is able to save 3.4 million m3 of water from evaporating. In terms of quantity of water saved per unit of energy generated, the plant has the potential to prevent the evaporation of 5.2 m3 per MW h water. This potential water saving offsets the water footprint of the system by reducing it from 21.5 m3 per MW h to 16.3 m3 per MW h. One advantage foam-based FPV assuredly has over conventional PV and pontoon-based FPV is the suppression of water usage during the operation phase of the system. A comparison of the water footprint from the manufacture phase of a flexible PV module and a rigid PV module performed in SimaPro using the water scarcity index method of Hoekstra et al.101 has shown that the water footprint of rigid PV modules (568 m3 per m2 of module) is 2.9 times greater than the water footprint of a flexible module (196 m3 per m2 of module). Combining the fact that flexible modules have a lower water footprint than rigid modules, the fact that foam-based FPV systems do not consume water during their operation phase, and the fact that foam-based FPV substantially offsets its own water footprint by about 25% via reduced evaporation from the host water body, indicates that foam-based FPV have the best water footprint to date among crystalline silicon-based PV systems when the lifetime of the modules is 30 years. Because the foam-backed modules are in direct contact with the water surface, it should be mentioned that the reduced evaporation and change in albedo due to the FPV could contribute to increased heating of the lake. This calculation is not straightforward because it depends on the surface albedo of the lake and the absorption coefficient of the water throughout the year and future experimental work is needed to quantify these variables. It should be pointed out that roughly a fifth of the energy that would normally be absorbed by the lake water is instead extracted via conversion to electricity, so even if the surface albedo decreased because of the FPV leading to local increases in surface temperature, this effect is dampened by the electrical energy reduction.
The sensitivity analysis has shown that even though the results are not affected by the lifetime of the PE foam, the lifecycle impacts of a flexible FPV plant are sensitive to the lifetime of the modules. When the lifetimes of the modules was varied down from 30 to 5 years with a 5 year decrement, the range of the impacts was 1.3 to 6.5 years for the EPBT, 0.83 to 4.29 years for the CO2PBT, 11 to 59 kg CO2 eq per MW h for the GHG emissions to energy ratio, and 16 to 105 m3 per MW h for the final water footprint. When the flexible modules have to be replaced every 5 years, corresponding to the manufacturer's warranty, the EPBT (6.5 years) is higher than the value (4.65 years) reported by Kim et al. using single crystalline silicon rigid modules.24 This indicates, however, that the foam-backed-FPV modules are not advantageous from an energy perspective although they are from a GHG emission stand point. For the foam-based flexible FPV system to be at least as EPBT-efficient as the value of 4.65 years, the lifetime of the modules needs to be greater than 7.4 years. Nevertheless, even when the lifetime of the flexible modules is set to 5 years, which is the warranty offered by the manufacturer, they appear to have a lower GHG footprint (59 kg CO2 eq per MW h) than the high value reported in the literature (88 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 23 and 108)). Furthermore, a reverse analysis on the GHG emissions shows that the foam-based FPV system would emit as much greenhouse gases as the lowest value found in the literature (12.3 kg CO2 eq per MW h (ref. 20)) when the lifetime of the panels is set to 26.6 years. This analysis shows that for foam-based FPV to be assuredly the greenest FPV to date, the lifetime of the modules needs to be at least 26.6 years.
The study has covered the life cycle analysis of a 10 MW foam-based FPV plant and has shown that foam-based FPV has the potential of becoming the greenest type of solar PV in an industry already well-respected for being one of the greenest forms of electricity production. By reducing the components involved in the balance of the system as well as by using lighter solar PV modules, the energy requirement and GHG emissions associated with crystalline solar PV are greatly reduced. It is challenging to exactly quantify by how much foam-based FPV improves the environmental impacts of the solar PV industry because the results of a life cycle assessment vary depending on the location. The focus of the current study has been to determine the life cycle inventory of the newly proposed design of a foam-based FPV system and compare that with existing values from the literature for land-based solar PV systems and pontoon-based FPV systems. It should be noted that these studies have different system boundaries and locations. Therefore, future work is needed to run a complete comparative life cycle assessment of a foam-based flexible FPV system, a pontoon-based FPV system, and a land-based PV system using the same system boundaries, ideally using all experimental values as inputs. A particularly interesting case to examine is the comparison of foam-based flexible FPV and land-based PV using flexible modules and alternative racking system. Further studies are also needed to evaluate the impact of the location and the recycling process on the different PV systems.
Another challenge that needs to be addressed through future studies is the testing of the durability of the foam-based racking in different aquatic environments. As FPV systems are a relatively new technology, there is little information regarding the maintenance process of the system.110 This is particularly true for foam-based FPV because this technology is still at the research phase. Nevertheless, as any other energy production system, FPV systems must undergo preventive and corrective maintenance during their operation phase. Pontoon-based FPV systems require cleaning during the operation phase, but in the case of foam-based FPV, the modules are semi-submerged, therefore cleaning is not an issue. The most important maintenance aspect in the case of foam-based FPV would be to ensure the integrity of the foam, the anchoring system, as well as the modules in a marine environment. In this study, the flexible PV, the polyethylene foam, the polyurethane marine sealant, as well as the stainless-steel zip-ties have been assumed to have a lifetime of 30 years and the results have shown that for foam-based FPV to be the greenest crystalline silicon based solar PV system to date, the lifetime of the modules needs to be at least 26.6 years. Therefore, the durability of these core components, especially the solar modules, needs to be tested experimentally and the impact of using different types of sealant, foam, or zip-ties can be explored as well as encapsulation methods for the flexible PV modules. Future study is also needed to develop a complete maintenance profile for FPV systems.
Because foam-based flexible PV modules are a new technology, there are no available data from the module manufacturers regarding the life cycle inventory, which have been adapted from the recent values of the life cycle inventory of rigid crystalline silicon modules. This assumption is the core assumption in the article, but it should be noted that foam-based FPV have a net positive impact on the environment in terms of EPBT and CO2 emissions as long as they last even a year, which has already been experimentally verified in the course of seasonal deployments when obtaining the experimental data to do this analysis. In, future studies, along with testing for the durability of the flexible modules, consultations with flexible module manufacturers would be beneficial to get a more in-depth understanding of the life cycle inventories of the modules, and the foam-based FPV system as a whole. Not only do foam-based FPV appear to be the greenest crystalline silicon-based PV to date, when the lifetime of the modules is at least 26.6 years, as shown by the results of this study, but a recent study has also determined that using foam-based racking could reduce the cost of racking by $0.37–$0.61 per W as compared to pontoon-based racking or land-based PV racking.48 Consequently, future work is needed to experimentally scale up foam-based FPV to investigate the real economic costs and viability of the system to find out the return-on-investment period of a foam-based FPV plant, as well as to compare the value of solar (VOS)111 of the system to that of conventional PV systems.
To further improve the environmental performance of the foam-based FPV system, future studies need to perform accelerated testing of the system to demonstrate the overall lifetime, therefore reducing the material input for longer lifetimes. Also, the investigation of the recycling processes of the different plastic components that go into the system design, as well as the use of recycled material for foam manufacturing is a key factor to reducing the lifecycle impacts of the foam-based FPV system. Additionally, FPV systems are known to pair well with aquaculture to form aquavoltaic systems.112–114 Future work is needed to investigate the LCA of a foam-based aquavoltaic system. The life cycle impacts of any solar PV system are location dependent because of the nature of the solar resource. This is even more applicable to FPV systems because they can only be installed at specific locations that have a water surface. Different locations worldwide depend on different energy production systems. Therefore, future studies should focus on the impact of the geographic deployment optimization on foam-based FPV systems by assessing the local water conservation needs as well as the type of energy sources that feed the local electricity grid.
Conclusions
This study has shown that the base case result for a foam-based FPV system, where the lifetime of the modules was 30 years, is one of the lowest energy payback times (1.3 years) in c-Si solar PV technologies reported to date. It also represents the lowest GHG emissions to energy ratio (11 kg CO2 eq per MW h) to date among the same types of PV material technologies. In addition, the foam-based FPV system also had 5 times less water footprint (21.5 m3 per MW h) as compared to a conventional pontoon-based FPV (110 m3 per MW h). The lifetime of the foam-based racking does not affect the result while the lifetime of the modules has a significant effect on the lifecycle impacts of the foam-based plant. Therefore, foam-based FPV has a net positive impact on the environment in terms of EPBT and CO2 emissions if its lifetime is above 7.4 years and the technology has the potential to become the greenest crystalline silicon-based solar PV technology if the lifetime of the modules can be guaranteed for at least 26.6 years. Future work is needed to determine the lifetimes of the system's components.
Data availability
All the data used in the study, including the life cycle inventory, the electrical design parameters and the water saving calculations, are stored in an Open Source Framework repository available for download here: https://osf.io/qt6mx/
Author contributions
Conceptualization: KSH, JMP; data curation: KSH, PM; formal analysis: KSH; funding acquisition: JMP; investigation: KSH; methodology: KSH; resources: JMP; supervision: JMP; validation: KSH, PM, JMP; visualization: KSH, PM; writing – original draft: KSH, JMP, writing – review & editing: KSH, PM, JMP.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge technical support from K. Perrine. This work was supported by the Witte and Thompson Endowments.
Notes and references
J. M. Pearce, Photovoltaics — a path to sustainable futures, Futures, 2002, 34, 663–674,  DOI:10.1016/S0016-3287(02)00008-3 .

          NREL, Champion Photovoltaic Module Efficiency Chart, Photovoltaic Research,  2021, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/module-efficiency.html, accessed August 12, 2021 Search PubMed .

          F. Kreith, P. Norton and D. Brown, CO2 Emissions from Coal-Fired and Solar Electric Power Plants, Solar Energy Research Institude, Golden, CO, USA,  1990. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/legosti/old/3772.pdf Search PubMed .

          V. M. Fthenakis, R. Betita, M. Shields, R. Vinje and J. Blunden, Life Cycle Analysis of High-Performance Monocrystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Systems: Energy Payback Times and Net Energy Production Value, 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2012, pp. 4667–4672,  DOI:10.4229/27THEUPVSEC2012-6CV.4.14 .
E. A. Alsema, Energy pay-back time and CO2 emissions of PV systems, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2000, 8, 17–25,  DOI:10.1002/(SICI)1099-159X(200001/02)8:1<17::AID-PIP295>3.0.CO;2-C .
J. H. Wong, M. Royapoor and C. W. Chan, Review of life cycle analyses and embodied energy requirements of single-crystalline and multi-crystalline silicon photovoltaic systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 608–618,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.241 .
N. A. Ludin, N. I. Mustafa, M. M. Hanafiah, M. A. Ibrahim, M. Asri Mat Teridi, S. Sepeai, A. Zaharim and K. Sopian, Prospects of life cycle assessment of renewable energy from solar photovoltaic technologies: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 96, 11–28,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2018.07.048 .
K. Kato, A. Murata and K. Sakuta, Energy pay-back time and life-cycle CO2 emission of residential PV power system with silicon PV module, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1998, 6, 105–115,  DOI:10.1002/(sici)1099-159x(199803/04)6:2<105::aid-pip212>3.0.co;2-c .

          E. A. Alsema, P. Frankl and K. Kato, Energy Pay-Back Time of Photovoltaic Energy Systems: Present Status and Prospects, Utrecht University Repository,  1998. https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/7943, accessed August 9, 2021 Search PubMed .
E. A. Alsema and E. Nieuwlaar, Energy viability of photovoltaic systems, Energy Policy, 2000, 28, 999–1010,  DOI:10.1016/S0301-4215(00)00087-2 .
M. Zimek, A. Schober, C. Mair, R. J. Baumgartner, T. Stern and M. Füllsack, The Third Wave of LCA as the “Decade of Consolidation, Sustainability, 2019, 11, 3283,  DOI:10.3390/su11123283 .
J. B. Guinée, R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, A. Zamagni, P. Masoni, R. Buonamici, T. Ekvall and T. Rydberg, Life Cycle Assessment: Past, Present, and Future, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 90–96,  DOI:10.1021/es101316v .

          M. de Wild-Scholten, Energierücklaufzeiten für PV-module und systeme energy payback times of PV modules and systems, in Workshop Photovoltaik-Modultechnik,  2009, p. 27 Search PubMed .
L. Lu and H. X. Yang, Environmental payback time analysis of a roof-mounted building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) system in Hong Kong, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 3625–3631,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.06.011 .
M. Ito, K. Kato, K. Komoto, T. Kichimi and K. Kurokawa, A comparative study on cost and life-cycle analysis for 100 MW very large-scale PV (VLS-PV) systems in deserts using m-Si, a-Si, CdTe, and CIS modules, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 17–30,  DOI:10.1002/pip.770 .
A. Stoppato, Life cycle assessment of photovoltaic electricity generation, Energy, 2008, 33, 224–232,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2007.11.012 .

          M. de Wild-Scholten and R. Gløckner, Energy Payback Time and Carbon Footprint of Elkem Solar Silicon®, 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2012, pp. 4661–4666,  DOI:10.4229/27thEUPVSEC2012-6CV.4.12 .
S. Pacca, D. Sivaraman and G. A. Keoleian, Parameters affecting the life cycle performance of PV technologies and systems, Energy Policy, 2007, 35, 3316–3326,  DOI:10.1016/j.enpol.2006.10.003 .
W. Chen, J. Hong, X. Yuan and J. Liu, Environmental impact assessment of monocrystalline silicon solar photovoltaic cell production: a case study in China, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 112, 1025–1032,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.08.024 .
N. Stylos and C. Koroneos, Carbon footprint of polycrystalline photovoltaic systems, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 64, 639–645,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.10.014 .
V. Muteri, M. Cellura, D. Curto, V. Franzitta, S. Longo, M. Mistretta and M. L. Parisi, Review on Life Cycle Assessment of Solar Photovoltaic Panels, Energies, 2020, 13, 252,  DOI:10.3390/en13010252 .
M. Ito, M. Kudo, M. Nagura and K. Kurokawa, A comparative study on life cycle analysis of 20 different PV modules installed at the Hokuto mega-solar plant, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 878–886,  DOI:10.1002/pip.1070 .
U. Desideri, S. Proietti, F. Zepparelli, P. Sdringola and S. Bini, Life Cycle Assessment of a ground-mounted 1778kWp photovoltaic plant and comparison with traditional energy production systems, Appl. Energy, 2012, 97, 930–943,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.01.055 .
B. Kim, J. Lee, K. Kim and T. Hur, Evaluation of the environmental performance of sc-Si and mc-Si PV systems in Korea, Sol. Energy, 2014, 99, 100–114,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2013.10.038 .
W. Luo, Y. S. Khoo, A. Kumar, J. S. C. Low, Y. Li, Y. S. Tan, Y. Wang, A. G. Aberle and S. Ramakrishna, A comparative life-cycle assessment of photovoltaic electricity generation in Singapore by multicrystalline silicon technologies, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 157–162,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2017.08.040 .
Y. Fu, X. Liu and Z. Yuan, Life-cycle assessment of multi-crystalline photovoltaic (PV) systems in China, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 86, 180–190,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.07.057 .

          J. Pearce and A. Lau, Net Energy Analysis for Sustainable Energy Production From Silicon Based Solar Cells, in Solar Energy, ASMEDC, Reno, Nevada, USA,  2002, pp. 181–186,  DOI:10.1115/SED2002-1051 .
N. J. Mohr, A. Meijer, M. a. J. Huijbregts and L. Reijnders, Environmental life cycle assessment of roof-integrated flexible amorphous silicon/nanocrystalline silicon solar cell laminate, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 802–815,  DOI:10.1002/pip.2157 .

          A. Buis, A Degree of Concern: Why Global Temperatures Matter, Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet,  2019, https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2865/a-degree-of-concern-why-global-temperatures-matter, accessed May 12, 2021 Search PubMed .
J. G. Groesbeck and J. M. Pearce, Coal with Carbon Capture and Sequestration is not as Land Use Efficient as Solar Photovoltaic Technology for Climate Neutral Electricity Production, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 13476,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-31505-3 .
A. Shahsavari and M. Akbari, Potential of solar energy in developing countries for reducing energy-related emissions, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 90, 275–291,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.065 .
F. Creutzig, P. Agoston, J. C. Goldschmidt, G. Luderer, G. Nemet and R. C. Pietzcker, The underestimated potential of solar energy to mitigate climate change, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17140,  DOI:10.1038/nenergy.2017.140 .
Z. A. A. Majid, M. H. Ruslan, K. Sopian, M. Y. Othman and M. S. M. Azmi, Study on Performance of 80 Watt Floating Photovoltaic Panel, J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 2014, 7, 1150–1156,  DOI:10.15282/jmes.7.2014.14.0112 .
K. Trapani and D. L. Millar, The thin film flexible floating PV (T3F-PV) array: The concept and development of the prototype, Renewable Energy, 2014, 71, 43–50,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2014.05.007 .
N. M. Kumar, J. Kanchikere and P. Mallikarjun, Floatovoltaics: Towards improved energy efficiency, land and water management, Int. J. Civ. Eng. Technol., 2018, 9, 1089–1096 Search PubMed .
M. Rosa-Clot, P. Rosa-Clot, G. M. Tina and P. F. Scandura, Submerged photovoltaic solar panel: SP2, Renewable Energy, 2010, 35, 1862–1865,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2009.10.023 .
G. M. Tina, M. Rosa-Clot, P. Rosa-Clot and P. F. Scandura, Optical and thermal behavior of submerged photovoltaic solar panel: SP2, Energy, 2012, 39, 17–26,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2011.08.053 .
C. Ferrer-Gisbert, J. J. Ferrán-Gozálvez, M. Redón-Santafé, P. Ferrer-Gisbert, F. J. Sánchez-Romero and J. B. Torregrosa-Soler, A new photovoltaic floating cover system for water reservoirs, Renewable Energy, 2013, 60, 63–70,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2013.04.007 .
S. A. Abdulgafar, O. S. Omar and K. M. Yousif, Improving the efficiency of polycrystalline solar panel via water immersion method, IJIRSET, 2014, 3, 96–101 Search PubMed .
S. Mehrotra, P. Rawat, M. Debbarma and K. Sudhakar, Performance of a solar panel with water immersion cooling technique, Int. J. Sci. Environ. Technol., 2014, 3, 1161–1172 Search PubMed .
K. S. Hayibo, P. Mayville, R. K. Kailey and J. M. Pearce, Water Conservation Potential of Self-Funded Foam-Based Flexible Surface-Mounted Floatovoltaics, Energies, 2020, 13, 6285,  DOI:10.3390/en13236285 .

          A. McKay, Floatovoltaics: Quantifying the Benefits of a Hydro-Solar Power Fusion, Pomona College,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. R. Santafé, P. S. Ferrer Gisbert, F. J. Sánchez Romero, J. B. Torregrosa Soler, J. J. Ferrán Gozálvez and C. M. Ferrer Gisbert, Implementation of a photovoltaic floating cover for irrigation reservoirs, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 66, 568–570,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.006 .

          P. Sharma, B. Muni and D. Sen, Design parameters of 10 KW floating solar power plant, in Proceedings of the International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology (IARJSET), National Conference on Renewable Energy and Environment (NCREE-2015), Ghaziabad, India, International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology (IARJSET), Ghaziabad, India,  2015, https://www.iarjset.com/upload/2015/si/ncree-15/IARJSET-17-P127.pdf Search PubMed .
G. D. P. D. Silva and D. A. C. Branco, Is floating photovoltaic better than conventional photovoltaic? Assessing environmental impacts, Impact Assess. Proj. Apprais., 2018, 36, 390–400,  DOI:10.1080/14615517.2018.1477498 .
S. K. Cromratie Clemons, C. R. Salloum, K. G. Herdegen, R. M. Kamens and S. H. Gheewala, Life cycle assessment of a floating photovoltaic system and feasibility for application in Thailand, Renewable Energy, 2021, 168, 448–462,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2020.12.082 .
A. Müller, L. Friedrich, C. Reichel, S. Herceg, M. Mittag and D. H. Neuhaus, A comparative life cycle assessment of silicon PV modules: Impact of module design, manufacturing location and inventory, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111277,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2021.111277 .
P. Mayville, N. V. Patil and J. M. Pearce, Distributed manufacturing of after market flexible floating photovoltaic modules, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2020, 42, 100830,  DOI:10.1016/j.seta.2020.100830 .

          D. Chung, C. Davidson, R. Fu, K. Ardani and R. Margolis, U.S. Photovoltaic Prices and Cost Breakdowns. Q1 2015 Benchmarks for Residential, Commercial, and Utility-Scale Systems,  2015,  DOI:10.2172/1225303 .

          D. Feldman, V. Ramasamy, R. Fu, A. Ramdas, J. Desai and R. Margolis, U.S. Solar Photovoltaic System and Energy Storage Cost Benchmark: Q1 2020,  2021. https://doi.org/ DOI:10.2172/1764908 .
M. Ito, S. Lespinats, J. Merten, P. Malbranche and K. Kurokawa, Life cycle assessment and cost analysis of very large-scale PV systems and suitable locations in the world, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 159–174,  DOI:10.1002/pip.2650 .

          W. Klöpffer, Introducing Life Cycle Assessment and its Presentation in ‘LCA Compendium’, in Background and Future Prospects in Life Cycle Assessment, ed. W. Klöpffer, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2014, pp. 1–37,  DOI:10.1007/978-94-017-8697-3_1 .

          ISO, Environmental Management – Life Cycle Assessment – Requirements and Guidelines – Amendment 2, ISO,  2020, https://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/07/61/76122.html, accessed January 28, 2022 Search PubMed .

          SimaPro, About SimaPro, SimaPro, https://simapro.com/about/, accessed  February 16, 2021 Search PubMed .

          PRé, SimaPro Database Manual – Methods Library, SimaPro, San Francisco, CA, United States,  2020. https://simapro.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/DatabaseManualMethods.pdf (accessed March 3, 2021) Search PubMed .

          Sunpower, SunPower Flexible Solar Panels | SPR-E-Flex-110, Sunpower. ( 2018). https://us.sunpower.com/sites/default/files/110w-flexible-panel-spec-sheet.pdf (accessed October 13, 2020) Search PubMed .

          SEIA, Recycling & End-Of-Life Considerations for Photovoltaics, SEIA,  2021, https://www.seia.org/initiatives/recycling-end-life-considerations-photovoltaics, accessed February 17, 2021 Search PubMed .

SunPower® Module 40-year Useful Life, SunPower, San Jose, CA, United States,  2013. https://us.sunpower.com/sites/default/files/media-library/white-papers/wp-sunpower-module-40-year-useful-life.pdf Search PubMed.

          K. S. Hayibo and J. M. Pearce, Calculations for Life Cycle Assessment of a Foam-Based Flexible Floatovoltaics, Open Science Framework,  2021,  DOI:10.17605/OSF.IO/QT6MX .
A. Phinikarides, N. Kindyni, G. Makrides and G. E. Georghiou, Review of photovoltaic degradation rate methodologies, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 40, 143–152,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.155 .

          D. C. Jordan and S. R. Kurtz, Reliability and Geographic Trends of 50,000 Photovoltaic Systems in the USA: Preprint, in National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2014, p. 10. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/62801.pdf Search PubMed .

          K. S. Hayibo and J. M. Pearce, Calculations for Water Conservation Potential of Self-Funded Foam-Based Flexible Surface-Mounted Floatovoltaics, OSF,  2020, https://osf.io/twexy/ Search PubMed .

          N. O. and A. A. US Department of Commerce, NDBC Station History Page,  2020, http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/station_history.php?station=nbba3 (accessed June 23, 2020) Search PubMed .

          Solcast, Solar Irradiance Data,  2021,  DOI:10.25911/5C073E713E5DD .
G. J. van Oldenborgh, S. Philip, S. Kew, M. van Weele, P. Uhe, F. Otto, R. Singh, I. Pai, H. Cullen and K. AchutaRao, Extreme heat in India and anthropogenic climate change, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 2018, 18, 365–381,  DOI:10.5194/nhess-18-365-2018 .
J. T. Abatzoglou, A. P. Williams and R. Barbero, Global Emergence of Anthropogenic Climate Change in Fire Weather Indices, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2019, 46, 326–336,  DOI:10.1029/2018GL080959 .
M. Goss, D. L. Swain, J. T. Abatzoglou, A. Sarhadi, C. A. Kolden, A. P. Williams and N. S. Diffenbaugh, Climate change is increasing the likelihood of extreme autumn wildfire conditions across California, Environ. Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 094016,  DOI:10.1088/1748-9326/ab83a7 .
A. Achhami, A. Kalra and S. Ahmad, Dynamic Simulation of Lake Mead Water Levels in Response to Climate Change and Varying Demands, World Environ. Water Resour. Congr., 2018, 260–268,  DOI:10.1061/9780784481400.023 .
D. Hannoun, T. Tietjen and K. Brooks, The potential effects of climate change and drawdown on a newly constructed drinking water intake: Study case in Las Vegas, NV, USA, Water Util. J., 2021, 1–13 Search PubMed .
B. R. Bathey and M. C. Cretella, Solar-grade silicon, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 3077–3096,  DOI:10.1007/BF01203469 .

          R. Frischknecht, R. Itten, P. Sinha, M. de Wild-Scholten, J. Zhang, V. Fthenakis, H. C. Kim, M. Raugei and M. Stucki, Life Cycle Inventories and Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Systems, International Energy Agency, New York, USA,  2015, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279180644_Life_Cycle_Inventories_and_Life_Cycle_Assessment_of_Photovoltaic_Systems Search PubMed .

          Statista, Major Countries in Silicon Production 2020, Statista,  2021, https://www.statista.com/statistics/<?ccdc_no 268108?>268108<?ccdc END?>/world-silicon-production-by-country/, accessed July 15, 2021 Search PubMed .

          A. Ebong and N. Chen, Metallization of crystalline silicon solar cells: A review, in High Capacity Optical Networks and Emerging/Enabling Technologies,  2012, pp. 102–109,  DOI:10.1109/HONET.2012.6421444 .

          SunPower, SunPower Maxeon Gen II Solar Cells, SunPower, United States.  2020, https://us.sunpower.com/solar-resources/sunpower-maxeon-gen-ii-solar-cells, accessed July 19, 2021 Search PubMed .

          R. Frischknecht, P. Stolz, L. Krebs, M. de Wild-Scholten and P. Sinha, Life Cycle Inventories and Life Cycle Assessments of Photovoltaic Systems 2020 Task 12 PV Sustainability, International Energy Agency, New York, USA,  2020,  DOI:10.13140/RG.2.2.17977.19041 .
C. de Alwis, T. R. Leftwich and K. A. Perrine, New Approach to Simultaneous In Situ Measurements of the Air/Liquid/Solid Interface Using PM-IRRAS, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 3404–3414,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b03958 .

          ThermoFisher Scientific, Nicolet™ iS50 FTIR Spectrometer,  2021, https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/912A0760, accessed July 16, 2021 Search PubMed .

          K.-H. Dörner, H. Ehbing, C. Hässler, J. Ramthun, G. Stollwerck, R. Eiben, M. Niedermeyer and P. Schuster, Solar modules with a transparent polyurethane front side and a process for producing same, US Pat., US7049803B2,  2006, https://patents.google.com/patent/US7049803B2/en, accessed June 15, 2021 Search PubMed .

          Michigan Tech, Philips XL 40 ESEM, Michigan Technological University,  2021, https://www.mtu.edu/acmal/shared-facilities/electron-optics/instrumentation/philips-xl-40-esem/, accessed July 16, 2021 Search PubMed .
I. S. Al-Haydari and H. S. Al-Haidari, Mechanical Properties of Polyethylene Terephthalate-Modified Pavement Mixture, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 870, 012073,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899X/870/1/012073 .

          Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Polyethylene Terephthalate, GESTIS-Stoffdatenbank,  2021, https://gestis.dguv.de/data?name=530566%26lang=en, accessed July 20, 2021 Search PubMed .

Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate (EVA) Product, Price and Market, Plastics Insight, https://www.plasticsinsight.com/resin-intelligence/resin-prices/ethylene-vinyl-acetate/, accessed  July 20, 2021 Search PubMed.

          R. Satpathy and V. Pamuru, Chapter 5 - Manufacturing of crystalline silicon solar PV modules, in Solar PV Power, ed. R. Satpathy and V. Pamuru, Academic Press,  2021, pp. 135–241,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-817626-9.00005-8 .
G. Sang, P. Xu, T. Yan, V. Murugadoss, N. Naik, Y. Ding and Z. Guo, Interface Engineered Microcellular Magnetic Conductive Polyurethane Nanocomposite Foams for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 153,  DOI:10.1007/s40820-021-00677-5 .
B. R. Hubbard and J. M. Pearce, Open-Source Digitally Replicable Lab-Grade Scales, Instruments, 2020, 4, 18,  DOI:10.3390/instruments4030018 .

          3M United States, 3M™ Marine Adhesive Sealant 5200,  2021, https://www.3m.com/3M/en_US/p/d/b40066983/, accessed March 2, 2021 Search PubMed .

          A. Messmer and A. Chaudhary, Life Cycle Assessment of Adhesives Used in Wood Constructions,  2015 Search PubMed .

          Ecoinvent, Ecoinvent Version 3, Database,  2021, https://www.ecoinvent.org/database/database.html, accessed July 17, 2021 Search PubMed .

          Suncor Stainless, Anchor Weight and Rode Guide, Suncor Stainless,  2021, https://suncorstainless.com/anchor-weight-and-rode-guide/, accessed November 15, 2021 Search PubMed .

          P. Stolz and R. Frischknecht, Life Cycle Assessment of Current Photovoltaic Module Recycling, International Energy Agency, Golden, CO, USA,  2017, https://iea-pvps.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Life_Cycle_Assesment_of_Current_Photovoltaic_Module_Recycling_by_Task_12.pdf, accessed July 20, 2021 Search PubMed .
A. Kemona and M. Piotrowska, Polyurethane Recycling and Disposal: Methods and Prospects, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1752,  DOI:10.3390/polym12081752 .
W. Yang, Q. Dong, S. Liu, H. Xie, L. Liu and J. Li, Recycling and Disposal Methods for Polyurethane Foam Wastes, Procedia Environ. Sci., 2012, 16, 167–175,  DOI:10.1016/j.proenv.2012.10.023 .

          B. Björkman and C. Samuelsson, Chapter 6 - Recycling of Steel, in Handbook of Recycling, ed. E. Worrell and M.A. Reuter, Elsevier, Boston,  2014: pp. 65–83,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-396459-5.00006-4 .
M. A. J. Huijbregts, L. J. A. Rombouts, S. Hellweg, R. Frischknecht, A. J. Hendriks, D. van de Meent, A. M. J. Ragas, L. Reijnders and J. Struijs, Is Cumulative Fossil Energy Demand a Useful Indicator for the Environmental Performance of Products?, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 641–648,  DOI:10.1021/es051689g .
R. Kenny, C. Law and J. M. Pearce, Towards real energy economics: Energy policy driven by life-cycle carbon emission, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 1969–1978,  DOI:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.11.078 .

          U.S. EIA, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) - U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), How Much Carbon Dioxide Is Produced Per Kilowatthour of U.S. Electricity Generation?,  2020, https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php, accessed July 26, 2021 Search PubMed .

          O. US EPA, Understanding Global Warming Potentials, US EPA,  2016, https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/understanding-global-warming-potentials, accessed March 3, 2021 Search PubMed .

          US EPA, GHG Inventory Development Process and Guidance, US EPA,  2015, https://www.epa.gov/climateleadership/ghg-inventory-development-process-and-guidance, accessed March 3, 2021 Search PubMed .

          T. Ponsioen, Updated Carbon Footprint Calculation Factors, PRé Sustainability,  2014, https://pre-sustainability.com/articles/updated-carbon-footprint-calculation-factors/, accessed March 3, 2021 Search PubMed .
S. Gorjian, H. Sharon, H. Ebadi, K. Kant, F. B. Scavo and G. M. Tina, Recent technical advancements, economics and environmental impacts of floating photovoltaic solar energy conversion systems, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 278, 124285,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124285 .
A. Y. Hoekstra, M. M. Mekonnen, A. K. Chapagain, R. E. Mathews and B. D. Richter, Global Monthly Water Scarcity: Blue Water Footprints versus Blue Water Availability, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e32688,  DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0032688 .

          J. B. Keyes and K. R. Rábago, A REGULATOR'S GUIDEBOOK: Calculating the Benefits and Costs of Distributed Solar Generation, Interstate Renewable Energy Council, Inc.,  2013, https://irecusa.org/publications/a-regulators-guidebook-calculating-the-benefits-and-costs-of-distributed-solar-generation/ Search PubMed .

          Renogy, 175 Watt 12 Volt Flexible Monocrystalline Solar Panel, Renogy United States,  2021, https://www.renogy.com/175-watt-12-volt-flexible-monocrystalline-solar-panel/, accessed November 15, 2021 Search PubMed .
C. Ioakeimidis, K. N. Fotopoulou, H. K. Karapanagioti, M. Geraga, C. Zeri, E. Papathanassiou, F. Galgani and G. Papatheodorou, The degradation potential of PET bottles in the marine environment: An ATR-FTIR based approach, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23501,  DOI:10.1038/srep23501 .
F. Julienne, N. Delorme and F. Lagarde, From macroplastics to microplastics: Role of water in the fragmentation of polyethylene, Chemosphere, 2019, 236, 124409,  DOI:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124409 .

          Thorn & Derrick International, BAND-IT Reusable Stainless Steel Cable Ties AE Range, Power and Cables,  2021, https://www.powerandcables.com/product/product-category/band-cable-ties-stainless-steel-ae/, accessed August 5, 2021 Search PubMed .
S. H. Fukurozaki, R. Zilles and I. L. Sauer, Energy Payback Time and CO2 Emissions of 1.2 kWp Photovoltaic Roof-Top System in Brazil, Int. J. Smart Grid Clean Energy, 2013, 2, 164–169,  DOI:10.12720/sgce.2.2.164-169 .
G. Hou, H. Sun, Z. Jiang, Z. Pan, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Q. Yao, Life cycle assessment of grid-connected photovoltaic power generation from crystalline silicon solar modules in China, Appl. Energy, 2016, 164, 882–890,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.11.023 .
D. O. Akinyele, R. K. Rayudu and N. K. C. Nair, Life cycle impact assessment of photovoltaic power generation from crystalline silicon-based solar modules in Nigeria, Renewable Energy, 2017, 101, 537–549,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2016.09.017 .

          World Bank Group, ESMAP, SERIS, Where Sun Meets Water: Floating Solar Handbook for Practitioners, World Bank Group, Washington, D.C,  2019, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32804 Search PubMed .
K. S. Hayibo and J. M. Pearce, A review of the value of solar methodology with a case study of the U.S. VOS, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 137, 110599,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2020.110599 .
H. Dinesh and J. M. Pearce, The potential of agrivoltaic systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 299–308,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.024 .
A. M. Pringle, R. M. Handler and J. M. Pearce, Aquavoltaics: Synergies for dual use of water area for solar photovoltaic electricity generation and aquaculture, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 80, 572–584,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.191 .
K. Moustafa, Toward Future Photovoltaic-Based Agriculture in Sea, Trends Biotechnol., 2016, 34, 257–259,  DOI:10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.12.012 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  System boundary diagram of the foam-based FPV plant.	 


Power rating of the plant	10 MW (ref. 59)
Installation location	Lake Mead
Module make and model	SunPower SPR-E-Flex-110 (ref. 56)
Module STC power	110 W (ref. 56)
Number of modules	90910 (ref. 59)
Module degradation rate	0.50% (ref. 60 and 61)
Average PV efficiency year 1	20.90% (ref. 59)
Average annual energy production	21.7 GW h per year (ref. 59)
Lifetime of the system	30 yearsa (ref. 57)
Lifetime energy production	650.3 GW h (ref. 59)
Projected yearly water savings	115000 m3 (ref. 59)
Projected lifetime water savings	3.4 million of m3 (ref. 59)

110 W flexible single crystalline photovoltaic modules	90910
Mass of solar PV modules	181820 kg
Polyethylene foam	10710 kg
Polyurethane marine sealant	25567 kg
Stainless steel zip-ties	982 kg
Anchoring concrete	450 kg
Metal chain	450 kg
Electric installation for 570 kWp open ground PV system	18
500 kW inverters	40

 	Fig. 2  Exploded diagram of an after-market modified foam-based floating solar PV module.	 

 	Fig. 3  Spectral comparison of polyurethane rubber with the top clear layer of the flexible module.	 

 	Fig. 4  Spectral comparison of polyethylene terephthalate and the back white layer of the flexible module.	 

 	Fig. 5  ESEM view of the thickness of the layers of the flexible module encapsulation.	 

Polyethylene terephthalate (bottom layer)	253	1380 (ref. 80 and 81)	226
Ethylene vinyl acetate (solar cell encapsulation)	1330	948 (ref. 82 and 83)	817
Polyurethane rubber (top layer)	527	1210 (ref. 78 and 84)	413
Monocrystalline silicon solar cells	150	—	224
Grommets	—	—	4
Junction box, cables, and electronics	—	—	316
Total	—	—	2000

 	Fig. 6  After-market modification of a flexible solar PV module by taping PE foam on the back layer of the modules using a polyurethane marine sealant.	 
EPBT (years) = Econs (kW h)/Ean (kW h per year)	(1)
	(2)


Flexible PV modules (metric tons)	1091	545	364	273	218	182
Marine sealant (metric tons)	153	77	51	38	31	26
PE foam (metric tons)	64	32	21	16	13	11
Average annual energy generation (GW h per year)	23.1	22.8	22.5	22.2	21.9	21.7

 	Fig. 7  Detailed energy use results (in GW h) of the life cycle assessment of the 10 MW FPV plant using the CED method.	 

 	Fig. 8  Detailed GHG emissions (in metric tons CO2 eq) of the 10 MW foam-based FPV plant using the GWP method.	 

 	Fig. 9  Detailed water footprint (in m3) of the 10 MW PV foam-based FPV plant using the WSI method.	 

 	Fig. 10  Sensitivity analysis results of lifecycle metrics. The metrics results are shown in groups for variation of PE foam lifetime ranging from 5 to 30 years. Inside each group, the metric result is shown for module lifetime variation ranging from 5 to 30 years. (a) Energy use result using the CED method. (b) GHG emission results using the GWP method. (c) Water footprint results using the WSI method.	 

 	Fig. 11  Detailed results of the impact of the variation of the module lifetime (5 to 30 years) on the system lifecycle impact categories, for a PE foam lifetime of 15 years.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
