Research Highlights  - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B512291K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B512291K
(Highlight)
Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 1001-1004Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsResearch HighlightsFirst published on 7th September 2005
Aerosol flow synthesis of nanoparticles
Nanocrystalline colloidal semiconductors are of current scientific and commercial interest owing to their tuneable optical and electronic properties and resulting applications in electronic devices and biosensors. The physical characteristics of nanocrystallites are determined primarily by spatial confinement effects with properties such as the optical band gap often differing considerably from the bulk semiconductor. As these properties are ultimately determined by the physical dimensions of the crystallites, there is considerable interest in synthetic routes that can yield nanoparticles of well defined size and shape. In practice, deviations about the mean particle radius should be lower than one percent. Unfortunately, this is beyond the tolerance of most standard syntheses and in general it is necessary to employ some form of post-treatment to extract the desired particle size and sample size distribution. Using such post hoc approaches, it is possible to obtain nanoparticles with extremely narrow size distributions, however processing can be complex and yields are generally low. Accordingly, it is preferable to use direct techniques, requiring no post-treatment, to prepare the crystals. Recently, a number of studies have indicated that the use of continuous flow, microfluidic devices may provide a direct route to the production of metal, metal-oxide and compound semiconductor nanoparticles. Such devices have the advantage of eliminating local variations in reaction conditions such as concentration and temperature and of allowing rapid, reproducible changes in these conditions should they be desired. An interesting alternative to these methods has recently been described by Yuri Didenko and Kenneth Suslick at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne.1 In these studies a continuous chemical aerosol flow is used to synthesize both CdSe and CdTe nanoparticles. The authors create a dense mist by ultrasonic nebulization of solutions containing appropriate precursors (Fig. 1). Reactions are then initiated within individual sub-micron droplets by motivating the mist in a gaseous argon stream into a furnace. Initially, aerosols are formed using an ultrasonic transducer taken from a home humidifier. These aerosol droplets contain reactants dissolved in both a high-boiling point solvent and a lower boiling point solvent (toluene). When the aerosol droplets enter the furnace they are rapidly heated. This causes the toluene to evaporate above 111 °C and leave submicron droplets which contain the reactants within the high boiling point solvent. At high temperatures nanoparticles are formed and upon exiting the furnace they are rapidly cooled and collected in a solvent bubbler. Importantly, the authors demonstrate that the approach can be used in a variety of synthetic schemes. For example, for CdSe nanoparticle synthesis a variety of Cd sources (including CdO, CdCO3 and Cd(CH3CO2)2), Se sources (including trioctylphosphine selenide) and surfactants (including hexadecylamine and oleic acid) were used to generate highly luminescent particles of well-defined size. In addition, variation of the furnace temperature provides a simple way of controlling average particle size and emission across a wide wavelength range. Interestingly, the authors show that the method can be applied to the synthesis of highly luminescent CdTe nanoparticles, which in turn can be directly deposited onto planar substrates to form CdTe solar cells and LEDs.
 Fig. 1  Experimental apparatus for chemical aerosol flow synthesis. a. Solutions of high boiling liquids containing appropriate precursors are diluted and then atomized by an ultrasonic nebulizer. The volatile solvent boils off, leaving submicron liquid droplets that are carried through the tube furnace by a gas flow. Reactions inside the heated liquid droplets result in the preparation of narrow distributions of quantum dot semiconductor particles, which are trapped in a liquid-filled bubbler. b. Photograph of nebulized mist produced by the ultrasonic fountain. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, The American Chemical Society.) 
One of the key features of this new approach to nanoparticle synthesis is the ability to produce high-quality nanoparticles in relatively large amounts. For example, using their low-end nebulizer Didenko and Suslick generate a system throughput of over 100 mg h−1 and estimate significantly higher yields if ultrasonic horn atomizers are adopted in future systems.1
Rapid prototyping of glass microstructures
A cursory glance through the literature illustrates that the majority of early microfluidic systems were constructed from glasses or silicon as the substrate material. This is not surprising since standard photolithography and wet-etching techniques could be used to efficiently structure these materials to produce microchannel networks. In addition, much of the early work in the field focused on transferring separation methods to planar chip formats, and in particular the development of electrophoretic separation technology. Although silicon-based CE chips have been reported, the conductivity of silicon proved problematic when applying high voltages necessary for the generation of electroosmotic flow and consequently, the vast majority of early microfluidic systems were sculpted from glassy materials. Glasses possess other beneficial properties such as well-defined surface chemistries, excellent optical characteristics and good electroosmotic properties. However, common opinion is that machining of glasses presents a number of problematic issues that ultimately hinders their widespread use in commercial applications. The most deleterious of these being the nature of typical lithographic processing and limitations on the aspect ratios of etched features. Fabrication of planar glass devices commonly involves multiple processes such as substrate cleaning, lithographic patterning, wet-etching and thermal bonding. Although each process is well defined, fabrication is often a time-consuming and expensive process (in part due to costs associated with the establishment and maintenance of cleanroom facilities). In addition, wet-etching is isotropic in nature and will generally yield channels with sloping walls and of relatively low aspect ratios.
Recently, there have been a few reports of laser direct-writing on glassy substrates. Such methods are of interest since they allow for rapid prototyping of microfluidic devices and also allow complex feature structures (which are difficult to make using standard photolithographic methods) to be generated. An interesting development in this area has been reported by Ji-Yen Cheng and associates at the Academia Sinica of the National Taiwan University in Taiwan.2 The authors describe a flexible approach for rapid prototyping of glass microstructures using a laser direct-writing method requiring no photomask generation. Specifically, the authors use a 266 nm diode-pumped solid state Nd:YAG laser operating at low power and high repetition rates to induce backside wet-etching of glass substrates. To effect substrate etching the glass substrate and etchant chamber are mounted on a two-dimensional translation stage (Fig. 2). As the laser, which is focused onto the substrate plane, is moved in relation to the substrate stage it excites the sensitised etchant solution and initiates spatially localised etching of the glass substrate. The authors show that this general method can be used to rapidly and controllably structure crack-free and debris-free microfluidic features in glass substrates. Variation of the laser repetition rate is shown to yield a maximum etching rate at approximately 6 kHz. This is due to the fact that bubbles formed in the etchant solution after excitation are not allowed to fully disappear prior to the next laser pulse at higher repetition rates. Furthermore, although the etching mechanism is not fully understood the choice of photothermal sensitizer is crucial in allowing efficient etching of glass (which is generally resistant to chemical corrosion). Extensive studies by the authors suggest that lower etching thresholds are obtained when using aromatic solvents with strong vibronic interactions. To demonstrate the ability of the technique to create complex feature structures, stepped trenches and transverse asymmetric trenches were fabricated in glass substrates and used to create an integrated liquid-phase flow reactor and concentrator.
 Fig. 2  Setup of a DPSS laser direct-writing system for glass micromachining. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing Ltd.) 
Such a technique should prove to be a useful tool for prototyping glass microstructures, due to its high speed, operational flexibility, low operational costs and applicability to a variety of glassy materials. Although thermal bonding of coverplates to structured substrates is still required to create complete fluidic systems, the complete fabrication process from concept to operation is still significantly quicker than conventional photolithographic processes used in glass chip manufacture.
Microfluidic cofactor regeneration
The development of environmentally friendly and stereoselective enzymatic transformations in the pharmaceutical and fine chemical industries is an area of high current interest. In many instances, cofactors are required to allow rapid and efficient catalytic activity. Since such cofactors are too costly to be used in stoichiometric quantities, their in situ regeneration provides the most promising route towards the creation of efficient and cost-effective biocatalysis. An elegant demonstration of how microfluidic reaction systems may be used to perform such enzymatic reactions and also allow continuous cofactor regeneration has recently been performed by Paul Kenis and co-workers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne and the Université Paul Sabatier.3 In these studies the authors create a microfluidic reactor that performs both cofactor regeneration and subsequent biocatalytic substrate conversion. Using a simple ‘y-shaped’ reactor geometry buffer and substrate streams are continuously introduced under laminar flow conditions. By varying the flow rate ratio of the input streams the reagent stream may be forced to flow close to a cathode fabricated on the microchannel surface, as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the electrochemical microreactor for cofactor regeneration and subsequent biocatalytic substrate conversion. Reaction depletion zones are marked in grey and adjustment of the width or focusing of the substrate stream is achieved by changing the ratio of volumetric flow rates, Q2/Q1. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, The American Chemical Society.) 
To establish the efficacy of their approach the authors address the electrogenerated regeneration of NADH using FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) as a mediator. Here, the reagent stream contains FAD and NAD+ formate dehydrogenase (FDH) as the enzyme. FAD shuttles electrons from the cathode to FDH which then regenerates NADH from NAD+. Using a flow rate ratio (buffer stream to reagent stream) of approximately 12 the system allows 31% NADH regeneration which is significantly better than any conversion efficiency previously reported. Then using the same microfluidic system, the authors demonstrate the in situ conversion of an achiral substrate (pyruvate) into a chiral product (L-lactate) using a lactate dehydrogenase catalyst with a turnover of 21 mmol L-lactate per mol NAD+ s−1. Although impressive, operation of multiple reactors in parallel with reagent recirculation should allow substantial improvements in this value, and also open the way up for the production of large quantities of chiral molecules.
Programmable microfluidic computers
Since the emergence of the integrated circuit and the digital microprocessor in the 1960s, their use and application has extended to nearly every area of technological development and now semiconductor devices define the basis of business efficiency and industrial competitiveness. The foundation of this expansion is the tremendous increase in performance and the reduction in cost of information processing and storage. For example, during the last 25 years, microprocessors have improved by orders of magnitude in performance and the cost per transistor is now less than €10−5. Underlying these trends is the reduction in the circuit minimum feature size, which is now below 100 nm. However, as feature sizes become smaller, technological bottlenecks arising from electrical interconnections, doping fluctuations, tunnelling currents, design complexity, the resolution of lithographic processes and huge investment costs make further progress in semiconductor technology unrealistic. Consequently, the continuous exponential improvement in cost per function that has occurred over the quarter of a century will decelerate, and the search for alternative device architectures that overcome current limitations will become an area of high importance.
Over the past few years a few studies have suggested the use of microfluidic networks as information carriers in molecular computers. A recent report by Danny van Noort of the Institute of Computer Technology at Seoul National University highlights this interest and provides an example of how such systems may be configured.4 As is well-known, microfluidic systems can efficiently process and manipulate picolitre fluidic volumes at high speed and with high spatial control. Through the use of interconnected networks of microchannels and proficient valving, specific ‘programmes’ or series of logic operations can be executed in an automated fashion. In a sense, microchannels behave in a similar fashion to wires in an integrated circuit, allowing the flow of information between operators. Van Noort proposes a simple microfluidic computer that can be used to solve a sequence of logical operations in an efficient manner. Such a system is envisaged to include capture probes (for DNA sequence recognition) that provide the basis for simple AND and NOT operations. Furthermore, bundles of parallel microchannels that are terminated by common inlet and outlet flow lines provide the basis for memory modules. Problem solving is achieved through the integration of fluidic switches (which allow the control of flow through microreactors containing capture probes) and memory lines, which in turn enables problem solving operations to be performed in a configurable manner.
In this concept paper, van Noort illustrates how such a system can be used to perform difficult mathematical problems such as the ‘maximum clique problem’ and also reports the fabrication of a simple 3-bit programmable computer. The device is fabricated in PDMS and incorporates actuated membrane valves to effect flow control through a microfluidic circuit. The beauty of the described approach lies in the simple fabrication techniques used to create the fluidic computer and also the flexible programming capability inherent in such an approach. Although a niche area, future developments in this very new field of application will be interesting to follow.
Microfluidic probe
Although microfluidic systems have found wide application in the biological and physical sciences, experimental limitations still hinder their use in some situations. For example, microchannels are prone to blocking when processing complex, high viscosity or heterogeneous fluids and their reduced characteristic dimensions inherently generate high flow resistances when operating within hydrodynamic pumping regimes. Such problems mean that handling large objects (such as tissue slices) and processing large surfaces are significant challenges.
David Juncker and colleagues at the IBM Research Laboratory in Zurich have recently developed a microfluidic probe that overcomes some of the above limitations by using liquid, rather than solid, boundaries to constrain the fluid flow using hydrodynamic forces.5 The authors term their device a ‘microfluidic probe’ since it is used to create a spatially-localised microfluidic flow on a planar surface. If a mesa with an aspiration aperture is immersed in a fluid, aspiration of fluid into the aperture produces a hemispherical flow field around the aperture. Moreover, if the mesa is positioned close to and parallel to a surface, a radial laminar flow field develops. Addition of a second injection aperture then allows a processing solution to be injected, flow downstream and be directed through the aspiration aperture with a high degree of spatial confinement. This process of hydrodynamic flow confinement allows precise control (through variation of aspiration and injection flow rates) of the liquid flow within an open gap and thus precise addressing of the neighbouring surface. Calibration experiments demonstrate minimal sensitivity of the confinement limit on the gap distance and also efficient confinement for gaps as large as 50 µm.
Using this elegant approach Juncker and colleagues are able to effectively perform ‘write’ and ‘erase’ operations on surfaces and thus can perform processes such as cell collection and interfacial reactions with ease.5 Other processes successfully performed by the IBM group include the use of the microfluidic probe to form continuous microscale protein gradients on surfaces and selective detachment and collection of single cells from surfaces. In conclusion, the microfluidic probe will undoubtedly prove useful in the selective processing of many biological systems and maybe of particular utility in allowing in vitro manipulation of single-cells within native environments.

Andrew J. de Mello

References
Y. Didenko and K. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12196–12197 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Chen, M.-H. Yen, C.-W. Wei, Y.-C. Chuang and T.-H. Young, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2005, 15, 1147–1156 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Yoon, E. R. Choban, C. Kane, T. Tzedakis and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10466–10467 CrossRef CAS .
D. van Noort, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., 2005, 3384, 365–374 Search PubMed .
D. Juncker, H. Schmid and E. Delamarche, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 822–828 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Experimental apparatus for chemical aerosol flow synthesis. a. Solutions of high boiling liquids containing appropriate precursors are diluted and then atomized by an ultrasonic nebulizer. The volatile solvent boils off, leaving submicron liquid droplets that are carried through the tube furnace by a gas flow. Reactions inside the heated liquid droplets result in the preparation of narrow distributions of quantum dot semiconductor particles, which are trapped in a liquid-filled bubbler. b. Photograph of nebulized mist produced by the ultrasonic fountain. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, The American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Setup of a DPSS laser direct-writing system for glass micromachining. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the electrochemical microreactor for cofactor regeneration and subsequent biocatalytic substrate conversion. Reaction depletion zones are marked in grey and adjustment of the width or focusing of the substrate stream is achieved by changing the ratio of volumetric flow rates, Q2/Q1. (Adapted with permission. Copyright 2005, The American Chemical Society.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
