Insights into organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials: organoimido functionalized polyoxomolybdates  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1DT04376E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1DT04376E
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 4945-4975Insights into organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials: organoimido functionalized polyoxomolybdates

        
          
            Ankita 
            Pardiwala†
, 
      
        
          
            Shubham 
            Kumar†
 and 

        
          
            Ritambhara 
            Jangir
          
        
      *
      Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, Ichchanath, Surat-395 007, Gujarat, India. E-mail: ritambhara.jangir@chem.svnit.ac.in
Received 
      30th December 2021
    , Accepted 13th February 2022First published on 14th February 2022AbstractPolyoxometalates (POMs) are polyatomic anions that comprise transition metal group 5 (V, Nb, Ta) or group 6 (Mo, W) oxyanions connected together by shared oxygen atoms. POMs are fascinating because of their exclusive and remarkable characteristics. One of the most interesting features of POMs is their capability to function as an electron relay by performing stepwise multi-electron redox reactions while maintaining their structural integrity. Functionalization of POMs with amino organic compounds results in organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates, which have aroused interest due to augmentation of their properties. Comprehensive study has shown that the synthesis methodologies to obtain desired organoimido derivatives of POMs by employing various imido-releasing reagents have progressed drastically in recent decades, particularly the innovative DCC-dehydrating technique. These organoimido functionalized POMs have been used as major building blocks to develop unique nanostructured organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials. Many conventional organic synthesis processes such as Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling and esterification reactions have been performed with organoimido functionalized POMs where the presence of POM triggered the reaction process. Thus, investigation of the reactivity of organoimido derivatives of POMs foreshadows the intriguing future of POMs chemistry.
1. Introduction
Polyoxometalates (POMs) are metal–oxygen clusters that retain their molecular identity in solid and liquid states.1 This is a vast class of anionic clusters made up of oxygen and transition metal atoms (usually M = vanadium (V), molybdenum (Mo), or tungsten (W)) that have an enormous range of structural and electrical properties.2,3 POMs have triggered the interest of researchers in recent years due to their extraordinary physical and chemical properties. Due to changeable chemical structures and interesting features, these complexes have been employed in various fields such as medicine,4 catalysis,5–7 magnetism,8–10 and nanoscience.11,12 The first salt of a POM, ammonium 12-molybdophosphate, (NH4)3[PMo12O40] was synthesized by Berzelius in 1826; since then these materials have been the focus of extensive study.13 The chemistry of POMs has advanced drastically with the advancement of structure characterization techniques, particularly single X-ray diffraction, due to structural confirmation of POMs with precision.14 After the development of the famous Keggin structure in 193415 nine new POM structures have been identified sequentially, i.e. Dawson,16 Waugh,17 Silverton,18 Anderson,16 and Lindqvist,19 Finke,20 Standberg,21 Weakley,22 and Preyssler.23 These were among the innovative architectures reported in the years 1970–1980 (Table 1).
Table 1 Various polyoxometalates with their properties/applications




Sr. no.
POMs
Name
Properties/applications
Ref.




1



Keggin [α-XM12O40]n−
Electrochemical, electrocatalyst, solar cells and optoelectronics devices, photocatalytic and electroanalytical, supercapacitors, sensors and medicinal

52–60



2



Dawson [α-X2M18O62]n−
Catalytic, medicinal, anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-tumour, photosensitizing, redox mediators, electrochromical activity, degradation of dyes

61–70



3



Waugh [XMo9O32]6−
Photocatalytic, magnetism, photosensitizer

71–74



4



Silverton [XM12O42]8−
Photocatalytic, photoluminescence, magnetic and electrocatalytic.

75–78



5



Anderson [HxXMo6O24]n−
Photosensitizer, supramolecular chemistry, molecular device, catalysis, photochemistry energy storage, energy conversion photocatalysis, biopharmacy

79–88



6



Lindqvist [Mo6O19]n−
Photoelectronic, catalyst, sensor, electrochemical, batteries, redox activity, medicinal and photochromism

89–98



7



Finke [M4(X2W15)2]n−
Photoelectrochemical, electrochemical and water oxidation catalyst

99–101



8



Standberg [HnP2Mo5O23]n−
Medicinal, luminescent and electrochemical

102–108



9



Weakley [EuW10O36]9−
Magnetic and electrocatalytic

109 and 110


10



Preyssler [EuP5W30O110]12−
Electrocatalytic, photoluminescence, biocatalytic, photocatalytic and medicinal

111–119





POMs are ideal candidates for designing and constructing diverse dimensional architectures with the careful assortment of suitable cations and organic molecules. POMs can also oblige as electron containers owing to their ability for multi-electron reduction without losing their architecture.24 POMs are further valued because of their attractive electrical and optical properties, such as conductivity, photochromism, electrochromism and redox activities, which result in variety of potential applications, such as acting as solid-acid catalysts and electron-transfer catalysts for a variety of organic synthesis reactions.6,25–31 Yongge Wei et. al,32,33 A. Müller et al.34–47 and others48–51 have synthesised and structurally described a huge number of nanoscale large clusters of polyoxometalates and related assemblies such as chain-like Mo38, ball-like Mo132 and tyre-like Mo176 self-assembled from Mo36. These enormous clusters with strong nuclearity have proved to be ideal models for nanochemistry, materials science and mesoscopic physics.
In addition, Liu et al. have discovered and demonstrated that such POM nanoclusters may self-assemble into almost monodisperse vesicle-like nanoaggregates with spherical morphologies in solution.120,121
Despite the fact that POMs have been studied for 200 years due to their interesting molecular properties, little progress has been made in developing genuine, practical POM-based materials and advanced POM-based functional materials, as this is a complicated and challenging research area.14 The utilisation of organic ligands or organometallic units to functionalize POMs is a unique method for generating organic–inorganic hybrid materials based on POMs. These organically functionalized hybrid POMs have been synthesized by replacing one or more oxo or [MoOx]n+ groups with organic functional groups. After the successful development of these materials by Knoth and Harlow,122 Zonnevijlle and Pope,123 Ho and Klemperer,124 the area has been intensively explored and presently covers the most diverse category of POM derivatives.125 Such organic POMs derivatives offer the possibility of developing new POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials, which are created by synchronous covalent linking between POMs and organic molecules. The resulting unique hybrid materials comprise not only the advantages of organic materials, but also the advantages of high processability, fine-regular structure, and electrical properties.126 These hybrid materials are found to be highly chemical stable electron acceptors, and have the potential to produce intriguing synergistic effects.127 The distinctive architecture and possibility of novel functionalities means that hybrid materials have received a lot of attention. However, little progress has been achieved in producing such POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids in large quantities due to unexplored reliable synthesis methods for functionalization.128
Among all the polyoxometalates, derivatization of polyoxomolybdates has enlarged researchers’ interest in recent years129 due to strong d–π interaction between the delocalized π electrons of organic moiety and empty d orbitals of molybdenum. A significant number of arylimido derivatives, including polymers of the Lindqvist hexamolybdate complex ion i.e. [Mo6O19]2−, have been consistently synthesized.14,130–132 The Lindqvist-type hexamolybdate [Mo6O19]2− is one of the most explored POMs due to its simplicity and highly symmetric six centres.133–135 Functionalization with amino/isocyanate ligands to get organo-imido derivatives of POMs has been trending due to interesting properties and applications in various fields.14 The basic formula after functionalizing with organo-imido fragments is [Mo6O(19−x)(N–R)x]2−, where x = 1–6 and N–R is an organic unit formed from an isocyanate or a primary amine molecule linked to a molybdenum center via triple bond.89,136,137 This functionalization enables the creation of new organic–inorganic hybrid systems with changeable electrical properties based on the nature of the incorporated organic fragment.138 Later on, organoimido derivatives of POMs with varying distant active functional groups have been used as building blocks to manufacture complex covalently connected POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids, such as nanodumbbells, polymeric chains, and controlled POM networks.139 Peng discovered this modular building block technique for the synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials, which includes rational design and structure regulation.139 Yongge Wei et al. described numerous synthesis techniques for generating organoimido derivatives of POMs by varying organoimido-releasing reagents.140Table 2 summarizes the review reports by different research groups reported in last 15 years, and most of them focus on the synthesis and functionalization of polyoxometalates. To the best of our knowledge, none of the review articles includes all the functionalized hexamolybdates along with their potential applications and reactivity all together.
Table 2 Review reports by different research groups reported in the last 15 years




S. No
Research group
Main contribution
Ref.




1
Y. Yan et al.
Metallopolymers from organically modified polyoxometalates (MOMPs)

141



2
Y. Wei et al.
The chemistry of organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates

14



3
F. Lefebvre et al.
Polyoxometalates containing late transition and noble metal atoms

142



4
G. Li et al.
POM-based chiral hybrids synthesis via organoimidization covalent modification of achiral precursors

143



5
Z. Peng et al.
Rational synthesis of covalently bonded organic–inorganic hybrids

144



6
P. Gouzerh et al.
Functionalization of polyoxometalates: towards advanced applications in catalysis and materials science

145



7
R. Jangir et al.
Synthesis of mono-, di-, and polysubstituted imido derivatives of POMs, applications and reactivity
Present work




Here, we intend to review the reported synthesis methods sequentially of all types of functionalization, such as mono-, di-, and polysubstituted imido derivatives of POMs along with their applications. Almost all functionalized arylimido hexamolybdates reported in the last ∼1.5 decades are discussed here at length. Further active participation of these organoimido derivatives of POMs in coordination, addition polymerization, electropolymerization, carbon–carbon couplings, and esterification reactions is also thoroughly discussed. Apart from hexamolybdates, we also include other Lindqvist and Keggin-type POMs and their usability. At the end, we give a thorough perspective, future challenges and the current status of POM chemistry.
2. Organoimido derivatives of POMs: synthesis and applications
Among different organically derivatized POMs, the organo imido derivatives of POMs have gained considerable interest in recent years where the polymeric chain of the Lindqvist hexamolybdate cluster [Mo16O19]2− can be attained.139 Zubieta and Kang were the first to identify imidoylization of POMs, which have been significantly studied and developed by Maatta et al., Proust et al., and Errinton et al., using fundamental synthesis methods such as reaction of existing inorganic POMs with phosphonimines, isocyanates, and aromatic amines. Yongge Wei et al. introduced the dehydrating agent N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) into the synthesis method to achieve large yields of organoimido-derivatized POMs during imidoylation.146 A variety of reactive functional groups including alkynyl,147 hydroxyl,148 halo,136 nitro,149 terpyridine,150,151 and amino152 have been attached to POMs using DCC. The complex structure of covalently connected POMs-based organic–inorganic hybrids includes nanodumbbells, polymeric chains, and controlled networks.139 These hybrid materials, especially Lindqvist hexamolybdate organoimido derivatives containing multiple Mo–N bonds, have aroused a lot of research interest due to the so-called “synergistic interaction” caused by groupings of inorganic POMs and organic ligands (d–π interaction).
2.1 Organoimido derivatives of Lindqvist hexamolybdates
Lindqvist hexamolybdate ion [Mo6O19]2− is one of the best recognized POMs clusters due to higher thermal and chemical stability as well as its ease of fabrication.153 In the Lindqvist structure, a core oxide ion is surrounded by an octahedral cage made up of six metals and eighteen oxygen atoms. An octahedral environment surrounds each of the six molybdenum atoms. Each molybdenum atom is connected to oxygen by creating one terminal molybdenum-oxo group (Mo=O), four doubly bridging oxygen atoms (μ2-O atoms) and one central oxygen atom (μ6-O). The terminal oxygen atoms of the hexamolybdate can easily be replaced by various nitrogenous species, such as imido groups, diazoalkyl,154 and diazenido155 due to sufficient reactivity of molybdyl groups (Mo=O). Appreciation should go to the pioneering work of Maatta, Errington, and Proust et al., who have developed three distinct processes to synthesize imido derivatives of the hexamolybdate. As imido-releasing reagents, isocyanates,136,156 aromatic amines,146,157,158 and phosphinimines154,159 have been used. These methods are used to replace partially or completely the six terminal oxygen atoms on the hexamolybdate cluster. Many monosubstituted,136,146,154,156–166 disubstituted131,136,154,157,164,167–169 and multisubstituted organoimido157,170,171 derivatives of hexamolybdate have been synthesized in recent years and employed for various applications.
2.2 Monosubstituted imido derivatives of POMs
In 1991, Maatta and co-workers developed monofunctionalized organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate ion using phosphinimines as imido-releasing reagents following a two-day reflux process (∼85 °C) using anhydrous pyridine medium. As revealed by the study, despite extremely low surface charge density of the [Mo6O19]2− species, direct functionalization can be achieved in a simple and uncomplicated manner under mild conditions.159 Afterwards, Proust and co-workers revealed that this type of reaction also works well when anhydrous acetonitrile is refluxed instead of anhydrous pyridine using dry nitrogen gas atmosphere.172 Contamination can also occur due to partial hydrolysis of the imido derivatives or during initial workup or dissolution and dilution procedures. It was found that when three or four droplets of water were added to the electrochemical cell no immediate alteration in the polarogram was observed, but a few days later, a rise in the fraction of [Mo6O19]2− was noticed. This implies that the significance of hydrolysis should not be overstated.172 Despite the use of non-handy phosphinimine reagents, a lengthy procedure, and rigorous purification method of the products, these reactions show efficient direct functionalization of the hexamolybdate salt. Furthermore, through aza-Wittig reactions, phosphinimines are effective reagents to incorporate the C=N group in organic compounds from the carbonyl group.173 Various investigations confirm that the molybdyl group in the hexamolybdate ion acts as carbonyl of aldehydes, ketone, or esters in certain ways due to having similar chemical properties. The arylimido monosubstituents of the hexamolybdate cluster can be synthesized using the phosphinamine method.162 The styrylimido ligand can be used as a reactive site, capable of transporting its metal complex into a standard polymeric environment, as demonstrated in this study. A similar protocol was used for the synthesis of other unique types of hybrid inorganic/organic polymers that contain covalently linked organoimido-metal complexes as functioning backbone substituents.162 However, attempts to create alkylimido counterparts using this method failed due to the higher reactivity of phosphinalkylimines than the equivalent phosphinarylimines, which results in reduction and rearrangement of hexamolybdate cluster.156 Errington et al. developed a new procedure for the synthesis of both alkyl and aryl organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate by the reaction of alkyl and aryl isocyanates with [Mo6O19]2− at high temperatures in acetonitrile or benzonitrile, and were able to get a crystal structure of the alkylimido derivative of the hexamolybdate, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O18(NBut)].156 Following that, Maatta and co-workers excellently improved this method by employing dry pyridine as the solvent.136 This homologous oxo/(NAr) hexamolybdate derivative gives plenty of opportunities to know how the electrochemical properties of the clusters vary with different degrees of substitution. The hexamolybdate as well as its mono-, bis-, and tetrakis(NAr) derivatives were studied by cyclic voltammetry in acetonitrile.136 The alkyl isocyanate reacts more readily with hexamolybdate cluster in dry pyridine even at room temperature, whereas higher temperature (reflux for longer time) is required for the reaction of aryl isocyanates with [Mo6O19]2− in dry pyridine.161,174 The organoimido ligands provide the hexamolybdate cluster with more electron density than an oxo ligand, making the [Mo6O18(NR)]2− complexes more difficult to diminish than the [Mo6O19]2− parent.161 The reaction is found to be similar to the formation of imines when isocyanates react with aldehydes or ketones, implying that molybdyl and carbonyl are chemically similar. Tertiary amines are some of the most widely used catalysts to promote moderate-temperature isocyanate reactions with alcohols, carboxylic acids, and water.175 Maatta has also produced a number of monosubstituted organoimido derivatives using this modified method, comprising the charge-transfer ferrocenylimido complex, (nBu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18] (FcN = (η5-C5H5)Fe(μ–η5:σ-C5H4N)) (1) (Scheme 1).160 The ferrocenyl group acts as donor and polyoxometalate acts as acceptor and a covalent bond is formed to produce the ferrocenylimidohexamolybdate complex (isolated as the tetrabutylammonium salt). The integrity of the donor–acceptor system will be preserved in the solution.160 (nBu4N)2[(Mo5O18)Mo≡N–Z–N≡Mo(O18Mo5)] (Z = p-C6H4 (2), p-(C6H3Me) and (3) 1,4-cyclo-C6H10 (4)) were the first organodiimido-bridged bis(hexamolybdate) derivatives developed by Maatta (Scheme 2).174
 Scheme 1  Reaction of [Bu4N]2[Mo6O19] with ferrocenyl isocyanate to produce (nBu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18] (1) in pyridine.160 
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of organodi-imido bridged bis(hexamolybdate) complexes 2–4.174 
Later on, Errington et al. used a new method for the preparation of organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate ions using aromatic primary amines in benzonitrile and triethylamine at 150 °C. However, this reaction requires relatively harsh conditions and the product comes in the form of a mixture containing mono- and di-functionalized derivatives and several oligomers. This method includes an alternative pathway for synthesizing organoimido derivatives to use more inexpensive and more readily available amines as imido-releasing reagents.176 Furthermore, this reaction verified the resemblances between molybdyl and carbonyl groups because it accurately represents the Schiff base reaction between primary amines and aldehydes as well as ketones, which included the nucleophilic addition of an amine to the carbonyl followed by removal of water.177
Roesner et al. have developed an interesting method in which dry pyridine has been replaced with benzonitrile as the solvent. Under heating conditions using dry N2 gas, aromatic amines with highly electron-donating substituents, such as alkoxy groups, can produce mono organoimido derivatives of a hexamolybdate in respectable yields (Scheme 3).158 Conformational flexibility of the ligands offers significant interest in synthesizing certain supramolecular species such as basket handle adducts, the development of soluble polymers, and the connection of polyoxometalates to solid supports. This intrinsic flexibility could also be a factor in the inability to crystallize the products.158
 Scheme 3  Bis(hexamolybdate) species are made up of the hexamolybdate ion.158 
Yongge Wei et al. have been interested in the chemistry of POMs derivatives, including developing new synthesis techniques for organoimido derivatives.32,178–180 Based on the investigations of Maatta, Errington, and Proust's groups in this field, it is proved that the molybdyl is an inorganic analogue of the carbonyl group in organic chemistry under certain conditions, hence some organic synthesis techniques can be extended into the chemistry of POM derivatives. If the released water can be taken out from the reaction mixture sequentially using common dehydration reagents of organic chemistry, Errington's aromatic-amine route will be irreversible and fast and the process will also be completed at the end.181 The same group, in collaboration with Peng, revealed that carbodiimides like DPC (N,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide) and DCC (N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide) are most commonly used dehydrating reagents in organic synthesis which can used for the synthesis of organoimido derivatives.146 It is possible to drastically speed up the reaction of [Mo6O19]2− with aromatic primary amines, and an unique synthesis process using DCC-dehydrating was established to produce arylimido POM derivatives. UV-Vis absorption experiments have been used to explore the electronic characteristics of functionalized hexamolybdates. The metal–oxygen cluster and the organic conjugated segment have a strong electronic interaction.146 The metal–oxygen cluster has been functionalized with a wide variety of aromatic primary amines and significant an association was found in less than 12 hours in hot acetonitrile, pyridine, or N,N′-dimethylformamide using N2 atmosphere. Furthermore, with simple bench modifications, pure crystalline compounds with high yield can easily be obtained. Most importantly, the reaction accepts extra distant functional groups on the aromatic ring, such as iodo, ethynyl, and terpyridyl groups.146,182 A terpyridine ligand can successfully be connected to a hexamolybdate cluster via Mo–N imido bond. In its crystalline state, these mono imido arylimido derivatives of POMs create a dimeric structure through π–π stacking.182 Through controlled molecule-module-assembly technique, such compounds create excellent building blocks for constructing POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials molecular and polymeric hybrids, but studies on their physical properties have yet to be conducted in a systematic manner. Efforts are being made to investigate the electrical, optical, and photophysical properties of this novel class of hybrids.144
Yongge Wei et al. have also employed other dehydrating agents such as calcium chloride, 4 Å zeolite, magnesium sulfate, calcium hydride, N,N′-carbonyldiimidazole, or phosphorus pentoxide instead of carbodiimides. However, these dehydrating reagents did not have the same activating impact as DCC.146 This indicates that DCC is not only a dehydrating agent that removes the water produced during the process, but also plays a role in increasing the electrophilicity of the molybdenum atom by activating the terminal Mo=O bond. This is similar to how it activates the carboxyl group in amide and peptide synthesis.183 Furthermore, an excessive amount of DCC can hinder the process due to formation of byproducts such as (Bu4N)2+(C6H11NH3)2+[β-Mo8O26]·2DMF by side reactions with the molybdate ions and the initial produced products.146 It should be noted that aromatic amines containing electron-withdrawing substituents such as fluoro, chloro, and nitro groups, as well as aminopyridines, make this reaction extremely difficult due to low nucleophilicity or basicity, as well as their ease of oxidation.164 This method was useful for the synthesis of alkylimido derivatives, due to aggressive reduction of the parent molybdate ion and generally production of single electron reduction products, [Mo6O19]2− by aliphatic primary amines in reflux condition.146,164 Remarkably, it was shown that in the presence of DCC, a proton may accurately speed up the synthesis process when α-[Mo8O26]4− is reacted with aromatic primary amines under conditions identical to those employed to functionalize octamolybdates with organoimido groups. The mono organoimido derivatives were effectively generated in high quality and yields.164 A significant number of mono-imido hexamolybdates have been developed through the acid-assisting pathway where an extensive range of imido-releasing reagents such as aromatic primary amines with fused rings, quickly oxidized aliphatic primary amines, as well as those containing electron-withdrawing groups such as fluoro, chloro, bromo and nitro groups have been utilized.164,165,184–186 In this acid-assisting pathway, the proton released by hydrochloride salts plays an important role for the formation of mono-functionalized derivatives. Furthermore, when active aromatic amines with electron-donating substituents, such as alkyl, alkoxy, and alkylamino groups, react with α-[Mo8O26]4−, only the bi-functionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate are formed, whereas inert aromatic amines with electron-withdrawing substituents, such as fluoro, chloro, and nitro groups, get oxidized by the octamolybdate ion. Using a typical bioactivity test protocol, mono-functionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate with the greatest electron-withdrawing trifluoromethyl and trifluoromethoxy groups showed herbicidal activity.184 When tested by the MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay, the mono-functionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate, which had the highly electron-withdrawing nitro group, had some effects on cellular growth suppression of K562 cells.186 Additionally, increasing the amount of hydrochloride salts can also speed up the process and allow the process to take place at room temperature. Although additional research is needed to fully understand the reaction mechanism, one probable role for the proton is to form a complex with DCC, therefore improving the electrophilic capacity of DCC to attack the molybdyl oxo group. Furthermore, when compared to α-octamolybdate ions, hexamolybdate ions and their derivatives are significantly more stable in an acidic organic solvent. The proton also activates the conversion of α-octamolybdate to hexamolybdate via the breaking and reassembly process.
The same research group has reported another method for the synthesis of POMs derivatives through organic–inorganic hybrids. This method, which includes the esterification of carboxylic acid in the presence of DCC, functionalization with carboxylic acids such as cinnamic acids and bibasic acids, is proposed for generating novel POM-based polymer hybrids and supramolecular building blocks. UV-Vis absorption was used to examine the electrical characteristics of these functionalized hexamolybdates (6–10) (Scheme 4).187
 Scheme 4  In the presence of DCC, POM is esterified with a carboxylic acid.187 
Two local anaesthetic hexamolybdate derivatives bearing an ester of electron-withdrawing group (R = p-CH3OOCC6H4, p-CH3CH2OOCC6H4) have been synthesized in the presence of DCC in acetronitrile. These compounds were unstable in basic solution, prompting the local anaesthetic analogue to be released. Hence, this property opens up a new avenue for the controlled release of drugs for pharmaceutical development.188 Moreover, bromo/iodo-functionalized aryl hexamolybdate derivatives react with olefins in Pd-catalyzed Heck reaction. Since the olefinic units are readily available and act as reactive polymerization building blocks, the reaction might be practiced using hybrid POMs for a controlled and reasonable reaction pathway.188 Later, thorough study on a series of organoimido compounds with hydroxyl functionalization has been done. This compound takes part in hydrogen bonding interactions, which leads to supramolecular assembly of organoimido-derivatized hexamolybdates and supplies some accessible precursors for subsequent alteration, such as esterification. The optical band gaps of these compounds were calculated using their solid state reflectance spectra to investigate their potential applicability in conductivity.189 When polyoxometalates are linked together to behave as endocyclic metal centres, bisarylamines with o-alkoxy chain substituents generate semirigid metallamacrocycles. These POM-based metallamacrocycles have a strong chirality and can easily be packed into homochiral nanochannels. Thus, development of a new technology for the reliable synthesis of chiral POMs, particularly chiral metallamacrocycles, from achiral building blocks has been done. Their redox characteristics, resolution, and potential usage in catalysis, absorption and separation, and nonlinear optical (NLO) materials were all thoroughly investigated.190
In 2011, the same research group documented three rigid rod-like conjugated organic-POM hybrids (11, 12 and 13) with –NH2 functional group at terminal position with varied rod lengths and substituents on the rods. Synthesis of hexamolybdate derivatives 11 and 12 was done by combining equimolar aromatic diamines in a single pot (Scheme 5), whereas complex 13 was obtained by reaction between octamolybdate ion and the aromatic diamine in the presence of DCC in the ratio of 1:1:1.75 (Scheme 6). Additionally, here the chemical reactivity of amino groups makes them beneficial for the design and manufacture of high-level POM-organic hybrids.152
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of aromatic diamine-based monosubstituted arylimido hexamolybdates 11 and 12.152 
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of monosubstituted arylimido hexamolybdates, 13.152 
In 2012, Yongge Wei et al. proved through DFT (density functional theory) investigations that amines are the best imido-releasing reagents for the synthesis of imido functionalized polyoxometalates. The direct imidoylation of hexamolybdate with methylamine was discovered to be a kinetically and thermodynamically unfavourable procedure. The energy barriers of carbodiimide-catalyzed activation of [Mo6O19]2− were revealed to be related to the electron-withdrawing abilities of substituents on carbodiimides.191
Qichun Zhang et al. have revealed that pyrene participates in covalent bonding with POM through the imido group, resulting in an unique organic–inorganic hybrid. The discovery could lead to a way for the development of new charge transfer hybrid clusters with organic functionalized POMs, as well as an important direction for their application in optical and electrical devices. These authors elucidated the mechanistic route that drives charge transfer in organoimido derivatives of POMs and proposed a new approach for developing new organic-POM electron transfer hybrids.192 A year later, Tianbo Liu et al. developed two types of nearly identical macroionic molecular rods that self-assembled into “blackberry”-type supramolecular structures in dilute solution. These structures had nearly identical charge densities and morphologies except for their different enclosed centre metal atoms. This study shows that long-range counter ion-mediated electrostatic attraction is sensitive to tiny changes in macroions, implying that macroion selection and preference should be exact. Such discovery could lead to the understanding of biomolecule recognition and self-assembly, as well as the design of polyelectrolyte materials.193
Yongge Wei et al. in 2013 reported synthesis of four novel organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate with distant carboxyl groups, using 3-aminobenzoic acid, 4-amino-3-methylbenzoic acid, 3-amino-4-methylbenzoic acid, and 3-amino-2-methylbenzoic acid as the imido-releasing agents using the DCC method. The solid state study shows that hydrogen-bonding interactions significantly contribute to the creation of supramolecular assemblies of these substances. Furthermore, the chemical reactivity of the carboxyl groups makes these molecules potentially useful in the design and manufacture of advanced POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials.137 A new organoimido derivative of hexamolybdate, (Bu4N)2[O18Mo6≡NC6H4-4-COOH] (14) has also been synthesized using reflux conditions (∼110 °C) in anhydrous acetonitrile overnight by taking the starting materials (Bu4N)4[Mo8O26], DCC, and p-aminobenzoic acid hydrochloride (Scheme 7). This compound was further linked to copper ions for successful construction of a new hexamolybdate-based paddle-wheel macrocluster, which is described in detail in the reactivity section (Scheme 28). The results show that this strategy is realistic and effective for fabricating POM macrostructures with more controllable and designable interesting properties.193
 Scheme 7  POM functionalization with aromatic carboxylic acid to generate coordination assembly with Cu2+.193 
In 2014, Yongge Wei et al. developed aliphatic organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate based on amantadine, using DCC as dehydrating agent. The findings indicate that there is covalent linking between bioactive ligands like amantadine and POMs when the DCC-dehydrating process is used which could boost their clinical cancer therapeutic potential.98 The same group has employed organically functionalized Lindqvist POM (15) in energy storage devices as anode material. LIBs (lithium-ion batteries) are demonstrated in Scheme 8 where the anodes are made of pure organically grafted POMs. These authors developed a method for property-oriented organic grafting to improve the electronic conductivities of polyoxometalates (POMs) applied in lithium-ion batteries. Organic grafting of POMs provides a good opportunity for enhancing electronic conductivities of POMs due to improved metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) via strong d–π electronic interactions.93
 Scheme 8  Schematic redox reactions within organo-POM anode.93 
In 2015, the same group reported the development and synthesis of a variety of surfactants using hexamolybdate as a polar head group in order to understand their crystalline characteristics (Scheme 9). This work reveals the unique significance of the lengths of alkyl tails which contribute to the packing of hybrid surfactants. This discovery enabled the development of POM-based organic hybrids having a crystalline nature and used as liquid-crystal functional materials.194
 Scheme 9  Generation of hexamolybdate as the polar head group to produce surfactants.194 
Furthermore, synthesis of a series of pyridine-functionalized mono arylimido substituted hexamolybdates has been done and the reactivity of their alkylation at the heterocyclic nitrogen atom was investigated, and a class of alkylated compounds based on POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid zwitterions was effectively produced. This is found to be an effective method for constructing zwitterionic clusters which includes post-functionalization organically derivatized POMs (Scheme 10).195
 Scheme 10  Alkylation of pyridine-functionalized hexamolybdate with iodoalkanes.195 
The impact of post-functionalization on the characteristics of parent organo-imido products as well as the introduction of various post-functional groups on organo-imido hexamolybdate with additional programmed chemical properties have also been investigated (Scheme 11).196
 Scheme 11  Schematic representation of the post-functionalization protocol.196 
A metal-oxo nanoscale cluster (n-Bu4N)2[Mo5NaO13(OCH3)4(NO)], (MLPOM), which is synthesised from monolacunary Lindqvist-type polyoxomolybdate (MLPOM), particularly reacts with Hg2+ in methanol/water mixture through structural transformation. Thus, MLPOM can be employed as a colorimetric sensor to detect the presence of Hg2+ through a simple and label-free method for selectively detecting aqueous Hg2+. In industrial waste, the colorimetric sensor has been utilized to detect mercury contamination.197
In 2016, R. Murugavel et al. reported the superficial synthesis of mono-functionalized arylimido hexamolybdates, (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)] and (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(2,2′,6,6′-tetraisopropylbenzidine)] by reacting the parent POM, (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O19] with a sequence of aniline derivatives (Scheme 12). When the surface of the hexamolybdate is modified by aryl amines, the transformation from normally inert parent complex ion to useful catalysts occurs, which efficiently catalyses the oxidation of cyclohexene to cyclohexene epoxide and benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde and benzoic acid.198
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of mono-functionalized arylimido hexamolybdates, (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)] (20) and (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(2,2′,6,6′-tetraisopropylbenzidine)] (21).198 
Yongge Wei et al. have developed the first organoimido-POMs-based fluorescent single-molecule switch by mono-substituting hexamolybdate with isoquinoline moiety. This hybrid POM demonstrates proton-induced switchable fluorescence through aqueous acetonitrile solution at room temperature. The organo functionalized polyoxometalates-based sensors have shown interesting proton-responsive switchable fluorescence activity.90 The same group has also investigated the degradable organoimido derivative of hexamolybdate with cleavable organic group. This hybrid POM shows good pharmacodynamics in human malignant glioma cells (U251) as well as the ability to cross the blood–brain barrier and less toxic behaviour in rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. Thus, new possibilities for the development of degradable anticancer drugs for clinical cancer treatment have been opened.199 John Fielden et al. have proved that polyoxometalates (POMs) can be outstanding redox active acceptors for high-performance second-order nonlinear optical (NLO) chromophores. It is a potential new class of NLO materials with much better transparency/non-linearity trade-offs and reversible electrochemistry than related organic systems.95
In 2017, Diego Venegas-Yazigi et al. reported the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical properties of the first Re organometallic hybrid POM [nBu4N][Mo6O18NC6H4-CH2-N3C2H2-Re-phen(CO)3] (Scheme 13). This study reveals that the hybrid ligand contains a new, more intense band that obscures intra polyanion charge transfer. The electrochemical results reveal that condensation of the phenyl–triazole molecule quenches the strong acceptor feature of polyoxometalate fragment.92
 Scheme 13  Synthesis of [nBu4N][Mo6O18NC6H4-CH2-N3C2H2-Re-phen(CO)3] (22).92 
Reaction of α-octamolybdates and corresponding hydrazides results in the benzoyldiazenido functionalized polyoxometalates, (nBu4N)3[Mo6O18 (=N=NCOAr)] (Ar = Ph (23a), Ph-o-Cl (23b), Ph-p-Cl (23c), Ph-m-Cl (23d), Ph-o, p-Cl2 (23e), Ph-p-Br (23f), Ph-p-NO2 (23g), Ph-m-NO2 (23h) and Ph-p-OMe (23i) in dry acetonitrile with dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) as a dehydrating agent (Scheme 14). When compared to hexamolybdate and related hydrazide ligands, most of the hybrid compounds exhibit higher anti-tumor efficacy. The anti-tumor effect of these compounds was investigated using their inhibitory actions against K562.200
 Scheme 14  Synthesis route of benzoyldiazenido functionalized polyoxometalates (23a–23i).200 
A hybrid molecule POM-TANI@EB (TANI: trianiline; EB: emeraldine base) (24) has been developed where Lindqvist hexamolybdate has been functionalized with N,N′-bis(4′-amino-2,6-dimethylphenyl)-1,4-quinonediimine. This hybrid POM has found to be a redox-responsive and conducting oligomer with controlled morphologies (Scheme 15). This discovery opens a new view of self-assembly systems based on polyoxometalates that could be used as conducting functional materials.201
 Scheme 15  Synthesis route of a hybrid molecule POM-TANI@EB (24).201 
John Fielden et al. have investigated ten chromophores based on organoimido polyoxometalate (POM) and showed that imido-Lindqvist clusters are particularly effective acceptors in second-order NLO (nonlinear optical) materials when used with short (phenyl) π-bridges. Here, the substituents on the aryl ring significantly impact the nature of electronic transitions in arylimido-POMs.138 The NLO response of a hexamolybdate metal cluster was investigated using time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT). A conjugated polymer with a metal cluster as a hanging side-chain has already been researched in terms of synthesis and optical characteristics. This research elucidates the NLO behaviour of a conjugated polymer with a metal cluster POM, which could lead to new approaches to developing high-performance NLO materials.202 Further, it is found that employing polyoxometalates as co-adsorbents in dye-sensitized photocathodes (p-DSSCs) boosts open circuit voltage (VOC) up to 100% in some conditions, and with well-matched dye/mediator combinations, ∼50% fall in photocurrent cancels out any improvement in effectiveness. The findings suggest that charged and electron-accepting co-adsorbents can be used to suppress recombination and enhance photovoltage. Applications that benefit from increased charge lifetime, such as solar capacitors, photoelectrochemistry or photochromic devices have also been explored.203
In 2018, Diego Venegas-Yazigi et al. reported two novel aromatic organo-imido polyoxometalates containing an electron donor triazole group ([nBu4N]2[Mo6O18NC6H4N3C2H2]) and a highly conjugated fluorene ([nBu4N]2[Mo6O18NC13H9]). Electrochemical and spectroscopic characteristics of several organo-imido complexes were investigated. A theoretical investigation of redox potentials and excitation analysis were used to evaluate the effect of the interaction with a metal centre on the substitution of the organo-imido fragment. The results demonstrate a bathochromic shift caused by charge transfer processes driven by the increase in conjugation in organic fragment. The electrochemical studies’ cathodic shift demonstrates electrical communication and conjugation among both organic and inorganic fragments.204
In 2019, Benoît Champagne et al. reported a theoretical analysis of second-order nonlinear optical responses of Lindqvist-type organoimido polyoxometalates. Density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) with the B97X-D range-separated hybrid exchange–correlation functional were used to describe the field-induced effects of second-order nonlinear optical characteristics of Lindqvist-type organoimido polyoxometalates carrying donor and acceptor substituents to unravel the relationships between their structures and their first hyperpolarizabilities. The findings show that polyoxometalate moieties are strong candidates for achieving significant second-order nonlinear optical responses while maintaining a wide transparency window.205 Further studies by Ashraf Janjua et al. show that organic–inorganic hybrid adducts having POM have proved to be effective materials in the field of optoelectronics. The theoretical investigation demonstrates that the behaviour of organoimido hexamolybdates can be adjusted by modifying the NLO response, which could be valuable to scientists for the development of suitable NLO materials.206
In 2020, Yongge Wei et al. documented selective oxidation of anilines using hydrogen peroxide catalysed by a molybdenum oxide complex, [N(C4H9)4]2[Mo6O19] (Scheme 16). Selective oxidation of anilines can be accomplished to yield different symmetric/asymmetric azobenzene and azoxybenzene molecules in high quantities by using H2O2 as an eco-acceptable oxidant. The method was applied to variety of anilines substrates having a number of different functional groups. The mechanistic studies observed extremely active reactive and mysterious imido molybdenum complexes as intermediates.97
 Scheme 16  Oxidation of anilines by [N(C4H9)4]2[Mo6O19].97 
Recently, Mujica et al. have developed a hybrid material by dispersing the polyoxometalate [nBu4N]2[Mo6O18NC13H9] functionalized with 2-aminofluorene (POMAF) and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) in 1,3-dioxolane. The material shows peroxidase-like activity and can be applied for the amperometric quantification of hydrogen peroxide.207
2.3 Disubstituted imido derivatives of POMs
The bifunctionalized organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate are the simplest and most prevalent possible building blocks for POM-based hybrids among organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate. A. Proust et al. found that the cis-diimido derivative was produced even when simply one equivalent of Ph3P=NPh was reacted with [Mo6O19]2−. Derivatization of polyoxometalates may afford efficient pathways to promote electronic coupling in charge-transfer materials based on organic donors and permit polyoxometalates to be merged into conducting polymers.208 Though, when two equivalents of Ph3P=NPh were used, mono- and cis-diimido derivatives produced along with unreacted hexamolybdate anions. It is also difficult to isolate consecutive derivatives because they frequently co-crystallize in the crystalline stage. The significance of hydrolysis should not be overstated. Nonetheless, it could explain part of the discrepancy between solid-state and solution compositions.154 Maatta et al. were the first to investigate di-organoimido derivatives thoroughly. They discovered that reacting (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19] with two equivalents of 2,6-diisopropylphenyl isocyanate in pyridine under reflux condition for eight days yields the cis-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate (nBu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-diisopropylphenyl). The route is low-efficient due to the time-consuming process. Moreover, it has been found that the crude yields contained a combination of higher- and lower-substituted hexamolybdates, making large-scale isolation of the desired difunctionalized compounds difficult and impracticable. The availability of homologous oxo/(NAr) hexamolybdate derivatives allows researchers to investigate how the electrochemical characteristics of clusters respond to varied degrees of substitution.136,161 Yongge Wei et al. attempted to manufacture di-organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate using the DCC-dehydrating approach. When the same technique with a stoichiometric proportion of two equivalents of aromatic primary amines was used as in the case of mono-substituted derivatives, production of disubstituted derivatives in desired yields failed at first. Instead, a combination of different polysubstituted hexamolybdates was produced, due to the presence of six equally reactive sites of hexamolybdate ion. However, using this reaction sequence to functionalize the α-isomer of the octamolybdate ion, α-[Mo8O26]4−, led to selective synthesis of difunctionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate with high purity and yield. A novel and very effective method has been discovered for synthesizing bifunctionalized organoimido hexamolybdates selectively. Through this method it is simple to add two functional groups to a hexamolybdate cluster; it opens the door for main chain-POM-containing hybrid polymers.131 This innovative approach simplifies the synthesis of a variety of di-organoimido hexamolybdates using simple bench procedures.164,209 For example, the equivalent di-organoimido hexamolybdates are obtained by reacting (nBu4N)2[α-Mo8O26] with DCC and 4-iodo-2,6-diisopropylaniline or 4-ethynyl-2,6-dimethylaniline in a proportion of 1:2:2 in dry acetonitrile under reflux condition of 6 to 12 hours in good yields (Scheme 17). Both of these compounds feature a cis-disubstituted structure with two active functional groups at the end, making them useful building blocks for developing new organic–inorganic hybrids.209
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of bifunctionalized clusters, 25 and 26.209 
Min Zhang et al. have proved by theoretical studies that both cis- and trans-isomers of di-organoimido hexamolybdates can be produced in the same reaction in 4:1 ratio due to presence of four cis terminal oxo groups, and only one trans terminal oxo reactive site in mono-organoimido derivative when steric and electrical effects of imido groups are considered negligible. When steric hindrance is taken into account, which is highly common in organic substitution processes, the trans-isomer increases to more than 25% and becomes the main product. However, contrary to predictions, the trans-disubstituted hexamolybdates were barely found when the aforesaid reaction pathway was employed. This indicates that disubstituted hexamolybdate with arylimido ligands favours generation of the cis-isomeric derivative. The presence of an existing imido substituent generates an activating impact on the neighbouring molybdyl groups, implying that the steric effect is less essential here. Certainly, density functional theory showed cis-disubstituted derivatives are more stable than the trans-isomers.210
By utilising the aromatic primary amines approach, Errington reported a trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate, (nBu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NC6H4NH2)2], via the reaction of (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19] with 1,4-phenylenediamine in a 1:2 ratio. Their findings suggest that, in the given particular supportive conditions, the trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate is a kinetically more stable compound that can be separated under particular supportive conditions. It also strongly implies that the mechanism of direct functionalization of hexamolybdate with aromatic primary amines differs significantly from that of phosphinimines or isocyanates. The aromatic primary amines approach makes it relatively easy to make trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate derivatives.176 This research group retested DCC-dehydrating technique for the direct functionalization of hexamolybdate by taking stoichiometric proportions of (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19] and the associated aromatic primary amines in response to the aforementioned concept.168,169 The products have smaller optical band gap of 2.25 eV than the parent hexamolybdate, as seen in a semiconductor, suggesting that the optical band gap of polyoxometalates could be controlled effectively via chemical modification through suitable organic ligands. In the solid state, two anion clusters form a dimer via π–π stacking of phenyl rings. The dimers connect together via C–H⋯O hydrogen bonding interactions and produce 1D chain. This type of supramolecular arrangement, together with its semiconductivity, suggests that organoimido derivatives can potentially applied as organic–inorganic hybrid conducting materials.168 By carefully controlling the refluxing time, it is possible to achieve reasonable yields of both cis- and trans-disubstituted imido complexes by reacting (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19] with two equivalents of DCC in acetonitrile and two equivalents of various active aromatic primary amines having electron-donating substituents, such as 2,6-dimethylaniline and o-anisidine. In general, a careful planning of reaction conditions can yield the cis-isomer; for example, after a 24-hour refluxing procedure (nBu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2-methoxy-C6H4) can be extracted. The solid UV-Vis and NIR reflectance spectroscopy analysis confirmed the semiconductive nature (band gap of 2.55 eV). Thus, these complexes can be employed in constructing catenulate POM-based organic/inorganic hybrid molecular materials.168 A relatively short refluxing duration, on the other hand, favours the synthesis of the trans-isomer; for example, the molecule (nBu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3) was obtained after just 6 hours of refluxing. This is the first trans-bifunctionalized derivative that has been synthesized using such a simple method. The electrical, optical, and photophysical properties of these new linear hybrids have also been explored in one dimension (Scheme 18).211
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of (nBu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3) (27).211 
A family of mixed disubstituted organoimido hexamolybdates has successfully been synthesized by using a one-pot procedure in decent yields, involving discrete aromatic moieties, aromatic and aliphatic moieties, and various cis-configured aliphatic moieties (Scheme 19). The time-dependent electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) technique was employed to monitor the functionalization of POMs. The chiral separation and supramolecular assembly of mixed di- and polysubstituted organoimido hexamolybdates containing different remote reactive groups, as well as the design and synthesis of multifunctional hybrid materials derived from mixed ligands with potential photoelectric properties, are currently being explored.212
 Scheme 19  One-pot synthesis of bifunctionalized POM using mixed ligands (2,6-dimethylaniline and 2,6-diisopropylaniline).212 
A new trans-dinitrosyl-substituted polyoxometalate, (NBu4)4[Mo6O17(NO)2] (29) was synthesized with high purity and modest yield by employing a highly selective reaction technique based on the well-known N,N-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) imidoylization method under mild reaction circumstances (Scheme 20). 29 has been decomposed to generate therapeutic NO species. This investigation provided a new path to controlled-release technology for NO storage and targeted delivery. Such a study could open up new avenues for medicinal product development.213
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of trans-dinitrosyl-substituted polyoxometalate (NBu4)4[Mo6O17(NO)2] (29).213 
In 2014, trans-disubstituted aliphatic organoimido derivatives were successfully synthesized for the first time (Scheme 21). Hexamolybdate based on amantadine, (nBu4N)2cis-[Mo6O17(≡NC10H15)2] (30) and (nBu4N)2trans-[Mo6O17(≡NC10H15)2] (31) could be obtained as signal crystals. The crystal structure of the trans isomer provided better understanding of these disubstituted derivatives. The results suggest that by using the DCC-dehydrating procedure bioactive ligands such as amantadine can be covalently attached to POMs, which may have potential applications in clinical cancer treatment.98
 Scheme 21  Synthesis approach for compound (nBu4N)2cis-[Mo6O17(NC10H15)2] (31) and (nBu4N)2trans-[Mo6O17(NC10H15)2] (32).98 
R. Murugavel et al. have reported the superficial synthesis of difunctionalized arylimido hexamolybdates (nBu4N)2[Mo6O17(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)2] (33) when a mixture of (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19], an aromatic amine, and dicyclohexyl carbodiimide (DCC) are heated under reflux in anhydrous acetonitrile under nitrogen for 18 hours (Scheme 22). It has been found an effective and selective olefin epoxidation catalyst.198
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of difunctionalized arylimido hexamolybdates, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O17(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)2] (33).198 
Recently, Janjua et al. have predicted the NLO response of disubstituted organoimido hexamolybdate. In these organic–inorganic hybrid compounds, a considerable molecular second-order NLO response has been observed, particularly in [Mo6O17cis-(p-MeOC6H4N)2]2− and [Mo6O17trans-(p-MeOC6H4N)]2−, which have static second-order polarizability (βvec) estimated to be 1949.60 au and 1565.10 au, respectively. These systems have a fair possibility of being selected as efficient second-order nonlinear optical materials.206 John Fielden et al. have synthesized three new disubstituted arylimido-polyoxometalate (POM) hybrid chromophores with linear dipolar, C2v, and linear centrosymmetric geometries. These hexamolybdate derivatives are prepared by coupling anilines and further amines with (nBu4N)2[Mo6O19] using DCC, and dimethylsulfoxide as solvent. The findings reveal that in all disubstituted POM derivatives, communication between the POM units occurs, resulting in the creation of class II mixed valence species when one POM is reduced. In the C2v systems, placing methyl groups ortho to the imido-linkages has a significant impact on POM–POM distances, resulting in enhanced electrochemically observable through-space communication and a decrease in through-bond communication. Methylation also makes the imido-linkages more resistant to hydrolysis.214
2.4 Polysubstituted imido derivatives of POMs
Hexamolybdate with polysubstituted imido derivatives denotes that three or more oxo groups of the parent hexamolybdate are substituted with organoimido ligands. Maatta has documented polysubstituted hexamolybdates with 2,6-diisopropylphenylimido ligands where three to six terminal oxo groups are replaced.136,161,170 It has been shown that different degrees of substitution in homologous oxo/(NAr) hexamolybdate derivatives affect the electrochemical characteristics of clusters.136 Furthermore, Maatta and co-worker established a reaction of parental hexamolybdate [nBu4N]2[Mo6O19] with the suitable organic isocyanate, RNCO [(R) n-butyl, cyclohexyl, 2,6-diisopropylphenyl]. This study further demonstrates cyclic voltammetry measurement of polysubstituted arylimido complexes [Mo6O(19−x)(NAr)x]2− (Ar = 2,6-diisopropylphenyl, x = 3, 4, 5, 6) where there is a nonstop development of electron density with enhancing arylimido incorporation.161 Maatta et al. also revealed these multi-functionalized hexamolybdates synthesized via cautious supervision of the molar ratios of the 2,6-diisopropylaniline isocyanate and the hexamolybdate cages under reflux condition in pyridine.136,161,170 Despite the separation and characterization of all of these polysubstituted derivatives, the nonselective environment of a reaction generates a mixture of many multifunctionalized products, making the separation process tough. Thus, synthesis of polysubstituted imido hexamolybdates seems to be a difficult task for chemists.
Yongge Wei et al. have tried to create poly-2,6-dimethylanilido hexamolybdate using the dehydrating agent DCC. Increasing the molar ratio of aromatic primary amines and DCC resulted in a tri-organoimido derivative (nBu4N)2[Mo6O16(μ2-NAr)(NAr)2] and a penta-organoimido derivative (nBu4N)2[Mo6O14(μ2-NAr)(NAr)4] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3) with reasonable yield.171 Surprisingly, these complexes are not totally terminal oxo groups replaced species, instead with one bridging oxo group substitution. A μ2-bridging oxygen atom shared by two imido-bearing molybdenum atoms is substituted by a μ2-bridging organoimido ligand. These bridging oxo groups in the middle of two terminal organoimido ligands appeared to be double activated by neighbouring imido groups, hence became more nucleophilic than oxygen. Such polysubstituted hexamolybdates where the bridging oxygen atom is substituted with organoimido bridging groups have been reported for the first time. Thus, this broadens the scope of organoimido-POM coordination chemistry and opens up exciting new possibilities in the chemistry of organoimido POM derivatives.171 In 2014, the same group synthesized an aliphatic trisubstituted organoimido derivative of hexamolybdate based on amantadine, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O16(NC10H15)3] (34) in reasonably good yield (Scheme 23). The findings suggest that covalent linking of bioactive ligands like amantadine to POMs via the DCC dehydrating process could increase their utility in clinical cancer treatment.98
 Scheme 23  Synthesis of trisubstituted POM, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O16(NC10H15)3] (34).98 
In 2016, Yongge Wei et al. had successfully synthesized a sequence of regioselective polyorganoimido derivatives of POMs, [Mo6O13(NAr)3(2-NAr)3]2 (Ar = phenyl, p-methoxyphenyl, and p-ethylphenyl), with high selectivity and reasonable good yields by using a one-octant synthesis technique which is generic and highly regioselective. Using a regioselective method to obtain multifunctionalized organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates can drastically alter the electronic structures of POMs, resulting in unique “value-adding” features, which is useful in photoelectronic transformation and catalysis.89 The very recent result of Chiang et al. shows synthesis of triply substituted RN-POMs, [TBA]2[Mo6O16(t-NR)2(-NAr)], (R = cyclohexyl, NAr = 2,6-dichloro-4-aminopyridyl; 4-aminopyridyl; 2,6-dimethyl-4-aminopyridyl) using the dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) technique. Such multi-functionalization of POM results in better electronic delocalization within the metallic core and enhanced anode material electrical conductivity. This investigation shows that multi-organofunctionalization of distinct oxometallic clusters opens up a new path for the development of high-efficiency lithium-ion battery electrode materials.215
In 2018, Yongge Wei et al. was the first group to synthesize a porous nitrogen-doped molybdenum carbide and phosphide hybrid, N@MoPCx-800, having a nanosheet structure. This was prepared at 800 °C using an inert atmosphere by pyrolysis of fully substituted polyorganoimido-derivatized heteropolyoxometalate precursor, [Mo4O(ArPO3)2(NAr)4(μ2-NAr)5] (Ar = phenyl, Mo4-CNP). It was demonstrated that the porous N@MoPCx-800 nanosheet hybrid shows remarkable electrocatalytic activity and stability for hydrogen production. Hence, such an organically functionalized polyoxometalate-assisted method offers new ways of hydrogen evolution using active non-noble metal electrocatalysts.216
Further, controllable atomic engineering of nitrogen dopant on molybdenum carbide (Mo2C) by designing organoimido-derivatized POM nanoclusters has been done. Here a significant regulation of the electronic structure of Mo2C enhanced the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance.217
3. Organoimido derivative of other POMs
Although chemistry based on hexamolybdate organoimido derivatives is a well-developed synthetic chemistry that has yielded numerous results, only a little research on other POMs has been reported. Extending the aforementioned methodologies to other POMs, such as other Lindqvist and Keggin POMs, has not achieved much. Functionalization of the hexatungstate anion [W6O19]2− has been attempted, as well as some other important Lindqvist homopolyoxometalates. However, all of the above imido methods have failed because [W6O19]2− does not react with isocynates, phosphinimine and primary amine under the established conditions. The tungstyl groups in the hexatungstate appear to be less reactive than the molybdyl ones in the hexamolybdate. More than a decade ago, Maatta discovered (nBu4N)2[W6O18(NAr)] (Ar = 2,6-diisopropyl-C6H3), the only organoimido derivative of hexatungstate through reaction of (nBu4N)2[WO4] with 2,6-diisopropylphenyl isocyanate in 1,2-dichloroethane or pyridine; however, the yield is limited (approx. 10% based on (nBu4N)2[WO4]) (Scheme 24).218 The utilization of polyoxotungstate components has been done as oxidation-resistant ligands, the synthesis of polyoxoanion-supported complexes and catalysts, photo- and electroluminescence studies, and assessments of their efficacy as anti-HIV medicines.
 Scheme 24  Synthesis of polyoxotungsten imido derivative, (nBu4N)2[W6O18(NAr)] (35).218 
It was assumed that the method involved the formation of the organoimido-tungstate complex, [WO3(NAr)], which would then self-assemble with more [WO4]2− to generate the target product. Furthermore, Maatta has reported that the proton in an acidic impurity is most likely involved in the construction of the hexanuclear cluster. Yongge Wei has developed the mono-organoimido hexamolybdate using the similar acid-assisting path as aforementioned.164 Careful addition of an appropriate acid may improve the process. The hexatungstate cluster is stable, but replacing tungstyl groups with a reactive molybdyl groups increases the reactivity of the cluster. For the first time, Yongge Wei et al. have studied the mono-imido derivatives, (nBu4N)2[W5O18(MoNAr)] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3 (36) or 4-iodo-2,6-dimethyl-C6H2 (37)), which were obtained by reacting (nBu4N)2[MoW5O19] with 2,6-dimethylaniline or 4-iodo-2,6-dimethylaniline and DCC in the proportion of 1:1:1.5 in acetonitrile using reflux condition and nitrogen atmosphere with reasonable yields of 60% (Scheme 25).219
 Scheme 25  Synthesis of imido derivatives of the [MoW5O19]2− cluster anion.219 
The DCC-dehydrating procedure has been proved to be suitable for direct functionalization of a Lindqvist heteropolyoxometalate [MoW5O19]2− with aromatic primary amines. An imido substituent replaces the terminal oxygen atom of the molybdenum atom of the cluster as expected. These studies demonstrate the way to develop organoimido derivatives of the less reactive POM clusters, e.g. substituting one of the terminal metal-oxo groups with a functionalizable Mo–O group.219 In 2014, Yongge Wei et al. successfully synthesised the new mixed POM, i.e. “POV–POMo” hybrid, by covalently connecting Lindqvist-type polyoxomolybdate and polyoxovanadate into a nanoscale triad cluster. Surprisingly, when two hexamolybdate and one hexavanadate clusters are hybridized, they produce a stunning photochromism when exposed to sunlight.94
4. Reactivity of organoimido derivatives of POMs
Although organoimido derivatives of POMs have been recognized for nearly three decades and different types of synthesis methods have been invented, the reactivity of fewer organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate has recently been explored.151,159,162,220–224 In an organoimido POM, both the inorganic cluster structure and the organic moiety have the ability to serve as active sites for their own reactions. Although the Mo–N bond can also be used as a reaction site for correlative reactions like hydrolysis, it is usually unproductive owing to the loss of the organic ligand from the cluster when the Mo–N bond is broken. To date, the reaction chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs has primarily concentrated on the integrated organic ligands, which provide considerable promise in the controlled synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrids through well-established conventional organic synthesis techniques. Several key inorganic and organic processes that do not rupture the Mo–N bond have been employed, particularly for organo-imido substituted hexamolybdates. Coordination, addition polymerization or electro polymerization, carbon–carbon couplings, esterification, etc. are examples of these types of reactions.151,162,187,188,221,222,225
Carbon–carbon coupling reactions, in particular, have been shown to be an effective tool for creating hybrid organic–inorganic materials based on POMs using the molecule-module-assembly technique.226 Furthermore, a unique methodology has been developed for creating a C=C double bond through a process known as doubly dehydrogenative coupling of two saturated Csp3–H bonds triggered by POMs, which is a significant step for the development of advanced POM chemistry.227 It expected that an organo substituted POM's surface oxygen atoms on the cluster skeleton should be more reactive to coordinate with a metal ion than the equivalent parent cluster.227 However, such reactivity has not been observed in organo imido substituted hexamolybdates. If the inserted organoimido segment contains coordinating reactive groups like carboxyl, pyridyl and hydroxyl then these derivatives act as POM-functionalized organic ligands.
In view of this principle, the organoimido derivative of hexamolybdate with a distant terpyridyl group has been studied where the terpyridyl ligand participates in coordination with a variety of bivalent transition metal ions such as Zn2+ and Ru2+.151 UV-Vis spectra proved this coordination where an intense characteristic absorption peak (392 nm) of the functionalized terpyridyl ligand reduces markedly when extra [Ru(tPy)Cl3]− is added. Nevertheless, a new absorption band at 504 nm increasingly arises in the meantime, which is a typical M → L charge-transfer transition of Ru-bisterpyridine complexes. Thus, it indicates formation of a new POM-functionalized bisterpyridine–Ru complex (Scheme 26).151
 Scheme 26  The hexamolybdate functionalized with terpyridyl ligand undergoes a coordination process with [Ru(tPy)Cl3]−.151 
The coordination of two terpyridyl groups in a bifunctionalized organoimido hexamolybdate with Fe2+ was also conducted in acetonitrile/DMSO at room temperature. The resulting coordination polymer was proved by 1H NMR, UV-vis, and ESI-MS. However, attempts to obtain single crystals of this compound have failed (Scheme 27).228
 Scheme 27  . A transition-metal complex and POM clusters are joined via a metal–ligand coordination in the synthesis of a molecular hybrid.228 
In 2013, Yongge Wei et al. revealed that (nBu4N)2[O18Mo6(NC6H4-4-COOH)], which was synthesized by reacting parent octamolybdate and para-aminobenzoic acid hydrochloride, produces extremely crystalline frameworks, (nBu4N)8[Cu2(O18Mo6≡NC6H4-4-COO)4·(CH3CN)·[(C2H5)2O]] and [Cu2(O18Mo6≡NC6H4-4-COO)4·(CH3CN)2] by a self-assembly process of (nBu4N)2[O18Mo6(NC6H4-4-COOH)] with Cu(CH3COO)2·5H2O (Scheme 28).193
 Scheme 28  POM-functionalized carboxylic acid coordination assembly with Cu2+.193 
At the start of the century, Maatta described addition polymerization of organoimido derivative of POMs with an unsaturated functional group, i.e. C=C double bond.162 It has been shown that p-styrenylimido hexamolybdate and 4-methylstyrene could undertake conventional free radical-induced copolymerization, which was triggered by AIBN (2,2′-azobis (2-methylpropionitrile)) in 1,2-dichloroethane. This resulted in a copolymer with organoimido substituted POMs (Scheme 29).162 Based on the relative intensities of the aryl groups, the –CH2 groups of tetrabutylammonium cations, styrenic CH3 group, in 1H NMR, the copolymer should have a composition of roughly three 4-methyl styrene units per unit of p-styrenylimido POM. This study shows that the hexamolybdate-functionalized styrenylimido ligand has chemical reactivity comparable to free styrene and may be used as a reactive site to introduce a metal complex into a standard polymeric condition. In the production of innovative hybrid inorganic–organic polymeric materials that include covalently organoimido-POM complexes, such a technology should have a broad application potential.162
 Scheme 29  Copolymerization of 4-methylstyrene and p-styrenyl imido hexamolybdate caused by free radical-induced copolymerization.162 
John Fielden et al. have effectively prepared polypyrrole supercapacitors using covalently linked Lindqvist polyoxometalates by coelectropolymerization with pyrrole (Scheme 30). The POMs increase the specific capacitance (up to 5) and decrease the charge-transfer resistance of the films via altering the behaviour of the polypyrrole (PPy) film and introducing a significant additional Faradaic contribution via the polyoxometalates redox procedures. These results were proved by cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements.225
 Scheme 30  Coelectropolymerization of a POM-based monomer to form polypyrrole.225 
Pd generally accelerates carbon–carbon coupling reactions of aryl halides and terminal acetylenes or ethylenes.226,229 Arylimido derivatives of POMs with distant iodo, ethynyl, or vinyl group may experience common Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions and the POM skeletons and imido links do not break under coupling reaction conditions. Thus, such organic-functionalized cluster would be excellent building blocks for the rational synthesis of molecular POM–organic hybrids.229 The arylimido derivative of hexamolybdate with a distant iodo group, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O18(NAr)] (Ar = 4-iodo-2,6-dimethyl-C6H2) reacts with 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene or 3,5-ditert-butyl-1-ethynylbenzene at room temperature in acetonitrile (Sonogashira coupling reaction) (Scheme 31).222 The pure coupled products can frequently be obtained with excellent yields of more than 80%. This process is extraordinarily quick in comparison to traditional coupling reactions in organic synthesis, taking only 20 minutes to complete as examined via thin-layer chromatography.226,229 Under these reaction conditions, the hexamolybdate clusters were intact, and they withstood in the coupling product. Furthermore, the coupling reaction is clearly activated due to the electron-withdrawing nature of the hexamolybdate cluster, and the reactivity of the iodo group in organoimido substituted hexamolybdates can potentially be improved.226 Longer reaction times and extra base were established to be unfavourable to the desired coupling products, as they caused the Mo–N bond to rupture and the parent hexamolybdate cluster to slowly decompose under the reaction circumstances.222
 Scheme 31  Sonogashira coupling of 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene/3,5-ditert-butyl-1-ethynylbenzene with iodo-functionalized hexamolybdate in acetonitrile at room temperature.222 
After establishing and investigating that iodo- or ethynyl-phenylimido functionalized POM clusters can successfully participate in Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling procedures, a wide range of POM-based hybrids with diverse connecting geometries, including covalently connected POM networks, has been rationally designed and easily synthesized. For instance, the Sonogashira coupling reaction has produced high yields of hybrid molecular dumbbells using two hexamolybdate clusters connected via a rigid conjugated organic rod of various lengths (Scheme 32).223
 Scheme 32  Hybrid nanodumbbells assembled in a controlled manner.223 
Since the last decade, charge-transfer hybrids depending on organic donors and inorganic acceptors have attracted a lot of attention. The prospective applicability of these hybrids is in solar energy alteration and storage, in particular photovoltaic cells, and conducting materials such as superconductors and new molecular conductors and nonlinear optical systems.224,230–232 POMs have been employed extensively in the formation of charge-transfer salts containing organic cation donors, as well as charge-transfer supramolecular aggregates with neutral organic π donors via cocrystallization.224 POMs have also been used in the development of intramolecular charge-transfer hybrids.224 The well-known example is the charge-transfer ferrocenylimido substituted hexamolybdate, (nBu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18] (FcN = (η5-C5H5)Fe(μ–η5:σ-C5H4N)). A charge-transfer transition arises from the Fe2+ centre to the hexamolybdate cluster which is detected at 536 nm when a ferrocenyl donor is covalently attached to a hexamolybdate acceptor.160 However, a direct functionalization procedure of the hexamolybdate cluster yielded just 19% of this hybrid. Furthermore, the charge recombination is facilitated by the short separation distance between the ferrocenyl donor and the cluster acceptor. Due to the coherent superexchange process, the cluster acceptor also easily induces charge recombination, resulting in lowering of the charge-transfer efficiency.233 Such issues can easily be rectified by generating POM-based organic hybrids via Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling reactions using iodophenylimido-functionalized POM cages as building blocks.
For example, the Sonogashira coupling reactions of mono- and diiodophenylimido substituted hexamolybdate clusters with ethynylferrocene produced two novel charge-transfer hybrids in excellent yield (∼65%) (Scheme 33).224
 Scheme 33  Synthesis of two new charge-transfer hybrids based on hexamolybdate clusters.224 
POM-containing hybrid polymers have been intensively investigated for the exploration of novel conducting materials. Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions have made it possible to make conjugated polymeric hybrids with covalently connected POM clusters which can be found in both the main and side chains.131,234 Peng et al. have found that difunctionalized clusters such as (nBu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2], (Ar = 4-iodo-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H2 (Scheme 34)131 or 4-ethynyl-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H2),234 as well as 2,5-bis(2,2-dimethylpropoxy)-1,4-diethynylbenzene or 2,5-bis (2,2-dimethylpropoxy)-1,4-diiodobenzene as starting materials were used to make main-chain POM-containing polymers (Scheme 34). Photovoltaic cells fabricated with these polymers have a power exchange efficiency of 0.15 percent, which is substantially better than photovoltaic cells made with other conjugated polymers in the identical device design.234 Peng and co-worker used Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions to combine the hexamolybdate cluster into polyphenylene/polyethynylene as conjugated side-chain pendants, resulting in new polymeric hybrids. Due to the effective fluorescence quenching in such materials, which allows free charge transporter to reside in various structural units, they have a considerably greater potential for applicability in photovoltaic cells.132
 Scheme 34  Synthesis of main-chain-POM-containing conjugated polymers.131 
One of the straightforward procedures to synthesize dienes, substituted olefins, and other unsaturated compounds is the Heck reaction, which has grown to be one of the most fundamental, accessible, and necessary synthesis approaches in organic chemistry. Using well-developed Heck reaction methods, efforts have been made to produce vinyl-functionalized POMs from hexamolybdate-functionalized aryl bromides and iodides as starting materials, but have failed.235–238 This is possibly due to poor solubility of organoimido derivatives in typical organic solvents, such as dioxane, which is an effective solvent in Heck reactions. Following several trials, Yongge Wei and co-workers have noticed that hexamolybdate-functionalized aryl bromides and iodides can endure the absence of ligand in the Pd-catalyzed Heck coupling reaction, in the existence of bromomagnesium aromatic amines. Such method offers a simple procedure for introducing a vinyl group to POM clusters using a range of olefins such as styrene, 4-bromostyrene, ethyl acrylate, and acrylonitrile (Scheme 35).188 This approach provides a path to produce POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials in which polyoxometalate clusters are covalently linked with organic conjugated segments, since vinyl units are conveniently available and reactive building components included for polymerization. Unlike conventional Heck reactions, this procedure uses bromomagnesium of aromatic amine as a base to prevent the breakdown of organoimido substituted hexamolybdate. It also skips the phosphine ligand as a palladium catalyst stabiliser because POM anions and quaternary ammonium cations can play the same role in this reaction. However, a suitable quantity of Pd catalyst is essential for a successful coupling process.
 Scheme 35  Pd-catalyzed bromo/iodo-functionalized organic hexamolybdate derivatives react with alkenes in the Heck reaction.188 
Despite significant progress in the reaction chemistry of organic POMs and their derivatives, research into the side chain reactivity of organoimido substituted POMs needs further attention.239–243 Yongge Wei et al. have shown that in the presence of DCC, a phenolic hydroxyl functionalized organoimido substituted hexamolybdate can undergo an esterification reaction with carboxylic acids (Scheme 36).187 The organoimido derivative acted as a functionalized phenol in the process, whereas DCC worked as a dehydration agent and encouraged the esterification process. When compared to a conventional esterification reaction, DCC is essential here because organoimido compounds are difficult to esterify, even after longer reaction hours at reflux conditions. Moreover, degradation of the organoimido derivatives has been observed. This is possibly due to the POM cluster's extraordinarily distinct electrical and structural features when compared to conventional functional groups in organic chemistry. Thus, it has a lower thermal stability at higher temperatures during the reaction. Hence, the reaction needs a new path for creating hybrid materials with covalently attached POM clusters and organic conjugated segments which should be controlled and rational.
 Scheme 36  Esterification of carboxylic acids with phenolic hydroxyl functionalized hexamolybdate derivatives.187 
5. Perspective and future challenges
There has been a lot of progress in the synthetic chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs by employing various imido-releasing reagents and the DCC-dehydrating process for preparing organoimido derivatives of POMs. The extraordinary properties of various organic POM derivatives are mainly due to the organic π electrons that can extend their conjugation to the inorganic framework, leading to strong d–π interactions. The remote organic functionality can also be used as a building block to create more complex POM-organic hybrids. The influence of additional distant functional groups, metal centres, POM architectures, and composites of organo-imido derivatized POMs with other common anodic materials on battery performance are also being investigated. POMs as a part of side-chain pendants in conjugated polymers may prove to be better candidates for photovoltaic applications. Attempts to develop such hybrid polymers are currently in progress. Researchers are also working on chiral separation and supramolecular assembly of mixed di- and polysubstituted organoimido hexamolybdates with varying remote reactive groups. Design and synthesis of multifunctional hybrid materials derived from mixed ligands with potential photoelectric properties is still in progress. Despite the numerous advantages of POMs, researchers face a variety of obstacles. Some of the problems of POMs and POM-based hybrids are discussed below:
• Covalently bonded POM-organic hybrids, especially those incorporated with organic π-conjugated systems and their reactive chemistry, are still in their early stages.
• Despite the fact that classically organic synthesis approaches have shown tremendous promise in this area, only a few methods for the manufacture of covalently bonded organoimido derivatives of POMs have been invented.
• Only a few molecular and polymeric hybrids have been synthesized, and thorough studies on their physical properties have yet to be carried out.
• Chirality has become an important concern in a variety of fields, including pharmaceuticals, asymmetric catalysis, and clinical analysis. The synthesis and determination of chiral polyoxometalates (POMs) is a fascinating but difficult topic since POMs themselves show high symmetry. Chiral species are still used in the context of using chiral organic ligands as structure-directing agents to transmit chirality to the entire POM-based hybrids method.143
However, with the development of rational synthesis techniques, a huge variety of hybrids, including molecular, dendritic, and polymeric systems, will be generated in the near future.14 It is envisaged that efforts will be made to investigate the electrical, optical, and photophysical aspects of this new hybrid class.
6. Conclusion
In recent decades, the chemistry of synthesizing organoimido derivatives of POMs by varying reagents that release imido has progressed significantly. Despite showing interesting potential in this field, only a few conventionally organic synthesis methods for the construction of covalently attached organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates have been explored. Organoimido substituted polyoxometalates are used as essential building blocks in well-developed conventional organic synthesis techniques such as Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling and esterification to produce unique organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials with nanostructures. As the POM skeletons and imido connections do not break during common Pd-catalyzed coupling procedures, such organic-functionalized clusters would be appropriate building blocks for the rational synthesis of novel molecular POM-organic hybrids. In light of new experimental investigations, on a chain of Lindqvist-type organoimido POMs derivatized with ligands of various lengths and natures, TDDFT calculations were performed. These theoretical calculations are to figure out what links their structures to their first hyperpolarizabilities. Due to having easily accessible and reversible significant redox activity, bottom-up design of functional molecular materials based on hexamolybdates and the development of future hybrid molecular/semiconductor electrical gadgets could be possible. Organically functionalized polyoxometalates-based sensors might benefit from proton-responsive switchable fluorescence activity. More importantly, this research offers new methods for designing and synthesizing POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid fluorescent single-molecule switches. As a consequence, organoimido derivatives of POMs and their reactive reactions foreshadow an exciting future for new materials. Hence, this advanced chemistry opens up a lot of opportunities for creating new molecular and polymeric hybrids based on POMs in a more controlled way. Furthermore, it is expected that attempts will be made to explore the electrical, pharmacological, optical, and photophysical characteristics of this novel hybrid class.
Author contributions
A. P. and S. K. have thoroughly studied and designed the entire draft and contributed equally, R. J. mentored the entire work and gave approval for final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
R. J. thanks the Director, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology Surat (Gujarat), for providing SEED GRANT for the research. A. P. and S. K. are thankful to the Department of Chemistry, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology Surat (Gujarat) for providing the necessary facilities and financial support.
References

          M. T. Pope, Heteropoly and Isopoly Oxometalates, Springer, Berlin,  1983, vol. 8 Search PubMed .
M. T. Pope, Polyoxo anions: synthesis and structure, Comprehensive coordination chemistry II, 2004, 3, 635–678 Search PubMed .

          D. M. Mingos, Bonding and charge distribution in polyoxometalates, Springer,  1999 Search PubMed .
C. L. Hill, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 1–2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mizuno and M. Misono, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 199–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, Y. V. Geletii, C. Zhao, J. W. Vickers, G. Zhu, Z. Luo, J. Song, T. Lian, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7572–7589 RSC .
L. E. Briand, G. T. Baronetti and H. Thomas, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 256, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. Müller, F. Peters, M. T. Pope and D. Gatteschi, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 239–272 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Clemente-Juan, E. Coronado and A. Gaita-Ariño, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7464–7478 RSC .
K. Suzuki, R. Sato and N. Mizuno, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 596–600 RSC .
Y. Wang and I. A. Weinstock, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7479–7496 RSC .

          T. Yamase and M. T. Pope, Polyoxometalate chemistry for nano-composite design, Springer Science & Business Media,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. A. E. Opalovskii and V. E. Fedorov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1966, 35, 186–204 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 3599–3615 RSC .
J. Keggin, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1934, 144, 75–100 CAS .
J. S. Anderson, Nature, 1937, 140, 850–850 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bergman and J. Waugh, Acta Crystallogr., 1953, 6, 93–94 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Dexter and J. Silverton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1968, 90, 3589–3590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Che, M. Fournier and J. Launay, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 1954–1960 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Finke, M. Droege, J. R. Hutchinson and O. Gansow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1587–1589 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Matsumoto, M. Kato and Y. Sasaki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1976, 49, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Villanneau, H. Carabineiro, X. Carrier, R. Thouvenot, P. Herson, F. Lemos, F. Ramôa Ribeiro and M. Che, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12465–12471 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ayati, A. Ahmadpour, F. F. Bamoharram, B. Tanhaei, M. Mänttäri, M. Lahtinen and M. Sillanpää, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 133, 415–420 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Zhang, Y. Huang and Y. Wei, Trends in Polyoxometalates Research, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2015, pp. 37–71 Search PubMed .
J. M. Clemente-Juan, E. Coronado and A. Gaita-Ariño, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7464–7478 RSC .
M. Nyman and P. C. Burns, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7354–7367 RSC .
X. López, J. J. Carbó, C. Bo and J. M. Poblet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7537–7571 RSC .
H. N. Miras, J. Yan, D.-L. Long and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7403–7430 RSC .
A. Proust, B. Matt, R. Villanneau, G. Guillemot, P. Gouzerh and G. Izzet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7605–7622 RSC .
Y.-F. Song and R. Tsunashima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7384–7402 RSC .
P. Yin, D. Li and T. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7368–7383 RSC .
S.-W. Zhang, Y.-G. Wei, Q. Yu, M.-C. Shao and Y.-Q. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6440–6441 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Jiang, Y.-G. Wei, Q. Liu, S.-W. Zhang, M.-C. Shao and Y.-Q. Tang, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1937–1938,  10.1039/A804358B .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, J. Meyer, H. Bögge, F. Peters, W. Plass, E. Diemann, S. Dillinger, F. Nonnenbruch, M. Randerath and C. Menke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2122–2124 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, F. Peters, C. Menke and J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 484–486 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, C. Beugholt, P. Kögerler and C. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1220–1223 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge and M. Schmidtmann, Nature, 1999, 397, 48–50 CrossRef .
A. Müller and C. Serain, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 2–10 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and F. Peters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3359–3363 CrossRef .
A. Müller, M. Koop, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, F. Peters and P. Kögerler, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1885–1886,  10.1039/A904724G .
A. Müller, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, P. Kögerler, B. Hauptfleisch, S. Leiding and K. Wittler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1614–1616 CrossRef .
A. Müller, P. Kögerler and H. Bögge, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 222, 193–218 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Beckmann, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and A. Dress, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1162–1167 CrossRef .
A. Müller and S. Roy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 245, 153–166 CrossRef .
A. Müller, C. Kuhlmann, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, M. Baumann and E. Krickemeyer, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 2001, 2271–2277 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. Sarkar, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, S. Sarkar, P. Kögerler, B. Hauptfleisch, A. X. Trautwein and V. Schünemann, Angew. Chem., 1999, 38, 3238–3241 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Beckmann, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and A. Dress, Angew. Chem., 2002, 41, 1162–1167 CrossRef .
T. Yamase and P. V. Prokop, Angew. Chem., 2002, 114, 484–487 CrossRef .
Y.-K. Lu, X.-B. Cui, Y. Chen, J.-N. Xu, Q.-B. Zhang, Y.-B. Liu, J.-Q. Xu and T.-G. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2111–2117 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, C. Lu, X. Lin and H. Zhuang, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 452–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wassermann, M. H. Dickman and M. T. Pope, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1445–1448 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukhopadhyay, J. Debgupta, C. Singh, A. Kar and S. K. Das, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 1936–1941 CrossRef .
A. Alsalme, N. Alzaqri, A. Alsaleh, M. R. H. Siddiqui, A. Alotaibi, E. F. Kozhevnikova and I. V. Kozhevnikov, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishii, Y. Takenaka and K. Konishi, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 2756–2759 CrossRef .
D. Li, P. Ma, J. Niu and J. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 392, 49–80 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, D. Xia, Y. Yang, L. Shenga, T. Ye and R. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2378–2386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Rodriguez-Albelo, G. Rousseau, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, A. R. Ruiz-Salvador, S. Li, R. Liu, G. Zhang, B. Keita and A. Dolbecq, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9989–9999 RSC .
M. Yang, S. Rong, X. Wang, H. Ma, H. Pang, L. Tan, Y. Jiang and K. Gao, ChemNanoMat, 2021, 7, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Lu, F. Tu, J. Chen and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 1192–1195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Priyadarshini, S. Shanmugan, K. P. Kirubakaran, A. Thomas, M. Prakash, C. Senthil, C. W. Lee and K. Vediappan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2020, 142, 109468 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Lin, L.-S. Long and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3197–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Boussema, A. J. Gross, F. Hmida, B. Ayed, H. Majdoub, S. Cosnier, A. Maaref and M. Holzinger, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 109, 20–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nomiya, Y. Togashi, Y. Kasahara, S. Aoki, H. Seki, M. Noguchi and S. Yoshida, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 9606–9619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Ding, J. Wang, X. Wang and J. Suo, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 262, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Gumerova and A. Rompel, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0112 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, L. Xu, W. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Qiu and E. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 1101–1106 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Authier, Applications of Polyoxometalates in Medicine and their Putative Mechanisms of Action. Bachelor’s Thesis, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Faro, Portugal,  2015 Search PubMed .
M. Inoue, T. Suzuki, Y. Fujita, M. Oda, N. Matsumoto and T. Yamase, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2006, 100, 1225–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamase, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4773–4782 RSC .
M. Grabsi, N. Zabat, N. Khellaf and F. Ismail, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manag., 2019, 12, 100269 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, M. Xu and S. Lin, Front. Chem. China, 2007, 2, 213–217 CrossRef .
J. Barge and G. Gokavi, Orient. J. Chem., 2017, 33, 2573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Salomon, Y. Lan, E. Rivière, S. Yang, C. Roch-Marchal, A. Dolbecq, C. Simonnet-Jégat, N. Steunou, N. Leclerc-Laronze, L. Ruhlmann, T. Mallah, W. Wernsdorfer and P. Mialane, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6564–6574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Zhang, C. Yang, J. Zhang, K. Zheng, Q. Fang and G. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15332–15339 RSC .
H. Dong, W. Li, Y. Ou, D. Gao, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and P. Xiao, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 8356–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Sun, Y. Ji, H. Kong, S. Chen, P. Ma, J. Niu and J. Wang, Front. Chem., 2021, 9 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Tian, Z. Qin, J. Zhang, Y. Cao, S. Chu, L. Lu and G. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22270–22276 RSC .
F. Ju, D. VanderVelde and E. Nikolla, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomiya, T. Takahashi, T. Shirai and M. Miwa, Polyhedron, 1987, 6, 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, Y. Wang, B. Huang and Z. Xiao, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 7119–7133 RSC .
H. Yu, Y. Zhai, G. Dai, S. Ru, S. Han and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 13883–13887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y. Zhai, S. Ru, D. Zang, S. Han, H. Yu and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10164–10167 RSC .
H. An, Y. Guo, Y. Li, E. Wang, J. Lü, L. Xu and C. Hu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2004, 7, 521–523 CrossRef CAS .
A. Blazevic, E. Al-Sayed, A. Roller, G. Giester and A. Rompel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4762–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Luo, P. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Huang, Z. Zhao, J. Zhang and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 2551–2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Naruke and T. Yamase, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1992, 48, 597–599 CrossRef .
S. She, M. Li, Q. Li, Z. Huang, Y. Wei and P. Yin, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 1668–1672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Wang, Y. Zhai, M. Zhang, S. Ru, S. Han and Y. Wei, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 4274–4279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, K. Chen, J. Hu, J. Zhang, R. N. N. Khan and Y. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, S. She, J. Zhang, A. Bayaguud and Y. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hermosilla-Ibáñez, K. Wrighton-Araneda, G. Prado, V. Paredes-García, N. Pizarro, A. Vega and D. Venegas-Yazigi, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 8611–8620 RSC .
R. N. Nasim Khan, N. Mahmood, C. Lv, G. Sima, J. Zhang, J. Hao, Y. Hou and Y. Wei, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7374–7379 RSC .
A. Bayaguud, J. Zhang, R. N. N. Khan, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13150–13152 RSC .
A. Al-Yasari, N. Van Steerteghem, H. El Moll, K. Clays and J. Fielden, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 2818–2822 RSC .
P. Hermosilla-Ibáñez, K. Wrighton-Araneda, W. Cañón-Mancisidor, M. Gutiérrez-Cutiño, V. Paredes-García and D. Venegas-Yazigi, Molecules, 2019, 24, 44 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, Y. Cheng, S. Liu, C. Tao, A. Wang, W. Wei, H. Yu and Y. Wei, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 6452–6455 CrossRef .
S. She, S. Bian, J. Hao, J. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16987–16994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, L.-Y. Guo, J.-S. Li, J.-P. Bai, F. Su, L.-C. Zhang, X.-J. Sang, W.-S. You and Z.-M. Zhu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1125–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1209–1219 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Folkman and R. G. Finke, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7–16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, M. Wu, P. Wei, J. Zhao, H. Huang, C. Li, Y. Lu, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Catal., 2018, 358, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Ji, Y. Fang, P.-P. Han, M.-X. Li, Q.-Q. Chen and Q.-X. Han, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 86, 22–25 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qu, H. Feng, C. Ma, Y. Yang and X. Yu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 81, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. Zhang, Y.-G. Chen, Q. Tang, Z.-C. Zhang, D.-D. Liu and H.-X. Meng, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2012, 17, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, S. Li, J. Pan, L. Zhang, J. Xin, Y. Chen and X. Tan, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1702–1714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Ji, M. Zhao, P. P. Han, Y. Fang, Q. X. Han and M. X. Li, Inorg. Nano-Met. Chem., 2018, 48, 421–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, N. Shen, S.-C. Chen, Z.-H. Zhang, X. Feng, K.-L. Huang, M.-Y. He and Q. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 128, 108584 CrossRef CAS .
S. She, C. Gao, K. Chen, A. Bayaguud, Y. Huang, B.-W. Wang, S. Gao and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Martin-Sabi, J. Soriano-López, R. S. Winter, J.-J. Chen, L. Vilà-Nadal, D.-L. Long, J. R. Galán-Mascarós and L. Cronin, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 208–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-P. Hu, Y.-Q. Zhao, Z. Jagličić, K. Yu, X.-P. Wang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7415–7423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Antonio and M.-H. Chiang, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8278–8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Zhao, K. Yu, L.-W. Wang, Y. Wang, X.-P. Wang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 11046–11050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Li, E. Wang, X. Xu and Y. Ma, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2007, 360, 2063–2070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, M.-D. Cao, S.-L. Feng, F. Su, X.-J. Sang, L.-C. Zhang, W.-S. You, M. Yang and Z.-M. Zhu, Chem. -Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14614–14622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kato, K. Y. Maryunina, K. Inoue, S. Yamaguchi, H. Miyaoka, A. Hayashi, M. Sadakane, R. Tsunashima and S. Nishihara, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 602–604 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Bamoharram, Synth. React. Inorg., Met.-Org., Nano-Met. Chem., 2011, 41, 571–576 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Razavi, F. F. Bamoharram, T. Hashemi, K. Shahrokhabadi and A. Davoodnia, Toxicol. in Vitro, 2020, 68, 104917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, L. Hong, A. Geng, J. Yan, S. Yao and Z. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1409–1412 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10942–10943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, E. Diemann, H. Li, A. W. Dress and A. Müller, Nature, 2003, 426, 59–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Knoth and R. L. Harlow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4265–4266 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zonnevijlle and M. T. Pope, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 2731–2732 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. C. Ho and W. G. Klemperer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6772–6774 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ho and W. Klemperer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6772–6774 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. K. Rao and M. Vijayan, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 516–519 CrossRef CAS .

          M. T. Pope, Introduction to polyoxometalate chemistry. In Polyoxometalate Molecular Science, Springer, Dordrecht,  2003, pp. 3–31 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez, G. D. A. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061–3083 CrossRef CAS .
R. Villanneau, R. Delmont, A. Proust and P. Gouzerh, J Chemistry, 2000, 6, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Katsoulis, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 359–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, M. Lu, B. Xu, Y. Wei, Z. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4129–4132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, M. Lu, J. Kang, D. Wang, J. Brown and Z. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2841–2851 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nagano and Y. Sasaki, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 1979, 35, 2387–2389 CrossRef .

          M. Hutin, M. Rosnes, D. Long and L. Cronin, Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry II,  2013, pp. 241–269 Search PubMed .
N. I. Gumerova and A. Rompel, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 1–20 CrossRef .
J. B. Strong, R. Ostrander, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3601–3602 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sima, Q. Li, Y. Zhu, C. Lv, R. N. N. Khan, J. Hao, J. Zhang and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 6551–6558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Yasari, N. Van Steerteghem, H. Kearns, H. El Moll, K. Faulds, J. A. Wright, B. S. Brunschwig, K. Clays and J. Fielden, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 10181–10194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 930–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, P. Wu and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12412–12413 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, X. Zheng, J. Yao, P. Xu, Z. Miao, J. Li, Z. Lv, Q. Zhang and Y. Yan, J. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 884, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Putaj and F. Lefebvre, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1642–1685 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Zhang, Y. Huang and Y. Wei, Trends in Polyoxometalates Research, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2015, pp. 37–71 Search PubMed .
Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 930–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Proust, R. Thouvenot and P. Gouzerh, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1837–1852 RSC .
Y. Wei, B. Xu, C. L. Barnes and Z. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4083–4084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Song, D.-L. Long and L. Cronin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 109–115 RSC .
P. Wu, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, J. Hao, J. Chen, P. Yin and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5557–5559 RSC .
S. Xue, A. Chai, Z. Cai, Y. Wei, C. Xiang, W. Bian and J. Shen, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4770–4775,  10.1039/B719388B .
J. Zhu, M.-n. Shen, X.-j. Zhao, P.-c. Wang and M. Lu, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 872–878 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, Z. Peng, Y. Wei and D. R. Powell, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2562–2563,  10.1039/B307415C .
Y. Zhu, Z. Xiao, L. Wang, P. Yin, J. Hao, Y. Wei and Y. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 7304–7309 RSC .
N. Hur, W. Klemperer, R. Wang, M. Fournier and P. Alvin, Inorg. Synth., 1990, 27, 77–78 Search PubMed .
H. Kwen, J. V. G. Young and E. A. Maatta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1145–1146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-C. Hsieh and J. A. Zubieta, Polyhedron, 1986, 5, 1655–1657 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Errington, C. Lax, D. Richards, W. Clegg and K. Fraser, in Polyoxometalates: From Platonic Solids to Anti-Retroviral Activity, Springer,  1994, pp. 105–114 Search PubMed .
W. Clegg, R. J. Errington, K. A. Fraser, S. A. Holmes and A. Schäfer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 455–456,  10.1039/C39950000455 .
R. A. Roesner, S. C. McGrath, J. T. Brockman, J. D. Moll, D. X. West, J. K. Swearingen and A. Castineiras, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 342, 37–47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 345–346 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Stark, V. G. Young Jr. and E. A. Maatta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2547–2548 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Strong, G. P. A. Yap, R. Ostrander, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. Thouvenot, P. Gouzerh and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 639–649 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Moore, H. Kwen, A. M. Beatty and E. A. Maatta, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1793–1794,  10.1039/B005022I .
H. Tan, W. Chen, D. Liu, Y. Li and E. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 1245–1249 RSC .
Q. Li, P. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Xia, Y. Wang and H. Guo, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2005, 631, 773–779 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. Wei and H. Guo, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 1223–1228 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Bi, G.-F. Hou, B. Li, L.-X. Wu and U. Kortz, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6345–6353,  10.1039/B821750E .
T. Zhang, W. Guan, L. Yan, T. Ma, J. Wang and Z. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5459–5465 RSC .
Y. Xia, P. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Wang and H. Guo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Wei, Y. Wang and H. Guo, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9823–9828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Strong, B. S. Haggerty, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1137–1138,  10.1039/A701782K .
J. Hao, Y. Xia, L. Wang, L. Ruhlmann, Y. Zhu, Q. Li, P. Yin, Y. Wei and H. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2626–2630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Proust, R. Thouvenot, M. Chaussade, F. Robert and P. Gouzerh, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1994, 224, 81–95 CrossRef CAS .

          A. W. Johnson, Ylides and imines of phosphorus, Wiley-Interscience,  1993 Search PubMed .
J. L. Stark, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 1165–1166,  10.1039/C39950001165 .
J. Saunders and R. Slocombe, Chem. Rev., 1948, 43, 203–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Clegg, R. Errington and K. Fraser, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 455 RSC .

          G. Patrick, Instant notes in organic chemistry, Taylor & Francis,  2004 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, P. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. Wei and H. Guo, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 1223–1228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, M. Lu, B. Xu, Y. Wei, Z. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4129–4132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, P. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Wang and H. Guo, Crystal growth, 2006, 6, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
W. Clegg, R. J. Errington, K. A. Fraser, S. A. Holmes and A. Schafer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 4, 455–456 RSC .
Z.-K. Qu, K. Yu, Z.-F. Zhao, Z.-h. Su, J.-Q. Sha, C.-M. Wang and B.-B. Zhou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6744–6751 RSC .
F. Kurzer and K. Douraghi-Zadeh, Chem. Rev., 1967, 67, 107–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xue, A. Chai, Y. Wei, C. Xiang, W. Bian and J. Shen, J. Mol. Struct., 2008, 888, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Wei, H. Guo and C.-G. Zhan, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 2305–2313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xue, A. Chai, Z. Cai, Y. Wei, C. Xiang, W. Bian and J. Shen, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4770–4775 RSC .
L. Zhu, Y. Zhu, X. Meng, J. Hao, Q. Li, Y. Wei and Y. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 10923–10927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Wang, J. Hao, P. Yin, J. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Zhu and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3076–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Zhu, P. Yin, W. Fu, J. Chen, J. Hao, F. Xiao, C. Lv, J. Zhang, L. Shi, Q. Li and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 9222–9235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, J. Hao, J. Zhang, C. Lv, P. Yin, L. Wang and Y. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5956–5957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, J. Hu, H. Zhou, Z. Li, R. N. N. Khan and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8681–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, X. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Yu, Y. Feng, H. Chen, Y. Li, G. Rakesh, C. H. A. Huan, T. C. Sum, Y. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 12185–12191 RSC .
Y. Zhu, P. Yin, F. Xiao, D. Li, E. Bitterlich, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, J. Hao, T. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17155–17160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, K. Chen, J. Hao, Z. Wei, H. Zhang, P. Yin and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 6075–6077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, J. Hu, R. N. N. Khan, J. Zhang and Y. Wei, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 16698–16702 RSC .
R. N. N. Khan, C. Lv, J. Zhang, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 4568–4575 RSC .
K. Chen, S. She, J. Zhang, A. Bayaguud and Y. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–9 CAS .
R. Jangir, R. Antony and R. Murugavel, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 1004–1013 RSC .
S. She, S. Bian, R. Huo, K. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, P. Yin, J. Zhang, F. Xiao, Z. Fang, W. Fu, Y. Wei and S. Xue, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2017, 5475–5484 CrossRef CAS .
S. She, Z. Huang, P. Yin, A. Bayaguud, H. Jia, Y. Huang, Y. Wei and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14860–14865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haroon, R. Mahmood and M. R. S. A. Janjua, J. Cluster Sci., 2017, 28, 2693–2708 CrossRef CAS .
H. El Moll, F. A. Black, C. J. Wood, A. Al-Yasari, A. Reddy Marri, I. V. Sazanovich, E. A. Gibson and J. Fielden, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 18831–18835 RSC .
P. Hermosilla-Ibáñez, K. Wrighton-Araneda, W. Cañón-Mancisidor, M. Gutiérrez-Cutiño, V. Paredes-García and D. Venegas-Yazigi, J. Mol., 2019, 24, 44 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Rtibi, M. Abderrabba, S. Ayadi and B. Champagne, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 11210–11219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haroon and M. R. S. A. Janjua, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 26, 101880 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mujica, I. Sotomayor-Santander, P. Hermosilla-Ibáñez, F. Oyarzun-Ampuero, M. C. Rodriguez, G. A. Rivas, D. Venegas-Yazigi and S. Bollo, Electroanalysis, 2021, 33, 2105–2114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gouzerh and A. Proust, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 77–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, J. Zhang, J. Hao, L. Liu and Y. Wei, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 10065–10070 RSC .
L.-K. Yan, Z.-M. Su, W. Guan, M. Zhang, G.-H. Chen, L. Xu and E.-B. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17337–17343 CrossRef .
C. Qin, X. Wang, L. Xu and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2005, 8, 751–754 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, R. N. N. Khan, J. Zhang, J. Hu, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 1174–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Hao, R. N. N. Khan, J. Zhang and Y. Wei, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 1664–1671 CrossRef .
A. Al-Yasari, H. El Moll, R. Purdy, K. B. Vincent, P. Spence, J.-P. Malval and J. Fielden, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 11807–11817 RSC .
T. S. Jadhav, S. A. Abbas, Y.-C. Liu, W.-T. Wu, G.-H. Lee, C.-W. Chu and M.-H. Chiang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 643–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Ge, J. Hu, J. Zhang, J. Hao and Y. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701601 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, J. Hu, H. Xu, W. Bian, J. Ge, D. Zang, D. Cheng, Y. Lv, C. Zhang, J. Gu and Y. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800789 CrossRef .
T. R. Mohs, G. P. A. Yap, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 9–10 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, M. Lu, C. F.-c. Cheung, C. L. Barnes and Z. Peng, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5489–5490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, P. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Wang, P. Wang and H. Guo, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2004, 7, 524–527 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, B. Xu, Z. Peng, X. Zhu, Y. Wei and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7062–7065 CrossRef .
B. Xu, Y. Wei, C. L. Barnes and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2290–2292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, Y. Wei, B. Xu, C. F. C. Cheung, Z. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., 2002, 114, 1636–1638 CrossRef .
J. Kang, J. A. Nelson, M. Lu, B. Xie, Z. Peng and D. R. Powell, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 6408–6413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Alshehri, A. Al-Yasari, F. Marken and J. Fielden, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 11120–11129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, Y. Zou, Y.-F. Wang, L. Liu and Q.-X. Guo, Synlett, 2004, 1254–1258 CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Wei, J. Hao, Y. Zhu and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5810–5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, B. Xu, Z. Peng, X. Zhu, Y. Wei and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7062–7065 CrossRef .
K. Sonogashira, Y. Tohda and N. Hagihara, Tetrahedron Lett., 1975, 16, 4467–4470 CrossRef .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 1993, 26, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435–461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang and J. Zubieta, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 1192–1193,  10.1039/C39880001192 .
E. A. Weiss, M. J. Ahrens, L. E. Sinks, A. V. Gusev, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5577–5584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, B. Xie, J. Kang, F.-C. Chen, Y. Yang and Z. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6989–7000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Shaughnessy, P. Kim and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2123–2132 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Reetz and E. Westermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 165–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176–4211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bareyt, S. Piligkos, B. Hasenknopf, P. Gouzerh, E. Lacôte, S. Thorimbert and M. Malacria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6788–6794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bar-Nahum, H. Cohen and R. Neumann, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 3677–3684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Favette, B. Hasenknopf, J. Vaissermann, P. Gouzerh and C. Roux, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2664–2665,  10.1039/B308889H .
X. Wei, M. H. Dickman and M. T. Pope, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 10254–10255 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Keana, M. D. Ogan, Y. Lu, M. Beer and J. Varkey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 7957–7963 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors have made equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

1	

	Keggin [α-XM12O40]n−	Electrochemical, electrocatalyst, solar cells and optoelectronics devices, photocatalytic and electroanalytical, supercapacitors, sensors and medicinal	
52–60

2	

	Dawson [α-X2M18O62]n−	Catalytic, medicinal, anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-tumour, photosensitizing, redox mediators, electrochromical activity, degradation of dyes	
61–70

3	

	Waugh [XMo9O32]6−	Photocatalytic, magnetism, photosensitizer	
71–74

4	

	Silverton [XM12O42]8−	Photocatalytic, photoluminescence, magnetic and electrocatalytic.	
75–78

5	

	Anderson [HxXMo6O24]n−	Photosensitizer, supramolecular chemistry, molecular device, catalysis, photochemistry energy storage, energy conversion photocatalysis, biopharmacy	
79–88

6	

	Lindqvist [Mo6O19]n−	Photoelectronic, catalyst, sensor, electrochemical, batteries, redox activity, medicinal and photochromism	
89–98

7	

	Finke [M4(X2W15)2]n−	Photoelectrochemical, electrochemical and water oxidation catalyst	
99–101

8	

	Standberg [HnP2Mo5O23]n−	Medicinal, luminescent and electrochemical	
102–108

9	

	Weakley [EuW10O36]9−	Magnetic and electrocatalytic	
109 and 110
10	

	Preyssler [EuP5W30O110]12−	Electrocatalytic, photoluminescence, biocatalytic, photocatalytic and medicinal	
111–119


1	Y. Yan et al.	Metallopolymers from organically modified polyoxometalates (MOMPs)	
141

2	Y. Wei et al.	The chemistry of organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates	
14

3	F. Lefebvre et al.	Polyoxometalates containing late transition and noble metal atoms	
142

4	G. Li et al.	POM-based chiral hybrids synthesis via organoimidization covalent modification of achiral precursors	
143

5	Z. Peng et al.	Rational synthesis of covalently bonded organic–inorganic hybrids	
144

6	P. Gouzerh et al.	Functionalization of polyoxometalates: towards advanced applications in catalysis and materials science	
145

7	R. Jangir et al.	Synthesis of mono-, di-, and polysubstituted imido derivatives of POMs, applications and reactivity	Present work

 	Scheme 1  Reaction of [Bu4N]2[Mo6O19] with ferrocenyl isocyanate to produce (nBu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18] (1) in pyridine.160	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of organodi-imido bridged bis(hexamolybdate) complexes 2–4.174	 

 	Scheme 3  Bis(hexamolybdate) species are made up of the hexamolybdate ion.158	 

 	Scheme 4  In the presence of DCC, POM is esterified with a carboxylic acid.187	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of aromatic diamine-based monosubstituted arylimido hexamolybdates 11 and 12.152	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of monosubstituted arylimido hexamolybdates, 13.152	 

 	Scheme 7  POM functionalization with aromatic carboxylic acid to generate coordination assembly with Cu2+.193	 

 	Scheme 8  Schematic redox reactions within organo-POM anode.93	 

 	Scheme 9  Generation of hexamolybdate as the polar head group to produce surfactants.194	 

 	Scheme 10  Alkylation of pyridine-functionalized hexamolybdate with iodoalkanes.195	 

 	Scheme 11  Schematic representation of the post-functionalization protocol.196	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of mono-functionalized arylimido hexamolybdates, (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)] (20) and (nBu4N)2 [Mo6O18(2,2′,6,6′-tetraisopropylbenzidine)] (21).198	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthesis of [nBu4N][Mo6O18NC6H4-CH2-N3C2H2-Re-phen(CO)3] (22).92	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthesis route of benzoyldiazenido functionalized polyoxometalates (23a–23i).200	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis route of a hybrid molecule POM-TANI@EB (24).201	 

 	Scheme 16  Oxidation of anilines by [N(C4H9)4]2[Mo6O19].97	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of bifunctionalized clusters, 25 and 26.209	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of (nBu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3) (27).211	 

 	Scheme 19  One-pot synthesis of bifunctionalized POM using mixed ligands (2,6-dimethylaniline and 2,6-diisopropylaniline).212	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of trans-dinitrosyl-substituted polyoxometalate (NBu4)4[Mo6O17(NO)2] (29).213	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthesis approach for compound (nBu4N)2cis-[Mo6O17(NC10H15)2] (31) and (nBu4N)2trans-[Mo6O17(NC10H15)2] (32).98	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of difunctionalized arylimido hexamolybdates, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O17(4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline)2] (33).198	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthesis of trisubstituted POM, (nBu4N)2[Mo6O16(NC10H15)3] (34).98	 

 	Scheme 24  Synthesis of polyoxotungsten imido derivative, (nBu4N)2[W6O18(NAr)] (35).218	 

 	Scheme 25  Synthesis of imido derivatives of the [MoW5O19]2− cluster anion.219	 

 	Scheme 26  The hexamolybdate functionalized with terpyridyl ligand undergoes a coordination process with [Ru(tPy)Cl3]−.151	 

 	Scheme 27  . A transition-metal complex and POM clusters are joined via a metal–ligand coordination in the synthesis of a molecular hybrid.228	 

 	Scheme 28  POM-functionalized carboxylic acid coordination assembly with Cu2+.193	 

 	Scheme 29  Copolymerization of 4-methylstyrene and p-styrenyl imido hexamolybdate caused by free radical-induced copolymerization.162	 

 	Scheme 30  Coelectropolymerization of a POM-based monomer to form polypyrrole.225	 

 	Scheme 31  Sonogashira coupling of 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene/3,5-ditert-butyl-1-ethynylbenzene with iodo-functionalized hexamolybdate in acetonitrile at room temperature.222	 

 	Scheme 32  Hybrid nanodumbbells assembled in a controlled manner.223	 

 	Scheme 33  Synthesis of two new charge-transfer hybrids based on hexamolybdate clusters.224	 

 	Scheme 34  Synthesis of main-chain-POM-containing conjugated polymers.131	 

 	Scheme 35  Pd-catalyzed bromo/iodo-functionalized organic hexamolybdate derivatives react with alkenes in the Heck reaction.188	 

 	Scheme 36  Esterification of carboxylic acids with phenolic hydroxyl functionalized hexamolybdate derivatives.187	 
Footnote
† These authors have made equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
