Key components and design strategy of the membrane electrode assembly for alkaline water electrolysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00142C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00142C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1384-1430Key components and design strategy of the membrane electrode assembly for alkaline water electrolysis

        
          
            Lei 
            Wan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ziang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qin 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Maobing 
            Pang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dongcheng 
            Lin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Liu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Baoguo 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      The State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, No. 30 Shuang-Qing Road, Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: bgwang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      14th January 2023
    , Accepted 21st February 2023First published on 22nd February 2023AbstractAlkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production is a promising approach to address the severe energy crisis. Membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) provide an important place for the electrochemical reaction and multiphase transfer, which directly determines the performance and durability of alkaline water electrolysis. Thus, developing high-performance and low-cost MEAs is the key to promote the large-scale applications of alkaline water electrolysis. Herein, based on the discussion of the fundamentals of alkaline water electrolysis, we review the state-of-the-art MEAs, including electrocatalysts, ion conductive membranes, and gas/liquid diffusion layers, as well as the progress in preparation technologies of MEAs. Especially, the overall design strategies of MEAs are discussed to promote high-performance alkaline water electrolysis, thus highlighting the complex relationship of the electrocatalyst and main components with the performance of alkaline water electrolysis. Finally, the current challenges and future perspectives on the development of MEAs are discussed. This review can provide a timely reference for future directions in MEAs’ challenges and perspectives for alkaline water electrolysis.
Lei Wan
Lei Wan has been learning in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, China, since his postgraduate study from 2018. And currently, he is a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Baoguo Wang, and focuses on the synthesis of polymer membranes and electrode materials for alkaline water electrolysis.
Ziang Xu
Ziang Xu is now a PhD candidate in Chemical engineering at Tsinghua University in China. He received his Bachelor’s degree of Chemical engineering from Tianjin university. In 2009, he was supported with a visiting scholar foundation on aqueous organic flow battery program at Harvard University. He received Gold Award for iGEM competition and Asia-Pacific Regional Liaison from AIChE in 2016 & 2018. His research works have been published in high impact journals, e.g. Nature Communications, Energy environmental science, Nano letters, Journal of material chemistry A. His interests are currently focusing on material design for Energy Storage & Conversion.
Baoguo Wang
Prof. Baoguo Wang received his BS and MS degrees in chemical engineering from Tsinghua University in 1987 and 1993, respectively, and obtained PhD from Tokyo University in 2000. His current interest focuses on developing advanced materials and device for electricity conversion and storage, including hydrogen generation with AEM water electrolysis, and vanadium flow battery (VFB) for electricity storage. He has published over 350 papers and presentations; 29 patents have been issued and licensing declaration.

Broader context
Global warming and environmental pollution have attracted great attention worldwide, and thus developing large-scale renewable energy is urgent and important. The advantage of hydrogen as an energy carrier is not only its high energy density, but also that hydrogen and electricity can be interconverted by water electrolysis technology. Alkaline water electrolysis has been considered as a promising hydrogen production approach with large-scale and low-cost production. The sandwich-structured membrane electrode assembly is the site for electrochemical reactions and gas/liquid mass transport during the water electrolysis process, which is the critical factor that determines the performance and durability of alkaline water electrolysis. To realize the large-scale industrialization of alkaline water electrolysis, the key components and design strategies of the membrane electrode assembly are urgently required to be systematically considered and optimized. Here, the key components of the membrane electrode assembly, including electrocatalysts, ionic conductive membranes, and the gas/liquid diffusion layer, are systematically summarized to demonstrate the latest advancements. Especially, the overall design strategies of the membrane electrode assembly are discussed to promote high-performance alkaline water electrolysis, thus highlighting the complex relationship of the electrocatalyst and main components with the performance of alkaline water electrolysis. This review can guide researchers to further comprehensively design membrane electrode assemblies to achieve high-performance and long-life alkaline water electrolysis for large-scale hydrogen production.

1. Introduction
In recent decades, massive consumption of fossil fuels has resulted in environmental pollution. Thus, developing clean and renewable energy has become an emergency in the short term.1 Hydrogen, as an attractive alternative energy carrier, is one of the most promising renewable energy sources to alleviate the excessive dependence on fossil fuels due to its merits of ultra-high energy density (140 MJ kg−1) and carbon-free characteristics.2 Nevertheless, most hydrogen is by far produced by steam reforming of natural gas and other fossil fuels under harsh conditions. Moreover, hydrogen production is energy-intensive and even accompanied by the release of CO2 byproducts.3 Therefore, exploring efficient green hydrogen production technology is a crucial route to reduce carbon emissions and thus achieve carbon neutrality.
Water electrolysis using intermittent electricity generated by sustainable energy sources (e.g., solar and wind power) is a promising strategy to achieve green hydrogen production for large-scale applications.4,5 The low-temperature water electrolysis technologies can be distinguished by the electrolyte used in the electrolyzer: alkaline water electrolysis and proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE).6 Compared to PEMWE, alkaline water electrolysis has some advantages. The major advantages can be summarized as follows: (1) the alkaline environment allows the use of inexpensive, non-precious metals as catalysts, showing long-term stability and high electrochemical efficiency; (2) corrosion problems can be minimized under alkaline conditions.7 As a result of these advantages, alkaline water electrolysis in recent years has been considered as a promising water electrolysis technology, and great effort has been put into its research and development.8,9
The membrane electrode assembly (MEA), also known as “full cell-type” or “zero-gap”, is the heart of an alkaline water electrolysis system.10 As shown in Fig. 2a, the MEA can be divided into three main components: the ionic conductive membrane, the catalyst layer (CL) and the liquid/gas diffusion layer (LGDL). The ionic conductive membrane allows hydroxide ions to pass through it but prevents hydrogen permeation. The CL is in direct contact with the membrane and the LGDL. The LGDL consists of a porous layer that allows for an efficient removal of reactants and products from the electrode. The sandwich-structured MEA is the site for electrochemical reactions and gas/liquid mass transport during the water electrolysis process, which is the critical factor that determines the performance and durability of alkaline water electrolysis. In recent years, extensive research on preparation and electrochemical performance of individual catalysts and membranes has been reported.11,12 Most of the articles focus on either membrane or catalyst development and improvement. Interestingly, there have been only a few publications specifically focusing on the MEA properties, including its impact on the electrolysis performance. Moreover, the relationship between the catalyst and CL or MEA is still unclear. To bridge the gap between a highly active catalyst or membrane and a high-performance MEA with platinum-group metal (PGM)-free catalysts, here in this review, we comprehensively overview the development and challenge of the MEA for alkaline water electrolysis. First, we start with a brief overview of alkaline water electrolysis, followed by outlining the basics of the MEA at the single-cell level. Then, we summarize the advancement of the key materials used in the MEA for alkaline water electrolysis. Based on the material design, MEA formation and the alkaline water electrolysis test process are reviewed to highlight key factors for high-performance alkaline water electrolysis. Finally, we discuss the overall design strategies of high-performance MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis, including the CL, ionic conductive membranes and interface structures. We anticipate that this review will serve as a useful introduction to the basics of alkaline water electrolysis and provide a comprehensive summary of advanced key materials and MEAs, as well as serve as inspiration for further study to realize the large-scale application of alkaline water electrolysis.
2. Fundamentals of alkaline water electrolysis
2.1. The development of alkaline water electrolysis
Since 1800, when Nicholson and Carlisle discovered that electricity can split water into H2 and O2, the water electrolysis has attracted much attention. In the past 200 years, significant advancements have been achieved in developing highly efficient electrocatalysts, ionic conductive membranes and related electrolyzers for alkaline water electrolysis (Fig. 1a). Dmitry Lachinov developed the industrial application of alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production in 1888.22 By 1902, more than 400 industrial alkaline water electrolyzers were already in operation. The first significant alkaline water electrolysis plant, with 10000 N m3 H2 h−1 capacity, was put into operation in 1939. Further, the first pressurized industrial electrolyzer was manufactured by Zdansky/Lonza in 1948.23 In this period, commercial alkaline water electrolysis concepts were developed, and most of the technological components are currently in use. As shown in Fig. 1b, traditional alkaline liquid water electrolysis (ALWE) based on two porous electrodes separated by a liquid alkaline electrolyte suffers from low current density (<200 mA cm−2) with efficiencies typically only in the region of up to <60%. These relatively low efficiencies promoted the development of other water electrolysis technologies, most notably the developed PEMWE in 1973. PEMWE can operate at a high current density of ∼2 A cm−2, correspondingly giving an energy efficiency of ∼70%. However, the perfluorosulfonic acid membrane (such as Nafion) and the noble catalysts (such as Pt/C and IrO2) are irreplaceable due to the acidic environment, which caused the high cost of PEMWE for hydrogen production. PEMWE works using a PEM as the solid electrolyte, and by employing a zero-gap electrolyzer where the electrodes are deposited directly onto the PEM (Fig. 1c). Inspired by the development of PEMWE, an important step towards these ‘Advanced Alkaline Electrolysers’ is employing a cell design based on the zero-gap electrolyzer concept (Fig. 1d). Zero-gap alkaline water electrolysis was first proposed in 1967 by Costa and Grimes,24 using mesh electrodes on either side of a porous membrane. The zero-gap cell design works by compressing two porous electrodes on either side of an ionic conductive membrane, achieving a gap between the two electrodes equal to the thickness of the membrane (<0.5 mm). This design significantly reduces the ohmic resistance contribution from the electrolyte between the two porous electrodes. During the 1980s, great efforts were devoted to improving the electrolysis performance of alkaline water electrolysis. Anion exchange membrane water electrolysis (AEMWE) was developed using an AEM, which can combine the advantages of solid polymer electrolyte technology and the material compatibility of the alkaline environment. Thus the cost of hydrogen production can be further reduced. AEMWE is a developing technology and the first AEMWE paper was published in 2011.17 Compared to ALWE and PEMWE technologies, AEMWE is still in the early stages of development and AEMWE still requires significant research and efforts for large-scale applications. We note that ALWE uses concentrated KOH solution as an electrolyte, while PEMWE using only polymer electrolytes with pure water as an electrolyte. In 2012, Zhuang and co-workers first reported pure-water-fed AEMWE using quaternary ammonia polysulfone as a polymer electrolyte.18 However, AEMWE fed with pure water or dilute electrolytes (such as 0.1 M KOH or 1 wt% K2CO3) suffered from high operating voltages. In 2020, Kim and co-workers achieved high-performance (2.7 A cm−2@1.8 V) and pure-water-fed AEMWE using PGM-free electrocatalysts by improving alkaline ionomers in CLs, but the limited stability still required to be improved.20 Moreover, the first commercial AEMWE was launched by Enapter in 2020. In the last two years, AEMWE has achieved significant progress in performance and durability due to engineered electrocatalysts or ionic conductive membranes. In 2022, our group reported the overall design of MEAs for AEMWE, forming 3D-ordered MEAs with porous CLs, ultrathin AEMs and 3D CL/AEM interfaces.21 A high current density of 3.1 A cm−2 was obtained at 2.0 V, and the pure-water-fed AEMWE can steadily operate at 1.0 A cm−2 for over 600 h.
 Fig. 1  (a) Timeline of major developments in the application of alkaline water electrolysis. Insets: The discovery of water electrolysis13 (1800. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); industrial synthesis of H2 through water electrolysis14 (1888. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2009); industrial alkaline water electrolysis in operation15 (1902. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); alkaline water electrolysis for 10000 N m3 H2 h−115 (1939. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); the first zero-gap electrolyzer16 (1967. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016); the first AEMWE paper17 (2011. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011); the first pure-water-fed AEMWE paper18 (2012. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011); ion-solvating membranes for alkaline water electrolysis;19 engineering ionomers for pure-water-fed AEMWE;20 overall design of MEAs for pure-water-fed AEMWE21 (2022. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022). Schematic of water electrolysis cells: (b) alkaline liquid water electrolysis (ALWE), (c) proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE), (d) zero-gap ALWE, and (e) anion exchange membrane water electrolysis (AEMWE). 
2.2. Basics of alkaline water electrolysis

2.2.1 Cell voltages of the alkaline water electrolyzer. 
Water is electrochemically split into H2 and O2. The total process can be described as follows:2H2O (l) → 2H2 (g) + O2 (g)For alkaline water electrolysis, a concentrated KOH/NaOH solution is utilized as the electrolyte to reduce the resistance of the solution. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) can be written as follows:Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (E0 = −0.83 V vs. SHE)Anode: 2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e− (E0 = 0.40 V vs. SHE)The cell potentials of the two half-reactions are used to obtain the total reversible cell voltage (Erev) of alkaline water electrolysis. Erev can be described as follows:Erev = Eanode − EcathodeFor standard conditions, Erev can be calculated as 1.23 V. The pH of the electrolyte affects the E0 values at the anode and cathode, but the Erev value of 1.23 V is kept constant. In practical alkaline water electrolysis, this is never accomplished since an extra overpotential is required to meet the theoretical expectations. As shown in Fig. 2b, the actual cell voltage (Ecell) is distinct from the reversible cell voltage because of inefficiencies of alkaline electrolyzers; Ecell can be divided into multiple contributing elements:Ecell = Erev + ηanode + ηcathode + I × Rcellwhere ηanode, ηcathode, I, and Rcell are the anode overpotential, the cathode overpotential, the current, and the overall cell resistance, respectively. The anode overpotential is greater than the cathode overpotential. With increasing current densities, the contribution from ohmic losses becomes more prominent, becoming the dominant factor at high values. As shown in Fig. 2c, the overall cell resistance can be divided into circuit resistance, bubble resistance, electrolyte resistance, and membrane resistance.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the typical MEA in alkaline water electrolysis. (b) The individual contributions to cell voltage, including reversible cell voltage, ohmic losses, anode overvoltage and cathode overvoltage. (c) The contributions to the overall cell resistance, including circuit resistance, bubble resistance, electrolyte resistance, and membrane resistance. (d) Typical polarization curve of water electrolysis, which can be divided into the kinetic region, ohmic region, and mass-transfer region. (e) Typical Nyquist plot and equivalent circuit model of MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis. 


2.2.2 Overpotential analysis in MEAs. 

Fig. 2d shows a typical polarization curve of MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis. The polarization curve is split into three regions, including the kinetic region, ohmic region, and mass-transfer region. The initial part of the curve is considered as the kinetic region, which mostly affects the activation resistances. The ohmic region is mainly apparent in the middle section of the curve, and the concentration resistances are significant in the tail. This linear shape indicates that the ohmic and mass-transfer resistance are the key parameters of electrolysis performance of MEAs. Therefore, Ecell is also composed of Erev and the three main overpotentials η:Ecell = Erev + ηkin + ηohm + ηmasswhere ηkin is the kinetic overpotential, ηohm is the ohmic overpotential, and ηmass is the mass transport overpotential. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), as a versatile tool, can promote a better understanding of the overpotential origin of MEAs in alkaline water electrolysis.25Fig. 2e shows a typical Nyquist plot, wherein the impedances are expressed in the real part and the imaginary part in the semicircle. The impedance at high frequency, intercepting the x-axis, is the overall ohmic resistance of electrolyzers. The difference between the higher frequency intercept and the lower frequency intercept is the polarization resistance. The charge transfer resistance is overwhelmed by the kinetics of the reaction. The concentration polarization resistance is the second arc at the lower frequency. The overall resistance of electrolyzers is the summation of resistances at lower frequency and the differential resistance character of polarization curves. Therefore, EIS was used to measure the high frequency resistance (HFR) representing the overall cell resistance Rohm. ηohm is therefore determined asηohm = i × Rohm = i × HFRηkin was extracted using a Tafel model, in which the Tafel slope b and exchange current density i0 were the governing kinetic parameters. The Tafel model was fitted to iR-free alkaline water electrolysis cell voltages at low current densities. The entire ηkin of the cell isηkin = b × log(i/i0)Mass transport was defined as the sum of gaseous/liquid transfer in the LGDL/CL and ionic transport in the CLs. ηmass was calculated by subtracting Erev and ηkin and ηohm from Ecell.

3. Key components of MEAs in alkaline water electrolysis
3.1. PGM-free electrocatalysts
Developing OER/HER electrocatalysts with low overpotential, excellent long-term stability, and low cost is highly important yet challenging for reducing the cost of hydrogen production. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 3a, high-performance electrocatalysts for industrial applications should meet the following challenges: (1) deliver a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an extremely low overpotential (less than 300 and 100 mV for OER and HER, respectively); (2) maintain excellent electrochemical and mechanical stability at industrially operating temperatures (>80 °C) in a highly corrosive electrolyte (∼30 wt% KOH solution) for long-term operation; and (3) must have scale-up production capability and low-cost preparation methods. To achieve these targets, various strategies have been widely used to exploit high-performance OER/HER electrocatalysts for alkaline water electrolysis (Fig. 3b). An excellent regulation strategy of OER/HER electrocatalysts offers the following merits: (1) increasing the electrochemical active surface area; (2) enhancing electrical conductivity between active materials and substrates; (3) accelerating gas/liquid mass transfer, especially at high current densities; (4) regulating the electronic structures or band structures of active sites; and (5) creating dual sites and phase engineering. The performance of MEAs in terms of OER (Fig. 4a) and HER (Fig. 4b) PGM-free electrocatalysts is summarized. The OER electrocatalysts have attracted more attention compared with HER electrocatalysts. Moreover, the current density of MEAs in terms of HER electrocatalysts was generally less than 1 A cm−2, which may be attributed to high overpotential for OER in alkaline water electrolysis. In the past 10 years, although significant progress in PGM-free electrocatalysts has been achieved for alkaline water electrolysis, most of the electrocatalysts with high activities are reported only in a three-electrode system. Much efforts should be devoted to developing high-performance PGM-free electrocatalysts at the MEA level. Herein, we summarize the recent advances of the emerging electrocatalytic materials in MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis.
 Fig. 3  (a) Important merits and (b) regulation strategies for designing high-performance OER/HER electrocatalysts. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using TMS, TMO, and TM(OH)x anode electrocatalysts. (b) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using metal or alloy, TMS, and TMP cathode electrocatalysts. (c) Degradation rates during continuous long-term durability testing of the reported alkaline water electrolysis employing PGM-free electrocatalysts. References for data points for (a): 1,26 2,27 3,28 4,29 5,30 6,31 7,32 8,33 9,34 10,35 11,36 12,37 13,38 14,39 15,40 16,41 17,42 18,43 19,44 20,45 21,46 22,47 23,48 24,49 25,50 26,51 27,52 28,53 29,54 30,55 31,56 32,57 33,58 34,59 35,60 36,61 37,62 38,63 39,64 40,65 41.66 (b): 1,67 2,32 3,33 4,35 5,48 6,68 7,69 8,70 9,39 10,62 11,71 12,41 13,72 14,53 15,73 16,54 17,74 18,47 19,75 20,76 21,51 22,77 23,78 24,79 25,80 26,31 27,81 28.66 (c): 1,67 2,27 3,74 4,29 5,47 6,31 7,32 8,75 9,48 10,36 11,82 12,51 13,77 14,70 15,83 16,62 17,78 18,84 19,41 20,53 21,85 22,54 23,86 24.66 (d) The surface reconstruction of electrocatalysts in an alkaline electrolyte.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (e) Pourbaix diagram of various elements in the potential range of water electrolysis.88 Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
3.2. Stability issues of OER and HER electrocatalysts

Fig. 4c summarizes the durability of alkaline water electrolysis in terms of electrocatalysts. Most of the electrocatalysts developed in the laboratory can just maintain a low current density (<500 mA cm−2) and a high voltage degradation rate (>0.1 mV h−1) for a short period (<500 h) under mild electrolyte (1 M KOH) and temperature (25 °C) conditions. The intrinsic factors for electrocatalyst degradation can be summarized as (1) morphology changes; (2) surface poisoning; and (3) metal dissolution. In general, the stability issue of OER electrocatalysts is of more significance than that of HER electrocatalysts. However, during electrolysis or intermittent periods, HER electrocatalysts also experience degradation in activity, which can be attributed to various factors, including the decomposition of the electrocatalyst, hydride formation, agglomeration of nanosized catalyst particles, and redeposition of dis-solved cations on the electrocatalysts.
During the OER, the electrocatalysts may undergo chemical and structural changes, including the dissolution of the electrocatalyst and compositional and structural changes, which can increase or reduce the inherent activity. Typically, at a high oxidation potential, electrocatalysts will undergo a surface reconstruction process to form metal oxides or (oxy)hydroxides at the surface or bulk of electrocatalysts (Fig. 4d).89 It was demonstrated that the corresponding metal (oxy)hydroxides of TMO, TMS, and TMP could be formed to display a high OER activity. Thus, the pristine electrocatalysts are not stable during OER, which are called “precatalysts”. Actually, the formed metal (oxy)hydroxides serve as the true catalytically active species and stable phases for OER in alkaline electrolytes.87 One of the challenges of the surface-reconstruction reaction is that it could accompany a high catalyst dissolution rate and thus lead to catalytic instability, which is the so called “transient dissolution mechanism.” In a recent study, Frydendal et al. utilized the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance to quantify the mass loss of MnOx during the short-term stability tests.90 The anodic dissolution of MnOx led to constant mass loss of electrocatalysts, which may cause activity degradation. From a thermodynamic perspective, the surface reconstruction process may be further elucidated. As shown in Fig. 4e, the Pourbaix diagrams have been used to provide a deeper insight into the electrocatalyst stability, which describe how metal-based electrocatalysts might undergo surface reconstruction or dissolve under particular pH and voltage conditions during OER by simulating the surface stability.88

3.2.1 OER catalysts. 
The OER process in alkaline electrolytes involves the consumption of OH− in multiple steps. The widely recognized OER mechanisms can be summarized as the adsorbate evolution mechanism (AEM) and the lattice-oxygen-mediated mechanism (LOM).87
For AEM under alkaline conditions:O–M–O + OH− = O–M(–OH)–O + e−O–M(–OH)–O + OH− = O–M(O)–O + H2O(l) + e−O–M(O)–O + OH− = O–M(OOH)–O + e−O–M(OOH)–O + OH− = O–M–O + O2(g) + H2O(l)For LOM under alkaline conditions:O–M–O + OH− = O–M(–OH)–O + e−O–M(–OH)–O + OH− = O–M(O)–O + H2O + e−O–M(O)–O + O–M(O)–O = O–M–* + O–M–* + O2(g)O–M–* + OH− = O–M–OH + e−O–M–OH + OH− = O–M–O + H2O(l) + e−In comparison to HER, the multiple four-electron reaction of OER indicates a more complicated mechanism and an inherently sluggish process. Adsorbing the reactants and transferring them to the catalyst’s surface as intermediates for subsequent processes necessitates the active engagement of the catalysts. As shown in Fig. 5, the formation way of oxygen molecules is the biggest difference between AEM and LOM processes.91 For the AEM mechanism, the primary reaction pathway is broken down into four steps, each of which is accompanied by the transfer of protons to the electrolyte. Oxygen precipitation involves the formation of the MOOH intermediate, and the catalyst’s adsorption of hydroxl groups or water molecules will form the oxygen atoms. In the theoretical investigation of the OER mechanism, the adsorption energy of the AEM intermediates M–OH, M–O*, and M–OOH is critical, and the adsorption energy of the reaction intermediates of an ideal electrocatalyst must be at an appropriate level. The M–OH and M–O* species are formed in the first and two steps of the LOM process, which is similar to the AEM mechanism. The final step is to activate lattice oxygen at two nearby metal locations in order to create direct O–O free radical coupling, which does not involve M–OOH intermediates. Thus, the LOM process can effectively avoid the limitation of adsorption-energy scale. The performance of MEAs has a close relationship with and largely depends on OER.
 Fig. 5  OER reaction mechanism in alkaline electrolytes. M stands for metal active sites and the dashed circle represents the lattice oxygen vacancy. 
3.2.1.1 Transition metal oxides. 
Transition metal oxides (TMO) are considered as promising electrocatalysts for OER because of their low cost, easy fabrication, and high activity in alkaline electrolytes.92 Particularly, the spinel oxides, such as MnCo2O4, NiCo2O4 and Co3O4 with a metal element having a variable valence state, may provide a high catalytic activity for OER. For example, Chanda et al. used the Ni1+xCo2−xO4 (−1 ≤ x ≤1) series of materials as the OER catalysts and an anion-selective membrane for MEA construction.93 The performance of MEAs with the NiCo spinel oxides was evaluated in a 10 wt% KOH electrolyte. The anode catalyst composition was considered to have a significant impact on the performance of the MEA. NiCo2O4 exhibited the highest current density of 135 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.85 V.
Forming nanostructured TMO is an effective way to improve electrocatalyst utilization towards OER. The higher surface area of TMO provides more accessible active sites for electrochemical reactions.95 Bhushan et al. developed hollow spherical-structured NiCo2O4, which showed a small overpotential of 400 mV and a Tafel slope of 153 mV dec−1.86 The high OER activity of NiCo2O4 hollow spheres was attributed to the easy accessibility of the electrolyte to both the inner and outer surfaces, remarkably increasing the catalytic active sites. Further, the hollow spherical-structured NiCo2O4 catalysts were assembled with the polyaniline AEM as MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis. The MEA showed a relatively low voltage of 2.0 V at 400 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 6a, Jang et al. utilized a pH-controlled co-precipitation method to effectively regulate the composition and morphology of Cu0.5Cu2.5O4 nanoparticles.44 The formed nanosized Cu0.5Co2.5O4 particles have a size of ∼3 nm and a high surface area (Fig. 6b), which significantly increased the activation sites. The Cu0.5Co2.5O4 electrocatalyst displayed a low overpotential of 285 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH. Furthermore, the AEM water electrolysis using the Cu0.5Co2.5O4 electrocatalyst as an anode recorded a current density of 1.3 A cm−2 at 1.8 V in 1 M KOH. Moreover, the energy conversion efficiency can be maintained at ∼80% for 100 h during long-term operation. Lee and co-workers produced small densely packed Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 nanoparticles on Ni foam (Fig. 6c and d).34 This electrode achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 towards OER at a low overpotential of 192 mV. When coupled with a Pt/C HER electrocatalyst, the resulting AEMWE achieved a high current density of 2.0 A cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.9 V in 1 M KOH (Fig. 6e).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the etching process of Cu0.5Co2.5O4. (b) TEM and HRTEM (inset) images of Cu0.5Co2.5O4 prepared under different pH conditions.44 Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (c) Synthesis process of Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 on Ni foam. (d and e) SEM images of the Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 electrode.34 Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (f) Synthesis process of the CuCoO4 anode by chemical etching. (g) The ratio of Co ([Co2+] and [Co3+]) and O ([OVacancy] and [OLattice]) was calculated from XPS results by using the integral area of each element. (h) Polarization curves of the CE-CCO, commercial IrO2 and commercial Ni foam.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (i) The number of Co4+ atoms and TOF at 1.65 VRHE at each CV cycle. (j) AEMWE components. (k) Polarization curves of AEMWE in 1 M KOH at 60 °C.37 Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (l) SEM images of eCCO and CCO. (m) Schematic of the three-cell AEMWE stack. (n) Durability test and the corresponding energetic efficiency of the AEMWE stack at 0.5 A cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH at 45 °C.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
Fundamental studies have revealed that engineering the surface structure of TMO catalysts to expose more of highly active sites is crucial for enhancing their electrocatalytic activity.96,97 It has been demonstrated that regulating defects in nanocomposites, particularly oxygen vacancies, is an effective way for improving the catalytic performance of TMO.98,99 In addition to acting as shallow donors to improve the electrical conductivity of TMO, oxygen vacancies can change the surface electronic structure and increase the number of active sites for OER.100 Park et al. used the surface chemical etching technique to introduce oxygen vacancies on CuCo-oxide (CE-CCO), thus increasing electrical conductivity for OER45 (Fig. 6f). As shown in Fig. 6g, compared to bulk CuCo5O8, the oxygen vacancy signal in CE-CCO was more intense. Moreover, the amount of surface oxygen vacancies was positively associated with the Co2+/Co3+ ratio. Density functional theory (DFT) analysis showed that oxygen vacancies change the electronic structure of Cu and Co to promote the adsorption/desorption of oxygen intermediates on/from the electrocatalyst surface. CE-CCO showed an exceptionally low OER overpotential of 310 mV at 100 mA cm−2 compared to bulk CuCo5O8 (Fig. 6h). When CE-CCO was used as the anode of a MEA for AEMWE, a high current density of 1390 mA cm−2 was recorded at 1.8 V. Recently, operando spectroscopy techniques have identified that the Co4+ ion is the real OER active site in spinel-type Co3O4.101 Nevertheless, only near-surface Co3O4 could undergo an oxidation reaction that resulted in the formation of amorphous CoOx(OH)y and a transition from Co2+-Td to Co3+-Oh.102 Therefore, it is crucial to increase the amount of Co4+ at the OER potential, known as the fast OER active site. To achieve this purpose, Ham et al. reported an octahedral Co2+-rich Co oxide with the inactive Sb5+ ion as an OER electrocatalyst.37 It was found that the oxygen vacancies generated by OER inactive Sb effectively promoted the oxidation from Co3+ to Co4+ by regulating the OH− adsorption energy of Co. As shown in Fig. 6i, compared to Co3O4, the amount of Co4+ atoms and the TOF value were dramatically improved in the 10th cycle of CV, demonstrating that the active site density and intrinsic OER activity of CoSb2O6 were increased. Thus, in comparison to Co3O4 with a high overpotential value of 460 mV at 100 mA cm−2, CoSb2O6 required a much lower overpotential of 360 mV. The high electrocatalytic performance of CoSb2O6 was further confirmed using an AEMWE configuration (Fig. 6j). As shown in Fig. 6k, CoSb2O6 showed an impressive current density of 800 mA cm−2 at 1.9 V. In addition, Jang et al. reported an etched copper–cobalt oxide anode (eCCO) by a simple chemical etching (Fig. 6l).94 The chemical etching significantly increased the amount of Co3+, which can be further oxidized to Co4+ as the OER active sites. The assembled MEA with eCCO and a polycarbazole-based AEM achieved a high current density of 4.2 A cm−2 at 1.9 V in 1 M KOH. The potential of eCCO under industrial conditions was verified by the large-sized three-cell AEMWE stack which exhibited a high energy conversion efficiency of 75% and good electrolysis stability with an extremely low degradation rate of 8.5 mV kh−1 for 2000 h in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 6m and n).
3.2.1.2 Transition metal hydroxides. 
Transition metal hydroxides (TM(OH)x) have been verified with remarkable OER activity for alkaline water electrolysis. In the case of single-metal hydroxides, Burke et al. reported the OER activity trend as follows: FeOxHy > CoOxHy > NiOxHy > MnOxHy (Fig. 7d).103 The OER activity of FeOxHy is greater than that of other single-metal hydroxides. The OER activity may be significantly increased by incorporating Fe into the Ni lattice.104 As shown in Fig. 7a, iron seems to be crucial for the observed enhancement and promotes the creation of high-surface-area structures.105 In the oxide/(oxy)hydroxide lattice, Ni atoms are easily replaced by Fe atoms. Fe and Ni are present in the as-prepared catalysts as Fe3+ and Ni2+, respectively, which change the overall charge. In addition, the intercalation of anions (carbonate or water molecules) compensates the charge, forming layered and high-surface-area structures, which significantly promotes ion transport (Fig. 7b and c). Fig. 7d shows the CV curves of the different TM(OH)x catalyst films.103 The incorporation of Fe into Ni- and Co-hydroxides significantly improved the OER performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and (b) XRD patterns for different amounts of Fe in the NiFeOxHy catalysts. (c) The unit cell structures for Ni(OH)2 and NiFeOxHy catalysts.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (d) Overpotential plotted versus the corresponding turnover frequency number and (e) CV curves for the catalysts in a Fe-free 1 M KOH electrolyte.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
NiFe-based layered double hydroxides (LDHs), known to be excellent OER catalysts with high intrinsic activity, have been widely employed for alkaline water electrolysis.106–109 Much research has been devoted to increasing the electrochemical surface area and active sites of NiFe LDHs through size control110,111 and morphology design.112–114 Hiroyuki et al. used a liquid phase reaction to synthesize NiFe LDHs with a lateral size of <10 nm (Fig. 8a).115 The NiFe LDH showed an overpotential of 247 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for OER, which is significantly lower than that of commercial IrO2 electrocatalysts. A MEA with the NiFe LDH as the anode for AEMWE showed a low cell voltage of 1.59 V for obtaining 1.0 A cm−2 in 1 M KOH at 80 °C (Fig. 8b). As shown in Fig. 8c, Jiang and co-workers effectively regulated the composition and morphology of NiFe LDH for OER.58 The obtained single layer NiFe3 LDH showed a low overpotential of 249 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and an ultrasmall Tafel slope of 24 mV dec−1. In AEMWE, the Ni3Fe LDH achieved a high current density of 2 A cm−2 at 2.0 V, and maintained long-term stability for 400 h at 1 A cm−2 (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Time course of the pH of the reaction mixture during NiFe LDH synthesis and schematic illustration of the synthesis mechanism of NiFe LDH. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs using the NiFe LDH and IrOx as the anode electrocatalysts at 80 °C.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of single layer NiFe3 LDH. (d) Polarization curve of AEM water electrolysis based on the Ni3Fe LDH@Ni fiber electrode and the commercial Ir black@Ni fiber electrode.58 Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic illustration of NiFeV LDH on Ni foam by a corrosion process. (f) Polarization curves of AEMWE for NiFeV LDH recorded at 50 °C in a 1 M KOH solution.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (g) Schematic model of porous monolayer NiFe LDH.122 Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (h) The schematic diagram of formation of FeNiW LDH by the electrochemical corrosion strategy.123 Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that incorporation of an additional metal species in binary LDHs can offer even higher OER activities by adjusting the electronic structure.116–118 As shown in Fig. 8e, Lee et al. successfully prepared ternary NiFeV LDH nanosheets for OER through a facile surface corrosion method.52 DFT calculations revealed that the presence of V in NiFeV LDH is crucial to improve OER activity. In a three-electrode system, the NiFeV LDH electrode required only a low overpotential of 272 mV to achieve a current density of 100 mA cm−2, outperforming the NiFe LDH catalyst by 50 mV. The AEMWE with the NiFeV LDH anode exhibited a high current density of 729 mA cm−2 at 1.7 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 8f). Similarly, Lee et al. reported significant improvement of OER activity using ternary NiFeCo LDH in half-cell and full AEMWE systems.47
The performance of OER electrocatalysts can be significantly improved by defect engineering, for example by adjusting the electronic states and generating active sites. The defect engineering, including both cation (Fe and Ni)119,120 and anion (O)121 vacancies, has been achieved for NiFe LDH. As shown in Fig. 8g, Zhang et al. reported a porous monolayer NiFe LDH with abundant oxygen and cation vacancies, increasing the electropositivity of the NiFe LDH nanosheets and enhancing H2O adsorption and bonding strength of the OH* intermediate formed in OER.122 Thus, this NiFe LDH achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 230 mV, with a Tafel slope of only 47 mV dec−1. He et al. synthesized WNiFe LDH nanosheets with abundant oxygen vacancies through an electrochemical corrosion engineering strategy (Fig. 8h).123 The intrinsic electronic states of the electrocatalysts were effectively modulated by the presence of oxygen vacancies in WFeNi LDH, thus accelerating the charge transfer ability of WFeNi LDH. The FeNiW LDH exhibited impressive OER activity with a low overpotential of 202 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 55.7 mV dec−1. In addition, FeNiW LDH exhibited a negligible potential degradation for 120 h at 300 mA cm−2.
NiFe LDH suffers from low electrical conductivity due to interlayer spacing between the layered hydroxide sheets, limiting its potential as an electrocatalyst.124 Therefore, NiFe LDH is often hybridized with a conductive support, especially carbonaceous materials, such as carbon nanotubes125–127 or graphene,128,129 in order to improve electrical conductivity for OER. However, the fact that carbonaceous materials might be oxidized under a highly anodic OER condition is often neglected.49 To overcome the low electrical conductivity of NiFe LDH without using carbonaceous materials, hierarchical NiFe LDH electrocatalysts are constructed using high-conductivity materials as the substrate for OER. Interestingly, this structure design also increases the surface area of NiFe LDH to a large extent, thereby promoting the OER activity. Wen et al. dispersed NiFe LDH nanoparticles on ultrathin NiS nanosheets, forming a Schottky heterojunction structure for OER (Fig. 9a).130 The intrinsic OER activity is boosted by the interfacial charge transfer at the NiS and NiFe LDH Schottky interface. Notably, the NiFe LDH/NiS Schottky heterojunction showed an extremely low overpotential of 325 mV at 1000 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 9b, the authors achieved the large-area preparation of the NiFe LDH/NiS electrode, and maintained well the uniformity. The high OER activity and good durability of the NiFe LDH/NiS electrode were further validated in industrial alkaline water electrolysis (Fig. 9c and d). Wang et al. also reported amorphous NiFe LDH nanosheets grown on the crystalline FeNi2S4 nanograss, forming amorphous/crystalline heterojunction structures, which could significantly promote the electron transfer across the interfaces (Fig. 9e).131 Thus, the NiFe LDH/FeNi2S4 electrode achieved a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an ultralow overpotential of 306 mV for OER. As shown in Fig. 9f and g, Li et al. electrodeposited NiFe LDH nanosheets on Mo-doped NiSx, forming a 3D hollow core–shell composite nanoarray structure.132 Mo-doped NiSx as the core displayed excellent electrical conductivity, facilitating the rapid electron transfer during OER. NiFe LDH/Mo-doped NiSx exhibited an overpotential of 224 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Ren and co-workers designed a 3D hierarchical architecture by growing NiFe LDH nanosheets on Cu nanowires towards OER, which was advantageous for fast electron transport, high surface area, and enhanced liquid/gas mass transfer (Fig. 9h).133 As shown in Fig. 9i, the Cu@FeNi LDH electrode required only a low overpotential of 315 mV to deliver a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of NiFe LDH/NiS electrodes. (b) Photographs of large-area NiS and NiFe LDH/NiS electrodes and the corresponding SEM images. (c) Polarization curves and (d) the cell voltages of the electrolyzer at a constant catalytic current of 8000 mA for 80 h at 80–85 °C.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) Schematic illustration of the FeNi2S4@NiFe LDH heterostructure.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (f) Synthesis of 3D hollow core–shell Mo-NiSx@NiFe LDH/NF electrodes. (g) SEM image of Mo-NiSx@NiFe LDH/NF.132 Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (h) Fabrication procedures of the self-standing 3D core–shell Cu@NiFe LDH electrocatalyst. (i) Polarization curves of Cu@NiFe LDH.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
3.2.1.3 Transition metal sulfides. 
Transition metal sulfide (TMS) has been considered as one of the most significant OER catalysts because of the satisfactory activity and acceptable stability.134,135 The researchers have been puzzled for a long time by the thermodynamic instability of TMS under oxidative OER conditions despite considerable attempts to develop novel TMS catalysts for OER.136 An agreement has been reached in several research studies that TMS undergoes structural reconstruction during OER and the TMS acts as a ‘pre-electrocatalyst’. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism of structural reconstruction and the actual active sites of the TMS catalysts under OER remain controversial and indistinct. As shown in Fig. 10a, the current opinions on the aforementioned debate may be generally divided into four categories as follows. (1) TMSs completely transform into oxide/hydroxide during OER, and the oxide/hydroxide serves as the actual OER active sites.137–139 (2) TMSs are surface-oxidized into oxide/hydroxide to afford a sulfide–oxide/hydroxide core–shell structure, and the as-formed core–shell structure with a regulated electronic structure serves as the actual OER active site.140,141 (3) TMSs are electrochemically oxidized into solid oxide/hydroxide and soluble sulfate/sulfite during OER, and the as-generated sulfate/sulfite anions adsorb on the oxide/hydroxide to regulate the electronic structure of the oxide/hydroxide for enhanced OER electrocatalytic activity.142 (4) TMSs on the surface transform into oxysulfide by means of oxygen and sulfur anions leading to the co-construction of a multi-anionic structure.143
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the underlying mechanism of structural reconstruction for TMS electrocatalysts towards OER. (b) Schematic illustration of (i) NiS2/Ni3S4 as a “pre-catalyst”, (ii) activated NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH covered with NiS2/Ni3S4 and (iii) stabilized NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH. (c) Polarization curves of the MEA with NiS2/Ni3S4 in AEMWE. (d) Polarization curves of MEAs with Ni/NiO or NiS2/Ni3S4 before and after long-term stability tests. (e) The stability test of MEAs with Ni/NiO or NiS2/Ni3S4 at 1000 mA cm−2.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (f) Synthesis process of S-FeOOH/IF. (g) Polarization curves with iR-compensation of AEMWE with the S-FeOOH/IF electrode in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
As shown in Fig. 10b, Xia et al. fabricated a hierarchical NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH electrocatalyst, which was electrochemically derived from S-rich NiS2/Ni3S4 composites by a multistep sulfur leaching process.63 Compared with commercial Ni/NiO and hydrothermally prepared Ni(OH)2 catalysts (>460 mV@50 mA cm−2), NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH showed a decreased overpotential of 374 mV at 50 mA cm−2 for OER and good stability at 10 mA cm−2 for 65 h operation. As shown in Fig. 10c, the improved electrolysis performance of NiS2/Ni3S4 by sulfur leaching was also verified at the single-cell level. The current density of the MEA with NiS2/Ni3S4 was increased from 1152 to 1587 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH after sulfur leaching three times. As shown in Fig. 10d, the optimized NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH heterostructure exhibited an excellent AEMWE performance (1.80 A cm−2 at 2.0 V) and excellent stability (a low voltage degradation of 0.12 mV h−1 at 1000 mA cm−2 for 500 h) (Fig. 10e). Zhang et al. reported a dynamic S2− regulation strategy for activating the iron foam (IF) at high current density, preparing OER catalysts with high activity and stability (Fig. 10f).60 S-doped FeOOH nanostructures were successfully prepared by in situ electrochemical activation. The S-FeOOH/IF electrode exhibited an industrial-level current density of 1000 mA cm−2 with an ultralow overpotential of 358 mV. Importantly, the electrode can operate stably at 1000 mA cm−2 for at least 1000 h in a three-electrode system. The S-FeOOH/IF in AEMWE demonstrated a low cell voltage of 1.99 V to obtain a current density of 1000 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10g).


3.2.2 HER catalysts. 
It is generally known that HER kinetics are sluggish in alkaline electrolytes, particularly on PGM-free electrocatalysts. In comparison to PEMWE, HER kinetics in alkaline water electrolysis are two or three orders of magnitude lower under high pH conditions.
The HER in an alkaline electrolyte proceeds by the initial dissociation of water and the formation of hydrogen intermediates (Had) by the Volmer step:H2O + e− → Had + OH−followed by either the electrochemical Heyrovsky step:H2O + Had + e− → H2 + OH−or the chemical Tafel recombination step:2Had → H2It is generally agreed that the first water dissociation is the rate-determining step since H2O dissociation is often a sluggish response. Additionally, alkaline HER is more complicated than acid HER, with Had, hydroxyl adsorption (OHad), and water dissociation all crucial aspects/processes that should be optimized when developing novel electrocatalysts. In a nutshell, the HER in an alkaline electrolyte should break strong covalent H–O bonds (in water) which is a difficult first-up reaction. Herein, this section discusses the advanced progress of PGM-free electrocatalysts in MEAs for the HER under alkaline conditions.
3.2.2.1 Metal and alloy catalysts. 
Metal and alloy catalysts are frequently adopted as HER catalysts in alkaline water electrolysis.144 In the last decade, the inexpensive Ni nanoparticles were commonly employed as cathode catalysts. Cao et al. used Ni nanopowders with a loading of 2 mg cm−2 as a HER electrocatalyst in AEMWE, and achieved a current density of 100 mA cm−2 at a voltage of 1.99 V.145 To further improve the catalyst utilization, Ahn et al. developed electrodeposited Ni on carbon paper as a HER electrode.146 Electrodeposited Ni is highly distributed on the surface of carbon paper, thus offering a high electrochemical active area for HER. The MEA based on this HER electrode with a low Ni loading of 8.5 μg cm−2 exhibited a current density of 150 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.9 V. However, the pure Ni catalysts had HER activity inferior to that of Pt-based PGM catalysts.
One of the established methods to improve the HER activity of Ni catalysts is to combine Ni with other transition metal oxides. Commercial ACTA 3030 (Ni/(CeO2–La2O3)/C) materials have been widely used as the HER electrocatalyst, and the performance of MEAs with ACTA 3030 was tested in a diluted K2CO3/KHCO3 electrolyte solution separated by an A201 AEM (Tokuyama Corporation).40 The cell voltage significantly decreased from 2.01 to 1.89 V at 470 mA cm−2 when increasing the ACTA 3030 loading from 0.6 to 7.4 mg cm−2. Jang et al. used La–Ce oxide to modify Ni/C (Ni-LCO/C), improving the HER activity and durability of Ni.147 The XPS spectra demonstrated that the shift of the binding energy to lower energies by 0.9 eV appears in Ni-LCO/C compared to Ni/C, which indicated the increased electron transfer from the carbon support to Ni in Ni-LCO/C than in Ni/C. The X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) revealed that the d-band vacancies in Ni decrease with the presence of the cocatalyst, LCO. The Ni-LCO/C catalyst demanded 114 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 for HER, corresponding to a Tafel slope of 72.7 mV dec−1. Therefore, the heterostructure of the Ni-LCO/C electrocatalyst improved the HER activity by inducing a strong interaction between the substrate and the catalyst particles by easily inducing electron transfer to Ni. The authors further constructed an AEMWE system using Ni-LCO/C as the cathode catalyst. Ni-LCO/C required a cell voltage of only 1.8 V for obtaining 450 mA cm−2 in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.
An effective strategy to improve the HER activity of Ni is to construct alloys. Alloying can change the adsorption/desorption strength of adsorbates on the electrocatalyst surface by modulating the electronic structures of the surface and near-surface atoms of electrocatalysts.148 Compared to Ni-only catalysts, the stability and HER activity have been found to be improved by the addition of Mo to Ni to produce intermetallics or disordered compounds.149 In intermetallic compounds, the atomic fraction of Mo is much larger than that in disordered structures. A NiMo alloy cathode and a NiFe alloy anode were assembled and impregnated with a self-crosslinking quaternary ammonia polysulfone membrane as the MEA.18 The NiMo alloy achieved 400 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V under a pure water electrolyte. In another work, Faid et al. reported the NiMo alloy with a sponge-like structure toward HER, which was believed to expose a much higher specific surface area.150 The AEMWE employing these NiMo/X72 cathode catalysts achieved 1 A cm−2 at 1.9 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte. Likewise, Chen et al. developed NiMo nanoparticles embedded in nanowires by annealing NiMoO4 in a reductive atmosphere at a high temperature.83 The annealing temperature and the reductive atmosphere were thought to have a huge influence on the ECSA of NiMo catalysts. Thus, annealing at 550 °C in H2/NH3 (5% H2) gave samples the highest surface area and appropriate morphology, leading to optimized HER activity. These NiMo catalysts were integrated into an AEMWE system, which delivered 1.0 A cm−2 at 1.57 V in 1 M KOH. This performance has been acknowledged to be the highest among PGM-free catalyst decorated MEAs so far. Kraglund et al. used Mo-containing RANEY® nickel as the cathode and m-PBI membranes displaying an impressive rate capability of approximately 2800 mA cm−2 at less than 2 V.151
To further investigate the operational capability of Ni-based HER catalysts in practical applications, Park and coworkers synthesized NiCoO-NiCo/C as HER catalysts for a commercial AEMWE stack.32 Ni/C was alloyed with Co to improve the electrocatalytic activity of HER catalysts. In addition, oxide (Ni/Co–O) was locally formed on the synthesized NiCo/C to increase its durability. The comparative HER activity of commercial Ni/C, Ni/C, NiCo/C and NiCoO–NiCo/C catalysts revealed that the alloy effect of Co enhances HER activity. The durability test of NiCoO-NiCo/C in a three-electrode system confirmed that the electrolysis stability of HER electrocatalysts was enhanced by the metal oxide's high bond dissociation energy. The NiCo/C and NiCoO–NiCo/C electrocatalysts' single-cell polarization curves revealed that their overall activity was greater than that of the produced Ni/C catalyst. The electrode exhibited the best cell performance with a current density of 504 mA cm−2 at 1.85 V. By stacking and running five single cells using NiCoO–NCO/C and CuCoO catalysts as the cathode and anode, respectively, the applicability of the AEMWE stack system was verified. At around 9.25 Vstack, the 5-cell stack delivered a current density of 740.23 mA cm−2 (1.85 V per cell).
3.2.2.2 Transition metal phosphides. 
Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) are the most extensively studied candidates for the alkaline HER due to their high catalytic performance and low cost.153 Due to their high electronegativity, P atoms in TMPs are able to remove electrons from neighboring transition metals, which is the primary cause of their exceptional catalytic activity. The positively charged proton can be trapped as a base by the negatively charged P atoms. As a result, a moderate bonding between the reaction intermediates and products and the catalyst surface is caused by the presence of P atoms. Therefore, Ni and cobalt phosphide catalysts such as Ni2P, Ni5P4, and Ni3P, and CoP, Co2P, and CoP2, respectively, were studied in alkaline media.
According to research, adding a metal or non-metal element to binary TMPs can change their electronic structure, which in turn optimizes the adsorption free energy of reaction intermediates and increases their inherent catalytic activity towards HER. As shown in Fig. 11a, Yu et al. reported a NiMoP nanowire array with high surface area for HER in an alkaline electrolyte.152 The incorporation of Mo into NiP promoted optimal free energy of water activation and hydrogen adsorption on the electrocatalyst surface. Therefore, the NiMoP electrocatalyst displayed a low overpotential of 294 mV at a high HER current density of 1000 mA cm−2. In addition, the NiMoP electrocatalyst remained a high HER current density in long-term stability tests (Fig. 11b). As shown in Fig. 11c and d, Lee et al. developed ternary FeNiCoP through hydrothermal and subsequent phosphidation methods.47 Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the Co incorporation promoted the decreased energy barrier of water dissociation of NiFeP, thus being able to improve the intrinsic HER activity. The ternary FeNiCoP exhibited a low overpotential of 37 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for HER. Further, the authors constructed a MEA by combining ternary FeNiCo LDH and FeNiCoP as the anode and cathode, respectively, for AEMWE (Fig. 11e). As shown in Fig. 11f, a current density of 500 mA cm−2 could be achieved at 1.72 V, equalling a high energy efficiency of 73%. In long-term stability tests, the AEMWE system could maintain a stable voltage of ∼1.72 V at 500 mA cm−2 for 40 h.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the self-supported 3D Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP electrode. (b) Stability test of the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode under different constant potentials.152 Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Synthesis process of NiFeCo LDH and phosphide nanosheets on Ni foam. (d) Photographs of bare Ni foam, NiFeCo and NiFeCoP electrodes. (e) Schematic of an AEMWE system using NiFeCo LDH and NiFeCoP electrodes. (f) Polarization curves and (g) durability test of AEMWE with NiFeCo LDH//NiFeCoP recorded at 50 °C in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (h) Preparation process of NiCoP@NiFeP electrocatalysts. (i) Schematic of an AEMWE system using the NiCoP@NiFeP electrode. (j) Polarization curves of AEMWE with NiCoP@NiFeP or commercial Pt/C and IrO2 catalysts.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. 
The rational design of TMP heterojunctions is a promising approach to boost the catalytic activity of TMPs. Recently, Zhao et al. reported a dual-metallic NiCoP@NiFeP heterojunction array for HER in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 11h).78 DFT calculations indicated that the d-band center was regulated by the homogeneous interface structure, promoting the suitable adsorption of intermediates in reactions. The NiCoP@NiFeP electrode required only a low overpotential of 98 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 11i, the NiCoP@NiFeP electrodes were used as both anode and cathode, and combined with the commercial FAA-PK-130 AEM to form MEAs for AEMWE, which exhibited a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at 1.93 V, significantly outperforming the commercial Pt/C and IrO2 catalysts.
3.2.2.3 Transition metal sulfides. 
TMS materials have gained substantial attention as HER electrocatalysts in alkaline conditions because of their high conductivity, facilitating charge transfer reactions. The structures of the TMS can be divided into two categories: layered MS2 (M = Mo, W) and nonlayered MxSy (M = Co, Fe, Ni, Cu, Zn, etc.).
In 2005, Hinnemann's group discovered for the first time that the edge sites of MoS2 resemble the structure of the hydrogenase, suggesting the potential of MoS2 as an effective HER catalyst.156 The findings of the DFT theory further confirmed the hypothesis that Pt and MoS2 had similar free energies for absorbing atomic hydrogen. Jaramillo's group confirmed that S–H bonds can easily form at edge locations with S atoms, which contributes to the production of hydrogen.157 They discovered that the catalytic activity was inversely correlated with the MoS2 edge length, which was associated to edge site exposure. The basal plane is mostly catalytically inactive, whereas the unsaturated S atoms play a significant role in HER catalysis. Many strategies, including amorphous MoS2, defect-rich MoS2, and low-crystalline MoS2, have been investigated in an effort to increase the HER activity of the material. Unfortunately, owing to its broad bandgap, MoS2 has very poor conductivity, reducing the activity of HER. The conductivity of MoS2 can be improved by doping other atoms or combining with conductive materials, such as reduced graphene oxide (RGO),158 carbon nanospheres,159 graphene,160 and carbon cloth (CC).161 As shown in Fig. 12a, Liu and coworkers developed MoS2 microspheres modified by Mo2C, forming a rough surface structure for HER under alkaline conditions.154 As shown in Fig. 12b, MoS2/Mo2C achieved a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 220 mV. In another work, Liu et al. prepared highly active CuMo6S8 on Cu foam for HER, in which the in situ reaction formed a strong electrocatalyst–support interfacial binding force compared with weak electrostatic adsorption between the MoS2 nanoflakes and the Cu foam support (Fig. 12c).155 As shown in Fig. 12d, the CuMo6S8/Cu electrode achieved an ultrahigh current density of 2500 mA cm−2 at an ultralow overpotential of 334 mV. Moreover, the high HER current density of 2500 mA cm−2 could be maintained over 100 h without an obvious increase in the overpotential. Subsequently, Chanda et al. grew vertically oriented NiFeS on Ti3C2 MXene modified Ni foam through continuous electrochemical and hydrothermal methods (Fig. 12e).61 The high electrical conductivity and hydrophilicity of MXene significantly promoted the HER activity of NiFeS. Thus the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode exhibited a lower overpotential of 180 mV than that (250 mV) of the NiFeS electrode at 20 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 12f, a single-cell system constructed by coupling the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode with the commercial Sustainion X37-50 AEM further demonstrated the high electrocatalytic activity of as-prepared electrodes. Compared with commercial Pt/C//IrO2, the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode exhibited obvious superiority at high current densities (Fig. 12g). As shown in Fig. 12h, at a cell voltage of 1.95 V, the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode exhibited a high current density of ∼600 mA cm−2 compared with that (∼550 mA cm−2) of the commercial system.
 Fig. 12  (a) Design schematic of MoS2/Mo2C for HER. (b) Polarization curves of a Pt foil, MoS2, and MoS2/Mo2C in 1 M KOH.154 Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (c) The preparation process of the CuMo6S8/Cu electrode. (d) Polarization curves of CuMo6S8/Cu, MoS2, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH.155 Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. (e) Synthesis process of NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene/Ni foam. (f) Schematic of an AEMWE system using the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode. (g) Polarization curves of MEAs with the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode or commercial electrocatalysts and (h) corresponding current densities at different cell voltages.61 Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. 

3.3. Hydroxide ion conductive membranes
The hydroxide ion conductive membrane is a key component of alkaline water electrolysis, which mainly plays two roles: (1) conducting hydroxide ions to form internal pathways; (2) preventing hydrogen penetration to avoid dangerous accidents. As shown in Fig. 13a, the fundamental physicochemical properties of membranes include ion conductivity (or area resistance), alkaline stability, swelling ratio, mechanical strength, gas permeation, and preparation cost. In practical alkaline water electrolysis, the required hydrogen ion conductive membrane should meet the following requirements: (1) high OH− conductivity (>200 and 140 mS cm−1 at 80 °C in 30 wt% KOH and pure water, respectively); (2) high alkaline stability (ion conductivity or area resistance retention >80% retention after 50000 h operation); (3) strong mechanical stability (50000–100000 h operation under practical alkaline water electrolysis); (4) low hydrogen permeability (H2 in O2 < 0.2 vol%); and (5) low cost for large-scale industrial applications (Fig. 13b). However, it is challenging to satisfy the above-mentioned requirements simultaneously, and the trade-off of the fundamental properties of the membrane must be carefully designed. To date, commercially available membranes for alkaline water electrolysis can be divided into three categories, including porous membranes (PMs), ion-solvating membranes (ISMs), and AEMs (Fig. 13c). As shown in Fig. 13d, the key features of typical commercial membranes are compared. Compared with commercial Zirfon PMs (∼180 mS cm−1 in 30 wt% KOH at 80 °C) and poly(2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole) (m-PBI) ISMs (∼100 mS cm−1 in 30 wt% KOH at 80 °C), the commercial PiperION AEM exhibited a high hydroxide conductivity of ∼190 mS cm−1 at 95 °C even when measured in pure water.162–164 The PiperION AEM could maintain ∼99% ionic conductivity at 100 °C for 2000 h in 1 M KOH. For the m-PBI membrane, the ionic conductivity remained ∼47% at 80 °C for ∼4000 h in 6 M KOH. However, the mechanical strength (∼67 MPa) of PiperION is lower than that of the m-PBI (∼130 MPa) membrane. For the Zirfon membrane, the polyphenylene sulfide substrate significantly improved the mechanical strength of the Zirfon membrane. The Zirfon membrane showed a lower swelling ratio (∼0%) compared with that of m-PBI (∼35%) and PiperION (∼10%) membranes due to the absence of cationic groups in PMs. However, the gas permeation of the Zirfon membrane is higher than that of dense m-PBI and PiperION membranes. The reported bubble pressure of the Zirfon membrane was ∼2.5 bar, which should be improved for the application of pressurized alkaline water electrolysis. In addition, the cost of PiperION is significantly higher than that of Zirfon and m-PBI membranes. Therefore, the overall performance of hydroxide ion membranes remains to be further improved. As shown in Fig. 14a, the electrolysis performance of single cells with ionic conductive membranes has significantly improved since 2020. Moreover, the reported performance of MEAs with AEMs is reasonably higher than that of MEAs with PMs and ISMs in recent two years due to their high hydroxide conductivity. Thus AEMWE has been widely considered as a promising large-scale hydrogen production technology, which has the potential to replace PEMWE in the future. Here, the advanced membrane materials for alkaline water electrolysis have been summarized and discussed.
 Fig. 13  (a) Fundamental properties of hydroxide ion conducting membranes and (b) performance targets of hydroxide ion conducting membranes through trade-off of the fundamental features. (c) Three approaches towards hydroxide conducting membranes, including PMs, ISMs, and AEMs. (d) A comparison of key features of commercial PMs (Zirfon), ISMs (m-PBI), and AEMs (PiperION). 
 Fig. 14  (a) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using PMs, ISMs, and AEMs. (b) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using commercially available AEMs, including Sustainion X37-50 Grade T, Fumasep FAA-3-50, A201, and Ameion membranes. (c) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using reported AEMs, including ether-containing AEMs, ether-free PEs and ether-free PAs. (d) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis fed with 0.1 M KOH or pure water. References for data points for (a): 1,165 2,164 3,166 4,167 5,168 6,163 7,169 8,170 9,39 10151, 11,171 12,172 13,19 14,173 15,174 16,69 17,175 18,176 19,51 20,177 21,178 22,179 23,26 24,180 25,181 26,182 27,183 28,67 29,184 30,185 31,186 32,74 33,187 34,29 35,46 36,36 37,188 38,189 39,190 40,54 41,191 42,192 43,27 44,47 45,34 46,193 47,76 48,49 49,68 50,194 51,38 52,52 53,62 54,41 55,44 56.45 (b): 1,27 2,47 3,32 4,34 5,194 6,38 7,52 8,62 9,195 1044, 11,45 12,28 13,30 14,35 15,82 16,60 17,196 18,197 19,37 20,198 21,62 22,199 23,84 24,63 25,64 26,200 27,43 28,65 29,57 30,33 31,48 32,201 33,202 34,72 35,56 36,203 37,33 38.70 (c): 1,26 2,180 3,204 4,93 5,205 6,54 7,206 8,86 9,207 10,183 11,74 12,29 13,208 14,181 15,184 16,185 17,186 18,187 19,209 20,36 21,94 22,210 23,188 24,211 25,190 26,191 27.212 (d): 1,26 2,59 3,213 4,214 5,215 6,216 7,217 8,218 9,219 10,147 11,220 12,221 13,222 14,223 15,29 16,67 17,185 18,94 19,224 20,210 21,225 22,226 23,227 24,228 25,35 26,229 27,230 28,224 29,231 30,232 31,233 32,205 33,234 34,235 35,236 36,237 37,238 38,145 39,194 40,239 41,240 42,241 43,21 44,242 45,243 46,190 47,219 48,191 49,244 50,192 51,245 52,246 53,209 54,210 55,247 56,20 57,188 58.211 

3.3.1 Porous membranes. 
Porous membranes with good alkaline resistance are widely used in industrial alkaline aqueous solution electrolysis, which is usually composed of chemically inert polymer substrates and hydrophilic inorganic fillers. The commercial diaphragms currently used for alkaline water solution electrolysis are polyphenylene sulfide (PPS) woven fabrics and Zirfon composite diaphragms. The porous membrane material realized early in alkaline liquid water electrolysis is asbestos, which has the disadvantages of high carcinogenicity, high-temperature instability and high internal resistance. It has been replaced by PPS woven fabrics. However, the macroporous structure and high porosity of PPS woven fabrics lead to low bubble point pressure (<2 bar), thus causing high hydrogen permeability. Therefore, they are not suitable for pressurized alkaline liquid water electrolysis. At present, the commercial Zirfon PERL composite membrane has been successfully used in alkaline liquid water electrolysis, which consists of hydrophilic ZrO2 nanoparticles (85 wt%) and a polysulfone backbone with an average pore size of 150 nm. There are two regions in the porous Zirfon PERL membrane: (1) interconnected ZrO2 pores (∼30 nm); (2) connected pores in the polysulfone support (>1 μm). The large pores promote the alkaline electrolyte transfer through the membrane, which is beneficial to improve the hydroxide conductivity of the porous membrane, but aggravate the hydrogen permeability at the same time. Therefore, the development of a porous diaphragm with high hydroxide conductivity and low hydrogen permeability is of great significance for alkaline liquid water electrolysis.
To further improve the hydroxide conductivity of Zirfon-based porous membranes, different hydrophilic materials have been used as fillers, including CeO2,248 BaSO4249 and cellulose nanocrystals.174 For example, Cho et al. successfully prepared a cellulose nanocrystals-ZrO2/polysulfone porous composite membrane using cellulose nanocrystals as organic fillers.174 The cellulose nanocrystalline structure is rich in hydroxyl groups, which promotes its high mechanical properties, thermal stability and high hydrophilicity.250,251 The composite membrane showed an area resistance of 0.18 Ω cm2 in a 10 wt% KOH solution, which is significantly lower than that (0.71 Ω cm2) of the commercial Zirfon PERL membrane. The alkaline liquid water electrolysis using the composite membrane showed a current density of 600 mA cm−2 at 1.83 Vcell in a 10 wt% KOH electrolyte at 80 °C. Our group proposed an in situ pore-filling polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)/layered double hydroxide (LDH) composite membrane to further improve the alkaline resistance and hydroxide conductivity of porous membranes.51 Compared with polysulfone materials, the PTFE without any heteroatoms has better alkaline and dimensional stability.252 In addition, as a two-dimensional layered material, LDH has the advantages of high hydroxide ion conductivity, high alkalinity and good hydrophilicity.253 Therefore, the PTFE/LDH composite membrane has a low area resistance of 0.05 Ω cm2 and excellent alkali resistance. The PTFE/LDH composite membrane showed no change of the area resistance during the 2000 h test in a 1 M KOH solution at 60 °C. The alkaline liquid water electrolysis using the PTFE/LDH composite membrane obtained a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at 1.8 Vcell. The cell sustained its performance with no sign of decay for over 180 h at a current density of 500 mA cm−2. To decrease the hydrogen permeability of commercial Zirfon PERL membranes, Kim et al. used an ultrasonic spray method to construct a crosslinked polyvinyl alcohol (cPVA) skin layer on the commercial Zirfon PERL membrane.178 The introduction of a thin and dense skin layer significantly improved gas barrier properties. Especially, the optimized composite membrane with a thin cPVA skin layer exhibited a high bubble point pressure of 2.71 bar and a low hydrogen permeability of 1.12 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1 bar−1.


3.3.2 Ion-solvating membranes. 
In order to solve the high ohmic resistance and poor gas barrier properties of porous membranes, Aili et al. first proposed the concept of ISMs for alkaline liquid water electrolysis.172 Owing to the dense structure of the ISMs, they have excellent gas barrier properties. The poly(benzimidazole) (PBI) materials that can deprotonate the benzimidazole groups to dope KOH electrolytes have been widely studied as ISMs for alkaline water electrolysis. To further improve the hydroxide conductivity of PBI membranes, Hu et al. reported PBI-based ISMs containing sulfonic acid chains (NPBI-BS) for alkaline liquid water electrolysis.163 The hydrophilic sulfonate side chains promoted the NPBI-BS membrane to absorb more KOH electrolyte, thus improving OH− conductivity. The MEA with a NPBI-BS membrane showed a high current density of 1900 mA cm−2 at 2.0 V in 6 M KOH at 80 °C. The MEA exhibited good durability under dynamic operating conditions (the current density switched from 0.8 to 1.6 A cm−2) over 100 h. Recently, Kraglund et al. reported a KOH-doped mPBI membrane for alkaline liquid water electrolysis.151 The cells based on this mPBI membrane and non-precious metal catalysts obtained a high current density of 1700 mA cm−2 at 1.8 Vcell in a 24 wt% KOH solution. The EIS measurements showed that the cell using the mPBI membrane showed lower overall ohmic resistance than that of the state-of-the-art PEMWE.
Although great advancements in current densities and durability have been made for alkaline water electrolysis using PBI-based ISMs, the degradation of benzimidazole groups under a highly concentrated KOH electrolyte remains to be a significant issue because of the weak bond between imidazole and phenylene moieties. Research showed that hydroxide ions can attack the position of benzodiazepine C2 through nucleophiles, leading to the degradation of the PBI backbone. To improve the alkaline resistance of ISMs, Hu et al. presented an alkaline-stable ISM based on poly (2,2′-(1,4-naphthalene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole) (NPBI) for ALWE.164 The alkaline stability of NPBI membranes can be improved by introducing bulky naphthyl moieties around the benzimidazolide C2 position in the backbones. After treating in 6 M KOH at 80 °C over 7100 h, the NPBI membrane exhibited an unchanged molecular structure and good mechanical strength. The cell using the NPBI membrane can reach ∼2500 mA cm−2 at 2.01 V in 6 M KOH, and continue to operate for 298 h at 500 mA cm−2.
In addition to the design of the PBI molecular structure, the construction of a PBI-based blending membrane is conducive to improving the hydroxide conductivity and alkaline stability of ISMs. A variety of polymers have been used to prepare PBI-based blending membranes, including polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),166 commercial anion-exchange ionomer (FAA3)254 and poly(vinyl benzyl chloride).255
In summary, the use of ISMs can effectively solve the problem of high hydrogen permeability of porous membranes. By means of molecular structure design and blending of different membrane materials, the researchers improved the hydroxide conductivity of ionic solvation membranes to varying degrees. However, the conductivity of ionic solvation membranes is seriously dependent on alkaline electrolytes, which leads to low electrolysis performance of alkaline electrolytic water in a low concentration alkaline electrolyte and cannot be electrolyzed in pure water.


3.3.3 Anion exchange membranes. 
AEMs are composed of the polymer backbone and nitrogen-containing cations. The hydroxide ions are transported by the cation sites in AEMs. To achieve high-performance AEMWE, AEMs with high hydroxide conductivity are highly desirable. AEMs have been developed for over 70 years. To date, various commercially available AEMs have been used in water electrolysis. Fig. 14b compares the electrolysis performance of MEAs with that of typical commercial AEMs, including FAA-3-50 (Fumatech), Sustainion X37-50 Grade T (Dioxide Materials), A201 (Tokuyama), and Aemion AEMs. Compared with A201 and Aemion AEMs, Sustainion X37-50 Grade T and FAA-3-50 AEMs are more widely used for alkaline water electrolysis, and higher performance has been reported recently. For example, an AEMWE cell operating with Sustainion X37-50 Grade T and 1 M KOH feed, and with FeNiV LDH and Pt/C as electrocatalysts achieved a current density of 2.1 A cm−2 at 1.8 V at 50 °C.52 However, the electrolysis performance of pure-water-fed AEMWE cells with Sustainion X37-50 Grade T is not satisfactory due to the low hydroxide conductivity of AEMs. Additionally, a cell with a FAA-3-50 AEM and 3D unified electrodes was operated at 1.8 V, resulting in a current density of 2.6 A cm−2, but the electrolysis stability remains to be further improved due to the FAA-3-50 polyaromatic backbone with ether bonds.57 Therefore, the overall properties of commercial AEMs should be improved by developing novel polymer materials and membrane structures. In this section, we discuss the recent advancement of AEMs for alkaline water electrolysis.
3.3.3.1 Ether-containing AEMs. 
Initially, AEMs were prepared with aryl ether polymers by nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) reactions between oxygenated nucleophiles and aromatic carbon electrophiles, which have been widely used for constructing covalent bonds between aryl moieties and heteroatoms. The products of SNAr are known as polyarylethers because they have ether bonds (C–O–C) in the polymer backbones, which have good engineering properties, high molecular weight, good mechanical strength, and low synthetic cost.
Representative ether-containing AEMs for water electrolysis include those prepared from poly(arylene ether ketone) with an imidazolium functional group256 and a cyclic ammonium functional group,204 quaternary ammonium polysulfone,18,180,229 and poly(2, 6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) with aliphatic cationic side chains.213,227,233,257 These AEMs have moderately low hydroxide conductivities of 20–50 mS cm−1 and current densities of 200–500 mA cm−2 at 1.8 Vcell for water electrolysis (Fig. 14c). Furthermore, the alkaline stability of polyarylethers remains to be a significant issue since ether-linked polymers are inherently fragile under a highly concentrated KOH electrolyte. The hydrolysis of ethers and quaternary carbon by OH− is accelerated by their electrophilic groups, such as aryl ethers and aryl sulfones. Moreover, the hydroxide substitution is made possible by the carbon near to the electronegative oxygen atom, which causes the polymer backbone to degrade, resulting in backbone degradation of the polymer, thus weakening the chemical stability and mechanical integrity of ether-containing AEMs.
3.3.3.2 Ether-free AEMs. 
At present, the major trend of AEM development is to synthesise ether-free AEMs that are both durable and highly conductive and outperform ether-containing AEMs. In this section, we analyze examples of the two most significant and intensively researched types of ether-free AEMs for water electrolysis: polyarylene-based AEMs (PA-AEMs) and polyethylene-based AEMs (PE-AEMs).
PA-AEMs have aromatic ring backbones, which exhibit markedly improved performance compared with ether-containing AEMs (Fig. 14c). The current density data points (at 1.8 V) of MEAs with PA-AEMs exhibit a distinctive upward trend over time, while those of ether-containing AEMs remain at less than 500 mA cm−2. Since 2020, the electrolysis performance of MEAs with PA-AEMs has significantly increased over 1.0 A cm−2 at 1.8 V. Moreover, the recently reported performance of PA-AEMs is extremely high, even surpassing the reported performance of PEMWE. Notably, Chen et al. reported a high-performance AEMWE cell (4.85 A cm−2 at 1.8 V) with poly(fluorenyl-co-aryl piperidinium) (PFAP)-based AEMs.212 After that, various ether-free PA-AEMs were developed for AEMWEs.188 Liu et al. reported ether-free poly(aryl piperidinium) with extended aromatic segments as AEMs (PQP-100) for AEMWE.186 The PQP-100 AEM exhibited an increased hydroxide conductivity of 118.72 mS cm−1 at 80 °C due to the improved phase-separated morphology. The AEMWE with the PQP-100 AEM achieved a current density of 1544 mA cm−2 at 2.0 V in 1 M KOH. To further improve the hydroxide conductivity of PA-AEMs, composite PA-AEMs have been reported. For example, Lv et al. reported a quaternary ammonium poly (n-methyl-piperidine-co-p-terphenyl) (QAPPT)/FeNi LDH composite PA-AEM.189 The authors found that the QAPPT AEM with a low doping content of 3 wt% achieved a significantly higher hydroxide conductivity of 217.6 mS cm−1 compared with that (∼130 mS cm−1) of the pristine QAPPT AEM. The 1 M KOH-fed AEMWE with a QAPPT/3% FeNi LDH AEM achieved 1 A cm−2 at 1.82 V. The cross-linking strategy has been used to address the trade-off between hydroxide conductivity and stability of PA-AEMs. Guo et al. presented a series of crosslinked PBI-based AEMs for AEMWE.261 The used hydrophilic cross-linker facilitated micro-phase separation, thus improving the hydroxide conductivity. Moreover, the cross-linked AEM exhibited improved dimensional and alkaline stability. The AEMWE with the crosslinked AEM maintained a low voltage of ∼1.5 V for over 500 h at 150 mA cm−2.
PE-AEMs are ether- and aromatic-free polymers composed of C–C single bonds. Owing to the formed C–C single bonds, PE-AEMs generally have a number-average molecular weight of >100 kDa. Therefore, PE-AEMs exhibit highly alkaline resistance. Notably, the backbones without an aromatic moiety effectively prevent the formation of acidic phenols during high OER potential, thus alleviating the degradation of the ionomer in the anode CL.20 Because the entanglement of their high-molecular-weight linear chains increases their maximum tensile strain and strength, PE-AEMs exhibit particular advantages in terms of mechanical integrity. This means that PE-AEMs are more resilient and have a lower glass transition temperature than AEMs made of non-PE. Commercially available Sustainion X37-50 as a PE-AEM has been widely used for water electrolysis in studies for developing catalysts, and the high performance of Sustainion X37-50 has been achieved. However, there are few papers on novel PE-AEMs for water electrolysis (Fig. 14c). For example, Chen et al. reported 0.1 M NaOH-fed AEMWE with a poly(norbornene) (PNB) AEM and a self-adhesive PNB ionomer,220 which required only 1.83 V to achieve a current density of 1 A cm−2.
At present, the reported performance of AEMWE is reasonably high when using a 1 M KOH electrolyte. To compete with PEMWE, the AEMWE cells operated with pure water are highly desirable, which is highly related to the used AEMs and ionomers in catalyst layers. Therefore, we summarize the electrolysis current density (1.8 V) of MEAs with ether-containing, PA-based, and PE-based AEMs in 0.1 M KOH or pure water (Fig. 14d). The electrolysis performance of PA-AEMs and PE-AEMs is obviously higher than that of ether-containing AEMs in both 0.1 M KOH and pure water. Yamaguchi et al. reported fully aromatic poly(fluorene-alt-tetrafluorophenylene)-trimethyl ammonium AEMs with high molecular weight for pure-water-fed AEMWE.191 The MEA with this AEM and ionomer achieved a current density of 1 A cm−2 at 1.94 V in pure-water feed. In another work, Yan et al. developed MEAs with a F-doped NiFeOOH OER electrode and a poly(aryl piperidinium) AEM for water-fed AEMWE, which achieved a current density of 1020 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V.245
3.3.3.3 Alkaline stability of AEMs. 
To demonstrate the durability of AEMs in AEMWE, we further compare data on the electrolysis stability of AEMWE. As shown in Fig. 15a, the voltage degradation rates of PA-AEMs and PE-AEMs are mostly lower than those of ether-containing AEMs. The cationic groups are also necessary to consider when constructing a highly alkali-resistant AEM, which are prone to suffering from degradation during the practical operation, leading to the decrease of ion conductivity.260 The degradation mechanism of the cationic groups depends on the specific molecular structure. As typical cationic groups, the quaternary ammonium (QA) and imidazolium (IM)-based AEMs have been widely used in AEM fuel cells and AEMWE.262 As shown in Fig. 15b-c, most QA and IM groups are prone to degradation under alkaline conditions via different approaches, including the Hofmann degradation (E2), nucleophilic substitution (SN2), or ring-opening reaction.263
 Fig. 15  (a) Degradation rates during continuous long-term durability testing of the reported alkaline water electrolysis. References for data points for (a): 1,26 2,84 3,28 4,35 5,183 6,74 7,29 8,31 9,32 10194, 11,67 12,186 13,203 14,36 15,192 16,191 17,180 18,54 19,79 20,258 21,34 22,45 23,77 24,38 25,27 26,47 27,83 28,52 29,188 30,189 31,94 32,259 33,78 34,60 35,196 36,41 37,62 38,49 39,53 40,63 41.70 The degradation pathway of (b) QA and (c) IM groups under alkaline conditions.260 Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. The durability tests of AEMWE with PFTP-based AEMs and (d) PGM or (e) PGM-free electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH.212 Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
For the dagradation of QA groups triggered by the Hofmann mechanism, the elimination of β-hydrogen is the main approach via an anti-coplanar intermediate. Dehydrogenation reactivity and the intermediate formation rate are hence the key factors affecting the degradation rate. Additionally, the SN2 degradation is carried out via a direct, backward nucleophile attack. Thus, the reaction kinetics are mainly determined by the steric hindrance of QA groups. In this regard, the synthesis of specific QA without a β-hydrogen is an efficient strategy to avoid the Hofmann degradation and improve the alkaline stability of AEMs. Tetramethylammonium (TMA) without β-hydrogen was early considered to be a stable QA group.264 Since the cationic groups should be grafted on the polymer backbone to form AEMs, it is theoretically challenging to directly incorporate TMA into polymer backbones. The most common method for fabricating AEMs is by functionalizing halogenated polymers with various tertiary amines because the majority of currently available polymers contain phenyl groups. Therefore, benzyl trimethylammonium (BTMA)-based AEMs have been extensively developed. However, because of the withdrawing effect of the phenyl group on benzyl hydrogen (α-H), BTMA-based AEMs exhibit accelerated SN2 degradation at the benzyl position, especially under practical operating conditions. In this regard, Park et al. studied the alkaline stability of side-chain-type poly(phenylene) AEMs.265 They found that side-chain-type poly(phenylene) membranes were nearly stable in 0.5 M NaOH at 80 °C for 11000 h. Kreuer et al. systematically investigated the alkaline stability of different QA groups in 6 M NaOH at 160 °C.264 The results demonstrated that N,N-dimethyl piperidinium (DMP) exhibited higher alkaline stability among these QA groups. The half-lives of DMP (87.3 h) exceeded the TMA (61.9 h) benchmark. In 2019, Wang et al. reported a series of poly(aryl piperidinium) (PAP)-based AEMs via a super-acid polycondensation, effectively incorporating DMP in the aryl ether-free polymer backbone.162 The hydroxide conductivity of PAP AEMs exhibited a negligible change after 2000 h in a 1 M KOH solution at 100 °C. Moreover, these PAP AEMs have been commercialized as PiperION for application in fuel cells and water electrolysis. After that, many PAP-based AEMs with DMP as cationic groups have been developed for AEMWE. For example, Chen et al. reported a series of poly(fluorenyl-co-terphenyl piperidinium) (PFTP)-based AEMs with DMP cationic groups for AEMWE applications.212 The PFTP-based AEMs exhibited only ∼20% loss in hydroxide ion conductivity after alkaline treatment in 5 M KOH at 80 °C for 2000 h.266 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 15d, the AEMWE with PFTP-based AEMs and PGM electrocatalysts maintained a cell voltage of 2.0 V at 500 mA cm−2 for over 1000 h. When PGM-free electrocatalysts were used, the AEMWE exhibited a continuous voltage decrease at 500 mA cm−2 for 1000 h (Fig. 15e). However, the Sustainion AEM-based AEMWE with identical electrocatalysts showed a high voltage degradation rate of 1.2 mV h−1 for only 250 h.
The Holdcroft group developed commercial Aemion AEMs, which were prepared from methylated PBI.267 The OH− attack is sterically hindered by the introduction of methyl groups in both ortho-positions of the linking 2-phenyl group. The Aemion membrane showed 6% chemical degradation when exposed to 2 M NaOH at 80 °C for 7 days. Further, the Holdcroft group evaluated the durability of AEMWE at 0.5 A cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH.225 The cell voltage could be maintained at ∼1.7 V, and the average voltage degradation was 2.39 mV h−1. Fan et al. investigated the degradation behaviors of poly(arylimidazolium)s.268 The polymers with ethyl-, propyl-, and butyl-substituted side chains showed excellent alkaline stability. The chemical stability of these polymers after immersion of the AEM in 10 M KOH at 80 °C indicated that 94 to 98% of imidazolium remained intact after 240 h in highly caustic solutions. The possible degradation mechanisms of poly(arylimidazolium)s were evaluated with the less stable methyl-substituted poly(arylimidazolium). The 1H NMR analysis after the alkaline stability test suggested that the degradation of the AEMs occurs via both dealkylation and ring-opening pathways. The AEMWE with the poly(arylimidazolium) AEM exhibited a negligible voltage degradation at 400 mA cm−2 in 6 M KOH for ∼48 h. By contrast, the cell voltage of the AEMWE employing the FAA-3 AEM rapidly increased to ∼750 mV at a low current density of 20 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH.

3.4. Liquid/gas transport layer
The LGDL is an important component for alkaline water electrolysis. Many physical processes are involved in LGDLs, including electrons transfer, heat transfer, and reactant/product transfer with minimum losses. To date, various LGDLs have been employed in practical water electrolysis, including metal foams, felts, and meshes. Herein, we have summarized the recent advancements of LGDLs for alkaline water electrolysis.
Carbon-based materials are widely used as LGDLs because of their good elasticity under compression, high gas/liquid permeability, excellent chemical stability in alkaline media, and high electrical conductivity.270 The most common types of carbon-based LGDLs are carbon cloth (CC) and carbon paper (CP). CC typically comprises interlocking bundles of carbon fibre woven together with a regular structure. Chen et al. used CC as anode and cathode LGDLs for AEMWE.271 The cell with CoFe anode catalysts and Pt/C cathode catalysts yielded a current density of ∼130 mA cm−2 at 1.80 Vcell. As for CP, the fibres are rigid, straight and randomly oriented. Thus, the porosity of CP is lower than that of CC.272
Conventional carbon-based LGDLs suffer from severe corrosion in alkaline water electrolysis anodes due to the high potential towards OER, limiting the durability. An effective strategy is to prepare LGDLs from metal-based materials that are mechanically stable and show high electrical conductivity. Recently, Ni-based and Ti-based foams and felts have been used as anode LGDLs to increase AEMWE performance and durability. Nevertheless, there is a trade-off between the gas/liquid transport properties and the electronic conductivity in LGDLs, since electrons are conducted through the solid, non-porous phase of the LGDLs.273 Therefore, to achieve sufficient electrical conductivity and good liquid/gas mass transfer, the LGDLs’ structure should be optimized.274 Park and co-workers investigated the effect of pore structures in Ni-based LGDLs on AEM water electrolysis.197 For the Ni-felt LGDLs, the decreased thickness by compression improved electrolysis performance because of the decreased electron pathway and thereby reduced ohmic resistance. As for Ni foam LGDLs, the trade-off between electrical conductivity and mass transfer can be optimized by adding a suitable compressing force. Furthermore, the optimized Ni-foam and Ni felt exhibited a higher electrolysis stability compared with the conventional Ti-felt due to the oxides formed on Ti-felt. Similarly, Yang et al. investigated the trade-off between surface area and pore structure of LGDLs on the performance of alkaline water electrolysis.269 As shown in Fig. 16a–c, three Ni-based LGDLs, including Ni foam, Ni microfiber felt, and NiCu nanowire felt, were studied. The NiCu nanowire felt showed the highest electrolysis performance due to the highest surface area (Fig. 16d). However, owing to the trapped gas bubble inside NiCu nanowire felt, the electrolysis performance showed a fast degradation (Fig. 16e). As for Ni foam, the open structure promoted the removal of gas bubbles, but the low surface area limited the electrolysis performance. Notably, the best performance was demonstrated by the Ni microfiber felt because it balanced a large surface area with bubble removal capability. The Ni microfiber felt maintained a high current density of 25 A cm−2 for 100 h without degradation. However, the active area of Ni-based LGDLs was only 16 mm2. The scale effect should be clarified in further study.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) Ni foam, (b) Ni MF felt, and (c) Ni–Cu NW felt. (d) Polarization curves for OER of different LGDLs. (e) Diagram of the pore-throat aspect ratios showing how gas bubbles move via pores.269 Reproduced from ref. 269 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Schematic of AEMWE with the conventional LGDL and TTLGDL. Polarization curves of the bare TTLGDL, SC-TTLGDL, and commercial SC-Ti foam in AEMWE operated with (g) 0.1 NaOH electrolyte and (h) pure water, respectively.247 Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
The conventional LGDLs constructed by foams, felts, and meshes have a thickness of more than 200 μm. Moreover, their disordered pore shapes and architectures make it difficult to manage the distribution of water, electrons, and heat, which results in high interfacial contact resistance. In this regard, as shown in Fig. 16f, Li et al. reported an engineered LGDL with thin-flat and straight-pore structures for AEM water electrolysis.247 The cell using the engineered thin/tunable LGDL (TTLGDL) reached a high current density of 2.0 and ∼1.0 A cm−2 at 1.80 Vcell under 0.1 M NaOH-fed and water-fed conditions, respectively (Fig. 16g and h). Compared with the commercial Ti foam, the TTLGDL significantly improved the interfacial contacts and mass transport because of its well-tunable structure features, including straight-through pore structure, uniform pore distribution, and controllable pore size.275
4. MEA preparation technology
The MEA preparation technology can be divided into two categories: conventional methods with ionomers (including catalyst-coated substrate and catalyst-coated membrane) and self-supported electrode without ionomers. As shown in Fig. 17a and Fig. 18, we have summarized the electrolysis performance and durability of MEAs prepared by different technologies in recent years.
 Fig. 17  (a) Recent research on MEA preparation technologies including CCS with ionomer, CCM, and CCS with a self-supported electrode: (a) the current density of MEAs at a cell voltage of 1.8 V in 1 M KOH. References for data points for CCS with ionomer: 1 (Ir black//Aemion™//Pt/C);225 2 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);44 3 (NiFe2O4//A201//NiFeCo);33 4 (NiFe LDH//X37-50//Pt/C);49 5 (IrO2//HTMA-DAPP//Pt/C);210 6 (Ir black//Fumapem-3-PE-30//NiCu MMO);215 7 (Co//PFAEM//Pt/C);208 8 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//NiCoO-NiCo/C);32 9 (Ni2Fe1B//Fumapem-3-PE-30//Pt/C);259 10 (CoCuO//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);94 11 (IrO2/FAA-3//Pt/C);200 12 (NiFeOx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);43 13 (Ni(OH)2-Fe//Sustainion XA-9//RANEY® NiMo);48 14 (NiS2/Ni3S4//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);63 15 (Pt/C//QPAP//Pt/C);181 16 (IrO2//PDTP//Pt/C);184 17 (NiCo2O4@C//X37-50 Grade T//NiCo2O4@C);27 18 (NiFe2O4//C-IL-100//NiFeCo),36 CCM: 1 (IrO2//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);190 2 (IrO2//PFOTFPh-TMA//Pt/C);191 3 (NiMnOx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);30 4 (Ir black//A201//Ni-W-600);72 5 (IrO2//QMter-co-Mpi//Pt/C);192 6 (IrO2//A201//Pt/C);201 7 (IrO2//PTP-C1//PtRu/C);185 8 (IrO2//TM1™//Pt/C);188 9 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C),196 10 (NiFe//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);197 11 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);200 12 (IrO2//PBB-SEBS//Pt/C);182 13 (IrO2//QAPPT/LDH//Pt/C);189 14 (IrO2//PFPB-QA//Pt/C);187 15 (NiCoP@rGO//AIEM//NiCoP@rGO),74 and CCS with a self-supported electrode: 1 (Cu0.81Co2.19O4//X37-50//Co3S4);31 2 (CuCo2O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);38 3 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);45 4 (NiFe2O4//X37-50//RANEY® Ni);41 5 (NiFeV LDH//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);52 6 (NiFeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);57 7 (Ni0.75Fe2.25O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);34 8 (FeNi-PS//FAA-3-50//FeNi-PS);82 9 (NiFeCo LDH//X37-50 Grade T//NiFeCoP);47 10 (NiFe LDH/MoSx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);65 11 (Co(OH)x-Ag-Co(OH)2//X37-50//Pt/C);55 12 (IrO2//X37-50//CuCoP);76 13 (CoSb2O6//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);37 14 (Ni foam//PVBC-MPy/PSF//Ni foam);180 15 (Ni2Fe8-Ni3S2//FAA-3-50//Ni4Mo/MoO2);62 16 (Ir-Ni/Mo5N6//X37-50 Grade T//Ir-Ni/Mo5N6);194 17 (Ni2P@FePOxHy//X37–50//NiMoO4);193 18 (IrO2//X 37-50//Ni@Ni(OH)2);68 19 (Fe2P-Ni12P5//FAA-3-50//Co2P-Ni12P5);80 20 (NiCoP//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);195 21 (NiFeCr LDH//X37-FA//NiMoCo);53 22 (Fe-CoOOH//X37-50//Pt/C);50 23 (NiCoP@NiFeP//FAA-PK-130//NiCoP@NiFeP);78 24 (S-FeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt mesh);60 25 (NiFe//FAA-3-PE-30//NiFeP).79 Schematic of conventional MEA preparation methods with ionomers: (b) CCS and (c) CCM methods.276 Reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
 Fig. 18  Comparison of degradation rates and stability time at specific current densities in 1 M KOH for MEAs prepared by different technologies including CCS with ionomer, CCS with a self-supported electrode and CCM. References for data points for 1 (IrO2//PFPB-QA//Pt/C);187 2 (Cu0.81Co2.19O4//X37-50//Co3S4);31 3 (IrO2//PDTP//Pt/C);184 4 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//NiCoO-NiCo/C);32 5 (Ni felt//AemionTM//Ni felt);203 6 (Ir-Ni/Mo5N6//X37-50 Grade T//Ir-Ni/Mo5N6);194 7 (NiFe//X37-50 Grade T//Ni);85 8 (NiFe//FAA-3-50//Ni);84 9 (Ni0.75Fe2.25O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);34 10 (Ir black//A201//NiW);72 11 (IrO2//TM1TM//Pt/C);188 12 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);196 13 (CoCuO//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);45 14 (NiFe LDH//PVBC-MPy/35%PEK-cardo//NiMo);54 15 (NiFeV LDH//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);52 16 (TPP-FSN//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);258 17 (Fe-NiMo//X37-50 Grade T//NiMo);83 18 (CuCo2O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);38 19 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50//Pt/C);44 20 (Fe2P2S6//YAB//Fe2P2S6);66 21 (NiFeCo LDH//X37-50 Grade T//NiFeCoP);47 22 (Ni foam//PVBC-MPy/PSF//Ni foam);180 23 (IrO2//SEBS-Pi//Pt/C);183 24 (NiFeCr//X37-50//V-Ni2P/Ni12P5);77 25 (NiCo2O4@C//X37-50 Grade T//NiCo2O4@C);27 26 (IrO2//PFOTFPh-TMA//Pt/C);191 27 (NiCoP@rGO//AIEM//NiCoP@rGO);74 28 (NiFe//PBI/mTPN-50//Mo compounds);67 29 (IrO2//QAPPT/LDH//Pt/C);189 30 (IrO2//QMter-co-Mpi//Pt/C);192 31 (NiCo2O4//QPS//Pt/C);26 32 (NiCo2O4//PSEBS-DABCO//NiCo2O4);29 33 (IrO2//PQP-100/Pt/C);186 34 (S-FeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt mesh);60 35 (FeNi LDH//X37-50//Pt/C);49 36 (FeNiCr LDH//X37-FA//NiMoCo);53 37 (Ni2Fe8-Ni3S2//FAA-3-50//Ni4Mo/MoO2);62 38 (NiCoP@NiFeP//FAA-PK-130//NiCoP@NiFeP);78 39 (NiAlMo//HMT-PMBI//NiAlMo);70 40 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50 Grade//Pt/C);44 41 (NiS2/Ni3S4//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);63 42 (FeNi-PS//FAA-3-50//FeNi-PS);82 43 (CuCoO//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);94 44 (NiFe2O4//X37-50//RANEY® Ni).41 
4.1. Conventional methods with ionomers
As shown in Fig. 17b and c, in the catalyst-coated substrate (CCS) method the CLs are deposited onto the LGDLs. The CCS method results in inadequate contact between the membrane and the CLs despite being straightforward and hence appropriate for mass manufacturing. In the catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) method the CLs are directly prepared onto the membrane, thus improving the CL/membrane interface contact. Park et al. studied the impact of the CL fabrication method on the electrolysis performance using constant ink compositions.199 The CCM-type MEA showed superior performance compared with the CCS-type MEA with or without hot pressing. This indicated that the CCM method could improve the formed AEM/CL interfaces, thus improving electrolysis performance. Moreover, in the CCS process, the hot pressing is essential for enhancing the contact between the AEM and CL, thereby improving electrolysis performance. However, in another study, hot pressing in the CCS method obviously decreased the cell performance.277 The authors stated that the hot-pressing process increased the PTFE coverage of catalytic active sites and destroyed the CL structure, thus decreasing the electrochemical active area of CLs due to the hydrophobic and non-ion conducting PTFE binder. Park et al. compared the electrolysis performance of CCS-type and CCM-type MEAs.196 The study demonstrated that the CCS-type MEA showed higher current densities compared with the CCS-type MEA at the same cell voltage. The authors found that the macroporous CL in the CCS-type MEA showed increased catalyst utilization and electron transport compared with the plain CL in the CCM-type MEA, which may be attributed to the fact that reactions occur only on the CL adjacent to great electrical conductors in water electrolysis.278
In the CCS and CCM methods, the catalyst ink can be deposited using different methods, including spraying, painting, or brushing methods. Among these approaches, the spraying method has been widely used in alkaline water electrolysis.279 The sprayed ink composition has a remarkable impact on the MEA performance. Cho et al. investigated the optimal PTFE binder content in CCS-type MEAs.280 MEAs with low binder contents (<9 wt%) showed high initial current densities but suffered from rapid performance degradation because of catalyst loss. By contrast, MEAs with high binder contents showed high long-term stability. However, by converting the electrocatalysts’ active sites and impeding the transport of hydroxide ions and electrons, the overloaded PTFE binder slowed down the electrochemical reactions.281 In another study, Zappia also investigated the impact of Nafion binder content in CCS-type MEAs on the electrolysis performance.177 They found that a 25 wt% Nafion content results in optimal cell performances and ideal stability. Faid et al. found that the cathode potential was more affected by the anion-exchange ionomer content compared with the anode potential in CCS-type MEAs.282 Additionally, Plevová et al. examined the impact of the catalyst-to-binder ratio in the CL on CCM-type MEAs.283,284 They found that a small amount of anion-exchange ionomer improved the ionic contact between the CL and the membrane.
4.2. Self-supported electrodes without ionomers
Self-supported electrodes typically represent the active materials in situ grown in the LGDLs, including carbon cloth (CC), carbon paper (CP), metal foil, melaine sponge, wood, metal mesh (Ni/stainless steel mesh), metal felt, and metal foam (Ni foam). Self-supported electrodes avoid the use of polymer binders in comparison to powder catalysts, preventing them from inhibiting the exposure of active sites and diffusion of gas bubbles.285 The mechanical stability of self-supported electrodes is also effectively improved by such tight anchoring, and the electron transfer efficiency between the active materials and the substrate is guaranteed.286 Therefore, self-supported electrodes are more suitable for alkaline water electrolysis under high current density and long-term operations. Herein, we mainly introduce several synthetic methods that have been widely employed to prepare self-supported catalysts on different LGDLs, including electrochemical, hydro/solvothermal methods, electrospinning, vapor chemical deposition, 3D printing, and chemical etching (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Summary of fabrication methods and used substrates of self-supported electrodes. 

4.2.1. Electrodeposition. 
Electrodeposition is a versatile approach to synthesise self-supported electrodes. Target materials are consistently and quickly deposited on LGDLs that have been chosen as working electrodes during the electrodeposition process.288 Various electrodeposition methods, including galvanostatic deposition, potentiostatic deposition, cyclic voltammetry, pulse deposition and electrophoretic deposition, have been developed for alkaline water electrolysis. The electrodeposition devices can be divided into two-electrode and three-electrode systems. A positive electrode and a negative electrode that are both submerged in electrolytes make up the two-electrode system. The electrodeposition voltage is provided by the power supply or electrochemical workstation. The three-electrode system consists of a working electrode, a counter electrode, and a reference electrode. The morphology, composition and performance of self-supported electrodes can be effectively regulated via the electrodeposition solution (by varying the composition, pH, and temperature) and electrochemical operation (by varying time, current and potential).289 Most transition-metal-based materials such as oxides,216 hydroxides,287 sulfides,223 selenides, phosphides,76 and alloys290 can be electrodeposited on a conducting LGDL.
Ahn et al. developed a MEA by potentiostatic deposition of nickel on CP for alkaline water electrolysis.146 The developed MEA with a low Ni loading of 8.5 μg cm−2 exhibited a current density of 150 mA cm−2 at 1.9 Vcell. Our group used a potentiostatic deposition method to effectively regulate the intrinsic activity and mass transport of self-supported electrodes.82 The compound composition, the electronic properties, and the surface wettability of self-supported electrodes could be modulated by simply changing the electrodeposition solution composition. The MEA with optimal self-supported electrodes delivered a high current density of 2.5 A cm−2 at 2.0 V. Park et al. reported a 3D unified electrode, in which NiFeOOH was directly electrodeposited on a LGDL at different current densities as the anode for AEMWE.57 As shown in Fig. 20a, compared to conventional electrodes prepared by using powder electrocatalysts, the unified electrode can improve the electrical connection between the CL and LGDL, leading to enhanced performance and durability. The authors investigated the impact of electrodeposition time, Ni/Fe ratio, and substrates on the performance of the unified NiFeOOH electrode. The AEMWE with the optimal NiFeOOH anode revealed an ultra-high current density of 3600 mA cm−2 at 1.9 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 20b). Guo et al. reported sphere-shaped CuCoP nanoparticles electrodeposited on CP by a cyclic voltammetry method.76 The as-prepared electrode exhibited a low overpotential of 59 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2 for HER. In single-cell tests, the MEA with the CuCoP/CP cathode showed a high current density of 700 mA cm−2 at 1.9 V. As shown in Fig. 20c, Thangavel et al. proposed that the high surface roughness and wettability of the LGDL promoted uniform and intimate integration of electrodeposited materials on the LGDL.287 Especially, the amorphous NiFeOOH was electrodeposited on CP with surface activation. The NiFeOOH/CP electrode showed an overpotential of 170 mV at 10 mA cm−2 towards OER, which is much lower than that of the NiFeOOH/CP electrode without surface activation. Moreover, an AEMWE assembled with the NiFeOOH/CP anode delivered 1 A cm−2 at 1.88 V with good electrolysis stability for 240 h.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the conventional electrode and unified electrode prepared by electrodeposition. (b) Polarization curves of AEMWE with conventional IrO2 and unified electrodes in 1 M KOH.57 Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (c) Schematic of one-plot electrodeposition of NiFeOOH on a surface activated CFP.287 Reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. (d) Schematic of a novel and scalable electrodeposition for the preparation of self-supported NiFe and NiFeP electrodes.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. 
In addition, electrodeposition is an efficient approach to prepare nanostructured electrocatalysts, including 2D nanostructure (such as nanofilms, nanosheets, and nanoflowers) and 3D nanocomposite structure (such as hierarchical nanoporous structure and core–shell composite nanostructure). Choi et al. prepared honeycomb-like Cu0.81Co2.19O4 nanosheet arrays on Ni foam through electrodeposition and thermal oxidation methods.38 It was reported that the codeposition with Cu changed the morphology and OER activity of Co(OH)2. The Cu0.81Co2.19O4/Ni foam anode was assembled with a commercial Fumasep FAA-3-PE-30 AEM and a Pt/C cathode for AEMWE. In a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, the AEMWE achieved current densities of 100 and 400 mA cm−2 at 1.68 and 1.82 V, respectively. Recently, hierarchical 3D porous structures have been prepared via electrodeposition at large current densities which are fascinating electrode materials for alkaline water electrolysis due to their large surface and high porosity. During electrodeposition, hydrogen bubbles are vigorously produced at the electrode surface, which act as templates to construct the porous nanostructure.291 For example, Kim et al. prepared CoMo heterohierarchical foam on CP towards HER.290 More active sites were available in the heterohierarchical foam structure, and the high porosity of CLs facilitated reactant penetration to the inner electrode and facilitated the escape of the produced gases. Therefore, the CoMo/CP electrode exhibited a low overpotential of 110 mV at 20 mA cm−2 for HER. It was demonstrated that active sites can be extremely exposed by constructing core–shell electrocatalysts. Moreover, the charge transfer in the catalytic reactions can be facilitated by an internal interface. In this regard, Jiang et al. reported a novel one-step oxidation–electrodeposition method to prepare a Ni@Fe-doped Ni(oxy)hydroxide anode for alkaline water electrolysis,179 which revealed an overpotential of 245 mV at 10 mA cm−2. The Ni@Fe-doped Ni(oxy)hydroxide anode and the Zirfon separator were assembled as the MEA, which exhibited a high current density of 1.63 A cm−2 at 2.0 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.
Constructing amorphous–crystalline heterojunctions is a promising strategy to improve the internal activity of self-supported electrodes for HER or OER due to the improved charge transfer at the interfaces. Electrodeposition has emerged as an efficient and fast technology for synthesizing amorphous nanomaterials, which can be utilized to construct amorphous materials with abundant defect and active sites onto crystalline materials for forming hierarchical heterostructures. For example, Wen et al. reported a Schottky heterojunction FeNi LDH/NiS nanosheet array for large current density OER.130 The highly dispersed ultrafine FeNi LDH nanoparticles were electrodeposited onto the ultrathin NiS nanosheets to form the FeNi LDH/NiS hierarchical heterostructure. According to theoretical calculations, coupling NiFe LDH onto NiS might adjust the d-band center of Ni(Fe) atoms and the affinity of oxygen intermediates for good OER kinetics. Therefore, the NiFe LDH/NiS Schottky heterojunction delivered a current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an ultralow overpotential of 325 mV. Moreover, scaled-up NiFe LDH/NiS electrodes were employed in a practical alkaline water electrolysis device. The MEA maintained a current of 8000 mA at 2.01 V for >80 h.
In traditional two-electrode systems, the inert anodes (such as graphite electrodes) were used for the preparation of self-supported electrodes. However, as shown in Fig. 20d, Wei et al. proposed a novel electrodeposition set-up. The Fe anode was utilized as an Fe source for the preparation of Fe-based electrocatalysts. The disintegration of the potential system and contamination of the inert anode at high voltage during the electrodeposition process can be considerably minimized due to the anode's own dissolution. By the novel electrodeposition strategy, both FeNi and FeNiP self-supported electrodes were successfully prepared for OER and HER, respectively. The AEMWE was constructed by the assembly of as-prepared electrodes and a commercial Fumasep FAA-3-PE-30 AEM, which required only 1.73 V to deliver 1000 mA cm−2 in 5.0 M KOH and operated continuously over 200 h.


4.2.2. Hydro/solvothermal method. 
The hydro/solvothermal method has been widely utilized to synthesize nanostructured catalytic materials at modest temperature in a pressure-tight reactor. In hydro/solvothermal reaction, the nucleation and conformal development of active materials occur on the substrates' surface flaws and oxyl groups, which promotes homogeneous catalyst deposition. For instance, a hydrothermal method was utilized to synthesize a series of FeOOH/NiFe LDH self-supported electrodes with a vertically aligned nanosheet structure, adjustable composition, and homogeneous distribution on Ni foams.292 The synthesized transition metal oxy-compounds can be directly used as electrocatalysts or act as the precursors to prepare other materials such as sulfides, selenides, phosphides, carbides, nitrides, and alloys through post-treatment.38 Self-supported electrodes of Ni3S2 nanorod arrays/Ni foam,293 NiSe nanowire film/Ni foam,294 and Ni2P nanosheets/Ni foam295 have been prepared by a one-pot hydro/solvothermal route. Ding et al. reported Fe-Ni3S2 anode electrocatalysts on Ni foam via one-pot hydrothermal reaction for alkaline AEMWE.62 The authors investigated the impact of reaction temperature and reactants on the morphology and composition of the Fe-Ni3S2/NF electrode during hydrothermal reaction. The morphology of Fe-Ni3S2 self-supported electrodes was transformed from a rough and irregular structure to a hierarchical nanowire structure when the hydrothermal temperature was increased from 150 to 190 °C. It was reported that thiourea not only served as a S source but also synergistically modulated the growth of the hierarchical structure with citric acid. The optimal Fe-Ni3S2/NF electrode exhibited an ultra-low overpotential of 302 mV at 1000 mA cm−2. The single-cell AEMWE with the Fe-Ni3S2/NF anode electrode achieved a high current density of 1 A cm−2 at 1.65 V. In addition, Meena et al. prepared a bifunctional V- and Co-based bimetallic oxide on NF (VCoCOx/NF) via a one-pot hydrothermal method.228 The VCoCOx/NF electrode delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 63 and 240 mV for HER and OER, respectively, which were lower than those of powder Pt/C and IrO2 electrocatalysts. Using the VCoCOx/NF electrode as the anode and the cathode, the assembled MEA exhibited a current density of 200 mA cm−2 at 2.01 V in pure-water-fed AEMWE.


4.2.3. Electrospinning method. 
Electrospinning technology can be scaled up to produce catalytic materials with continuous 1D nanofibre structures, high porosity and specific surface area.296 The fundamental idea behind electrospinning is that a charged jet will emerge from the Taylor cone when the applied voltage reaches a critical point when the repelling electrostatic force overcomes the surface tension of the solution.297 The parameters of the solutions (such as concentration, surface tension, viscosity, etc.), the applied voltage, and the surroundings (i.e., temperature and relative humidity) all have a significant impact on the morphology of tiny nanofibers. For the purpose of creating self-supported electrodes for alkaline water electrolysis, electrospun nanofibres have been used extensively.298 Busacca et al. utilized the electrospinning method to prepare NiMn2O4 and NiCo2O4 electrocatalysts on carbon nanofibers for OER.231 It was reported that the nanometer-scale NiMn (∼20 nm) and NiCo (∼9 nm) spinel electrocatalysts were uniformly dispersed on carbon nanofibers, which facilitated the catalyst utilization for OER in alkaline water electrolysis. The NiMn2O4 self-supported electrodes exhibited a high mass activity (362 A g−1@1.8 V) in a zero-gap AEMWE. Similarly, Kang et al. reported carbon-coated Co0.9Fe0.1 alloy nanoparticles supported on carbon nanofiber (CNF) for OER.299 The MEA based on the highly graphitized Co0.9Fe0.1/CNF anode exhibited a current density of 794 mA cm−2 at 1.7 V.


4.2.4. Chemical vapor deposition. 
Chemical vapor deposition has been widely employed to prepare self-supported electrodes by combining with hydrothermal and electrodeposition approaches. Some metal LGDLs or metal oxides, hydroxides, or oxyhydroxides formed on LGDLs can react with the gas phase during sintering at high temperatures. Phosphorus (PH3 or P), sulfur, selenium, carbon (CH4 or CO), and nitrogen (NH3 or N2) were widely utilized to form the corresponding phosphides,78 sulfides,300 selenides, carbides, and nitrides. For instance, the ternary NiFeCoP nanosheet arrays were in situ prepared on Ni foam by transforming the Ni foam supported NiFeCo LDH with phosphorus vapor.47 The AEMWE using NiFeCo LDH as the anode and NiFeCoP as the cathode reached 500 mA cm−2 at only 1.75 V. Chen et al. reported high-activity NiMo and Fe-NiMo self-supported electrodes for OER and HER, respectively, which were prepared by annealing NiMoO4 and Fe-NiMoO4 on Ni foam in a mixed NH3/H2 atmosphere, respectivity.83 The NiMo/NF and Fe-NiMo/NF electrodes exhibited low overpotentials of 107 and 244 mV to achieve a current density of 500 mA cm−2 for HER and OER, respectively. The MEA was constructed by assembling the self-supported electrodes with a commercial Sustainion X37-50 AEM, which delivered a high current density of 1 A cm−2 at 1.57 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.


4.2.5. 3D printing. 
Complex architectures with distinctive chemical, mechanical, and structural characteristics may be quickly prepared by 3D printing, which are great for liquid/gas mass transport in alkaline water electrolysis.301,302 Extrusion-based 3D printing techniques, such as direct ink writing, have been used to construct highly ordered multiscale cellular materials made from metals303 and carbons.304 For example, a Ni electrode with highly controlled, periodic structures was prepared by a filament-based printing technique for alkaline water electrolysis.305 The organized micron-sized holes in the 3D-printed periodic structure would significantly lower the frequency of bubble collisions and deformations in comparison to the irregular pores randomly strewn across the interior space of commercial 3D substrates, thus significantly decreasing ohmic resistance and increasing the number of available catalytic sites.


4.2.6. Chemical corrosion. 
Chemical corrosion, which often results in the corrosion layers of rust, is a spontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction process that occurs in various micro areas on the surface of metals.306 The produced waste rust can be utilized as an active material for electrocatalytic reactions. Recently, there have been some investigations adopting corrosion engineering to fabricate advanced self-supported electrodes based on metal foams of Ni,34 Fe,307 alloy308 and stainless steel309 for OER and HER application in alkaline water electrolysis. Notably, corrosion engineering has the following exceptional benefits: straightforward synthesis, efficient control, simple manufacturing scale-up, and low preparation cost. In a typical example, the Ni foam electrode can be chemically corroded in the presence of Fe3+ and V3+ cations to form a self-supported NiFeV LDH/Ni foam electrode with excellent OER performance.52 The AEMWE assembled with the NiFeV LDH electrode achieved a high current density of 2.1 A cm−2 at 1.8 V in 1 M KOH. In addition, Lee et al. reported corrosion-engineered Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 nanoparticles on Ni foam as the anode for AEMWE.34 The presence of Fe3+ and high-temperature conditions promoted the formation of bimetallic oxide on the surface of commercial Ni foam. The Ni0.75Fe2.25O4/NF electrode required an overpotential of 192 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2 towards OER, which outperformed the commercial IrO2 electrocatalyst (265 mV). This may be attributed to the small catalyst size and optimal Fe composition. When the self-supported anode was coupled with the Pt/C cathode and the commercial Sustainion X37-50 AEM, the obtained MEA achieved a high current density of 2.0 A cm−2 at 1.9 V in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.

5. Durability of MEAs at the single-cell level
AEMWE using intermittent renewable energy sources is essential to achieve green hydrogen production. However, the inputs of fluctuating currents into an electrolyzer change not only the voltage of the electrolyzer, but also its temperature and gas pressure, gas purity, and gas generation amount over time.310 Therefore, the durability of the alkaline water electrolysis system against the changes must be ensured. To achieve the direct connection of AEMWE to intermittent renewable power sources, a high load range (5 to 200%) and operating pressure (70 bar) are highly desirable to be competitive.311 However, these present a formidable challenge to the durability of AEMWE, including each component and the MEA. Up to now, the lifetime of the AEMWE stack is around 5000 h, but it is expected to skyrocket to at least 100000 h to be competitive. In this section, the durability of AEMWE is discussed from the perspective of the single-cell level.
5.1. Durability of MEAs in pure water-fed AEMWE
Pure water-fed AEMWE only uses an alkaline polymer as the electrolyte, which can eliminate the negative effects of liquid electrolytes but tends to show poor durability. As shown in Fig. 21, the reported durability of pure water-fed AEMWE is less than 600 h at a low current density (<1000 mA cm−2). Pandiarajan et al. reported that the cell voltage of spinel ferrite catalyzed AEMWEs at 200 mA cm−2 and room temperature increased from 1.6 to 1.75 V within 3 h despite the stable OER activity of the catalyst at >100 h in the rotating disk electrode experiment.315 Chu et al. reported that the iridium oxide catalyzed AEMWEs at 200 mA cm−2 and 50 °C exhibited a voltage increase from 1.75 to 2.3 V in 35 h, although they did not observe any notable degradation of the piperidinium-functionalized AEM from the post-mortem test.205 Since operating AEMWEs with only flowing water and without additional liquid electrolytes is less corrosive, the durability-limiting factors of pure water-fed AEMWEs are not related to the alkaline stability of MEA components, but associated with a high operating cell voltage and current density. In this section, we discuss two durability-limiting factors, i.e., three-phase interfaces in CLs and CL/AEM interface structures at the single-cell level.
 Fig. 21  (a) Durability comparison of pure water-fed AEMWE. References for data points for (a): 1,236 2,246 3,209 4,229 5,230 6,18 7,194 8,20 9,211 10,240 11,241 12,233 13,21 14,205 15,219 16,191 17,312 18,234 19.245 (b) The performance and durability tests of pure water-fed AEMWE with a NiFeCo anode electrocatalyst at 80 °C.313 Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (c) Nyquist plot of pure water-fed AEMWE before and after the durability tests. SEM images of the NiFeCo anode electrocatalyst (d) before and (e) after the durability tests. Schematic of the ionomer/electrocatalyst interface (f) before and (g) after the durability tests. (h) Schematic diagram of degradation mechanisms by electrochemical phenyl oxidation.314 Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. The durability of pure water-fed AEMWE with (i) TMA-70 and (j) TMA-53 ionomers.20 Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (k) The durability of pure water-fed AEMWE employing different PFOTFPh-TMA ionomers.191 Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 

5.1.1. The degradation of three-phase interfaces in CLs. 
In pure water-fed AEMWE, the electrochemical reactions occur only on “tripe-phase boundaries” (TPBs), meaning locations with electron conductors, active catalysts, anionic carriers, and pathways for reactants/products. Therefore, the durability of TPBs directly determines the long-term operation stability of pure water-fed AEMWE. The degradation of TPBs mainly originates from the property changes of the solid/solid interface between the ion-conducting ionomer and the electron-conducting electrocatalyst, which are caused by the following factors: (1) the morphological and structural changes of the electrocatalyst; (2) the detachment of the electrocatalyst and ionomer; and (3) ionomer poisoning.
Recently, Lei et al. investigated the impact of electrocatalyst reconstruction on the durability of pure water-fed AEMWE with a NiFeCo-based anode catalyst.313 For the KOH feeding mode, the cell voltage of the AEMWE could maintain stability for 100 h at a current density of 200 mA cm−2. The surface of reconstructed electrocatalysts lost contact with the ionomer, but could still participate in the reaction due to the contact with the KOH solution. Thus, a good electrolysis durability can be achieved in the KOH feeding mode. However, when pure water was fed to the AEMWE, the cell voltage could maintain stability for only about 60 h, and then, it rapidly increased from ∼1.6 to 2.0 V (Fig. 21b). EIS results showed that the ionic resistance of the anode CL significantly increased after the durability test (Fig. 21c), which can be attributed to the dagradation of TPBs in the anode CL. As shown in Fig. 21d and e, the NiFeCo electrocatalyst had undergone a drastic structural change, transforming from nanoparticles to nanosheets. When the structure of NiFeCo changed, the contact area between the catalyst surface and the ionomer reduced significantly, leading to a dramatic decrease of the catalyst utilization and a rapid increase of the cell voltage (Fig. 21f and g). To further verify this, the authors used a phosphate buffer to control the local pH, and found that the morphology of the electrocatalyst no longer changed after the durability test, and the cell performance could be recovered to the initial performance in pure water. The negative impact of electrocatalyst reconstruction on the ionomer/electrocatalyst interface was also found by Krivina et al.316
In 2019, Li et al. proposed that the phenyl group in the ionomer backbone may be oxidized at OER potentials and produce a phenolic compound, which can be deprotonated to neutralize the hydroxide of the ammonium functional groups (Fig. 21h).314 Thus, the decreased local pH at the catalyst/ionomer interface caused the dagradation of pure water-fed AEMWE. In addition, this phenomenon is also observed in fuel cells, which can be called ionomer poisoning. After that, several studies have been conducted to investigate the dagradation of the ionomer in AEMWEs. Lindquist et al. investigated the durability of pure water-fed AEMWE with the commercial PiperION AEM and electrocatalysts.243 The average voltage degradation rate of the AEMWE was 0.67 mV h−1 at 500 mA cm−2 for 180 h. XPS analysis demonstrated that the ionomer was undergoing significant oxidative damage after the electrolysis stability tests. Further, Krivina et al. systematically investigated the impact of the ionomer conductivity, redox potential, and pH tolerance on the degradation of commercially available ionomers (including Aemion, Sustainion, and PiperION) in a three-electrode system.317 However, the dagradation of ionomers remains to be studied in a single cell under the pure water feeding mode. Krivina and coworkers investigated the impact of anode electrocatalysts on the oxidation of the ionomer in pure-water-fed AEMWEs.316 They found that different degradation processes occurred for different electrocatalysts, and high electronic conductivity of the electrocatalyst resulted in a better voltage performance but faster ionomer oxidation. Especially, the pure water-fed AEMWE with Co3O4 anode electrocatalysts showed the best durability with a low degradation rate of 1.8 mV h−1 at 500 mA cm−2 over 20 h, which could be attributed to the good structural stability and electrical conductivity.
Considering the ionomer poisoning, Li et al. proposed the ionomer design criteria for high-performance pure-water-fed AEMWE.20 The pure-water-fed AEMWE using an ammonium-enriched ionomer (IEC = 3.3 m equiv. g−1) achieved an ultra-high current density of 2.7 A cm−2 at 1.8 V. However, the cell voltage of the AEMWE rapidly increased from ∼1.6 V to ∼2.2 V at 200 mA cm−2 within ∼10 h, which can be attributed to the catalyst detachment from anode and cathode CLs because of the low strength of the ionomer with high IEC (Fig. 21i and j). In addition, Xiao et al. also found the detachment of electrocatalysts in pure water-fed AEMWE with the PiperION ionomer during long-term operation, which caused continuous voltage degradation, especially at high current densities.245 Therefore, improving the ionomer/electrocatalyst strength is an important strategy to improve the durability of pure water-fed AEMWE. Chen et al. found substantial voltage degradation of AEMWE with the hexamethyl-p-terphenyl poly(benzimidazolium) (HMT-PMBI) ionomer and AEM when the feeding electrolyte was changed from 1 M KOH to 0.1 M KOH or pure water.219 The durability of AEMWE was significantly improved by decreasing its swelling through increasing its hydrophobicity. To improve the adhesion strength of electrocatalysts and ionomers, Chen et al. reported self-adhesive ionomers for high-durability AEMWE. The AEMWE exhibited stable voltage performance at a high current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for over 600 h without degradation.220 However, the self-adhesive ionomers have not been applied in pure water-fed AEMWE. Sonic et al. reported a series of wholly aromatic TMA-modified poly(fluorene-alt-tetrafluorophenylene) (PFOTFPh-TMA) ionomers with high molecular weight and moderate IEC to improve the durability of pure water-fed AEMWE.191 As shown in Fig. 21k, the pure-water-fed AEMWE employing the PFOTFPh-TMA ionomer with high IEC (3.2 m equiv. g−1) exhibited a drastic voltage change after 20 h operation due to the high swelling and low mechanical stability of the ionomer. By contrast, by increasing the molecular weight (Mw = 240000 g mol−1) and slightly decreasing the IEC (2.7 m equiv. g−1) of the ionomer, the cell voltage of the pure water-fed AEMWE slightly improved with operating time, demonstrating an excellent durability at 200 mA cm−2 for ∼150 h.


5.1.2. The degradation of CL/AEM interface structures. 
Due to the significant differences in physicochemical properties of the CLs and AEM, interfacial delamination between CLs and AEM can occur and negatively impact the AEMWE performance, especially under a low-concentrated KOH electrolyte or pure water feeding mode.318 The gap between CLs and AEM will significantly increase the ionic transfer resistance at the interface. Thus, the degradation of CL/AEM interface structures should also be considered. The impact of the CL/AEM interface on the durability of AEM fuel cells has been well-studied.319 Kim et al. proposed that membrane–electrode interfacial compatibility is a critical issue in AEM fuel cells.320 Fuel cell performance degradation scaled well with initial membrane–electrode interfacial resistance, suggesting that the membrane–electrode interface had a tremendous impact on fuel cell durability. However, a few studies have been conducted to investigate the CL/AEM interface structures during long-term operation in pure water-fed AEMWE. Jang et al. found that the precipitate produced by dissolved metal cations at the interface caused an increase of the overall cell resistance due to the increasing contact resistance.94 In 2022, our group examined the interface structure of the conventional CCS-type MEA after electrolysis stability tests. Multiple micro-cracks and gaps can be found when assembling the FAA-3-50 AEM with gas diffusion electrodes.46 Recently, our group investigated the durability of the conventional CCM-type MEA in pure water-fed AEMWE.21 The cell voltage rapidly increased to 250 mV within 100 h, which may be attributed to the CL/AEM interface detachment. Moreover, IES results demonstrated the increased cell resistance caused by the interface gap.

5.2. Durability of MEAs in concentrated KOH-fed AEMWE
In concentrated KOH-fed AEMWE, a catalyst–electrolyte interface is formed to maintain the electrocatalyst utilization for OER and HER. Therefore, the use of ionomers with high IEC is not necessary. The ionomer detachment in pure water-fed AEMWE can be alleviated to improve the durability. Moreover, the circulated alkaline electrolyte can neutralize the phenols produced by the ionomer oxidation, eliminating the ionomer poisoning issues in pure water-fed AEMWE. Therefore, the durability-limiting factors of KOH-fed AEMWE mainly depend on the durability of components, including alkali-resistant AEMs and electrochemically stable catalysts. Recently, using 0.1 or 1 M KOH as an electrolyte, AEMWEs with high durability have been reported. Jang et al. reported a highly durable AEMWE using PGM-free catalysts and a stable polycarbazole-based AEM,94 which maintained a low cell voltage of 1.75 V in 0.1 M KOH for 3000 h, and exhibited a low voltage degradation rate of 0.011 mV h−1. Liu et al. reported the durability of 1 M KOH-fed AEMWEs using several commercial AEMs.41 The electrolyzers using commercial Fumatech FAA-50 and Sustainion 37–50 AEMs could maintain a high current density of 1 A cm−2 at 60 °C. The electrolyzer using the FAA-50 AEM showed a low voltage degradation rate of 0.4 mV h−1 for the initial 180 h after which the electrolyzer started to leak. The electrolyzer with the Sustainion 37–50 AEM was highly stable over 2000 h with an ultralow voltage degradation rate of 0.005 mV h−1. The authors considered that the short lifespan of the electrolyzer with the FAA-3 AEM may be attributed to the poor alkaline stability of the AEM since the other components used in electrolyzers were identical. Xia et al. reported the durability of 1 M KOH-fed AEMWE by employing stable NiS2/Ni3S4 anode electrocatalysts.63 The cell operated for 500 h at a current density of 1 A cm−2 with a degradation rate of 0.12 mV h−1. However, the AEMWE with Ni/NiO anode electrocatalysts showed a high degradation of 1.7 mV h−1 for only 50 h. The durability difference may be attributed to the unstable Ni/NiO anode electrocatalysts due to the use of an identical AEM. Based on the above discussion, the durability-limiting factor of concentrated KOH-fed AEMWE mainly depends on the stability of the components of MEAs.
In summary, the durability of pure water-fed AEMWE still suffered from many problems related to materials and interface structures in MEAs. Much efforts should be devoted to developing advanced ionomer materials and constructing active and stable interface structures in MEAs in the future. By contrast, the concentrated KOH feeding mode effectively alleviated the degradation of MEAs, especially for ionomer and CL/membrane interfaces. Thus, up to now, concentrated KOH-fed AEMWE is a promising technology to achieve large-scale green hydrogen production based on intermittent renewable power sources.
6. Overall design of MEAs towards high-performance alkaline water electrolysis
Although the recently reported performance of conventional MEAs is high for alkaline water electrolysis, the practical application of MEAs needs to concurrently address the issues of insufficient catalyst utilization, limited mass transport, and high ohmic resistance. Thus, the overall design of MEAs with maximized triple-phase boundaries in CLs, triple-phase mass transport highways, and enlarged membrane/CL and CL/LGDL interfaces is essential to reduce the polarization losses in the kinetic, mass transport, and ohmic regions (Fig. 22). This section highlights several design strategies to achieve high-performance MEAs in the single cells.
 Fig. 22  Schematic of ideal 3D-ordered MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis, including CLs, membrane, membrane/CL interface, and CL/LGDL interface. 
6.1. Constructing ordered triple-phase transfer channels in CLs
Compared to conventional MEAs, nanostructured MEAs with ordered triple-phase transfer channels in CLs offer advantages in improving the electrolysis performance and durability, which are attributed to the following factors: (1) the dispersion of the active catalysts which increases the electrochemically active surface area; (2) the ordered highways for electron and mass transport, especially at high current densities; and (3) the enhanced structural stability of the nanostructured CLs. As shown in Fig. 23a, for alkaline water electrolysis, the morphology engineering of nanostructured materials is the effective construction strategy of ordered triple-phase transfer channels in CLs. The most common method for producing nanostructured CLs with ordered triple-phase transfer channels is to prepare active materials in the form of free-standing 1D nanoarrays (such as nanowires, nanorods, and nanotubes), or 2D nanoarrays (such as nanosheets, nanowalls, and nanoflakes), or 3D nanoporous structures on LGDLs. For example, Hu et al. reported hollow FeCo2S4 nanotube multitripod arrays towards OER322 (Fig. 23b). More active sites are exposed because of the well-defined hollow nanotube structure, speeding up the charge transfer process (Fig. 23c). Thus, the as-prepared electrode required an overpotential of only 278 mV to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Similarly, Li et al. constructed holey CoFeN nanosheet arrays grown on Ni foam towards OER and HER323 (Fig. 23d). This unique holey nanosheet architecture can not only expose abundant active sites but also facilitate the charge/mass transfer.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of self-supported electrodes with homogeneous and heterogeneous structures.321 Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (b) Synthesis process of hollow FeCo2S4 nanotube arrays. (c) Schematic of the structure–function relationship of FeCo2S4 nanotube arrays for OER.322 Reproduced from ref. 322 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Synthesis process of holey CoFeNx nanosheet arrays.323 Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of the NiFe@NiFeOOH nanowire arrays. (f) SEM image of NiFe@NiFeOOH nanowire arrays. (g) Digital photos demonstrating the oxygen bubbles on the surface of different electrodes. (h) The polarization curves recorded on different electrodes for OER.324 Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (i) Schematic of the structure–function relationship of the hierarchical Ni@FeNiOOH electrode for OER. (j) Polarization curves of Ni@FeNiOOH electrodes for OER. (k) Polarization curves of MEAs for AEMWE in 1 M KOH.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. 
Maximum exposure of the active sites in CLs cannot be obtained if the electrolytes cannot fully penetrate the electrode, leading to lower catalytic activity. In addition, high current densities for alkaline water electrolysis result in the surface of CLs producing enormous gas bubbles. Once these bubbles are trapped around the CL surface because they are unable to escape in time, there is a severe “bubble shielding effect” that prevents electrolyte transport, slowing the diffusion of the produced gas, blocking exposed active sites, and ultimately resulting in high reaction resistance and decreased electrocatalytic activity. Thus, it is crucial to design the CL architecture in such a way as to decrease gas bubble adhesion behavior, facilitate electrolyte diffusion, and reduce reaction resistance, thus maintaining the catalytic ability of CLs.329,330 Therefore, great efforts have been devoted to regulating the composition and micro-/nanostructure of the electrode surface with superhydrophilicity. In a typical example, Jiang et al. prepared a CoSx–Ni3S2 nanosheet array on Ni foams.331 The CoSx–Ni3S2 electrode exhibited superhydrophilic and superaerophobic surface properties, facilitating the exposure of active sites and alleviating the bubble shielding effect. Liang et al. utilized a magnetic-field-assisted chemical deposition method to construct a hierarchical NiFe@NiFeOOH electrode324 (Fig. 23e and f). The NiFe alloy nanowire surface experienced in situ formation of the ultrathin (∼5 nm) and amorphous NiFeOOH, which is recognized as an OER phase with high intrinsic activity. In addition, the liquid/gas mass transfer could be significantly enhanced through the hierarchical electrode design. The study showed that oxygen bubbles could leave easily from the surface of nanowire arrays with a small size (Fig. 23g). The contact area between the electrode and the bubbles could be reduced by electrode designs that were rough on both micro- and nanoscale. This reduced the interfacial adhesion of the bubbles and improved the surface hydrophilia toward the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 23h, the NiFe@NiFeOOH electrode can deliver current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 at record low overpotentials of 248 and 258 mV, respectively. Jiang et al. reported a novel one-step oxidation-electrodeposition approach to generate Ni@Fe-Ni(oxy)hydroxide self-supported electrodes with a core@shell hierarchical architecture towards OER for alkaline water electrolysis.179 Notably, to increase the Ni(oxy)hydroxide shell's inherent catalytic activity, trace Fe was doped to it (Fig. 23i). Specifically, the Ni core facilitated the electron transport to the surface of the FeNiOOH shell, whereas the ordered and hierarchical architecture enhanced liquid/gas transport and provided abundant active sites. As a result, the alkaline water electrolysis cell using the Ni@FeNiOOH self-supported electrodes exhibited a lower cell voltage of 200 mV compared with the bare Ni mesh at 2 A cm−2 (Fig. 23j and k).
6.2. Constructing ionic highways in membranes
Two efficient strategies have been proposed to improve hydroxide conductivity, including increasing ion exchange capacity (IEC) and constructing ionic highways in membranes. Nevertheless, owing to the excessive increase in IEC, the mechanical properties and dimensional stability of the membranes would be compromised, thus limiting the practical applications of membranes for alkaline water electrolysis. By contrast, fast ion transport is made possible by continuous ion channels inside membranes, which suggests an effective method for obtaining high-performance AEMs. The effective construction of ideal ionic highways in AEMs remains a formidable challenge.
Strategies to drive the formation of ion conducting channels inside AEMs may include three categories: (1) regulating the membrane architectures, including block,333,334 side-chain type,335 comb-shaped,336 hyperbranched,337 and semi-interpenetrating network;338 (2) improving the self-aggregation of cationic chains including incorporating additional hydrophobic moieties to improve polarity discrimination,339 or allocating the cationic group to the AEM side chain to provide higher mobility for ion aggregation;340,341 and (3) incorporating inorganic nanofillers,181,342 organic ionic surfactants343 or crystalline porous materials344 to create ionic channels at polymer–filler interfaces via various non-covalent interactions. Liu et al. reported a comb-shaped poly(terphenyl piperidinium) (PTP) AEM for water electrolysis (Fig. 24a).185 The authors replaced the alkyl side chains with hydrophilic N-oligo (ethylene glycol) (OEG) side-chains pendant to the piperidinium groups (PTP-OEG), inducing microphase separation for fast hydroxide transport. Utilizing the PTP-OEG AEM, the constructed AEMWE with IrO2 and PtRu/C electrocatalysts was tested by a high current density of 5.9 A cm−2 at 2.2 V (Fig. 24b and c). Similarly, Zhang et al. inserted dipolar ethylene oxide (EO) spacers in the cationic side chain grafted onto alkaline stable aryl-ether free poly(aryl piperidinium) (PBP) (O-PDQA) for highly conductive AEMs (Fig. 24d).325 As shown in Fig. 24e–g, the self-assembly of the flexible side chain with cation-dipole interaction to build linked ionic highways for rapid water and ion movement was confirmed by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and microscopy investigations. In contrast, there was obvious patterning structure and no obvious micro-phase separation for the PDQA AEM without EO spacers (Fig. 24h–j). Therefore, the O-PDQA AEM exhibited a high hydroxide conductivity of 106 mS cm−1 at 80 °C. Cha et al. reported quaternised polycarbazole-based AEMs consisting of an ether-free backbone incorporating a trimethyl-ammonium-terminated flexible alkyl side chain (QPC-TMA) (Fig. 24k).190 As shown in Fig. 24l, the SAXS profile of the commercial FAA-3 AEM showed no scattering peaks, whereas the dry QPC-TMA AEM displayed a distinct diffraction pattern at 0.22 Å−1, which corresponds to a d-spacing of 2.9 nm. This result indicated that the QPC-TMA AEM had a well-developed interconnected network between the hydrophilic channels for fast hydroxide transport. As shown in Fig. 19m, the AEMWE using the QPC-TMA AEM demonstrated impressive electrolysis performance (3.5 A cm−2 at 1.9 V).
 Fig. 24  (a) The impact of side chain engineering on hydroxide conductivity and alkaline stability of AEMs. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs with side chain engineering PTP AEMs in pure water or 1 M KOH. (c) Stability tests of MEAs with PTP-OEG and PTP AEMs at 1.0 A cm−2 for 300 h.185 Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (d) Molecular structure of QPC-TMA. (e) SAXS profile of QPC-TMA and commercial FAA-3-50 AEMs. (f) Polarization curves of MEAs with QPC-TMA and commercial FAA-3-50 AEMs in 1 M KOH at 70 °C.190 Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (g) The schematic diagram showing the function of the self-aggregated side chain, promoting the formation of ionic highways in AEMs. SAXS profile of (h) O-PDQA and (k) PDQA. TEM images of (i) O-PDQA and (l) PDQA. AFM images of (j) O-PDQA and (m) PDQA.325 Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
Crosslinking methods have also been developed to construct ionic highways in AEMs. In order to create extremely effective ion transport channels in AEMs, Hu et al. used rigid crosslinkers to increase the interchain spacing of polymer chains.345 When the short flexible crosslinker was substituted by the long rigid crosslinker, the hydroxide conductivity of the AEM improved from 63.2 to 110.3 mS cm−1 at 80 °C. As shown in Fig. 25a and b, Kim et al. reported a crosslinked AEM containing ionic highways along charge-delocalized pyrazolium cations and homoconjugated triptycenes.326 Specifically, a hydroxide conductivity of 111.6 mS cm−1 at 80 °C was achieved with a low IEC of 7 0.91 mmol g−1.
 Fig. 25  (a) Design of ionic highways through a pyrazolium cross-linked triptycene polymer. (b) Schematic for a case of 0% degree of cross-linking.326 Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Vibrating sample magnetometer curves of membranes in the TP and IP directions. (d–g) Cross-sectional TEM images of membranes.327 Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. (h) Scheme for the synthesis of COF-QAs and ordered ionic transport highways.328 Reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
The performance of water electrolysis can be enhanced by through-plane (TP) conducting pathways in AEMs because they provide effective highways for the transport of hydroxide ions between electrodes. Liu et al. used paramagnetic ferrocenium polymers to synthesise TP-oriented AEMs under a magnetic field.327 As shown in Fig. 25c, in magnetic-cast AEMs, the paramagnetic ferrocenium groups were significantly influenced by the magnetic field and created a TP-oriented structure. Fig. 25d–g displays the TEM images of cross-sectional membrane samples that directly demonstrated anisotropic TP orientation in magnetic-cast AEMs and isotropic behavior in normal-cast AEMs. The magnetic-cast AEMs displayed a high TP hydroxide conductivity of ∼160 mS cm−1 at 95 °C.
A new family of organic porous crystalline materials called covalent organic frameworks (COFs) is developing. With regard to alkaline water electrolysis, the modular architecture of COFs enables molecular-level modification of the crystalline lattice to provide the ionic transport channels with a beneficial physical microenvironment. Additionally, it is hypothesized that rapid anion transport via the COF membranes may be accomplished by simultaneously modifying the channels inside crystalline frameworks’ physical and chemical structures/microenvironments.346 As shown in Fig. 25h, He et al. designed COFs functionalized with quaternary ammonium (QA) groups (COF-QA) toward ultrafast anion transport.328 It was discovered through the side-chain engineering of COF-QAs that shorter, more hydrophilic organic spacers are preferable for increasing the anion conductivity of the COF-QAs with identical backbone topologies. The resultant self-standing COF membranes exhibit a high hydroxide conductivity of 212 mS cm−1 at 80 °C.
6.3. Constructing 3D CL/membrane interfaces
There are broad activities on improvements of CLs and membranes in the reported literature. Most articles focus on either membrane or CL development. Nevertheless, there have been only a few reported studies specifically focusing on the CL/membrane interface properties, including its effect on the performance of alkaline water electrolysis. It was reported that the CL/PEM interface has a major impact on the overall cell performance of PEM fuel cells. To date, the CL/membrane interface structures are desirable to achieve the transformation from 2D to 3D, thereby enhancing the ionic transport and stability at interfaces. As shown in Fig. 26a–f, the main modification approaches include the patterned electrode,347 ionomer-impregnated electrodes,209 porous membrane surface,348 direct membrane deposition,349,350 surface-patterned membrane,351 and membrane swelling.46 In 2021, our group studied the effect of the 3D CL/membrane interface on the electrolysis performance of AEMWE for the first time.46 We reported a strategy for resolving interfacial issues that involved creating an AEM with a very high water absorption (HWU-AME). The design is advantageous in an AEM where there is a lot of water and swelling occurs mostly in the through-plane direction in the MEA, as the membrane may fill the microgaps at the “solid–solid” AEM/CL interface in an adaptive manner (Fig. 26g and h). Consequently, the AEMWE achieved an excellent performance (0.911 A cm−2 at 1.9 V and room temperature) and long-term durability (160 h). In addition, recent studies have shown that a nanoengineered CL/PEM interface can significantly improve PEMWE performance. In a typical example, as shown in Fig. 26i, by using gradient tapered anode arrays and a 3D CL/PEM interface, Dong et al. proposed an ordered MEA for PEMWE.332 As shown in Fig. 26j and k, compared to a 2D CL/PEM interface and relatively tortuous pore structures, the anode with gradient tapered arrays displays a 3D CL/PEM interface, which could offer continuous triple-phase transfer pathways at CLs and interfaces. Therefore, the assembled MEA with low Ir loading showed an improved performance (1.801 V at 2 A cm−2) and great stability. Recently, our group proposed a novel 3D-ordered MEA for alkaline water electrolysis that was nanoengineered using highly porous CLs with vertical triple-phase transfer channels, an extremely thin AEM, and 3D CL/membrane interface architectures21 (Fig. 27a and b). As shown in Fig. 27c, to construct the 3D-ordered CLs on the AEM, the membrane was directly constructed on VCoP porous foams by the direct membrane deposition method. The CL maintained a highly ordered porous nanostructure throughout the synthesis process, and at the same time, a 3D interface between the CLs and AEM was formed by the dispersed membrane layer impregnated into the porous CLs. Therefore, the interfacial contact area of the 2D interface structure for traditional MEAs was ∼20 times smaller than that of the formed 3D interface structure (Fig. 27d and e). The transition from a 2D interface structure to a 3D constructed interface had resulted in significant improvements: (1) the OH− transport pathways between the AEM and the CLs were constructed by the 3D interface structure; (2) the AEM and the CLs had good adhesion; and (3) the dispersed polymer in the CLs prevented the detachment of the catalysts into the electrolyte (Fig. 27f). A high current density of 4200 mA cm−2 was attained at 2.0 V in 1 M KOH due to the mass transfer highways created by the overall architecture of the 3D-ordered MEAs (Fig. 27g). Moreover, the water-fed AEMWE could maintain over 600 h at 1 A cm−2 (Fig. 27h).
 Fig. 26  Schematic of different strategies to engineer the CL/membrane interface: (a) patterned electrode, (b) ionomer-impregnated electrode, (c) porous membrane surface, (d) direct membrane deposition, (e) surface-patterned membrane, and (f) membrane swelling. The SEM image of MEAs fabricated with g) FAA-3–50 and (h) HWU-AEM.46 Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. (I) Preparation procedure of the MEA with a 3D CL/membrane interface and gradient tapered arrays. The SEM images of the (j) top view and (k) cross section of the anodic CL with gradient tapered arrays.332 Reproduced from ref. 332 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
 Fig. 27  Schematic of (a) conventional and (b) 3D-ordered MEAs. (c) The synthesis process of 3D-ordered MEAs. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the membrane-coated CL in the 3D-ordered MEA. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the novel 3D-ordered MEA and corresponding EDS mapping. (f) Schematic illustration of the improvements from a conventional MEA to the 3D-ordered MEA by overall design. (g) Polarization curves of alkaline water electrolysis with different MEAs recorded at 60 °C. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves of alkaline water electrolysis with 3D-ordered MEAs at 60 °C in pure water.21 Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. 
6.4. Designing advanced CL/LGDL interfaces
The CL/LGDL interfaces have been well-studied in PEMWEs. For alkaline water electrolysis, attempts at improvement have been confined to the development of ionic conductive membranes or electrocatalysts. However, the CL/LDGL interface design has not attracted much importance. Typically, a microporous layer (MPL) is added to the LGDL to strengthen the interfacial connection, enhance liquid/gas transport and protect the delicate MEA from perforation. Designing MPLs with suitable porosity, pore size and thickness promotes the formation of advanced CL/LGDL interfaces, achieving high electrocatalyst utilization and low mass transport loss. For example, Stiber and coworkers reported a sintered Ti MPL on Ti mesh as the LGDL for PEMWE.311 The Ti MPL is entirely bound to the Ti mesh by diffusion and has a consistent pore size distribution and porosity, effectively eliminating the ohmic losses caused by interfaces. The PEMWE with this LGDL enabled operation at 6 A cm−2 under extreme conditions (90 °C and 90 bar pressure). Moreover, the high liquid/gas permeability for the LGDL enhanced two-phase transport at high current densities. Three different MPLs were used to construct a series of LGDLs by Schuler et al.352 They discovered that the increased interfacial contact area through the customized surface of the LGDL with tiny MPL particles leads to reduced membrane deformation and higher catalyst utilization. Peng et al. investigated the impact of CL/LGDL interfacial properties on the performance of PEMWE.353 The authors found that the surface properties of LGDLs were critical to govern the CL utilization and electrode kinetics. The CL/LGDL interfacial contact area and water accessibility for the CL must be balanced when determining the surface porosity of the LGDLs.
In conclusion, a growing variety of LGDLs with different materials, pore architectures, and surface structures are being created commercially, motivated by the success of numerous research studies on the structural design of LGDLs. To achieve and maintain high performance of alkaline water electrolysis, it is indispensable to construct an advanced CL/LGDL interface with high contact area and low interfacial and mass transfer resistance.
7. Summary and outlook
Hydrogen, as a clean and sustainable energy carrier, is taking the lead of fuels for its versatile applications. Alkaline water electrolysis is a more promising technology than other approaches. In this review, we first introduce the timeline of major developments and the basics of alkaline water electrolysis. Then the research status of the key components of MEAs, including electrocatalysts, ion conductive membranes, and gas/liquid diffusion layers, is provided. Thereafter, the preparation techniques of MEAs, including powder electrocatalysts and self-supported electrodes, are overviewed. Furthermore, the overall design strategies of MEAs are discussed to develop high-performance alkaline water electrolysis. The design of the electrocatalyst and the relationship of components with the performance of alkaline water electrolysis are highlighted. Although alkaline water electrolysis has currently achieved great success, many challenges remain to be resolved immediately.
Although significant achievements have been made in the development of key materials of MEAs in recent years, they are still far from large-scale practical applications due to the following technology barriers and manufacture challenges:
(1) For assessing and contrasting the catalytic performance of electrocatalysts in a reliable manner, standard electrochemical testing criteria must be established. The acquired findings of polarization curves and stability are significantly influenced by the counter electrode, catalyst substrates, catalyst loading, and testing settings. Additionally, by establishing standardized evaluation programs and materials for integrated electrodes and powder electrocatalysts, the catalyst performance data can be presented under unified conditions, allowing for convincing comparisons between different catalysts and assisting in the understanding of structure–activity relationships as well as the search for new effective electrocatalysts.
(2) A thorough knowledge of the catalytic mechanism is still lacking. The reconstruction phenomenon of electrocatalysts during OER and HER has been discovered. The original electrocatalyst (so-called “pre-catalyst”) surface sites would undergo dynamic reconstruction and transform into real reactive species. Therefore, operando characterisation approaches will be an effective tool for future studies since they can identify the true active sites and offer information about the surface change of electrocatalysts in real time.
(3) Developing PGM-free catalysts with high electrocatalytic activity and excellent operation stability is still a challenge. The long-term chemical and structural durability in alkaline electrolytes is very low. Moreover, the low overpotential at more than 1000 mA cm−2 is far from satisfactory. The activity of electrocatalysts can be further improved by engineering morphologies, defects, interfaces, etc.
(4) Recently, significant improvements have been made in the research of ion conductive membranes for alkaline water electrolysis, especially in the hydroxide conductivity and alkali resistance, which greatly promote the development of alkaline water electrolysis. For PMs used in ALWE, they have the advantages of low price and good alkali resistance, but high hydrogen permeability and ohmic resistance limit their further development. To solve the bottleneck of the PMs, various ISMs with different molecular structures have been proposed, which can effectively alleviate the hydrogen penetration. However, the SIMs heavily rely on alkaline electrolytes, resulting in serious alkali corrosion of equipment. The recently proposed AEM water electrolysis technology can effectively reduce the concentration of the electrolyte, and can even directly use pure water as the electrolyte. Researchers have prepared many novel AEMs by molecular structural design. However, the problems of low hydroxide conductivity and poor chemical stability are still prominent. In short, ion conductive membranes should achieve high hydroxide conductivity, low hydrogen permeability, good alkaline stability and mechanical strength for achieving high-performance alkaline water electrolysis.
Although PGM-free electrocatalysts have shown promising electrocatalytic activity towards OER and HER evaluated in a standard three-electrode system, hardly any have been able to translate this superior performance into MEAs. Great efforts should be made to bridge the gap between half-cell studies and MEAs, which can be summarized as follows:
(1) The test conditions of the half-cell should close the gap. For example, the temperature and the alkaline electrolyte of commercial alkaline water electrolysis typically range from 50 to 90 °C and 30 wt% KOH, respectively, which have a significant impact on the catalytic activity and stability of electrocatalysts. In addition, to completely close the gap, new testing techniques could still be needed, such as integrating a reference electrode with the MEA.
(2) More research efforts at ionomer chemistry should be focused on the ionomer/electrocatalyst morphology. Most work to date has continued to circulate high-concentration (1.0–6.0 M) KOH electrolytes to avoid low electrolysis performance. Engineering alkaline ionomers with high IEC and stable molecular structure can promote pure-water-fed AEMWE in the future study.
(3) More research efforts should be devoted to the membrane/CL and CL/LGDL interfaces. Mass transport at these two interfaces is the bottle-neck issue for MEA performance and lifetime.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22278239; 21776154) and the National Key R & D Program of China (2022YFB2404903; 2020YFB1505602).
Notes and references
A. Slamersak, G. Kallis and D. W. O. Neill, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 6932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chatenet, B. G. Pollet, D. R. Dekel, F. Dionigi, J. Deseure, P. Millet, R. D. Braatz, M. Z. Bazant, M. Eikerling, I. Staffell, P. Balcombe, Y. Shao-Horn and H. Schafer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4583–4762 RSC .
M. Davis, A. Okunlola, G. Di Lullo, T. Giwa and A. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2023, 171, 112962 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yu, Y. Duan, X. Y. Feng, X. Yu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2007100 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chi and H. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vincent and D. Bessarabov, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1690–1704 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abbasi, B. P. Setzler, S. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, B. Pivovar, B. Tian, X. Chen, G. Wu and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805876 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Miller, K. Bouzek, J. Hnat, S. Loos, C. I. Bernäcker, T. Weißgärber, L. Röntzsch and J. Meier-Haack, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2114–2133 RSC .
C. Santoro, A. Lavacchi, P. Mustarelli, V. Di Noto, L. Elbaz, D. R. Dekel and F. Jaouen, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15, e202200027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Kong, J. Kim, S. Choi, F. Ciucci, Y. Hao, S. Yang, Z. Shao and J. Lim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154–9196 RSC .
M. Mandal, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 8, 36–45 CrossRef .

          G. Chisholm, T. Zhao and L. Cronin, Storing Energy,  2022, pp. 559–591 DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-824510-1.00015-5 .

          T. Smolinka, Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources,  2009, pp. 394–413 Search PubMed .

          T. Smolinka, H. Bergmann, J. Garche and M. Kusnezoff, Electrochemical Power Sources: Fundamentals, Systems, and Applications,  2022, pp. 83–164 DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-819424-9.00010-0 .
R. Phillips and C. W. Dunnill, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 100643–100651 RSC .
X. Wu and K. Scott, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12344–12351 RSC .
L. Xiao, S. Zhang, J. Pan, C. Yang, M. He, L. Zhuang and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7869–7871 RSC .
M. R. Kraglund, D. Aili, K. Jankova, E. Christensen, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3125–F3131 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, E. J. Park, W. Zhu, Q. Shi, Y. Zhou, H. Tian, Y. Lin, A. Serov, B. Zulevi, E. D. Baca, C. Fujimoto, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan, Z. Xu, Q. Xu, P. Wang and B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1882–1892 RSC .
C. A. C. S. D. M. F. Santos and J. L. Figueiredo, Quimera, 2013, 36, 1176–1193 Search PubMed .
M. Paidar, V. Fateev and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 737–756 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. A. P. Grimes, Chem. Eng. Prog., 1967, 63, 56–58 Search PubMed .
I. Vincent, E. C. Lee and H. M. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schauer, J. Hnát, L. Brožová, J. Žitka and K. Bouzek, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 473, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Jeong, Y. S. Park, J. Jeong, K.-B. Lee, D. Kim, K.-Y. Yoon, H.-S. Park and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 25070–25077 RSC .
E. López-Fernández, J. Gil-Rostra, C. Escudero, I. J. Villar-García, F. Yubero, A. de Lucas Consuegra and A. R. González-Elipe, J. Power Sources, 2021, 485, 136–144 CrossRef .
J. Hnát, M. Plevová, J. Žitka, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 547–555 CrossRef .
A. Carbone, S. C. Zignani, I. Gatto, S. Trocino and A. S. Aricò, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 9285–9292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Park, J. H. Lee, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, S. M. Park, W.-S. Choi, Y. Kim, J. Yang and S. M. Choi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 36–45 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Park, J. Jeong, Y. Noh, M. J. Jang, J. Lee, K. H. Lee, D. C. Lim, M. H. Seo, W. B. Kim, J. Yang and S. M. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120170 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Pushkareva, A. S. Pushkarev, S. A. Grigoriev, P. Modisha and D. G. Bessarabov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 26070–26079 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Jung, Y. S. Park, S. Woo, N. Kwon, Y. Xing, S. H. Oh, S. M. Choi, J. W. Han and B. Lim, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127670 CrossRef CAS .
E. López-Fernández, J. Gil-Rostra, J. P. Espinós, A. R. González-Elipe, F. Yubero and A. de Lucas-Consuegra, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 136–144 CrossRef .
X. Wang and R. G. H. Lammertink, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8401–8412 RSC .
K. Ham, S. Hong, S. Kang, K. Cho and J. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Park, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, S. M. Park, X. Wang, M. H. Seo, S. M. Choi and J. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2344–2349 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vincent, E. C. Lee and H. M. Kim, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 37429–37438 RSC .
C. C. Pavel, F. Cecconi, C. Emiliani, S. Santiccioli, A. Scaffidi, S. Catanorchi and M. Comotti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1378–1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Motealleh, Z. Liu, R. I. Masel, J. P. Sculley, Z. Richard Ni and L. Meroueh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3379–3386 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Vineesh, A. Sekar, S. Rajappa, S. Pal, S. Alwarappan and T. N. Narayanan, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 4295–4300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campagna Zignani, M. L. Faro, A. Carbone, C. Italiano, S. Trocino, G. Monforte and A. S. Aricò, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 413, 140078 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Jang, J. Yang, J. Lee, Y. S. Park, J. Jeong, S. M. Park, J.-Y. Jeong, Y. Yin, M.-H. Seo, S. M. Choi and K. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4290–4299 RSC .
Y. S. Park, J. Yang, J. Lee, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, W.-S. Choi, Y. Kim, Y. Yin, M. H. Seo, Z. Chen and S. M. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119276 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L. Wan, Y. Liao, P. Wang, K. Liu and B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23485–23496 RSC .
J. Lee, H. Jung, Y. S. Park, N. Kwon, S. Woo, N. C. S. Selvam, G. S. Han, H. S. Jung, P. J. Yoo, S. M. Choi, J. W. Han and B. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 294, 120246 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, V. A. Saveleva, M. J. Eslamibidgoli, D. Antipin, C. Bouillet, I. Biswas, A. S. Gago, S. S. Hosseiny, P. Gazdzicki, M. H. Eikerling, E. R. Savinova and K. A. Friedrich, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2221–2230 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Jeon, J. Lim, P. W. Kang, J. W. Lee, G. Kang and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 37179–37186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, M. H. Han, Y. J. Ko, B. K. Min, K. H. Chae and H. S. Oh, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, Z. Xu and B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Jung, Y. S. Park, S. Woo, J. Yang, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, N. Kwon, B. Lim, J. W. Han and S. M. Choi, Small, 2021, 17, e2100639 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Wang, Z. X. Lou, X. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Y. Zhao, K. Z. Sun, W. X. Li, J. Chen, H. Y. Yuan, M. Zhu, S. Dai, P. F. Liu and H. G. Yang, Small, 2022, 18, e2200303 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, M. R. Kraglund, A. K. Reumert, X. Ren, D. Aili and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17914–17922 RSC .
W. Guo, J. Kim, H. Kim, G. H. Han, H. W. Jang, S. Y. Kim and S. H. Ahn, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 889, 161674 CrossRef .
D. Guo, J. Chi, H. Yu, G. Jiang and Z. Shao, Energies, 2022, 15, 4645 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, S. Park, M.-J. Kim, H. Shin, S. Y. Kang, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, ACS Catal., 2021, 12, 135–145 CrossRef .
W. Jiang, A. Y. Faid, B. F. Gomes, I. Galkina, L. Xia, C. M. S. Lobo, M. Desmau, P. Borowski, H. Hartmann, A. Maljusch, A. Besmehn, C. Roth, S. Sunde, W. Lehnert and M. Shviro, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Klingenhof, P. Hauke, M. Kroschel, X. Wang, T. Merzdorf, C. Binninger, T. Ngo Thanh, B. Paul, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 3415–3422 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, F.-T. Li, Y.-W. Dong, B. Dong, F.-N. Dai, C.-G. Liu and Y.-M. Chai, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 315, 121571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chanda, K. Kannan, J. Gautam, M. M. Meshesha, S. G. Jang, V. A. Dinh and B. L. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 321, 122039 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ding, H. Lee, Z. Li, J. Du, L. Wang, D. Chen and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2023, 4, 2200130 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xia, W. Jiang, H. Hartmann, J. Mayer, W. Lehnert and M. Shviro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 19397–19408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Devarayapalli, J. Lee, S. Kang, S. Moon, S. V. P. Vattikuti, J. Lee and K. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2022, 527, 231151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Shen, X. Liu, B. Ning, C. Shi, L. Pan, X. Zhang, Z.-F. Huang and J.-J. Zou, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1732–1741 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, G. Wang, A. Belharsa, J. Ge, W. Xing and Y. Yang, Small Methods, 2019, 4, 1900632 CrossRef .
M. Najibah, E. Tsoy, H. Khalid, Y. Chen, Q. Li, C. Bae, J. Hnát, M. Plevová, K. Bouzek, J. H. Jang, H. S. Park and D. Henkensmeier, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 640, 119832 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. Kim, H. Kim, S. Hong, H. Kim, S. Y. Kim and S. H. Ahn, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 24, 100994 CrossRef CAS .
F. Razmjooei, A. Farooqui, R. Reissner, A. S. Gago, S. A. Ansar and K. A. Friedrich, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3951–3960 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Weissbach, R. Reissner, A. Ansar, A. S. Gago, S. Holdcroft and K. A. Friedrich, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7903–7912 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhiani, F. Jalili and S. Kamali, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 26563–26574 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Li, G. Zhang, H. Huang, W. T. Lu, F. F. Cao and Z. G. Shao, Small, 2020, 16, e2005184 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Niaz, J.-Y. Park and H.-T. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 31550–31562 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Mandal, K. Singh and V. K. Shahi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 8611–8620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, Q. Lv, G. Li, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 486–496 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. Kim, H. Kim and S. H. Ahn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 19789–19801 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, S. Wang, Y. Li, C. Jia, Z. Su, D. Hao, B. J. Ni, Q. Zhang and C. Zhao, Small, 2022, 18, e2204758 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, M. Sun, Q. Wen, S. Wang, S. Han, L. Huang, G. Cheng, Y. Liu and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10209–10218 RSC .
Z. Wei, M. Guo and Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 322, 122101 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, X. Liu, Z. He, Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Z.-F. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Fang and J.-J. Zou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 9956–9968 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. Kim, H. Kim and S. H. Ahn, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 45, 1918–1931 CrossRef .
L. Wan, Z. Xu, P. Wang, P.-F. Liu, Q. Xu and B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133942 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen and X. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002285 CrossRef CAS .
E. López-Fernández, C. Gómez-Sacedón, J. Gil-Rostra, J. P. Espinós, A. R. González-Elipe, F. Yubero and A. de Lucas-Consuegra, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133774 CrossRef .
E. López-Fernández, C. Gómez-Sacedón, J. Gil-Rostra, J. P. Espinós, J. J. Brey, A. R. González-Elipe, A. de Lucas-Consuegra and F. Yubero, Renewable Energy, 2022, 197, 1183–1191 CrossRef .
M. Bhushan, M. Mani, A. K. Singh, A. B. Panda and V. K. Shahi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17089–17097 RSC .
F.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu, Z. Adler and H. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1704–1731 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, B. Ruqia, Y. Park, H. J. Kim, H. S. Oh, S. I. Choi and K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2003188 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Du, J. Huang, C. Wu, Y. Sun, G. Zou, C. Yang and J. Xiong, Small, 2019, 15, e1901980 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Frydendal, E. A. Paoli, B. P. Knudsen, B. Wickman, P. Malacrida, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 2075–2081 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
H. Wang, K. H. L. Zhang, J. P. Hofmann, V. A. de la Peña O'Shea and F. E. Oropeza, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19465–19488 RSC .
D. Chanda, J. Hnát, T. Bystron, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 247–258 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Jang, S. H. Yang, M. G. Park, J. Jeong, M. S. Cha, S.-H. Shin, K. H. Lee, Z. Bai, Z. Chen, J. Y. Lee and S. M. Choi, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 2576–2583 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, G. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Zou, S. Zang and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, L. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Liu, S. Zhao and Z. Q. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114696 CAS .
T. Ling, D. Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Mao, X. W. Du, Z. Hu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ji, L. Fan, L. Tao, Y. Sun, M. Li, G. Yang, T. Q. Tran, S. Ramakrishna and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13840–13844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, Z. Wei, C.-L. Dong, J. Ma, S. Shen, Y. Li and S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2563–2569 RSC .
M. Zhang, M. de Respinis and H. Frei, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bergmann, E. Martinez-Moreno, D. Teschner, P. Chernev, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araujo, T. Reier, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Burke, S. Zou, L. J. Enman, J. E. Kellon, C. A. Gabor, E. Pledger and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3737–3742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. Kundu and S. Noda, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105514 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, Z. Xu, Q. Cao, Y. Liao, B. Wang and K. Liu, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 4535–4543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, K. Jiang, H. Wang and S. Hu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 530–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Cui and G. Qian, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139686 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan and P. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 8356–8376 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, W. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang and W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, X. Zhang, F. Zhan, Y. Tao, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O’Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703585 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, L. Yu, Y. Chen, X. F. Lu, S. Gao and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1906432 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, J. F. Yang, B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 172–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chi, H. Yu, G. Jiang, J. Jia, B. Qin, B. Yi and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3397–3401 RSC .
H. Koshikawa, H. Murase, T. Hayashi, K. Nakajima, H. Mashiko, S. Shiraishi and Y. Tsuji, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 170334 Search PubMed .
Y.-N. Zhou, F.-L. Wang, S.-Y. Dou, Z.-N. Shi, B. Dong, W.-L. Yu, H.-Y. Zhao, F.-G. Wang, J.-F. Yu and Y.-M. Chai, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131643 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, J. Xiao, C. Huang, J. Zhou, M. Qiu, Y. Yu, Z. Ren, C. W. Chu and J. C. Yu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2022, 119, e2202382119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, N. Yang, Y. Yang, Q. Wang, X. Xie, D. Sun-Waterhouse, L. Shang, T. Zhang and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 24612–24619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Wu, J. Yang, T. X. Tu, W. Q. Li, P. F. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. F. Li, J. T. Li and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26829–26836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, R. Lian, J. Wang, S. He, S. P. Jiang and Z. Rui, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135395 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900881 CrossRef .
J. He, X. Zhou, P. Xu and J. Sun, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, J. Huang, H. Wan, F. Chen, Y. Lin, X. Xu, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 32, 93–104 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. Gong, Y. Liang, J. Feng, J. E. Kim, H. Wang, G. Hong, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zheng, K. Gong, Y. Zhou, W. Chen, Z. Pan, G. Liu and L. Lang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 35680–35688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Wei Ma, C. Wang, J. Liang, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wen, K. Yang, D. Huang, G. Cheng, X. Ai, Y. Liu, J. Fang, H. Li, L. Yu and T. Zhai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102353 CrossRef CAS .
F.-L. Wang, X. Yu Zhang, J.-C. Zhou, Z.-N. Shi, B. Dong, J.-Y. Xie, Y.-W. Dong, J.-F. Yu and Y.-M. Chai, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 2068–2080 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Guo, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Zhao and R. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18989–18999 RSC .
L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1820–1827 RSC .
M. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. He and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5320–5363 RSC .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, M. Xu, A. Chen, Z. Ni, O. Akdim, T. Wagberg, X. Huang and G. Hu, ACS Nano, 2023, 17, 636–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, J. Sun, S. Lee, J. S. Lee and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 244–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mabayoje, A. Shoola, B. R. Wygant and C. B. Mullins, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Liu, W. Li, L. Gu, H. Liu, P. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Zhang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1139–1152 CAS .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, C. Chen, R. Fan and M. Shen, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang and S. Shen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1855–1864 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, W. Du, W. Zhou, C. Wang, S. Lu, S. Lu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22470–22474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-X. Zhao, J.-N. Liu, C. Wang, J. Wang, L. Song, B.-Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3257–3264 RSC .
J. Mohammed-Ibrahim and X. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 34, 111–160 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Cao, X. Wu and K. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9524–9528 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ahn, B.-S. Lee, I. Choi, S. J. Yoo, H.-J. Kim, E. Cho, D. Henkensmeier, S. W. Nam, S.-K. Kim and J. H. Jang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154–155, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Jang, J. Yang, J. Jeong, G. H. Kim, C. Y. Kwon, N. V. Myung, K. H. Lee and S. M. Choi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 12508–12513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, S. Gao, J. Su, Z. Lun, G. Xia, J. Chen, R. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 469–479 CrossRef .
S. H. Park, D. T. To and N. V. Myung, Applied Catalysis A: General, 2023, 651, 119013 CrossRef CAS .
A. Faid, A. Oyarce Barnett, F. Seland and S. Sunde, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 614 CrossRef .
M. R. Kraglund, M. Carmo, G. Schiller, S. A. Ansar, D. Aili, E. Christensen and J. O. Jensen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3313–3318 RSC .
L. Yu, I. K. Mishra, Y. Xie, H. Zhou, J. Sun, J. Zhou, Y. Ni, D. Luo, F. Yu, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 492–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 RSC .
Y. Luo, L. Tang, U. Khan, Q. Yu, H. M. Cheng, X. Zou and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 269 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, R. Xie, Y. Luo, Z. Cui, Q. Yu, Z. Gao, Z. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Kang, S. Ge, S. Li, X. Gao, G. Chai, L. Liu and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 6382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-R. Liu, X. Shang, W.-K. Gao, B. Dong, X. Li, X.-H. Li, J.-C. Zhao, Y.-M. Chai, Y.-Q. Liu and C.-G. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2885–2896 RSC .
W.-H. Hu, X. Shang, J. Xue, B. Dong, J.-Q. Chi, G.-Q. Han, Y.-R. Liu, X. Li, K.-L. Yan, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2088–2095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, F. Li, Y. Sun, X. Zhang and L. Tang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 291, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, L. Wan, Y. Lin and B. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 16566–16574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. P. Setzler, S. Rojas-Carbonell, C. Ben Yehuda, A. Amel, M. Page, L. Wang, K. Hu, L. Shi, S. Gottesfeld, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, M. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Liu and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 663, 121005 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, Y. Huang, L. Liu, X. Hu, K. Geng, Q. Ju, M. Liu, J. Bi, S. Luo and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 643, 120042 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. Huang, X. Hu, B. Hu, M. Liu, J. Bi, L. Liu and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2023, 668, 121186 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Diaz, R. E. Coppola, G. C. Abuin, R. Escudero-Cid, D. Herranz and P. Ocón, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 535, 45–55 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, M. K. Hansen, R. F. Renzaho, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 447, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, M. R. Kraglund, J. Tavacoli, C. Chatzichristodoulou and J. O. Jensen, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 598, 117674 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Diaz, J. Hnát, N. Heredia, M. M. Bruno, F. A. Viva, M. Paidar, H. R. Corti, K. Bouzek and G. C. Abuin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 312, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
G. Borisov, H. Penchev, K. Maksimova-Dimitrova, F. Ublekov, E. Lefterova, V. Sinigersky and E. Slavcheva, Mater. Lett., 2019, 240, 144–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. A. Trisno, A. Dayan, S. J. Lee, F. Egert, M. Gerle, M. R. Kraglund, J. O. Jensen, D. Aili, A. Roznowska, A. Michalak, H. S. Park, F. Razmjooei, S.-A. Ansar and D. Henkensmeier, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4362–4375 RSC .
D. Aili, A. G. Wright, M. R. Kraglund, K. Jankova, S. Holdcroft and J. O. Jensen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5055–5066 RSC .
H. I. Lee, M. Mehdi, S. K. Kim, H. S. Cho, M. J. Kim, W. C. Cho, Y. W. Rhee and C. H. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 616, 118541 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, J. H. Lee, C. Lee, H.-S. Cho, M. Kim, S.-K. Kim, J. H. Joo, W.-C. Cho and C.-H. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cartagena, F. E. Bedoya-Lora and J. A. Calderón, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 044501 CrossRef .
C. Karacan, F. P. Lohmann-Richters, M. Shviro, G. P. Keeley, M. Müller, M. Carmo and D. Stolten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 054502 CrossRef .
M. I. Zappia, S. Bellani, Y. Zuo, M. Ferri, F. Drago, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, Front Chem, 2022, 10, 1045212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. H. Han, J. Yuk, S. Kim, Y. Song, S. So, K. T. Lee and T.-H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2022, 524, 231059 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, X. Jiang, J. Hnát, A. Michalcova, I. Biswas, R. Reissner, V. Kyriakou, F. Razmjooei, H. Liao, K. Bouzek and S.-A. Ansar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 23863–23873 RSC .
H. Li, N. Yu, F. Gellrich, A. K. Reumert, M. R. Kraglund, J. Dong, D. Aili and J. Yang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 633, 119418 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. C. Tinh, V. D. Thuc, Y. Jeon, G.-Y. Gu and D. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 660, 120903 CrossRef CAS .
K. Min, Y. Lee, Y. Choi, O. J. Kwon and T.-H. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 664, 121071 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, L. Gao, L. Hu, N. A. Qaisrani, X. Yan, W. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Ruan and G. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 581, 283–292 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Qiao, S. Liu, L. Liu and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 653, 120558 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Bai, Z. Liu, S. Miao, J. Pan, L. Shen, Y. Shi and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2023, 665, 121135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Hu, B. Hu, L. Liu and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 642, 119966 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lim, I. Jeong, J. Choi, G. Shin, J. Kim, T.-H. Kim and T. Park, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2023, 610, 155601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kang, J. E. Park, G. Y. Jang, O.-H. Kim, O. J. Kwon, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 9115–9126 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lv, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Z. Huang, Y. Zhou, W. Song, J. Hao and Z. Shao, Int. J. Energy Res., 2022, 46, 11892–11902 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Cha, J. E. Park, S. Kim, S.-H. Han, S.-H. Shin, S. H. Yang, T.-H. Kim, D. M. Yu, S. So, Y. T. Hong, S. J. Yoon, S.-G. Oh, S. Y. Kang, O.-H. Kim, H. S. Park, B. Bae, Y.-E. Sung, Y.-H. Cho and J. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3633–3645 RSC .
R. Soni, S. Miyanishi, H. Kuroki and T. Yamaguchi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 4, 1053–1058 CrossRef .
X. Yan, X. Yang, X. Su, L. Gao, J. Zhao, L. Hu, M. Di, T. Li, X. Ruan and G. He, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228805 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meena, P. Thangavel, D. S. Jeong, A. N. Singh, A. Jana, H. Im, D. A. Nguyen and K. S. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 306, 121127 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Tong, K. Li and P. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 628, 306–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Sekhar, B. Ramulu, M.-H. Han, M. Nagaraju, S. J. Arbaz, H.-S. Oh and J. S. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 14163–14173 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, H. E. Bae, M. Karuppannan, K. M. Oh, O. J. Kwon, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 109, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, H. J. Choi, S. Y. Kang, G. Y. Jang, O. H. Kim, M. Karuppannan, Y. E. Sung, O. J. Kwon and Y. H. Cho, Int. J. Energy Res., 2022, 46, 16670–16678 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, Y.-E. Sung and C. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20517–20524 RSC .
J. E. Park, S. Y. Kang, S.-H. Oh, J. K. Kim, M. S. Lim, C.-Y. Ahn, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gatto, A. Caprì, C. Lo Vecchio, S. Zignani, A. Patti and V. Baglio, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.04.176 .
A. Kiessling, J. C. Fornaciari, G. Anderson, X. Peng, A. Gerstmayr, M. R. Gerhardt, S. McKinney, A. Serov, Y. S. Kim, B. Zulevi, A. Z. Weber and N. Danilovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 084512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiessling, J. C. Fornaciari, G. Anderson, X. Peng, A. Gerstmayr, M. Gerhardt, S. McKinney, A. Serov, A. Z. Weber, Y. S. Kim, B. Zulevi and N. Danilovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 024510 CrossRef .
A. Khataee, A. Shirole, P. Jannasch, A. Krüger and A. Cornell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 16061–16070 RSC .
N. Lee, D. T. Duong and D. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 271, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, Y. Shi, L. Liu, Y. Huang and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7717–7727 RSC .
J. Schauer, J. Žitka, Z. Pientka, J. Křivčík, J. Hnát and K. Bouzek, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42581 CrossRef .
D. Chanda, J. Hnát, M. Paidar, J. Schauer and K. Bouzek, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghoshal, B. S. Pivovar and S. M. Alia, J. Power Sources, 2021, 488, 229433 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan, J. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Xu, M. Pang, P. Wang and B. Wang, Small, 2022, 18, e2200380 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Kang, D. Li, M. Pak, S. M. Alia, C. Fujimoto, G. Bender, Y. S. Kim and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 054522 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sankar, S. Roby, H. Kuroki, S. Miyanishi, T. Tamaki, G. M. Anilkumar and T. Yamaguchi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2023, 11, 854–865 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, S. Y. Paek, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S. Y. Lee and Y. M. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6338–6348 RSC .
Z. Feng, P. O. Esteban, G. Gupta, D. A. Fulton and M. Mamlouk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 37137–37151 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cossar, A. O. Barnett, F. Seland, R. Safari, G. A. Botton and E. A. Baranova, J. Power Sources, 2021, 514, 230563 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Faid, A. O. Barnett, F. Seland and S. Sunde, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 371, 137837 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Choi, M. J. Jang, Y. S. Park, K. H. Lee, J. Y. Lee, M. H. Seo and S. M. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38663–38668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, M. H. Han, U. Lee, K. H. Chae, H. Kim, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, C. H. Choi and H.-S. Oh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 14071–14081 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, K. Scott and M. Mamlouk, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 387–396 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. Mardle and S. Holdcroft, J. Power Sources, 2022, 550, 232134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M. Mandal, K. Groenhout, G. McCool, H. M. Tee, B. Zulevi and P. A. Kohl, J. Power Sources, 2022, 536, 231495 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, K. Selvakumar, N. Lakshminarasimhan, S. M. Senthil Kumar and M. Mamlouk, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koch, J. Disch, S. K. Kilian, Y. Han, L. Metzler, A. Tengattini, L. Helfen, M. Schulz, M. Breitwieser and S. Vierrath, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 20778–20784 RSC .
C. V. M. Inocêncio, F. Fouda-Onana, J. Rousseau, N. Guignard, T. Napporn, C. Morais and K. B. Kokoh, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 10396–10401 CrossRef .
B. Mayerhöfer, F. D. Speck, M. Hegelheimer, M. Bierling, D. Abbas, D. McLaughlin, S. Cherevko, S. Thiele and R. Peach, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 4304–4314 CrossRef .
P. Fortin, T. Khoza, X. Cao, S. Y. Martinsen, A. Oyarce Barnett and S. Holdcroft, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227814 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koch, L. Metzler, S. K. Kilian, P. A. Heizmann, F. Lombeck, M. Breitwieser and S. Vierrath, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2023, 7, 2200332 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng and T. S. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meena, P. Thangavel, A. S. Nissimagoudar, A. Narayan Singh, A. Jana, D. Sol Jeong, H. Im and K. S. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132623 CrossRef CAS .
J. Parrondo, C. G. Arges, M. Niedzwiecki, E. B. Anderson, K. E. Ayers and V. Ramani, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9875–9879 RSC .
D. Xu, M. B. Stevens, M. R. Cosby, S. Z. Oener, A. M. Smith, L. J. Enman, K. E. Ayers, C. B. Capuano, J. N. Renner, N. Danilovic, Y. Li, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 7–15 CrossRef .
C. Busacca, S. C. Zignani, A. Di Blasi, O. Di Blasi, M. Lo Faro, V. Antonucci and A. S. Aricò, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 20987–20996 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thangavel, M. Ha, S. Kumaraguru, A. Meena, A. N. Singh, A. M. Harzandi and K. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3447–3458 RSC .
L. Zeng, T. S. Zhao, R. H. Zhang and J. B. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 87, 66–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Parrondo and V. Ramani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1015–F1020 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, S. Y. Lee, T. K. Lee, H.-J. Kim and Y. M. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 611, 118355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and K. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3123–3129 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 124–129 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yue, J. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Xia, P. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Kong, X. Wang, Y. Yan and B. Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6546–6553 RSC .
F. Razmjooei, T. Morawietz, E. Taghizadeh, E. Hadjixenophontos, L. Mues, M. Gerle, B. D. Wood, C. Harms, A. S. Gago, S. A. Ansar and K. A. Friedrich, Joule, 2021, 5, 1776–1799 CrossRef CAS .
N. U. Hassan, Y. Zheng, P. A. Kohl and W. E. Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 044526 CrossRef .
A. R. Motz, D. Li, A. Keane, L. D. Manriquez, E. J. Park, S. Maurya, H. Chung, C. Fujimoto, J. Jeon, M. K. Pagels, C. Bae, K. E. Ayers and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22670–22683 RSC .
G. A. Lindquist, S. Z. Oener, R. Krivina, A. R. Motz, A. Keane, C. Capuano, K. E. Ayers and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 51917–51924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Koch, P. A. Heizmann, S. K. Kilian, B. Britton, S. Holdcroft, M. Breitwieser and S. Vierrath, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15744–15754 RSC .
J. Xiao, A. M. Oliveira, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Wang, J. Wang, B. P. Setzler and Y. Yan, ACS Catal., 2020, 11, 264–270 CrossRef .
E. J. Park, C. B. Capuano, K. E. Ayers and C. Bae, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, S. Yu, D. Li, L. Ding, W. Wang, Z. Xie, E. J. Park, C. Fujimoto, D. A. Cullen, Y. S. Kim and F. Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 50957–50964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, C. Lee, J. H. Lee, S. K. Kim, H. S. Cho, M. Kim, W. C. Cho, J. H. Joo and C. H. Kim, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Burnat, M. Schlupp, A. Wichser, B. Lothenbach, M. Gorbar, A. Züttel and U. F. Vogt, J. Power Sources, 2015, 291, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Liao, C. Li and Z. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23774–23782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, A. A. Armentrout, J. Li, H. L. Tekinalp, J. Nanda and S. Ozcan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13350–13356 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Yu, D. Xing, W. Lu, Z. Shao and B. Yi, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 421–422, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, R. Ma, X. Bai, K. Wang, H. Zhu and T. Sasaki, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602629 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Konovalova, H. Kim, S. Kim, A. Lim, H. S. Park, M. R. Kraglund, D. Aili, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and D. Henkensmeier, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 564, 653–662 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Coppola, D. Herranz, R. Escudero-Cid, N. Ming, N. B. D’Accorso, P. Ocón and G. C. Abuin, Renewable Energy, 2020, 157, 71–82 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Tham and D. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 581, 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marinkas, I. Struźyńska-Piron, Y. Lee, A. Lim, H. S. Park, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, J. Kim, A. Maljusch, O. Conradi and D. Henkensmeier, Polymer, 2018, 145, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, C. Im, I. Spanos, K. Ham, A. Lim, T. Jacob, R. Schlogl and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202214541 CAS .
A. Y. Faid and S. Sunde, Mater. Lett., 2022, 324, 132738 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen and Y. M. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2021, 113, 101345 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, T. Ban, Y. Wang, X. Wang and X. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2023, 638, 349–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Park, C. G. Arges, H. Xu and Y. S. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 3447–3457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, G. He and F. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 7348–7360 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Marino and K. D. Kreuer, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 513–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Park, S. Maurya, M. R. Hibbs, C. H. Fujimoto, K.-D. Kreuer and Y. S. Kim, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 5419–5428 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, H. H. Wang, S. P. Kim, H. M. Kim, W. H. Lee, C. Hu, J. Y. Bae, E. S. Sim, Y. C. Chung, J. H. Jang, S. J. Yoo, Y. Zhuang and Y. M. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Wright, J. Fan, B. Britton, T. Weissbach, H.-F. Lee, E. A. Kitching, T. J. Peckham and S. Holdcroft, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2130–2142 RSC .
J. Fan, S. Willdorf-Cohen, E. M. Schibli, Z. Paula, W. Li, T. J. G. Skalski, A. T. Sergeenko, A. Hohenadel, B. J. Frisken, E. Magliocca, W. E. Mustain, C. E. Diesendruck, D. R. Dekel and S. Holdcroft, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2306 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, M. J. Kim, M. Brown and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J.-W. Lee and B. N. Popov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 5850–5865 CrossRef CAS .
G.-C. Chen, T. H. Wondimu, H.-C. Huang, K.-C. Wang and C.-H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10174–10181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C.-Y. Wang and K. S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3965–3975 CrossRef CAS .
N. U. Hassan, E. Motyka, J. Kweder, P. Ganesan, B. Brechin, B. Zulevi, H. R. Colón-Mercado, P. A. Kohl and W. E. Mustain, J. Power Sources, 2023, 555, 232371 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, S. Z. Oener, G. Lindquist, H. Jiang, C. Li and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 305–312 CrossRef .
J. Mo, Z. Kang, S. T. Retterer, D. A. Cullen, T. J. Toops, J. B. G. Jr, M. M. Mench and F.-Y. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600690 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Ahn, J. E. Park, S. Kim, O. H. Kim, W. Hwang, M. Her, S. Y. Kang, S. Park, O. J. Kwon, H. S. Park, Y. H. Cho and Y. E. Sung, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 15075–15140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lim, H.-j Kim, D. Henkensmeier, S. Jong Yoo, J. Young Kim, S. Young Lee, Y.-E. Sung, J. H. Jang and H. S. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 76, 410–418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mo, Z. Kang, S. T. Retterer, D. A. Cullen, T. J. Toops, J. B. G. Jr, M. M. Mench and F.-Y. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600690 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Y. Faid and S. Sunde, Energy Technol., 2022, 10, 2200506 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Cho, H.-Y. Park, H. J. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Lim, D. Henkensmeier, S. J. Yoo, J. Y. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. S. Park and J. H. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Cho, H.-Y. Park, S. Choe, S. J. Yoo, J. Y. Kim, H.-J. Kim, D. Henkensmeier, S. Y. Lee, Y.-E. Sung, H. S. Park and J. H. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Faid, L. Xie, A. O. Barnett, F. Seland, D. Kirk and S. Sunde, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 28272–28284 CrossRef CAS .
M. Plevová, J. Hnát, J. Žitka, L. Pavlovec, M. Otmar and K. Bouzek, J. Power Sources, 2022, 539, 231476 CrossRef .
J. Hnát, M. Plevova, R. A. Tufa, J. Zitka, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17493–17504 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1806326 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102074 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thangavel, G. Kim and K. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14043–14051 RSC .
H. Li, X. Han, W. Zhao, A. Azhar, S. Jeong, D. Jeong, J. Na, S. Wang, J. Yu and Y. Yamauchi, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 1788–1824 RSC .
J. Kim, H. Kim, G. H. Han, S. Hong, J. Park, J. Bang, S. Y. Kim and S. H. Ahn, Exploration, 2022, 2, 20210077 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Kim, W. Guo, G. H. Han, S. Hong, J. Park, H. W. Jang, S. Y. Kim and S. H. Ahn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 2093–2102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Yu, Z. Wang, X. Gong, Z. Guo and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9488–9513 RSC .
J. Chi, H. Yu, B. Qin, L. Fu, J. Jia, B. Yi and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 464–471 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ouyang, X. Wang, C. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Wu, Z. Ma, S. Dou and S. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, N. Cheng, Z. Pu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9351–9355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Xu, S. Zhuo, J. Zhang and B. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2376–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, T. Wu, Y. Dai and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5298–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5670–5703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Wu, Z. Kou, N. Song, G. Nie, C. Wang, F. Verpoort and S. Mu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, K. Ham and J. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 353, 136521 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, L. Liao, Q. Bian, F. Yu, D. Li, J. Zeng, L. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Tang, H. Zhou and Z. Ren, Small, 2022, 18, e2105642 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Bu, Z. Mao, Y. Bu, Q. Quan, Y. Meng, Z. Lai, D. Chen, P. Xie, H. Li, C. Liu, X. Wang, S. Yip, J. Lu and J. C. Ho, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 320, 121995 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahn, Y. S. Park, S. Lee, J. Yang, J. Pyo, J. Lee, G. H. Kim, S. M. Choi and S. K. Seol, Sci. Rep., 2022, 12, 346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marquez, K. Kawashima, Y. J. Son, R. Rose, L. A. Smith, N. Miller, O. A. Carrasco Jaim, H. Celio and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 42153–42170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandrasekaran, B. Yao, T. Liu, W. Xiao, Y. Song, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, Y. Li and M. A. Worsley, Materials Horizons, 2018, 5, 1166–1175 RSC .
T. Kou, S. Wang, R. Shi, T. Zhang, S. Chiovoloni, J. Q. Lu, W. Chen, M. A. Worsley, B. C. Wood, S. E. Baker, E. B. Duoss, R. Wu, C. Zhu and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002955 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Gong, S. Deng, T. Zhao, T. Shen, J. Zhang and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2009032 CrossRef .
X. Liu, X. Guo, M. Gong, T. Zhao, J. Zhang, Y. Zhu and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23188–23198 RSC .
P. Wang, Y. Lin, Q. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Wan, Y. Xia and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 9022–9031 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. Li, Y. Shen, W. Jiao, J. Wang, Y. Zou and X. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121605 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kojima, K. Nagasawa, N. Todoroki, Y. Ito, T. Matsui and R. Nakajima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2023, 48, 4572–4593 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stiber, H. Balzer, A. Wierhake, F. J. Wirkert, J. Roth, U. Rost, M. Brodmann, J. K. Lee, A. Bazylak, W. Waiblinger, A. S. Gago and K. A. Friedrich, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Leng, G. Chen, A. J. Mendoza, T. B. Tighe, M. A. Hickner and C. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9054–9057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lei, K. Yang, G. Wang, G. Wang, J. Lu, L. Xiao and L. Zhuang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 16725–16733 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, I. Matanovic, A. S. Lee, E. J. Park, C. Fujimoto, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9696–9701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pandiarajan, L. John Berchmans and S. Ravichandran, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34100–34108 RSC .
R. A. Krivina, G. A. Lindquist, S. R. Beaudoin, T. N. Stovall, W. L. Thompson, L. P. Twight, D. Marsh, J. Grzyb, K. Fabrizio, J. E. Hutchison and S. W. Boettcher, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2203033 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Krivina, G. A. Lindquist, M. C. Yang, A. K. Cook, C. H. Hendon, A. R. Motz, C. Capuano, K. E. Ayers, J. E. Hutchison and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18261–18274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, M. Pang, J. Le, Z. Xu, H. Zhou, Q. Xu and B. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 7956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Breitwieser, M. Klingele, S. Vierrath, R. Zengerle and S. Thiele, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701257 CrossRef .
W. E. Mustain, M. Chatenet, M. Page and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2805–2838 RSC .
H. Zhao, L. Liu, R. Vellacheri and Y. Lei, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700188 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, R. Wang, P. Sun, Z. Xiang and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19426–19433 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Xing, R. Yang, T. Wen, D. Jiang, W. Shi and S. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29253–29263 CAS .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. J. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
J. Zhang, K. Zhang, X. Liang, W. Yu, X. Ge, M. A. Shehzad, Z. Ge, Z. Yang, L. Wu and T. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 327–337 RSC .
Y. Kim, Y. Wang, A. France-Lanord, Y. Wang, Y. M. Wu, S. Lin, Y. Li, J. C. Grossman and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18152–18159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, N. Xie, J. Xue, M. Li, C. Zheng, J. Zhang, Y. Qin, Y. Yin, D. R. Dekel and M. D. Guiver, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 329–339 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Y. Yang, H. Wu, G. He, Z. Xu, Y. Kong, L. Cao, B. Shi, Z. Zhang, C. Tongsh, K. Jiao, K. Zhu and Z. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2001284 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, Z.-Y. Yu, X.-L. Zhang, Y.-R. Zheng, Y. Duan, Q. Gao, R. Wu, B. Sun, M.-R. Gao, G. Wang and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7537–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, P. Wang, L. Wan, Z. Xu, M. Z. Sultana and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 19448–19458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, N. Yang, C. Yang, X. Zhu, Y. Jiang, X. Shen, C. Li and Q. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118780 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Yue, F. Zhang, H. Zhao, Q. Cheng, G. Wang, J. Xu, C. Chen, Z. Zou, Z. Dou and H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 9434–9440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Cha, J. E. Park, S. Kim, S.-H. Shin, S. H. Yang, S. J. Lee, T.-H. Kim, D. M. Yu, S. So, K. M. Oh, Y.-E. Sung, Y.-H. Cho and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9693–9706 RSC .
C. G. Arges, Y. Kambe, H. S. Suh, L. E. Ocola and P. F. Nealey, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1377–1389 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Lai, Y. Z. Zhuo, C. X. Lin, Q. G. Zhang, A. M. Zhu, M. L. Ye and Q. L. Liu, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 502, 94–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Li, W. Chen, B. Pang, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, X. Wu, F. Cui and G. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 49840–49849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ge, X. Liang, L. Ding, J. Hou, J. Miao, B. Wu, Z. Yang and T. Xu, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 573, 595–601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, L. Liu, J. Liao, Y. Shen and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11317–11326 RSC .
L. Zhu, X. Peng, S. L. Shang, M. T. Kwasny, T. J. Zimudzi, X. Yu, N. Saikia, J. Pan, Z. K. Liu, G. N. Tew, W. E. Mustain, M. Yandrasits and M. A. Hickner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902059 CrossRef .
L. Liu, X. Chu, J. Liao, Y. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Ge, M. A. Hickner and N. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 435–446 RSC .
Y. Zhu, L. Ding, X. Liang, M. A. Shehzad, L. Wang, X. Ge, Y. He, L. Wu, J. R. Varcoe and T. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3472–3479 RSC .
W. Chen, T. Li, X. Yan, X. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, F. Zhang, S. Zhang and G. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 629, 119293 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, X. Wang, T. Li, X. Yan, X. Wu, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. Zhang and G. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 640, 119815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. Guan, K. Li and S. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15138–15144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, X. Deng, X. Dong, Y. Hong, Q. Zhang and Q. Liu, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 619, 118806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, P. Li, N. Zhang and S. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7146–7154 RSC .
Z. Kang, Y. Chen, H. Wang, S. M. Alia, B. S. Pivovar and G. Bender, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 2335–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Joseph, J. Büsselmann, C. Harms, D. Henkensmeier, M. J. Larsen, A. Dyck, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. W. Nam, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 520, 723–730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Klingele, M. Breitwieser, R. Zengerle and S. Thiele, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11239–11245 RSC .
P. Holzapfel, M. Bühler, C. Van Pham, F. Hegge, T. Böhm, D. McLaughlin, M. Breitwieser and S. Thiele, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 110, 106640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, M. Her, S. Kim, J. H. Jang, J. E. Chae, J. Choi, M. Choi, S. M. Kim, H. J. Kim, Y. H. Cho, Y. E. Sung and S. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34805–34811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schuler, J. M. Ciccone, B. Krentscher, F. Marone, C. Peter, T. J. Schmidt and F. N. Büchi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903216 CrossRef .
X. Peng, P. Satjaritanun, Z. Taie, L. Wiles, A. Keane, C. Capuano, I. V. Zenyuk and N. Danilovic, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2102950 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Lei Wan
	Lei Wan has been learning in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, China, since his postgraduate study from 2018. And currently, he is a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Baoguo Wang, and focuses on the synthesis of polymer membranes and electrode materials for alkaline water electrolysis.

Ziang Xu
	Ziang Xu is now a PhD candidate in Chemical engineering at Tsinghua University in China. He received his Bachelor’s degree of Chemical engineering from Tianjin university. In 2009, he was supported with a visiting scholar foundation on aqueous organic flow battery program at Harvard University. He received Gold Award for iGEM competition and Asia-Pacific Regional Liaison from AIChE in 2016 & 2018. His research works have been published in high impact journals, e.g. Nature Communications, Energy environmental science, Nano letters, Journal of material chemistry A. His interests are currently focusing on material design for Energy Storage & Conversion.

Baoguo Wang
	Prof. Baoguo Wang received his BS and MS degrees in chemical engineering from Tsinghua University in 1987 and 1993, respectively, and obtained PhD from Tokyo University in 2000. His current interest focuses on developing advanced materials and device for electricity conversion and storage, including hydrogen generation with AEM water electrolysis, and vanadium flow battery (VFB) for electricity storage. He has published over 350 papers and presentations; 29 patents have been issued and licensing declaration.

Broader context
Global warming and environmental pollution have attracted great attention worldwide, and thus developing large-scale renewable energy is urgent and important. The advantage of hydrogen as an energy carrier is not only its high energy density, but also that hydrogen and electricity can be interconverted by water electrolysis technology. Alkaline water electrolysis has been considered as a promising hydrogen production approach with large-scale and low-cost production. The sandwich-structured membrane electrode assembly is the site for electrochemical reactions and gas/liquid mass transport during the water electrolysis process, which is the critical factor that determines the performance and durability of alkaline water electrolysis. To realize the large-scale industrialization of alkaline water electrolysis, the key components and design strategies of the membrane electrode assembly are urgently required to be systematically considered and optimized. Here, the key components of the membrane electrode assembly, including electrocatalysts, ionic conductive membranes, and the gas/liquid diffusion layer, are systematically summarized to demonstrate the latest advancements. Especially, the overall design strategies of the membrane electrode assembly are discussed to promote high-performance alkaline water electrolysis, thus highlighting the complex relationship of the electrocatalyst and main components with the performance of alkaline water electrolysis. This review can guide researchers to further comprehensively design membrane electrode assemblies to achieve high-performance and long-life alkaline water electrolysis for large-scale hydrogen production.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Timeline of major developments in the application of alkaline water electrolysis. Insets: The discovery of water electrolysis13 (1800. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); industrial synthesis of H2 through water electrolysis14 (1888. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2009); industrial alkaline water electrolysis in operation15 (1902. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); alkaline water electrolysis for 10000 N m3 H2 h−115 (1939. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022); the first zero-gap electrolyzer16 (1967. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016); the first AEMWE paper17 (2011. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011); the first pure-water-fed AEMWE paper18 (2012. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011); ion-solvating membranes for alkaline water electrolysis;19 engineering ionomers for pure-water-fed AEMWE;20 overall design of MEAs for pure-water-fed AEMWE21 (2022. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022). Schematic of water electrolysis cells: (b) alkaline liquid water electrolysis (ALWE), (c) proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE), (d) zero-gap ALWE, and (e) anion exchange membrane water electrolysis (AEMWE).	 
2H2O (l) → 2H2 (g) + O2 (g)
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (E0 = −0.83 V vs. SHE)
Anode: 2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e− (E0 = 0.40 V vs. SHE)
Erev = Eanode − Ecathode
Ecell = Erev + ηanode + ηcathode + I × Rcell

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the typical MEA in alkaline water electrolysis. (b) The individual contributions to cell voltage, including reversible cell voltage, ohmic losses, anode overvoltage and cathode overvoltage. (c) The contributions to the overall cell resistance, including circuit resistance, bubble resistance, electrolyte resistance, and membrane resistance. (d) Typical polarization curve of water electrolysis, which can be divided into the kinetic region, ohmic region, and mass-transfer region. (e) Typical Nyquist plot and equivalent circuit model of MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis.	 
Ecell = Erev + ηkin + ηohm + ηmass
ηohm = i × Rohm = i × HFR
ηkin = b × log(i/i0)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Important merits and (b) regulation strategies for designing high-performance OER/HER electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using TMS, TMO, and TM(OH)x anode electrocatalysts. (b) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using metal or alloy, TMS, and TMP cathode electrocatalysts. (c) Degradation rates during continuous long-term durability testing of the reported alkaline water electrolysis employing PGM-free electrocatalysts. References for data points for (a): 1,26 2,27 3,28 4,29 5,30 6,31 7,32 8,33 9,34 10,35 11,36 12,37 13,38 14,39 15,40 16,41 17,42 18,43 19,44 20,45 21,46 22,47 23,48 24,49 25,50 26,51 27,52 28,53 29,54 30,55 31,56 32,57 33,58 34,59 35,60 36,61 37,62 38,63 39,64 40,65 41.66 (b): 1,67 2,32 3,33 4,35 5,48 6,68 7,69 8,70 9,39 10,62 11,71 12,41 13,72 14,53 15,73 16,54 17,74 18,47 19,75 20,76 21,51 22,77 23,78 24,79 25,80 26,31 27,81 28.66 (c): 1,67 2,27 3,74 4,29 5,47 6,31 7,32 8,75 9,48 10,36 11,82 12,51 13,77 14,70 15,83 16,62 17,78 18,84 19,41 20,53 21,85 22,54 23,86 24.66 (d) The surface reconstruction of electrocatalysts in an alkaline electrolyte.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (e) Pourbaix diagram of various elements in the potential range of water electrolysis.88 Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 
O–M–O + OH− = O–M(–OH)–O + e−
O–M(–OH)–O + OH− = O–M(O)–O + H2O(l) + e−
O–M(O)–O + OH− = O–M(OOH)–O + e−
O–M(OOH)–O + OH− = O–M–O + O2(g) + H2O(l)
O–M–O + OH− = O–M(–OH)–O + e−
O–M(–OH)–O + OH− = O–M(O)–O + H2O + e−
O–M(O)–O + O–M(O)–O = O–M–* + O–M–* + O2(g)
O–M–* + OH− = O–M–OH + e−
O–M–OH + OH− = O–M–O + H2O(l) + e−

 	Fig. 5  OER reaction mechanism in alkaline electrolytes. M stands for metal active sites and the dashed circle represents the lattice oxygen vacancy.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the etching process of Cu0.5Co2.5O4. (b) TEM and HRTEM (inset) images of Cu0.5Co2.5O4 prepared under different pH conditions.44 Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (c) Synthesis process of Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 on Ni foam. (d and e) SEM images of the Ni0.75Fe2.25O4 electrode.34 Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (f) Synthesis process of the CuCoO4 anode by chemical etching. (g) The ratio of Co ([Co2+] and [Co3+]) and O ([OVacancy] and [OLattice]) was calculated from XPS results by using the integral area of each element. (h) Polarization curves of the CE-CCO, commercial IrO2 and commercial Ni foam.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (i) The number of Co4+ atoms and TOF at 1.65 VRHE at each CV cycle. (j) AEMWE components. (k) Polarization curves of AEMWE in 1 M KOH at 60 °C.37 Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (l) SEM images of eCCO and CCO. (m) Schematic of the three-cell AEMWE stack. (n) Durability test and the corresponding energetic efficiency of the AEMWE stack at 0.5 A cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH at 45 °C.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and (b) XRD patterns for different amounts of Fe in the NiFeOxHy catalysts. (c) The unit cell structures for Ni(OH)2 and NiFeOxHy catalysts.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (d) Overpotential plotted versus the corresponding turnover frequency number and (e) CV curves for the catalysts in a Fe-free 1 M KOH electrolyte.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Time course of the pH of the reaction mixture during NiFe LDH synthesis and schematic illustration of the synthesis mechanism of NiFe LDH. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs using the NiFe LDH and IrOx as the anode electrocatalysts at 80 °C.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of single layer NiFe3 LDH. (d) Polarization curve of AEM water electrolysis based on the Ni3Fe LDH@Ni fiber electrode and the commercial Ir black@Ni fiber electrode.58 Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic illustration of NiFeV LDH on Ni foam by a corrosion process. (f) Polarization curves of AEMWE for NiFeV LDH recorded at 50 °C in a 1 M KOH solution.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (g) Schematic model of porous monolayer NiFe LDH.122 Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (h) The schematic diagram of formation of FeNiW LDH by the electrochemical corrosion strategy.123 Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of NiFe LDH/NiS electrodes. (b) Photographs of large-area NiS and NiFe LDH/NiS electrodes and the corresponding SEM images. (c) Polarization curves and (d) the cell voltages of the electrolyzer at a constant catalytic current of 8000 mA for 80 h at 80–85 °C.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) Schematic illustration of the FeNi2S4@NiFe LDH heterostructure.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (f) Synthesis of 3D hollow core–shell Mo-NiSx@NiFe LDH/NF electrodes. (g) SEM image of Mo-NiSx@NiFe LDH/NF.132 Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (h) Fabrication procedures of the self-standing 3D core–shell Cu@NiFe LDH electrocatalyst. (i) Polarization curves of Cu@NiFe LDH.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the underlying mechanism of structural reconstruction for TMS electrocatalysts towards OER. (b) Schematic illustration of (i) NiS2/Ni3S4 as a “pre-catalyst”, (ii) activated NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH covered with NiS2/Ni3S4 and (iii) stabilized NiSx/Ni(OH)2/NiOOH. (c) Polarization curves of the MEA with NiS2/Ni3S4 in AEMWE. (d) Polarization curves of MEAs with Ni/NiO or NiS2/Ni3S4 before and after long-term stability tests. (e) The stability test of MEAs with Ni/NiO or NiS2/Ni3S4 at 1000 mA cm−2.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (f) Synthesis process of S-FeOOH/IF. (g) Polarization curves with iR-compensation of AEMWE with the S-FeOOH/IF electrode in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 
H2O + e− → Had + OH−
H2O + Had + e− → H2 + OH−
2Had → H2

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the self-supported 3D Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP electrode. (b) Stability test of the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode under different constant potentials.152 Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Synthesis process of NiFeCo LDH and phosphide nanosheets on Ni foam. (d) Photographs of bare Ni foam, NiFeCo and NiFeCoP electrodes. (e) Schematic of an AEMWE system using NiFeCo LDH and NiFeCoP electrodes. (f) Polarization curves and (g) durability test of AEMWE with NiFeCo LDH//NiFeCoP recorded at 50 °C in a 1 M KOH electrolyte.47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (h) Preparation process of NiCoP@NiFeP electrocatalysts. (i) Schematic of an AEMWE system using the NiCoP@NiFeP electrode. (j) Polarization curves of AEMWE with NiCoP@NiFeP or commercial Pt/C and IrO2 catalysts.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Design schematic of MoS2/Mo2C for HER. (b) Polarization curves of a Pt foil, MoS2, and MoS2/Mo2C in 1 M KOH.154 Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (c) The preparation process of the CuMo6S8/Cu electrode. (d) Polarization curves of CuMo6S8/Cu, MoS2, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH.155 Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. (e) Synthesis process of NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene/Ni foam. (f) Schematic of an AEMWE system using the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode. (g) Polarization curves of MEAs with the NiFeS@Ti3C2 MXene electrode or commercial electrocatalysts and (h) corresponding current densities at different cell voltages.61 Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Fundamental properties of hydroxide ion conducting membranes and (b) performance targets of hydroxide ion conducting membranes through trade-off of the fundamental features. (c) Three approaches towards hydroxide conducting membranes, including PMs, ISMs, and AEMs. (d) A comparison of key features of commercial PMs (Zirfon), ISMs (m-PBI), and AEMs (PiperION).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using PMs, ISMs, and AEMs. (b) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using commercially available AEMs, including Sustainion X37-50 Grade T, Fumasep FAA-3-50, A201, and Ameion membranes. (c) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis using reported AEMs, including ether-containing AEMs, ether-free PEs and ether-free PAs. (d) Electrolysis performance of representative alkaline water electrolysis fed with 0.1 M KOH or pure water. References for data points for (a): 1,165 2,164 3,166 4,167 5,168 6,163 7,169 8,170 9,39 10151, 11,171 12,172 13,19 14,173 15,174 16,69 17,175 18,176 19,51 20,177 21,178 22,179 23,26 24,180 25,181 26,182 27,183 28,67 29,184 30,185 31,186 32,74 33,187 34,29 35,46 36,36 37,188 38,189 39,190 40,54 41,191 42,192 43,27 44,47 45,34 46,193 47,76 48,49 49,68 50,194 51,38 52,52 53,62 54,41 55,44 56.45 (b): 1,27 2,47 3,32 4,34 5,194 6,38 7,52 8,62 9,195 1044, 11,45 12,28 13,30 14,35 15,82 16,60 17,196 18,197 19,37 20,198 21,62 22,199 23,84 24,63 25,64 26,200 27,43 28,65 29,57 30,33 31,48 32,201 33,202 34,72 35,56 36,203 37,33 38.70 (c): 1,26 2,180 3,204 4,93 5,205 6,54 7,206 8,86 9,207 10,183 11,74 12,29 13,208 14,181 15,184 16,185 17,186 18,187 19,209 20,36 21,94 22,210 23,188 24,211 25,190 26,191 27.212 (d): 1,26 2,59 3,213 4,214 5,215 6,216 7,217 8,218 9,219 10,147 11,220 12,221 13,222 14,223 15,29 16,67 17,185 18,94 19,224 20,210 21,225 22,226 23,227 24,228 25,35 26,229 27,230 28,224 29,231 30,232 31,233 32,205 33,234 34,235 35,236 36,237 37,238 38,145 39,194 40,239 41,240 42,241 43,21 44,242 45,243 46,190 47,219 48,191 49,244 50,192 51,245 52,246 53,209 54,210 55,247 56,20 57,188 58.211	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Degradation rates during continuous long-term durability testing of the reported alkaline water electrolysis. References for data points for (a): 1,26 2,84 3,28 4,35 5,183 6,74 7,29 8,31 9,32 10194, 11,67 12,186 13,203 14,36 15,192 16,191 17,180 18,54 19,79 20,258 21,34 22,45 23,77 24,38 25,27 26,47 27,83 28,52 29,188 30,189 31,94 32,259 33,78 34,60 35,196 36,41 37,62 38,49 39,53 40,63 41.70 The degradation pathway of (b) QA and (c) IM groups under alkaline conditions.260 Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. The durability tests of AEMWE with PFTP-based AEMs and (d) PGM or (e) PGM-free electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH.212 Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) Ni foam, (b) Ni MF felt, and (c) Ni–Cu NW felt. (d) Polarization curves for OER of different LGDLs. (e) Diagram of the pore-throat aspect ratios showing how gas bubbles move via pores.269 Reproduced from ref. 269 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Schematic of AEMWE with the conventional LGDL and TTLGDL. Polarization curves of the bare TTLGDL, SC-TTLGDL, and commercial SC-Ti foam in AEMWE operated with (g) 0.1 NaOH electrolyte and (h) pure water, respectively.247 Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Recent research on MEA preparation technologies including CCS with ionomer, CCM, and CCS with a self-supported electrode: (a) the current density of MEAs at a cell voltage of 1.8 V in 1 M KOH. References for data points for CCS with ionomer: 1 (Ir black//Aemion™//Pt/C);225 2 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);44 3 (NiFe2O4//A201//NiFeCo);33 4 (NiFe LDH//X37-50//Pt/C);49 5 (IrO2//HTMA-DAPP//Pt/C);210 6 (Ir black//Fumapem-3-PE-30//NiCu MMO);215 7 (Co//PFAEM//Pt/C);208 8 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//NiCoO-NiCo/C);32 9 (Ni2Fe1B//Fumapem-3-PE-30//Pt/C);259 10 (CoCuO//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);94 11 (IrO2/FAA-3//Pt/C);200 12 (NiFeOx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);43 13 (Ni(OH)2-Fe//Sustainion XA-9//RANEY® NiMo);48 14 (NiS2/Ni3S4//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);63 15 (Pt/C//QPAP//Pt/C);181 16 (IrO2//PDTP//Pt/C);184 17 (NiCo2O4@C//X37-50 Grade T//NiCo2O4@C);27 18 (NiFe2O4//C-IL-100//NiFeCo),36 CCM: 1 (IrO2//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);190 2 (IrO2//PFOTFPh-TMA//Pt/C);191 3 (NiMnOx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);30 4 (Ir black//A201//Ni-W-600);72 5 (IrO2//QMter-co-Mpi//Pt/C);192 6 (IrO2//A201//Pt/C);201 7 (IrO2//PTP-C1//PtRu/C);185 8 (IrO2//TM1™//Pt/C);188 9 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C),196 10 (NiFe//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);197 11 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);200 12 (IrO2//PBB-SEBS//Pt/C);182 13 (IrO2//QAPPT/LDH//Pt/C);189 14 (IrO2//PFPB-QA//Pt/C);187 15 (NiCoP@rGO//AIEM//NiCoP@rGO),74 and CCS with a self-supported electrode: 1 (Cu0.81Co2.19O4//X37-50//Co3S4);31 2 (CuCo2O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);38 3 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);45 4 (NiFe2O4//X37-50//RANEY® Ni);41 5 (NiFeV LDH//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);52 6 (NiFeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);57 7 (Ni0.75Fe2.25O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);34 8 (FeNi-PS//FAA-3-50//FeNi-PS);82 9 (NiFeCo LDH//X37-50 Grade T//NiFeCoP);47 10 (NiFe LDH/MoSx//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);65 11 (Co(OH)x-Ag-Co(OH)2//X37-50//Pt/C);55 12 (IrO2//X37-50//CuCoP);76 13 (CoSb2O6//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);37 14 (Ni foam//PVBC-MPy/PSF//Ni foam);180 15 (Ni2Fe8-Ni3S2//FAA-3-50//Ni4Mo/MoO2);62 16 (Ir-Ni/Mo5N6//X37-50 Grade T//Ir-Ni/Mo5N6);194 17 (Ni2P@FePOxHy//X37–50//NiMoO4);193 18 (IrO2//X 37-50//Ni@Ni(OH)2);68 19 (Fe2P-Ni12P5//FAA-3-50//Co2P-Ni12P5);80 20 (NiCoP//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);195 21 (NiFeCr LDH//X37-FA//NiMoCo);53 22 (Fe-CoOOH//X37-50//Pt/C);50 23 (NiCoP@NiFeP//FAA-PK-130//NiCoP@NiFeP);78 24 (S-FeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt mesh);60 25 (NiFe//FAA-3-PE-30//NiFeP).79 Schematic of conventional MEA preparation methods with ionomers: (b) CCS and (c) CCM methods.276 Reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 18  Comparison of degradation rates and stability time at specific current densities in 1 M KOH for MEAs prepared by different technologies including CCS with ionomer, CCS with a self-supported electrode and CCM. References for data points for 1 (IrO2//PFPB-QA//Pt/C);187 2 (Cu0.81Co2.19O4//X37-50//Co3S4);31 3 (IrO2//PDTP//Pt/C);184 4 (CuCoO//X37-50 Grade T//NiCoO-NiCo/C);32 5 (Ni felt//AemionTM//Ni felt);203 6 (Ir-Ni/Mo5N6//X37-50 Grade T//Ir-Ni/Mo5N6);194 7 (NiFe//X37-50 Grade T//Ni);85 8 (NiFe//FAA-3-50//Ni);84 9 (Ni0.75Fe2.25O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);34 10 (Ir black//A201//NiW);72 11 (IrO2//TM1TM//Pt/C);188 12 (IrO2//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);196 13 (CoCuO//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);45 14 (NiFe LDH//PVBC-MPy/35%PEK-cardo//NiMo);54 15 (NiFeV LDH//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);52 16 (TPP-FSN//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);258 17 (Fe-NiMo//X37-50 Grade T//NiMo);83 18 (CuCo2O4//X37-50 Grade T//Pt/C);38 19 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50//Pt/C);44 20 (Fe2P2S6//YAB//Fe2P2S6);66 21 (NiFeCo LDH//X37-50 Grade T//NiFeCoP);47 22 (Ni foam//PVBC-MPy/PSF//Ni foam);180 23 (IrO2//SEBS-Pi//Pt/C);183 24 (NiFeCr//X37-50//V-Ni2P/Ni12P5);77 25 (NiCo2O4@C//X37-50 Grade T//NiCo2O4@C);27 26 (IrO2//PFOTFPh-TMA//Pt/C);191 27 (NiCoP@rGO//AIEM//NiCoP@rGO);74 28 (NiFe//PBI/mTPN-50//Mo compounds);67 29 (IrO2//QAPPT/LDH//Pt/C);189 30 (IrO2//QMter-co-Mpi//Pt/C);192 31 (NiCo2O4//QPS//Pt/C);26 32 (NiCo2O4//PSEBS-DABCO//NiCo2O4);29 33 (IrO2//PQP-100/Pt/C);186 34 (S-FeOOH//FAA-3-50//Pt mesh);60 35 (FeNi LDH//X37-50//Pt/C);49 36 (FeNiCr LDH//X37-FA//NiMoCo);53 37 (Ni2Fe8-Ni3S2//FAA-3-50//Ni4Mo/MoO2);62 38 (NiCoP@NiFeP//FAA-PK-130//NiCoP@NiFeP);78 39 (NiAlMo//HMT-PMBI//NiAlMo);70 40 (Cu0.5Co2.5O4//X37-50 Grade//Pt/C);44 41 (NiS2/Ni3S4//FAA-3-50//Pt/C);63 42 (FeNi-PS//FAA-3-50//FeNi-PS);82 43 (CuCoO//QPC-TMA//Pt/C);94 44 (NiFe2O4//X37-50//RANEY® Ni).41	 

 	Fig. 19  Summary of fabrication methods and used substrates of self-supported electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the conventional electrode and unified electrode prepared by electrodeposition. (b) Polarization curves of AEMWE with conventional IrO2 and unified electrodes in 1 M KOH.57 Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (c) Schematic of one-plot electrodeposition of NiFeOOH on a surface activated CFP.287 Reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. (d) Schematic of a novel and scalable electrodeposition for the preparation of self-supported NiFe and NiFeP electrodes.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Durability comparison of pure water-fed AEMWE. References for data points for (a): 1,236 2,246 3,209 4,229 5,230 6,18 7,194 8,20 9,211 10,240 11,241 12,233 13,21 14,205 15,219 16,191 17,312 18,234 19.245 (b) The performance and durability tests of pure water-fed AEMWE with a NiFeCo anode electrocatalyst at 80 °C.313 Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (c) Nyquist plot of pure water-fed AEMWE before and after the durability tests. SEM images of the NiFeCo anode electrocatalyst (d) before and (e) after the durability tests. Schematic of the ionomer/electrocatalyst interface (f) before and (g) after the durability tests. (h) Schematic diagram of degradation mechanisms by electrochemical phenyl oxidation.314 Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. The durability of pure water-fed AEMWE with (i) TMA-70 and (j) TMA-53 ionomers.20 Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (k) The durability of pure water-fed AEMWE employing different PFOTFPh-TMA ionomers.191 Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic of ideal 3D-ordered MEAs for alkaline water electrolysis, including CLs, membrane, membrane/CL interface, and CL/LGDL interface.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of self-supported electrodes with homogeneous and heterogeneous structures.321 Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (b) Synthesis process of hollow FeCo2S4 nanotube arrays. (c) Schematic of the structure–function relationship of FeCo2S4 nanotube arrays for OER.322 Reproduced from ref. 322 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Synthesis process of holey CoFeNx nanosheet arrays.323 Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of the NiFe@NiFeOOH nanowire arrays. (f) SEM image of NiFe@NiFeOOH nanowire arrays. (g) Digital photos demonstrating the oxygen bubbles on the surface of different electrodes. (h) The polarization curves recorded on different electrodes for OER.324 Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (i) Schematic of the structure–function relationship of the hierarchical Ni@FeNiOOH electrode for OER. (j) Polarization curves of Ni@FeNiOOH electrodes for OER. (k) Polarization curves of MEAs for AEMWE in 1 M KOH.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) The impact of side chain engineering on hydroxide conductivity and alkaline stability of AEMs. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs with side chain engineering PTP AEMs in pure water or 1 M KOH. (c) Stability tests of MEAs with PTP-OEG and PTP AEMs at 1.0 A cm−2 for 300 h.185 Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (d) Molecular structure of QPC-TMA. (e) SAXS profile of QPC-TMA and commercial FAA-3-50 AEMs. (f) Polarization curves of MEAs with QPC-TMA and commercial FAA-3-50 AEMs in 1 M KOH at 70 °C.190 Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (g) The schematic diagram showing the function of the self-aggregated side chain, promoting the formation of ionic highways in AEMs. SAXS profile of (h) O-PDQA and (k) PDQA. TEM images of (i) O-PDQA and (l) PDQA. AFM images of (j) O-PDQA and (m) PDQA.325 Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Design of ionic highways through a pyrazolium cross-linked triptycene polymer. (b) Schematic for a case of 0% degree of cross-linking.326 Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Vibrating sample magnetometer curves of membranes in the TP and IP directions. (d–g) Cross-sectional TEM images of membranes.327 Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. (h) Scheme for the synthesis of COF-QAs and ordered ionic transport highways.328 Reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of different strategies to engineer the CL/membrane interface: (a) patterned electrode, (b) ionomer-impregnated electrode, (c) porous membrane surface, (d) direct membrane deposition, (e) surface-patterned membrane, and (f) membrane swelling. The SEM image of MEAs fabricated with g) FAA-3–50 and (h) HWU-AEM.46 Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. (I) Preparation procedure of the MEA with a 3D CL/membrane interface and gradient tapered arrays. The SEM images of the (j) top view and (k) cross section of the anodic CL with gradient tapered arrays.332 Reproduced from ref. 332 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic of (a) conventional and (b) 3D-ordered MEAs. (c) The synthesis process of 3D-ordered MEAs. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the membrane-coated CL in the 3D-ordered MEA. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the novel 3D-ordered MEA and corresponding EDS mapping. (f) Schematic illustration of the improvements from a conventional MEA to the 3D-ordered MEA by overall design. (g) Polarization curves of alkaline water electrolysis with different MEAs recorded at 60 °C. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves of alkaline water electrolysis with 3D-ordered MEAs at 60 °C in pure water.21 Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
