Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B416929H View PDF VersionPrevious Article  DOI: 10.1039/B416929H
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 1567-1595Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materialsAndy Fisher*a, Phill Goodallb, Michael W. Hindsc, Simon N. Nelmsd and Denise M. PennyeaSchool of Earth, Ocean and Environmental Science, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AAbBNFL, Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PGcRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8dThermo Elemental, Ion Path, Road Three, Winsford, Cheshire, UK CW7 3BXeShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SHReceived 4th November 2004First published on 22nd November 2004Contents1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys2 Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear materials3 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics and refractories3.5 CatalystsReferencesAbstractThis atomic spectrometry update is the latest in an annual series under the title ‘Industrial Analysis’. Again, the writing team has remained unchanged this year. Solid sampling techniques are still proving extremely popular for the industrial type samples because many of them are hard to dissolve/digest. As well as perennial favourites such as the X-ray techniques that, in general, are regarded as being non-sample destructive, laser ablation and glow discharge, which cause minimal sample loss, are also gaining ground. The use of LIBS is growing rapidly and it is appearing in application sectors where it had not previously. There has been a large increase of interest in the biomedical subject areas. Proteomics has had several applications featured, as has the detection of several drug/drug metabolites. Similarly, the interaction of drugs with compounds that are present naturally has also been studied. Even biocompatible ceramics for use in orthopaedic applications have been studied in this review period. The nuclear section is still dominated by the determination of depleted uranium. This topic looks as if it could run for a few years yet. As always, the glass section is split largely between archaeological determinations and forensic applications, although some new XRF instrumentation was also reported. In the semiconductor and conducting materials section, there has been an increase in the development and characterisation of solar cells.1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloysIn general, work on solid sample analysis continues to be the focus of research and in particular laser induced breakdown spectrometry
					(LIBS) maintains a presence as a growing new technique. The performance of LIBS in the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) wavelength region for the analysis of steel samples was evaluated.1 A newly designed VUV echelle system was used. Sulfur and P were determined with limits of detection in the low-ppm range.The group led by Laserna2 developed a portable CCD based LIBS instrument. Both laser and emitted light travel through a fibre optic cable to and from the hand-held probe to the main unit. Good results were reported for sorting scrap steel on the basis of precision, speed and accuracy compared with laboratory XRF analyses.The group also reported that compositional distribution maps of inclusion elements such as Al, Ca, Mg, Mn and Ti in stainless steel can be generated by an automated line imaging of LIBS through a microline laser operating at 532 nm.3 The emitted light from the micro-plasma was collected onto a charge coupled device (CCD) detector to generate the spatially resolved data set. Tomographic maps could be created with 50 μm spatial resolution between craters by the LIBS automated system. The same approach was applied by Loebe et al. to the analysis of element distribution in the area where tool steel was soldered.4 In this study, a 266 nm diode pumped Nd:YAG laser was used in combination with echelle optics to create 2-D pictures. These showed changes in element distributions along the solder edge and permit the study of element diffusion in steel.Kraushaar and colleagues applied LIBS to the determination of total Fe, CaO and SiO2 in solid steel slag samples using a multivariate calibration model to account for the wide variation of steel slag composition.5 Results agreed with XRF measurements and the precision was <1% RSD (no concentration levels noted). The analytes C, P and S were determined in liquid low steel by LIBS with multiple pulse excitation.6 The light was guided into the melt inside a moveable lance system. Limits of detection were reported to be <21 μg g−1.The application of glow discharge atomic emission spectrometry (GD-AES), in the steel industry, was reviewed by Xhoffer and Dillen.7 It appears that GD-AES was used for qualitative and quantitative analyses of coated and un-coated steel products. However, other complementary techniques were required in most cases for a complete analysis. Weiss8 found that more accurate determinations were obtained by composite calibration estimates from multiple lines of the same element rather than single wavelength calibration for multi-matrix GD-AES. Results were compared for Fe–Ni–Cr alloys on a CCD-based spectrometer. Organic coatings on steels were investigated using GD-AES to detect molecular emission from the diatomic species CH, OH, NH and CO.9 Practical aspects of depth-profiling by radiofrequency GD-AES were discussed by Shimizu et al. for a variety of samples, including sputter deposited oxide films on stainless steel.10Glow discharge time of flight mass spectrometry (GD-TOF-MS) was also used for depth-profiling with a time of flight mass spectrometer11 to determine the coating thickness on steel. Different approaches were tried and, in general, better results were obtained by fixing the electrical current and pressure in the glow discharge.Karasev and Suito12 used laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS) to measure the size of Al2O3, MgO and complex CaO, MgO, Al2O3 inclusions located on the surface of iron and glass samples. A new method for making samples with particle inclusions has been developed. Calibration between the analytical signal for the inclusion type and inclusion particle size has been achieved. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and single-particle optical sensing methods (SPOS) have been used to verify the LA-ICP-MS results. Good agreement was reported between LA-ICP-MS and SEM for particles 10–40 μm in diameter but for the 2–20 μm range only reasonable agreement between LA-ICP-MS and both SPOS and SEM was reported. The same LA-ICP-MS technique was used by the same authors to determine the composition and particle size distribution of inclusions in a nickel alloy with 10% Fe.13 These were compared with particle analysis by SEM with electron probe micro-analysis (EMPA). Good agreement was found for particle sizes >1 μm. Particle distribution under 1 μm was underestimated due to the limit of measuring small particles on polished surfaces by LA-ICP-MS. It was claimed that LA-ICP-MS was superior to SEM with EPMA for measuring complex non-uniform inclusions. Coustures and colleagues used LA-ICP-MS to determine inclusions trapped in iron archeological material which was compared with trace element analysis of ore bodies and artifacts at known ancient ore processing sites in order to establish the origin of iron tools at other archaeological sites.14Houk et al.15 mixed particles from LA and desolvated particles from a Teflon microconcentric nebulizer into an ICP simultaneously with detection by a magnetic sector mass spectrometer. Calibration was attained by comparing the analyte signals from the solution with those from the solid sample. Signal normalization was based on the weight of particles, measured by piezoelectric microbalance, transported from the ablation cell. The authors claimed matrix matched solid standards and prior knowledge of the sample were not required for calibration. The relative accuracy of trace element determination was found to be 3–12% using both a steel and a glass reference material, for all analytes measured except Bi and Pb.Lu and co-workers reported the use of briquetted samples with a protective layer of borax to analyse powdered metallurgical slags by XRF16 along with the application of a “pseudo-Voight” curve fitting-function to resolve overlapping peaks. The analytical results were in agreement with reference material values and with those from samples prepared by a conventional fused disk sample preparation. Kondo et al.17 reported that by using cold crucible levitation melting, more than 70% of alumina and slag inclusions in steel were concentrated in a surface layer 70 μm thick. This sample preparation did not alter the particle size distributions or the composition of the inclusions and enabled energy dispersive (ED) XRF to be used to assess steel cleanliness. Micro-XRF and micro X-ray absorption spectrometry were used to study the speciation of selenium on iron surfaces.18Multiple method studies have been carried out to evaluate: the properties of iron used in 18th century stone monument construction using X-ray diffraction (XRD), ICP-OES, ICP-MS, SEM + EDX and EPMA,19 the surface finish degradation on steel using ICP-OES, EPMA and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),20 and the site preference of Fe added to Ni75Al25 alloys by XRD, EDXRF, SEM and ICP-OES.21 Hou et al.22 employed XRD, ICP-OES, XPS and FT-IR to characterise the assembly of magnetite nanoparticles. An et al.23 studied the internal oxidation in Cr–Mn carburized steels by GD-AES, SEM with EDXRF and transmittance electron microscopy (TEM). GD-AES was used to determine the element distribution in depth profiles of the internal oxidation layer. SEM and TEM were used to identify the oxide type and morphology.Graham24 wrote an overview article about the application of surface techniques in understanding corrosion and oxide growth on metals, alloys and semiconductors. These techniques include: secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), Auger electron spectrometry, X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS), and TEM. Non-metallic inclusions in low carbon chromium steel were analysed using Auger electron spectrometry and SIMS.25 Elements determined in the inclusions were Al, Ca, Mg, O and S. In other reports, SIMS was used to study the interaction of hydrogen with a NdFeCoB alloy26 and to examine pitting corrosion in 316L stainless steel by microbially deposited MnO.27New developments in solution analysis have been reported. Fehr and co-workers28 determined Te isotope composition in iron meteorites and geological samples by multi-collector (MC) ICP-MS. The Te was separated from the iron matrix by solvent extraction and then determined by MC-ICP-MS. Precision improved more than 10-fold for 122–130Te/128Te ratios and 4-fold for 120Te/128Te ratios compared with measurements by thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS). Goltz et al.29 examined the parameters affecting electroerosion of metal samples which can be used as a rapid method of sample preparation for ICP-MS. An on-line sample preparation system was tested but high RSD (±10%) were observed for major elements in steels and brass.1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloysJurado-Lopez and de Castro30 used LIBS for rapid identification of alloys in jewellery manufacture. A rank correlation method was used to compare LIBS spectra from an unknown to those from library spectra of known alloys. LIBS was applied by Cravetchi et al. to the microanalysis of aluminium alloys and minor element precipitates (Mg–Cu and Mn–Cu–Fe) on the surface plane of the alloys.31 Single shot UV laser pulses <μJ were used to map the surface composition and were in agreement with XRF microanalysis measurements.The analytical performance and quantification suitability of GD-OES and GD-MS for two grades of pure copper were investigated by a round robin study involving 10 laboratories and 11 different instrument set-ups.32 As expected from the relative sensitivities of the techniques, the GD-OES was applied only to the samples where contaminants were high, whereas GD-MS was applied to both of the samples. Statistical analysis of the GD-MS data using analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed there to be a great deal of uniformity. A Plackett–Burman experimental design was applied to the examination of different ways of sampling copper–titanium–zinc alloys.33 Major, minor and trace elements were determined by GD-OES in samples taken from two different sampling moulds and the data was evaluated by an analysis of variance test. For Cu, Fe and Ti a combined uncertainty of the two different sampling methods was estimated and compared with the expanded uncertainty without uncertainty due to sampling.The analytes Ag, Au and Cu in medieval Venetian coins were determined using mass-resolved ion scattering spectrometry by Daolio and co-workers.34 Conditions were set so that the ion beam eroded the sample for layer analysis and analytical signal generation. Quantification was accomplished by comparison with pure element samples. Studies showed that the surface of the coin was approximately 80% Ag and decreased towards the centre of the coin. The application of LA-MC-ICP-MS to the analysis of Pb isotope ratios in Roman silver was demonstrated.35 The technique offered the advantage of no chemical preparation, minimal damage to the artifact, and yielded better isotope reproducibility than TIMS. In another study, the provenance of ancient gold coins was assessed using osmium isotope ratios determined by LA-MC-ICP-MS.36 Gold coins can be traced back to the ore sites, based on the Os isotope ratios, provided the gold contains platinum group element inclusions.X-ray analysis techniques were applied by Linke et al. to differentiate medieval silver coins produced in two mints in the same area which have the same physical features.37 Minor and some trace elements were determined by EDXRF and SEM/EDX was used to examine corrosion and Ag in the centre of the coins. PIXE proved to be useful by determining different levels of Ni in two coin types which could not be measured by the other two techniques at the ppm range. Metals and pigments of archaeological interest were analysed using a portable EDXRF system.38 This permitted the analysis of brass, bronze and gold on location and also enabled researchers to perform systematic studies of very large artifacts in situ. The utility of a portable PIXE system was discussed in reference to analysing ancient materials.39 Synchrotron induced XRF was used in combination with EDXRF to determine the elemental composition of a bronze vase which, due to impurities found in the alloy, was proven to be of Roman origin.402 Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum productsThe review of 2004 is dominated by the analysis of particulate material whether it comes from the burning of coal or from diesel car exhaust particulates. The analysis ranges from the determination of single “difficult” elements e.g., mercury, to a full elemental sweep using a combination of techniques—a change in direction from previous years. This review will try to report novel aspects of the analysis, which include the various analytical techniques or the sample collection or pre-treatment routes.2.1.1 Petroleum products. There is no real dominant technique or analysis theme in this review period for petroleum products, although we start to see the power of GC × GC being exploited by coupling to detectors other than the FID.Comprehensive gas chromatography (GC × GC) has been combined with atomic emission detection (AED) to enable element-selective detection. Under optimised experimental conditions, the requirement of a minimum of five data points across a peak can be obtained, even for analytes eluting early from the second-dimension column. Simple manipulation of the results allows the combined presentation of up to four sets of elemental data in one two-dimensional plot. GC × GC with AED and mass spectrometric (MS) detection in petrochemical analysis for fingerprinting as well as the identification of N- and S-containing unknowns is presented as an application.41 A comprehensive piece of work has been undertaken to separate, characterise and quantify the S components of JP-8 aviation fuel.42 Separation was performed using several different methods, including class-specific chemical oxidation methods that used iodine and another that used hydrogen peroxide, and a polarity-based separation that used a polar high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column. Following separation, the S concentration was quantified into “reactive” and “non-reactive” classes, on the basis of the ease of transformation of the species, using chemical oxidation procedures, which also relates to the tendency for the species to undergo typical hydrodesulfurization reactions with hydrogen. These two classes were broken down further, with S compounds being classified as thiol, sulfides and disulfides, thiophenes, benzothiophenes or dibenzothiophenes. The jet fuels tested in this study appeared to contain S mainly as thiols or sulfides and disulfides, as determined by gas chromotography-atomic emission detection (GC-AED), following the chemical oxidation procedures. Of the refractory sulfur compounds, benzothiophenes comprised the majority, as determined by GC-MS following the (HPLC) fractionations. Thiophenes and dibenzothiophenes contributed minor amounts to the total concentration of refractory S compounds.It is notoriously difficult to nebulise a volatile organic solvent into an ICP without some sort of “help”, e.g. cooled spray chamber, USN, etc. An alternative to these devices is the direct injection nebulizer (DIN). Kahen et al.43 investigated the use of a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN) as a sample introduction method for ICP-MS for the analysis of petroleum samples dissolved in volatile organic solvents. To minimize solvent loading, the solution uptake rate was reduced to 10 µL min−1, and oxygen was added to the nebulizer gas flow and outer flow. Factorial design was applied to investigate the effect of nebulizer tip position within the torch and the nebulizer and intermediate gas flow rates on the precision and the net signal intensity of the elements tested for multi-elemental analysis. Under the optimal conditions, acceptable recoveries (100±10%) and good precision (better than 3% RSD) were obtained for trace elemental analysis in organic matrices. Unfortunately, because of high blank levels, detection limits were 1–3 orders of magnitude higher for organic sample introduction compared with those acquired for aqueous solutions.Lombaert et al.44 described a new direct analysis of metals present in exhaust particles and collected on a filter by using the technique of time resolved laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (TREBLIBS). This technique avoids the need for complete destruction of the sample and so removes the difficulties associated with sample preparation, e.g., rate of solubility, sample contamination and possible losses. In a few milliseconds, it was possible to obtain a qualitative and semi-quantitative composition of the complex diesel particulate matrix. In this study Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg and Zn appear as the major metallic species. The report presented the comparative results between TREBLIBS and SEM/EDS and the profile of metallic evolution versus air/fuel ratio. Excimer laser fragmentation fluorescence spectroscopy (ELFFS) has also been used to monitor diesel particulate matter in engine exhaust.45 This technique is used to monitor the fluorescence from the carbon fragments at 248 nm, CH (431 nm) and C-2 (468 nm) generated from the light of the ArF laser, which photofragments the particles. The single-shot detection limit of ELFFS is low enough to allow for real-time monitoring of particulate matter from diesel engines, as well as from other combustion systems. ELFFS is sensitive to both the volatile and non-volatile fraction of the particulate matter, and monitoring fluorescence from multiple fragments provides information on the chemical composition of the particles.2.1.2 Fuel. There is an increased focus on potential adverse health affects associated with exposure to ambient particulate matter (PM). Combustion is a major anthropogenic source of fine particulate matter and in urban areas traditional residential wood combustion can be a major contributor. New and upgraded biomass fuels have become more common. Fuel pellets are especially well suited for the residential market. Boman et al.46 had an objective to determine the mass size distributions, elemental distributions and inorganic phase distributions of PM from different combustion appliances and pelletized biomass fuels. Six different typical pellet fuels were combusted in three different commercial pellet burners (10–15 kW). The experiments were performed in a newly designed experimental setup that enabled constant-volume sampling. Total PM was analysed for morphology using environmental scanning microscopy (ESEM), elemental composition using energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and crystalline phases using XRD. For complementary chemical structure characterisation, TOF-SIMS, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy were also used. The emitted particles were mainly found in the fine (<1 µm) mode with mass median aerodynamic diameters of 0.20–0.39 µm and an average PM of 89.5%
						± 7.4% of total PM. The inorganic elemental compositions of the fine particles were dominated by Cl, K and S, with minor amounts of Na and Zn. The dominating alkali phase was KCl, with minor but varying amounts of K3Na(SO4)2 and, in some cases, also K2SO4. With some constraints, the results also showed that the amounts and speciation of the inorganic PM seemed to be quite similar to that predicted by chemical equilibrium calculations.Many studies relating to coal-fired furnaces and the characteristics of the emissions as a result of changes to the operating conditions have been reported. The main aim of this was to understand how to burn coal more efficiently and, as a consequence, reduce pollution to the atmosphere. Using a spectrograph and charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, ultraviolet and visible light emission spectra were obtained from a coal-burning electric utility’s cyclone furnaces operating under either fuel-rich or fuel-lean conditions.47 Emission spectra at the burner and outlet ends of cyclone furnaces were obtained. Spectra from all cyclone burners show emission lines for the trace elements K, Li, Na and Rb, as well as the molecular species OH and CaOH. The Ca emission line was detected at the burner end of both the fuel-rich and fuel lean cyclone furnaces but was not detected at the outlet ends of either furnace type. Other findings were reported and sufficient data were obtained to satisfy the aim of identifying light emission signals that can be related to a cyclone furnace’s operating condition in order to adjust its air/fuel ratio to minimise pollutant production.Simultaneous sampling of flue gas from a coal-fired plant to aid the understanding of the fate of As, Hg and Se has been attempted by Otero-Rey et al.48 A study of As, Hg and Se emissions from a 1400 MW coal-fired power plant equipped with electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) was carried out for the combustion of a mixture of two types of coal. Simultaneous sampling of coal, bottom ash, fly-ash, flue gas, and particles associated with the gas phase was performed. The sampling method for the flue gas was the “Ontario Hydro Method sampling Train”, an ASTM method for Hg speciation. The As and Se were determined by HG-AAS and Hg by CV-AAS. The results were used to examine the following: overall mass balances; relative distribution of these elements in the coal-fired power plant; As, Hg, and Se concentrations in coal and combustion residues; and the determination of the predominant oxidation state for Hg in flue gas. The flue gas sampling method was found to be applicable for As but the Se was not completely collected by this sampling train. The results indicated that HgII was the predominant species in flue gas. It has also been demonstrated that 24%, >99.8% and 90% for As, Hg and Se, respectively, in the stack emissions were in the gaseous phase.Continuing on the theme of understanding the composition of emissions, with respect to the environmental impact, information regarding the Cd distribution inside single municipal solid waste and biomass fly ash particles has been achieved.49 The internal 2-D distributions of the main and trace elements in such highly inhomogeneous matrices were determined successfully by means of the combined synchrotron radiation induced micro-X-ray fluorescence (µ-SRXRF) and tomography (µ-SRXRFT) techniques. The paper goes on to describe how the 2-D internal images were obtained and reconstructed, enabling a detailed elemental information on the fly ash particles. It concluded that the Cd concentration is higher in the core of the fly ash particle and that Ca-containing matrixes are found to be the main Cd-bearing phases. Fly ash particles have also been studied and re-constructed using micro-beam XRF.50 It was possible to generate two-dimensional maps of the elemental distribution over large spherical fly-ash particles with a resolution down to about 1 µm. By applying special reconstruction algorithms the symmetrical part of the elemental distribution can be reconstructed. The results showed that such a fly-ash particle could be split into a radial symmetric part containing non-volatile carbonaceous compounds and an asymmetric part representing precipitates or sub-particles formed within the fly-ash particle. The symmetric part showed distinctly visible outer and inner shells. By using the asymmetric part of the distribution, the interior of the fly-ash particle could be studied without interference from the inner and outer shells.A new approach to the analysis of particulate matter by radiofrequency GD-OES was reported.51 Dispersion of the particles in a sol–gel sample matrix provided a convenient means of generating a thin film suitable for sputter sampling into the discharge. Acid-catalysed sol–gel glasses synthesised from tetramethyl orthosilicate were prepared and spun-cast on glass substrates. Use of the sol–gels as sample matrices allows for background subtraction through the use of analytical blanks and may facilitate the generation of calibration curves via readily synthesised, matrix-matched analytical standards in solids analysis. Detection limits were determined for minor elements to be in the range of 1–10 µg g−1 in Portland Cement and Coal Fly Ash samples for the elements Al, Fe, Mg, S and Si. Values for Ca were in the range of 15–35 µg g−1. This preliminary study demonstrated the possibility of incorporating various insoluble species, including ceramics and geological specimens in powder form, into a solid matrix for further analysis by either rf-GD-OES or MS.2.1.3 Oils. In the 2004 review period the analysis of crude and lubricating oils is quite light in comparison with previous years. Two papers report the use of ID-ICP-MS. The first reported the determination of Hg in crude oil and the second the determination of S in oil after a pressurized wet digestion technique in open vessels. Kelly et al.52 reported on a method which could achieve accurate low-level determination of Hg in petroleum products. This is increasingly necessary because there could be a future requirement to assess the contribution to the Hg cycle to comply with reporting regulations for toxic elements. The samples were spiked with mercury-201 and wet ashed in a closed system (Carius tube) using 6 g of high purity nitric acid. The Hg values for the crude oils and diesel fuel were the lowest values ever reported for these matrices. The second paper53 described the development of a new technique for digesting samples using the well-established high-pressure asher (HPA) from Anton Paar GmbH. The digestion was performed in semi-open vessels inside a pressurized autoclave; this system was assessed for the digestion of larger sample amounts. Gasoil was spiked with an isotopic spike, which was enriched in 34S and was then wet digested in the HPA. The oxidised S of the dried samples was reduced to H2S and precipitated as As2S3. The S was measured as arsenic monsulfide (AsS+). Recovery tests for increasing mass indicate that recoveries decreased with increase in the mass digested. This was, however, reproducible, allowing the establishment of correction values for yield, which in turn enabled the digestion of a larger sample mass for routine work. Overall, this sample preparation technique did have advantages over conventional HPA digestion.Trace metals in crude oils are still of interest since some are known to be catalyst poisons in refinery processes. As and Te were determined down to levels of 1 ng g−1 in crude oils, using a complex sample pre-treatment route.54 This included decomposition by an oxyhydrogen-combustion method, the organic Te and organic As being converted to the inorganic species: these were collected in a 0.01 M HCl solution. The pH was adjusted with sodium hydride after the addition of an iron(III) solution. The precipitate was collected and re-dissolved in HCl, and this solution was then analysed by GF-AAS.2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.2.1 Organics. There has been a large increase in interest in metallomics and/or proteomics in this review period. Metallomics may conveniently be described as “the characterisation of the entirety of metal and metalloid species within a cell or tissue type”, whereas proteomics (or metalloproteomics) was defined as “structural and functional characterisation of metal binding proteins and their structural metal-binding moieties”.55 This particular review described the use of ICP-MS detection of heteroelements after separation using gel electrophoresis or capillary chromatography. Analytes such as P, S and Se in proteins, metal complexes with nucleic acids, carbohydrates and metal tagged biomolecules in general may all be analysed. Other reviews of the same area include one by Haraguchi,56 who discussed metallomics and another by Maret 57 who discussed the exploration of the zinc proteome.Several independent research groups have used gel electrophoresis to purify the proteins followed by LA-ICP-MS of the individual spots to determine either P or metal-bound proteins. Wind et al. used this technique to determine 31P in a mixture of myoglobin, alpha-casein and reduced fibrinogen after separation using one dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.58 These authors stated that a special washing procedure was necessary to remove phosphate non-covalently bound to the proteins. A LOD of 5 pmol was reported. Becker and co-workers determined the metals Al, Cu and Zn as well as P and S in human brain proteins.59 On this occasion, 2-D electrophoresis was performed and detection was by LA-double focusing sector field ICP-MS. Another paper in this area has been produced by Binet et al., who determined the Cd- and Zn-binding proteins in Escherichia coli.60 The capabilities of the technique for determining Se-proteins in blood cell extracts and in yeasts have been discussed by Chery et al.61 For the former, a 1-D separation using sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was used, whereas the latter required a 2-D separation. The use of a quadrupole-based ICP-MS instrument required the additional use of a dynamic reaction cell (DRC) which, by the addition of carbon monoxide as the reaction gas, removed the interference effect arising from the argon dimer on the most abundant Se isotope at m/z 80. Other reaction gases, e.g., methane, ammonia, oxygen, argon and hydrogen, were also tested, but the carbon monoxide yielded the best performance. Two papers have reported the use of SDS-PAGE followed by detection using synchrotron radiation XRF.62,63 The former paper reported the determination of Se-proteins and of metal-loaded apoazurin in rat testis homogenate. The latter paper discussed the determination of proteins containing Cu, Fe and Zn in human liver cytosol. Drying of the gel before analysis decreased the amount of Compton scattering and hence decreased the background signal. A total of six Zn containing proteins spanning the mass range 17.5–63 kDa, four Fe containing proteins with mass 20–83.5 kDa and one Cu protein with mass 22 kDa were detected. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) has also been coupled with ICP-MS for the purposes of speciation of proteins. A paper by Hann and co-workers used both SEC-ICP-DRCMS with oxygen as the reaction gas and SEC-ICP-SFMS to determine the Fe/S and the Mn/S ratios.64 The use of oxygen in the DRC enabled S to be measured accurately if the mass at m/z 48 was monitored (corresponding to 32S16O). The same gas also enabled Fe and Mn to be measured at 54 and 56 and also 55, respectively. An injection volume of 20 μL and a SEC flow rate of 0.3 mL min−1 yielded LODs for Fe of 2 and 0.6 ng g−1 at m/z 54 and 56 respectively, of 4.3 ng g−1 for S measured at m/z 48 and of 0.4 ng g−1 for Mn at m/z 55. Use of the sector field instrument using a resolution of 4500 yielded LODs of similar range, although the S could be measured directly at m/z 32. As an example, the authors analysed myoglobin, haemoglobin, cytochrom C, arginase and Mn superoxide dismutase obtained from E. coli. In a similar sort of paper, Goenaga Infante et al. used SEC-ICP-TOF-MS for the determination of Cd, Cu and Zn containing proteins in fish tissues.65 These authors reported that speciation differences were observed between control and Cd stressed carp and concluded that this technique may be used for ecotoxicological and bio-monitoring purposes.The difficult task of coupling capillary electrophoresis (CE) with ICP-MS has been reported in three papers, two of which, by Prange and co-workers, described the determination of metallothionein-like proteins.66,67 The first of these papers discussed the optimization of the CE separation, in which the voltage (30 kV, positive polarity), the capillary temperature (288.15 K), the buffer concentration, buffer pH and the use of different buffer systems were all studied (the optimum being 100 mM tricine–ammonia, adjusted to pH 7.2). The technique was applied to the separation of metallothionein-like proteins extracted from Elbe Bream and Roe deer livers. The separation was complete within 10 min and two of the peaks observed in the real samples had retention times corresponding with those obtained from the commercial standards. The second of the papers67 discussed the use of an ICP-MS instrument equipped with an octopole reaction cell for the determination of Cd, Cu, S and Zn in commercially available metallothioneins and again, metallothionein-like proteins obtained from the bream and Roe deer. The authors reported LODs of 1.3 μg L−1 for 34S and 3.2 μg L−1 for 32S and also 0.3 and 0.5 μg L−1 for Zn and Mn at m/z 66 and 55, respectively. A further paper by Yeh et al. described the separation and determination of the S containing amino acids L-cysteine, L-cystine, DL-homocystine and L-methionine.68 On this occasion, separation was achieved using a 70 cm lomg × 75 mm id fused silica capillary with a voltage of +22 kV and a buffer of 10 mM disodium tetraborate, 0.1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM Triton X-100 buffer (pH 9.2). Again, S was monitored at m/z 48 and LODs were in the range 0.047–0.058 μg S mL−1, yielding absolute LODs of 1.3–1.6 pg of S for a 27 nL injection volume. As an application, the S containing amino acids were determined in urine and in nutritive complement samples.Other macromolecules that have been studied include the polysaccharide scleroglucan, which was labeled with I so that it could be determined rapidly using TXRF (or by a radiochemical method if 131I was used)69,70 and the PAGE separation followed by capillary liquid chromatography-ICP-MS determination of 31P in human fibrinogen.71The analysis of drugs continues to be an area of great interest. Many of the more recent papers were more pharmacologically based, i.e., attempted to determine how the drugs interact with compounds present naturally, and several of these have been produced by two research groups. An example of this type of work has been published by Mandal and co-workers,72 who found evidence that cis-platin could co-bind with a natural Cd and Zn containing metallothionein. Using SEC-ICP-MS, they demonstrated that at roughly neutral pH, the Zn was displaced by the cis-platin but that the Cd and cis-platin could combine with the same molecule, forming a complex of general formula Cd4Ptn–metallothionein, where n
						= 1–7. A similar study by Hagrman et al. produced slightly different results.73 These authors found that at pH 7.4 in 10 mM Tris-NO3 and 4.2 mM sodium chloride, the cis-platin displaced both Cd and Zn equally well from metallothionein molecules. The reactions between the drug and the metallothionein were monitored using HPLC, AAS and UV-Vis spectrophotometry. A very similar paper by the same research group discussed the interaction of the Pt drugs cis-platin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin with glutathione.74 Mandal and co-workers also studied the cis-platin interactions with haemoglobin using the instrumental techniques of nano-electrospray mass spectrometry and SEC-ICP-MS.75 The SEC-ICP-MS separated the free and protein-bound cis-platin and enabled the simultaneous measurement of 195Pt and 57Fe. The nano-electrospray-MS managed to study the haemoglobin–drug complexes and further demonstrated the specific binding of the cis-platin to the alpha chain, heme-alpha, beta-chain and heme-beta units of the haemoglobin.Other research in this area has concentrated on detecting breakdown products of drugs. Hann and co-workers used HPLC-isotope dilution-ICP-MS to speciate cis-platin and its breakdown products in water containing different chloride concentrations and in urine.76 The LODs for the parent compound and two of its degradation products were in the range 0.65–0.74 μg L−1. Degradation products of 6 × 10−6 M cis-platin were monitored over a period of 48 h in solutions of chloride of concentration 0, 50 and 100 mg L−1. The authors went on to calculate the first order reaction rate constants for cis-platin aquation and for the second order reverse reaction. A method for the determination of a new triplatinum anti-cancer drug (BBR3464) and five potentially related compounds in spiked human blood has been reported by Vacchina et al.77 In order to separate the free circulating drug from the pharmacologically active fraction, two sample preparations were optimized. For the former, an ultrafiltration technique was used to separate non-covalently protein bound Pt, whilst the latter incorporated an acid precipitation step so that the covalently protein bound Pt could be obtained. Once the fractions had been separated, cation exchange HPLC-ICP-MS was used to separate and detect the individual species. A refrigerated cyclonic spray chamber used with a Meinhard nebuliser acted as the interface system. A pre-concentration step involving freeze-drying was also developed and the overall LOD was 0.15 ng mL−1
						(as Pt). Precision was tested at two different concentration ranges and was found to be approximately 15% for 1–10 ng mL−1 and 20% for 0.2–1 ng mL−1.Other drugs that have been determined in this review period include omeprazole.78 A 1 ∶ 1 mix of labelled 32S and 34S drug was determined by HPLC-hexapole-ICP-MS. These authors also found that the sensitivity of determining S at either m/z 32 or 34 was insufficient because of polyatomic interference effects, and therefore they too used the addition of oxygen to the hexapole collision cell to determine S at m/z 48 and 50. Two research groups have determined halogenated drugs using HPLC-ICP-MS. Bu and co-workers found that the use of a high resolution double focusing sector field instrument in either medium or high resolution mode decreased the background counts by up to five orders of magnitude compared with a quadrupole based instrument.79 The samples, which were a series of organic compounds and drugs, were dissolved in appropriate solvents and then diluted in either de-ionized water or 5% ammonium hydroxide. Memory effects and signal intensities were studied for the analytes Br, Cl, F and I, which were present in these samples at concentrations of sub-ppm to percent. Results were found to be slightly variable, with some being in excellent agreement with the known or theoretical value, whilst others were not in such good agreement. The same analytes in drugs have been determined by Jensen et al. who also compared the use of a direct injection nebuliser (DIN) with an Aridus de-solvating micro-concentric one.80 For the DIN, operated with flow rates of 25 and 50 μL min−1, the influence of 0–50% methanol and 0–25% acetonitrile on the sensitivity of the analyte determination was studied. It was found that for Br and Cl the sensitivity decreased with increasing solvent load, but for I the maximum sensitivity was achieved at a low level of organic solvent, but then decreased at higher concentrations. The response of the DIN was also independent of the chemical structure of the drug. Measurements using the Aridus nebuliser were less encouraging, with several compounds being lost in the de-solvating unit. Those compounds that were not lost did, however, have a sensitivity that was independent of the methanol concentration. Levothyroxine and its degradation products that also contain I have been determined by HPLC-UV-ICP-MS.81 Complete separation of the species was achieved within a 25 min chromatographic run using 22% acetonitrile at pH 2.3, adjusted with 0.08% trifluoroacetic acid. Dilution of the eluent post-column using 2% nitric acid (1 ∶ 3.3) enabled the plasma, which could be perturbed under the influence of 22% acetonitrile, to be sustained and did not lead to peak broadening. Detection limits using UV at 225 nm were 28.9–34.5 μg L−1, whereas the ICP-MS yielded LODs that were a factor of 175–375 better than this.As always, there has been great interest in the analysis of plants or herbs that were used as traditional Chinese medicines. Many of these were extremely straightforward applications and so will not be discussed in any detail here. However, some of the more interesting papers have used speciation analysis and these will be commented upon. Speciation of AsIII and AsV in Niuhuang Jiedu tablets has been reported by Xing and Mei.82 These authors optimised the hydrochloric acid and the sodium tetrahydroborate concentrations (3.6–5.8 mol L−1 and 2–2.5%, respectively) so that maximum sensitivity of the HG-AFS system was achieved. The AsIII was detected initially and then after the AsV was reduced to AsIII the total As could be determined. The AsV was calculated by difference. Precision was 0.8% and 2.9%, whilst recovery of a spike was between 96.7 and 116.3% and between 109 and 116.8% for AsII and AsV, respectively. Another paper that used AFS as a detection system was described by Sun and co-workers,83 who determined total As, AsIII, total Sb and SbIII in Chinese herbal medicines. On this occasion, a double channel instrument was used so that As and Sb could be determined simultaneously. A comparison of Soxhlet extraction and an n-octanol–water extraction system were compared, with the conclusion that the Soxhlet extraction was efficient but that both methods could give information on the acidity of the medicine. Since octanol is a long chain alcohol, it resembles the configuration of carbohydrates and fats. It has therefore been used to determine the lipophilicity and bio-availability of some drugs. Using AAS as a means of detection, Li and Deng used octanol solubility and compared it with water solubility for the speciation of several Fe species from eight different medicines.84 By determining the total Fe concentration, the sum of the two extractions could be summed and a mass-balance calculated. The experiments were performed at a pH that resembled the acidity at different digestive sites in the intestinal tract. Speciation of Mg, Mn and Zn in aqueous extracts of medicinal plants has been reported.85 Ultra-filtration indicated that between 60 and 100% of these metals were present as molecules with a molecular mass of below 5000. This fraction was further characterised by SEC coupled with either AAS or UV-Vis spectrophotometry. The authors found that there was a link between both Mg and Mn and carbohydrates, whereas the Zn was associated with (poly)phenols.There has been huge interest in determining Se and Se species in yeast. A number of methods have been utilized, including HPLC-ICP-MS. A paper by Capelo et al. used the enzymes protease XIV and subtilisin in conjunction with an ultrasonic probe to extract the samples.86 The presence of the ultrasonic probe enabled extremely rapid (<30 s) extraction of the Se without the need for careful temperature optimization, which, the authors stated, reduced the risk of species inter-conversion. Two papers produced by Szpunar’s group described the SEC-ICP-MS determination of Se species in yeast.87,88 Trypsin and pronase XIV were used successfully as extractants. In both papers, the fractions collected by SEC were then also analysed using reversed phase HPLC and MALDI-TOF-MS detection so that identification of the species could be made. The latter paper identified a family of seleno-proteins present in the yeast where 2–9 methionine had been replaced by selenomethionine. Two proteins, a heatshock protein (HSP12) and a salt-stress induced protein (SIP18), contained over 95% of the selenium. Bendahl and Gammelgaard described a method whereby a cold water extraction of selenized yeast followed by incubation at 110 °C in 6 M hydrochloric acid and detection using CE-ICP-MS was used.89 The CE utilized a capillary dynamically coated with poly(vinyl sulfonate). Although 20 Se -containing compounds could be separated in 13 min, the water extraction accounted for only 9% of the total Se present in the tablets. Other problems were also observed, including co-elution of species when spikes were made into the aqueous extract and then co-elution of 45% of the total extracted Se in the presence of the acid. The 2-D SDS-PAGE-LA-ICP-MS method used so frequently during proteomics has also been applied to the determination of Se in yeast.90 This technique was used in conjunction with ion trap-MS and TOF-MS instruments to give the maximum amount of information possible. Up to 10 Se-containing proteins were characterised in terms of molecular mass in the range 9–20 kDa. Another paper has used solid phase micro-extraction followed by multi-capillary GC to separate Se species.91 The GC was coupled with a number of different detectors, including ICP-MS, MIP-AES and AFS. All of the detectors were found to be suitable, but the best sensitivity was obtained when MIP-AES was used. Typical LODs using this method were 0.47, 0.57 and 0.19 ng mL−1 for diethyl selenide, dimethyl selenide and dimethyl diselenide, respectively. At least 7 volatile Se compounds were observed in the yeast samples that had been enriched with inorganic selenium.The analysis of paints for forensic purposes was again a fairly popular analysis. Hall and Tinklenberg determined Pb, Ti and Zn by EDXRF in lead based house paints manufactured by several different producers.92 By using three-dimensional plots of the different concentrations, it was possible to discriminate between different manufacturers’ products. A total of 51 red spray paints have also been analysed by both EDXRF for metallic components and FT-IR to identify the binder type, filler and pigment.93 A database was therefore built that was capable of classifying different paints. Trace elemental analysis of 18 automotive paints using LA-ICP-MS has been described by Hobbs and Almirall.94 A set of matrix matched standards were prepared to aid the analysis.There is obviously a need to undertake non-destructive analysis of archaeological or historical samples. Therefore X-ray based techniques are the most commonly employed. An overview of techniques such as X-ray radiography, XRF and XRD in archaeological samples has been prepared by Schreiner et al.95 Conversely, Mantler and Klikovits produced a paper entitled “analysis of art objects and other delicate samples: was XRF really non-destructive?”.96 The answer to their own question appears to be “no”, since they produce evidence that exposure to a 3 kW radiative source for several minutes (as was required for wide angle scans as well as for the determination of light elements in a wavelength dispersive instrument) can leave traces of permanent yellowing, brittleness and even mechanical decomposition. Scanning electron microscopy indicated that this arises through permanent alteration of cellulose fibres and of the binder in paper. The authors did say, however, that a typical measurement cycle with conventional tubes and energy dispersive systems (e.g., 100 s, 100 W tube power) leads to no visible harm. A database of historical pigments analysed by XRD and XRF has been prepared.97 It was possible to differentiate between pigments having the same name but produced by different manufacturers. The aim of having this database was that it will enable a fast and easy identification of pigments during the restoration and conservation of an art object. A portable EDXRF instrument has been used to study inks on paper engravings.98 The paper was characterised from its EDXRF spectra and the inks were characterised by subtracting the paper spectra away from the ink + paper spectra.Numerous other applications of atomic spectrometry to organic materials have been published. Gas chromatography has been used by several workers to determine volatile analytes. Both GC-MS and GC-AES have been used to determine methyl tert-butyl ether and its degradation products (tert-butyl formate, tert-butyl alcohol, acetone, methyl acetate, isobutene and formaldehyde) in water.99 A compound parabolic collector reactor was found to show a rapid and complete oxidation of the parent compound, but complete mineralization was not achieved until 155 min. By inspecting the different compounds’ abundances at different times, the authors managed to propose the degradation pathway. Guchardi and Hauser described the GC separation of organic compounds followed by detection using a new capacitively coupled micro-plasma.100 The plasma was generated with an ac voltage of 20 kV at 20 Hz by capacitive coupling of the energy. The plasma could be sustained even at the low flow rates employed in GC and the light from the C line at 247.9 nm and from the CN band at 385.2 nm was used for detection. As an application, benzene was determined with an LOD of 80 pg of C. A near-infrared-echelle detector for MIP-OES that was capable of detection between 640 and 990 nm has been described by Koch and co-workers.101 Halogenated and sulfurous hydrocarbons were separated by GC and Br, C, Cl, F, H, I and S detected using this new device. Detection limits were dependent on the plasma gas applied but were in the range 200–2200 pg s−1 for argon and 70–660 pg s−1 for helium. Part per trillion levels of 2-iodophenol, 4-iodophenol and 2,4,6-triiodophenol have been determined in different water samples by solid phase micro-extraction (SPME) followed by GC-ICP-MS detection of I.102 Several different types of SPME fibre were tested, with the 75 μm Carboxen–poly(dimethyl siloxane) being found to be the most efficient. Optimal conditions for the pre-concentration were a pH of 2, an extraction time of 30 min, and desorption in the GC detector at 290 °C for 2 min. The interface between the GC and ICP-MS instruments was maintained at 325 °C to preserve peak shape and the introduction of a small oxygen bleed improved sensitivity. For speciation purposes it is necessary to have well characterised species to act as calibrants. Bancon-Montigny et al. have reported the synthesis of milligram amounts of isotopically enriched methylmercury (with the Hg isotope at 198 being enriched).103 The synthesis first converted 198Hg to HgCl2 and this was then reacted with methylcobalamin to produce the methylmercury. After extraction in toluene and drying over sodium sulfate, the product was analysed by GC-MS and the isotope ratio was determined using GC-ICP-MS. The yield was reportedly 99%. A simple method for the determination of up to 21 analytes in organic matrices in which the sample was simply suspended in concentrated nitric acid and then aspirated into an ICP-OES instrument has been reported.104 Calibration was against simple aqueous standards and the method was validated by the successful analysis of a metallo-organic standard. Comparable results were obtained to those from a microwave digestion. As an application the NIST reference material 1084a Wear Metals in Lubricating Oil was analysed. Spike recoveries ranged from 83–105% and the limits of quantitation were 6 μg g−1 or better for all analytes. The determination of Si in naphtha by GFAAS has been optimized using a multivariate fractional factorial design and a Doehlert matrix method.105 It was found that parameters such as sample volume and pyrolysis time were insignificant, whereas other parameters, e.g., pyrolysis and atomization temperatures, were statistically significant with the optima being 728 °C and 2696 °C, respectively. The LOD was 15 μg L−1, corresponding to an absolute amount of 143 pg, and precision was 8 and 11.4% RSD at a concentration of 100 and 50 μg L−1, respectively.Cloud point extraction/enrichment has again proved a popular area of study in this review period. However, many of the publications report very simple applications. A few of the more interesting applications published include a paper by Manzoori et al., who used dithizone as a complexing agent for the selective pre-concentration of Ag from water.106 Water acidified with sulfuric acid to pH < 1 was treated with Triton X-114 and the dithizone. After phase separation the surfactant rich phase was diluted with tetrahydrofuran and the analyte determined using FAAS. After optimization of the procedure, a pre-concentration factor of 43 was obtained for 10 mL of sample, yielding a linear range of between 3 and 200 ng mL−1 and a LOD of 0.56 ng mL−1. Li and co-workers determined both Cr and Cu in water samples by complexing the metals with oxine in the presence of Triton X-100 and then aspirating the Triton X-100 into an ICP-OES instrument.107 Again, parameters such as pH, concentration of the chelating agent and surfactant, equilibration temperature and time were all optimized. Precision was 4.3 and 4.8% and LODs were 1.29 and 1.31 ng mL−1 for Cr and Cu, respectively. A comparison of cloud point extraction and low temperature directed crystallization as pre-concentration tools for the determination of the trace elements Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Zn in environmental water samples has been made by Giokas et al.108 Extraction efficiency, accuracy, precision, sample throughput and interferences were compared using ICP-OES as the means of detection. The authors found that both methods could be used for the selected analyses and concluded that once the drawbacks of each technique had been identified, the analyst could plan the practical approach to the analysis better. A micelle mediated pre-concentration other than cloud point extraction has been used for the on-line FI-ETAAS determination of Pb in biological reference materials.109 The procedure involved the formation of the analyte as the APDC complex and then mixing it with Triton X-114. The analyte entrapped surfactant micelles were adsorbed on to a micro-column packed with silica gel and then eluted with 50 μL of acetonitrile for detection. Heating, salting out, centrifugation and filtration were all avoided during this protocol. A LOD of 44.6 ng L−1 was obtained for a 2.2 mL sample volume and 30 samples h−1 could be analysed. Precision for 11 replicates of 1 μg L−1 was 2.9% RSD.2.2.2 Solvents. There have been several theoretical/fundamental studies of the introduction of organic solvents to atomic spectroscopic instrumentation. Bjorn and Frech introduced ethanol, hexane, toluene and a natural gas condensate to an ICP-MS instrument via a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN).110 The most critical parameters during the optimization were found to be the nebulizer gas flow (0.3 L min−1) and the amount of oxygen added to the plasma (0.5 L min−1 to the auxiliary gas flow). The species HgCl2, CH3HgCl, (CH3)2Hg and inorganic Hg were used as analytes and their recoveries in hexane were 99 ± 4, 101 ± 4, 95 ± 4 and 104 ± 7%, respectively. Based on the measurement of a 201Hg spiked blank, the 3σ LOD was 85 pg mL−1. The authors did notice a carbon accumulation on the cone and concluded that the rate of deposition was related to the amount of carbon introduced through the nebuliser. Approximately 50 hexane based samples could be analysed before cleaning of the cone became necessary. A low power argon based MIP generated by a resonant rectangular cavity was characterised in terms of assorted temperatures when species formed from the reaction of sodium tetrahydroborate in hydrochloric acid–ethanol were introduced.111 The molecular emission bands for OH and CH were used to determine the rotational temperature (Trot) while the atomic emission lines of Ar, H, and Sb were used to calculate the excitation temperature (Texc). Conflicting results were found, with Trot measured using OH increasing from 2970–3820 K when the ethanol content increased from 10–90%; whereas Trot using CH was found to decrease from 6100–4540 K over the same ethanol range. For the same ethanol range, the excitation temperatures all decreased with increase in ethanol in the ranges 5670–4800, 6190–3950 and 10500–7390 K for Ar, H and Sb, respectively. The electron number density was measured using the Stark broadening of the Hβ line and were found to be between 2.5 × 1015 and 0.57 × 1015 cm−3. The non-spectroscopic effects of some different organic compounds (methanol, acetonitrile, glucose, ammonium acetate and tris(hydroxymethyl) aminomethane) in ICP-MS measurements have been evaluated.112 An increase in sensitivity for the analytes As, Se and Zn was observed and this was attributed to more efficient ionization caused by the presence of C+ ions in the plasma.Dimethylformamide (DMF) has been introduced to FAAS instruments in a series of papers by Taher.113–115 Several analyte pre-concentration/matrix removal procedures were described in these pieces of work. Lead was complexed with 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol, and the complex so formed was adsorbed onto microcrystalline naphthalene at a pH of between 8.4 and 11.5.113 Elution was by 5 mL of DMF. Alternatively, Tl could be retained as either the 1,10-phenanthroline or tetraphenylborate complex onto benzophenone.114 Again elution was by 5 mL of DMF and the sensitivity for 1% absorption was 0.22 μg mL−1. In the final paper of this series, Cu was determined in natural waters and standard biological samples after separation and pre-concentration onto Amberlite XAD-2 loaded with 2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol.115 The Cu was quantitatively retained at pH 6.5–9.5. Another group adsorbed the ethyl xanthate complexes of Co and Ni onto benzophenone at a pH of between 8 and 10.116 Again 5 mL of DMF was used to elute the analytes prior to their detection using FAAS. A pre-concentration factor of 200 was achieved, yielding calibration ranges that were linear over the ranges 0–75 and 0–100 μg L−1 for Co and Ni, respectively. The method was validated by the determination of the analytes in the reference materials IAEA HH-1 and NIES 5 Hair, with good agreement being obtained with the certified values.A simple automated on-line extraction system prior to GFAAS detection for the analytes Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in reference soils, sediments, plants, animal tissues and bone has been devised.117 After acid digestion of the matrices, the diethyldithiocarbamate complexes were extracted into IBMK at a pH of less than 2. The analyses of reference materials yielded results in good agreement with certified values. The method apparently overcame the need for other tedious and contaminating sample preparation procedures and minimized matrix interferences from salts and iron. Another application led to the determination of Cd in natural waters.118 The Cd complex with APDC was formed and this was extracted on-line into IBMK. Then, using a newly designed gravitational phase separator, the water phase was separated (to waste) from the IBMK, which was then fed to a sample loop prior to Cd determination using FAAS. A sample enrichment of 155 was achieved, yielding a LOD of 0.02 μg L−1. The sampling rate was 33 h−1, precision at 2 μg L−1 was 3.6% and the calibration was linear over the range 0.06–6 μg L−1. The method was validated by the successful analysis of certified reference materials. Karami and co-workers determined several metal ions (Bi3+, Cd2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Fe3+, Ni2+, Pb2+ and Zn2+) in water samples simultaneously by ICP-OES after retaining them as their diethyldithiocarbamate chelates on a mini-column of octadecyl silica.119 After pre-concentrating the analytes, they could be eluted for detection using methanol. Parameters such as the sample flow rate (7.2 mL min−1), eluent flow rate (3.5 mL min−1), weight of solid phase (100 mg) and eluent volume (0.8 mL), were optimized using a modified Simplex method. An enrichment factor of 312.5 was achieved for each analyte, yielding LODs of 1.3, 1.0, 0.8, 0.3, 14.7, 0.5, 5.5 and 0.1 ng L−1 for Bi, Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Zn, respectively. The retention of the xylenol orange complexes of Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni and Pb on Amberlite XAD-16 in the pH range 7–9 has been used to pre-concentrate these analytes from natural water and salt samples.120 After the pre-concentration step, the analytes were eluted to FAAS detection using 1 M nitric acid in acetone. Again, the effects of different reagent amounts, sample volumes and the matrix of the sample were investigated. Method validation was by spike/recovery experiments, with acceptable recovery values being achieved. Precision was in the range 3–10% RSD.2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acidsThe literature this year has again seen the publication of a large number of applications based on multi-collector ICP-MS and speciation analysis in particular, reflecting the increasing interest in these areas. There have also been some novel developments in portable X-ray analysers and advances in data interpretation and processing. Atomic absorption/fluorescence techniques have also continued to be applied to novel analyses, and several papers using this technology are worthy of mentioning in this year’s review.The measurement of mercury in various minerals using a procedure based on combustion/trap/atomic fluorescence spectrometry has been reported by Liang and co-workers.121 The combustion/trap technique has been continually refined since its development just under a decade ago. In this work, the technique was adapted for mineral analysis by utilising tantalum boats to introduce the samples into the combustion system. NIST reference standards and other certified reference materials that were physically and chemically similar to the sample mineral materials were used for calibration. The performance of the method was evaluated by measuring certified reference mineral samples and comparing the results with those from acid digestion methods. The technique was also compared with other methods of mineral analysis for samples having varying concentration levels, using statistical analysis of the data. The combination of the tantalum boat sample introduction method with AFS detection yielded a method detection limit for Hg of ∼0.1 ng g−1. Compared with wet digestion methods, recoveries for Hg using this technique were up to 20% higher (i.e., closer to quantitative recovery) for samples with concentrations >10 ng g−1 and up to 70% higher for samples containing <10 ng g−1 Hg, demonstrating a marked improvement in quantitative accuracy using this procedure. The precision of the method was found to be typically around 8% RSD (approximately half that reported for wet digestion methods).A procedure for the determination of selenite and selenate in drinking water, based on a fully automatic on-line separation/preconcentration system coupled to ETAAS using permanent chemical modifiers, has been described by Stripeikis and colleagues.122 The method utilised a time-based flow injection (FI) separation/preconcentration system coupled with an ETAAS spectrometer to determine selenite and selenate at ultra-trace levels in drinking water directly. Preconcentration of both the selenium species was achieved using a micro-column packed with an anionic resin (Dowex 1X8), placed in the robotic arm of the autosampling device. Selenite and selenate were sequentially eluted using 0.1 M HCl (for selenite), then 4 M HCl (for selenate). Interference during selenium atomisation from the large quantities of chloride in the samples was prevented by using iridium as a permanent chemical modifier for the furnace cuvette. For both species, the separation/preconcentration system achieved a retention efficiency of 53% and an enhancement factor of 82 (for a preconcentration time of 180 s at a sample flow rate of 3 ml min−1), with HCl elution volumes of 100 μL. The detection limit (3σ) was 10 ng L−1 for both species and the precision (n
					= 10) achieved at the 200 ng L−1 level was 3.5% for selenite and 5.6% for selenate. A recovery study based on addition of selenite and selenate standard solutions to tap water samples gave recoveries of 97–103% for both species. This procedure demonstrated an effective application of ETAAS in an automated, on-line application and provided analytically useful results. However, to enhance the detection capability of the technique, an improvement in the retention efficiency of both selenium species was required. This would also offer the potential to shorten the duration of the preconcentration step, thereby increasing the sample throughput.An ETAAS application of interest has been reported by Chen et al., in which the determination of Pb in blood using a tantalum-foil-lined-tube ETAAS system (with a platinum matrix modifier) was investigated.123 Use of a tantalum foil lining in the furnace cuvette was applied to extend the cuvette’s working life. The method provided a detection limit for Pb of 1.74 μg L−1 and recoveries in the range 96–103%. Typical precisions of better than 5.0% were achieved.A study of the efficiency of protons, nickel, palladium and thorium as chemical modifiers for the ETAAS determination of Cd, together with fast temperature programs to accelerate the analysis, has been performed.124 A comparison between the different modifiers was made in terms of the type of salt matrix in which the Cd was determined, the absorbance–time profiles and the effectiveness of elimination of the sodium chloride interference. The results were used to develop a method for the ETAAS determination of cadmium in biological and environmental samples. The highest sensitivity was obtained using nickel, together with protons, as the matrix modifier. The accuracy of the method was assessed by the determination of Cd in various certified reference materials. A detection limit of 0.03 ng Cd mL−1 was achieved, with a characteristic mass of 0.35 pg. This method provided a convenient and relatively inexpensive means of determining Cd in biological and environmental samples at concentration ranges that were encountered in these sample types. However, many biological and environmental samples, such as drinking waters, contain Cd at levels less than the detection limit achieved with this method, so in order to successfully analyze these samples a preconcentration step would also be required.An interesting and topical paper has been published by Potgieter et al. on the subject of the determination of hexavalent chromium in South African cements and cement-related materials using ETAAS.125 The method was based on selective extraction of CrVI in the cement matrix by treatment with 0.1 M Na2CO3 solution followed by direct determination of Cr by ETAAS. The procedure was applied to South African cement clinkers, natural gypsum, limestone and certified reference materials. A CrVI detection limit in the cement samples of 0.14 μg g−1 was achieved. It was found that between 30% and 80% of the total Cr in South African cement clinkers was CrVI compounds and that 8–26% of the total amount of CrVI species were water soluble. This latter observation was of concern since CrVI compounds are known carcinogens, and the water solubility of these materials increases the risk of their ingestion. The analytical performance of the method was verified by analysis of a sulfate-resisting Portland cement, BCS-CRM, and the results obtained were consistent with the certified values.Some novel work has also been performed this year using optical emission detection. A procedure for the simultaneous determination of hydride forming elements (As, Bi, Ge, Sb and Se) and of Hg in biological and environmental reference materials using an ETV-MIP-OES system with in situ trapping of the hydrides in a graphite furnace, has been reported by Mausiewicz and Kopras.126 A combination of hydride generation (HG) and in situ preconcentration of the hydrides onto the Pd-modified (for As, Bi, Ge, Sb, Se) or Au-modified (for Hg) interior wall surfaces of the furnace cuvette was used. The furnace formed the ETV sample introduction unit of the MIP-OES detection system used to detect the analytes of interest. Compromise conditions were established to allow simultaneous detection of all the analytes, based on a hydride-trapping temperature of 300 °C and a vaporization temperature of 2100 °C. Calibration was achieved using a standard additions approach. The absolute limits of detection (3σ of the blank peak height) achieved were 3, 8, 15, 8, 20 and 10 ng for As, Bi, Ge, Hg, Sb and Se, respectively. The efficiency of the instrumentation for generation and retention of the hydrides was better than 55% on average. This HG-ETV-MIP-OES method was effectively applied for the determination of As, Bi, Ge, Hg, Sb and Se in various biological and environmental certified reference materials (hair, tissue, leaves, soil, sediment, fly ash) with a precision of 8–15% RSD at concentrations 50-times higher than the detection limit, following decomposition of the samples by microwave digestion. Generally good agreement between the results and the reference values was obtained. This method was quite effective, although somewhat complex in operation. The use of compromise conditions for the whole suite of analytes and the relatively low overall system efficiency were areas that could potentially be modified or improved to increase the detection power of the method.An interesting application of data analysis has been described, in an article by Grotti and Frache, that studied acid effects in ICP-OES using internal standards selected by principal component analysis (PCA).127 This procedure aimed to use PCA to select optimal internal standards in ICP-OES in order to compensate for the effects of inorganic acids and their mixtures. An axially viewed ICP was used and operated under conditions chosen to maximize the efficiency of internal standardization. The analysis of the PCA score plot allowed a simple description of the characteristics of several reference and analytical emission lines to be obtained with respect to single and combined acid effects, and facilitated the choosing of optimal internal standards accordingly. The majority of the emission lines studied showed similar behaviour, with strong signal suppression in the presence of sulfuric acid and acid mixtures in particular. This suppression was observed to be independent of the energy of the emission line. By analysing synthetic samples, the authors verified that the errors due to hydrochloric, nitric, sulfuric acids and their mixtures could be reduced from 10 to 40% to less than 5%, using Sc 424 nm and Co 238 nm as reference emission lines. However, for a few emission lines (Se 196 nm, As 188 nm, As 193 nm, Sb 206 nm and P 213 nm), optimal correction by internal standardization was not achieved. The method was validated by analyzing the certified reference material BCR 288B (Pb with added impurities) after digesting a sample of this material with nitric acid. The results demonstrated that when Sc 424 nm or Co 238 nm reference emission lines were employed, the uncorrected results moved towards the certified values, giving a significant improvement in accuracy.Applications of ICP-MS in the area of inorganic chemicals and acids measurement have again risen this year, reflecting the continuing growth and increasing popularity of this analytical technique. A study into the feasibility of using the direct introduction of cigarette smoke for on-line trace element analysis by ICP-MS has been reported by Chang et al.128 For this work, an automated system for interfacing a smoking machine with an ICP-MS instrument to facilitate smoke generation, collection, injection and analysis, was developed. The instrument was used to profile major and minor elements in the particulate and gas phases of mainstream cigarette smoke of 2R4F reference cigarettes, by examination of full mass spectra taken from each sample. This method provided a means of rapidly screening the transfer of trace elements into mainstream smoke during cigarette combustion. A range of elements were identified in the whole cigarette smoke, including major analytes, such as Na, and trace elements, such as As, Cd and Hg. The major portions of most of these elements were found to be present in the particulate phase, whereas the greatest level of Hg was detected in the gas phase. The elements As, Br, Cd, Cl, I and Sb were distributed between both phases. The measurement precision was element dependent and ranged from 5 to 25% RSD, based on either peak height or peak area measurements.As mentioned at the start of this section of the review, the number of speciation applications has grown again this year. The trend in this analysis area in recent years has been towards more routine application of speciation measurements (for both oxidation state speciation and organic molecule speciation), and considerable work has been done to achieve this goal. ICP-MS is a powerful detector for speciation analysis, and this was reflected in the growing numbers of LC/CE/GC-ICP-MS papers appearing in the literature. Speciation of V, Cr and Fe by capillary electrophoresis (CE) dynamic reaction cell (DRC) ICP-MS has been studied.129 In this work, speciation of FeIII/II, VV/IV and CrVI/III was performed. Two different CE migration modes were used to separate the six metal ions using pre-capillary complexation. The first, the counter-electroosmotic mode, was applied to separate FeIII/II and VV/IV ions using a 60 cm × 75 μm id fused silica capillary. The voltage was set at +22 kV and a 15 mmol L−1 tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) buffer (pH 8.75) containing 0.5 mmol L−1 ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 0.5 mmol L−1 orthophenanthroline (phen) was used as the electrophoretic buffer. The second approach, co-electroosmotic mode, was employed for the separation of CrVI/III ions. For this separation, the applied voltage was set at −22 kV and a 10 mmol L−1 ammonium citrate buffer (pH 7.7) containing 0.5 mmol L−1 diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and 0.01% polybrene was used as the electrophoretic buffer. Measurements were made at m/z 51, 52 and 56 for V, Cr and Fe, respectively, using NH3 as the reaction cell gas to reduce the interfering polyatomic ions 35Cl16O+, 40Ar12C+ and 40Ar16O+. Detection limits in the range 0.1–0.5, 0.4–1.3 and 1.2–1.7 ng mL−1 were achieved for V, Cr and Fe, respectively. The method was successfully applied for the speciation of V, Cr and Fe in wastewater, giving recoveries in the range of 92–120% for various species.Another pertinent speciation study, concerned with the development of analytical procedures for the determination of total Cr by ICP-MS, and hexavalent Cr by HPLC-ICP-MS, in different materials used in the automotive industry, has been described by Seby and colleagues.130 A recent European directive has been adopted which limits the use of hazardous substances such as Pb, Hg, Cd and CrVI in vehicle manufacturing. From July 2003 a maximum of 2 g of CrVI, in corrosion-preventing coatings of key components, has been authorised per vehicle. Since no standardised procedures are at present available to verify that vehicles leaving the production line are in accordance with this directive, the objective of this work was to develop analytical procedures for total Cr and CrVI determination in these materials. Initially, the sample digestion procedures were optimised for total chromium determination in plastic and metallic materials. High resolution ICP-MS was used to examine the influence of polyatomic interferences on the detection of 52Cr and 53Cr. Where there was a large interference on m/z 52 for plastic materials (mainly 40Ar12C+), it was possible to use quadrupole ICP-MS to monitor m/z 53 instead, provided that digestions were only performed using HNO3
					+ H2O2. This mixture was also necessary for digestion of Cr from metallic materials. For the determination of CrVI, extraction procedures in alkaline media (NH4+/NH3 buffer solution at pH 8.9), assisted by sonication, were developed for four different corrosion-preventing coatings, followed by detection using HPLC-ICP-MS. After optimisation and validation with the only currently available solid reference material certified for its CrVI content (BCR 545, Welding Dust), the efficiency of this extraction procedure for screw coatings was compared with that described in the EN ISO 3613 standard usually used in routine laboratories. For coatings comprising zinc and aluminium passivated with chromium oxides, the extraction procedure developed in this work was more efficient than the standard method. This was also observed for the screw sample covered with a chromium passivant layer on zinc–nickel. However, for the coating comprising a chromium passivant layer on alkaline zinc, the standard extraction procedure was more efficient. In the case of painted metallic plate samples, extraction without reactive degradation of CrVI was difficult to perform.Returning to the subject of using reaction/collisional chemistry with ICP-MS, this technology has also been applied to measuring the radioisotopes 90Sr, 135Cs, 137Cs, 210Pb and 226Ra.131 By optimising the collision cell parameters, an improvement in sensitivity for all these radioisotopes was achieved. The authors demonstrated that measurement of 135Cs and 90Sr required different collision cell parameters when they were measured in the presence or absence of Ba and Zr. This was a consequence of isobaric interference from the non-radioactive 135Ba and 90Zr isotopes. The method provided detection limits that were improved by a factor of 100, 33, 22, 500 and 50 for 90Sr, 135Cs, 137Cs, 210Pb and 226Ra, respectively, compared with non-reaction cell measurements of these isotopes.An interesting application of ICP-MS has been reported by Gikunju et al., who studied the detection and identification of bacteria using direct injection.132 In this work, ICP-MS was used for the inorganic chemical characterisation of biological materials by direct injection. Suspended, microgram-sized samples of Bacillus subtilis spores (BG), Bacillus subtilis vegetative cells (Bg) and Bacillus thuringiensis
					(Bt) were analysed via a simple direct injection procedure. The unique chemical signatures of each sample were found to reflect the processing history of each bacteria material. This qualitative correlation could be used to identify each bacterium in the samples analysed.The use of LA-ICP-MS also remains an area of research interest, and the possibility of applying this technique for fingerprinting diamonds from different deposits has been investigated.133 The results illustrated that, after optimization of the analysis conditions, the LA unit used (a 193 nm excimer laser with a flat-top beam profile) was capable of ablating the diamonds in a controlled way and the sensitivity of the ICP-MS device was sufficient for the detection of more than ten elements. In this work, diamonds originating from four different mines were studied. Each diamond was ablated on 8 different spots for 30 s and the median of the eight integrated signals was taken as a representative value for subsequent statistical analysis. Under these conditions, the total mass of material removed from a single diamond was around 16 μg. Finally, 9 elements were selected for fingerprinting purposes (Al, Hg, Na, Ni, Pb, Sb, Sn, Ti and Zn) and different pattern recognition techniques were applied to classify the data. The authors considered that the results obtained were promising, especially for data subjected to pattern recognition using the partial least squares approach, providing that appropriate data standardization was carried out.Some interesting work on the measurement of isotope ratios on transient signals by multicollector (MC) ICP-MS has been described by Gunther-Leopold et al.134 Precise and accurate isotope ratio measurements are important in many geological, nuclear and bioavailability applications. MC-ICP-MS permits highly precise measurement of isotope compositions for a wide range of elements combined with good detection limits due to its high sensitivity. The technique is usually applied to continuously introduced samples, but in the present study it was applied for isotope ratio determination on transient signals generated by a HPLC coupled to the MC-ICP-MS instrument. In order to investigate the origin of ratio drifts across the transient signals for this hyphenated technique, measurements with the same solutions were also carried out using a flow-injection device for sample introduction. The results demonstrated that the main source of bias in the measured isotope ratios lay within the ICP-MS rather than in fractionation effects on the HPLC column. Preliminary studies on short transient signals of gaseous samples (i.e., dry plasma conditions) showed a reverse fractionation effect compared with flow injection and HPLC generated transient signals (i.e., wet plasma conditions).In another transient signal application for MC-ICP-MS, capillary gas chromatography was coupled with the MC-ICP-MS instrument.135 The instrumentation was used to assess precision and instrumental mass bias in S isotope ratio determination for the gaseous S species SF6. Integration of the peaks was performed using a special peak-integration method based on definition of the integration area by assessment of a uniform isotope-ratio area within the chromatographic peak. Instrumental mass bias was found to be approximately 12% per mass unit and proved to be stable in the concentration range measured. Replicate injections of 2, 10, 20 and 30 ng (as S) of SF6 diluted in argon gave precisions for the 32S/34S ratio ranging from 0.6% RSD (for 2 ng injections) to 0.03% RSD (for 30 ng injections). The 32S/33S and 33S/34S isotope ratio precision was better than 0.4% RSD for injections of 10 ng (as S) and higher. Detection limits were in the absolute pg range for all the measured S isotopes.Although now often superseded by MC-ICP-MS, TIMS was still used in many applications. It has been used, in the form of negative ion TIMS, to effect a 10-fold improvement in the precision of B isotopic analysis.136 Boron isotopes are potentially very important to cosmochemistry, geochemistry and paleoceanography: however, measuring their ratio has been limited by the large sample amount required for positive TIMS (PTIMS), and the high mass fractionation for negative ion TIMS (NTIMS). When measuring B as BO2−, NTIMS was a highly sensitive technique, requiring only nanogram sized samples, but it had rather poor precision (typically 0.7 to 2.0 parts per thousand) as a result of the large mass fractionation encountered with this relatively light ion. In contrast, measuring B as the much heavier molecule, CS2BO2+, PTIMS usually achieves better precision (around 0.1–0.4 parts per thousand). Furthermore, there was a consistent 10 parts per thousand offset in the 11B/10B ratio for the NIST SRM 951 standard boric acid between NTIMS data and the certified value, although the cause of this offset was unknown. In this work, the authors adapted an earlier technique to improve the NTIMS technique for BO2−. They were reportedly able to correct for instrumental fractionation by measuring BO2− species at masses 42, 43 and also at 45, which enabled normalization of the 45/43 BO2− ratio to an empirical 18O/16O value. In addition, different activators and different chemical forms of B were found to produce different slopes for the fractionation lines. After normalizing the BO2− ratios to a fixed 18O/16O value, the authors obtained a mean 11B/10B value for NIST SRM 951 that matched the NIST certified value. The technique developed in this work could consequently achieve precision and accuracy comparable to that of PTIMS. This new highly sensitive and precise NTIMS technique for B isotopes was stated by the authors to be critical for studies of early solids in the solar system and for examining individual foraminifera in sediments.Finally, another study of S, this time using isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS), was worth discussing. In this work, the 34S/32S ratio of the Soufre de Lacq elemental sulfur isotopic reference material (IAEA-S-4) was evaluated to determine its homogeneity, using a continuous flow IRMS procedure.137 Using this method, the reference material was determined to be isotopically homogeneous in amounts as small as 41 μg. The δ34S value for this reference material was found to be +16.90 ± 0.12 parts per thousand (1σ), on the Vienna Canon Diablo troilite (VCDT) scale, where IAEA-S-1 was −0.3 parts per thousand and IAEAS-2 was +22.67 parts per thousand.X-ray fluorescence as a means of elemental detection also continues to find new applications. Multi-element analysis of kitchenware and other food related items using a 241Am radioisotope XRF transportable spectrometer and hand-held analyzers has been reported by Anderson.138 Radioisotopic X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (RXRFS) performed with an analyzer based on a 241Am excitation source was investigated as a potential field method for screening kitchenware for the presence of toxic elements. A system based on commercially available detection equipment was used to measure surface concentrations of Au, Ba, Bi, Cd, Ce, Co, Cs, Cu, Fe, La, Pb, Sb, Sn, Sr, Zn and Zr in a wide variety of samples. Certified reference material solders, glasses, and paint films and well-characterised oven-fired test tile glazes and metal can seams were analysed to determine element sensitivities and analytical limits and to demonstrate the accuracy of the instrument. With analysis times of between 3 and 5 min, the analyzer demonstrated 3σ limits of detection of less than or equal to 100 μg cm−2 for analytes with atomic numbers of 40–65 and >70. Good accuracy was demonstrated for glaze and thin sample analyses, whereas for solders and metal can seams, greater uncertainties of 20–40% resulted. Two commercially available hand-held RXRFS analyzers, evaluated as part of the study, yielded results that agreed well with those obtained with the 241Am based RXRFS system.Finally, in another X-ray detector based study, solid-state chemical speciation, desorbability, and total levels of As in poultry litter and amended soils were investigated using synchrotron based probing techniques, namely micro-focused synchrotron X-ray fluorescence (SXRF) and micro-focused X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopies, coupled with chemical digestion and batch experiments.139 Recent US legislation has lowered the maximum concentration levels (MCL) of total As to 10 ppb in drinking water, which has raised concerns about the agricultural use of As-containing biosolids, such as poultry litter (PL). The total As levels in the PL studied in this work were as high as 50 mg kg−1. In the materials analysed, As (in the forms of AsII, AsIII and AsV) was found to be concentrated in abundant needle-shaped microscopic particles (approximately 20 μm × 850 μm in size) associated with Ca, Cu and Fe and, to a lesser extent, with S, Cl and Zn. Post-edge XANES features of litter particles were observed to be dissimilar to those of the organo-AsV compound in poultry feed (i.e., roxarsone), suggesting possible degradation/transformation of roxarsone in the litter and/or in poultry digestive tracts. The extent of As desorption from the litter increased with increasing time and pH from 4.5–7, but at most 15% of the total As was released after 5 d at pH 7, which indicated the presence of insoluble phases and/or strongly retained soluble As compounds. No significant As accumulation (<15 mg kg−1) was found in long-term PL-amended agricultural surface soils, which suggests that As in the PL may have undergone surface and subsurface transport processes. These research results raised concerns with the authors about long-term PL amendment effects on As contamination in surrounding soil–water environments, and the possible impact on human health.2.4 Nuclear materialsThe mass spectrometry of long-lived radionuclides was reviewed by Becker.140 Advances in ICP-MS technology were highlighted, e.g., multi-collector instruments as a potential replacement for TIMS and the provision of collision/reaction cells to provide chemical resolution. An evaluation of the different forms of inorganic mass spectrometry was made and included a comparison with ICP-MS.The single largest, and most controversial, topic remains the consequences of the use of depleted uranium
					(DU) munitions. This is reflected in the numbers of papers concerned primarily with U bioassay and, of these, a small number provide either a greater understanding or improvement in the methodology. A survey of uncertainties in bioassay measurements was integral to a European project on “Optimization of Monitoring for Internal Exposure (OMINEX)”.141 Alpha-spectrometry remains the primary method of analysis but, although currently of limited use in routine environments, ICP-MS was recognised as being advantageous for longer lived radionuclides. The different parameters influencing the uncertainty of the result were investigated and optimum conditions for obtaining the lowest uncertainty and limit of detection were given for both alpha and mass spectrometry.The concentration and isotopic composition of U in the urine of groups of exposed and non-exposed personnel from the 1991 Gulf War was determined using ICP-MS by Gwiazda and colleagues.142 The exposed group was composed of two sub-groups: (a) exposed by wounding with DU fragments, (b) exposed by routes such as inhalation, ingestion, etc. The simple use of uranium concentration as an indicator of exposure to DU was rejected, as there was considerable overlap in the populations between exposed and non-exposed groups. Preliminary isotopic analysis, obtained by direct nebulization of urine into the ICP-MS, suggested that the uranium in many of the samples was enriched with respect to natural U. This was clarified by increasing the mass resolution from M/ΔM
					= 300 to 4000 whereupon a polyatomic ion (m/e 234.81 amu) was resolved from the uranium-235 ion. Subsequent purification of digested samples, using anion chromatography, yielded isotopic ratios indicative of either natural or depleted uranium. This work suggests strongly that (a) isotopic composition is the most reliable indicator of exposure to DU, (b) uranium concentrations are not a reliable indication of exposure, (c) the reliable determination of the isotopic composition of uranium in urine by ICP-MS must involve a purification procedure. Similar difficulties in U bioassay for the monitoring of occupationally exposed workers suggested that simple sample dilution before introduction into ICP-MS for isotopic analysis may be limited by interferences.143 In this case, anomalous values were observed for the minor isotope 234U. This isotope can make a significant contribution to the effective dose for minimally exposed workers, especially where the source was highly enriched uranium. The introduction of a purification stage provided a solution to the problems observed with the quantification of 234U.A rapid method for the analysis of small volumes of urine (2 mL) was reported by Pappas et al.144 Sample preparation included wet ashing via a microwave digestion and purification using a solid phase chelation extraction. A SF-ICP-MS instrument was used with a desolvating nebulizer. The gas-flows of the system were optimised to minimise mass bias effects. This procedure was considered to allow the accurate determination of U isotope ratios (<1% bias) in urine at total U concentrations of <10 pg mL−1 with little or no correction.The use of LA-ICP-MS for the detection of DU in contaminated soils has been seen as a useful screening method that reduces significantly the time and cost of sample preparation.145 Pressed pellets of the soil were prepared and the 235U/238U ratios determined. Substantial correction was needed to mitigate pulse counting artefacts attributed to sample inhomogeneity and subsequent sporadic introduction of the uranium analyte into the plasma. However, after correction, good agreement with parallel measurements using gamma-spectroscopy was obtained.Improvements in the measurement of minor U isotopes, e.g., 234U or 236U, was investigated using ICP-MS146,147 and TIMS.148 For example, the limiting factor for the determination of 234U ∶
					238U ratios by MC-ICP-MS in geological materials147 was seen as the relatively poor abundance sensitivity of the instrument (ca. 25 ppm). A correction was applied based upon the tail shape derived from peaks of mono-isotopic ion beams. This was considered to provide an estimate of the actual tail contribution under each peak and to be superior to a correction based upon a half-mass zero baseline estimate. The latter produced an apparent bias (3%) on 234U ∶
					238U ratios determined in equilibrated U. A double spike (236U, 233U) was used to correct for mass bias and a desolvating nebulizer was used for sample introduction. An external reproducibility of 0.08%
					(2-sigma) was achieved for measurements on an isotopic CRM (NBL-112a). The measurement of 236U ∶
					238U ratios in sediments146 can be used as an indicator of an anthropogenic input from irradiated U. Where sufficiently elevated levels are present, ICP-MS provides a rapid means of assessing this input. SF-ICP-MS at medium resolving power (R
					= 3440) was used to assess the 236U ∶
					238U ratios in sediments and soils with a determination limit of 2 × 10−7 relative abundance. The limiting factors on the determination of 236U were seen as: (a) an interference from 235U–H and (b) tailing from the 238U peak, i.e., limited by abundance sensitivity. TIMS remains the standard method for certification of nuclear materials and a series of new techniques are claimed to provide a significant improvement in accuracy and precision.148 Firstly, the total evaporation technique was modified by introduction of a peak tailing correction to improve the determination of minor isotopes, and secondly, a multi-dynamic measurement regime was used. The latter combines the simultaneous detection of multiple isotopes with dynamic cycling of mass in two or more steps. This was made possible by a new mass spectrometer fitted with quadrupole lenses that allows the rapid switching of the ion beam dispersion during dynamic measurements. This reduces the dependence of the isotope ratio measurement on the individual cup sensitivities and pre-amplifier gains. The impact of these developments in terms of improved precision and accuracy was demonstrated during several recent NBL-certification exercises.The determination of Pu using ICP-MS continues to attract attention and this is illustrated for applications in environmental149,150 and emergency response analysis.151 Response to incidents requires a rapid turn-around of samples to assess any release of activity. Recent wildland fires near two US facilities emphasised this need and provided the driver for the development of an ICP-MS methodology for detection of airborne Pu.151 The most promising approach was based upon acid leaching of the air-filter samples using an open vessel microwave system. The limits of detection were consistent with emergency response levels and superior to those achieved with a competing methodology based upon alpha-spectroscopy, e.g., <0.1 and ∼1 mBq m−3239Pu, respectively. It was believed that a reporting time of <24 h from receipt at the ICP-MS laboratory could be achieved. A procedure for the determination of Pu in soils149 was optimized by Nygren et al. by considering the digestion and separation methods, i.e., acid-leaching versus fusion with lithium metaborate and TEVA resin versus UTEVA + TRU. Anomalous Pu values were obtained after separation based upon TEVA + TRU resins. An analysis at higher mass resolution revealed an interference based upon lanthanide containing polyatomic ions. The combination of a lithium metaborate fusion and subsequent separation on TEVA maximized the yield of Pu and minimized the interference from lanthanide containing polyatomic ions. The repeatability of the method (RSD = 2.5%) was assessed by analysis of a sediment CRM (IAEA 300). The direct analysis of Pu in soils and sediments using LA-ICP-MS,150 as reported by Boulyga and co-workers, offered a combination of low limits of detection and rapidity. A laser ablation system, modified to produce high ablation rates, was coupled to an SF-ICP-MS instrument. Interferences from polyatomic ions (UH+ and PbO2+) and by tailing from 238U+ were minimized by dry plasma conditions and medium mass resolution (R
					= 4000). This yielded limits of detection of ∼3 × 10−13 g g−1
					(700 μBq g−1239Pu) for Pu isotopes in soil samples containing U in the low μg g−1 range. Quantification was obtained by isotope dilution, the spike being added to the sample, followed by drying and pressing of the sample into a pellet. The LA-ICP-IDMS method was considered to show good agreement with methodologies based upon dissolution followed by alpha-spectrometry or ICP-MS. A CRM was also analysed (NIST 4357) and agreement with the certified value of 239Pu +
					240Pu (10.4 ± 0.2 mBq g−1) demonstrated (9.8 ± 3 mBq g−1). The uncertainty on the LA-ICP-IDMS determination was significantly greater than that assigned to the reference value and a specific comment on the limitations of the method for inhomogeneous samples is noted, e.g., where “hot” particles are present.The introduction of collision/reaction cells to provide “chemical resolution” of isobars in ICP-MS has great potential for the determination of radionuclides. The resolution of 129I+ from 129Xe+ is an exemplar for this approach.152 A mixture of oxygen and helium as reaction gases within a hexapole collision cell yielded limits of detection ca. 2 orders of magnitude better than those obtained with SF-ICP-MS, i.e., ∼0.8 pg mL−1 and 5 μBq mL−1.Although already very common in other areas of analytical atomic spectrometry, the application of hyphenated techniques for speciation is becoming of growing interest in the nuclear industry. Coupled CE-ICP-MS was used by Kuczewski et al. to study the redox speciation of Pu and Np in solution.153 Separation of NpIV, UVI, LaIII and ThIV in aqueous acetic acid solution (1 mol L−1) was accomplished within 15 min and LODs of ∼50 ng mL−1 reported. Similarly, separation of various Pu and Np oxidation states in a range of aqueous matrices was demonstrated. The Pu and Np redox equilibria were shown to be unperturbed during the CE separation by comparison with the UV-Vis spectra of Pu and Np equilibrium solutions. The interaction of PuVI with humic acid-containing groundwaters was also followed by CE-ICP-MS. The migration of radionuclides in the aquatic environment and the role of colloids as carriers are of intense interest. The combination of flow-field flow fractionation and ICP-MS154 was used to provide element specific fractograms for (a) smectitic colloids derived from a natural bentonite and (b) humic/fulvic acid colloids. The study concluded that even in groundwater/sediments systems with a high humic/fulvic acid content, inorganic colloids might play an important role as carriers for radionuclides.The determination of radionuclides continues to provide interesting applications for laser spectroscopy. Inductively coupled plasma cavity ringdown spectroscopy
					(ICP-CRDS) was applied to determine the isotopic composition of U.155 Three different U lines were studied (U atom line at 358.49 nm and the U ion lines at 286.57 and 409.01 nm) and the isotopic splitting resolved for each. The LOD for individual isotopes was estimated to be in the region of 70–150 ng mL−1 and spectra for both naturally abundant and highly enriched (50%
					235U) uranium were obtained. The potential for the development of ICP-CRDS as a field-deployable, on-line U isotope monitor was discussed. Isotopic analysis of Cs in irradiated fuel and sediments was performed using resonance ionization mass spectrometry
					(RIMS).156 A graphite furnace was used as the atomizer and ionization was via single resonance excitation with a laser diode followed by photoionisation with an argon ion laser (488 nm). This yielded an optical selectivity of >102 for 135Cs and 137Cs against 133Cs and an overall selectivity of 108.3 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and compositesAs always, many polymers are difficult to dissolve. Therefore there has been great interest in solid sampling techniques. Sellner and co-workers employed LA-ICP-MS for the determination of Mn in polystyrene beads (400 μm in diameter) used to catalyse the enantiospecific epoxidation of styrene to the corresponding epoxide.157 The polymer was prepared by co-polymerisation of styrene with chiral cross-linking dendritic salens and then loaded with manganese acetate and lithium chloride. Using an ArF excimer laser at 193 nm, the authors analysed freshly prepared beads, beads that had been used up to 20 times and “re-loaded” beads. By ablating 40 pm deep craters, it was found that Mn was evenly distributed throughout the fresh and re-loaded beads, but that the used ones showed that it had been leached to approximately 25% of the original content after 15 uses. In addition, the authors also concluded that the Mn was leached from the surface inwards towards the centre. The determination of Pd in a number of materials including a polymer, a pharmaceutical drug and a used auto-catalyst reference material, by solid sampling GFAAS, has been described by Resano et al.158 The influence of parameters such as the temperature programme, the use of a matrix modifier, the analytical wavelength employed and sample mass were all investigated. It was found that the concentration of Pd varied widely between the different sample types (2 ng g−1 to 326 μg g−1). Overall, the authors concluded that direct analysis of the solid materials prevented the need for lengthy or hazardous dissolutions whilst enabling a reasonable precision to be obtained (between 3 and 15% RSD). In addition, with an analysis time of 15 min per sample, there was a high throughput and the LOD of 0.4 ng g−1 in the drug indicated good sensitivity. By far the largest volume of work performed by analysing solid materials has employed various X-ray techniques. The degradation rates for poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) and for nitrocellulose with cellulose acetate in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has been reported.159 Previous studies had demonstrated very differing results for degradation rate, especially when using different pieces of instrumentation. The present work indicated that the variation could arise through both the difference of layer thickness used for the measurement and the differing levels of adventitious electrons in the different instruments. The study led to the formulation of simple operating recommendations for this type of analysis. The surfaces of two pure polyolefins, low density polyethylene and biaxially oriented polypropylene, were modified by vacuum UV light in the presence of low pressure ammonia and the resulting surfaces analysed by an assortment of techniques including XPS, TOF-SIMS and total reflectance IR.160 It was shown that up to 25% N could be chemically bonded to the surface, predominantly as an amine group. Using contact angle goniometry before and after treatment, it was found that the addition of N led to an increase in the surface energy of the polymers. Two papers by Boeykens and co-workers have described the chemical modification of polysaccharide molecules (e.g. scleroglucan) so that it was possible to detect them using total reflection-XRF (TXRF).69,70 In both examples OH groups of the molecule were substituted by I, but the experimental parameters, e.g., temperature, pH and concentrations of reagents, were optimised to ensure that only some of the OH groups became substituted. This was to ensure that the physical properties of the macromolecule were not altered. Quantification of the macromolecule was made by a “previous careful calibration”. The majority of papers that have discussed the analysis of solid samples have used conventional EDXRF. Many of these have been applications that have characterised a product that has been synthesised. Examples include: the preparation, characterisation and performance of a conductive fabric prepared by the diffusion polymerisation of aniline using ammonium persulfate as the oxidant;161 the determination of the chemical composition of canjica, a polymeric water soluble material collected from nine Brazilian sugar and alcohol plants;162 and the characterisation of a PVC membrane sensor used for the selective determination of cerium(III).163 The canjica was shown by CHNS analysis to be a carbohydrate, and XRF indicated that various elements (Al, Ca, Cl, Fe, K, Mn, P, Si and Ti) were present at concentrations that varied considerably from sample to sample. Nakano and Nakamura have described the preparation of calibration standards for XRF spectrometry of trace metals in plastics.164 Organometallic standards of the analytes Co, Cr, Ge, Ni, Sb and V in xylene were cast into polyurethane or polyester. The calibration disk was described as having a homogeneous elemental distribution and excellent durability. Calibrations were linear up to 50 ppm for V and Ni, 100 ppm for Co and Ge, 200 ppm for Cr and 400 ppm for Sb. The LODs were typically 0.1–0.4 ppm for all analytes except Ni (0.066 ppm) and Sb (2.1 ppm). The procedure was applied to a number of industrial plastic samples and the results compared well with those obtained by AAS and by XRF using the fundamental parameter calculation method.A liquid nitrogen free EDXRF spectrometer has been developed to monitor the amount of Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb in plastics and polymers used in the automotive industry.165 The author stated that this was in response to new guidelines that were being adopted by many countries all over the world. Two papers by Hosseini and co-workers have discussed the synthesis and characterisation of polymers that can be used for toxic gas and vapour sensing.166,167 In one,166 a copolymer of pyrrole and poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) was prepared, and in the other,167 the conducting polymer polypyrrole was mixed with non-conducting ones, e.g., PVC, PVAc and polystyrene. In both cases, an assortment of analytical techniques including SEM, differential scanning calorimetry, UV-Vis spectrophotometry and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) were used to characterise the product. The mechanism by which the films manage to detect a large number of hydrogen halides, halogens and halogenated organic compounds was investigated by using several tecnniques including XRF. Another approach to solid sampling has been taken by Gornushkin and co-workers, who developed and evaluated an algorithm for the automatic correction of a continuum background in LIBS and Raman spectroscopy.168 The algorithm was applied to both simple and complex spectra and a study into its effect on identification accuracy was performed. It was found that the algorithm successfully eliminated background radiation whilst maintaining spectral integrity. By using both techniques, a number of plastics were identified correctly, with the percentage of correct identifications by Raman improving significantly when compared with the uncorrected data.Both SIMS and TOF-SIMS have been used by workers to investigate diffusion or layering within polymers. X-ray and neutron reflectivity have been used in conjunction with SIMS to determine the extent of probe segregation to an interface in ultra-thin polymer films as a function of thermal cycles.169 Results, however, indicated that no segregation was evident. The use of TOF-SIMS for solid surface studies has been overviewed (with 39 references) by Paryjczak and Szynkowska (in Polish).170 The paper covered numerous topics including the principles and construction of TOF-SIMS spectrometers, and applications such as studies of surface areas, chemical composition, surface segregation, trace analysis, depth-profiling analysis and the analysis of materials such as catalysts, polymers, semiconductors, biopolymers and fibres. A summary of the relative merits and drawbacks of the technique was also presented. Another review of TOF-SIMS has been prepared by Belu et al., who discussed its use for the analysis of biomaterials.171 Since the surface of these materials plays such a critical role in the success of a surgical implant, the surface chemistry must be characterised very accurately. The technique of TOF-SIMS was ideal for this purpose, because it has the ability to determine the composition, structure, orientation and spatial distribution of the molecules and chemical structures at the surface. The review introduces the first principles of the technique and then moves on to discussing its strengths and weaknesses, as well as the sample considerations that must be taken into account. Finally, the authors provide an outlook for the use of TOF-SIMS for biomaterials analysis. Two applications of TOF-SIMS have been published in this review area. One described the preparation and subsequent analysis of polyaniline emeraldine base (PANI EB) films doped with selenium.172 The thin films were obtained by spin coating of silicon and zinc selenide substrates with PANI EB and Se solution in DMSO. The Se distribution was studied using TOF-SIMS. Many semiconductor devices were encapsulated in epoxy moulding compounds. Often, these compounds contain halide ions (either Br as a flame retardant or Cl from epichlorohydrin used in the epoxidation) which, when in the presence of water, can break down the protective oxide layer on the surface of aluminium metallized components and accelerate corrosion. Since the rate of corrosion will depend on the rate of ion diffusion, Lantz and Pecht used TOF-SIMS to measure ion diffusion in the epoxy moulding compounds.173 It was found that the rate of diffusion depends on the type of moulding compound, on the pH and on the concentration of ions present. The mode of diffusion was through the polymer resin matrix rather than diffusion at the interface of the resin and filler particles.Several applications of the analysis of polymers or the leaching of analytes from polymers have been published. The systematic errors in the determination of trace metals (Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni and Pb) by GFAAS have been discussed.174 The behaviour of these analytes (at pH 2) on contact with borosilicate glass and polyethylene containers and then transferred to polyethylene–polypropylene and home-made quartz autosampler cups was studied. The authors found that the analytes interacted with the different materials to a different degree. The most significant losses of Cr and Ni occurred on a polyethylene surface, whilst the highest absorbance signals were obtained from quartz containers. Other analytes, e.g., Cd and Cu, also yielded higher absorbances when kept in quartz containers. Conversely, for Pb, the quartz container yielded the lowest absorbance reading. The container material had no effect for either Co or Mn. A method of pressurized wet digestion in open vessels has been reported by Maichin et al.175 A high pressure asher was adapted with a Teflon liner. The autoclave was partly filled with water containing 5% hydrogen peroxide. The digestion vessels (quartz or PFA-Teflon) were either dipped partly into the water or arranged on top of it by means of a titanium or PTFE coated stainless steel rack, and then the asher closed and pressurized with nitrogen to a pressure of 100 bar. The digestion vessels tested varied in volume between 1.5 mL and 50 mL. Sample size and volume of digesting solution varied depending on the size of the vessel, but for the smallest vessels, 50 mg of sample was digested with 0.2 mL of nitric acid + 0.5 mL water + 0.2 mL of hydrogen peroxide. The time required for digestion was 90–120 min, depending on the sample type. Nine CRMs were digested using this apparatus, and the digests analysed by GFAAS. No cross contamination between samples was observed and the data obtained for As, Hg and Se agreed well with the certified values, indicating that losses of these volatile analytes were minimal. The procedure was applied to the digestion of a number of sample types including cocoa, walnuts, pumpkin oil, lubrication oil, straw, polyethylene and coal. An interesting application has been reported by Liou, who used a range of analytical techniques (SEM, XRD, FT-IR and ICP-MS) to investigate the kinetics of the pyrolysis of electronic packaging material.176 Using temperature ramps of 5, 10, 15 or 20 K min−1 and under an inert nitrogen atmosphere, the effect of the heating programme on the surface area and pore structure of the samples was discussed. In addition, kinetic parameters such as the activation energy, pre-exponential factor and reaction order were determined. The author concluded that the results would be useful in developing pyrolysis or incineration systems for plastic waste from electronic components. Two similar papers that used TOF-SIMS have been published by Skrzydlewska and Balcerzak. In one, toxic elements in laminated plastic food packaging materials were determined after high pressure microwave digestion in a mixture of nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide.177 Materials analysed included low density polyethylene (LDPE), polypropylene, and a mix of terephthalate–polyethylene. Limits of detection ranged from 0.01 (Sb) to 0.117 (As) ng g−1. In the LDPE, Cr was found at a concentration of 0.33 mg kg−1, Sb was present at 1.81 mg kg−1 and Pb content was 0.53 mg kg−1. In the polypropylene, only Cr and Pb were detected (0.31 and 1.06 mg kg−1, respectively). The CRM BCR 681, polyethylene was used to validate the procedure. In the other paper,178 multi-elemental analysis of non-food packaging materials was reported. Both LDPE and high density polyethylene (HDPE), as well as a mix of polyethylene–polypropylene (PE–PP), were analysed. Again, digestion was achieved using the high pressure microwave digestion apparatus, but on this occasion the acid mixture was either nitric–hydrogen peroxide (for the LDPE and PE–PP mix) or nitric, sulfuric and hydrogen peroxide (for the HDPE). The authors used TOF-SIMS as the means of analysis and utilised the internal standards Y and Rh. A total of 13 analytes were determined. It was found that the concentration ranges of the analytes varied markedly between samples, e.g., Cr was present at concentrations of between 0.22 and 219 mg kg−1. Similarly, Pb showed the largest range of concentrations, being present at between <0.13 and 1222 mg kg−1. An evaluation of screening methods for the analysis of contaminants in re-cycled polyethylene–terephthalate flakes has been made by Nerin and co-workers.179 The techniques used were headspace GC-MS, liquid extraction followed by GC-MS and migration testing using ICP-MS. A total of 50 samples from around Europe were analysed, including six that been spiked with a selection of model contaminants. All samples were analysed blind. Results indicated that the only real contaminants originated from the first use, e.g., flavour aroma compounds from soft drinks. For the atomic spectroscopy, it was found that the only analytes that showed any migration were Ca, Na and Si. Silver containing polymers are known to exert an anti-bacterial effect. Two papers have discussed the characterisation of such polymers. Yu et al. prepared an Ag loaded polyacrylonitrile hollow fibre using a dry jet–wet spinning technique from a dope containing 0.5% silver nitrate.180 The fibres so formed were examined using SEM and the Ag content was determined by ICP-OES. The fibres were found to have a five layer structure and to contain Ag at a concentration of 0.19%. After flushing with water for 60 d, the Ag content was found to decrease to only 0.1%, but this was still sufficient to exhibit anti-bacterial activity. The other paper, which was written in Japanese, impregnated Ag into phenolic resin-based spherical carbon particles.181 These spherical particles were then characterised using SEM, AAS, XRD and nitrogen adsorption. Several papers have focused on the analysis of re-cycled polymers. A European directive limiting the use of hazardous substances such as Cd, CrVI, Hg and Pb in vehicle manufacturing has been adopted.130 This means that each vehicle must have no more than 2 g of CrVI contained in the anti-corrosion coatings. The paper described methods for the determination of both total Cr and CrVI. A digestion process using nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide was used for the analysis of both plastic and metallic materials for the total Cr determination, whereas an alkaline medium of ammonium/ammonia at pH 8.9 was used with sonication for the CrVI extraction. Such digestion media enabled Cr to be determined at m/z 52 and 53, even using a quadrupole based ICP-MS instrument. Determination of CrVI was achieved using HPLC-ICP-MS. The method was validated by analysis of the CRM BCR 545 Welding Dust which apparently is, at present, the only CRM with CrVI data.Numerous other preparation/characterisation studies have been presented including several that have characterised micro-beads. Polystyrene–poly(ethylene glycol) Tentagel micro-beads (20 μm diameter) were functionalised with 2,2′6′2″-terpyridine units, forming a material that had affinity for the transition metals.182 The beads were then loaded with different metal ions (Co, Cu, Fe and Ni) and then analysed using optical microscopy, UV-Vis spectrophotometry, AAS, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM. In a paper by Gawdzik and Sobiesiak, synthetic carbon microspheres for use in chromatography were examined.183 The spheres were prepared by using arc discharge argon plasma treatment of 4,4′-bis(maleimidodiphenyl)methane and divinylbenzene (DVB); and the chemical structure was determined by elemental analysis, SEM, acid–base titrations and AAS. It was found that Cu was a contaminant, and that it originated from the plasma reactor electrodes. It could be removed, however, by using either 20% nitric acid or EDTA. Another paper described the synthesis and then characterisation of polysaccharide phosphate particles using thermogravimetric analysis, SEM and an ICP technique.184 These beads could then be suspended in a silicone oil to form an anhydrous electro-rheological fluid. The final paper in this category used the techniques XPS and ICP-OES to characterise sub-micron particles of polymethyl methacrylate that had been prepared with europium octanoate as an integral part of the polymer.185 Both techniques indicated that there was a surface enrichment of the rare earth element, but there was disagreement as to the overall value that was present, with the XPS value always being larger than the ICP-OES value.Flame retardants have been another popular area of research in this review period. Two papers by Wu and co-workers have discussed the use of hydroxyl functional organophosphorus flame retarding agents.186,187 In the former paper, the retarding agent was combined with dimethyloldihydroxyethylurea (DMDHEU) which acts as a binder between the flame retardant and cotton cellulose, thus making the system durable to home laundering. Limiting oxygen index (LOI) is one of the most commonly used parameters to indicate the flammability of textiles and other polymeric materials. This study investigated the correlation between LOI and P/N content of the fabric. For the measurements, ICP-OES was used for P and IR was used for the N. The other paper was very similar, but on this occasion melamine formaldehyde was used as the binder rather than DMDHEU. The on-line determination of heavy metals and brominated fire retardants in technical polymers such as end of life waste electric and electronic equipment using LIBS has been reported by Stepputat and Noll.188 An auto-focusing unit with an adjustment range of 50 mm was incorporated into the LIBS analyser to permit measurement of objects that pass by the analyser at various distances away on a conveyor belt. The authors appeared satisfied that the analyser was capable of achieving its task. The determination of Br in flame retardant plastics using GD-MS has been reported by Li et al.189 The authors reported that the direct analysis of bulk samples produced both atomic and molecular species, thereby allowing elemental and molecular characterisation. Unfortunately, the low ion signal intensities hindered quantification for many samples. However, those samples that were compacted with a silver binder provided intense analyte signals and could readily be quantified. The atomization mechanism was investigated using SEM and MS and it was found that although there was evidence of some thermal desorption, the sputter atomization dominated. Signal stability, measurement precision, measurement accuracy and LOD were all assessed. Different procedures to extract high concentrations of a series of brominated flame retardants from various polymer materials have been examined.190 The procedures included extraction with supercritical carbon dioxide, supercritical carbon dioxide modified with toluene, acetonitrile and THF and Soxhlet extraction. Ordinary supercritical carbon dioxide led to poor extraction efficiencies (between 6 and 20%), but the modified version yielded higher recovery. The Soxhlet extraction using 1-propanol had very high recoveries of between 93 and 100%. The materials were analysed both before and after extraction using EDXRF, IR, HPLC with UV detection and GC-MS.There has been considerable interest in the preparation and characterisation of nanocomposite particles in this review period. Paunesku et al. observed that the emerging area of nanotechnology holds promise for overcoming limitations of existing technology for intra-cellular manipulation.191 This was because nanocomposites can be introduced to the cells and targeted to specific sub-cellular sites. The authors describe how they introduced TiO2–DNA into cells and then localised the Ti by mapping the Ti K-alpha XRF that had been induced at the 2-ID-E microprobe of the SRI-CAT at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. Matzui and co-workers used salt thermolysis to prepare Co on carbon particulates and then characterised the product using the techniques XRD, SEM, Auger spectroscopy and SIMS.192 The process involves the formation of a thin film of the salt onto the surface of the thermally expanded carbon particles and, after thermal decomposition, cobalt oxide particles of diameter 50–100 nm were formed. These can then form aggregates that were up to 400 nm in size. Two papers have discussed methods of impregnating the molecular sieve MCM-41 with zinc sulfide.193,194 In the former paper, the zinc sulfide nanoparticles were synthesised in the reverse micelles of sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate in isooctane and were then impregnated into the molecular sieve by using compressed carbon dioxide. The composites obtained were characterised by XRD, nitrogen adsorption, TEM, AAS, TGA and photoluminescence. Results indicated that the zinc sulfide was present within the pores of the molecular sieve. The authors claimed that this method of preparation had several advantages over conventional methods. In the other paper,194 Xi et al. reported the synthesis of PVK–zinc sulfide in ethylenediamine modified MCM-41. The zinc sulfide content of the product was determined by ICP-OES. The Cu diffusion barrier properties of layered silicate/fluorinated polyimide nanocomposites were studied by Jiang and Wei using TEM and SIMS.195 They found that the Cu was effectively retarded from penetrating into the polyimide layers by the layered silicates, and hence the diffusion coefficients of the layered nanocomposites were lower than that of pure polyimide. Mbhele et al. investigated the influence of Ag nanoparticles on the properties of poly(vinyl alcohol)
					(PVA).196 The nanocomposite was formed by mixing a colloidal solution of Ag nanoparticles with a water solution of PVA. Composite films with different contents of inorganic phase were obtained after solvent evaporation. The compositions of these inorganic phases were determined using TEM and AAS. The results indicated that the Ag was present as 20 nm particles at 0.19, 0.22 or 0.73% by weight, depending on the ratio in which the starting materials were mixed. The presence of the Ag improved the thermal stability of the composite compared with the polymer, but stress relaxation measurements revealed reduced stability of the nanocomposite.Other composites have been prepared and characterised. Khan and co-workers prepared a polypyrrole polyantimonic acid composite by mixing the inorganic precipitate of hydrated antimony oxide with the polypyrrole.197 The product was a cation exchanger that had good capacity, good thermal and chemical stability, good reproducibility and selectivity for Hg. The material was characterised using AAS, SEM, elemental analysis, XRD, FT-IR and TGA. The composite could be used as a membrane for an ion selective electrode that measured Hg in solution. Zirconia supported, Keggin type polyoxometalates synthesised using a sol–gel technique have been reported in two papers by Jiang and co-workers.198,199 In the first, 12-tungstophosphoric acid–zirconia was synthesised and in the second, the mono and di-Ti substituted versions were prepared. In both cases, the composites were characterised using FT-IR, 31P magic angle spinning NMR, ICP-OES and nitrogen adsorption. All of the composites were catalysts, with the 12-tungstophosphoric acid being used to catalyse the synthesis of dimethyl carbonate from methanol and carbon dioxide, and the Ti-substituted versions assisting in the photocatalytic degradation of the dye naphthol blue black.3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materialsThere is still a great deal of interest in this subject area. As always, the various forms of XRF have been used extensively. Pahlke discussed the relative merits of vapour phase decomposition
					(VPD)–TXRF.200 This is a technique whereby a surface acid digestion and preconcentration procedure are incorporated into an automated and routine procedure. A linear range of 1011–1014 atoms cm−2 was obtained for a large selection of analytes. The LOD ranges between 1 × 1011 and 1 × 107 atoms cm−2 depending on the analyte and on the X-ray excitation energy. Analytes with low atomic mass (e.g. Al, Mg and Na) may be determined at a concentration of approximately 109 atoms cm−2. The development of a VPD-TXRF spectrometer has been reported by Yamagami and co-workers.201 The instrument was designed to give a minimum footprint, protect operators and instrumentation from HF gas and to avoid cross contamination between samples. The LODs achieved using this instrumentation were 2 orders of magnitude superior to those obtained by conventional TXRF. The results obtained were compared with those using AAS, and were found to be in good agreement over a wide concentration range. A paper by Mori and Uemura reviewed and discussed three different types of TXRF, i.e., straight TXRF, VPD-TXRF and sweeping-TXRF.202 The latter was used to conduct whole surface analysis without chemical preconcentration. In addition, the authors discussed the potential drawbacks of conventional standard samples prepared by physisorption, i.e., the reproducibility of depth-profiling and stability, and proposed the use of chemisorption through the use of immersion in alkaline hydrogen peroxide. This method of standard sample preparation reportedly overcame the drawbacks associated with physisorbed standards. Beckhoff and colleagues have described the development of a novel piece of instrumentation capable of analysing contamination on 200 and 300 mm silicon wafers by either TXRF or EDXRF.203 The most prominent features of the instrument were a high vacuum load-lock combined with an equipment front-end module and an irradiation chamber with an electrostatic chuck mounted on an 8 axis manipulator. The whole surface of the wafers could be scanned by monochromatised undulator radiation. A series of papers by Streli et al. have discussed the determination of low atomic mass analytes such as Al, C, Mg and Na on silicon wafers.204–206 In the first of these papers, LODs ranging from 0.3–1.3 pg were obtained using TXRF and from 2 × 107 to 1 × 108 atoms cm−2 using VPD-TXRF. The latter two papers used synchrotron radiation-TXRF to perform the analyses.Several reviews and overviews of the use of atomic spectroscopy for the analysis of semiconductors have been published. Included in these was one by Shabani et al., who discussed the recent advanced applications of GFAAS and ICP-MS.207 The authors discussed the problems arising from silicon-based polyatomic interferences that can impair the LODs of numerous analytes and described methods of overcoming them. The advantages and disadvantages of VPD, drop etching and drop sandwich etching for the recovery of metal impurities from silicon wafers were also discussed. Becker and Dietze discussed the state of the art in inorganic mass spectrometry for the analysis of high purity materials such as semiconductors.208 Included in the review were the techniques of ICP-MS, LA-ICP-MS, GDMS and SIMS. The control of water vapour contamination in process gases is critical to the successful manufacture of semiconductor devices. Funke and co-workers reviewed the techniques currently available for this analysis and these included FT-IR, tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy, cavity ringdown spectroscopy, intra-cavity laser spectroscopy, electron impact ionization mass spectroscopy and atmospheric pressure ionization mass spectroscopy.209 Sensor based technologies such as oscillating quartz crystal microbalances as well as chilled mirror-, capacitor- and electrolytic-based hygrometers were also reviewed. Relative advantages and disadvantages of each of the techniques, as well as trends and future developments, were also discussed. The analysis of various chemicals used in the semiconductor industry has been described by Kawabata and Kishi.210 Severe isobaric and polyatomic interferences exist for analytes such as Ca, Fe and K during conventional operation, but the use of a cool plasma alleviates some of the problems. However, the cool plasma technique does have drawbacks, mainly originating for the much lower plasma energy. The authors described how the use of DRC-ICP-MS eliminates the interferences via a combination of a chemical gas to dissociate the polyatomic species and dynamic bandpass tuning, which acts as a mass filter.As always, depth-profiling and diffusion studies have been popular research areas. Liu and co-workers have pointed out that high resolution depth-profiling (of 1 nm) is critical in the semiconductor industry today.211 In addition to good resolution, it is necessary to have well characterised reference materials so that accurate quantitative analysis of doping profiles can be obtained. The International Standards Organization (ISO)/Technique Commission (TC201)/Surface Chemical Analysis (SC6-SIMS) have been engaged in the development of the international standardization of depth-profiling of dopants in silicon using SIMS. The paper by Liu et al.211 reported the use of the low energy primary ion O-2(+) in the SIMS depth-profiling of BN delta-doped silicon samples grown by magnetron sputtering. Surface roughening complicated the measurement so, in an attempt to minimise this, the effects of oxygen flooding and sample rotation were studied. There are numerous methods that may be used to achieve depth-profiling, and they fall into two broad camps. Either a layer is removed and this is then analysed (as is the case with SIMS, GDMS, GDOES, ablation based techniques, etc.), or the layer that remains after another layer has been removed is analysed in situ
					(e.g., Auger electron spectroscopy or XPS). Assuming there is no preferential sputtering of a component, the techniques are complementary and should yield the same result. A paper by Hofmann discussed the concepts and present state of depth-profiling.212 This author stated that the ion–solid interaction was fundamental to the understanding of depth-profiling and discussed how a greater understanding has yielded great improvements in experimental profiling experiments. The development of mathematical models has also facilitated deconvolution of the measured profile. A comparison of different methods for the precise measurement of Ge depth-profiles in silicon–germanium hetero-bipolar transistors has been made by Zaumseil and colleagues.213 X-ray diffractometry and reflectometry, spectroscopic ellipsometry, Auger electron spectroscopy, SIMS and TEM were all used during the comparison. It was shown that the values obtained agreed very well within the error limits and that an achievable accuracy of layer thickness of about 1 nm can be achieved routinely. The highest accuracy for determining the Ge content was obtained using either XRD or well calibrated spectroscopic ellipsometry.A femtosecond LA-TOF-MS technique has been applied to in-depth multi-layer analysis.214 The samples analysed were a silicon wafer, which had been implanted with 1017 ions cm−2 of Co that had previously been characterised using other established techniques, and a thin film metal standard (NIST 2135c), which was a silicon wafer with nine alternating layers of Cr and Ni, each having a thickness of 56 and 57 nm, respectively. Using a resolution of 300, the orthogonal TOF-MS instrument was capable of achieving adequate sensitivity. The results obtained were very encouraging, with the technique being capable of resolving the depth profiles of these samples. However, the precision was poor and this was attributed to pulse to pulse stability of the laser system used. Despite this, the authors concluded that the technique showed a great deal of promise.The technique most commonly used for depth-profiling/diffusion studies has been SIMS. Strontium bismuth tantalate (SBT) was introduced to amorphous silica as a ferroelectric material for non-volatile memories.215 Diffusion of Bi, Sr or Ta from an SBT layer into a thin layer of silica was promoted by annealing at 800 °C for time periods in the range 1–24 h. The diffusion profiles of the analytes were then determined using SIMS and, in an attempt to elucidate the diffusion mechanism, the results were compared with profiles derived from theoretical calculations. Although SIMS cannot determine the analytes’ binding situation, it can be used in conjunction with theoretical calculations to obtain indirect information, which led the authors to conclude that Bi and Sr reacted with vacancies in the silica. The diffusion coefficients of Bi and Sr at 800 °C were found to be 10−14 and 10−15 cm2 s−1, respectively. Other papers that have studied mechanistic aspects of diffusion include ones by Mosca and co-workers,216 who determined Be diffusion in molecular beam epitaxy grown gallium arsenide structures, and another by Marcon et al.217 who also determined Be, but in indium gallium arsenide, grown by gas source molecular beam epitaxy. Both papers concluded that Be diffusion occurs via a “kick-out” mechanism. The former paper also found that Be diffusion was faster in p/p(+)/p structures than in p/p(+) ones. Merabet and Gontrand studied the diffusivity of B in polycrystalline silicon during rapid thermal annealing at temperatures of between 1000 and 1150 °C for 20 s.218 Once the SIMS data had been acquired, it was analysed using the Suzuoka model. It was found that the grain boundary diffusivity was two to three times larger than the volume diffusivity.There has been considerable interest in the study of solar cells in this review period. An assortment has been studied including those prepared from CdS, CdSxSe(1−x) and CdSe for use in graded band gap solar cells.219 These compounds were grown at 170 °C using electrodeposition from an electrolyte containing ethylene glycol as the solvent. Using XRF, the value of x in the compounds was found to be 0.22, 0.50, 0.76 or 1.00, depending on the conditions. By varying the value of x, the band gap could be varied from 1.7 eV (for x
					= 0, i.e. CdSe) to 2.4 eV for x
					= 1 (i.e. CdS). The structure remained hexagonal throughout, but the lattice spacing increased as the smaller S ions were replaced by the larger Se ones. Mills and co-workers reported the preparation of a novel, highly stable amorphous silicon hydride.220 The product was formed by using a microwave plasma reaction of silane, hydrogen and helium, where a positively charged helium ion acted as a catalyst. The product was characterised using TOF-SIMS, which indicated a large SiH+ peak in the positive spectrum and H− in the negative one; and XPS. The authors theorised that the highly stable silicon hydride coating may advance the production of integrated circuits and micro-devices by resisting the oxygen passivation of the surface and possibly altering the dielectric constant and band gap to increase the device performance. The majority of applications in this part of the review concern the characterisation/properties of copper gallium selenide (CGS) or copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin films. Nishiwaki et al. described the preparation of Ga rich CGS films prepared on molybdenum/soda lime substrates by the bilayer process.221 The film surfaces were then modified by chemical bath treatment with indium sulfate, thioacetamide and triethanolamine to improve the performance in solar cell applications. The film compositions were characterised using XRF and XPS. The chemical bath treatment led to an improvement in the spectral response, especially at the long wavelength part of the spectrum, which resulted in an increase in a short circuit current density and an increase in the parallel and series resistance of the cells. Herz et al. reported the deposition of CIGS thin films on 1–3 μm layers of alumina, deposited as diffusion barriers by rf sputtering from a ceramic target, on metal foils.222 A CIGS solar cell of 0.25 cm2 achieved an efficiency of approximately 10–11% without sodium doping. In the absence of the alumina barriers, the efficiency was substantially lower, except for when the films were deposited on titanium foils. This was attributed to a reduction in fill factors and to reduced open-circuit voltages. Using SIMS and sputtered neutral mass spectrometry depth-profiling, the different cell efficiencies were correlated with the amount of impurities entering the CIGS layer by diffusion from the substrates. The presence of the diffusion barriers decreased the amount of Fe and Cr diffusing from the chromium steel foils, the amount of Ti diffusing from the titanium foil and the amount of Co, Fe, Ni and Ti diffusing from the Kovar® foils. Laser ionization TOF-MS was used by Garcia and co-workers to demonstrate its usefulness in obtaining P distribution-profiles in solar cells.223 The distribution of P was critical since it affects the location of the p-n junction. In addition, the titania anti-reflective coating was also measured, where a sampling depth of 0.3 nm pulse−1 was achieved. The authors concluded that the technique was fast, it did not require sample handling or preparation and it was free from charge effects that affect the ion beam techniques. The synchrotron XRF techniques of XRF microscopy, and X-ray absorption micro-spectroscopy (μ-XAS) have been used to analyse the behaviour of transition metals in solar cells and single crystalline silicon with extended defects.224 The former technique was capable of detecting metal precipitates as small as a few tens of nm in diameter within a silicon matrix with micron-scale resolution. When used in conjunction with the X-ray beam induced current (XBIC) technique, it was possible to acquire information about the elemental nature of the transition metal precipitates and their recombination activity. The μ-XAS yields information regarding the local environment of the impurity atoms and their chemical state. The authors used these techniques to model defect structures in photovoltaic grade multicrystalline silicon, whilst the effect of transition metal clusters on the electrical properties of good and bad regions of the multicrystalline silicon were also discussed.Superconductors have also been studied using atomic spectroscopic techniques during this review period. The yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) type has been studied in three separate reports. The calcining conditions for the formation of YBCO films by metallorganic deposition using trifluoroacetates have been discussed by Niwa and colleagues.225 As well as the residual C content being determined by SIMS, the authors also measured the critical current density (J(c)) of the films calcined at different temperatures. The J(c) values of the films depended on decomposition of the trifluoroacetates and copper oxide nanocrystallite growth rather than the influence of the C content. Films of between 217 and 241 nm thickness and with J(c) values of 1.7 to 2.9 MA cm−2 were grown successfully. Diffusion coefficients of Ag in YBCO films over the temperature range 700–850 °C have been measured using EDXRF.226 The Ag atoms were excited by an annular 50 mCi americium-241 radioisotope source emitting 59.543 keV photons. The authors derived equations that described the Ag diffusion across both the grains and over the grain boundaries. Following annealing at 400 °C in 18O, diffusion of O and some cations in 300 nm thick YBCO films deposited on single crystal LaAlO3 and buffered Hastelloy C276 substrates were measured using SIMS.227 It was found that in the YBCO–LaAlO3 sample, the oxygenation was very slow, with complete oxygenation taking several hours. Diffusion along a-b planes was, however, extremely rapid in the other sample, with complete oxidation taking only minutes. Similarly, the cation diffusion was also found to be slow in the YBCO/LaAlO3 sample and much faster in the coated conductor.Other papers published in this review period include one by Song and co-workers, who described the use of a wet chemical cleaning process for the gallium arsenide substrate.228 Ammonia solution was used to remove particles and metals from the surface, followed by a hydrochloric acid/peroxide cleaning step that removed metallic contaminants as well as controlling the components of an oxide layer. The metal contaminants were detected pre- and post-cleaning by TXRF, whilst characterisation of the oxide layer was achieved using XPS, atomic force microscopy and ellipsometry. A surface roughness of 0.95 nm and a uniform oxide layer thickness of 2 nm were observed. Li and colleagues used close spaced sublimation to deposit Te doped cadmium telluride on ITO/glass substrates.229 The films were then characterised using XRD, SEM and the Hall effect. It was concluded that Te doping was favourable to the growth of the cadmium telluride crystallite. Hankare et al. used a simple, low temperature route to growing polycrystalline cadmium selenide and mercury selenide thin films.230 The process was based on the reaction between complexed cadmium sulfate or mercury nitrate with sodium selenosulfate in aqueous alkaline medium at 278 K. The films produced were characterised using XRD, optical absorption, electrical measurements and AAS, and were found to be uniform, well adherent, dark red, diffusely reflecting and polycrystalline in cubic form with no trace of hexagonality. The cadmium selenide film showed a double band gap at 2.15 and 1.86 eV, whilst the mercury selenide also had a double band gap, but at 0.45 and 0.8 eV. In addition, the same research group presented a modified chemical bath deposition method using the same starting materials for the growth of the binary material Cd1−xHgxSe.231 On this occasion, the reaction took place in ammoniacal solution at 5 °C. Parameters such as the reactant concentration, pH, deposition temperature and rate of agitation were found to influence the quality and thickness of the films produced significantly. The same suite of techniques was used to characterise the films. Again, the products were polycrystalline and cubic in structure and all of the films demonstrated n-type conductivity.3.3 GlassesMuch of the work concerning the analysis of glasses has been in the fields of archaeology or forensic science. Vittiglio and co-workers described two prototype micro-XRF spectrometers that enabled the non-destructive and local analysis of sub-mm sized samples.232 One was a table-top version that could be used in the laboratory environment, whereas the other was portable. The primary X-ray beam was focused to 70–100 μm in diameter by polycapillary lenses. Detection limits for transition metals in biological and glass materials were in the range 10–100 ppm, and the instruments were applied to materials from both the cultural heritage and forensic sector. An overview of X-rays in art and archaeology has been prepared by Schreiner et al.95 The techniques discussed included X-ray radiography; which yields information on the manufacturing process and condition of an object; XRF and XRD. An overview of obtaining XRF data from archaeological materials that include metallic objects with irregular surfaces (e.g., coins), metallic objects with either a natural or artificial patina and glasses and ceramics has been produced by Milazzo.233 For the glasses and ceramics, the author explained how measurements of the Compton scattered intensity of the exciting radiation and by use of a proper scaling law made it possible to evaluate the matrix absorption coefficients for all of the characteristic X-ray line energies. The use of WDXRF for the study of ancient glasses has been limited in the past because of the large amount of sample required for the analysis. Falcone and colleagues have undertaken a study in an attempt to overcome this limitation.234 By melting as little as 0.2 g of the sample of ancient glass with a lithium tetraborate flux and using reference and synthetic glasses for calibration, the authors succeeded in determining 31 elements of interest that ranged in concentration from ppm levels up to the major constituents. The reproducibility, sensitivity and reliability of the technique were also discussed.The use of LIBS for the analysis of glasses has been evaluated by Muller and Stege.235 Although LIBS is gaining wide acceptance for a number of applications, it has rarely been used for archaeometrical studies. These authors used a frequency quadrupled Nd:YAG laser operating at 266 nm to excite the samples, resulting in a crater of approximately 200 μm in diameter that was hardly visible to the naked eye. Using a high resolution echelle spectrometer that operated between 200 and 780 nm and had a resolution of 10–30 pm, it was possible to determine 90 analytes. The effects of sample distance, surface roughness and the accumulation of depth profiles were studied. Problems were found to arise for the determination of K and Na because their high concentrations caused self-absorption effects. Using a Si line as an internal standard, the precision was found to be between 3 and 20%. Other problems were found with the accuracy for a number of analytes. The authors concluded on an optimistic note by stating that these problems may be overcome in the future by using improved spectrometer set-ups and matrix correction approaches.The rest of the papers under the art and archaeometry section have been characterisation studies. Shortland studied colorants such as lead antimonite yellow and calcium antimonite white in Egyptian glass of the second millennium BC.236 Trace element data obtained from a pilot study using LA-ICP-MS indicated that the Caucasus was possibly the origin of the antimony used in these glasses. A study, using the techniques of SEM-EDS, XRF, ICP, Mossbauer spectroscopy, XRD and thermogravimetry, of archaeological finds of the 13–16th century from the Florence area of Italy contributed to the clarification of the production methodology.237 As well as non-vitreous finds, such as raw materials, refractory products, crucibles and production waste, vitreous finds such as the glasses (including glass masses, glass-working waste and the finished products) were analysed. Products from two sites, Germagnana and Gambassi, were studied, and it was concluded that both sites obtained the raw materials from the same source. Major and trace analytes in a series of 16th century glass fragments originating from castle sites in the neighbourhood of Ljubljana have been determined using micro-SRXRF and electron probe X-ray microanalysis by Smit and co-workers.238 These glasses were compared chemically with those from Antwerp and Venice (these analysed using PIXE and PIGE). It was found that the differences for the analytes were generally less than 10%, except when the concentration of the analyte was less than 1% w/w, in which case the deviation was closer to 20%. The authors managed to determine that Antwerp glass contained both local and Venetian compositions, whereas the Ljubljana glasses bore a close resemblance only to the Venetian composition. Ion beam analysis (PIXE and PIGME) has been used by Biron and Beauchoux for the analysis of 20 Mosan enamels dating from the late 12th and early 13th centuries.239 The ion beam techniques were used to determine the composition of both the glass and the metal phases of the enamel plaques, and the results wee compared with those obtained previously by the British Museum and the authors’ own laboratory. It was found that all of the 12th century coloured glasses (except the red ones) were soda-lime silicates with mineral sodium sources that were opacified with antimony compounds. The red glasses were potash-lime silicates with wood-ash potassium sources. The 13th century glasses were soda-lime silicates using plant ash sodium sources and tin oxide-based opacifiers. The authors therefore managed to hypothesise a chronological evolution for the glass composition.Much interest in the forensic applications of glass analysis has also been demonstrated. Two papers published by Trejos and Almirall have used LA-ICP-MS to characterise glasses.240,241 In the first, LA-ICP-MS was used to study fractionation, since this poses one of the major challenges to using this technique for characterising glass. Two different approaches were taken to evaluate the fractionation: (i) fractionation index and (ii) the measurement of the U to Th ratio. It was found that most of the fractionation indexes were low (between 0.8 and 1.2) for the majority of the analytes. The U ∶ Th ratio seemed to indicate that fractionation was higher at the beginning of the ablation process. To evaluate whether or not fractionation could affect the quantification of glass samples by LA-ICP-MS, a comparison was made between this technique and conventional solution-based determination. In addition, the distribution of particle size during the ablation under different laser systems and conditions was also measured to see the effects on fractionation. Standard reference materials (NIST 610, 612 and 1831) were analysed in triplicate, along with 10 casework samples originating from different automobiles. In the second of the papers241 the results from LA-ICP-MS using a Nd:YAG laser operating at 266 nm with an output power of 6 mJ were compared with those obtained from solution nebulisation. A total of 91 different glasses were determined (45 headlamp glasses spanning 20 years and 46 automotive glasses that included side windows, rear windows and windshields). A suite of analytes were determined, with some (Ba, Hf, Mg, Pb, Sb, Sr and Zr) being determined by isotope dilution. Analysis of NIST 612 indicated that the bias was less than 5%, whilst precision was generally better than 10% RSD. The authors stated that whilst solution nebulisation utilising external calibration and isotope dilution presented excellent sensitivity and precision, it also suffered the disadvantages that complex dissolution procedures were required and the sample was effectively destroyed. The LA-ICP-MS method, however, was described as being simpler, faster and was capable of providing an excellent alternative to solution analysis of glass for forensic purposes. A further paper by these authors presented a real case study, in which someone had broken the windows of 15 vehicles.242 Using traditional methods (colour, thickness, density, refractive index) as well as a solution ICP-MS method in which 16 analytes were determined, the authors analysed 15 samples (one from each of the cars) and 42 glass fragments found on the suspect. The ICP-MS method by itself was capable of differentiating between all of the samples, and associated four of the known samples with several of the questioned fragments. A paper by Suzuki et al. (written in Japanese) compared the results of the analysis of glass from vehicle headlights obtained by SR-XRF and ICP-MS.243 Fragments of glass of less than 1 mm in size were analysed and good correlation between the results of the different techniques was obtained.Inclusion size measurement in glass and in iron has been achieved using LA-ICP-MS and the results compared with those obtained by SEM and single particle optical sensing (SPOS).12 The results were in reasonable agreement and it was concluded that LA-ICP-MS had the perspective to be used for quick measurement of inclusion composition and size. Measurements were made for single component oxides (e.g., MgO and Al2O3) and for multi-component oxides (e.g., CaO–Al2O3–MgO). Loebe and co-workers used LIBS operating with a 266 nm Nd:YAG laser and echelle optics to characterise a glass defect in a tumbler.4 The system was capable of 10 pm spatial resolution and so a comparison of the spectra from the defect could be made with those from the surrounding areas. Both the elemental composition of the glass and the trace impurities could be detected at the same time. A radioisotope XRF spectrometer using an americium-241 excitation source has been used for multi-element (16 analytes) determination in a variety of housewares and other food related items.138 Analysis of various CRMs, e.g., solders, glasses and paint films enabled the determination of analyte sensitivities, LODs and instrumental accuracy. Analysis times of 3–5 min yielded LODs of ≤100 μg cm−2 for elements with Z
					= 40–65 and Z > 70. Two commercially available hand-held instruments were used as a comparison and the results were found to be in good agreement.Leaching from/corrosion of glasses has been studied in two publications. Using SIMS, Lee studied the surface of the glass after contact with the leaching solution in an attempt to prove the mechanism.244 It was found that the post-leaching penetration depth for Li and Na was greater than those of Ca and Si, while the H concentration gradually decreased. This was sufficient evidence for the authors to postulate two separate mechanisms; the first being an initial wash off and diffusion control and the other being a dissolution associated with diffusion. The other paper used static corrosion tests on two model glasses of composition 75SiO2 15Na2O 10CaO and 75SiO2 15Na2O 10MgO.245 The leachant solution (water at 80 °C) was then analysed using AAS, whilst the surface layers of the monolithic sample was analysed using secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS). Modelling of the data with the geochemical code PHREEQC showed that Na diffusion profiles in the surface layers of the glasses were established during the first few hours of the test. Both glasses showed that the dissolution rate depended on the chemical affinity for dissolution between the surface gel layer and the corrosion solution.Biological glass coatings such as those that coat metallic prostheses used in orthopaedic surgery have been studied in two papers by Barbotteau and colleagues.246,247 Two glasses (BVA and BVH) were analysed using an assortment of techniques including PIXE, RBS and SEM-EDX. The BVA was found to dissolve after 3 months and is replaced by bone. The mechanism was found to be via the development of a direct chemical bond between the prosthesis and the bone by the formation of a calcium phosphate layer at its surface. The BVH glass was not bio-active, but was used instead as a cement to isolate the metallic implant from the biological environment.3.4 Ceramics and refractoriesThere has been a marked increase in the number of papers published on bioceramics. These materials are often hydroxyapatite based and are used extensively for orthopaedic applications. Several papers have described the preparation and subsequent chemical characterisation of such materials. Several preparation methods have been described, including the electrophoretic deposition from a suspension in isopropyl alcohol onto type 316L stainless steel.248 The chemical composition of the coating was determined using SIMS. Analysis by SIMS also identified a metal–ceramic diffusion interlayer. An electrochemical assisted process under cathodic polarisation has also been used to coat titanium surfaces with hydroxyapatite.249 The effects of current density, polarisation time and of different Ca/P ratios (1, 1.33 and 1.67) were studied. Analysis by ICP-OES determined the Ca/P ratios of the actual coatings and discovered that a Ca/P ratio of about 2 existed, indicating that excess Ca was stored in the layer. A paper by Tadic et al. has described a continuous preparation method for nanoscopic calcium phosphate ceramics.250 The influence of the processing parameters, e.g. temperature and time, on the properties of the calcium phosphates was also studied. Assorted techniques including XRD, IR, AAS, SEM and TEM were used to characterise the product. It was found that all of the precipitates were non-stoichiometric, Ca deficient hydroxyapatites. Synthetic hydroxyapatite (HAP), carbonate–apatite (CHA) and carbonate–fluoride–apatite (CFA) were prepared and analysed using FT-IR, AAS and XRD.251 The materials were placed inside a dog mandible bone for a number of weeks and their effects examined. It was found that CHA was a potential bone-grafting material and that CFA accelerated bone formation to a greater extent than the other materials. Leaching studies from the bioceramics have also been reported extensively because they are known to exert a cytotoxic effect. Several different solutions have been used for these studies including 0.2 M Tris-HCl buffer solution at 37 °C,252 water, ammonium citrate, ammonium acetate and citric acid253 and lysozyme containing phosphate buffer solution.254 In the first of these examples,252 calcium zirconium phosphate ceramic was leached; in the second,253 calcium phosphate in the P2O5–CaO–SiO2–K2O system was leached; and in the final example254 the sample to be extracted was a composite of beta-dicalcium pyrophosphate and glucose mediated chitosan–polyethylene glycol membrane. In all cases, the extracts were analysed using ICP-OES. In another paper, calcium phosphate/calcium sulfate based hybrid materials were leached and the extracts obtained from specific time points over a one month period analysed using AAS.255Some ceramic materials are difficult to dissolve. Therefore, a number of papers have reported methods for direct analysis of the solid materials. Several different techniques have been described. Bleiner and co-workers used LA-ICP-MS for depth-profiling of manganese–perovskite and cobalt–perovskite ceramics that were used as fuel cell cathodes.256 The laser was set up to ensure that beam induced artefacts did not exist and that a lateral resolution of below 100 μm and a depth resolution of 0.1–0.2 μm was obtained. Analysis of the signal structure of the depth profiles was performed by means of signal convolution and numerical differentiation. The results were compared with those obtained by a dissolution method and ICP-MS analysis. Another paper that has used LA-ICP-MS has been presented by Haberecht et al.257 These authors prepared Si–B–N–C ceramic materials using two different synthetic routes and then characterised the composition of the materials by LA-ICP-MS. The authors reported that very satisfying results were obtained and that the technique demonstrated high potential for this sort of analysis. A new approach for the analysis of particulate matter by radiofrequency GD-OES has been described by Davis and co-workers.51 The particles were dispersed in an acid catalysed sol–gel matrix, synthesised from tetramethyl orthosilicate, which was ideal for generating a thin film for sputter sampling into the discharge. Analytical blanks prepared from the same sol–gels but without the sample dispersed in them were prepared and the results obtained from these readily subtracted from those obtained from the samples. The technique was validated by the successful analysis of NIST 1884a (Portland cement) and NIST 2690 (coal fly ash), and was applied to difficult to dissolve samples such as geological specimens and ceramics. For the analytes Al, Fe, Mg, S and Si, LODs were in the range 1–10 μg g−1. A paper by Minami and co-workers described the simultaneous GFAAS determination of Al, Ca and Fe in silicon carbide and silicon nitride powders.258 The powders were slurried in 0.1 M nitric acid using ultrasonication and introduced to the furnace directly. Good agreement with certified values was reported and for a 10 μl aliquot of a suspension containing 200 mg of sample in 20 mL, LODs were 0.6, 0.15 and 2.5 μg g−1 for Al, Ca and Fe, respectively. The authors did report some problems with imprecision, with RSD values of 5–33% being reported.Several papers have reported XRF techniques for analysing ceramic samples. Many of these were relatively straightforward application of XRF in which the authors have synthesised a type of ceramic and have then used the analytical technique to characterise the product. Examples include the synthesis of nanocrystalline aluminium nitride by the nitridation of coarse aluminium powder in flowing ammonia gas using ammonium chloride and potassium chloride as additives259 and a study of the phase composition and structure of porous glass ceramics.260 A portable EDXRF instrument has been used to identify overglaze and underglaze cobalt decoration of ceramics from Valencia in Spain.261 The spectrometer had an X-ray tube and a thermoelectrically cooled semiconductor detector. The ratios between the fluorescence line of the main component of the glaze (Pb L-alpha line) and of the main components of the pigment (Co K-alpha, Ni K-alpha and Mn K-alpha), measured at different incident angles of X-rays, increased with the angle for underglaze decoration and decreased for overglaze decoration. A battery of analytical techniques has been used by Phillips to identify the nature and mechanism of V staining components in fired clay bricks.262 In addition, the effects of magnesite, calcite and fluorspar that were added to try and overcome them were also determined. Techniques such as SEM, electron probe microanalysis, LA-ICP-MS and XPS indicated that the stains consisted of K, Mo, Na, O, S and V and that V4+ formed initially within the brick and was then oxidised to V5+ as water transported the K and Na salts to the brick surface. Analysis of the stain by XRD led to a reasonable match with KVO(SO4)2. The addition of 1% magnesite to the brick mix led to fired products that were free from staining. This was attributed to the increased alkalinity of the magnesite locking the V into what was otherwise an acidic glassy phase.Two papers have discussed the use of LIBS for analysing ceramics. Kuzuya et al. focused a Q-switched laser on ceramic targets in an argon atmosphere at reduced pressure, and the emission spectra were measured using time resolved spectroscopy.263 Maximum intensity and line to background ratio was obtained in the presence of argon at 200 Torr and with a time delay of 0.4 μs before the plasma was observed. Standard ceramic samples were analysed for their content of Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Ti. A micro-LIBS device devoted to the analysis of the distribution of analytes on surfaces has been described by Menut and co-workers.264 The device had a spatial resolution of 3 μm and enabled a time resolved spectrum of Ce in a uranium matrix to be acquired with a LOD of 1.14%. Numerous calibration curves constructed over a year gave a single shot repeatability of 2% and a calibration reproducibility of 7%.Several diffusion studies that have utilised SIMS analysis have been produced. Amongst these is the determination of 44Ca, 88Y and 96Zr self diffusion in single crystalline calcia and yttria doped zirconia over a temperature range of 960–1700 °C.265 It was found that Zr bulk diffusion was slower than Ca and Y bulk diffusion and that the rate of diffusion was related to the cationic radius. For the Y stabilised zirconia, the bulk diffusivity for both Y and Zr was maximal when the Y content was 10–11%. For the Ca stabilised zirconia, it was found that diffusion of both Ca and Zr was independent of Ca content. The role of diffusion phenomena in the processing of ceramics and the use of SIMS for the evaluation of diffusion coefficients has been discussed by Haneda.266 By comparison of diffusion coefficients calculated in this manner with results obtained directly from creep measurements, it was possible to identify the ion species that govern creep in yttrium aluminium garnet (YAG). The author demonstrated that O diffusion into thin films involved metastable defects, and that these could play an important role in the sintering process. Diffusion of O has also been discussed in BIMEVOX materials267 and for mixed conducting oxide ceramics.268A number of synthesis/characterisation studies have also been published. Included in these was the preparation of LaCoO3 and La1−xBaxCoO3 powders using a polymerised complex technique.269 Heating at 130 °C of La(Ba)–Co–citric acid–ethylene glycol in proportions of 1 ∶ 1 ∶ 10 ∶ 40 yielded a gel, pyrolysis of which at 350 °C yielded the powders of the ceramics. These powders were then analysed using XRD, thermal analysis and IR. The amounts of metals determined by AAS in the samples after annealing at 900 °C confirmed the composition to be LaCoO3. Agglomerate free and highly crystalline barium strontium titanate (BST) ceramic nanoparticles have been prepared by Itoh and Okuyama using the salt assisted spray pyrolysis method.270 The effects of the salt concentration, operating temperature and droplet/particle residence time in the hot zone as a function of carrier gas flow rate on the particle size, crystallinity and chemical composition of the particles were evaluated. It was found that particle size decreased with decreasing salt concentration, operating temperature and residence time. The chemical homogeneity of the particles was evaluated using ICP-OES and the composition was found to reflect the initial solution composition. The influence of hydrothermal reaction conditions on the properties of PbII, ZrIV and TiIV
					(PZT) ceramics prepared from salts of these metals has been studied by Piticescu and co-workers.271 The compositions of the products were determined using ICP, DCP and AAS and micro-structural analysis was performed using XRD, SEM, DSC and Raman spectroscopy. Based on this work, the authors proposed a mechanism for the hydrothermal synthesis of PZT powders. A wavelength dispersive XRF instrument has been used to characterise ceramics of the ferroelectric Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 type that had been doped with Pb(Nb,Mn)O3 and Bi2O3.272 Both the major (Pb, Zr and Ti) and the minor (Nb, Mn and Bi) elements were determined. To overcome inhomogeneity problems, sample preparation involved digesting the sample (25 mg) with nickel (as an internal standard) in sulfuric acid, evaporating to dryness and then digesting in nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide. After dilution to 25 mL, 0.5 mL of the sample was dropped onto the substrate ready for analysis. Standards of multi-element solution were dropped onto the same substrate to ensure a similar chemical composition.Hand-made glazed food ceramic wares from the state of Pernambuco in Brazil were usually glazed with a lead oxide and there was therefore a concern that the Pb may leach into food and hence create a health problem.273 If leaching according to the standard ASTM 738-76 protocol was followed, the amount of Pb leached was between 100 to 4000 times the maximum permitted value. In this study the amount of Pb lost during the glazing process was determined by measuring the Pb in the samples before and after the firing. A mixture of nitric, hydrofluoric and perchloric acids was used for dissolution of the samples and AAS was used to measure the Pb in the resulting digests. The authors calculated that an estimated 166 kg Pb per year would be released into the atmosphere from lead oxide glazing. The chemical resistance of ceramic tiles was subject to the European Standard UNE-EN ISO 10545-13, which uses a number of aqueous based chemical agents at room temperature followed by a visual inspection of the tile. Since many conditions were more aggressive than those found in the standard, a paper written in Spanish has evaluated the effects of aqueous solutions of several organic and inorganic acids on the tile surface at temperatures of 60 °C, at pH 2 and under agitation.274 Visual inspection as well as optical microscopy and SEM were used to examine the effects on the tile surface and AAS was used to determine Fe in the leachates. The authors concluded that in all cases there was a progressive dissolution of Fe from the ceramic body.As always, there has been a lot of interest in the analysis of archaeological pottery. A paper by Papadopoulou et al. compared 6 different decomposition procedures for a standard ceramic potsherd material (SARM 69).275 The methods compared were three microwave assisted decompositions, one fusion, one combined microwave and conventional heating procedure and a wet decomposition method. In all cases, analysis was by ICP-OES and the analytes of interest were Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Si (major elements), Ba, Mn and Ti (minor elements) and Co and Cu (trace elements). Analysis for each analyte was performed at two different spectral lines and the standards were matrix matched. In general, recoveries for the analytes ranged from 75 to 110%. After statistical evaluation of the data, it was possible to select the most appropriate dissolution method. In most cases, the scientists have attempted to perform analyses on the archaeological artefacts without causing any damage. Therefore, non-destructive techniques such as XRF have been used frequently. An overview of obtaining XRF data from archaeological materials that include metallic objects with irregular surfaces (e.g., coins), metallic objects with either a natural or artificial patina and glasses and ceramics has been produced by Milazzo.233 This paper was discussed in more detail in the Glasses section. Numerous applications have been reported. Amongst these were the study of the phase separated opaque glaze from the Qionglai kiln (Tang dynasty, 618–907 AD),276 spectroscopic investigation of Greek ceramic artefacts (from 4th and 5th century BC) which also used techniques such as FT-IR and XRD277 and an investigation into the glaze composition and decoration techniques of 15th century Vietnamese Tam Thai and lustre porcelains.278 All three of these studies have determined the chemical composition of the ceramics and then used this data, together with data obtained from other techniques, to draw conclusions about the structural phases, glazing temperatures, etc. For the Vietnamese porcelains, the underglaze décor was found to result from cobalt containing manganese ore that had had iron oxide added to it. The overglaze décor was from either a dispersion of copper in a lead-based glass (gold/green) or hematite in a lead based flux (red). Another example of this type of application has been published by Leung and co-workers,279 who analysed the cross-section of sherds of Ru porcelain using an EDXRF probe line scanning method. It was found that a middle layer between the glaze and the porcelain body existed and that this was formed during the process of porcelain firing, when the vitreous glaze infiltrates into the surface of the porcelain. A paper by Garrigos et al. used techniques such as XRF, XRD, SEM, neutron activation analysis (NAA) and petrography to analyse pottery from Pereruela, Spain; and found that there was a large variability for cooking ware pottery produced in a single production centre, by the same technology and using local clays.280 The main source of chemical variation was found to be the use of different red clays and the presence of non-normally distributed inclusions of monazite. The chemical variability was so high that even one pot can be determined to have different provenances. Techniques such as Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS), UV-Vis spectrophotometry, XRF and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) have been used to analyse the nanoparticles present in the glazes of some historical pottery.281 It was found that gold decorations were characterised by Ag and Cu, while the red ones were characterised by Cu alone. It was the Ag nanoparticulates that determined the gold colour, whilst the red colour was governed principally by Cu particles. Using EXAFS, it was found that the Cu existed predominantly as Cu+, with some Cu2+ also being present. A paper by Feliu et al. has reported the analysis of 53 ceramic fragments from several archaeological deposits that were supposedly Tartessian.282 Using visible spectroscopy, XRD and EDXRF/SEM, the colour, mineralogical composition and interesting microstructures such as micro-organisms, vitrification and crystal formation were investigated. For the atomic spectroscopy, the analytes Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Na, Si and Ti were determined and then all of the data was processed using chemometric techniques such as cluster analysis. The authors were able to draw conclusions as to whether or not the fragments were actually Tartessian. Two ICP-MS based studies have also reported analysis of pottery/ceramics with a view to determining their origin. Kennett and co-workers analysed Lapita pottery from Fiji, Tonga and New Ireland.283 It was concluded that there were clear elemental distinctions between the pottery made in the different locations. In addition, there was significant variation in Fijian ceramics collected from settlements in close proximity to one another. In the other paper, analysis of porcelain bodies from three kilns from the Song-Yuan period (960–1368 AD) took place.284 Using a profile of approximately 40 elements, the authors were able to conclude that the trace element compositions clearly reflected the distinctive raw materials and their mineralogy and that it was possible to distinguish between products from the three kilns. Similarly, it was also possible to distinguish between pottery made in the same kiln but at different times and also between different grades of pottery. The mineralogical characteristics of the raw materials used by two workshops to prepare Roman pottery from North West Greece has been used in an attempt to elucidate the ceramic manufacturing technologies employed.285 The techniques employed in the study were optical microscopy, XRD, SEM and ICP-OES. From the results, the authors were able to deduce that both workshops used oxidising conditions within the kilns and that the firing temperatures were between 850 and 1050 °C. Padeletti and Fermo used ICP-OES, XRD, GFAAS and SEM to analyse both the ceramic bodies and the lustred surfaces of Italian Renaissance imitations of Hispano-Moresque style ceramics.286 The presence of cosalite (Pb2Bi2S5) in the Italian lustre decorations and its absence in the Hispano-Moresque ones was the factor that enabled distinction between the two.3.5 CatalystsAs always, there has been considerable interest in the design, characterisation and use of different catalysts. By far the most common catalyst type reported in this review period has been those that have been immobilised onto zeolites. These catalysts have many and varied uses. The most common of the zeolite-based catalysts was ZSM-5/HZSM-5. Adebajo and co-workers reported the XRD, XRF, ICP-OES, FT-IR and NMR characterisation of catalysts that were active for the oxidative methylation of benzene with methane.287 Both ZSM-5 and H-beta catalysts were tested. Results from XRD indicated that the crystalline structures of both catalyst types remained unchanged after batch reaction of benzene with methane, which was in agreement with the finding that the catalysts could be recovered and then re-used without loss of activity. Elemental and FT-IR analyses indicated that as the level of metal ion exchange increases, the Brønsted acid concentration decreases (but was never totally removed). In addition, FT-IR also demonstrated that only a small number of ion exchange sites were necessary for the catalyst to be active, because used catalysts with very low Brønsted acidity could be re-used without a decrease in activity. The post-steam treatment of a Mo-immobilised HZSM-5 catalyst increased its activity for methane dehydroaromatization under non-oxidative conditions.288,289 The process, which enhanced the stability of the catalyst, gave a higher methane conversion as well as a higher yield of light aromatics. It also decreased the formation of carbonaceous deposits. Overall, it was described as being facile and effective. The properties of the catalyst before and after post-steam treatment were compared using techniques such as 27Al, 29Si and 1H multinuclear magic angle NMR, XPS, XRF and TGA measurements. It was found that after the post-steam treatment the free Brønsted acid sites decreased and that there was more Mo migration into the HZSM-5 zeolite channels. In addition, the pore size was found to be larger, which aided the mass transport of the reaction products, but a severe treatment (i.e., with a treating time longer than 30 min) could lead to the formation of Al-2(MoO4)3 phases, which were detrimental to the reaction. Treating of nano-scale HZSM-5 with steam containing 0.8% by weight ammonia at 773 K, followed by loading with lanthanum oxide and nickel oxide, yielded catalysts that were active for the reduction of olefins in fluidized catalytic cracking gasoline.290 The parent and derivatized molecules were characterised by several techniques including TEM, XRD, IR and XRF. The stability of the catalysts was found to be satisfactory in all cases, but the initial activity decreased slightly after the combined modification. In addition, the modified catalyst had a reduced ability for aromatization and an increased ability for isomerization. After 300 h on-stream, the average olefin content of the gasoline was reduced from 56.3% to 20%; whilst the C7–C9 aromatics and paraffins contents increased from 11.6% and 32.1% to 20% and 60%, respectively. Morales et al. studied the reaction of acetone transformation over mono-metallic (Pt/H{Al}ZSM-5, Sn/H{Al}ZSM-5) and bimetallic PtSn/H{Al}ZSM-5) catalysts that had differing atomic fractions of tin.291 The solid catalysts produced were characterised by XRD, EDXRF, XPS, ICP-OES and EPR. A sensitive variation in the catalytic properties was observed as X–Sn was varied in the series PtSn/H{Al}ZSM-5; where X–Sn = number of Sn moles/number of Sn moles + number of Pt mole. These changes were attributed to the presence of effects of the electronic and geometric type, which were a consequence of the formation of a Pt–Sn alloy and probably the phenomenon of decoration of Pt particles. Pergher and co-workers described the preparation of Pd/NaY-zeolite and Pd-W/NaY-zeolite catalysts that were active for the decomposition of NO to N2 and N2O, through ion exchange and impregnation methods of the compounds Pd(NO3)2 and W(CO)6.292 In the latter case, photochemical activation of the W(CO)6 enabled the formation of the Pd–W derivative. Numerous methods were used to characterise the catalysts formed, including AAS. The conversion of NO and the selectivity to N2O was studied as a function of time and reduction temperature. It was found that both catalyst types exhibited an initial period of high and constant activity followed by deactivation. At 573 K the deactivation was more pronounced in the W containing analogue: however at 973 K the presence of W allowed the catalyst to have a higher conversion for a longer period of time. The authors concluded that the presence of W prevented the sintering of small Pd particles.Another common catalyst support used in this review period has been MCM-41. An example includes dicyano-functionalized palladium complexes that could be used as recoverable heterogeneous catalysts for the Heck reaction.293 The catalysts were easily separated after use and were re-usable. A modified impregnation method was used during the formation of the base catalyst Ba2SiO4 on the MCM-41 pore wall.294 Techniques including XPS, XRD, XRF, 29Si MAS NMR and nitrogen adsorption were used to characterise the product and the authors demonstrated that a high Ba loading of between 4.1 and 25.2% was achieved. The basicity of the catalysts was found to increase with increasing Ba loading. Chen and Ko used direct hydrothermal and impregnation methods to prepare vanadium containing catalysts (V-MCM-41 and V/MCM-41, respectively).295 Again, characterisation was achieved using ICP-OES, XRD, 29Si and 51V NMR, nitrogen adsorption and oxygen chemisorption. The catalysts were used for the oxidation reaction of diphenylmethane with tert-butyl hydroperoxide to produce benzophenone. De Clercq et al. discussed the preparation of two solid catalysts in which a Schiff base containing ruthenium was covalently anchored onto MCM-41.296 The catalysts were characterised using XRD, XRF, ICP-MS, FT-Raman, solid state NMR and BET techniques. The catalysts were multi-functional and the authors described how they could be used in ring closing metathesis (RCM), ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), Kharasch addition, atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) and vinylation reactions. The authors undertook a lengthy study of the reaction characteristics of their catalysts and found the effects of reaction time and temperature on the RCM reaction and that the ATPR process of styrene proceeds in a controlled fashion and yields well-defined polymers. In addition, the Kharasch activity was found to have a pronounced temperature dependence. The authors postulated a mechanism that could explain the observed selectivities in the vinylation experiments. Copper derivatized MCM-41 and beta zeolites that could be used for isomerization of 1-butene were synthesised and characterised using XRD, nitrogen adsorption, XRF, FT-IR and DCP-AES.297 The presence of Cu in the hydrogenated MCM-41 increased the activity compared with the untreated support, but the presence of Cu in the beta zeolite did not alter the catalytic activity. Using FT-IR and quantum chemical calculations, the authors attributed these phenomena to the presence of Cu+ in the H-MCM-41, which was formed during the catalytic pathway from Cu2+ to Cu metal, whereas the reduction was more rapid in the beta zeolite where the presence of Cu0 predominated. Bernas and co-workers compared numerous heterogeneous catalysts for the isomerization of linoleic acid to conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) at temperatures of between 80 and 120 °C.298 The metals Ir, Ni, Os, Pd, Pt, Rh or Ru as well as the bimetallic Pt–Rh were supported on activated carbon, alumina, silica/alumina, MCM-22, H-MCM-41 and other zeolite supports. The catalysts produced were characterised using the techniques of nitrogen adsorption, XRF, XRD, DCP-AES and XPS. It was found that two competing reactions were taking place. As well as an isomerization reaction, a hydrogenation reaction transformed the linoleic acid and CLA to mono-unsaturated octadecenoic acids, e.g., oleic acid, elaidic acid and cis- and trans-vaccenic acids. Further hydrogenation to stearic acid was also possible. It was found that the presence of Ni and Ru showed the best isomerization properties, but that the Pd analogue favoured the hydrogenation reaction.Composite catalysts have also been studied at length in this review period. Some of these applications have already been discussed in the polymers section.198,199 Another example has been reported by Yang et al. who functionalized macroporous titania materials with Keggin-type polyoxometalates using both the sol–gel and template methodologies.299 The products were evaluated for their photocatalytic activity for the degradation of the dyes rhodamine B, methyl orange and erythrosine BS. Among the numerous methods used to characterise the products were ICP-OES. The composite materials were shown to have greater activity than either pure titania or the polyoxometalates and this was attributed to the synergistic effect of the two together.Several other types of catalyst have been developed and characterised in this review period. Zhou and co-workers described the preparation of a lead–zinc double oxide heterogeneous catalyst that was capable of catalysing the synthesis of diphenyl carbonate via a trans-esterification reaction between dimethyl carbonate and phenol.300 The authors determined the effect of preparation method, calcination temperature, precursor and molar ratio of Pb/Zn on the catalytic activity. The catalysts were characterised using several different techniques including AAS. Overall, the authors concluded that the main active species was Pb3O4 and that ZnO played the role of a promoter. A calcination temperature of 500 °C and a Pb/Zn ratio of 2 ∶ 1 produced the catalysts with the highest activity; providing a yield of 45.6% diphenyl carbonate. Catalyst deactivation was caused by decreasing amounts of Pb3O4. A paper by Kladis et al. described the preparation and subsequent characterisation using nitrogen sorption, FT-IR, ICP-OES, XPS and XRD, of novel Co, Cu and Zn exchanged chabazite SAPO-18 solid acid catalysts.301 Once the catalysts had been characterised, FT-IR was used to determine their mechanism of reaction during the adsorption and disproportionation of nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide. Assorted species were identified including adsorbed N2O, chemisorbed NO2, metal–NO2, metal–NO and metal–(NO)2 complexes; metal CO complexes and physisorbed carbon dioxide. The ratio with which these species were formed depended on the pressure, reaction temperature and evacuation. Precious metals have been used in several heterogeneous catalytic applications. However, several important issues, e.g., the stability of the metal–oxide interface at working temperatures and pressures were not well understood. A review by Min et al. presented the current status of our understanding, which included recent results of model studies.302 Other precious metal catalysts reported include new supported group 8–10 metal (Co, Ir, Ni, Pd, Pt and Ru) alloy catalysts used for steam reforming and dehydrogenation of methanol,303 Co and Rh supported on active carbon catalysts that were used for low-pressure hydroformylation of middle olefins304 and the use of Pd nanoparticles in hydrotalcite for the highly selective semi-hydrogenation of alkynes.305As always, SIMS has been used to map the surface of catalysts and hence elucidate reaction mechanisms. Grams and co-workers used TOF-SIMS to obtain surface images with lateral resolution of 100 nm for a Co/ZrO2 catalyst system.306 This high resolution imaging was used to investigate the preparation conditions on the composition and dispersion of the active phase. Mixed CeO2–ZrO2 systems have attracted widespread interest because of their use in three-way catalyst technology that converts automotive exhaust gases into non-toxic products. A paper by Barison et al. described the chemical vapour deposition of a thin film of this material onto cordierite (the usual material used in mufflers) so that a high surface to volume ratio material was produced.307 The multi-layers of the material were studied using SEM, XPS and SIMS so that the surface and at-depth chemical compositions could be identified. In addition, any film inter-mixing induced by the annealing processes could also be studied. A paper by the same research group studied the surface chemistry of RuO2/IrO2/TiO2 mixed oxide electrodes that are used widely because of their excellent electrocatalytic activity.308 Catalysts containing different noble metal contents were studied. It was found that surface changes induced by electrochemical treatments could be identified. In particular, the presence of hydration or preferential dissolution phenomena were revealed.Leaching of catalysts
					(or non-recovery of the catalyst) was another extensively studied area. These studies tend to be relatively straightforward applications, but many were of interest anyway. The Schiff base 1,2-bis(salicylideneamino)phenylene cobalt(II) was chemically bound to a carbamate modified silica gel using a four step procedure.309 Once formed, the catalyst was found to be very active for the oxidation of cyclohexane at relatively mild conditions (150–200 °C and at 15–20 atm). The product was selective for the production of cyclohexanol, with this being produced in preference to cyclohexanone by a ratio of 45 ∶ 1. Thermogravimetric analysis indicated that the catalyst was stable up to 211 °C and AAS indicated that there was negligible loss over 50 h of use. Leaching of anchored Pd and Rh species from thiourea functionalized monolithic xerogel catalysts has been reported.310 The metals leached from the catalysts, which were useful for the hydroformylation (in the case of Rh) or hydrogenation (Pd) of styrene, were determined by ICP-OES. The catalytic wet-air oxidation of total organic carbon (TOC) in industrial effluents has been studied by Pintar and colleagues.311 These authors used titanium dioxide and titanium dioxide containing 3% Ru to destroy the TOC. The former had an efficiency of 87% and the latter 99.6%. Using ICP-OES, no leaching of Ru or Ti could be observed down to the LODs of 0.2 and 0.1 mg L−1, respectively. Two papers have discussed the leaching of catalysts through membranes.312,313 In the former paper, a porous inorganic membrane reactor was presented for homogeneous catalysis in supercritical carbon dioxide with in situ catalyst separation. The authors demonstrated the use of a fluorinated Wilkinson style catalyst for the hydrogenation of 1-butene. Since the particle size of the catalyst was in the range 2–4 nm it was much larger than the pore size of the membrane (0.5–0.8 nm) and so did not pass through. Butane could be produced continually at a temperature of 353 K and at a pressure of 20 MPa. Both UV-Vis and ICP-OES indicated that no detectable amount of P or Rh was present at the permeate side of the membrane. In the latter paper,313 4-methylstyrene was polymerized and then brominated before being reacted to form an air-stable phosphonium salt. When Pd was incorporated into the polymer, an efficient catalyst for carbon–carbon coupling reactions of the Sonogashira, Suzuki and Heck types was formed. The catalytic performance was not affected by the molecular weight over the range 5–35 kDa. If a membrane composed of a dense poly(dimethylsiloxane) layer cast on a porous sub-layer of poly(acrylonitrile) was prepared, then this formed a barrier that was virtually impervious to the catalyst. Retention of the catalyst, measured by TXRF determination of Pd, was found to be better than 99.5%. The catalyst could then be re-used without loss of activity for up to nine cycles of the Sonogashira and Suzuki reactions, although the polar aprotic solvents used in the Heck reaction rapidly degraded the membrane.Finally, Jones and co-workers reported the sulfur poisoning and subsequent regeneration of catalysts consisting of precious metal supported on alumina during methane combustion.314 The effects of compounds such as ethyl mercaptan, methyl mercaptan, carbonyl sulfide and hydrogen sulfide in the feed gas were determined by comparison with feed gases that did not contain them. Although all the catalysts studied were poisoned to some extent, Pt–alumina and Rh–alumina were poisoned more strongly than was Pd–alumina. Analysis of the exhaust gases using GC-AED and FT-IR analysis of the spent Rh–alumina catalyst indicated that sulfation of the support occurs and that a mixture of reduced and oxidised species were produced. Regeneration using hydrogen at 400 °C was partially successful, with Rh–alumina regenerating well, but Pt–alumina being particularly poorly regenerated.4 ReferencesI. Radivojevic, C. Haisch, R. Niessner, S. Florek, H. Becker-Ross and U. Panne, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(6), 1648 CrossRef CAS .S. Palanco, A. Alises, J. Cunat, J. Baena and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 933 RSC .M. P. Mateo, L. M. Cabalin and J. J. Laserna, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(12), 1461 CrossRef CAS .K. Loebe, A. Uhl and H. Lucht, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(30), 6166 CAS .M. Kraushaar, R. Noll and H. U. Schmitz, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(10), 1282 CrossRef CAS .L. Peter, V. Sturm and R. Noll, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(30), 6199 CAS .C. Xhoffer and H. Dillen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 576 RSC .Z. Weiss, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 584 RSC .A. Bengtson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1066 RSC .K. Shimizu, H. Habazaki, P. Skeldon and G. E. Thompson, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(9), 1573 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Pelaez, J. M. Costa-Fernandez, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 864 RSC .A. V. Karasev and H. Suito, ISIJ Int., 2004, 44(2), 356 Search PubMed .A. V. Karasev and H. Suito, ISIJ Int., 2004, 44(2), 364 Search PubMed .M. P. Coustures, D. Beziat, F. Tollon, C. Domergue, L. Long and A. Rebiscoul, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 599 Search PubMed .D. B. Aeschliman, S. J. Bajic, D. P. Baldwin and R. S. Houk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 872 RSC .L. M. Lu, M. Ward and A. McLean, ISIJ Int., 2003, 43(12), 1940 Search PubMed .H. Kondo, T. Toh, R. Uemori, T. Suzuki, K. Chiba, H. Yamamura, M. Wakoh and E. Takeuchi, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2003, 89(9), 1000 Search PubMed .A. M. Scheidegger, D. Grolimund, D. Cui, J. Devoy, K. Spahiu, P. Wersin, I. Bonhoure and M. Janousch, J. Phys. IV, 2003, 104, 417 Search PubMed .R. F. Gonzalez, M. A. de Buergo, F. M. Martin and M. C. L. de Azcona, Build. Environ., 2004, 39(3), 357 CrossRef .K. Asami and K. Hashimoto, Corrosion Sci., 2003, 45(10), 2263 Search PubMed .B. A. D’Santhoshini and S. N. Kaul, J. Phys.-Condensed Matter, 2003, 15(29), 4903 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. Hou, S. Gao, T. Ohta and H. Kondoh, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004,(6), 1169 CrossRef CAS .X. An, J. Cawley, W. M. Rainforth and L. Chen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(4), 689 CrossRef .M. J. Graham, Corrosion, 2003, 59(6), 475 Search PubMed .K. Gammer, M. Rosner, G. Poeckl and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(2), 255 CAS .D. Lebiedz, H. Zuchner and O. Gutfleisch, J. Alloys Compd., 2003, 356, 679 CrossRef .X. Shi, R. Avci, M. Geiser and Z. Lewandowski, Corrosion Sci., 2003, 45(11), 2577 Search PubMed .M. A. Fehr, M. Rehkamper and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 232(1), 83 CrossRef CAS .D. Goltz, M. Boileau and G. Reinfelds, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(7), 1325 CrossRef .A. Jurado-Lopez and M. D. L. de Castro, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(7), 1291 CrossRef .I. V. Cravetchi, M. Taschuk, G. W. Rieger, Y. Y. Tsui and R. Fedosejevs, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(30), 6138 CrossRef CAS .M. Kasik, C. Venzago and R. Dorka, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 603 RSC .B. Koklic and M. Veber, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2003, 8(3–4), 146 Search PubMed .S. Daolio, C. Pagura and A. Tolstogouzov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 222(1–4), 166 CrossRef CAS .M. Ponting, J. A. Evans and V. Pashley, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 591 Search PubMed .S. A. Junk and E. Pernicka, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 313 Search PubMed .R. Linke, M. Schreiner, G. Demortier and M. Alram, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(5), 373 CrossRef CAS .R. Cesareo, A. Castellano, G. Buccolieri, S. Quarta, M. Marabelli, P. Santopadre, M. Leole and A. Brunetti, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 213, 703 Search PubMed .L. Pappalardo, F. P. Romano, S. Garraffo, J. De Sanoit, C. Marchetta and G. Pappalardo, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 333 Search PubMed .M. F. Araujo, T. Pinheiro, P. Valerio, A. Barreiros, A. Simionovici, S. Bohic and A. Melo, J. Phys. IV, 2003, 104, 523 Search PubMed .L. L. R. van Stee, J. Beens, R. J. J. Vreuls and U. A. T. Brinkman, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1019(1–2), 89 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Link, J. P. Baltrus and K. S. Rothenberger, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17(5), 1292 CrossRef CAS .K. Kahen, A. Strubinger, J. R. Chirinos and A. Montaser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(3), 397 CrossRef .K. Lombaert, S. Morel, L. Le Moyne, P. Adam, J. T. de Maleissye and J. Amouroux, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2004, 24(1), 41 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Damm, D. Lucas, R. F. Sawyer and C. P. Koshland, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2003, 29, 2767 Search PubMed .C. Boman, A. Nordin, D. Bostrom and M. Ohman, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18(2), 338 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Wehrmeyer, D. E. Boll and R. Smith, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(8), 1020 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Otero-Rey, J. M. Lopez-Vilarino, J. Moreda-Pineiro, E. Alonso-Rodriguez, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, P. Lopez-Mahia and D. Prada-Rodriguez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37(22), 5262 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Camerani, B. Golosio, A. Somogyi, A. S. Simionovici, B. M. Steenari and I. Panas, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(6), 1586 CrossRef .A. Rindby, K. Janssens and J. Osan, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(3), 248 CrossRef CAS .W. C. Davis, B. C. Knippel, J. E. Cooper, B. K. Spraul, J. K. Rice, D. W. Smith and R. K. Marcus, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(10), 2243 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Kelly, S. E. Long and J. L. Mann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(5), 753 CAS .M. Ostermann, P. Kettisch, D. Becker and J. Vogl, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(4), 779 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nakamoto, N. Iwatani and K. Matusaki, Bunseki Kagaku, 2003, 52(7), 513 CAS .N. Jakubowski, R. Lobinski and L. Moens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 1 RSC .H. Haraguchi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 5 RSC .W. Maret, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 15 RSC .M. Wind, I. Feldmann, N. Jakubowski and W. D. Lehmann, Electrophoresis, 2003, 24(7–8), 1276 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Becker, M. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt and M. Przybylski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 149 RSC .M. R. B. Binet, R. L. Ma, C. W. McLeod and R. K. Poole, Anal. Biochem., 2003, 318(1), 30 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Chery, D. Gunther, R. Cornelis, F. Vanhaecke and L. Moens, Electrophoresis, 2003, 24(19–20), 3305 CrossRef .Y. X. Gao, C. Y. Chen, P. Q. Zhang, Z. F. Chai, W. He and Y. Y. Huang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 485(1), 131 CrossRef CAS .G. Weseloh, M. Kuhbacher, H. Bertelsmann, M. Ozaslan, A. Kyriakopoulos, A. Knochel and D. Behnel, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 259(3), 473 CrossRef CAS .S. Hann, G. Koellensperger, C. Binger, P. G. Furtmuller and G. Stingeder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 74 RSC .H. Goenaga Infante, K. Van Campenhout, D. Schaumloffel, R. Blust and F. C. Adams, Analyst, 2003, 128(6), 651 RSC .D. Profrock, A. Prange, D. Schaumloffel and W. Ruck, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(8), 1403 CrossRef .D. Profrock, P. Leonhard and A. Prange, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(1), 132 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Yeh, S. J. Jiang and T. S. Hsi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 502(1), 57 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Boeykens, C. Vazquez, N. Temprano and M. Rosen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2004, 55(2), 129 CrossRef CAS .S. Boeykens, C. Vazquez and N. Temprano, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(12), 2169 CrossRef .M. Wind, D. Gosenca, D. Kubler and W. D. Lehmann, Anal. Biochem., 2003, 317(1), 26 CrossRef CAS .R. Mandal, G. F. Jiang and X. F. Li, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2003, 17(9), 675 CrossRef CAS .D. Hagrman, J. Goodisman, J. C. Dabrowiak and A. K. Souid, Drug Metab. Dispos., 2003, 31(7), 916 Search PubMed .D. Hagrman, J. Goodisman and A. K. Souid, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 2004, 308(2), 658 CrossRef CAS .R. Mandal, C. Teixeira and X. F. Li, Analyst, 2003, 128(6), 629 RSC .S. Hann, G. Koellensperger, Z. Stefanka, G. Stingeder, M. Furhacker, W. Buchberger and R. M. Mader, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1391 RSC .V. Vacchina, L. Torti, C. Allievi and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 884 RSC .B. P. Jensen, C. Smith, I. D. Wilson and L. Weidolf, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(2), 181 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Bu, T. B. Wang and G. Hall, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1443 RSC .B. P. Jensen, B. Gammelgaard, S. H. Hansen and J. V. Andersen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 891 RSC .S. S. Kannamkumarath, R. G. Wuilloud, A. Stalcup, J. A. Caruso, H. Patel and A. Sakr, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 107 RSC .X. M. Xing and J. M. Mei, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2003, 23(5), 995 CAS .H. W. Sun, F. X. Qiao, R. Suo, L. X. Li and S. X. Liang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 505(2), 255 CrossRef CAS .S. X. Li and N. S. Deng, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2003, 32(1), 51 CrossRef CAS .G. Weber and P. Konieczynski, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(8), 1067 CAS .J. L. Capelo, P. Ximenez-Embun, Y. Madrid-Albarran and C. Camara, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(1), 233 CrossRef CAS .A. Polatajko, M. Sliwka-Kaszynska, M. Dernovics, R. Ruzik, J. R. Encinar and J. Szpunar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 114 RSC .J. R. Encinar, L. Ouerdane, W. Buchmann, J. Tortajada, R. Lobinski and J. Szpunar, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(15), 3765 CrossRef .L. Bendahl and B. Gammelgaard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 143 RSC .H. Chassaigne, C. C. Chery, G. Bordin, F. Vanhaecke and A. R. Rodriguez, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 85 RSC .C. Dietz, J. S. Landaluze, P. Ximenez-Embun, Y. Madrid-Albarran and C. Camara, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 260 RSC .G. S. Hall and J. Tinklenberg, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(7), 775 RSC .F. Govaert and M. Bernard, Forensic Sci. Int., 2004, 140(1), 61 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Hobbs and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(8), 1265 CAS .M. Schreiner, B. Fruhmann, D. Jembrih-Simburger and R. Linke, Powder Diffr., 2004, 19(1), 3 CrossRef CAS .M. Mantler and J. Klikovits, Powder Diffr., 2004, 19(1), 16 CrossRef CAS .B. Hochleitner, V. Desnica, M. Mantler and M. Schreiner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(4), 641 CrossRef .J. L. Ferrero, C. Roldan, D. Juanes, J. Carballo, J. Pereira, M. Ardid, J. L. Lluch and R. Vives, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 213, 729 Search PubMed .A. Aguera, M. Mezcua, D. Hernando, S. Malato, J. Caceres and A. Fernandez-Alba, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(1–3), 149 CrossRef .R. Guchardi and P. C. Hauser, Analyst, 2004, 129(4), 347 RSC .J. Koch, M. Okruss, J. Franzke, S. V. Florek, K. Niemax and H. Becker-Ross, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 199 CrossRef .R. G. Wuilloud, J. C. A. de Wuilloud, A. P. Vonderheide and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1119 RSC .C. Bancon-Montigny, L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon, V. Colombini and Z. Mester, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 18(2), 57 CrossRef CAS .T. B. Wang, X. J. Jia and J. Wu, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2003, 33(4), 639 CrossRef CAS .J. A. D. Amaro and S. L. C. Ferreira, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 246 RSC .J. L. Manzoori and G. Karim-Nezhad, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 484(2), 155 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, P. Liang, T. Q. Shi and H. B. Lu, At. Spectrosc., 2003, 24(5), 169 CAS .D. L. Giokas, L. P. Eksperiandova, A. B. Blank and M. I. Karayannis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 505(1), 51 CrossRef CAS .J. Nan, Y. Jiang and X. P. Yan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 946 RSC .E. Bjorn and W. Frech, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(2), 274 .M. Wlodarczyk and W. Zyrnicki, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(3), 511 CrossRef .P. Kralj and M. Veber, Acta Chim. Slov., 2003, 50(4), 633 CAS .M. A. Taher, Croat. Chem. Acta, 2003, 76(3), 273 CAS .M. A. Taher, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2003, 24(8), 1177 CAS .M. Ali Taher, A. Mostafavi and T. Rohani, Asian J. Chem., 2003, 15(3), 1331 Search PubMed .P. Gopikrishna, K. S. Rao, T. P. Rao and G. R. Naidu, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 144(4), 285 Search PubMed .H. Mosbaek, P. E. Holm and J. C. Tjell, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1489 RSC .A. N. Anthemidis, G. A. Zachariadis, C. G. Farastelis and J. A. Stratis, Talanta, 2004, 62(3), 437 CrossRef CAS .H. Karami, M. F. Mousavi, Y. Yamini and M. Shamsipur, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 509(1), 89 CrossRef CAS .M. Soylak and Y. Akkaya, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2003, 21(3), 455 Search PubMed .L. Liang, M. Horvat, H. Li and P. Pang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1383 RSC .J. Stripeikis, J. Pedro, A. Bonivardi and M. Tudino, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 502(1), 99 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Chen, L. X. Li and Z. L. Chen, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2003, 23(6), 1185 CAS .J. C. Feo, M. A. Castro, J. M. Lumbreras, B. de Celis and A. J. Aller, Anal. Sci., 2003, 19(12), 1631 CAS .S. S. Potgieter, N. Panichev, J. H. Potgieter and S. Panicheva, Cem. Concr. Res., 2003, 33(10), 1589 CrossRef CAS .H. Matusiewicz and M. Kopras, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1415 RSC .M. Grotti and R. Frache, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1192 RSC .M. J. Chang, J. D. Naworal, K. Walker and C. T. Connell, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(11), 1979 CrossRef .C. F. Yeh and S. J. Jiang, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1029(1–2), 255 CrossRef CAS .F. Seby, M. Gagean, H. Garraud, A. Castetbon and O. F. X. Donard, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(4), 685 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Epov, V. Taylor, D. Lariviere, R. D. Evans and R. J. Cornett, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 258(3), 473 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Gikunju, S. M. Lev, A. Birenzvige and D. M. Schaefer, Talanta, 2004, 62(4), 741 CrossRef CAS .M. Resano, F. Vanhaecke, D. Hutsebaut, K. De Corte and L. Moens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1238 RSC .I. Gunther-Leopold, B. Wernli, Z. Kopajtic and D. Gunther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 241 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Krupp, C. Pecheyran, S. Meffan-Main and O. F. X. Donard, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 250 CrossRef CAS .J. J. S. Shen and C. F. You, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(9), 1972 CrossRef CAS .H. P. Qi and T. B. Coplen, Chem. Geol., 2003, 199(1–2), 183 CAS .D. L. Anderson, J. AOAC Int., 2003, 86(3), 583 CAS .Y. Arai, A. Lanzirotti, S. Sutton, J. A. Davis and D. L. Sparks, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37(18), 4083 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Becker, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(10), 1757 CrossRef .C. Hurtgen and C. Cossonnet, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2003, 105(1–4), 375 CAS .R. H. Gwiazda, K. Squibb, M. McDiarmid and D. Smith, Health Phys., 2004, 86(1), 12 CrossRef CAS .C. Bouvier-Capely, N. Baglan, A. Montegue, J. Ritt and C. Cossonnet, Health Phys., 2003, 85(2), 216 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Pappas, B. G. Ting and D. C. Paschal, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1289 RSC .M. D. Seltzer, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(9), 1173 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Ketterer, K. M. Hafer, C. L. Link, C. S. Royden and W. Hartsock, J. Environ. Radioact., 2003, 67(3), 191 CrossRef CAS .P. Deschamps, R. Doucelance, B. Ghaleb and J. L. Michelot, Chem. Geol., 2003, 201(1–2), 141 CrossRef CAS .S. Richter and S. A. Goldberg, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 229(3), 181 CrossRef CAS .U. Nygren, I. Rodushkin, C. Nilsson and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1426 RSC .S. F. Boulyga, M. Tibi and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 342 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Farmer, A. C. Steed, J. Sobus, K. Stetzenbach, K. Lindley and V. F. Hodge, Health Phys., 2003, 85(4), 457 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Izmer, S. F. Boulyga and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1339 RSC .B. Kuczewski, C. M. Marquardt, A. Seibert, H. Geckeis, J. V. Kratz and N. Trautmann, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(24), 6769 CrossRef CAS .H. Geckeis, T. N. Manh, M. Bouby and J. I. Kim, Colloid Surf. A-Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 2003, 217(1–3), 101 Search PubMed .C. J. Wang, F. J. Mazzotti, G. P. Miller and C. B. Winstead, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(9), 1167 CrossRef CAS .L. Pibida, C. A. McMahon and B. A. Bushaw, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2004, 60(2–4), 567 CrossRef CAS .H. Sellner, K. Hametner, D. Gunther and D. Seebach, J. Catal., 2003, 215(1), 87 CrossRef CAS .M. Resano, E. Garcia-Ruiz, C. Crespo, F. Vanhaecke and M. A. Belarra, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1477 RSC .M. P. Seah and S. J. Spencer, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(11), 906 CrossRef CAS .F. Truica-Marasescu and M. R. Wertheimer, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 91(6), 3886 CrossRef CAS .N. V. Bhat, D. T. Seshadri and S. Radhakrishnan, Text. Res. J., 2004, 74(2), 155 Search PubMed .M. R. D. Oriani, F. Yokoya and M. N. Eberlin, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 19(6), 625 CrossRef CAS .A. A. A. Gaber, Anal. Lett., 2003, 36(12), 2585 CrossRef .K. Nakano and T. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(6), 452 CrossRef CAS .J. Valley, Spectroscopy, 2004, 13 Search PubMed .S. H. Hosseini and A. A. Entezami, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 90(1), 40 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Hosseini and A. A. Entezami, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 90(1), 49 CrossRef CAS .I. B. Gornushkin, P. E. Eagan, A. B. Novikov, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(2), 197 CrossRef CAS .C. White, W. L. Wu, Y. X. Pu, M. Rafailovich and J. Sokolov, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2003, 43(6), 1241 Search PubMed .T. Paryjczak and M. I. Szynkowska, Przem. Chem., 2003, 82(3), 199 Search PubMed .A. M. Belu, D. J. Graham and D. G. Castner, Biomaterials, 2003, 24(21), 3635 CrossRef CAS .E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, S. Sutovski, A. Shulzinger, A. Sheshnev and A. Gladkikh, Synth. Met., 2003, 139(2), 321 CrossRef CAS .L. Lantz and M. G. Pecht, IEEE Trans. Compon. Packaging Technol., 2003, 26(1), 199 Search PubMed .B. Godlewska-Zylkiewicz, B. Lesniewska and J. Golimowski, Microchim. Acta, 2003, 143(1), 13 Search PubMed .B. Maichin, M. Zischka and G. Knapp, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(5), 715 CAS .T. H. Liou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2003, 103(1–2), 107 CrossRef CAS .E. Skrzydlewska and M. Balcerzak, Chem. Anal., 2003, 48(6), 909 Search PubMed .E. Skrzydlewska and M. Balcerzak, Talanta, 2004, 62(5), 937 CrossRef CAS .C. Nerin, J. Albinana, M. R. Philo, L. Castle, B. Raffael and C. Simoneau, Food Addit. Contam., 2003, 20(7), 668 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Yu, M. Y. Teng, W. L. Chou and M. C. Yang, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 225(1–2), 115 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Zou, Z. H. Huang, F. Y. Kang and J. B. Yang, New Carbon Mater., 2003, 18(3), 214 Search PubMed .U. S. Schubert, A. Alexeev and P. R. Andres, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2003, 288(11), 852 CrossRef CAS .B. Gawdzik and M. Sobiesiak, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 214(1–4), 52 CrossRef CAS .D. P. Park, J. Y. Hwang, H. J. Choi, C. A. Kim and M. S. Jhon, Mater. Res. Innov., 2003, 7(3), 161 Search PubMed .J. Hu, H. Zhao, Q. J. Zhang and W. D. He, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 89(4), 1124 CrossRef CAS .W. D. Wu and C. Q. Yang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 90(7), 1885 CrossRef CAS .W. D. Wu, X. Zhen and C. Q. Yang, J. Fire Sci., 2004, 22(1), 11 Search PubMed .M. Stepputat and R. Noll, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(30), 6210 CAS .L. Li, C. M. Barshick, J. T. Millay, A. V. Welty and F. L. King, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(16), 3953 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Altwaiq, M. Wolf and R. van Eldik, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 491(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .T. Paunesku, N. Stojicevic, S. Vogt, J. Maser, B. Lai, T. Rajh, M. Thurnauer and G. Woloschak, J. Phys. IV, 2003, 104, 317 Search PubMed .L. Y. Matzui, L. L. Vovchenko, L. M. Kapitanchuk, N. I. Zakharenko and N. G. Babich, Inorg. Mater., 2003, 39(11), 1147 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Zhang, B. X. Han, Z. S. Hou, Z. M. Liu, J. He and T. Jiang, Langmuir, 2003, 19(18), 7616 CrossRef CAS .H. G. Xi, X. F. Qian, J. Yin, L. J. Bian, R. He and Z. K. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2003, 57(18), 2657 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Jiang and K. H. Wei, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 92(3), 1422 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Mbhele, M. G. Salemane, C. van Sittert, J. M. Nedeljkovic, V. Djokovic and A. S. Luyt, Chem. Mat., 2003, 15(26), 5019 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Khan and M. M. Alam, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 504(2), 253 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Jiang, Y. H. Guo, C. G. Wang, C. W. Hu, Y. Wu and E. B. Wang, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2003, 256(1–2), 203 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Jiang, Y. H. Guo, C. W. Hu, C. G. Wang and D. F. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2004, 39(2), 251 CrossRef CAS .S. Pahlke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(12), 2025 CrossRef .M. Yamagami, A. Ikeshita, Y. Onizuka, S. Kojima and T. Yamada, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(12), 2079 CrossRef .Y. Mori and K. Uemura, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2003, 58(12), 2085 Search PubMed .B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegauf, J. Weser and G. Ulm in Ultra Clean Processing of Silicon Surfaces V,  2003, vol. 92, pp. 89–92 Search PubMed .B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegauf, G. Ulm, J. Weser, G. Pepponi, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, T. Ehmann, L. Fabry, S. Pahlke, B. Kanngiesser and W. Malzer in Ultra Clean Processing of Silicon Surfaces V,  2003, vol. 92, pp. 165–169 Search PubMed .C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Wobrauschek, N. Zoger, P. Pianetta, K. Baur, S. Pahlke, L. Fabry, C. Mantler, B. Kanngiesser and W. Malzer, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(12), 2105 CrossRef .C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Wobrauschek, B. Beckhoff, G. Ulm, S. Pahlke, L. Fabry, T. Ehmann, B. Kanngiesser, W. Malzer and W. Jark, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(12), 2113 CrossRef .M. B. Shabani, Y. Shiina, F. G. Kirscht and Y. Shimanuki, Mater. Sci. Eng. B-Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2003, 102(1–3), 238 CrossRef .J. S. Becker and H. J. Dietze, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228(2–3), 127 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Funke, B. L. Grissom, C. E. McGrew and M. W. Raynor, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74(9), 3909 CrossRef CAS .K. Kawabata and Y. Kishi, At. Spectrosc., 2003, 24(2), 66 CAS .R. Liu, A. T. S. Wee, D. H. Shen and H. Takenaka, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(2), 172 CrossRef CAS .S. Hofmann, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A-Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 2004, 362(1814), 55 Search PubMed .P. Zaumseil, D. Kruger, R. Kurps, O. Fursenko and P. Formanek in Gettering and Defect Engineering in Semiconductor Technology,  2004, vol. 95–96, pp. 473–482 Search PubMed .V. Margetic, K. Niemax and R. Hergenroder, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(14), 3435 CrossRef CAS .R. Bungener, W. Pamler and U. Gosele, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process, 2003, 6(1–3), 43 CrossRef CAS .R. Mosca, P. Bussei, S. Franchi, P. Frigeri, E. Gombia, A. Carnera and M. Peroni, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93(12), 9709 CrossRef CAS .J. Marcon, M. Ihaddadene and K. Ketata, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 253(1–4), 174 CrossRef CAS .A. Merabet and C. Gontrand, Mater. Sci. Eng. B-Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2003, 102(1–3), 257 CrossRef .K. Premaratne, S. N. Akuranthilaka, I. M. Dharmadasa and A. P. Samantilleka, Renew. Energy, 2004, 29(4), 549 CrossRef CAS .R. L. Mills, B. Dhandapani and J. L. He, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Nishiwaki, A. Ennaoui, S. Schuler, S. Siebentritt and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431, 296 CrossRef .K. Herz, A. Eicke, F. Kessler, R. Wachter and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431, 392 CrossRef .C. C. Garcia, J. M. Vadillo, J. Ruiz and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(7), 779 RSC .T. Buonassisi, M. Heuer, O. F. Vyvenko, A. A. Istratov, E. R. Weber, Z. Cai, B. Lai, T. F. Ciszek and R. Schindler, Physica B, 2003, 340, 1137 CrossRef .T. Niwa, T. Araki, T. Muroga, Y. Iijima, Y. Yamada, T. Saitoh, I. Hirabayashi and Y. Shiohara, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2003, 13(2), 2747 CrossRef CAS .O. Dogan, M. Ertugrul, U. Cevik, E. Bacaksiz, E. Tirasoglu, A. I. Kobya and H. Erdogan, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(5), 363 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsukui, R. E. Koritala, M. Li, K. C. Goretta, A. Adachi, J. E. Baker and J. L. Routbort, Physica C, 2003, 392, 841 CrossRef .J. S. Song, Y. C. Choi, S. H. Seo, D. C. Oh, M. W. Cho, T. Yao and M. H. Oh, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 264(1–3), 98 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, Y. F. Zheng, J. B. Xu and K. Dai, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18(7), 611 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Hankare, V. M. Bhuse, K. M. Garadkar, S. D. Delekar and I. S. Mulla, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 82(3), 711 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Hankare, V. M. Bhuse, K. M. Garadkar, S. D. Delekar and P. R. Bhagat, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2004, 19(2), 277 CrossRef CAS .G. Vittiglio, S. Bichhneier, P. Klinger, J. Heckel, W. Fuzhong, L. Vincze, K. Janssens, P. Engstrom, A. Rindby, K. Dietrich, D. Jembrih-Simburger, M. Schreiner, D. Denis, A. Lakdar and A. Lamotte, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 213, 693 Search PubMed .M. Milazzo, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 213, 683 Search PubMed .R. Falcone, A. Renier and M. Verita, Archaeometry, 2002, 44, 531 Search PubMed .K. Muller and H. Stege, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 421 Search PubMed .A. J. Shortland, Archaeometry, 2002, 44, 517 Search PubMed .U. Casellato, F. Fenzi, P. Guerriero, S. Sitran, P. A. Vigato, U. Russo, M. Galgani, M. Mendera and A. Manasse, J. Cult. Herit., 2003, 4(4), 337 CrossRef .Z. Smit, K. Janssens, O. Schalm and M. Kos, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 213, 717 Search PubMed .I. Biron and S. Beauchoux, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2003, 14(9), 1564 CrossRef CAS .T. Trejos and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(5), 1236 CrossRef CAS .T. Trejos, S. Montero and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(8), 1255 CAS .S. Montero, A. L. Hobbs, T. A. French and A. R. Almirall, J. Forensic Sci., 2003, 48(5), 1101 CAS .Y. Suzuki, M. Kasamatsu, R. Sugita, H. Ohta, S. Suzuki and Y. Marumo, Bunseki Kagaku, 2003, 52(6), 469 .K. S. Lee, Y. C. Choi, Y. C. Seo, I. T. Kim, J. H. Kim and C. W. Jeong, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2004, 21(1), 11 CrossRef CAS .A. Jiricka, A. Helebrant, J. Hamackova, G. Heide and G. H. Frischat, Glass Sci. Technol., 2003, 76(6), 298 Search PubMed .Y. Barbotteau, J. L. Irigaray and E. Jallot, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(5), 450 CrossRef CAS .Y. Barbotteau, J. L. Irigaray and P. Moretto, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2004, 215(1–2), 214 Search PubMed .T. M. Sridhar and U. K. Mudali, Trans. Indian Inst. Met., 2003, 56(3), 221 Search PubMed .A. Sewing, M. Lakatos, D. Scharnweber, S. Roessler, R. Born, M. Dard and H. Worch in Bioceramics,  2004, vol. 254–2, pp. 419–422 Search PubMed .D. Tadic, A. Veresov, V. I. Putlayev and M. Epple, Materialwiss. Werkstofftech., 2003, 34(12), 1048 Search PubMed .T. Sakae, A. Ookubo, R. Z. LeGeros, R. Shimogoryou, Y. Sato, S. Lin, H. Yamamoto and Y. Kozawa in Bioceramics 15,  2003, Vol. 240–2, pp. 395–398 Search PubMed .G. Berger and U. Ploska, in Bioceramics 15,  2003, Vol. 240–2, pp. 607–610 Search PubMed .M. F. Barba, P. Callejas, J. O. Arzabe and J. M. Villora, J. European Ceram. Soc., 2003, 23(15), 2893 Search PubMed .J. W. Wang and M. H. Hon, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2004, 15(2), 129 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Cleere, G. M. Insley, M. E. Murphy, P. N. Maher and A. M. Murphy in Bioceramics,  2004, vol. 254–2, pp. 585–588 Search PubMed .D. Bleiner, P. Lienemann, A. Ulrich, H. Vonmont and A. Wichser, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1146 RSC .J. Haberecht, F. Krumeich, H. Grutzmacher and R. Nesper, Chem. Mat., 2004, 16(3), 418 CrossRef CAS .H. Minami, M. Yada, T. Yoshida, Q. B. Zhang, S. Inoue and I. Atsuya, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20(3), 455 CAS .Y. Qiu and L. Gao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86(7), 1214 CAS .M. I. Ryshchenko, L. A. Mikheenko, L. P. Shchukina and A. A. Baturin, Glass Ceram., 2003, 60(5–6), 168 CrossRef CAS .C. Roldan, J. Coll, J. L. Ferrero and D. Juanes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(1), 28 CrossRef CAS .D. N. Phillips, Br. Ceram. Trans., 2003, 102(6), 257 CrossRef CAS .M. Kuzuya, M. Murakami and N. Maruyama, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(5), 957 .D. Menut, P. Fichet, J. L. Lacour, A. Rivoallan and P. Mauchien, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(30), 6063 CrossRef CAS .M. Kilo, M. A. Taylor, C. Argirusis, G. Borchardt, B. Lesage, S. Weber, S. Scherrer, H. Scherrer, M. Schroeder and M. Martin, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94(12), 7547 CrossRef CAS .H. Haneda, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2003, 111(7), 439 CAS .R. N. Vannier, S. J. Skinner, R. J. Chater, J. A. Kilner and G. Mairesse, Solid State Ion., 2003, 160(1–2), 85 CrossRef CAS .E. Boehm, J. M. Bassat, M. C. Steil, P. Dordor, F. Mauvy and J. C. Grenier, Solid State Sci., 2003, 5(7), 973 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Khalil, Mater. Sci. Eng. A-Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Process., 2003, 352(1–2), 64 CrossRef .Y. Itoh and K. Okuyama, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2003, 111(11), 815 CAS .R. M. Piticescu, A. M. Moisin, D. Taloi, V. Badilita and L. Soare, J. European Ceram. Soc., 2004, 24(6), 931 Search PubMed .R. Sitko, B. Zawisza, J. Jurczyk, D. Bochenek and M. Plonska, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 144(1–3), 9 Search PubMed .M. V. Lima, F. Brayner and M. F. Pimentel, J. Phys. IV, 2003, 107, 777 Search PubMed .L. Escoda, M. Lledo, J. J. Sunol, P. Roura and J. Carda, Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidr., 2003, 42(2), 85 Search PubMed .D. N. Papadopoulou, G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, N. C. Tsirliganis and J. A. Stratis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 505(1), 173 CrossRef CAS .W. D. Li, J. Z. Li, J. Wu and J. K. Guo, Ceram. Int., 2003, 29(8), 933 CrossRef CAS .G. Barone, V. Crupi, S. Galli, D. Majolino, P. Migliardo and V. Venuti, J. Mol. Struct., 2003, 651, 449 CrossRef .P. Colomban and G. Sagon, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 125 Search PubMed .P. L. Leung, Z. W. Mao, M. Li, J. Zhu, M. Feng, Y. M. Yang, X. M. Sun, M. S. Guo and C. S. Wang, Sci. China Ser. B-Chem., 2003, 46(5), 465 Search PubMed .J. B. I. Garrigos, M. A. C. Ontiveros and V. Kilikoglou, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 1 Search PubMed .S. Padovani, C. Sada, P. Mazzoldi, B. Brunetti, I. Borgia, A. Sgamellotti, A. Giulivi, F. D’Acapito and G. Battaglin, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93(12), 10058 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Feliu, M. C. Edreira and J. Martin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 502(2), 241 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Kennett, A. J. Anderson, M. J. Cruz, G. R. Clark and G. R. Summerhayes, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 35 Search PubMed .B. P. Li, J. X. Zhao, K. D. Collerson and A. Greig, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2003, 48(12), 1219 Search PubMed .C. Rathossi, P. Tsolis-Katagas and C. Katagas, Appl. Clay Sci., 2004, 24(3–4), 313 CrossRef CAS .G. Padeletti and P. Fermo, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2003, 77(1), 125 Search PubMed .M. O. Adebajo, M. A. Long and R. L. Frost, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 60(4), 791 .H. X. Wang, G. Hu, H. Lei, Y. D. Xu and X. H. Bao, Catal. Lett., 2003, 89(1–2), 75 CrossRef CAS .H. X. Wang, L. L. Su, J. Q. Zhuang, D. L. Tan, Y. D. Xu and X. H. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(47), 12964 CrossRef CAS .P. Q. Zhang, X. S. Wang, X. W. Guo, H. C. Guo, L. P. Zhao and Y. K. Hu, Catal. Lett., 2004, 92(1–2), 63 CrossRef CAS .R. Morales, L. Melo, J. Brito, A. Llanos, D. Moronta, L. Albornoz and E. Rodriguez, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2003, 203(1–2), 277 CrossRef CAS .S. B. C. Pergher, R. M. Dallago, R. C. Veses, C. E. Gigola and I. M. Baibich, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2004, 209(1–2), 107 CrossRef CAS .H. Q. Yang, G. Y. Zhang, X. L. Hong and Y. Y. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2004, 210(1–2), 143 CrossRef CAS .Q. C. Li, S. E. Brown, L. J. Broadbelt, J. G. Zheng and N. Q. Wu, Micropor. Mesopor. Mat., 2003, 59(2–3), 105 Search PubMed .C. W. Chen and A. N. Ko in Nanotechnology in Mesostructured Materials,  2003, vol. 146, pp. 617–620 Search PubMed .B. De Clercq, F. Lefebvre and F. Verpoort, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2003, 247(2), 345 CrossRef CAS .V. Nieminen, N. Kumar, J. Datka, J. Paivarinta, M. Hotokka, E. Laine, T. Salmi and D. Y. Murzin, Micro. Mesopor. Mat., 2003, 60(1–3), 159 Search PubMed .A. Bernas, N. Kumar, P. Maki-Arvela, N. V. Kul’kova, B. Holmbom, T. Salmi and D. Y. Murzin, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2003, 245(2), 257 CAS .Y. Yang, Y. H. Guo, C. W. Hu, C. J. Jiang and E. B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13(7), 1686 RSC .W. Q. Zhou, X. Q. Zhao, Y. J. Wang and J. Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 260(1), 19 CrossRef CAS .C. Kladis, S. K. Bhargava and D. B. Akolekar, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2003, 203(1–2), 193 CrossRef CAS .B. K. Min, A. K. Santra and D. W. Goodman, Catal. Today, 2003, 85(2–4), 113 CrossRef CAS .N. Iwasa and N. Takezawa, Top. Catal., 2003, 22(3–4), 215 CrossRef CAS .B. T. Li, X. H. Li, K. J. Asami and K. Fujimoto, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17(4), 810 CrossRef CAS .A. Mastalir and Z. Kiraly, J. Catal., 2003, 220(2), 372 CrossRef CAS .J. Grams, J. Goralski and T. Paryjczak, Surf. Sci., 2004, 549(1), L21 CrossRef CAS .S. Barison, D. Barreca, G. A. Battiston, S. Daolio, M. Fabrizio, R. Gerbasi and E. Tondello, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(9), 996 CAS .S. Barison, S. Daolio, M. Fabrizio and A. De Battisti, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(3), 278 CrossRef CAS .A. Kumar and G. S. Mishra, Transit. Met. Chem., 2003, 28(8), 913 Search PubMed .L. Balzano, D. Cauzzi, C. Mucchino, G. Predieri and A. Tiripicchio, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2003, 204, 737 CrossRef .A. Pintar, G. Bercic, M. Besson and P. Gallezot, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2004, 47(3), 143 CrossRef CAS .E. L. V. Goetheer, A. W. Verkerk, L. J. P. van den Broeke, E. de Wolf, B. J. Deelman, G. van Koten and J. T. F. Keurentjes, J. Catal., 2003, 219(1), 126 CrossRef CAS .A. Datta, K. Ebert and H. Plenio, Organometallics, 2003, 22(23), 4685 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Jones, V. A. Dupont, R. Brydson, D. J. Fullerton, N. S. Nasri, A. B. Ross and A. V. K. Westwood, Catal. Today, 2003, 81(4), 589 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
