Multiple exciton generation in cluster-free alloy Cd x Hg 1−x Te colloidal quantum dots synthesized in water   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP01465K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01465K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25710-25722Multiple exciton generation in cluster-free alloy CdxHg1−xTe colloidal quantum dots synthesized in water†

        
          
            Stephen V. 
            Kershaw
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Sergii 
            Kalytchuk
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Olga 
            Zhovtiuk
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Shen
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Takuya 
            Oshima
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Witoon 
            Yindeesuk
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Taro 
            Toyoda
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Andrey L. 
            Rogach
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics and Materials Science and Centre for Functional Photonics (CFP), City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR. E-mail: skershaw@cityu.edu.hk;  Fax: +852-3442-0538
bDepartment of Engineering Science, Faculty of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications, 1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
cCREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      7th April 2014
    , Accepted 5th June 2014First published on 16th June 2014AbstractA number of different composition CdxHg1−xTe alloy quantum dots have been synthesized using a modified aqueous synthesis and ion exchange method. The benefits of good stoichiometric control and high emission quantum yield were retained whilst also ensuring that the tendency to form gel-like clusters and adsorb excess cations in the stabilizing ligand shells was mitigated using a sequestering method to remove excess ionic material during and after the synthesis. This was highly desirable for ultrafast carrier dynamics measurements, avoiding strong photocharging effects which may mask fundamental carrier signals. Transient grating measurements revealed a composition dependent carrier multiplication process which competes with phonon mediated carrier cooling to deplete the initial hot carrier population. The interplay between these two mechanisms is strongly dependent on the electron effective mass which in these alloys has a marked composition dependence and may be considerably lower than the hole effective mass. For a composition x = 0.52 we measured a maximum carrier multiplication quantum yield of 199 ± 19% with pump photon energy 3 times the bandgap energy, Eg, whilst the threshold energy is calculated to be just 2.15Eg. There is some evidence to suggest an impact ionization process analogous to the inverse Auger S mechanism seen in bulk CdxHg1−xTe.
1. Introduction
When quantum dots (QDs) are excited with energies Eex well above their bandgap energies Eg the electron hole pairs thus created are initially said to be hot by virtue of having an excess energy Eex–Eg that is well above any excess due to a simple thermal carrier distribution at room temperature. If nothing else, they will subsequently rapidly cool to an energy just above the bandgap prior to a later further relaxation upon electron–hole recombination.1 If carrier cooling can be controlled and made slow enough, carriers that are still hot might be extracted before they cool to the bandedge. For example, if they could be rapidly transferred to a wide bandgap semiconductor it may be possible to ultimately increase the photovoltage of solar cells based on such combinations of materials.1 Whilst still hot the carriers may also undergo a process of carrier multiplication where the excess energy, with an appropriate threshold forfeit, can be traded for a doubling (or more at higher excitation energies2) of carrier density in what is termed multiple exciton generation (MEG). There are several possible processes by which this may happen3–10 but the most common and generally favourable of these are classed as inverse Auger processes e.g. impact ionization.11–15 Forward Auger processes (Auger recombinations) are the scourge of multiple exciton (or carrier pair) occupied QDs since they rapidly reduce the population within a single QD to just one exciton from which only a single (cooled) carrier pair may be extracted or may radiatively recombine. The occurrence of Auger recombination is a useful indication that multiple carriers existed beforehand – whether created by MEG or simply the contemporaneous absorption of two excitation photons. By examining the excitation fluence dependence of the transient excited state population these two multiple carrier creation paths can be distinguished, and if MEG is established, a quantum yield for multiplication can be calculated.16 Again, the multiplication of hot carriers into additional pairs of bandedge carriers offers the potential of improving photovoltaic solar power conversion efficiency by generating additional photocurrent from the higher photon energy portions of the solar spectrum that are typically inefficiently used in many present day commercial photovoltaics. The investigation of the mechanisms and dynamics of hot carrier cooling and carrier multiplication processes in quantum dot materials, especially those such as CdxHg1−xTe alloy quantum dots where the bandgap lies just into the near IR, may lead to photovoltaic materials offering wide and efficient spectral coverage.
In narrow band InSb-like bulk semiconductors there may be up to 10 distinct Auger relaxation mechanisms involving various permutations of electron, light and heavy holes.17 In bulk CdxHg1−xTe just two of these processes termed Auger 1 and Auger 7 may be relevant (depending upon the dominant carriers, i.e. n- or p-type) along with yet another process which includes the split-off valence band lying below the degenerate light and heavy hole bands by the spin–orbit energy difference, Δ (Fig. 1). The latter special case is often termed an Auger S process18 (to underline the role of the split-off band) in low bandgap InSb-like bulk semiconductor studies. In bulk CdxHg1−xTe avalanche photodiodes,19 this inverse Auger S process is used to advantage when the bandgap and spin–orbit energies are equal and on resonance. In the bulk material the spin–orbit energy is weakly sensitive to the composition, whilst the bandgap is more sensitive, and this difference in composition coefficients leads to the two energies being equal for a given composition.
 Fig. 1  Conduction and valence levels near the bandgap in semiconducting bulk CdxHg1−xTe (after Landolt-Bornstein20). The variation of the bandgap (Eg) with composition is near linear and the material has a semi-metal range typically below compositions having x = 0.06 to 0.07 (depending upon temperature), where the conduction band minimum falls below the top of the valence band. The split-off energy level difference, Δ, typically has a weaker compositional dependence. 
It may also be possible to take advantage of a crudely analogous enhanced impact ionization coefficient in CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs with not only composition but also potentially QD size to allow tuning of the bandgap/spin–orbit matched region across a range of bandgap energies, i.e. the Eg/Δ matched point may span a range of bandgap energies depending on the QD size. It is interesting to note that the spin–orbit energy difference in bulk CdxHg1−xTe is in the range slightly above 1 eV and that if anything, a slight separation of the less confinement sensitive valence band levels in QDs will raise this energy a little further. This could be of significance for some solar applications where it may be desirable to efficiently convert solar radiation to photons with energies around 1.3–1.4 eV. Alloy QDs with enhanced photo-conversion or light-to-charge conversion yields in this energy range may be very useful in such devices. Spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements have been made of the bandgap and higher energy transitions in HgTe21–23 and CdTe QDs.24 In the latter case slightly non-spherical CdTe QDs in the 8.5 nm average diameter range embedded in SiO2 films were studied and a shift in the split-off band energy of 190 meV relative to bulk CdTe determined. For 4 nm diameter spherical CdTe Dayal et al. estimated a shift of around 300 meV which would place the split-off band energy slightly above 1.1 eV for x = 1, though they note that the values are strongly sensitive to shape and local stress effects.
There are several caveats that should be applied in trying to translate bulk impact ionization to QDs. This interesting mechanism is not the only possible inverse Auger process; in QDs there is a far lower density of states than the bulk, especially for the lighter and more confinement-shifted conduction levels. In such nanoparticles the notion of conventional bulk semiconductor band theory is questionable to a degree, and confinement effects may substantially alter the strength of Auger (and competing) processes. From band theory, the concept of carrier effective masses arises, related to the curvature of the relevant bands near the band edge. In bulk CdxHg1−xTe the electron effective mass varies markedly with composition, being always lower than the (heavy) hole mass (assumed to be more or less constant as a function of composition at 0.44m0) The electron effective mass may be almost zero at the semi-metal to semiconductor transition (x ∼ 0.07) and so the ratio of me/mh can take on relatively low values when compared with the lead chalcogenides PbTe, PbSe, and PbS where the virtually equal carrier masses leads to a ratio close to unity. This is significant for both hot carrier studies and carrier multiplication alike: in the former case the excess energy of the excitation photon above the bandgap is partitioned between the hot electron and hole with a factor of (1 + me/mh)−1 for the former and the remainder for the hole.25 For low me/mh the electron takes the greater proportion and so its cooling behaviour dominates the initial relaxation of the hot carriers. Being lighter than the holes however, hot electrons can be cooled more efficiently (with fewer interactions) than their heavier geminate counterparts. For carrier multiplication, the threshold energy for two exciton generation is (2 + me/mh) times the bandgap energy (see ESI,† Section S1), so in this case CdxHg1−xTe alloys close to the semimetal–semiconductor (in bulk) composition could in principle have relatively low thresholds and a commensurately more energy efficient performance.
Transient absorption (TA) and transient grating (TG) pump–probe measurements are both useful techniques to probe the dynamics of hot carrier creation and relaxation thereafter. Both are sensitive to the changes in the ground state population (usually bleaching and recovery) and that of excited states (e.g. new photoinduced absorptions). In the spectrally resolved versions, transient spectral changes may also reveal Stark-shift induced changes due to charged QD states or charges formed close to the QDs. The TG method is sensitive to pump induced changes in both the real and imaginary parts of the complex refractive index of the material and changes to the purely refractive component may be either positive or negative in sign for an increment in a given excited state population. Single probe wavelength TA and TG profiles can reveal the initial bleach of the band edge state as its population falls, alongside an induced absorption in an excited (hot) state and the relaxation from that state to the thermalized band edge state. The removal of multiple carrier pairs or excitons from that band edge can be followed as a sequence of Auger relaxations. The radiative relaxation of the final carrier pair in colloidal QDs is normally longer than 1 ns (usually several tens of ns) and is not generally measured using high speed, delay line type TA and TG experiments. In that time range either time resolved photoluminescence or flashlamp/electronically synchronised TA methods are used.
In order to be able to clearly observe band edge and excited state transients it is important to avoid the build up of local charges around the QDs (and an imbalance of charge remaining within the QDs). For solution based measurements this can be countered by rapidly stirring the contents of the measurement cuvette. However, for colloidal QDs grown (or in the case of alloy QDs, formed by ion exchange) in water based solutions there is another factor relevant to the reduction of photocharging (even with stirring) in such measurements.
Lesnyak et al.26 and others27 have shown that aqueous colloidal QDs such as CdTe may be assembled (near reversibly) into monolithic gels by the addition of excess divalent cation where multifunctional ligands are used to stabilize the QDs. In the ESI† (Section S2) it is shown that dynamic light scattering measurements of particle sizes in solution revealed the tendency for this gelation process to start to a limited degree even during synthesis or during ion exchange, if high QD/cation densities and even regular thiol ligands such as thioglycerol or mercaptopropionic acid are used. In the former case presumably even weak hydrogen bonding at the OH groups can contribute to the gel network formation, though the role of the excess concentration of divalent cation seemed to be the main critical factor. The formation of gel supporting links between QDs by excess divalent cations and multiple bound (multifunctional) ligands is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Possible ionic and dative bonding schemes whereby excess divalent cations such as Hg2+ can first become entrapped in the thiol or thio-acid ligand shell (thiolates and carboxylates at high pH) and eventually start to form more extensive gel-like networks of QDs (grey spheres), cations and ligands. 
We found that during synthesis or ion exchange it is not uncommon for clusters of gelled QDs to form stable solutions with cluster diameters in the 20–30 nm range. However for TA and TG carrier dynamics measurements it was necessary to break these clusters apart by sequestration of the excess divalent cations, and during the process of ion exchange several cycles of de-clustering followed by re-addition of the exchanging cation were adopted in order to reduce the effects of compositional broadening on the emission and absorption spectra of the alloy QDs. To further reduce the effect of any residual entrapped metal ions within the ligand shell around the final QDs, at the end of the ion exchange process the QDs were extracted into organic solution, replacing the water based ligands with dodecanethiol as a steric rather than ionic stabilizer so that as little ionic material was present alongside the QDs as possible. Full details of these synthetic procedures are given in the ESI† (Sections S2 and S3).
2. Methodology
2.1 Experimental techniques
Absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV 3600 spectrometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured on an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920P fluorescence spectrometer, with a xenon lamp as the excitation source for steady-state spectra and a picosecond pulsed diode laser (EPL-405 nm, pulse width: 48.9 ps) for lifetime (time-correlated single-photon counting – TCSPC) measurements. The absolute PL quantum yields of the QD alloy samples were determined by standard procedures using the same fluorescence spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere with its inner face coated with BENFLEC®. The excitation source for those measurements was the spontaneous emission from a steady state 500 mW, 685 nm diode laser operating just below the lasing threshold.
Particle sizes (hydrodynamic diameters) in solution were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Malvern Instruments Zetasizer Nano ZS machine.
The experimental arrangement used to measure the ultrafast evolution of the transient grating (TG) signal has been extensively described in detail previously28–34 and is shown schematically in Fig. S4 along with further experimental details (ESI,† Section S4). The laser source for both the pump and probe beams was a titanium sapphire regeneratively amplified laser (CPA-2010, Clark-MXR Inc.) providing a 1 kHz repetition rate, 775 nm wavelength, 150 fs width pulse train. A portion of the beam was used to pump an optical parametric amplifier (Quantranix TOAPS) to furnish a wavelength tunable pump beam with a tuning range from 290 nm to 3000 nm. The relative shift in pump and probe pulse arrival times at the sample was varied using an optical delay line – typically 0.1 ps delay increments were used at short times and ps increments at longer times ranging up to 420 ps. An optical grating (with periods from 40 to 200 line pairs per mm) fabricated on a quartz plate was positioned before the sample and in close proximity to it. The pump signal was modulated by a mechanical chopper and the modulated first order diffraction of the probe beam was measured by feeding the signal from the photodetector to a lock-in amplifier. In this way the steady state diffraction from the static grating on the quartz plate could be separated from that due to the pump-induced transient grating in the cuvette arising from excited state population modulation. The transient grating may have both amplitude and phase components due to transiently induced changes in absorption (bleaching and photoinduced absorptions) and changes in the refractive index respectively. The QD alloy samples were measured in solution in a 1 mm path length glass cuvette and during TG measurements stirred with a miniature magnetic stirrer.
2.2 Preparation of samples
Materials for the synthesis of the CdTe QD starting material used in the ion exchange process to form CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs were cadmium acetate hydrate (Cd(Ac)2·2H2O), Uni-Chem; sodium tellurite >99% (Na2TeO3), Aldrich; thioglycolic acid AR grade (TGA), Accuchem; sodium hydroxide AR grade (NaOH), Accuchem; sodium borohydride >98% (NaBH4), Aldrich.
For the ion exchange process: to convert CdTe QDs to CdxHg1−xTe QDs the Hg2+ source was mercury perchlorate 98% (Hg(ClO4)2·2.5H2O), Aldrich; the ligand to solubilize the latter was thioglycerol >99% (TG) Sigma Lifesciences; to break up QD clusters, solutions were treated with unadulterated food grade pure sodium bicarbonate; and during purification steps acetonitrile Chromasolv >99.9%, Sigma Aldrich was used to bring about precipitation of the QDs prior to centrifugation.
For solvent and ligand exchange: the organic solvent ligand was dodecanethiol >98% (DDT), Acros Organics; and final solvent was either toluene >99.7%, Sigma Aldrich; or tetrachloroethylene AR grade (TCE), Fisher Scientific. QD purification in the organic phase involved precipitation using methanol >99.8%, Sigma Aldrich.
All chemicals were used as received from the manufacturers.

2.2.1 CdTe QDs. 
The CdTe-QDs were synthesized by the one-pot method previously reported by Wu et al.35 Briefly, 0.4 mmol Cd(Ac)2·2H2O was dissolved in 50 ml of milliQ deionized water in a two-necked flask. Then 36 μl of TGA was injected into the solution and the pH was adjusted to 10.5 using 1 M NaOH solution. Thereafter 0.08 mmol Na2TeO3 was dissolved in 50 ml of milliQ water and added to the cadmium precursor solution followed by 160 mg of NaBH4 and the mixture allowed to react for 5 min. Afterwards the flask was connected to a condenser and refluxed at 100 °C under open-air conditions. The Cd2+/TGA/TeO32− molar ratio was 1:1:0.2. After several hours reflux during which the QD size increased, the solution PL peak reached 623 nm and the absorption peak 589 nm at which time the growth was terminated by cooling the solution. The QY of the final solution measured after several months storage in a refrigerator was 55%.


2.2.2 CdxHg1−xTe QDs by ion exchange. 
To convert the CdTe to CdxHg1−xTe QDs the CdTe starting material was mixed with aliquots of mercury perchlorate solution, stabilized (solubilized) with thioglycerol ligand at pH 10.8. The amount added (concentration and total volume) could be varied according to how rapidly and far the bandedge of the QDs was required to shift, however it became steadily more difficult to shift the bandgap as the exchange process progressed. Typically aliquots might be 5 ml volumes of a solution made up as 0.25 gm Hg(ClO4)2·2.5H2O: 250 μl TG: 40 ml milliQ water and pH adjusted to 10.8 with 1 M sodium hydroxide solution. In air the latter gradual deteriorates over several hours with some reduction of the mercury salt so it is best used promptly and the remainder discarded. The Hg2+ salt aliquots were added to a number of separate 10 ml volumes of the CdTe QD solution (as synthesized). In principle such an amount of Hg should be sufficient for complete exchange of the cation in the QDs but in practice a significant excess is required.
With such high cation and matching ligand concentrations, clustering (the onset of gelation) of the QDs is an additional complicating factor. (3.75 nm diameter) QDs entrapped in the interior of such (typically 20 nm or so diameter) clusters do not receive as great a dose of Hg2+ with the latter diffusing less readily into the interior of the clusters. Therefore a technique (detailed in the ESI,† Section S2), based on earlier work by Lesnyak et al.26 and Mayilo et al.27 to break apart the gel-like material was used. This was applied in several stages i.e. alternately treating the QDs with Hg2+ then breaking the clusters apart.
Several aliquots with a range of alloy compositions were prepared and after ion exchange in aqueous solution they were transferred into organic solution by exchanging the thioglycerol ligand for dodecanethiol (DDT). This procedure (see ESI,† Section S3) also helped to reduce the amount of ionic material in the solution left over from the synthesis and ion exchange processes.

3. Results
3.1 Material characterization
The progress of the ion exchange process was most readily monitored by the steady state PL of the exchange solutions, diluting small aliquots in D2O rather than water for the longer wavelength samples to reduce the distortion due to OH vibrational overtone and combination bands at long wavelengths (though water is a perfectly adequate solvent at shorter wavelengths). The progress of the Hg2+ induced shift of the QD emission to lower bandgap energies can be seen in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Changes in PL spectra of 3.75 nm diameter CdTe QDs (at right hand side) due to successive treatments with Hg2+ salt/thiol stabilizer solution (pH 10.8), with a de-clustering treatment after each treatment cycle. The end point for pure HgTe QDs of the same size is estimated to be at 0.757 eV (1640 nm), implying a barrier to complete ion exchange. The excitation energy was 3.06 eV (405 nm) in each case. 
Each peak is separated from the adjacent one by one round of Hg2+ addition, standing for one or more days and a cycle of de-clustering and clean-up of the solution. The end point (pure HgTe QDs, x = 0) is estimated as 1640 nm (0.76 eV) from which it can be seen that progress is becoming asymptotically slow and far from a complete exchange of cations. As discussed in the ESI† (see Section S3), the change in the cation ratio had already ceased before the longest wavelength cases and the sluggish continued red shift was in fact due to a different mechanism than composition change. There is further evidence for this, along with an indication of the influence of clustering of the QDs themselves, in Fig. 4 which shows the fitted stretched exponential PL lifetimes and stretch factors for the aqueous and organic counterparts (i.e. before and after solvent and ligand exchange).
 Fig. 4  Stretched exponential fit parameters (lifetime, τ and stretch factor, β) for PL decays of aqueous samples of a series of CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs before the final de-clustering treatment (circles) and the corresponding samples after de-clustering and extraction into organic solvent (triangles). The PL peak wavelengths of the samples in the organic phase are listed on the right. The excitation energy was 3.06 eV (405 nm) in each case. 
Lifetimes of around the 50 ns range are typical of HgTe QDs in organic solution. Longer lifetimes around the 100 ns range for Hg rich QDs in aqueous solutions seems to be a marker of strongly associated QDs (clusters) and might be explained via a charge transfer mechanism involving sites such as the entrapped Hg2+ ions in the dielectric (ligand shell) binding the dots together.
Several groups36,37 have discussed the radiative recombination rate in QDs using Maxwell Garnet theory to derive intrinsic absorption coefficients from solution absorption spectra and approximating the band edge transition as a simple single two level transition then applied Fermi's Golden Rule to express the recombination rate as:36 (1)where ns is the solution refractive index, ω the transition frequency , g is the degeneracy of the levels involved in the transition and εgap is the energy integrated absorption coefficient at the bandgap.
In the absence of any significant change in the oscillator strength of the band edge absorption (upon which εgap directly depends) the lifetimes upon exchange of solvents should simply scale in the inverse ratio of the high frequency dielectric constants of the two liquids i.e. nsolv22/nsolv12. In going from water to tetrachloroethylene the change in the dielectric medium should therefore reduce the lifetimes by a factor of 1.32 times. However, in Fig. 4, there is almost no change in lifetime for aliquot 2, and for aliquots 3 through 6 the ratio of the square of the lifetimes in the two solvents varies depending on the sample. The use of eqn (1) is rather approximate, given that experimentally the measured lifetimes are not single exponential but in fact PL decays are fitted to stretched exponential decays arising from the rather complex combination of size and composition distributions. Nonetheless, the variations in the difference in decay rates for QDs in the two solvents suggests that the change of solvent dielectric constant alone is not sufficient explanation. It is highly likely that the recombination rate in aqueous solution is rather higher than it should be otherwise, due to the formation of the gel-like medium and particle clustering, which gets progressively worse during the doping process, explaining the widening disparity between the two cases. We note that samples in the organic phase had most of the gel-like material stripped from the QDs during the exchange process.
The PL FWHM normalized by the peak wavelength (see Fig. S3, ESI†) is a crude indicator of the size distribution in pure, non-alloy QDs (assuming the PL QY is not strongly size dependent, etc.). Here we note that both size broadening and composition broadening will contribute to the relative spectral widths. Whilst the CdTe starting material had a FWHM/λmax of only 8.6%, the additional broadening for the six alloy aliquots after extraction was reasonably constant, which appears to vindicate the use of repeated de-clustering cycles to try to manage (minimize) the compositional broadening. Some is clearly inescapable, but it can be mitigated to a degree.
The nanoparticle size measured by DLS after extraction and washing in the organic phase is shown in Fig. 5. There was a slight increase in hydrodynamic size during the alloying process though this is unlikely to be due to any significant increase in the size of the alloy particles themselves. It is most likely that the particles still carry some residue of the excess ligand–metal ion complex on their surfaces and that this was becoming increasingly harder to fully remove the more times the Hg2+ dosing–declustering cycle was repeated.
 Fig. 5  Hydrodynamic diameters of CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD samples measured after de-clustering and extraction into organic solvent (toluene with DDT ligand) followed by several rounds of precipitation with methanol, centrifugation and re-dissolving. The sample numbering is the same as for Fig. 4. 
The PL QYs (for single exciton recombination) of the final organic versions of the CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD aliquots are shown, together with their absorption spectra, in Fig. 6. The QYs of most of the alloys are broadly comparable though lower than the original material – this may be improvable with better processing (fewer steps especially), though the very low first aliquot QY seems to be a frequently encountered effect. Susha et al.38 observed PL quenching on the addition of low concentrations (10 μM) of Hg2+ to CdTe QD solutions, and at higher concentrations (10–100 μM) the onset of alloying was observed but still initially with low PL QY. Fig. 6 also shows the optical absorption spectra of the final alloy products from which the bandgap energies can be estimated.
 Fig. 6  Absorption spectra (arbitrarily scaled for clarity) of the CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD samples in organic solution after de-clustering, extraction into DDT–toluene, followed by precipitation with methanol and re-dissolution in TCE. The corresponding single exciton recombination QYs are also shown (aliquot numbers 1 through 6/dotted line). 
3.2 TG measurements
Several of the CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD solutions (samples 2 to 5 – as numbered in Fig. 6) were screened for MEG using a TG pump–probe measurement technique. TG signals were measured at pump photon energies well above and well below the possible threshold energies for such materials (λpump = 290 nm (4.28 eV) and 500 nm (2.48 eV), respectively) as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  TG signals for CdxHg1−xTe QD alloy samples 2 to 5. (a) Sample 4 pumped below threshold at 500 nm: black curve/data points, low fluence; red curve/data points, high fluence. (b) Sample 5 pumped below threshold at 500 nm: black curve/data points, low fluence; red curve/data points, high fluence. (c) to (f) Samples 2 to 5 pumped above threshold at 290 nm. The inset to panel (c) shows the same transient on a shorter time scale where the sign of the initial peak due to the population of the hot excited state can be seen to be opposite that for the below threshold signals. 
Well below threshold the pump pulse initially populates a hot excited state, seen as a negative going change in the diffracted probe beam (λprobe = 770 nm). The signal due to the excited state population increase has the same sign as the bleach of the band edge state. The excited state rapidly cools to the band edge state and at high fluence, since multiple photon absorptions occur simultaneously, Auger relaxation of the multiple excitons is visible as a multiple exponential decay until only one exciton (electron–hole pair) survives at long times. Under these circumstances it is difficult to differentiate between carrier cooling and the onset of Auger relaxation so that the contributions to the TG signal from each process can be separately attributed. However, the cooling rate clearly did vary with the pump fluence – this was manifest as an apparent broadening of the excited state peak with fluence, and the Auger recovery also varied with fluence indicating a longer sequential chain of multiple exciton relaxations as the fluence increased. Both the excited state population and the single exciton pair populations scale linearly with pump fluence, so normalized plots show equal intensities for both the negative going excited state peak and the asymptotic level at long times (>400 ps). If MEG were present, normalization on the single exciton pair intensity at long times would reveal an increasing relative intensity for the negative peak (i.e. signal at short times) before Auger relaxation.
Well above threshold the TG profiles again contain the same contributions, but here (as seen more clearly in the inset to Fig. 7(c)) the initial excited state population increase has the opposite sign for the TG signal (positive going). This indicates that the change in the refractive contribution to the population dependant pump induced grating has the opposite sign at 290 nm pump wavelength when compared with 500 nm pump wavelength, which indicates different (hot) excited states are involved in each case. It is somewhat easier to distinguish the hot carrier cooling from the onset of Auger relaxation under these circumstances. Again a chain of multiple Auger relaxations removes the excess carrier pairs until only one remains at long times. Here we can compare the ratio of the TG signal just after cooling from the hot state to the TG amplitude at the band edge as a function of fluence. Whilst multiple pump excitation at high fluence will create a multiplicity of excitons after cooling, MEG will create exciton pairs even at low pump fluence. The QY for the latter can therefore be determined by extrapolating the ratio of the amplitude just after cooling to the amplitude at long times after Auger relaxation has removed the excess pairs, however created, to zero pump fluence.
4. Discussion
The relationship between QD size and bandgap energy as determined by absorption (or emission) spectroscopy has been established for CdTe and HgTe by several groups. Following Kamal et al.,37 for CdTe the starting material used herein had a band edge at 589 nm (Eg = 2.11 eV) corresponding to a QD diameter of 3.75 nm with a corresponding emission peak at 623 nm. According to Kovalenko et al.,39 HgTe QDs of the same size would have an emission peak at 1640 nm. Typically the room temperature Stokes shift of HgTe QDs in this size range, grown in aqueous solution is around 150 nm, so the corresponding band edge is estimated to be around 1490 nm (Eg = 0.83 eV) for complete ion exchange to form pure HgTe QDs. The QD sizing curves for CdTe and HgTe used to estimate the size are shown in Fig. 8. The vertical line indicates the CdTe QD starting size and its intersections with the two curves are the extremal points for compositional tuning assuming no accompanying growth during the ion exchange process.
 Fig. 8  Size vs. bandgap energy curves for CdTe and HgTe QDs using relationships from Kamal et al.37 and Kovalenko et al.39 respectively. The vertical line corresponds to the diameter of the CdTe QDs used as the starting material for the ion exchange. 
If the effective masses of the carriers in CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs can be assumed to be the same as in the bulk alloy material then we can estimate the compositional dependence from the data of Schmit40 and Antcliffe.41 The effective mass (mh) of (heavy) holes in bulk CdxHg1−xTe is assumed to be almost independent of composition at 0.44m0 whilst the electron effective mass (me) and therefore the ratio me/mh varies almost linearly above the semi-metal to semiconductor transition composition (at x = 0.065) as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Effective mass ratio (me/mh) for bulk CdxHg1−xTe alloy over the semiconductor composition range at 300 K calculated from Schmit40 and Antcliffe.41 
With knowledge of the QD composition, x, the effective mass ratio for the QD alloys, which determines the MEG threshold and the partition of the excess energy between hot carrier pairs, can be calculated. The QD composition can be estimated from the absorption band edge: at the most crude a linear trend between the respective pure CdTe and HgTe QD band edges could be assumed. In general, semiconductors have a slightly quadratic relationship between the bandgap and composition (the so-called bowing curve). Protière and Reiss42 have determined the bowing relationship for Cd1−xZnxSe core–shell QDs and they note that the form of the quadratic bowing curve in that case was identical to that of the bulk semiconductor with a simple composition independent shift in bandgap energy between the bulk and QD cases. The bowing in their case depressed the bandgap at x = 0.5 by roughly 10% relative to the linear extrapolation. In the bulk CdxHg1−xTe case the bowing relationship is in fact almost linear.43 However we have compared two cases for both linear and a similar 10% quadratic deviation as in the Cd1−xZnxSe study and compared the effect upon the relationship between the MEG threshold and the bandgap. Bowing will slightly shift the estimated composition thereby changing the me/mh ratio. However, since the threshold varies as (2 + me/mh) (see ESI,† Section S1) the difference in the threshold energy for the two cases only amounts to a few percent (≤5%) in the range covered by our samples and is not so significant. The two cases are shown in Fig. 10 and the points (from absorption spectra measurements) corresponding to the four samples studied in the TG measurements are also indicated.
 Fig. 10  Calculated MEG threshold (Et) vs. bandgap (Eg) energies for CdxHg1−xTe alloys for two bowing curve cases: linear and approximately 10% bowing of Eg at the mid-range x = 0.5 point. The vertical grey lines indicate the bandgap energies for QD alloy samples 2 to 5 (numbered). The two horizontal lines are the pump wavelengths used in the above threshold and below threshold measurements (4.28 eV (290 nm) and 2.48 eV (500 nm) respectively). 
4.1 Carrier cooling
In the TG measurements MEG was probed well above threshold and well below (290 nm and 500 nm pump wavelengths) irrespective of the possible effect of bowing. For the 290 nm pump transients the hot carrier cooling times could be readily distinguished from the early stages of Auger relaxation and are shown as a function of composition (for both the case of no bowing and assuming 10% bowing in the mid composition range), and as a function of the hot electron excess energy in Fig. 11(a). The far lower electron effective masses lead to the excess energy (relative to the bandgap) being partitioned much more in favour of the lighter carrier (80–90%). In Fig. 11(a) the vertical dashed line indicates the point where the electron effective mass is a minimum in the bulk material and may therefore be the point where the composition dependent cooling time reaches a maximum. Fig. 11(b) shows the dependence on the hot electron excess energy. If the cooling time was solely dictated by the location of the bandgap relative to the pump photon energy a linear dependence might be expected. However, the supralinear variation reflects the fact that along with the increase in excess energy available to both carriers as the bandgap increases with rising Hg2+ content, the electron effective mass also decreases, leading to the latter taking a greater share of the excess energy as the alloy is tuned further into the infrared. As we discuss further below, in the case of MEG, depending on the rate of carrier multiplication, the latter process should compete with the hot carrier cooling process to depopulate the hot carrier excited state more rapidly, so the apparent cooling times in Fig. 11(b) may be lower than might otherwise be obtained in the absence of MEG. Below the MEG threshold the carrier cooling process remains the only pathway for the hot carriers to relax to the band edge state.
 Fig. 11  (a) Above threshold effective carrier cooling times as a function of composition of CdxHg1−xTe QD alloys, the latter calculated for two cases: linear relationship between bandgap energy and composition and; 10% bowed relationship at mid composition point (see text). The vertical dashed line indicates the composition in the bulk material where the electron effective mass, me, is a minimum (semi-metal to semiconductor transition). (b) Cooling times as a function of the hot electron excess energy above the bandgap energy calculated for the two bowing curve cases, linear and 10% bowed at mid-composition CdxHg1−xTe range. The dashed lines are given as a guide to the eye. 
Below the MEG threshold (500 nm pump) the change in sign of the refractive index change for the transient grating associated with the hot carrier excited state means that it is not possible to differentiate between the signal decay due to phonon mediated cooling and that due to the initial part of the sequence of Auger relaxations of multiple excitons created at high pump fluence due to the absorption of multiple photons. This can be appreciated from Table 1 which lists the fitted lifetimes for sample 4 for a range of pump powers. The decays were fitted to a simple double exponential recovery of the form: S = a1e−t/τ1 + a2e−t/τ2 + y0.(2)The power dependence of lifetimes, τ1 and τ2, reflects the increasing number of excitons per dot as the pump fluence rises. Lifetime τ1 in particular will include contributions from both Auger recovery and carrier cooling, whilst lifetime τ2 will mostly arise from the former type of process.
Table 1 Bi-exponential fit parameters for 500 nm, below threshold, hot carrier cooling decays (combination of both Auger relaxation and phonon mediated cooling). The intensity was controlled by inserting neutral density filters in the pump beam path, with transmission factors as indicated




Intensity (%)

τ
1


τ
2


a
1


a
2


y
0





20
1.55 ± 0.08
10.4 ± 51
−1.0 ± 0.01
−0.01 ± 0.01
−0.03


30
2.14 ± 0.07
18 ± 5.4
−0.93 ± 0.01
−0.09 ± 0.01
−0.05


50
3.05 ± 0.08
35.2 ± 4.9
−0.79 ± 0.01
−0.12 ± 0.01
−0.08


100
3.8 ± 0.08
40 ± 8
−0.91 ± 0.01
−0.07 ± 0.01
−0.06




The cascade of n − 1 Auger decays occurring in n-fold exciton populated QDs has been studied extensively by many groups. In particular the group of Klimov et al.44–46 have investigated Auger recombination processes in PbSe QDs, CdSe QDs and nanorods, and ZnSe@CdSe inverted core shell QDs. For QDs they have studied the sequence of lifetimes observed as a function of fluence (exciton occupancy) and QD diameter. In doubly excited CdSe QDs they measured bi-exciton Auger recombination times ranging from around 40 ps for smaller (1.2 nm diameter) QDs to almost 300 ps for much larger QDs (4.1 nm), with a scaling proportional to the QD volumes. For PbSe QDs they found decay rates typically a factor of 3.3 times faster compared with CdSe for a given QD volume.45 For 3.75 nm diameter CdSe and PbSe QDs their result predict biexciton lifetimes of 142 ps and 43 ps respectively. For pure HgTe QDs of a similar size (3–4 nm), biexciton decay rates of 49 ps have recently been reported.16
Auger decay rates for more highly populated QDs are substantially faster following a scaling relationship that has been the subject of some debate. Barzykin and Tachiya47 developed stochastic models for the multiple decay chain in nanostructures (single wall nanotubes and quantum dots) for two cases: for pairs of bound excitons or; for the case where the electrons and holes are not bound as excitons and Auger recombination occurs between either two holes and one electron or two electrons and one hole. In the former case they predicted the decay rates (kn) of each stage should scale as: kn = 1/2n(n − 1)kbi(3)where kbi is the biexciton decay rate.
In the case where electrons and holes are uncorrelated, the successive rate constants scale as: kn = 1/2n2(n − 1)keh(4)where keh is the decay rate for a two pairs of mutually uncorrelated electrons and holes.
In a recent paper Klimov et al.46 compared the scaling of the lifetimes according to the same statistical model alongside a number of other models including one taking into account the detailed quantum mechanical states of the respective excitons where the extent of the degeneracies of the lowest excited states was shown to be significant when making comparisons between e.g. CdSe (1S state degeneracy, g = 2) and PbSe (1S state, g = 8).
Each of these models predicts a different scaling sequence for successive decay rate constants (kn = 1/τn). Taking Barzykin and Tachiya's statistical model for exciton pairs as an example: k2:k3:k4 are predicted to scale as 1:3:6, where k2 is the biexciton decay rate.
In the context of our present below threshold measurements (Table 1), there is insufficient data to draw meaningful precise conclusions about the detailed number and nature of the Auger recombination stages in terms of these models, and indeed the Auger recombination chain is only being used as a means to ascertain the minimum number of excitons (i.e. more than one, and averaged over the ensemble of dots, less than or equal to two) present after carrier cooling when the fluence is extrapolated to zero. The number of decay stages and the detailed model behind the Auger recovery in CdxHg1−xTe QDs remains a subject for further detailed study. The simple two component fit merely allows for some qualitative observations in the below threshold case: τ2 values are broadly what might be expected for biexciton recombinations, with amplitudes (a2) in most cases that are approximately similar to the offset y0 which one would expect if the signal amplitude (transient refractive index) change on removing one exciton were comparable to the signal change upon the final exciton (radiative) recombination. However the ratios of a1/a2 are rather large – if a1 were simply the Auger decay amplitude of a triexciton occupied QD the ratio of the amplitudes should be close to one. One possible explanation is that indeed highly occupied QDs are being generated, but the contribution from triexciton and higher transitions are all being absorbed (averaged) in the first exponential fitting terms, τ1 and a1. As already remarked however, it is also very likely that the first decay term contains contributions to the grating complex refractive index intensity that arise not just from higher order Auger recombinations (triexciton states, etc.) but also from population changes associated with carrier cooling from higher excited states. The latter occurs on timescales from ps to a few ps and with biexciton decay times of 10–40 ps and so (following the above scaling laws) may overlap with >biexciton recombination processes (in the few ps range) leading to an apparently larger value for a1. The spectral selectivity of the TA technique may make this a more useful technique to study detailed Auger recombination dynamics in cases such as this as it may be easier to separate the some of the population decay processes more readily.
4.2 Carrier multiplication
For four of the alloy samples, pumped at 290 nm, well above the threshold for any MEG process Fig. 12(a) to (d) show the power dependence of the negative peak representing the population of the band edge state just after carrier cooling, normalized by the population at long times after Auger relaxation has depleted all the excess excitons from multiply occupied QDs. The extrapolation of the power dependence to zero fluence gives an estimate of the quantum yield for MEG in the absence of multiple pump photon absorption.
 Fig. 12  Multiple exciton peak to single exciton TG signal intensity ratios (a/r) vs. relative fluences for CdxHg1−xTe QD alloy samples 2 to 5 (panels (a) to (d) respectively). The MEG QY is 100(1 + a/r)%. 
The QYs determined from the above plots are summarised in Fig. 13 showing the QYs for each of the QD alloys measured as a function of their bandgap energies. The QY appears to show a peak at 199 ± 19% for sample 4 with composition around x = 0.52/0.62 (unbowed/10% bowed) which offers some evidence that there may be an enhancement of MEG for certain alloy compositions. However, further work will be needed to confirm if this is due to a resonant interaction with valence levels in an analogous fashion to the inverse Auger S process in bulk materials. It is clear that MEG is occurring in a bandgap energy range that is attractive for solar energy conversion devices, and it would therefore also be of interest to investigate how sensitive the location of the QY vs. composition maximum is to QD size, and composition and size broadening of the bandgap and the assumed valence level split-off-like transition.
 Fig. 13  MEG QY vs. CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD bandgap energy (Eg) for samples 2 to 5 (in descending order left to right). The peak QY was obtained for sample 4 at 199 ± 19%. 
Apart from the above possible enhancement of MEG efficiency via a possible split-off band-like mechanism, previous early work on indirect bulk semiconductors48–50 and more recent work on InAs QDs51,52 which also have low me*/mh* ratios all suggest that under such conditions multiplication should be most favoured at alloy compositions where the electron mass is a minimum (i.e. for CdxHg1−xTe around x = 0.067 based on bulk material carrier masses). This may also be true in practice, though as yet the synthetic method used here has only allowed x = 0.47 to be reached. We note however that in Fig. 13, the left hand point (x = 0.47) is higher than the right hand-most point (x = 0.63) which may also suggest such an underlying carrier mass ratio dependence is present alongside the resonantly enhanced mechanism.
The nature of carrier cooling and MEG mechanisms in general in QDs have been the subject of much debate11,12 over a number of years, and MEG in particular has been observed in several QD systems.16,28,53–56 The occurrence of MEG is generally indicated in the fluence dependence of multiple exciton (Auger) relaxation following the generation of multiple carriers in QDs. In the limit of very low fluence, multiple absorption is negligible and therefore ideally only carrier multiplication can account for the presence of bi- (or multiple) excitons and the ensuing Auger recombination. However the possibility of the formation of long lived trion states in un-stirred samples led to the questioning of some of the earlier reports of carrier multiplication.57,58 Several studies have suggested that the rates of both Auger relaxation and its inverse process, Impact Ionization will be a strong function of QD particle size,59,60 whilst other studies suggest the size dependence is less acute.11 Other papers highlight the possible role of surface states with regard to the MEG QY,12 whilst the influence of QD shape on carrier multiplication has also been investigated. There have been few studies of the influence of alloy QD composition on MEG rates and QYs though Midgett et al.60 surveyed the size and composition dependence of the MEG QY in PbS, PbSe and PbSxSe1−x alloy QDs. For PbSe and the alloys they found the MEG efficiency to increase with the degree of carrier confinement and that the carrier cooling rate also scaled with the latter. Since these two processes are in competition for the initial hot carrier population, the interplay between the two depended on the precise QD size dependence of their relative rate constants with MEG being favoured at small particle sizes.
We are not aware of any previous MEG studies to date on mixed cation species alloy QDs or indeed on any that suggest the possibility of an enhancement analogous to the bulk material's inverse Auger S processes in II–VI QDs. In previous work showing MEG in related aqueous based HgTe QDs, Al-Otaify et al.16 noted that the optical transitions relevant to MEG in that material did not solely arise from the band edge (valence band maximum to conduction band minimum), but also substantially from either transitions between the valence band maximum and the next lowest conduction band, labelled CBM-1, or from lower lying valence bands and the conduction band minimum. The density of states of the valence bands was calculated and shown to be not as strongly affected by size quantization as the conduction bands, so the latter type of transition bears some resemblance to the case for the split-off band in bulk CdxHg1−xTe. In the latter, transitions involving the split-off band give rise to an enhancement in Impact Ionization when the bandgap and split-off (spin–orbit) energies are on resonance. In a QD version of CdxHg1−xTe it would be expected that finite size and composition distributions may lead to a less acute compositional sensitivity than for the bulk material. Although more detailed measurements and modelling are necessary to unambiguously confirm this hypothesis, we suggest that the compositional dependence for the MEG in our 3.75 nm diameter alloy QDs may support such an Impact Ionization enhancement mechanism in CdxHg1−xTe QDs.
5. Summary and conclusions
A range of CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs have been synthesized via aqueous synthetic methods for both the CdTe starting material and the subsequent ion exchange process. For ultrafast carrier dynamics studies we established that it is important to avoid the formation of QD clusters particularly when bound together with loosely coordinated excess cation left over from the synthesis or ion exchange process. We developed a method to break apart such clusters and to sequester the excess cations so that the resulting alloy QDs had the minimum amount of additional compositional broadening, and a reduced tendency to photocharge during pump–probe measurements. The QDs were readily extractable into organic solvents (with compatible ligands) as clean, individually dispersed QDs with no significant ionic payload allowing clear transient grating spectroscopy studies of the compositional dependence of MEG and carrier cooling to be made.
The strong compositional dependence of the electron effective mass is predicted to lead to an MEG threshold that depends strongly on the degree of cation exchange: close to the composition corresponding to the semi-metal to semiconductor transition in the bulk material, the threshold could in principle be within 5% of 2Eg and even over the range of compositions studied herein could approach 2.2Eg. Compositional tuning at fixed size allowed the bandgap energy to be varied and may be a means whereby Eg could be manipulated to be resonant with other possible transitions that could be involved in impact ionization processes. In this way the inverse Auger S process used in bulk CdxHg1−xTe avalanche photodiodes could be mimicked in QDs. There is some theoretical justification to anticipate such a likelihood, based on earlier modelling work on HgTe QDs, and we observe a compositional dependence for the MEG QY that is consistent with such a mechanism, although further detailed studies are needed to confirm this. The optimal composition, for 3.75 nm diameter CdxHg1−xTe QDs is around x = 0.52, at which point we see an MEG QY of 199 ± 20%, and calculate a threshold excitation energy of 2.15Eg. Hot carrier cooling competes alongside MEG to depopulate the initially hot excited states. The relatively low electron effective mass compared to that of the holes means the former carrier type dominates the cooling process. As the MEG QY increases, the apparent cooling rate (the net result of carrier multiplication and phonon mediated cooling) also increases, consistent with the MEG more effectively removing hot carriers as the composition becomes more Hg rich.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by GRF project 102412 from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong S.A.R. and partly supported by the CREST program of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) and Grant in Aid for Scientific Research (No. 26286013) from the Ministry of Education, Sports, Science and Technology of the Japanese Government.
References
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hanna, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2857–2862 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Velizhanin and A. Piryatinski, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 207401 CrossRef .
K. A. Velizhanin and A. Piryatinski, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165319 CrossRef .
R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Rupasov and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125321 CrossRef .
L. Silvestri and V. M. Agranovich, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205302 CrossRef .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shabaev, A. L. Efros and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2856–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Fischer, A. B. Madrid, C. M. Isborn and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 232–237 CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205423 CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 195324 CrossRef .
J.-W. Luo, A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3174–3181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Franceschetti, J. M. An and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2191–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Rabani and R. Baer, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4488–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Otaify, S. V. Kershaw, S. Gupta, A. L. Rogach, G. Allan, C. Delerue and D. J. Binks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16864–16873 RSC .
A. R. Beattie, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1962, 23, 1049–1056 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Rogalski, Infrared Detectors, CRC Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
P. Norton, Opto-Electron. Rev., 2002, 10, 159–174 CAS .

          R. Landolt-Bornstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, Vol 18 in Crystal and Solid State Physics, Springer, Berlin,  1984 Search PubMed .
V. Rinnerbauer, K. Hingerl, M. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 193114 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Rinnerbauer, M. Kovalenko, V. Lavchiev, G. Kocher, J. Roither, W. Heiss and K. Hingerl, Physica E, 2006, 32, 104–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rinnerbauer, K. Hingerl, M. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 254, 291–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Dayal, B. R. Mehta and P. D. Paulson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 115413 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. V. Vladimir Lesnyak, P. N. Gaponik, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmuller, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4090 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mayilo, J. Hilhorst, A. S. Susha, C. Höhl, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14589–14594 CAS .
Q. Shen, K. Katayama, T. Sawada, S. Hachiya and T. Toyoda, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 542, 89–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. s. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21928–21937 CAS .
K. Katayama, M. Yamaguchi and T. Sawada, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2775–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, K. Katayama, M. Yamaguchi, T. Sawada and T. Toyoda, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 486, 15–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, K. Katayama, T. Sawada and T. Toyoda, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 5927–5930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, Y. Ayuzawa, K. Katayama, T. Sawada and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 263113 CrossRef PubMed .
N. s. Guijarro, Q. Shen, S. Giménez, I. n. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Lana-Villarreal, T. Toyoda and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22352–22360 CAS .
S. Wu, J. Dou, J. Zhang and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14573–14578 RSC .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kamal, A. Omari, K. Van Hoecke, Q. Zhao, A. Vantomme, F. Vanhaecke, R. K. Capek and Z. Hens, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5049–5054 CAS .
A. S. Susha, A. M. Javier, W. J. Parak and A. L. Rogach, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 281, 40–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, E. Kaufmann, D. Pachinger, J. Roither, M. Huber, J. Stangl, G. Hesser, F. Schäffler and W. Heiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3516–3517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Schmit, J. Appl. Phys., 1970, 41, 2876–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Antcliffe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1970, 2, 345–351 CrossRef .
M. Protière and P. Reiss, Small, 2007, 3, 399–403 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Nemirovsky and E. Finkman, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 8107–8111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Achermann, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 245302 CrossRef .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16827–16845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, J. A. McGuire, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Rupasov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 195324 CrossRef .
A. V. Barzykin and M. Tachiya, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 065105 CrossRef .
S. Kolodinski, J. H. Werner and H. J. Queisser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 33, 275–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kolodinski, J. H. Werner and H. J. Queisser, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1995, 61, 535–539 CrossRef .
J. H. Werner, S. Kolodinski and H. J. Queisser, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 3851–3854 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, E. Hendry, M. T. W. Milder, R. Fanciulli, J. Savolainen, J. L. Herek, D. Vanmaekelbergh, S. Ruhman, D. Mocatta, D. Oron, A. Aharoni, U. Banin and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4146–4152 CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, E. Hendry, M. T. W. Milder, R. Fanciulli, J. Savolainen, J. L. Herek, D. Vanmaekelbergh, S. Ruhman, D. Mocatta, D. Oron, A. Aharoni, U. Banin and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4783–4784 CAS .
S. K. Stubbs, S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, B. F. Spencer, W. R. Flavell, P. Glarvey, O. Masala, N. L. Pickett and D. J. Binks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081303 CrossRef .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Stewart, L. A. Padilha, M. M. Qazilbash, J. M. Pietryga, A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 622–628 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, R. Limpens, W. D. A. M. de Boer, J. M. Schins, L. D. A. Siebbeles and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nair, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Binks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12693–12704 RSC .
K. Hyeon-Deuk and O. V. Prezhdo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1239–1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, J. T. Stewart, D. K. Smith, L. A. Padilha, V. I. Klimov, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3078–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp01465kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Conduction and valence levels near the bandgap in semiconducting bulk CdxHg1−xTe (after Landolt-Bornstein20). The variation of the bandgap (Eg) with composition is near linear and the material has a semi-metal range typically below compositions having x = 0.06 to 0.07 (depending upon temperature), where the conduction band minimum falls below the top of the valence band. The split-off energy level difference, Δ, typically has a weaker compositional dependence.	 

 	Fig. 2  Possible ionic and dative bonding schemes whereby excess divalent cations such as Hg2+ can first become entrapped in the thiol or thio-acid ligand shell (thiolates and carboxylates at high pH) and eventually start to form more extensive gel-like networks of QDs (grey spheres), cations and ligands.	 

 	Fig. 3  Changes in PL spectra of 3.75 nm diameter CdTe QDs (at right hand side) due to successive treatments with Hg2+ salt/thiol stabilizer solution (pH 10.8), with a de-clustering treatment after each treatment cycle. The end point for pure HgTe QDs of the same size is estimated to be at 0.757 eV (1640 nm), implying a barrier to complete ion exchange. The excitation energy was 3.06 eV (405 nm) in each case.	 

 	Fig. 4  Stretched exponential fit parameters (lifetime, τ and stretch factor, β) for PL decays of aqueous samples of a series of CdxHg1−xTe alloy QDs before the final de-clustering treatment (circles) and the corresponding samples after de-clustering and extraction into organic solvent (triangles). The PL peak wavelengths of the samples in the organic phase are listed on the right. The excitation energy was 3.06 eV (405 nm) in each case.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Hydrodynamic diameters of CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD samples measured after de-clustering and extraction into organic solvent (toluene with DDT ligand) followed by several rounds of precipitation with methanol, centrifugation and re-dissolving. The sample numbering is the same as for Fig. 4.	 

 	Fig. 6  Absorption spectra (arbitrarily scaled for clarity) of the CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD samples in organic solution after de-clustering, extraction into DDT–toluene, followed by precipitation with methanol and re-dissolution in TCE. The corresponding single exciton recombination QYs are also shown (aliquot numbers 1 through 6/dotted line).	 

 	Fig. 7  TG signals for CdxHg1−xTe QD alloy samples 2 to 5. (a) Sample 4 pumped below threshold at 500 nm: black curve/data points, low fluence; red curve/data points, high fluence. (b) Sample 5 pumped below threshold at 500 nm: black curve/data points, low fluence; red curve/data points, high fluence. (c) to (f) Samples 2 to 5 pumped above threshold at 290 nm. The inset to panel (c) shows the same transient on a shorter time scale where the sign of the initial peak due to the population of the hot excited state can be seen to be opposite that for the below threshold signals.	 

 	Fig. 8  Size vs. bandgap energy curves for CdTe and HgTe QDs using relationships from Kamal et al.37 and Kovalenko et al.39 respectively. The vertical line corresponds to the diameter of the CdTe QDs used as the starting material for the ion exchange.	 

 	Fig. 9  Effective mass ratio (me/mh) for bulk CdxHg1−xTe alloy over the semiconductor composition range at 300 K calculated from Schmit40 and Antcliffe.41	 

 	Fig. 10  Calculated MEG threshold (Et) vs. bandgap (Eg) energies for CdxHg1−xTe alloys for two bowing curve cases: linear and approximately 10% bowing of Eg at the mid-range x = 0.5 point. The vertical grey lines indicate the bandgap energies for QD alloy samples 2 to 5 (numbered). The two horizontal lines are the pump wavelengths used in the above threshold and below threshold measurements (4.28 eV (290 nm) and 2.48 eV (500 nm) respectively).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Above threshold effective carrier cooling times as a function of composition of CdxHg1−xTe QD alloys, the latter calculated for two cases: linear relationship between bandgap energy and composition and; 10% bowed relationship at mid composition point (see text). The vertical dashed line indicates the composition in the bulk material where the electron effective mass, me, is a minimum (semi-metal to semiconductor transition). (b) Cooling times as a function of the hot electron excess energy above the bandgap energy calculated for the two bowing curve cases, linear and 10% bowed at mid-composition CdxHg1−xTe range. The dashed lines are given as a guide to the eye.	 
S = a1e−t/τ1 + a2e−t/τ2 + y0.	(2)

20	1.55 ± 0.08	10.4 ± 51	−1.0 ± 0.01	−0.01 ± 0.01	−0.03
30	2.14 ± 0.07	18 ± 5.4	−0.93 ± 0.01	−0.09 ± 0.01	−0.05
50	3.05 ± 0.08	35.2 ± 4.9	−0.79 ± 0.01	−0.12 ± 0.01	−0.08
100	3.8 ± 0.08	40 ± 8	−0.91 ± 0.01	−0.07 ± 0.01	−0.06
kn = 1/2n(n − 1)kbi	(3)
kn = 1/2n2(n − 1)keh	(4)

 	Fig. 12  Multiple exciton peak to single exciton TG signal intensity ratios (a/r) vs. relative fluences for CdxHg1−xTe QD alloy samples 2 to 5 (panels (a) to (d) respectively). The MEG QY is 100(1 + a/r)%.	 

 	Fig. 13  MEG QY vs. CdxHg1−xTe alloy QD bandgap energy (Eg) for samples 2 to 5 (in descending order left to right). The peak QY was obtained for sample 4 at 199 ± 19%.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp01465k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
