Synthesis, properties and applications of 2D layered M III X VI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR05976G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR05976G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16802-16818Synthesis, properties and applications of 2D layered MIIIXVI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) materials

        
          
            Kai 
            Xu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Yin†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Huang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tofik Ahmed 
            Shifa
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Junwei 
            Chu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ruiqing 
            Cheng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhenxing 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jun 
            He
          
          
        
      *a
aCAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hej@nanoctr.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      28th July 2016
    , Accepted 1st September 2016First published on 2nd September 2016AbstractGroup III–VI compounds MIIIXVI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) are one class of important 2D layered materials and are currently attracting increasing interest due to their unique electronic and optoelectronic properties and their great potential applications in various other fields. Similar to 2D layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), MIIIXVI also have the significant merits of ultrathin thickness, ultrahigh surface-to-volume ratio, and high compatibility with flexible devices. More impressively, in contrast with TMDCs, MIIIXVI demonstrate many superior properties, such as direct band gap electronic structure, high carrier mobility, rare p-type electronic behaviors, high charge density, and so on. These unique characteristics cause high-performance device applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and optics. In this review, we aim to provide a summary of the state-of–the-art of research activities in 2D layered MIIIXVI materials. The scope of the review covers the synthesis and properties of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials and their van der Waals heterostructures. We especially focus on the applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Moreover, the review concludes with some perspectives on future developments in this field.Kai XuMr Kai Xu received his bachelor's degree from the School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University, in 2011. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jun He at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST), China. His research interests focus on the synthesis, assembly and characterization of two-dimensional materials and their advanced electronics and photonics.Jun HeProf. He received his PhD in Semiconductor Physics from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Applied Physics Department of Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, the Netherlands, and the Materials Department of University of California, Santa Barbara, USA. From 2007 to 2010, he worked at University of California, Los Angeles, USA, as a research scientist. He joined the “100-Talents” Program of CAS in Nov. 2010 and has been a Full Professor of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST) since then.
1. Introduction
In recent years, two-dimensional (2D) layered materials have been one of the most extensively researched classes of materials.1–14 The discovery of graphene, the monolayer counterpart of graphite, has demonstrated that it can be mechanically exfoliated from bulk graphite and also exists stably in the atmosphere.15–17 The essential feature of 2D layered materials is their atomic scale thicknesses. Because of the quantum confinement effect, 2D layered materials exhibit unique and fascinating physical properties and phenomena.4,18–20 For example, the electronic band structure of graphene exhibits a linear dispersion near the K point, and the charges, described as massless Dirac fermions.21 This issue enabled scientists to come up with an abundance of new physics.22,23 For practical applications, compared with conventional bulk semiconductors, 2D layered semiconducting materials possess extraordinary advantages, such as atomic smoothness, dangling bond free surface, and uniform and fixed thickness.24,25 These features intrinsically suppress thickness variation, trap generation and carrier scattering, ensuring high-performance and stable devices. Meanwhile, the atomic scale thickness of channel materials in field effect transistors (FETs) can guarantee efficient electrostatics, avoiding appearance of short channel effects.26 On the other hand, 3D heterostructure epitaxy is limited by lattice mismatch. However, in 2D layered materials, weak van der Waals interactions exist in two neighboring layers, and thus 2D heterostructures can be focused on band alignments rather than lattice mismatch.27,28 Moreover, their planar nature is compatible with the present micromanufacturing technology and beneficial for a high degree vertical integration system.29
Apart from graphene, the most intensively studied 2D layered materials include transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), properties of which are yet distinctly complementary to those of graphene.19,30–34 Actually, research on TMDs has been continuing for decades.33,35–40 Now 2D thin forms of TMDs attract a great deal of scientific and engineering interest. Different from zero band gap of graphene, TMDs have a sizable band gap of around 1–2 eV and show great potential for FETs and optoelectronic devices.4,41 Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) is one typical member of the TMD family, and high-performance monolayer MoS2 top-gate FETs were first experimentally demonstrated in 2011 by Kis's group.3 Encouraged by this, fruitful outcomes on TMDs have been achieved, such as higher mobility engineering, lower contact resistance strategies, a stable doping technique, large-scale MOCVD growth, ultrasensitive photodetectors and flexible devices.42–45 For example, an electron mobility of 44 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been demonstrated in monolayer MoS2 FETs at room temperature.43 By utilizing metallic nanoparticles, an experimental investigation of the doping effect on MoS2 was conducted, leading to a large shift in threshold voltage.45 Kang et al. reported 4 inch wafer-scale films of monolayer MoS2 with excellent spatial homogeneity over the whole film.44 The MoS2 photodetector exhibited a high responsivity of 880 A W−1.46 To date, scientists and engineers around the world have been focusing on the practicability and commercialization of TMDs.
Similar to 2D TMDs, group III–VI compounds MIIIXVI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) are one class of important 2D layered materials and have been attracting increasing interest recently.47–55 Layered materials MIIIXVI possess not only the merits of the 2D layered materials discussed previously, but also additional advantages, such as higher carrier mobility, direct band gap electronic structure, rare p-type electronic behaviors, high charge density and so on.51,52,56,57 For example, the room-temperature electron mobility of InSe FETs can reach as high as 1055 cm2 V−1 s−1, much larger than that of MoS2, WSe2, etc.58 The InSe flake photodetectors were broad spectra responsive from UV-visible to near infrared.59 The photoresponsivity and photodetectivity of InSe photodetectors were 104 A W−1 and 1013 Jones.60 These unique characteristics and high performances motivate greatly the use of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials for practical device applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and optics in the future.
In this review, we aim to provide a summary of the state-of-the-art of research activities on 2D layered MIIIXVI materials. Initially, we will outline the crystal structure and several theoretical studies on 2D layered MIIIXVI materials and further describe the difference in electronic structure between monolayer and bulk forms. Additionally, various strategies to synthesize monolayer and multilayer materials are discussed to lay the foundation for applications. Furthermore, we highlight the properties and applications of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials and their van der Waals heterostructures. Finally, the review is concluded with some perspectives on future developments in this field.
2. Crystal structure and simulations
The properties and applications of materials are mainly determined by using the crystal and electronic structures. It is necessary to briefly introduce the crystal and electronic structures of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials in order to understand thoroughly their nature. According to their stoichiometry, 2D layered MIIIXVI materials can be classified into two main categories: MX and M2X3, where M stands for a transition metal from group III (M = Ga, In) and X is a chalcogen (S, Se, Te).

Fig. 1a shows the schematic representation of typical MX structures. Typically, take InSe as an example; monolayer hexagonal InSe consists of planar quaternary layers, in which close-packed Se–In–In–Se monatomic sheets pile up along the c-axis. There is strong covalent bonding within each layer. According to the stacking arrangements of quaternary layers, four polytypes are defined as β, ε, γ, and δ, which are both layered structures.61 Among them, β-phase and γ-phase are two common forms of InSe. For β-InSe, each primitive unit cell contains two quaternary layers, i.e., eight atoms. However, in the unit cell of γ-phase, there are three layers of Se–In–In–Se monatomic sheets (twelve atoms).61,62Fig. 1b presents the crystal structure of γ-InSe with lattice parameters of c = 24.961 Å and a = 4.002 Å.61,63 Two adjacent layers are connected to each other not by strong covalent bonding, but through weak interlayer van der Waals interactions. Thus, γ-InSe can be mechanically exfoliated to mono- or few-layer structures by the standard scotch tape method. Bulk InSe is a typical n-type semiconductor with a direct band gap of 1.3 eV.59,61 Due to the quantum confinement effect, photoluminescence (PL) measurements of γ-InSe exhibited an obvious blue-shift to higher photon energies with the decrease of thickness,63 as illustrated in Fig. 1c. It is worth noting that the PL intensity is weakened with decreasing thickness, revealing that layered InSe undergoes a direct-to-indirect band gap crossover. This phenomenon is in contrast to those of TMDs and other III–VI compounds. Layered GaS and GaSe have stable hexagonal lattice structures similar to InSe, formed by stacking of the fundamental S–Ga–Ga–S and Se–Ga–Ga–Se sheet building blocks. The thicknesses of single-layer GaS and GaSe are 0.75 nm and 0.8 nm, respectively.64,65 Moreover, the band structures of GaS and GaSe also change with their thickness.66 In general, bulk GaS and GaSe are n- and p-type semiconductors with the indirect bandgap of 3.05 eV and 2.1 eV at room temperature.35,64
 Fig. 1  (a) Side and top views of fundamental InSe crystal structures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (b) Schematic representation of γ-rhombohedral InSe. In the unit cell of γ-phase, there are three layers of Se–In–In–Se monatomic sheets along the c axis. (c) PL spectra and the corresponding illustration of γ-InSe layers with various thicknesses at P = 0.1 mW, λ = 633 nm. (b–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) (d) Layered crystal structure of GaTe, where the tellurium and gallium atoms are represented by blue and yellow spheres, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (e) Four layers of In2Se3. Each single layer of In2Se3 has a thickness of about 1 nm. (f) Left panel: Raman spectra of In2Se3 at different temperatures. Right panel: the α → β phase transition temperature changed with the thickness of In2Se3. (e–f, Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) 
Strikingly different from the relatively simple structures of GaS, GaSe, and InSe, GaTe has a more complicated crystal structure even if it is also a kind of MX stoichiometry. GaTe has a monoclinic structure, the symmetry of which is less than that of the hexagonal lattice structure, as shown in Fig. 1d. Two-thirds of the Ga–Ga bonds in GaTe are perpendicular to the layer and the rest are parallel to the layer.51 Therefore, GaTe exhibits unique optical and crystallographic properties different from those of their III–VI group counterparts. In addition, bulk GaTe has a direct band gap of about 1.7 eV at room temperature,67 which is desirable to realize high-performance optoelectronic devices.
The most intensively studied group III–VI material with M2X3 stoichiometry (In2Se3, Ga2Se3 and Ga2Te3) is In2Se3. Generally, it exists in nature with five known crystal forms (α, β, γ, δ, and κ) at various temperatures.68,69 The tetrahedral bonding structure underlies all of the crystal forms mentioned above. There are one third of cationic vacancies in In2Se3 compounds in which the octet rule for sp3 hybridization is met. Among the five phases, γ- and δ-In2Se3 are a distorted wurtzite-like structure and a monoclinic structure, respectively.68 α-Phase, β-phase, and the recently discovered κ-phase are layered structures formed by inserting a cationic vacancy plane every three in-layers along the ab-direction.68–71 The two common forms of α-phase and β-phase have crystallographic structures that are differing in lattice parameters and material properties. Tao et al. have verified that the transformation of the α → β phase is closely related to temperature.70 Moreover, such a transformation temperature is gradually increased by 130 K with the decrease of layer thickness, as shown in Fig. 1f. Their electrical properties also change correspondingly, which makes it have a possible application in phase-change memories.72 The layered crystal structure of α-In2Se3 is displayed in Fig. 1e; each single layer of In2Se3 is composed of a quintuple layer, in which the Se–In–Se–In–Se atomic sheets are bonded to each other through strong covalent bonding. Therefore, the thickness of monolayer In2Se3 is about 1 nm,70,73 and weak van der Waals interactions exist in two neighboring layers. On the basis of the ab initio pseudopotential total-energy method, the direct band gap of α-In2Se3 is about 1.48 eV.73 Generally, a part of the 2D layered MIIIXVI materials are direct band gap structures, such as InSe, GaTe and In2Se3, beneficial for applications in high-performance optoelectronic devices.
3. Synthesis
The reliable production of high quality nanosheets is a prerequisite in order to explore their properties and possible applications. So far, there have been plenty of methods for the synthesis of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials. Here we mainly focus on some of them and further evaluate their merits.
3.1 Chemical vapor deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been widely used in the growth of 2D layered materials,55,58,59,65,72,74–79 such as graphene, TMDs and boron nitride (BN). For instance, single-crystal hexagonal graphene with a lateral size of 2 cm and wafer scale MoS2 film were successfully synthesized by the CVD method.44,80 The CVD growth of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials has much in common with other layered materials. Fig. 2a depicts the experimental setting for the growth of monolayer In2Se3 nanosheets.69 In the typical process of CVD, In2Se3 powder was used as the only precursor and was located in the middle of a tube. Silicon substrates with 285 nm thermal oxide layers served as the growth substrates, which were placed 10–15 cm away in the downstream. The optical images of the products grown in 5 and 15 minutes are illustrated in Fig. 2b and c respectively. Actually, the shape and thickness of the as-grown nanosheets could be controlled by adjusting the growth conditions, such as temperature, pressure, gas flow, substrates and so on. Analogously, ultrathin GaSe nanosheets can be synthesized with a similar experimental setting.65 The optical and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of GaSe nanosheets are shown in Fig. 2d and e.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic image of the experimental setting for In2Se3 nanosheets via the CVD method. (b–c) Optical images of as-grown In2Se3 nanosheets with 5 and 15 minute growth respectively. (a–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (d–e) Optical and AFM images of GaSe nanosheets synthesized by the CVD method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) (f) SEM image of GaTe nanowires. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (g) A typical SEM image of vertical GaTe nanosheets grown on a SiO2/Si substrate. (h) An optical image of planar GaTe nanosheets grown on mica. (i) The AFM image of a triangular GaTe nanosheet. (g–i, Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Compared to sulfide and selenide, their corresponding telluride is more difficult to synthesize due to the relatively inert chemical activity. By employing gold particles as catalysts, Shen's group developed a CVD method to synthesize GaTe nanowires using gallium sheets and tellurium powders.74 The growth temperature for GaTe nanowires is reported to be 800–850 °C. Fig. 1f shows the SEM image of the as-grown nanowires. Recently, He's group successfully synthesized 2D GaTe nanosheets on rigid silicon and flexible mica.75 Due to the different chemical environment of the substrate surface, the nanosheets exhibit a distinct morphology even if under exactly the same growth condition. It turns out that the chemically inert mica surface benefits the lateral epitaxy growth of GaTe nanosheets, which will be briefly discussed in the next part. The dangling bonds on the surface of the SiO2/Si substrate lead to vertically oriented nanostructures. High-quality single crystal GaTe nanosheets with a lateral size of several tens of micrometers can be obtained in both cases, as shown in Fig. 2g and h. Actually, to grow high-quality, large-scale and continuous 2D layered MIIIXVI materials, the critical parameters must to be controlled precisely. The products of CVD are sensitive to the growth conditions. The issue of controlling the stoichiometry, thickness, crystal orientation, doping, defects, domain size and large scale will be the subject of a future experimental study to realize high quality 2D layered MIIIXVI materials.
3.2 van der Waals epitaxy
Due to the weak van der Waals (vdW) interactions existing naturally in two neighboring layers, vdW epitaxy is an ideal approach for the growth of 2D layered materials. Especially, 3D heterostructure epitaxy in group III–IV compounds is limited by lattice mismatch. However, 2D heterostructures based on layered materials can be focused with respect to band gap alignments rather than lattice mismatch. One requirement for vdW epitaxy growth is that the surface of the substrate should be chemically inert (free of surface dangling bonds). The common substrates for this method include mica, graphene, BN and so on. Since the associated energy of a vdW force (40–70 meV) is much smaller than that of covalent bonding energy (200–6000 meV), an epitaxial heterostructure is attainable even if lattice mismatch is significant between the materials.81
It is worth mentioning that, in order to realize the integration of electronic and optoelectronic devices, achieving large-area as well as patterned growth of 2D materials is essential.82–84 vdW epitaxy growth combined with the surface treatment technique has been developed to reach this goal.76,85 The purpose of surface treatment is to control the nucleation site. So far, oxygen plasma etching and microintaglio printing have been utilized to efficiently define the nucleation sites of GaSe and In2Se3 nanosheets on mica. As shown in Fig. 3a, b and e, the locations of In2Se3, GaSe nanosheets grown on the surface of graphene or mica are random.76,85 However, after selective oxygen plasma etching, nanosheets would only nucleate at regions without etching, resulting in patterned In2Se3 and GaSe nanosheets as illustrated in Fig. 3d, f and g. Another method to control the nucleation sites is microintaglio printing.55 The process of this method is schematically illustrated in Fig. 3h. Polydimethylsilocane (PDMS) with designed structures was prepared in advance through a standard photolithography and replica moulding process.86 Solvent ink made of PDMS oligomer dissolving in acetone, ethanol and cyclohexane was then dropped on the surface of the prepared PDMS stamp. A freshly cleaved mica sheet was placed face-to-face with the PDMS stamp. Then, the imprints were left on the region not in contact, and the treated mica was immediately used for the growth of 2D materials. In situ observation indicated that Bi2Se3 nanosheets preferred to nucleate at the edge of additional residue aggregations and further expanded to the region without ink residues. As the growth time increases, the nuclei would eventually coalesce to cover the whole region in contact with the PDMS stamp. This process is shown in Fig. 3i. Techniques based on vdW epitaxy and surface etching can realize large-scale patterns of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials, providing the groundwork for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 3  (a–b) SEM image of In2Se3 flakes grown on graphene and mica respectively. (c) Schematic image illustrating the selective-area growth of In2Se3via oxygen plasma etching. (d) Optical image of patterned In2Se3 flakes grown on modified mica. (a–d, Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) (e) Optical image of GaSe nanosheets grown on mica. (f–g) Optical image of GaSe arrays by site-selected growth. (e–g, Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (h) Schematic image illustrating the process of microintaglio printing. (i) Optical image of Bi2Se3 crystals grown on mica at different stages. (h–i, Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.) 
3.3 Solution-phase method
Apart from vapor phase deposition, solution-phase methods, including solvothermal, liquid exfoliation, ligand-templated growth and so on, are able to synthesize MIIIXVI materials on a large scale.87–91 Various kinds of nanostructures can be synthesized by the solvothermal method. As an example, In2Te3 nanowires were prepared and applied to broad spectral photodetectors.79 The morphology of the synthesized nanowires is shown in Fig. 4a and b. Electron dispersive X-ray (EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) results further demonstrate that the synthesized nanostructures are In2Te3. Ga2Se3 nanoparticles could also be synthesized using the solvothermal method at room temperature.87 Unlike the method for synthesizing In2Te3, this kind of reaction takes place in a round bottomed flask without organic solvents. Instead, aqueous solutions of gallium(III) chloride and sodium thiosulphate are the only precursors. A high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of synthesized Ga2Se3 nanoparticles is shown in Fig. 4c. The size of the synthesized nanoparticles can vary from 12 nm to 35 nm.
 Fig. 4  SEM image of (a) 1D In2Te3 nanostructures and (b) a single 1D In2Te3 nanostructure grown by the solvothermal method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) TEM image of Ga2S3 nanoparticles synthesized by the solvothermal method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 Trans Tech Publications Ltd.) (d) Optical image of a typical GaS powder dispersion in 2-propanol. (e) Representative TEM image of GaS flakes exfoliated in IPA (d–e, reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Scheme of InSe nanosheets grown by the ligand-templated method. (g) The corresponding TEM image of as grown InSe nanosheets. (f–g, Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) (h) Scheme and (i–j) SEM micrograph of GaS and GaSe nanotubes grown by the long-chain amine-templated method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Over the past few years, liquid exfoliation has been well developed for its versatility and high-yield, as well as its simple preparation process. Typically, high-yield thin layer 2D layered materials can be obtained by ultrasonication in suitable solvents. The products are usually a few hundreds of nanometers in size and 1–10 layers thick. Benefiting from the adsorption of molecules from solution, the flakes are relatively stable against re-aggregation.92 So far, liquid exfoliation has been widely applied for the production of various 2D layered materials. However, its application for the synthesis of MIIIXVI materials is just at the beginning. Coleman's group demonstrated the effective production of GaS nanosheets by sonicating GaS powder in isopropanol.88 A typical dispersion is shown in Fig. 4d and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the obtained GaS nanosheets are shown in Fig. 4e. The statistical results indicate that the products vary from each other in the range of 3–80 layers thick and 50–1000 nm large, which could be further selected by controlling the centrifugation parameters. This method could also be used for the preparation of hybrid nanocomposites.89
Furthermore, ligand-templated growth is another alternative to synthesize nanomaterials with different structures. Besides, it offers additional advantages to synthesize 2D nanosheets even if the intrinsic vdW interaction is lacking. For instance, PbS, CdSe, ZnS, and CuS nanosheets have been successfully obtained through this method.93–95 It usually begins with the formation of a ligand template followed by a sulfurization/selenization process. Recently, GaS/GaS nanotubes and ultrathin InSe nanosheets were achieved by this method.90,91 The schematics of the related process are depicted in Fig. 3f and h. To synthesize InSe nanosheets, indium chloride and octadecylamine (ODA) are firstly mixed to form an indium–ODA complex and then reacted with selenourea dissolved in 1-octadecene (ODE).90 It is worth mentioning that the ODA served as an essential template ligand for the formation of InSe nanosheets during this process. The as-grown nanosheets were shaped as regular hexagons (as shown in Fig. 4g), whose lateral size could be 800 nm and thickness 5 nm. Due to the distinct properties of template ligands, flexible nanostructures could be fabricated via ligand-templated growth. Nicolosi's group developed a method to grow gallium sulfide/selenide nanotubes under the direction of long-chain amines.91 In their recipe, gallium acetylacetonate and sulfur/selenium were chosen as the precursors and hexadecylamine and dodecylamine were chosen as the solvents as well as the directing template. The images of as-synthesized GaS and GaSe nanotubes are illustrated in Fig. 4i and j.
3.4 Other methods
Due to the weak vdW interactions between adjacent layers, single or few layer 2D materials can be easily obtained by micromechanical cleavage using adhesive tape. Without reacting or coming into contact with other chemical reagents, the obtained thin layer nanosheets have clean surfaces and high-quality crystal structures, which are ideal for exploring electronic and optoelectronic applications as well as fundamental research. In a typical process, high quality bulk counterparts (usually synthesized by the Bridgman method) were thinned by repeatedly folding the adhesive tape. After scraping, the thinned sheets were transferred onto the surface of rigid substrates. Their thickness can be confirmed with the help of AFM, Raman, HRTEM or other characterization methods. Some other methods were also successfully developed to synthesize large-area MIIIXVI films.57,96 For instance, Elam's group used hexakis (dimethylamido) digallium (Ga2(NMe2)6, where Me = CH3) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to deposit GaSx films by atomic layer deposition and demonstrated its potential applications for lithium-ion battery anodes.96 Geohegan's group presented a pulsed laser deposition method to rapidly grow uniform GaSe nanosheets with digital thickness control.57 Aydoğan's group realized the electrochemical deposition of GaTe thin films on p-type Si substrate and studied the temperature related current–voltage characteristics of a Si/GaTe diode.97 It is reasonable to predict that high-quality MIIIXVI materials with desired properties can be prepared using improved methods in the future.
4. Properties and applications
4.1 Electronics
In the past 60 years, the introduction of high-performance boosters such as high-k dielectrics, metal gate, strain and new geometries has improved the performance of transistors.98 With the shrinking of the dimensions of planar devices, especially in bulk planar devices, good electrostatic control of the channel by the gate voltage is required. However, thin gate oxides result in increased leakage, high substrate doping and mobility degradation. The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) has predicted additional new materials and new transistor geometries will be needed to resolve the current challenges of transistor scaling in the next 10 years.
2D layered semiconducting materials are highly promising as channel materials for the ability to control the channel thickness at the atomic level.3 This feature can improve the gate control over the channel and suppress short channel effects,99 and meanwhile, their planar nature is more compatible with the present fabrication technology and beneficial for a high degree vertical integration system.100 As schematically shown in Fig. 5a and b, although conventional materials, such silicon and germanium, can also be reduced to a very thin layer, the atomically smooth and dangling bond-free surface of 2D materials intrinsically suppresses the interface state density and surface roughness scattering, guaranteeing robust device performance. Thus, silicon suffers from a more serious degeneration of mobility, compared with 2D materials, as presented in Fig. 5c. Moreover, the mobility of 2D materials can be further enhanced with an improvement of the material quality and gate dielectric engineering.43,101–103 The discovery of graphene has paved the way for rediscovery of other 2D materials, such as TMDs, BN, MIIIXVI and black phosphorus. 2D layered semiconductors have the advantage over graphene of extended bandgap tunability through thickness, composition, and strain.
 Fig. 5  (a) Issues of bulk materials and (b) advantages of 2D layered materials. (c) Silicon suffers from a more serious degeneration of mobility, compared with 2D materials. (d) Schematic of 2D FETs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.) 
So far, many studies on 2D layered materials have been conducted in FETs, which are the central building block for logic circuits.3,104,105 These materials used in FETs as transport channels mainly focus on TMDs such as MoS2 and WSe2.3,5,106–108 However, actually, it is reported that MoS2 is not a desirable material as a channel because of its low temperature mobility (0.1–200 cm2 V−1 s−1) and heavy electron effective mass (m* = 0.45m0).105,109 Indium selenide (InSe), being a typical layered material belonging to group III–IV compounds, has two common forms, namely the β-phase and γ-phase. The structure of InSe has been presented in a previous part. Importantly, InSe has a lower electron effective mass (m* = 0.145m0) and exhibits a very high mobility (103 cm2 V−1 s−1), because of which it has a great potential for layered materials in high-performance electronic devices.56,58,110,111 From the view of the devices, the real mobility easily suffers from various scatterings, especially those which come from the interface of dielectric/2D materials.58,112 For example, interfacial Coulomb impurities, surface roughness and surface polar phonon significantly decrease the mobility of devices.113 Especially with the thickness of materials decreasing to a few nanometers, the interfacial Coulomb impurities become a dominant scattering factor because of the shorter distance of impurities and electrons in monolayer materials.58 Traditional dielectric layers such as SiO2, Al2O3, HfS2etc. have lots of hydroxyl groups and other trap states at the interface between a dielectric and a channel, which leads to various interface scatterings. Thus, the mobility of devices can be enhanced by suppressing and eliminating these scatterings from interfaces. As shown in Fig. 6a, the PMMA/Al2O3 double layer is chosen as a dielectric, and the PMMA can screen the interfacial Coulomb scattering, such as hydroxyl groups, water and chemical absorptions. Fig. 6b and c show the transfer and output characterization of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric layer. The field-effect mobility of devices can be estimated from the transfer characterization using the following equation: μ = Lgm/WCiVds, where L is the channel length, gm is the transconductance extracted from the transfer characteristics, W is the channel width, Ci is the capacitance, and Vds is the drain voltage.114 In the case of PMMA/Al2O3, the mobility was found to be as high as 1055 cm2 V−1 s−1, larger than the mobility (64 cm2 V−1 s−1) of FETs with Al2O3. Moreover, this value was much higher than that of MoS2, WSe2, etc., and can even be comparable to that of strained 25 nm Si thin-films. The improvement of performance from PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric to Al2O3 dielectric was attributed to the suppression of interface Coulomb scattering. On the other hand, the subthreshold swing (SS) and on/off ratio of current in FETs is extremely important, because it implies a remarkably large on/off ratio at a small supply voltage.115 The SS can be calculated using the following equation: SS = dVg/d(logId).116Fig. 6d shows that the calculated SS of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectrics is 300 mV and the on/off ratio is 108 cm2 V−1 s−1, also higher than that of multilayer MoS2 FETs. The Id–Vd curve shows a linear regime under a low voltage and a current saturation regime at high voltage, which agree with the characteristics of conventional NMOS transistors and are beneficial for practical applications.
 Fig. 6  (a) The PMMA/Al2O3 double layer is chosen as the dielectric, and the PMMA can screen the interfacial Coulomb scattering, such as hydroxyl groups, water and chemical absorptions. (b) Transfer and (c) output characterization of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric layer. (d) The calculated SS of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectrics is 300 mV and the on/off ratio is 108 cm2 V−1 s−1, also higher than that of multilayer MoS2 FETs. (e) Transfer characteristics of InSe FETs fabricated on Al2O3 dielectric. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
Although the room-temperature mobility of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectrics can reach 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1, the intrinsic and temperature-dependent mobility of InSe in the two dimensional scales has not yet been clearly elaborated, because of the limit of two-terminal measurements. Sucharitakul et al. excluded the effect of contact, temperature, and different substrate dielectrics and obtained the intrinsic transport properties and mobility by four-terminal measurements.56Fig. 7a illustrates schematically the two-terminal and four-terminal measurements. The transfer curve of multilayer InSe FETs fabricated on PMMA substrate and the temperature-dependent mobility of two different measurements were obtained, as shown in Fig. 7b and c. With the decrease of temperature, the mobility measured by the two-terminal method degrades largely from 1250 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 300 cm2 V−1 s−1, while four-terminal field effect mobility displays a weak temperature dependence. The phenomenon results from the impact of worsened contacts at low temperature.43 Furthermore, different substrates such as SiO2, Si3N4, and HMDS-modified SiO2 are utilized as presented in Fig. 7c, which indeed confirmed that PMMA as a dielectric of FETs is superior to other substrates. As discussed above, the mobility of InSe FETs fabricated with PMMA exhibited a rapid degradation as the temperature decreases and the mobilities of other substrates display the opposite trend of temperature dependence. Thus, this suggests that PMMA does have the advantage of having a higher mobility than conventional dielectrics, despite being somewhat unstable against temperature cycling.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-terminal and four-terminal measurements. (b) Four-terminal conductance of InSe FETs on PMMA/SiO2 at different temperatures. (c) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two- and four-terminal measurements. (d) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two-terminal measurements at different substrates. (e) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two and four terminal measurements at Si3N4. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
Encouraged by the achievements on InSe, various other layered group III–IV compounds such as GaS, GaSe, GaTe and In2Se3 have been studied.47,51,52,117 FETs based on multilayer GaTe nanosheets were fabricated on SiO2 substrate, and their electrical properties were measured as shown in Fig. 8. The transfer characteristics of GaTe FETs were strongly affected by the environment. With the decrease of temperature, the electrical properties were further enhanced. The off state current of the device reduced to pA magnitude, and the on/off ratio rose to 105, which is enhanced more than 400 times, as indicated in Fig. 8b. To better understand the mechanism as to how the temperature affected the electrical properties of GaTe FETs, various temperature measurements and theoretical simulations were conducted. As the temperature increased, Vth of FETs shifted to the direction of positive voltage, indicating that more carriers are generated in the GaTe channel. Furthermore, the 2D channel density was extracted from the various-temperature transfer curve, as displayed in Fig. 8d. Below the temperature of 200 K, the carrier density increases slightly, while above 200 K, it increases sharply. This phenomenon indicated that some defect states were thermally activated above 200 K and the activation energy was extracted to be 0.19 eV. First-principles calculations also confirmed this result. Fig. 8e and f illustrate three low-energy native defects as a function of the Te chemical potential and their corresponding electronic structures. They imply that Ga vacancy and the Te-on-Ga antisite have the lower formation energy, but the activation energy of Te-on-Ga antisite was 0.6 eV and can be excluded.118 Thus, the activated behavior was attributed to the Ga vacancy and this finding was of significance to understand the physical nature of GaTe FETs and unlocked the hurdle for the practical application of FETs based on group III–IV compounds.
 Fig. 8  (a) The FETs based on multilayer GaTe nanosheets were fabricated on SiO2 substrate. (b) The transfer characteristics of GaTe FETs were strongly affected by the environment. With the decrease of temperature, the electrical properties were further increased. (c) The transfer characteristics at various temperatures. As the temperature increased, Vth of FETs shifted to the direction of positive voltage, indicating that more carriers are generated in the GaTe channel. (d) The 2D channel density was extracted from the various-temperature transfer curve. (e) Three low-energy native defects as a function of the Te chemical potential and (f) their corresponding electronic structures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
4.2 Optoelectronics
The conversion between light and electric signal is an extremely significant technology that affects our daily life. In recent years, 2D layered materials have emerged and rapidly established themselves for next-generation ultrathin and flexible optoelectronic devices.46,105,119–125 2D layered materials can be compatible with the highly silicon-based platform for optoelectronics, leading to large-scale integration into optoelectronic circuits.126 Graphene, as the first member of the 2D layered material family, is an exciting material which has been explored for developing photodetectors.127 However, the intrinsically weak light absorption (2.3%) and high dark current limit the practical applications of graphene. Other 2D layered materials beyond graphene are complementary to the properties of graphene. The relatively high earth abundance of group III–IV compounds and their direct band gaps in the visible range render them as light-absorption materials.128 Moreover, compared with a conventional direct band gap semiconductor, they have additional properties of transparency, mechanical flexibility and easy processing.
Another feature of 2D layered materials is their strong quantum confinement effects.4,63,129Fig. 1c depicts the PL spectra of InSe flakes with different thicknesses. With the decrease of thickness, the near-band gap PL peak exhibits a strong blue shift by 200 meV. Meanwhile, the peak intensity drops significantly, when thickness is below 10 nm. The quantum confinement effects observed in InSe flakes were stronger than that of MoS2 and also lead to a crossover from direct bandgap to indirect bandgap when the thickness of InSe flakes is lower than 5 nm. The InSe flakes can be excited in the technologically important near-infrared spectral range at room temperature, which provides more opportunities for planar device architectures and near-infrared light sensing. Few-layered InSe photodetectors were fabricated on SiO2/Si substrate, excited at 633 nm, as shown in Fig. 9a. Photoresponsivity of the photodetector implies the capacity for optoelectric conversion and can be defined as the ratio of the generated photocurrent Ips to optical power density P irradiating on the detector (R = Ip/PS).127,130Fig. 9b illustrates that the photoresponsivity can be tuned by using the drain voltage. Larger drain voltage reduces the transit time and recombination rate and thus enhances the photoresponsivity of the photodetector. On the other hand, detectivity indicates the capacity for detection for weak optical signals and is estimated using the equation D* = RS1/2/(2qId)1/2, where Id is the dark current. The responsivity and detectivity as a function of illumination wavelengths with a light intensity of 0.29 mW cm−2 at the gate voltage of 40 V are presented in Fig. 9c. The responsivity and detectivity are as high as 104 A W−1 and 1014 Jones respectively. The InSe flake photodetectors are broad spectra responsive from UV-visible to near infrared. Moreover, the photoresponsivity and photodetectivity of InSe photoresponse are superior to those of most other 2D materials, commercial Si and InGaAs photodetectors.131–133
 Fig. 9  (a) The InSe flakes can be excited in the technologically important near-infrared spectra range at room temperature, which provides more opportunities for planar device architectures and near-infrared light sensing. Few-layered InSe photodetectors were fabricated on SiO2/Si substrate. (b) The photoresponsivity can be tuned by using the drain voltage. Larger drain voltage reduces the transit time and recombination rate and thus enhances the photoresponsivity of the photodetector. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (c) The responsivity and detectivity as a function of illumination wavelength with the light intensity of 0.29 mW cm−2 at the gate voltage of 40 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) By utilizing the avalanche effect, the performances of InSe photodetectors were enhanced largely, with improved photoresponsivity, low dark currents and (e) a fast response time. A external quantum efficiency of 334% and a high avalanche gain of 47 were achieved. (f) Plasmonic Al disk nanoantennas patterned on the InSe flakes can improve the light absorption. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
Actually, for a photodetector, responsivity and detectivity are not the only factors that need to be considered because the amplification circuit can be used to improve them. However, the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) and response time cannot be tuned by using the signal process, which is problematic in practical applications. Lei et al. designed and demonstrated an avalanche InSe photodetector.134 By utilizing the avalanche effect, the performances of InSe photodetectors were enhanced largely, with improved photoresponsivity, low dark currents and fast response time. The avalanche effect of an InSe-based photodetector was realized by a large Schottky barrier between metal Al and semiconductor InSe. This device contained two Schottky junctions that are back to back. Because of the reverse biased Schottky barriers, the dark currents were suppressed dramatically. An external quantum efficiency of 334% and a high avalanche gain of 47 were achieved, as shown in Fig. 9d. Concurrently, an ultrafast response time of 60 μs was achieved, which was better than that for most reported 2D layered materials. Furthermore, the avalanche effect led to photocarriers being utilized more efficiently, but the number of photocarriers was not enhanced. A recent study has demonstrated that plasmonic Al disk nanoantennas patterned on the InSe flakes can improve the light absorption, as presented in Fig. 9f. It is clearly indicated that the plasmonic enhancement led to a large photocurrent. The combination of the avalanche effect and the plasmonic effect can work together and similar strategies can also be used in other 2D material based photodetectors.
2D layered materials are easily compatible with current micromanufacturing techniques. Meanwhile, their large surface-to-volume ratio and low dimensional features show that they have higher light sensitivity than bulk materials. Moreover, 2D layered materials also exhibit excellent mechanical properties, which make them applicable in flexible optoelectronics. Flexible devices greatly benefit from the development of 2D layered materials, which are accessible on soft polymeric or plastic substrates. Fig. 10a shows a GaS nanosheet photodetector fabricated on flexible PET substrates. Ultrahigh detectivity at different wavelengths was calculated in the range of 1012–1013 Jones for visible light and about 1014 Jones for ultraviolet light. The stability of the GaS nanosheet photodetector on PET substrates was measured before/after bending. The on/off ratio of the photocurrent is 104 after bending, showing that it is highly responsive and stable. On the other hand, GaSe nanosheets synthesized by a facile vdW epitaxy method also exhibited excellent photoresponse on flexible and transparent mica substrates, regardless of repeated bending, as shown in Fig. 10b. Thus, the planar feature, mechanical stability, high photoresponse and compatible manufacturing techniques make layered MIIIXVI materials show great potential for flexible optoelectronics in the future.
 Fig. 10  (a) GaS nanosheet photodetector fabricated on flexible PET substrates. Ultrahigh detectivity at different wavelengths was calculated in the range of 1012–1013 Jones for visible light and about 1014 Jones for ultraviolet light. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (b) GaSe nanosheets synthesized by a facile vdW epitaxy method also exhibited excellent photoresponse on flexible and transparent mica substrates, regardless of repeated bending. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
Patterning 2D layered materials has a benefit for the integration of electronic optoelectronic devices. As discussed in Fig. 3, Zheng et al. has patterned large-area arrays of In2Se3 on a transparent mica substrate.55 In2Se3 is another important n type semiconductor with a direct bandgap of 1.3 eV and exhibited great photoresponsivity and a fast response time.135Fig. 11 shows the photoresponse of patterned and packaged In2Se3 photodetectors. The photocurrents from single and multiple devices exhibited an excellent, stable and cooperative response, as presented in Fig. 11c. The In2Se3 photodetector arrays showed an ultrahigh responsivity of 1650 A W−1 at a low incident power of P = 622 nW cm−2. Moreover, dozens of devices were fabricated and all have shown excellent photoresponse, indicating the uniformity of this photodetector array. For practical applications of optoelectronic devices, packaging is an important aspect. Fig. 11g shows packaged In2Se3 photodetector arrays, which exhibit remarkable flexible and mechanical durability, with little change even after repeated dynamic bending tests. Patterned and packaged In2Se3 photodetectors hold great promise for next-generation photodetector arrays.
 Fig. 11  Patterning 2D layered materials have a benefit for the integration of electronic optoelectronic devices. (a) Photograph and (b) OM image of the In2Se3 photodetector array. (c) Photoresponse of the In2Se3 photodetector. (d) I–V curve in the dark and under different illuminations intensities. (e) Dependence of photoresponse on light intensities. (f) Statistical distribution of photoresponsivity of In2Se3 devices. (g) Schematic of device packaging. (h) Photoresponse characterization of the packaged device. (i) Current as a function of bending cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.) 
4.3 van der Waals heterostructures
Heterostructure is a core structure and functional unit in many electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as light emitting diodes, solar cells, tunneling transistors, and so on.125,136,137 With the rise and development of 2D layered materials, some researchers began to focus on the study of vdW heterostructures based on 2D layered materials. Encouraged by the first heterostructure based on graphene/h-BN proposed by Dean et al. in 2010,138 various other similar studies have been reported.125,136,137,139,140 The initial concept about vdW heterostructures was put forward by Geim and Grigorieva in 2013.141 This artificial heterostructure is composed of different 2D layered materials stacked together in a chosen sequence. Each isolated 2D layered material could be considered as building blocks, which are connected to each other through a weak vdW force. Therefore, different from conventional 3D heterostructures, vdW heterostructures can circumvent the strict requirement of lattice matching. The very easy requirement on crystal structure matching coupled with the unique nature of various 2D layered materials enables controllably synthesizing vdW heterostructures with novel properties. To begin with, we will introduce how to build a vdW heterostructure, which is a basis to realize their fascinating applications.
In general, there are two methods to fabricate vdW heterostructures. One approach is mechanical transfer. A typical transfer process was originally realized by Dean et al. in 2010, as illustrated in Fig. 12a. First of all, the desired layered material was exfoliated onto a polymer stack composed of a water-soluble layer and a PMMA film. Subsequently the water-soluble layer and the PMMA film with the desired 2D layered building block were separated by soaking them in deionized water. The layered material to be transferred is precisely controlled using a micro manipulator and reversely coated with the aimed building block at last. However, an immersion process was inevitable in this method, which was not good to obtain a clean interface. Therefore, a new assembly procedure without using liquid was developed to fabricate BN/graphene/BN heterostructures by Wang et al. in 2013,142 as shown in Fig. 12b. In brief, one of the 2D layered materials was used as a stamp to pick up another building block by vdW interaction in this way. Generally, both of the mechanical transfer processes mentioned above just need simple facilities, which are facile and are also widely used to assemble vdW heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds.143,144 Nevertheless, this mechanical transfer method has some deficiencies. The relatively low yield makes it difficult to realize the voluminous production of devices. Moreover, it is difficult to precisely control stacking orientation and it could introduce undesired impurities that are detrimental to device performance. In contrast, another method of in situ growth can solve these issues very well and has been attracting more and more attention.77,145–149 Li et al. reported the growth of GaSe/graphene heterostructures through the CVD method.77Fig. 12c depicts a SEM image of a GaSe epilayer on graphene and atomic resolution aberration-corrected dark-field (ADF)-STEM images of 1L graphene and 1L vdW epitaxial GaSe on graphene. Very recently, Li et al. demonstrated the synthesis of vertically stacked and lateral GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures via the same epitaxial technique.145 Schematics of the growth and optical micrographs of 1L MoSe2 and GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures are illustrated in Fig. 12d. The bilayer heterostructrures consisting of monolayered GaSe/MoSe2 exhibit atomically sharp interfaces and are well-defined. In addition, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is a common and effective growth technique. Moreover, it can exactly control the thickness of films with wafer-scale homogeneity and achieve scalable production of devices. For example, Yuan et al. and Liu et al. reported the controllable synthesis of GaSe and GaTexSe1−x on Si by molecular beam epitaxy, respectively.148,149 These growth processes based on vdW epitaxy can allow heteroepitaxy between various layered materials with large mismatches of lattice constants, as discussed in the synthesis part. More importantly, these direct growth approaches can provide a more clean, sharp and seamless stacking interface. Constructing vdW heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds by mechanical transfer and CVD provides a new route toward exploring the electronic and optoelectronic properties.
 Fig. 12  Fabrication of vdW heterostructures by mechanical transfer and CVD methods. (a) Schematic illustrating the transfer process utilized to build graphene/h-BN heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited.) (b) Schematic illustrating the assembly procedure without using liquid. Bottom panel: Optical, AFM, and high-resolution cross section ADF-STEM image of BN/graphene/BN heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2013 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Top panel: SEM images of GaSe epilayer on graphene. Bottom panel: ADF-STEM images of 1L graphene and 1L vdW epitaxial GaSe on graphene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (d) The experimental setting for the growth and optical micrographs of 1L MoSe2 and GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.) 
Although vdW heterostructures based on intensively investigated 2D layered materials, such as graphene, h-BN, and TMDs, have been widely reported, adequate reports on heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds are still expected. Now we discuss and evaluate properties and applications of vdW heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds. As is well known, the p–n junction underlies a large number of electronic and optoelectronic devices. When p- and n-type semiconductors are connected together, holes in p-region and electrons in n-region can diffuse and recombine with each other. Then, there will be a depletion region in which the same amount of positive and negative charges left at the interface. Meanwhile, a built-in electric field is formed to prevent free carriers from diffusing. Eventually, both the drift and diffusion motions from built-in electric field and concentration gradient respectively can reach dynamic equilibrium. When p–n junction is forward biased, the barrier at the interface can be lower, resulting in a substantial electric current through p–n junctions. The case corresponds to the on state of p–n junctions. Conversely, reverse bias can prevent significant electric current flow and turn it into the off state. This unidirectional transmission of current in p–n junctions is called rectification behavior. This unidirectional transmission of current in p–n junctions is called rectification behavior, which is the fundamental feature of a p–n junction. The rectification feature is characterized by the rectification ratio.
The photovoltaic (PV) effect is another basic characteristic of p–n junctions. It refers to the generation of potential difference in p–n junctions under light illumination. If a p–n junction is connected to a loop, the separation of the photo-excited electron–hole pairs owing to the drive of the built-in electric field can produce a current in the circuit. On the basis of the PV effect, the solar cell is one of the most important optoelectronic applications of heterostructures. Their performance indicators include the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Isc), fill factor (FF), and conversion efficiency (η). The open-circuit voltage is the difference of electrical potentials between the two terminals of a solar cell when it is disconnected. Short-circuit current stands for the electric current flowing through a p–n junction when the bias voltage is equal to 0 V. From the current–voltage (I–V) curve, both of the parameters can be extracted. The fill factor and conversion efficiency are defined as FF = ImVm/IscVoc and η = Pm/Pin respectively, where Im and Vm are the current and voltage corresponding to the maximal output power (Pm = ImVm), and Pin is the incident power. As for vdW heterostructures based on group III–VI materials, they exhibit superior rectification characteristics and PV effect. For example, as shown in Fig. 13a, Li et al. demonstrated GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures with gate-tunable rectification behavior and PV effect.145 At Vbg = 0 V, their open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density, fill factor, and conversion efficiency are about 0.57 V, 0.35 mA cm−2, 0.12%, and 0.38 respectively. Similarly, Yuan et al. fabricated vertical GaSe/Si p–n diodes,148 which show a rectification ratio over 100 at 300 K. As the temperature decreases to 120 K, the rectification ratio increases to 105. A pronounced PV effect has also been found under various incident laser powers (Fig. 13b). In addition, as photodetectors, vertical GaSe/Si heterostructures exhibit a high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 23.6%, a fast response time of 60 μs and steady photo-switching behavior after 1 million cycles of operation, as depicted in Fig. 13c.
 Fig. 13  Rectification feature, PV effect, and photoresponse of heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds. (a) SEM, AFM (inset) images, and gate-tunable rectification behavior and PV effect of GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (b) Device model of a vertical GaSe/Si heterostructure and its rectification feature and PV effect under various incident laser powers. (c) EQE under various laser powers at Vbias = 0 V, time-resolved photoresponse, and stability test of an 8-layer GaSe/Si diode. EQE is up to 23.6% and the fastest rise time can reach 60 μs. (b–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
Besides the applications based on p–n junctions mentioned above, hybridizing III–VI layered semiconductors with graphene to enhance the optoelectronic performance has also been drawing increasing attention.143,144,150 It is generally known that graphene possesses ultrahigh mobility, allowing fast transport of carriers and weak absorbance required by an optical window. As an appealing aspect, the work function of graphene is easily adjusted by the external electric field to form favorable band alignment between graphene and channel materials. Therefore, it is seen as a preferred candidate for use as a transparent electrical contact. For example, Mudd et al. reported planar and vertical vdW graphene/InSe heterostructures in which graphene is used as the electrode.143 Compared to Au-contacts, the disappearance of the Schottky barrier at the interface and the high conductivity of graphene significantly enhance the photoresponsivity of InSe-based photodetectors, as shown in Fig. 14a. In their vertical counterparts (Fig. 14b), the channel length depends on the thickness of the InSe nanosheet. The decreased distance between both of the graphene electrodes gives rise to the shortening of carrier transit time, and produces a more sensitive photoresponse. The photoresponsivity can be observed up to 105 A W−1 at λ = 633 nm in these vertical heterostructures.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of planar van der Waals graphene/InSe heterostructures, in which graphene is used as the electrode. Right panel: Photoresponsivity, band alignment of graphene/InSe/graphene and Au/InSe/Au heterostructures, as well as their work functions. (b) Schematic structures of two kinds of vertical graphene/InSe/graphene devices (type I and type II) and the photoresponsivity corresponded to type I (blue) and type II (magenta). T = 300 K, λ = 633 nm, Vs = 2 V, and Vg = 0 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
In another kind of graphene/InSe heterostructure demonstrated by Chen et al.,144 monolayer graphene covers an ultrathin InSe flake. Then, source/drain electrodes are deposited on graphene, as illustrated in Fig. 15a. Hence, the tight cover of graphene makes the ultrathin InSe flake stable in air. Moreover, graphene plays an important role in transporting photo-excited electrons. Fig. 15b gives the corresponding band structure diagram of a graphene/InSe heterostructure at different gate voltages. Under illumination with a 532 nm laser, photo-excited electron–hole pairs are generated in the InSe flake. Subsequently, photo-excited electrons are effectively transferred to graphene and at the same time photo-excited holes remain in InSe due to the vertical architecture and electronic structure at the interface. Compared to separate InSe-based photodetectors, the graphene/InSe photodetector exhibits a much better performance in photoresponsivity and external quantum efficiency, as displayed in Fig. 15c. A similar study has also been reported by Lu et al., wherein they demonstrated graphene/GaSe heterostructures with a high gain exceeding 107 and a fast response time of 10 ms.150
 Fig. 15  Photodetectors based on graphene/InSe heterostructures. (a) Schematic diagram and optical image of the device. Reproduced with permission. (b) The corresponding band structure diagram of a graphene/InSe heterostructure at different gate voltages. (c) Photocurrent, photoresponsivity, and EQE of the device under various incident laser powers ranging between 12.6 W m−2 and 6.3 × 103 W m−2. The maximal photoresponsivity of 0.94 × 103 A W−1 and EQE of 2.18 × 105% are acquired at P = 12.6 W m−2, λ = 532 nm, Vds = −50 mV, and Vg = 0 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
5. Conclusions
Group III–VI compounds MIIIXVI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) are a relatively new and exciting class of 2D layered materials possessing many superior properties that are not seen in the TMD family. We summarized the progress in the controlled synthesis and electronic and optoelectronic properties of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials. Following the rise of new exciting opportunities, future electronic devices require advances in the synthesis of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials. Although CVD and vdW epitaxy in 2D layered MIIIXVI materials has been realized, large-scale, continuous, uniform and control-thickness thin films still need to be grown. Single-crystal graphene with several millimeters has been synthesized. The preparation of monolayer MIIIXVI without the presence of domain boundary and dislocation is required. The difficulty in synthesizing such films lies in uncontrollable nucleation sites. Thus, researchers may consider improving the equipment of vapor-phase growth to realize controllable, stable and efficient precursor supply. In addition, low temperature growth techniques such as MBE and atomic layer deposition may be given due attention. Wet chemistry synthesis is well developed for its simplicity and high-yield. However, the thicknesses of the products are usually uncontrollable. Because of different-thickness layered materials with different properties, large applications in the future depend on the improvement of wet chemistry methods. Further development of the liquid phase method has a great benefit for the application of printed and flexible electronics in the market. On the other hand, the realization of integrating these layered materials needs the development of several techniques, such as reliable synthesis, contact engineering, selective doping, high-k dielectric deposition and so on, which require to be solved in the next few years. Chemical passivation and encapsulation of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials can further improve the carrier mobility. Combining vapor-phase synthesis with device integration may be an important breakthrough in the future. The properties and applications of 2D layered MIIIXVI materials are an exciting, expanding area of research and are also extending to practical applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21373065 and 61474033), the 973 Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (no. 2012CB934103), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (no. 2144059) and the CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS.
Notes and references
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Z. X. Wang, X. L. Du, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465705 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, F. M. Wang, Z. X. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, Q. S. Wang, Z. Z. Cheng, M. Safdar and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8468–8476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12162–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Yu, Q. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. B. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216803 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. W. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, J. H. Kang, D. Sarkar, W. Liu and K. Banerjee, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2015, 62, 3459–3469 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. L. Zhou, A. X. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Z. Li, H. L. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zeng, J. F. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. D. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, G. B. Liu, W. X. Feng, X. D. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. B. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feldman, E. Wasserman, D. J. Srolovitz and R. Tenne, Science, 1995, 267, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
C. Tan, Z. Liu, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2615–2628 RSC .
L. Luo, L. Chatzakis, J. Wang, F. B. P. Niesier, M. Wegener, T. Koschny and C. M. Soukoulis, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 3055 Search PubMed .
W. Jie, X. Chen, D. Li, Y. Y. Hui, S. P. Lau, X. Cui and J. Hao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Q. Chu, M. L. Toh, C. Kloc, P. H. Tan and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 791–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Kang, W. Cao, D. Sarkar, Y. Khatami, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2013, 19.4.1–19.4.4 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, D. Sarkar, J. H. Kang, W. Cao and K. Banerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. E. Xie, L. J. Huang, Y. M. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C. J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sarkar, X. J. Xie, J. H. Kang, H. J. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Navarrete, M. Moskovits and K. Banerjee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2852–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, J. J. Luo, A. M. Yan, H. S. S. R. Matte, M. Grayson, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3549–3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Hu, L. F. Wang, M. Yoon, J. Zhang, W. Feng, X. N. Wang, Z. Z. Wen, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Miyamoto, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1649–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Hu, Z. Z. Wen, L. F. Wang, P. H. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, Y. Dai, C. W. Niu, X. Li, Y. D. Ma and B. B. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11548–11554 RSC .
Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, Y. C. Li, X. Y. Zhan, M. Safdar, Q. S. Wang, F. M. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4859–4865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Hu, J. Zhang, M. N. Yoon, X. F. Qiao, X. Zhang, W. Feng, P. H. Tan, W. Zheng, J. J. Liu, X. N. Wang, J. C. Idrobo, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 694–703 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, E. Mafi and Y. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 193115 CrossRef .
D. Wu, A. J. Pak, Y. N. Liu, Y. Zhou, X. Y. Wu, Y. H. Zhu, M. Lin, Y. Han, Y. Ren, H. L. Peng, Y. H. Tsai, G. S. Hwang and K. J. Lai, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8136–8140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Zheng, T. Xie, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Chen, W. Jiang, S. L. Zhao, J. X. Wu, Y. M. Jing, Y. Wu, G. C. Chen, Y. F. Guo, J. B. Yin, S. Y. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sucharitakul, N. J. Goble, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, Z. A. Bogorad, F. C. Chou, Y. T. Chen and X. P. A. Gao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3815–3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, R. Gresback, M. K. Tian, K. Wang, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, G. Eres, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. A. McGuire, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, W. Zheng, W. W. Cao and P. A. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6587–6593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y. Y. Lu, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, C. D. Liao, B. K. Moorthy, C. H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, J. B. Wu, X. L. Li, W. Zheng, X. Zhou, K. Xiao, W. W. Cao, B. Yang, J. C. Idrobo, L. Basile, W. Q. Tian, P. H. Tan and P. A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7022–7028 RSC .
P. Gomes da Costa, R. G. Dandrea, R. F. Wallis and M. Balkanski, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 48, 14135–14141 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Lei, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, R. Kappera, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, H. Yamaguchi, G. Gupta, R. Vajtai, A. D. Mohite and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, T. Ren, A. Patane, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, P. H. Beton, Z. D. Kovalyuk, G. V. Lashkarev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi and A. I. Dmitriev, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5714–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1894–1905 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Lei, L. H. Ge, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, G. Shi, G. You, J. Lou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Rybkovskiy, A. V. Osadchy and E. D. Obraztsova, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 90, 235302 CrossRef .
A. Yamamoto, A. Syouji, T. Goto, E. Kulatov, K. Ohno, Y. Kawazoe, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 64, 035210 CrossRef .
X. H. Yu, T. J. Hou, X. H. Sun and Y. Y. Li, Solid State Commun., 2013, 162, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Zhou, Q. S. Zeng, D. H. Lv, L. F. Sun, L. Niu, W. Fu, F. C. Liu, Z. X. Shen, C. H. Jin and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6400–6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao and Y. Gu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3501–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Marsillac, A. M. CombotMarie, J. C. Bernede and A. Conan, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 288, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, S. Y. Ju, X. H. Sun, G. Ng, T. D. Nguyen, M. Meyyappan and D. B. Janes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 133119 CrossRef .
M. Ishikawa and T. Nakayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, L1576–L1579 CAS .
G. Yu, Z. Liu, X. M. Xie, X. Ouyang and G. Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6104–6110 RSC .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, M. Mirza, K. Xu, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, F. M. Wang, X. Y. Zhan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7252–7258 RSC .
M. Lin, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Jiang, W. S. Zheng, S. L. Zhao, C. H. Jin, Y. F. Guo, H. L. Peng and Z. F. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13274–13277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Li, L. Basile, B. Huang, C. Ma, J. W. Lee, I. V. Vlassiouk, A. A. Puretzky, M. W. Lin, M. Yoon, M. F. Chi, J. C. Idrobo, C. M. Rouleau, B. G. Sumpter, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8078–8088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. X. Cheng, Y. B. Zhou, T. Cao, H. Hong, Z. M. Liao, S. W. Wu, H. L. Peng, K. H. Liu and D. P. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7994–7997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4715–4721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Wu, X. F. Zhang, Q. H. Yuan, J. C. Xue, G. Y. Lu, Z. H. Liu, H. S. Wang, H. M. Wang, F. Ding, Q. K. Yu, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 43–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Liu, W. H. Zhang, D. X. Mou, J. F. He, Y. B. Ou, Q. Y. Wang, Z. Li, L. L. Wang, L. Zhao, S. L. He, Y. Y. Peng, X. Liu, C. Y. Chen, L. Yu, G. D. Liu, X. L. Dong, J. Zhang, C. T. Chen, Z. Y. Xu, J. P. Hu, X. Chen, X. C. Ma, Q. K. Xue and X. J. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 931 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. H. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. N. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Aizenberg, A. J. Black and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 1999, 398, 495–498 CrossRef CAS .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Nature, 2011, 475, 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhou, Y. F. Nie, Y. J. Liu, K. Yan, J. H. Hong, C. H. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. B. Yin, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 550–575 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ahamad and S. M. Alshehri, Nano Hybrids, 2014, 6, 37–46 CrossRef .
A. Harvey, C. Backes, Z. Gholamvand, D. Hanlon, D. McAteer, H. C. Nerl, E. McGuire, A. Seral-Ascaso, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, S. Winters, N. C. Berner, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3483–3493 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Aksimentyeva, P. Y. Demchenko, V. P. Savchyn and O. A. Balitskii, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 29 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lauth, F. E. S. Gorris, M. S. Khoshkhoo, T. Chasse, W. Friedrich, V. Lebedeya, A. Meyer, C. Klinke, A. Komowsld, M. Scheele and H. Weller, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1728–1736 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Metel, A. Pokle, C. Backes, C. J. Zhang, H. C. Nerl, K. Rode, N. C. Berner, C. Downing, N. McEvoy, E. Munoz, A. Harvey, Z. Gholamvand, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman and V. Nicolosi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11698–11706 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Son, X. D. Wen, J. Joo, J. Chae, S. I. Baek, K. Park, J. H. Kim, K. An, J. H. Yu, S. G. Kwon, S. H. Choi, Z. W. Wang, Y. W. Kim, Y. Kuk, R. Hoffmann and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6861–6864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Son, J. H. Yu, S. G. Kwon, J. Lee, J. Joo and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3214–3219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joo, J. S. Son, S. G. Kwon, J. H. Yu and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5632–5633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, J. A. Libera, T. T. Fister, H. Zhou, J. K. Hedlund, P. Fenter and J. W. Elam, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1029–1039 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cinar, Z. Caldiran, C. Coskun and S. Aydoğan, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mistry, C. Allen, C. Auth, B. Beattie, D. Bergstrom, M. Bost, M. Brazier, M. Buehler, A. Cappellani and R. Chau, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2007, 247–250 CAS .
W. Cao, J. Kang, D. Sarkar, W. Liu and K. Banerjee, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2014, 30.5.1–30.5.4 Search PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, M. B. Whitwick and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9934–9938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Zou, J. L. Wang, C. H. Chiu, Y. Wu, X. H. Xiao, C. Z. Jiang, W. W. Wu, L. Q. Mai, T. S. Chen, J. C. Li, J. C. Ho and L. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, Y. H. Lee, Y. X. Lin, W. J. Fang, L. L. Yu, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 464–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sarkar, X. J. Xie, W. Liu, W. Cao, J. H. Kang, Y. J. Gong, S. Kraemer, P. M. Ajayan and K. Banerjee, Nature, 2015, 526, 91–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. M. Shi, Y. H. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. D. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, J. H. Kang, D. Sarkar, Y. Khatami, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1983–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. L. Yu, Y. H. Lee, Y. M. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L. J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Ganapathi and S. Salahuddin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3768–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Segura, F. Pomer, A. Cantarero, W. Krause and A. Chevy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1984, 29, 5708–5717 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Savitskii, Z. D. Kovalyuk and I. V. Mintyanskii, Status Solidi A: Appl. Res., 2000, 180, 523–531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Yu, Z. Y. Ong, Y. M. Pan, Y. Cui, R. Xin, Y. Shi, B. G. Wang, Y. Wu, T. S. Chen, Y. W. Zhang, G. Zhang and X. R. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 547–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Huang, J. Pu, C. L. Hsu, M. H. Chiu, Z. Y. Juang, Y. H. Chang, W. H. Chang, Y. Iwasa, T. Takenobu and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Huang, B. Chen, Y. Xia, W. Lei, Z. Wang, Q. Wang, F. Wang, L. Yin and J. He, Small, 2016, 12, 3106–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Island, S. I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7853–7858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Cui, D. D. Caudel, P. Bhattacharya, A. Burger, K. C. Mandal, D. Johnstone and S. A. Payne, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053709 CrossRef .
H. S. Lee, S. W. Min, Y. G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3695–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, M. Y. Cho, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G. B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena, J. Joo and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, C. P. Chuu, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, M. L. Tsai, Y. H. Chang, C. T. Liang, Y. Z. Chen, Y. L. Chueh, J. H. He, M. Y. Chou and L. J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 Search PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, M. Barkelid, V. Zwiller, H. S. J. van der Zant, G. A. Steele and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, D. H. Li, H. L. Zhou, C. Wang, A. X. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. S. Jie, Z. B. Shao, Q. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, Y. M. Wang, Z. Sun and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2910–2919 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Sun and H. X. Chang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4133–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. B. Zhang, T. S. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Z. X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Huang, F. M. Wang, L. Yin, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7881–7887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, M. H. Tong, Y. J. Xia, W. Z. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Manga, J. Z. Wang, M. Lin, J. Zhang, M. Nesladek, V. Nalla, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1697–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Manga, S. Wang, M. Jaiswal, Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5265–5270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Lei, F. F. Wen, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. J. Gong, W. L. Gao, Z. H. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain, C. A. Durcan, M. T. Murphy, T. M. Murray, R. J. Matyi, R. L. Moore and B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Yan, S. Fathipour, Y. M. Han, B. Song, S. D. Xiao, M. D. Li, N. Ma, V. Protasenko, D. A. Muller, D. Jena and H. G. Xing, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5791–5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. C. Chen, Y. L. Li, M. Y. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard and C. R. Dean, Science, 2013, 342, 614–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, L. Hague, O. Makarovsky, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, C. J. Mellor, P. H. Beton, L. Eaves, K. S. Novoselov, Z. D. Kovalyuk, E. E. Vdovin, A. J. Marsden, N. R. Wilson and A. Patane, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3760–3766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Chen, J. Biscaras and A. Shukla, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5981–5986 RSC .
X. Li, M.-W. Lin, J. Lin, B. Huang, A. A. Puretzky, C. Ma, K. Wang, W. Zhou, S. T. Pantelides, M. Chi, I. Kravchenko, J. Fowlkes, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501882 Search PubMed .
Z. R. Kudrynskyi, A. P. Bakhtinov, V. N. Vodopyanov, Z. D. Kovalyuk, M. V. Tovarnitskii and O. S. Lytvyn, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 465601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. C. Mandal and S. Das, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2012, pp. 000177–000180 .
X. Yuan, L. Tang, S. S. Liu, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, Y. C. Zou, C. Liu, N. Guo, J. Zou, P. Zhou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3571–3577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Liu, X. Yuan, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, L. Tang, E. Z. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, C. Liu, C. Chen, J. Zou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8592–8598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Lu, J. W. Liu, H. F. Luo, V. Chikan and J. Z. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Kai Xu	Mr Kai Xu received his bachelor's degree from the School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University, in 2011. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jun He at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST), China. His research interests focus on the synthesis, assembly and characterization of two-dimensional materials and their advanced electronics and photonics.
Jun He	Prof. He received his PhD in Semiconductor Physics from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Applied Physics Department of Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, the Netherlands, and the Materials Department of University of California, Santa Barbara, USA. From 2007 to 2010, he worked at University of California, Los Angeles, USA, as a research scientist. He joined the “100-Talents” Program of CAS in Nov. 2010 and has been a Full Professor of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST) since then.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Side and top views of fundamental InSe crystal structures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (b) Schematic representation of γ-rhombohedral InSe. In the unit cell of γ-phase, there are three layers of Se–In–In–Se monatomic sheets along the c axis. (c) PL spectra and the corresponding illustration of γ-InSe layers with various thicknesses at P = 0.1 mW, λ = 633 nm. (b–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) (d) Layered crystal structure of GaTe, where the tellurium and gallium atoms are represented by blue and yellow spheres, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (e) Four layers of In2Se3. Each single layer of In2Se3 has a thickness of about 1 nm. (f) Left panel: Raman spectra of In2Se3 at different temperatures. Right panel: the α → β phase transition temperature changed with the thickness of In2Se3. (e–f, Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic image of the experimental setting for In2Se3 nanosheets via the CVD method. (b–c) Optical images of as-grown In2Se3 nanosheets with 5 and 15 minute growth respectively. (a–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (d–e) Optical and AFM images of GaSe nanosheets synthesized by the CVD method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) (f) SEM image of GaTe nanowires. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (g) A typical SEM image of vertical GaTe nanosheets grown on a SiO2/Si substrate. (h) An optical image of planar GaTe nanosheets grown on mica. (i) The AFM image of a triangular GaTe nanosheet. (g–i, Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–b) SEM image of In2Se3 flakes grown on graphene and mica respectively. (c) Schematic image illustrating the selective-area growth of In2Se3via oxygen plasma etching. (d) Optical image of patterned In2Se3 flakes grown on modified mica. (a–d, Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) (e) Optical image of GaSe nanosheets grown on mica. (f–g) Optical image of GaSe arrays by site-selected growth. (e–g, Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) (h) Schematic image illustrating the process of microintaglio printing. (i) Optical image of Bi2Se3 crystals grown on mica at different stages. (h–i, Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.)	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM image of (a) 1D In2Te3 nanostructures and (b) a single 1D In2Te3 nanostructure grown by the solvothermal method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) TEM image of Ga2S3 nanoparticles synthesized by the solvothermal method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 Trans Tech Publications Ltd.) (d) Optical image of a typical GaS powder dispersion in 2-propanol. (e) Representative TEM image of GaS flakes exfoliated in IPA (d–e, reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (f) Scheme of InSe nanosheets grown by the ligand-templated method. (g) The corresponding TEM image of as grown InSe nanosheets. (f–g, Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) (h) Scheme and (i–j) SEM micrograph of GaS and GaSe nanotubes grown by the long-chain amine-templated method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Issues of bulk materials and (b) advantages of 2D layered materials. (c) Silicon suffers from a more serious degeneration of mobility, compared with 2D materials. (d) Schematic of 2D FETs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The PMMA/Al2O3 double layer is chosen as the dielectric, and the PMMA can screen the interfacial Coulomb scattering, such as hydroxyl groups, water and chemical absorptions. (b) Transfer and (c) output characterization of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric layer. (d) The calculated SS of multilayer InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 dielectrics is 300 mV and the on/off ratio is 108 cm2 V−1 s−1, also higher than that of multilayer MoS2 FETs. (e) Transfer characteristics of InSe FETs fabricated on Al2O3 dielectric. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-terminal and four-terminal measurements. (b) Four-terminal conductance of InSe FETs on PMMA/SiO2 at different temperatures. (c) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two- and four-terminal measurements. (d) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two-terminal measurements at different substrates. (e) Comparison of the field effect mobilities of two and four terminal measurements at Si3N4. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The FETs based on multilayer GaTe nanosheets were fabricated on SiO2 substrate. (b) The transfer characteristics of GaTe FETs were strongly affected by the environment. With the decrease of temperature, the electrical properties were further increased. (c) The transfer characteristics at various temperatures. As the temperature increased, Vth of FETs shifted to the direction of positive voltage, indicating that more carriers are generated in the GaTe channel. (d) The 2D channel density was extracted from the various-temperature transfer curve. (e) Three low-energy native defects as a function of the Te chemical potential and (f) their corresponding electronic structures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The InSe flakes can be excited in the technologically important near-infrared spectra range at room temperature, which provides more opportunities for planar device architectures and near-infrared light sensing. Few-layered InSe photodetectors were fabricated on SiO2/Si substrate. (b) The photoresponsivity can be tuned by using the drain voltage. Larger drain voltage reduces the transit time and recombination rate and thus enhances the photoresponsivity of the photodetector. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (c) The responsivity and detectivity as a function of illumination wavelength with the light intensity of 0.29 mW cm−2 at the gate voltage of 40 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) By utilizing the avalanche effect, the performances of InSe photodetectors were enhanced largely, with improved photoresponsivity, low dark currents and (e) a fast response time. A external quantum efficiency of 334% and a high avalanche gain of 47 were achieved. (f) Plasmonic Al disk nanoantennas patterned on the InSe flakes can improve the light absorption. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) GaS nanosheet photodetector fabricated on flexible PET substrates. Ultrahigh detectivity at different wavelengths was calculated in the range of 1012–1013 Jones for visible light and about 1014 Jones for ultraviolet light. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (b) GaSe nanosheets synthesized by a facile vdW epitaxy method also exhibited excellent photoresponse on flexible and transparent mica substrates, regardless of repeated bending. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Patterning 2D layered materials have a benefit for the integration of electronic optoelectronic devices. (a) Photograph and (b) OM image of the In2Se3 photodetector array. (c) Photoresponse of the In2Se3 photodetector. (d) I–V curve in the dark and under different illuminations intensities. (e) Dependence of photoresponse on light intensities. (f) Statistical distribution of photoresponsivity of In2Se3 devices. (g) Schematic of device packaging. (h) Photoresponse characterization of the packaged device. (i) Current as a function of bending cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Fabrication of vdW heterostructures by mechanical transfer and CVD methods. (a) Schematic illustrating the transfer process utilized to build graphene/h-BN heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited.) (b) Schematic illustrating the assembly procedure without using liquid. Bottom panel: Optical, AFM, and high-resolution cross section ADF-STEM image of BN/graphene/BN heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2013 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Top panel: SEM images of GaSe epilayer on graphene. Bottom panel: ADF-STEM images of 1L graphene and 1L vdW epitaxial GaSe on graphene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (d) The experimental setting for the growth and optical micrographs of 1L MoSe2 and GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.)	 

 	Fig. 13  Rectification feature, PV effect, and photoresponse of heterostructures based on group III–VI compounds. (a) SEM, AFM (inset) images, and gate-tunable rectification behavior and PV effect of GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (b) Device model of a vertical GaSe/Si heterostructure and its rectification feature and PV effect under various incident laser powers. (c) EQE under various laser powers at Vbias = 0 V, time-resolved photoresponse, and stability test of an 8-layer GaSe/Si diode. EQE is up to 23.6% and the fastest rise time can reach 60 μs. (b–c, Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of planar van der Waals graphene/InSe heterostructures, in which graphene is used as the electrode. Right panel: Photoresponsivity, band alignment of graphene/InSe/graphene and Au/InSe/Au heterostructures, as well as their work functions. (b) Schematic structures of two kinds of vertical graphene/InSe/graphene devices (type I and type II) and the photoresponsivity corresponded to type I (blue) and type II (magenta). T = 300 K, λ = 633 nm, Vs = 2 V, and Vg = 0 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Photodetectors based on graphene/InSe heterostructures. (a) Schematic diagram and optical image of the device. Reproduced with permission. (b) The corresponding band structure diagram of a graphene/InSe heterostructure at different gate voltages. (c) Photocurrent, photoresponsivity, and EQE of the device under various incident laser powers ranging between 12.6 W m−2 and 6.3 × 103 W m−2. The maximal photoresponsivity of 0.94 × 103 A W−1 and EQE of 2.18 × 105% are acquired at P = 12.6 W m−2, λ = 532 nm, Vds = −50 mV, and Vg = 0 V. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
