Prospective materials and applications for Li secondary batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00831A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00831A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1986-2002Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsProspective materials and applications for Li secondary batteries

        
          
            Goojin 
            Jeong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young-Ugk 
            Kim
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hansu 
            Kim
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Young-Jun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Hun-Joon 
            Sohn
          
          
        
      *e
aGreen Energy System Center, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeongbuk 730-701, Korea
bBattery Development Team, Samsung SDI Co., LTD., Cheonan, Chungnam 330-300, Korea
cDepartment of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Korea
dAdvanced Batteries Research Center, Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-816, Korea
eDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-744, Korea. E-mail: hjsohn@snu.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-2-880-7226
Received 
      29th December 2010
    , Accepted 11th March 2011First published on 15th April 2011Abstract
        Li-ion batteries have been employed successfully in various small electronic devices for the last two decades, and the types of applications are currently expanding to include electric vehicles (EVs), power tools, and large electric power storage units. In order to be implemented in these emerging markets, novel materials for negative and positive electrodes as well as electrolytes need to be developed to achieve high energy density, high power, and safe lithium rechargeable batteries. Here, the trends of the market and development of materials for each application are introduced, and some of next generation Li-ion batteries are discussed.Goojin JeongGoojin Jeong received his BS, MS and PhD degrees in the Department of Mineral and Petroleum Engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2001. He did his postdoctoral work at the Arizona State University (2002–2003), and also worked as a senior researcher at Battery Development Team in Samsung SDI (2003–2010). Currently he is a research professor at Green Energy System Center in Kumoh National Institute of Technology. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials related to energy conversion and storage system, and recently he focused on alternative electrode materials for Li secondary batteries.Young-Ugk KimYoung-Ugk Kim received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Utah studying nanoparticle synthesis using high temperature processes. His research interests are in the secondary battery electrode material development and, since 2006, he has been working as a Senior Researcher of Samsung SDI, the world's leading lithium secondary battery company.Hansu KimHansu Kim received his BS, MS and PhD degrees in mineral and petroleum engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2000. He joined Energy Lab. of Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology as a member of research staff in 2001 and moved to Hanyang University in 2011. Currently he is an associate professor in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and printable flexible battery for the future mobile device applications.Young-Jun KimYoung-Jun Kim is currently a director of Advanced Batteries Research Center at Korea Electronics Technology Institute. He received his BS, MS and PhD (1999) from Seoul National University. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher at Kyushu University of Japan and also worked as a research engineer at Samsung SDI and Hyundai Motor Company (2001–2006). His current research activities are focused on key materials for lithium-ion battery, redox flow battery and lithium–air battery. And he is a member of the committee to plan Korean National R&D Programs of secondary batteries.Hun-Joon SohnHun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. Also he earned PhD from University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same University and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently, he is the POSCO Chair Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials under various conditions and mainly focusing on the development and characterization of anode materials for the Li secondary batteries, recently.

Broader context
A worldwide effort to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and preserve the environment promotes the development of alternative clean energy sources, especially solar cells and wind power. These systems require energy storage units due to intermittent energy generation and consumption. Li rechargeable batteries are considered one of the most probable candidates to meet the requirements of energy storage cells, and research to develop novel electrode materials and electrolytes has been performed intensively throughout the world. This perspective article introduces the trends of emerging markets for Li secondary batteries and discusses the requirements of the materials and technological issues to be solved for Li secondary batteries to be implemented in these new applications, such as EVs and large electrical power storage systems. Since the requirements for each application are different, material problems for next generation high capacity Li–air and Li–S batteries and high power Li rechargeable batteries are reviewed and discussed. Also, recent progress with respect to thin and flexible, all-solid-state, and 3-dimensional (3D) Li batteries for future applications in information technology is introduced in this paper.

1. Introduction
Modern electricity-based society has to simultaneously overcome many dilemmas, such as securing natural resources, preserving the natural environment, and maintaining economic growth. These factors are very closely interrelated, and economic growth tends to cause environmental pollution and global warming due to the excessive consumption of limited fossil fuel, and this drives the world to seek next generation energy sources. The use of alternative energy sources, such as nuclear, solar, and wind power, to reduce CO2 emissions requires devices to store the electric energy generated by these power plants. One of the most viable candidates for such devices is Li-ion batteries, which were commercialized by Sony in the early 1990s,1 and the last two decades have witnessed the dramatic growth in sales of Li-ion batteries close to 10 billion dollars in 2009.2
In general, Li-ion batteries use Li ions to be intercalated into graphite anodes from layered LiCoO2 cathodes through a non-aqueous Li-ion-containing organic electrolyte during charge and the process is reversed during discharge (Fig. 1).3 A tutorial review in this field with an emphasis on the basic chemistry of Li-ion batteries as well as other battery systems is available in the recent literature.3Li-ion batteries have been employed mainly for small electronic devices, such as cellular phones, laptop computers, and camcorders, and have expanded their usage into more large units including several types of EVs, robots, power tools, and electric power storage units. The demand for safe Li-ion batteries with large gravimetric and volumetric energy densities is continuously increasing, and the search for new electrode materials and electrolytes has been carried out around the world to displace the currently employed materials. In order to meet the requirements in newly generated markets, especially for the large scale battery units, various factors have to be considered,4 such as high power, long cycle and shelf life (sometimes under extreme conditions), and low cost. Beside these, safety, eco-friendliness, and a high rate capability must be taken into account for such batteries to be implemented successfully in several types of EVs.
 Fig. 1  The principle of operation of the first commercialized lithium-ion batteries. Lithium ions migrate back and forth between anode and cathode upon discharging/charging via the electrolyte, electrons do so similarly via the outer electrical circuit (© The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).3 
In this perspective article, the recent progress and technical issues with respect to electrode materials and applications of next generation Li secondary battery systems are discussed. Also, some of the new battery systems and their possible applications are introduced.
2. General trend of Li rechargeable battery market and development
As the use of information technology (IT) devices has been popular in our daily lives, the need for the development of safe and longer lasting rechargeable batteries has greatly increased. Recently, Li-ion batteries have been the leading rechargeable battery and the market for Li-ion batteries has been continuously growing with the rapid development of mobile electronic devices (Fig. 2). The progress of Li-ion battery technology for mobile applications is closely related with the increase in the 18650 cylindrical-type cell capacity. As shown in Fig. 3, the continuous capacity increase of 18650 cylindrical-type cells could be attributed to the increase of the active material capacity and the electrode energy density, and the efficient use of the cells' extra interior space. However, the safety of the cells deteriorated to cause several accidents and battery industries tend to focus on safety issues rather than on increase in the cell capacity. Mobile IT device markets have attracted public attention due to the advent of smart phones and tablet PCs. Most of these companies are developing IT devices with new functions and fancy designs, and, accordingly, there are increasing demands for new types of rechargeable batteries, such as flexible and thin film batteries that also have high energy densities (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 2  
          Li-ion battery market demand due to mobile IT devices. 
 Fig. 3  Trend of capacity and energy density increase in 18650 cylindrical-type Li-ion batteries. 
 Fig. 4  Trends in the development of mobile IT devices and related power source types (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology). 
EVs came into the market with the mass production of hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) models, such as the Prius (Toyota Motor Corp.) and Insight (Honda Motor Company) in 1997. Ni–metal hydride (Ni–MH) batteries had been used for most of the HEVs before the Elantra hybrid (Hyundai Motor Company) adopted Li-ion polymer batteries from LG Chem. for its HEV models in 2009. HEVs have a limited impact on the fuel efficiency and on the reduction of CO2 emissions because rechargeable batteries are used as auxiliary power sources. On the other hand, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) are driven by electricity only from high-capacity batteries so they receive much more attention as environmentally friendly vehicles. Representative PHEV models are the Chevrolet Volt (General Motors, Battery supplier: LG Chem) and Stellar (Subaru Motors). General driving ranges for PHEVs with only electricity from rechargeable batteries are currently 10–40 miles. Except for the Toyota Prius (PHEV 10 mile by Ni–MH batteries), most of the developed PHEVs have more than 20 mile driving ranges. Since the batteries for PHEVs require more than 5 times the battery capacity compared to HEVs while having limited space, only high-capacity Li rechargeable batteries can meet the energy needs of the vehicles. High-capacity Li batteries can be realized by the development of high capacity electrode materials and increasing operating voltages. In the mean time, much effort is also devoted to reduce the cost and to improve the safety of batteries.
The commercialization of fully battery powered electric vehicle (pure EV) is progressing rapidly. The representative EV models are the Leaf (Renault-Nissan Alliance) and i MiEV (Mitsubishi Motor Corp.), which also employed Li rechargeable batteries. Due to the limited energy density of Li-ion batteries, the driving ranges of EVs are 100–150 km, which are much lower than those of current internal-combustion engine vehicles (approximately 500 km). Although much effort has been made to develop high-energy density Li-ion batteries, maximum driving ranges based on current Li-ion battery technology are 200–300 km. Ni–MH batteries currently are dominant for HEVs, except for lead acid batteries in rechargeable battery markets for motor vehicles; it is evident that the Li-ion batteries with high energy densities and rate capabilities will be a main power source for electric vehicles. Fig. 5(a) shows the speculative annual light-duty vehicle (LDV) sales by technology type to achieve a BLUE Map scenario for a 50% reduction in global energy-related CO2 emissions by 2050 compared to 2005 levels.5PHEV and pure EV technologies for LDVs have evolved rapidly, and they are expected to begin to penetrate the market soon after 2010, with pure EV and PHEV sales reaching 2.5 and 5 million vehicles per year by 2020, respectively. With this prospect, the demands of Li-ion batteries for PHEVs and pure EVs are expected to increase rapidly because there are no alternatives in terms of the energy density.
 Fig. 5  Market prospect of (a) eco-friendly cars (© OECD/IEA, reprinted with permission)5 and (b) power storage (Pike Research, reprinted with permission)6 (CNG: compressed natural gas, LPG: liquefied petroleum gas, NAS: Na–S battery, Pumped Hydro: pumped-storage hydroelectricity, CAES: compressed air energy storage). 
As the power generation from renewable energy sources, such as solar cells and wind power, has recently increased, there are rising demands for power storage units which supplement irregular power generation and consumption patterns and also realize the future power network system, such as the Smart Grid. Specifications of rechargeable batteries for power storage vary with the type of use, and rechargeable batteries for power storage should have a very high capacity (MW h level) except for home use. Rechargeable batteries with a good rate capability and rapid response property are appropriate for smoothing short time power variation, such as through frequency regulation, and Li-ion batteries have been recently employed for this application. On the other hand, high capacity rechargeable batteries are required for load leveling purposes, and relatively cheap batteries, such as Na–S and redox flow batteries, can be used to repeat a charge/discharge cycle within a few hours. The market for power storage applications is at the initial stage and is worth approximately 2 billion dollars, but it is expected to grow explosively up to 35 billion dollars by 2020 with an expansion of renewable energy supplies and the Smart Grid system6 (Fig. 5(b)). The market share of rechargeable batteries in power storage applications will be dependent on their long-term reliability and price competitiveness.
3. Technical issues for each application

Fig. 6 shows the three main applications of lithium rechargeable batteries and the corresponding battery features/performances required for each application. The diagram in the hexagon indicates that the importance of each factor is more critical the further away from the center it is.
 Fig. 6  Three main applications of Li rechargeable batteries. 
For mobile devices, the volumetric energy density of prismatic Li-ion batteries increased two or three times during the past 15 years (about 600 W h L−1 (2009)).7 Existing Li-ion batteries still have not met the needed power, and the discrepancy between the energy stored in the Li-ion battery and power consumption of mobile devices might increase in the near future.8 As shown in Fig. 7, the required power for mobile devices is predicted to increase about 20% per year, while the annual advancement in the energy density of Li-ion batteries is expected to be 10% per year. Unfortunately, current Li-ion batteries already reached their technological limit.9 Nexelion, which was developed by Sony and was the first commercialized Li-ion battery that adopted a Li-alloy anode material, is a good example to show how a higher energy density Li-ion battery system was achieved by replacing the graphite anode material with a Sn-based amorphous alloy–carbon nanocomposite to provide about a 30% longer life-time.10 However, some technical issues remained for employing high capacity electrode materials, such as Si-based anode materials, and high energy density cathode materials, such as layered mixed oxides like Li2MnO3–LiMO2 (M: Co, Ni, Fe, Cr, etc.).11
 Fig. 7  Comparison of the increase of power required for mobile electronic devices and the actual increase of battery power (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology). 

        Li-ion batteries started to penetrate the power tools market although Ni–MH and Ni–Cd batteries are still the major power sources. As shown in Fig. 6, the key requirements of batteries for power tools are slightly different from those for portable electronic devices, and the rate capability that enables a device to draw high discharge currents during operation is the most important factor. Due to its relatively high energy density, no memory effect, and low self-discharge rate, Li-ion batteries should have already replaced other battery systems used for power tools. However, the use of Li-ion battery as a power source for power tools was hindered by the potential safety problems of Li-ion batteries, particularly under high current conditions. One of the successful approaches to simultaneously obtain a high power capability as well as ensure the safety of Li-ion batteries was to re-design the battery by minimizing the cell impedance and employing safer electrode materials.7,12 But these strategies sacrificed about half the energy density of the Li-ion batteries, although the gravimetric density of Li-ion batteries for power tools (about 94 W h kg−1) is much higher than those of Ni–Cd (35 W h kg−1) and Ni–MH (47 W h kg−1) batteries.13 Future research efforts to utilize the full potential of Li-ion batteries and to lower the safety risks further are undoubtedly essential for Li-ion batteries to become a dominant power source for power tools.
Intensive research efforts on battery-powered EVs have been devoted to developing electric power trains including electric motors and electrical power storage systems to replace internal combustion engines. Although Li-ion battery systems have high energy densities, high specific powers (300 W kg−1), and relatively long cycle lives (∼1000 cycles),14–17 there is a substantial gap between the performance of existing Li-ion battery technology and the battery requirements for EVs' goals as shown in Table 1.18 It should be noted that both energy density and specific power must be simultaneously attained for PHEVs. For pure EV applications, the gravimetric energy density of the battery should be increased seven-fold, which is beyond the theoretical limit of Li-ion batteries (about 250 W h kg−1).19Li rechargeable battery systems that use metallic Li as an anode, such as Li–Air and Li–S batteries, are being regarded as the most promising candidates to achieve this goal,19,20 and a detailed discussion will be given in the next section. Another issue is reducing the production cost of Li-ion batteries, although the cost of the battery will come down with the increase in production volume. Much concern is also being expressed about potential safety problems of Li rechargeable batteries for EVs, because safety risks will be magnified with the size increase of the batteries. Various approaches towards improving the safety of lithium rechargeable batteries have been suggested and some of them are as follows: modification of the electrolyte using chemical additives; the use of a modified separator and improved design of the battery pack; and the proof of safety of the battery.7
Table 1 Required performance and cost of batteries with respect to battery-powered electric vehicle applications




 
Year


2010
2015
2020
2030




Application
Advanced HEV

                  PHEV
                
Advanced PHEV
Pure EV



Performance

1
×1.5
×3
×7


Energy density/W h kg−1
70
100
200
700


Specific power/W kg−1
2000
2000
2500
1000


Cost ($ per kW h)
1220
370
240
60





        Li-ion batteries are also considered the most probable candidates for large scale electrical power storage systems for the purpose of improving the power quality for high-end use reliability and supporting neighborhood grids.21,22 One of the main concerns in Li-ion batteries for stationary electrical power storage is also their high production cost of more than $600 per kW h, which arises from large scale battery packs containing mechanical/electrical units for improved safety as well as from simply producing large-scale Li-ion battery cells. Although highly safe electrode materials, such as LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Mn, etc.) and Li4Ti5O12, can significantly improve battery safety, they have disadvantages, such as lower capacity and working potential than currently used electrode materials for Li-ion batteries. In this regard, all-solid-state Li rechargeable batteries have recently gained attention as alternatives to ultimately eliminate the safety problems of Li rechargeable batteries.23 On the other hand, relatively cheap battery systems, such as Na–S and redox flow batteries, have also been studied as alternatives to Li rechargeable batteries.24,25
In this section, three main applications of Li-ion batteries and their requirements with the related technical issues are briefly discussed. High energy density and high power Li-ion batteries are commonly required for these applications, and safety and cost-down issues should also be addressed for the success of Li-ion batteries in these promising application markets.
4. Perspective on next generation rechargeable Li batteries
4.1. High energy Li rechargeable batteries

4.1.1. Li-alloy anode based Li-ion batteries. 
Li-alloy materials are the most promising anodes for the replacement of graphite because they can store a large amount of lithium which results in higher specific capacities: 993 mA h g−1 for Li4.4Sn and 3590 mA h g−1 for Li3.75Si, vs. 372 mA h g−1 for LiC6 (Fig. 8).3,26 Also, Li-alloy anodes exhibit moderate operating potentials below 1 V (vs. Li+/Li Si: 0.4–0.5 V and Sn: 0.5–0.6 V).
 Fig. 8  Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), Si (Li3.75Si), Sn (Li4.4Sn), Al (LiAl), P (Li3P), and Sb (Li3Sb). The volume expansion of the lithiated phases was considered in calculating the volumetric capacities. 
There are numerous metals and metalloids that can be alloyed with Li electrochemically. Mostly, they are elements from group III (B, Al, Ga, and In), group IV (Si, Ge, Sn, and Pb), and group V (P, As, Sb, and Bi) in the periodic table. Additionally, Mg, Ca, Zn, Cd, Pd, Ag, Au, and Pt also can be alloyed with Li. The reaction mechanism and electrochemical performances of these alloying elements were reviewed in detail, recently.27 However, only a few elements (Si, Sn, Al, Sb, and P) have been widely investigated because they are cheap, abundant, and environmentally friendly, and especially, Si and Sn have been intensively focused on because of their promising electrochemical properties, such as the large capacities and moderate operating potentials.
The first use of Li-alloy anodes in commercial batteries was the employment of an alloy of lead, cadmium, and indium in coin-type cells developed by Matsushita.28 The main problem associated with the use of Li-alloys in rechargeable batteries is the large volume change (three times in some cases29,30) from the pure metals to the lithiated alloys while the expansion of Li-intercalated graphite, LiC6, is below 10%.31 Consequently, the repeated volumetric change during cycling generates stresses in the electrodes, and results in cracking and fracturing of the active materials to cause the deterioration of the anodes through loosening of the electrical network in the electrodes. Research and development of Li-alloy anodes has been accelerating with the advance of nanotechnology since Fuji announced amorphous tin composite oxide (ATCO) as an anode material in 1997.32 Generally, the nanostructured active materials have several advantages:33,34 they enable electrode reactions to occur, which cannot take place for micron-sized materials,35 and they can decrease the diffusion length of Li ions during cycling which remarkably improves the rate performance of the electrode material.36 In addition, the nanostructured Li-alloy materials render the discrete phase transitions that accompany alloy formation more facile, and reduce fracturing of the electrodes.37,38
One of the approaches for nanostructuring the Li-alloy anode materials is a nanocomposite material which can be classified into the following three categories: (i) active/inactive nanocomposite, (ii) all-active multiphase composite, and (iii) carbon-based composite. The basic concept of the active/inactive nanocomposite is that Li-active domains are dispersed within a Li-inactive matrix buffering the large volume change of the active domains. Also, the matrix prevents the aggregation of the active nano-domain, which may occur during cycling. In the case of an all-active multiphase composite, the strong expansion of a more reactive phase in the composite can be buffered by a less active matrix to minimize the extent of mechanical degradation in the overall electrode material. Carbon-based composites use a matrix, such as graphite or pyrolyzed carbon, to replace the inactive matrix, and some promising results have been obtained in terms of initial coulombic efficiency (ICE), high reversible capacity, and cycling stability. Carbon is expected to play an important role in electrode reliability owing to its relative softness, small volume change during Li insertion, and good electronic conductivity.
Numerous nanocomposite materials have been reported,27 including amorphous Sn-based oxides,32Sn2Fe,39SnCo,40,41Si–Al–M (M = Fe, Mn, Ni, Cr),42 and SiO43,44 for use in active/inactive nanocomposites, SnSb,45SnAg46 and AlSb47 for all-active multiphase composites, and Sn–C,48 Si–C,49 and SiO–C43,50 for carbon-based composites. Most intermetallic compounds follow the reaction mechanism of the active/inactive or all-active nanocomposite materials. However, there are some intermetallic compounds, such as Mg2Si,51Mg2Sn,52Cu6Sn5,53 and Cu2Sb,54 exhibiting an additional distinct reaction mechanism similar to a topotactic reaction which provides relatively stable cycle performance within the limited potential window. But such intermetallic compounds exhibited the same reaction mechanism with the active/inactive or all-active nanocomposite in the case of further Li insertion.
Among these, the SiO–C composite material has been considered as a promising high capacity anode material.43,44,50,55,56 And recently, Hitachi Maxell announced the commercialization of high-capacity Li-ion batteries employing SiO as a part of the anode composition.57,58SiO is regarded as a nanometre-scale mixture of nanocrystalline Si and amorphous SiO2 or other suboxides, in which the nanocrystalline Si phase acts as an active material, and the amorphous SiO2 or other suboxides produce Li2O or Li–silicate compounds that are expected to play a matrix role for the alleviation of volume changes. However, the Li2O or Li–silicate compounds are irreversible phases and result in a low ICE. To enhance the ICE as well as the cycling performance, much research is still being carried out, including research on an intimate carbon composite43 or carbon coating,50 as well as research on matrix modification by partial reduction.56
Another way of nanostructuring the Li-alloy materials is to control the size and shape of the particles, such as nanowires or nanotubes, accommodating a large stress and strain without cracking which improve the rate performance remarkably.37,59,60 Song et al.59 reported an array of tubular nanostructure form of Si which was capable of accommodating large volume changes. Such electrodes exhibit a high ICE (i.e., >85%) and stable capacity retention (>80% after 50 cycles) due to an unusual underlying mechanics dominated by free surfaces. This was manifested by a large anisotropic expansion in which a 400% volumetric increase was accommodated with only relatively small (<35%) changes in the axial dimension. These experimental results and the associated theoretical mechanics model demonstrated that the nano-scale engineering of electrode geometry can be used to advance the designs of rechargeable batteries with highly reversible capacities and long-term cycle stabilities.
The recent advances achieved with silicon and tin compounds have prompted research on group V elements known as pnicogens (P, As, Sb, and Bi, but not N) or their related compounds. The pnicogen elements have interesting crystalline structures comprised of puckered layer planes27 which provide available paths for facile lithium diffusion. Also, the group V elements have low atomic packing factors (P (ca. 30%), As (ca. 35%), Sb (ca. 39%), and Bi (ca. 41%))61 indicating that these elements have large voids for the accommodation of Li ions. They can form rich alloy phases with Li (Li3P, Li3As, Li3Sb, and Li3Bi), which provide high capacities when used as anodes in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 8). Additionally, there are many binary compounds with other metals and many works have reported using pnicogen-based intermetallic compounds62–68 and nanocomposite materials69–71 as anodes in Li-ion batteries. As one of the interesting materials, a black P with an orthorhombic layer structure synthesized by high energy mechanical milling from amorphous red P was reported.69 The black phosphorus/carbon nanocomposite exhibited a remarkably enhanced ICE (90%) as well as a specific capacity and cycle performance. Also, a vanadium phosphide (VP) anode exhibited the topotactic insertion/extraction of lithium ions without control of the voltage windows; in addition, a high volumetric capacity of 1452 mA h cm−3 and an excellent capacity retention of approximately 80% over 250 cycles were also observed.63 There are numerous reports on pnicogen-based materials that have been studied for high-performance anode materials. Although they have drawbacks that include low electrical conductivities and relatively high operating potentials around 1.0 V (vs. Li+/Li), they have interesting crystalline structures and high volumetric capacities. Proper nanostructuring and intimate carbon composites may enable pnicogen-based materials to facilitate the design of new concept anodes that have good electrochemical properties.
The advantage of Li-alloys over graphite anodes with respect to the energy density is evident as exemplified by Sony's Nexelion10 and Hitachi Maxell.57,58 Although recent progress in anodes based on Li-alloys and their related composites has been made, intensive research efforts are still necessary with respect to material and electrode design. In addition, further improvements associated with safety issues under extreme conditions and high rate capabilities are also needed. Understanding of the electrode/electrolyte interface property and cell engineering also remain to be pursued for the higher energy density batteries that may be applied to large-scale applications.


4.1.2. Li-metal anode-based rechargeable batteries. 

            Li metal has been regarded as the anode of choice because of its lowest potential as well as a large theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1). These features enable the highest cell voltage when coupling with a certain positive electrode and high energy density compared to other anode materials. Li metal has been used as an anode for the Li primary batteries since the early 1970s.72–74 Moli Energy (Canada) announced the first commercial Li metal secondary battery that would be released to the market in 1989. However, after one of the batteries caught fire, the company found that the battery had fatal safety problems with repeated cycling, and recalled all the sold batteries.75
The difficulties associated with the use of Li metal originate from its high reactivity with the organic electrolyte and the dimensional changes with repetitive electrochemical cycling. When Li is electrodeposited onto a Li metal electrode during a recharge step, it exhibits a filamentary and in some cases a dendritic deposit resulting in an abrupt increase of new surface area causing the increase in reactivity.76–78 Normally the thermal stability of lithium metal already covered with a Li compound (generally oxide, hydroxide, and carbonate) is not critical in many organic electrolytes since the amount of heat generated due to the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is small up to temperatures near the melting point of Li (180 °C). But the increase in fresh new surface areas generated during cycling causes the increase in reactivity and lowers the thermal stability of the system, and the battery becomes increasingly sensitive to abuse when cycled. Besides, the shape change of the Li metal electrode induces a distortion of the electrode-separator assembly, a so-called “jelly roll,” and this may lead to the internal short-circuit of the cell. Another drawback is the low cycling efficiency of the Li metal electrode.79,80 When the Li is stripped and deposited during repetitive cycling, a new Li surface is exposed and again passivated with a new SEI film, and Li is continuously consumed. Because of the mossy deposit, some of the Li becomes electrochemically unavailable (dead Li) on repeated cycling since it would lose the contact with the current collector, so an excess amount of Li is required to obtain a reasonable cycle life.80
To overcome these problems, researchers have tried to modify the properties of the surface film to stabilize the morphological change of the Li metal electrode to improve the cycling efficiency and safety. For example, LiF formation on the surface of the Li electrode through the electrolyte salt, LiPF6, or HF addition gives a good protective ability,81,82 and also a small amount of metallic salt, such as Al, Mg, and Sn, can be helpful by decreasing the interfacial resistance.76,83 Many studies to find proper electrolyte compositions have been performed. One alternate solution proposed was to use a solid polymer electrolyte which was less reactive with Li. However, the surface control of the Li anode is not technically solved yet, limiting the commercialization of batteries with Li anodes.


4.1.3. 
            Li–air battery. 
To achieve high capacity rechargeable batteries, the concept of traditional metal–air batteries has been introduced to the Li–metal based systems.84 Metal–air batteries, which are aqueous systems, have been studied for many years since their specific capacities are extremely high.85 Unlike conventional battery systems, the cathodic reactant, O2 from air, does not have to be stored inside the battery and this fact significantly reduces the total mass and volume of the battery. However, since these are aqueous systems, their specific energies are generally low due to their low operating cell voltage (under 2 V). The concept of replacing these metals with Li offers significant advantages, and Li–air batteries can deliver a very large theoretical energy density (5210 W h kg−1 including oxygen, and 11140 W h kg−1 excluding oxygen) compared to other energy storage devices.
The first Li–air battery in an organic electrolyte was reported in 1996 by Abraham and Jiang86 followed by several research groups. The schematic diagram of the Li–air battery system is presented in Fig. 9 and the reactions which occur inside the battery are as follows: 2Li + O2 → Li2O2, Eo = 3.10 V(1) 4Li + O2 → Li2O, Eo = 2.91 V(2)
 Fig. 9  Schematics of four different architectures of Li–air batteries (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).19 
In the initially proposed Li–air batteries, the discharge product, Li2O2 or Li2O, was not soluble in the organic electrolyte, and it blocked the porous air electrode, continuously inducing the degradation of cell performance. To remove these undesirable reaction products, recent studies on the aqueous electrolyte for the cathode side have been performed because these oxides are generally highly soluble in aqueous solutions. Similar approaches, i.e. employing solid electrolytes protecting the Li metal anode, have been also reported.87,88 Though the improved cycle performance can be achieved with the aqueous electrolyte, it raised a safety concern because of the co-existence of Li and water in the cell. Due to the complexity of the cell structure and the need for a Li metal anode with excess Li for the improved cyclability, there remained concerns despite the high capacities of the Li–air battery systems.89
Performance of the cathode is another important issue to be solved. Due to the large potential hysteresis of oxygen reduction and oxidation, the energy efficiency of the Li–air batteries is generally much lower than that of Li-ion batteries. Early stage Li–air batteries used carbonaceous materials with high surface areas as cathodes without any further treatment. However, these cathodes exhibited low energy efficiencies and were vulnerable to the clogging by the product; recent approaches for cathode modification are mainly focused on efficient metallic oxide catalyst development and the optimization of the cathode structure.
Ogasawara et al. reported the electrochemical charging and discharging of Li2O2 in the presence of an electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD) catalyst in which they observed that the enhanced decomposition of Li2O2 during electrochemical charging and cycling was sustained for many cycles.90 Other oxide catalysts were also tested, including α-MnO2, Fe oxides, Cu oxides, Co oxides, and mixed metal perovskite La0.8Sr0.2MnO3.91–93 Lu et al. reported noble metal-based catalysts that could greatly influence the discharge and charge potentials of Li–air batteries. They synthesized Au and Pt nanoparticle composites for the cathode and achieved 77% energy return as electricity during discharge compared to that of the energy used to charge the battery.94
Many researchers pointed out that the reduction of the Li2O2 was largely influenced by the depth of discharge, and good capacity retention on cycling and the cyclability were limited by the porosity of the electrode. Therefore, an optimized air electrode structure including oxygen micro-channels and an engineered porosity distribution can significantly reduce the oxygen depletion and improve cathode utilization. Recently, Zhang et al. tried to enhance the cathode performance using a single-wall nanotube (SWNT)/carbon nanofiber (CNF) composite as the cathode electrode and identified that the high porosity at the air side delayed pore blocking.95


4.1.4. Li–S battery. 

            Sulfur is a very abundant and cheap element, and each S atom can uptake two Li atoms, so S electrodes can deliver much higher capacities compared to conventional transition metal oxide cathodes. Li–S batteries had gained much attention through the late 1990's and the early 2000's since Polyplus (USA) announced its new battery system. But its discharge potential was relatively low, and unlike transition metal oxide, there is no Li source in a S cathode. When a S electrode is coupled with a Li metal anode, the battery yields a 2 V system with a high energy density characteristic.
During discharging, S reacts with Li to form Li2S through various intermediate polysulfides such as Li2S2, Li2S3, Li2S4, Li2S6, and Li2S8. Unlike S and Li2S, these polysulfides are soluble in the electrolyte and cause irreversible loss of active S material causing degradation of cycle performance.96,97 Another undesirable characteristic is the low electrical conductivity of the S cathode, and generally a large amount of conducting agents, such as carbon or transition metals, is used which leads to the loss of energy density for Li–S batteries. Also, safety concerns coming from the high flammability of S and high reactivity of Li metal also need to be overcome.
Previously, researchers had focused on either protecting the Li anode or minimizing the dissolution of the sulfur cathode as polysulfide anions. Thus, gel electrolytes and solid electrolytes were actively studied to retard the loss of S. Recent researchers, however, have turned their attention to cathode modifications. Recently, Ji et al. suggested the use of a mesopore of carbon on cathodes as a container of S through milling and a heat treatment process (Fig. 10).98 Also, the surface was functionalized and coated with polyethylene glycol to trap the polysulfides further in the cathode. Zhang et al. also synthesized a S–carbon sphere composite encapsulating S into micropores of carbon spheres by a thermal treatment of a mixture of sublimed S and carbon spheres which could achieve a long electrochemical stability of up to 500 cycles.99 Liang et al. employed a composite cathode material using bimodal porous carbon material as a template. The nanostructured sulfur–carbon composite cathode significantly improved the cyclability of the Li–S battery and the utilization of S during cycles. This composite cathode possessed a high ionic conductivity and exhibited a higher energy density and power than the cathodes made of mesoporous carbon or microporous carbon.100
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of (a) the structure and (b) redox processes of a mesoporous carbon/sulfur composite cathode (© Nature publishing group, reprinted with permission).98 

4.2. High power Li rechargeable battery

          Graphite has been employed as an anode material in most Li-ion batteries although numerous carbonaceous materials have been studied. Recently, other novel nanostructured carbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),101,102fullerenes,103 and graphene sheets,104 have been suggested as electrode materials for not only Li-ion batteries but also Li-ion capacitors. Li-ion capacitors offer an attractive alternative to conventional electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), which could increase the cell voltage, and further improve the energy and power densities by combining a battery-like electrode with a capacitor-like electrode in the same cell.105 The wide electrochemical potential window, chemical stability, and large surface area given by the nanostructured carbon materials are very attractive properties for high power applications.106,107
Even though they exhibit the promising high-rate capability, they still have serious problems of a large irreversible capacity during the 1st cycle and severe voltage hysteresis. At this stage, the nanostructured carbon anode materials do not seem to offer much advantage to be applied in Li-ion batteries for large-scale high power applications, so we mainly focused on titanium-based oxides and other transition metal oxides for anode materials. Also, Li–metal phosphates and 5 V cathode materials are discussed below with respect to high-power applications.

4.2.1. 
            Ti-based oxide anode materials for Li-ion batteries. 

            Ti-based oxide anode materials have attracted much attention due to their advantages, which include excellent stability, low cost, and being environmentally benign.108 In particular, Li4Ti5O12 has been intensively studied as a promising anode to meet the requirements for EVs and large scale electrical power storage systems.109–112Li4Ti5O12 has a defect spinel structure (Li[Li1/3Ti5/3]O4), and can reversibly accommodate Li to yield a rock salt type phase of Li2[Li1/3Ti5/3]O4 at approximately 1.55 V vs. Li+/Li. Since the crystal parameters between Li[Li1/3Ti5/3]O4 and Li2[Li1/3Ti5/3]O4 are almost identical with each other, this material provides a “zero-strain” system.111
Despite its low specific capacity of 175 mA h g−1 and low operating cell voltage (2.5 V with LiCoO2 cathode),113Li4Ti5O12 has some promising merits including: (i) a long cycle life arising from its zero-strain system; (ii) enhanced safety without Li plating on the electrode; and (iii) enhanced high rate capability due to its nanostructuring. In addition, there is little electrolyte decomposition due to its higher equilibrium potential. Unfortunately, the Li4Ti5O12 material has a low electrical conductivity.114 Several methods have been suggested to enhance the electrical conductivity, and the most common methods include reducing the particle size112,115,116 and surface coating with a conductive material.117–122 There are many reports on the synthesis of nano-sized Li4Ti5O12 particles, which exhibited an improved rate capability.115,116 However, these nanomaterials have some disadvantages which include low packing densities resulting in low volumetric energy densities, which may not meet the energy requirement for EVs. They also may have the low processability of homogeneously dispersed slurries and electrode fabrication. Surface coatings with highly conductive phases have so far been reported with various materials that include carbon,118,121silver,117copper,122 TiN,119 and organic compounds.120 The first commercialized high-rate Li-ion batteries employing the Li4Ti5O12 anode was the SCiB (Super Charge ion Batteries) by Toshiba.123,124 More than 90% of the battery capacity can be charged within 5 minutes and the batteries had exceptional long cycle lives with only 10% capacity loss after 3000 charge/discharge cycles. These batteries also exhibited a high level of safety even if an internal short circuit was forced. The presently commercialized SCiB unit cell has a nominal voltage of 2.4 V with a capacity of 4.2 A h and delivers ca. 900 W kg−1 of power density and 67 W h kg−1 of energy density. Higher power and energy densities of SCiB are being developed for future HEV and PHEV applications.

            TiO2 has been attractive as an alternative to Li4Ti5O12 due to its relatively larger specific capacity up to its theoretical value of 335 mA h g−1 if it could be lithiated to the rock salt composition LiTiO2. There are various TiO2 polymorphs, such as α-TiO2, rutile, anatase, brookite, hollandite, ramsdellite, and TiO2–B (bronze-type), and their electrochemical properties, except for α-TiO2, have been reported.125–133 Among them, anatase-nanostructured TiO2, such as in the form of a nanotube (238 mA h g−1 at a rate of 36 mA g−1),125,130,131 nano-rod,133 or nano-porous structure,126 and TiO2–B are generally accepted as promising candidates for anode materials.
Recently, a TiO2–B anode comprised of nanowires and nanotubes demonstrated a high capacity of more than 300 mA h g−1 and an excellent rate capability.130,131 Armstrong et al.131 demonstrated the fuel cell performance of TiO2–B with LiFePO4 or LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as a cathode; average cell voltages of approximately 2 or 3 V were obtained, respectively, with remarkable cycle performances. The excellent rate capability was also confirmed when 80% of the low-rate capacity was retained at 5 C, demonstrating the superior rate performance compared to similar fuel cells constructed using Li4Ti5O12; although further improvements are needed to increase the volumetric energy density due to the relatively low density of TiO2–B (3.73 g cm−3).134 The steadily improving performances of Li4Ti5O12 and TiO2 through nanostructuring combined with their inherently favorable safety make these nanostructured Ti-based oxides as promising materials for anodes of Li-ion batteries.


4.2.2. Other transition metal oxide anodes. 
Besides the Li4Ti5O12 and TiO2 materials, there are some other metal oxides in which Li ions can be inserted and extracted, such as MoOx,135–138WO2,139 and Fe2O3.140Molybdenum dioxide (MoO2) with a distorted rutile structure is an unusual and attractive transition metal oxide because of its high metallic electrical conductivity (1.1 × 104 S cm−1 at 300 K) and high chemical stability.141 The bulky polycrystalline MoO2 accommodates Li ions through the insertion reaction mechanism that forms LixMoO2 (0 < x < 1) with a theoretical capacity of about 209 mA h g−1 (LiMoO2). Although MoO2 exhibits a relatively larger capacity and operating potential comparable to Li4Ti5O12, the phase transition of LixMoO2 from a monoclinic phase (0 < x < 0.5) to an orthorhombic phase (0.45< x < 0.79) was believed to cause a poor cycle performance.135,142 However, the electrochemical properties of nanostructured MoO2, similar to TiO2,127 demonstrated both a high capacity and excellent cycle performance136,137 due to the facile charge transfer kinetics and a more open structure to facilitate solid-state diffusion of lithium and oxygen. Recently, ordered mesoporous nanosized MoO2 prepared by a hard templating exhibited similar results including a kinetically hindered conversion reaction of the MoO2 electrode with lithium at room temperature.138
The charge and discharge reaction of Li4Ti5O12, TiO2, and some other transition oxides are based on the insertion mechanism using crystallographic voids. However, large reversible capacities of transition metal oxides with interstitial-free 3d-metal oxide structures unsuitable for insertion electrochemistry have been reported recently as alternatives for anode materials in Li-ion batteries143,144 employing the conversion reaction as follows:MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O (M: transition metal)
The electrochemistry of the conversion reaction utilizes all the possible oxidation states of the transition metal component, and enables attaining high energy densities of the electrodes. These transition metal oxides exhibited high reversible capacities of 400–1000 mA h g−1 and good cyclic performances with an average operating potential of 1.8–2.0 V vs. Li+/Li.143–148 The microstructure of the lithiated phase exhibited a transition metal/Li2O nanocomposite in which 2–5 nm of metal were embedded in an amorphous Li2O matrix. The metallic nanoparticles were very active with respect to the decomposition of the Li2O matrix owing to the large interfacial surface, which results in the reversible electrochemical reactivity of Li2O at room temperature. Starting with the CoO anode reported by Tarascon's group,143 various transition metal oxides (e.g., FeO,145NiO,146MnO,147CuO,148etc.) have been suggested as alternative anode materials. Also, these investigations brought about much interest in reversible conversion reactions in other binary M–X compounds with X = N, F, S, P, and even H (i.e.hydride).144,149 Despite their large specific capacities and good cycling performance, these transition metal oxides are still not applicable for commercial use due to (i) their high operating potentials as an anode, (ii) low ICE, and (iii) the large potential hysteresis observed between the discharge and charge steps. For transition metal oxides with conversion reactions, more scientific breakthroughs seem to be necessary to understand the electrochemical hysteresis behavior and to resolve their problematic issues.


4.2.3. 
            LiFePO4 and other lithium metal phosphate cathodes. 
When used in batteries with the higher rate capabilities required in EVs and power tool applications, LiCoO2 develops an unstable structure, especially when it is delithiated at high current densities, and can be decomposed to liberate oxygen. The exothermic reaction can escalate in higher temperatures causing the ignition or explosion of the cells by thermal runaway.
As one of the most promising alternative cathode materials for high power applications, LiFePO4 has been under intense investigation since its introduction in 1997 by Goodenough et al.150LiFePO4 is naturally abundant, inexpensive, and environmentally benign and exhibits a theoretical specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1 and a flat operating potential at 3.5 V vs. Li+/Li. LiFePO4 has a stable three-dimensional phosphor–olivine structure.151,152 The strong covalent bonding between the oxygen and P5+ to form (PO4)3− units allows for stabilization of the structure compared to layered oxides, e.g.LiCoO2, where the oxide layers are weakly bound.11,153 This strong covalency stabilizes the anti-bonding Fe3+/Fe2+ state through an Fe–O–P inductive effect and increases the redox potential of the Fe3+/Fe2+ couple. This characteristic structure also results in higher thermal stabilities to provide excellent safety for battery usage.154
However, LiFePO4 has a very low electrical conductivity of ∼10−9 S cm−1 at room temperature,155 so it could achieve its theoretical capacity only at a very low current density or at elevated temperatures. To overcome this major problem, research on aliovalent cation doping,155–157 particle size effect,158–161 and surface coatings162,163 was carried out. At the moment, the LiFePO4/carbon composite is generally considered as a practically applicable material structure for large-scale high power Li-ion batteries.163–166 Wang et al.163 reported an in situpolymerization restriction method for the synthesis of a LiFePO4/carbon nanocomposite composed of a crystalline LiFePO4 core (about 20–40 nm) within a semi-graphitic carbon shell with a thickness of about 1–2 nm. The LiFePO4/carbon nanocomposite delivered a capacity of 168 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.6 C and 90 mA h g−1 even at a high rate of about 60 C. It would be important to maximize conductivity and minimize carbon content with the optimized particle size.
Recently, A123 Systems Inc.166 announced high-power Li-ion batteries consisting of LiFePO4 as a cathode and graphitic carbon as an anode for power tools. They have shown a power density of 3 kW kg−1 or 5.8 kW L−1 for a R26650 cell (26 mm diameter and 650 mm height) and 10 times longer cycle life than those of Ni–Cd batteries currently used in power tools. The nominal capacity of R26650 is 2.3 A h with an operating voltage of ca. 3.3 V, so that the energy density calculated is approximately 100 W h kg−1 or 200 W h L−1 using 70 g of battery weight. Valence technology has also introduced Li-ion accumulators employing Mg-doped LiFePO4 cathodes for stationary power storage and EV applications.167 Starting in the power tools application, the carbon/LiFePO4 battery is now becoming a promising battery system for HEVs or PHEVs, although worries about safety issues for the overall batteries cannot be ignored.
There is a Li4Ti5O12–LiFePO4 system electrode configuration that results in a more reliable and safe performance. Reale et al.168 demonstrated a polymer Li-ion battery (2 V) composed of a Li4Ti5O12–LiFePO4 electrode combination and a poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF)-based gel electrolyte on a laboratory scale. This battery delivered an appreciable capacity in a wide range of rates with a remarkable cycle life. Although it provided a relatively low operating cell voltage of 2 V, it was considered to be a thermally safe, chemically stable, low cost, and environmentally friendly battery. All these factors have made battery manufacturers positively consider this battery configuration for market production.
As described above, LiFePO4 still suffers from the problems of a low potential and density, so batteries based on this cathode have relatively low energy densities at approximately 50% of that of the cobalt-based system. Other olivine phosphates, i.e.LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Co, and Ni), have much higher redox potentials and can be utilized as alternative cathode materials with careful synthesis and appropriate treatments. In an oxide system, the potential of the M2+/M3+ redox couple is relatively low, but the redox potential is shifted to higher values because of the presence of the phosphate group as mentioned previously. The redox potentials of LiMnPO4, LiCoPO4, and LiNiPO4 are known to be 4.1 V, 4.8 V, and 5.1 V vs. Li+/Li, respectively, which are higher than that of LiFePO4 by 0.6–1.5 V.150,169 However, common organic electrolytes are not yet stable at higher potentials. In this regard, LiMnPO4 appears to be the best candidate among the LiMPO4 family although developments are still required to achieve better electrochemical performances to be implemented in practical applications. LiMnPO4 has a theoretical specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1 and a flat voltage profile during charge and discharge steps, implying that the conversion between LiMnPO4 and MnPO4 proceeds by a two-phase process. Problems with the LiMnPO4 arise from its very low electrical conductivity of <10−10 S cm−1,170 compared with ∼10−9 S cm−1 for LiFePO4,155 and the structural distortion that occurs upon oxidation to MnPO4, which hinders ionic transport.161,171 Also, the delithiated MnPO4 is subject to the well-known disproportionation (2Mn3+ = Mn2+ + Mn4+), which would cause capacity loss by the Mn dissolution. As a result, many early reports of LiMnPO4 showed poor capacity retention and cycling performance.172,173
Oh et al.174 reported that a LiMnPO4/carbon nanocomposite synthesized by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis exhibited an excellent rate capability and good cycle life in cell tests at 25 and 55 °C. This electrode delivered a discharge capacity of 158 mA h g−1 at 1/20 C, 126 mA h g−1 at 1 C, and 107 mA h g−1 at a 2 C rate, which were the highest capacities reported so far for this type of electrode. They confirmed that the carbon particles surrounded the LiMnPO4 and protected the electrode from HF attacks, thus reducing the dissolution of Mn. Martha et al.175 showed that LiMnPO4 nanoparticles synthesized by the polyol method delivered a stable reversible capacity of up to 145 mA h g−1 at discharge potentials >4 V (vs. Li+/Li) with a reasonable capacity retention during prolonged cycling. The rate capability of the LiMnPO4 studied therein was higher than those of LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 and LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) electrodes in similar experiments. Also, the thermal stability of the LiMnPO4 in an electrolyte was much higher than those of transition-metal oxide cathodes.


4.2.4. High-voltage (5 V) cathode materials. 
Several cathode materials have higher redox potentials, at approximately 5 V, and can be operated safely with some surface modifications and electrolyte stabilization. 5 V cathode materials can be generally divided into two structural categories: LiMxMn2−xO4 (spinel structure)176–181 and LiMPO4 (olivine structure),169,182,183 and these are summarized in Table 2. In the spinel-type structure, the M2+/M+3 or the M3+/M4+ transition is utilized in the high-voltage range while Mn remains in the +4 state.
Table 2 High-voltage cathode materials for Li-ion batteries




Formula
Structure type

                      Redox couple
Potential vs. Li+/Li/V




LiCr0.5Mn1.5O4
Spinel

                      Cr3+/Cr4+
4.8



                      LiCrMnO4
Spinel

                      Cr3+/Cr4+
4.8


LiFe0.5Mn1.5O4
Spinel

                      Fe3+/Fe4+
4.9


LiCo0.5Mn1.5O4
Spinel

                      Co3+/Co4+
5.0



                      LiCoMnO4
Spinel

                      Co3+/Co4+
5.0


LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4
Spinel

                      Ni2+/Ni4+
4.7


LiCu0.5Mn1.5O4
Spinel

                      Cu2+/Cu3+
4.9



                      LiCoPO4
Olivine

                      Co2+/Co3+
4.8



                      LiNiPO4
Olivine

                      Ni2+/Ni3+
5.1–5.3




Among 5 V high-voltage cathode materials, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 is the most attractive material because of its good cycling behavior and relatively high rate capability.184–186 Since the redox couple of Ni3+/Ni4+ in LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 is pinned at the top of the O 2p bands, a voltage step between the Ni2+/Ni3+ and Ni3+/Ni4+ redox couples is hardly observed in this spinel structure. Theoretically, it has a capacity of 147 mA h g−1 with a dominant potential plateau around 4.7 V whereas other spinel oxides exhibit two plateaus around 4.0 and 5.0 V (Fig. 11).176,178,187,188 Compared with conventional LiCoO2, it offers approximately 20% more energy and power densities.
 Fig. 11  Voltage profile of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 high-voltage material compared with other several cathode materials (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).188 
However, the potential of the Ni3+/Ni4+ redox couple is close to the decomposition potential of the conventional electrolyte and also it is not easy to synthesize a pure spinel structure of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 due to the formation of LixNi1−xO as a second phase which deteriorates the electrochemical performance of the cathode.189 To overcome these problems, various synthesis methods, such as sol–gel,190co-precipitation,191 and other novel syntheses,192,193 were employed to obtain pure spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. Metal doping194,195 and surface coating196,197 by another metal oxide were also studied to improve this material's electrochemical performance. Metal doping on LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 led to an excellent cycling due to the prevention of phase transformation and the structural stabilization. Surface coatings by metal oxides or phosphates protect the surface of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 by acting like a scavenger of HF generated from the electrolyte.
Since the spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode has a high nominal potential of 4.7 V, Ariyoshi et al.186 have successfully demonstrated a 3 V Li-ion battery with a Li4Ti5O12 anode, and the cell exhibited a quite flat operating voltage of 3.2 V with an excellent cyclability with an 83% capacity retention after 1100 cycles. Patoux et al.198 also confirmed the superior performance of a LiNi0.4Mn1.6O4/Li4Ti5O12 cell, which exhibited the steady capacity retention of ca. 138 mA h g−1 during cycling, and delivered a high capacity of 112 mA h g−1 even at a 10 C discharge rate. They also expected that such a cell could deliver approximately 140 W h kg−1 in a standard 2 A h cell configuration with a high-rate capability.
While surface coating is an effective way to stabilize electrode materials, the development of more stable electrolytes can be another approach to reduce the instability of electrolytes. Recently, ionic liquids have shown high stabilities at high potentials,199 although their electrochemical irreversible reactions at low potentials need to be resolved. All-solid-state batteries could be another approach using thin-film technologies to compensate for the lower diffusivity in solid electrolytes,200,201 and 5 V LiCoPO4 and LiNiPO4 cathodes can be employed in these systems. Although there remain many challenges to using LiCoPO4 and LiNiPO4 cathodes in practical usages, they have the greatest potential for improving battery performance while improving safety. Nanostructuring and surface modification of the 5 V LiMPO4 material with more stable electrolyte systems would be required for it to be implemented in future Li-ion batteries.

4.3. 
          Li rechargeable thin film and flexible batteries for emerging applications
Continuing progress in IT is creating new services and devices to revolutionize our daily life in which all devices may have their own microprocessors and be connected together by wireless networks.202 This ubiquitous mobile controlling environment requires the development of different forms of power sources with various sizes, shapes, and mechanical properties.203–206 For example, active radio frequency identification (RFID) tags and smart cards need thin and flexible batteries with thicknesses of less than 1 mm, although thin and flexible primary batteries were already commercialized by several companies and used for disposable applications.207,208
During past decades, various rechargeable batteries have been explored to meet the requirements of the aforementioned future mobile devices.203–206,210–213 Among these, thin film Li rechargeable batteries fabricated by vacuum deposition processes exhibited some promising results, such as high energy densities, excellent safety, and long cycle lives. Fig. 12 illustrates the typical configuration of a thin film Li rechargeable battery using the lithium phosphorous oxynitride (LiPON) glassy electrolyte developed by Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Due to the use of a highly stable solid-state electrolyte, these thin film batteries exhibited a wide range of operation temperatures, negligible self-discharge rates, excellent cycle lives of several thousand cycles, and greatly improved reliability over other batteries that used liquid electrolytes. Several companies have commercialized these batteries as power sources for smart cards, RFID tags, and autonomous micropower combined with energy harvesting modules.214–216 However, high production costs caused by expensive fabrication equipment and time-consuming processes should be solved in order to extend the range of applications. Low volumetric energy density due to the decrease of the volume fraction of electrode materials in cells of smaller batteries is also one of the main concerns for the commercialization of thin film Li rechargeable batteries.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of a thin film lithium rechargeable battery (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).204 
In recent years, various thin and flexible batteries prepared with nanostructured materials and electroactive polymer materials by non-vacuum fabrication methods have been reported,209–213 which have gained much attention due to their advantages, such as low cost, broad choice of substrates, and ease of mass production with the roll-to-roll process. Fig. 13 shows two successful examples of thin and flexible batteries: inkjet printed thin and flexible Li-ion batteries using Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles as the anode material and LiCoO2 nanoparticles as the cathode material from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (Fig. 13(a)); and Li-ion batteries integrated on paper by Stanford University (Fig. 13(b)).217 Apart from the merit of cost-effectiveness, these thin and flexible batteries have some advantages over vacuum deposited thin film batteries: easy fabrication of large area batteries and good compatibility with conventional battery manufacturing processes.
 Fig. 13  (a) Inkjet printed thin and flexible lithium ion battery (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology), and (b) Li-ion battery integrated on paper (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).217 
In order to increase the volumetric energy densities of miniaturized batteries, several research groups have focused on non-planar battery architecture.218–221 Three-dimensional (3D) electrode architecture is expected to highly enhance the areal capacity of batteries by increasing the volume fractions of electrode materials in cells. Various 3D battery architectures, such as 3D nanoscopic batteries,218 and all-solid-state 3D integrated batteries,219,220 were proposed to achieve improved capacities compared with batteries having planar forms (2D). However, in order to utilize the full potential of these non-planar battery architectures, electrochemically inactive components, such as packaging components, should also be redesigned to minimize the loss of energy density. Recently, Lai et al. reported that a 3D sintered electrode structure combined with a highly efficient cell packaging design improved the energy density of a battery on the cubic-centimetre scale.221 These recent progresses in battery design technology will bring batteries for future mobile devices closer to realization.
With the increase of the energy density of Li rechargeable batteries, safety problems become a significant concern, and all-solid-state batteries may be one of the ultimate solutions.23,200,201 While thin-film type all-solid-state batteries show promising behaviors, there are some technical problems in bulk type all-solid-state batteries, such as drastic capacity fading, poor rate capability, and narrow range of operation temperatures mainly due to poor ionic conductivity of the solid-state electrolyte. Currently, bulk type all-solid-state Li rechargeable batteries adopting Li2S-based sulfide electrolytes exhibited significant progress in their battery performance.201 These sulfides have a high Li ion conductivity of about 10−3 S cm−1, which is almost the same as liquid electrolytes, and all-solid-state batteries using these sulfide electrolytes exhibited excellent cycle performances over prolonged cycles. The rate performance of the all solid-state batteries could be improved by the modification of the interface between the oxide electrode and sulfide electrolyte. Ohta et al.23 reported that nanoscale coating of the lithium ion conducting material on the LiCoO2 electrode greatly improved the rate performance of the all-solid-state lithium rechargeable battery. However, further increases in rate capability and battery performance at low temperatures need to be achieved for the commercialization of all-solid-state batteries.
5. Conclusions
As our daily lives depend on the societal networks that consist of electrical, transportation, financial, and information networks, the demand for clean and alternative energy to operate these networks is ever increasing. Among these energy sources, Li rechargeable batteries are considered as one of the most viable candidates to satisfy all the needs of these systems due to their high energy densities, high power, and excellent cycling performances; however, these batteries still require quantum jumps with respect to materials as well as other related technical issues in order for Li rechargeable batteries to be successfully implemented in transportation systems and large power storage units. These problems can only be achieved through a properly designed nanostructured electrode material as well as cheaper and safer materials and production costs. In this perspective article, problems related to the materials and applications currently being investigated were reviewed, and the technical issues of Li rechargeable batteries that remain to be worked out in the near future were also discussed.
Acknowledgements
H.-J. Sohn wishes to express his appreciation for the financial support by the research fund of the POSCO Chair Professor at Seoul National University.
References
T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Sol. Cells, 1990, 9, 209 Search PubMed .

LIB-related Study, Program 08–09, Institute of Information Technology, Ltd., Japan,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Rosa Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565 RSC .

          M. Broussely, in Lithium Batteries Science and Technology, ed. G.-A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Kluwer Academic, The Netherlands,  2004 Search PubMed .

Technical Roadmap—Electric and Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, International Energy Agency Report,  2010.

Energy Storage on the Grid—Long Duration Storage Systems, Pike Research Report,  2010.
J.-M. Tarascon, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2010, 368, 3227 CrossRef .

          H. K. Lim, Proceeding of IEEE International Solid State Circuits Conference, San Francisco,  2008.
N. Tamura, R. Ohshita, M. Fujimoto, M. Kamino and S. Fujitani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A679 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.sony.net/SonyInfor/News/Press/200502/05-006E/index.html
        .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691 CrossRef CAS .
R.-F. Liang, Z.-X. Wang, H.-J. Guo, X.-H. Li, W.-J. Peng and Z.-G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 598 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Sulaiman and H. Hasan, Proceeding of International Workshop on Advanced Material for New and Renewable Energy, Jakarta,  2009.
A. F. Burke, Proc. IEEE, 2007, 95, 806 CrossRef .
S. Amjad, S. Neelakrishnan and R. Rudramoorthy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 1104 CrossRef .
A. Khaligh and Z. Li, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2010, 59, 2806 CrossRef .
J. Axen, K. S. Kurani and A. Burke, Transport Policy, 2010, 17, 173 CrossRef .

Roadmap for the Development of Next Generation Automotive Battery Technology, The New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO), Japan,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193 Search PubMed .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821 RSC .

          http://www.electricitystorage.org/ESA/technologies
        .
H. Kamath, EPRI J., 2010, 21 Search PubMed .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Zhang, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, J. P. Lemmon, V. Sprenkle and Z. Yang, J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc., 2010, 62, 31 Search PubMed .
C. Fabjan, J. Garche, B. Harrer, L. Jorissen, C. Kolbeck, F. Philippi, G. Tomazic and F. Wagner, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 47, 825 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115 RSC .
Z. Takehara, J. Power Sources, 1989, 26, 257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 31 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac, L. Christensen, D. B. Le and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A849 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Hwang, C. G. Cho and H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Li, P. He, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1294 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 657 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. Mcilwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS .
J. Graetz, C. C. Ahn, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A194 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mao, R. L. Turner, I. A. Courtney, B. D. Fredericksen, M. I. Buckett, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 3 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, P. J. Chupas and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, G. Mulas and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 928 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Fleischauer, M. N. Obrovac and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morita and N. J. Takami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A425 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, S. Park and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A1112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Takeda, N. Imanishi and O. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4009 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ronnebro, J. Yin, A. Kitano, M. Wada, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1738 CrossRef .
M. Stjerndahl, H. Bryngelsson, T. Gustafsson, J. T. Vaughey, M. M. Thackeray and K. Edstrom, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4947 CrossRef CAS .
G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saint, M. Morcrette, D. Larcher, L. Laffont, S. Beattie, J. P. Peres, D. Talaga, M. Couzi and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1765 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, H.-J. Sohn, H. Kim, G. Jeong and W. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 456 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Choi, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, A. S. Prakash, J. Saint, M. Morcrette and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5502 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fransson, E. Nordstrom, K. Edstrom, L. Haggstrom, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A736 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. L. Fransson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek, K. Edström, J. O. Thomas and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyachi, H. Yamamoto and H. Kawai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A376 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, S. A. Krachkovskiy and C. K. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5570 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.maxell.com/
        .

LiB-related Study, Program 10–11, Institute of Information Technology, Ltd., Japan,  Aug. 2010 Search PubMed .
T. Song, J. Xia, J.-H. Lee, D. H. Lee, M.-S. Kwon, J.-M. Choi, J. Wu, S. K. Doo, H. Chang, W. I. Park, D. S. Zang, H. Kim, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and U. Paik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1710 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-M. Park, PhD thesis, Seoul National University,  2009 .
D. C. S. Souza, V. Pralong, A. J. Jacobson and L. F. Nazar, Science, 2002, 296, 2012 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, Y.-U. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5566 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boyanov, J. Bernardi, E. Bekaert, M. Ménétrier, M.-L. Doublet and L. Monconduit, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 298 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Kim, C.-K. Lee, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A933 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crosnier, C. Mounsey, P. Subramanya Herle, N. Taylor and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4890 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morcrette, F. Gillot, L. Monconduit and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A59 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6319 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Woo, J.-H. Jung, H. Kim, M. G. Kim, C. K. Lee, H.-J. Sohn and B. W. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1979 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard and G. Eichineger, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1976, 68, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Dey and B. P. Sullivan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 222 CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047 CAS .
K. Brandt, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 173 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigard, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405 CrossRef CAS .
F. Orsini, A. Du Pasquier, B. Beaudoin, J.-M. Tarascon, M. Trentin, N. Langenhuizen, E. de Beer and P. Notten, J. Power Sources, 1998, 76, 19 CrossRef CAS .
P. Suresh, A. K. Shukla, S. A. Shivashankar and N. Munichandraiah, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 166 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saito, Y. Nemoto, S. Tobishima and J. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 476 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, R. Cahn, N. E. Bagshaw and A. Hamnett, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1996, 354, 1577 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Shiraishi, H. Tamura and Z. Takehara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Shiraishi and Z. Takehara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2187 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kumagai, Y. Kikuchi and K. Tanno, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1992, 22, 620 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34 Search PubMed .
K. F. Blurton and A. F. Sammells, J. Power Sources, 1979, 4, 263 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhanga, J. Xie, A. Hiranoa, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Visco, B. D. Katz, Y. S. Nimon and L. D. Dejonghe, US Pat., 7 282 295,  2007.

          J. Dahn, Scalable Energy Storage: Beyond Lithium Ion, Almaden Institute,  August 26–27, 2009 Search PubMed .
T. Ogasawara, A. Debart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, ECS Trans., 2007, 27, 225 Search PubMed .
A. Debart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. H. Schifferli and Y. Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, J. P. Zheng, R. Liang, C. Zhang, B. Wang, M. Hendrickson and E. J. Plichta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A953 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Cheon, K. S. Ko, J. H. Cho, S. W. Kim, E. Y. Chin and H. T. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A796 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Cheon, K. S. Ko, J. H. Cho, S. W. Kim, E. Y. Chin and H. T. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A800 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Qin, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1531 RSC .
C. Liang, N. J. Dudney and J. Y. Howe, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4724 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638 RSC .
S. W. Lee, N. Yabuuchi, B. M. Gallant, S. Chen, B.-S. Kim, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 531 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawasaki, Y. Iwai and M. Hirose, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 41, 415 CrossRef .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H.-S. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Noel and V. Suryanarayanan, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 193 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818 RSC .
K. M. Colbow, J. R. Dahn and R. R. Haering, J. Power Sources, 1989, 26, 397 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ferg, R. J. Gummov, A. de Kock and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147 CAS .
T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda and N. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1431 CAS .
L. Kavan and M. Gratzel, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A39 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Jansen, A. J. Kahaian, K. D. Kepler, P. A. Nelson, K. Amine, D. W. Dees, D. R. Vissers and M. M. Thackeray, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 902 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Ouyang, Z. Y. Zhong and M. S. Lei, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and J. Cho, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A81 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Tang and Z. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Z. Wen, X. Zhu and Z. Gu, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 1093 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wang, J. Gao, L. J. Fu, N. H. Zhao, Y. P. Wu and T. Takamura, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1109 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Park, A. Benayad, D.-J. Kang and S.-G. Doo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14930 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Al-Muhtaseb and J. A. Ritter, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and Z. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7756 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Z. Wen, B. Lin, J. Han and X. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 457, 400 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.scib.jp/en/index.htm
        .

          http://e2af.com/interview/091009.shtml
        .
J. Xu, C. Jia, B. Cao and W. F. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 8044 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Bao, Q.-L. Bao, C.-M. Li and Z.-L. Dong, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y.-G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421 .
M. Anji Reddy, V. Pralong, U. V. Varadaeaju and B. Raveau, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 8, A132 CrossRef .
L. D. Noailles, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 259 CrossRef .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862 CrossRef .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2597 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuhn, R. Amandi and F. Garcia-Alvarado, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and J. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A542 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, D. Choi, S. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, D. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Graff and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 588 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn and W. R. McKinnon, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 23, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Shi, B. K. Guo, S. A. Corr, Q. H. Shi, Y. S. Hu, K. R. Heier, L. Q. Chen, R. Seshadri and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4215 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ji, P. S. Herle, Y. Rho and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 374 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ku, Y. S. Jung, K. T. Lee, C. H. Kim and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A688 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sleigh and W. R. McKinnon, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 45, 67 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham, D. M. Pasquariello and E. B. Willstaedt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 743 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Rogers, R. D. Shannon, A. W. Sleight and J. L. Gillson, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 841 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Aubom and Y. L. Barberio, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 638 CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. Rosa Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1212 CrossRef CAS .
B. Varghese, M. V. Reddy, Z. Yanwu, C. S. Lit, T. C. Hoong, G. V. S. Rao, B. V. R. Chowdari, A. T. S. Wee, C. T. Lim and C. H. Sow, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3360 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhong, X. Xia, B. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Wang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, L. Dupont, P. Poizot, J. B. Leriche and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oumellal, A. Rougier, G. A. Nazri, J.-M. Tarascon and L. Aymard, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 916 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjumdaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188 CAS .
D. Jugovic and D. Uskokovic, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 538 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Song, K. T. Lee, M. G. Kim, L. F. Nazar and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3818 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Nanjundaswamy, A. K. Padhi, J. B. Goodenough, S. Okada, H. Ohtsuka, H. Arai and J. Yamaki, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 92, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 39 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, A. Abouimrane and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goni, L. Lezama, A. Pujana, M. I. Arriortua and T. Rojo, Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 2001, 3, 937 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gibot, M. Casas-Cabanas, L. Laffont, S. Levasseur, P. Carlach, S. Hamelet, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 741 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kobayashi, S. I. Nishimura, M. S. Park, R. Kanno, M. Yashima, T. Ida and A. Yamada, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada, H. Koizumi, S. I. Nishimura, N. Sonoyama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Nakamura and Y. Kobayashi, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 357 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meetong, H. Huang, S. Speakman, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Rho, L. F. Nazar, L. Perry and D. Ryan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, Y. R. Wang, E. Hosono, K. X. Wang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Salah, A. Mauger, K. Zaghib, J. B. Goodenough, N. Ravet, M. Gauthier, F. Gendron and C. M. Julien, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1692 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Park, Y. Cho, S. Lee, H.-C. Yoo, H.-K. Song and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/c0ee00559b .

          http://www.a123systems.com/a123/products
        .

          http://www.valence.com/
        .
P. Reale, S. Panero, B. Scrosati, J. Garche, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and M. Wachtler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A2138 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Howard and R. M. Spontiz, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 887 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yonemura, A. Yamada, Y. Takei, N. Sonoyama and R. Kanno, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1352 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada, Y. Kudo and K. Y. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A747 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 93 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, M. Remskar, D. Hanzel, J. M. Goupil, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 274 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Oh, S.-W. Oh, C.-S. Yoon, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3260 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Martha, B. Markovsky, J. Grinblat, Y. Gofer, O. Haik, E. Zinigrad, D. Aurbach, T. Drezen, D. Wang, G. Deghenghi and I. Exnar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A541 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, S. Takeda and M. Iwanaga, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 90 CrossRef .
C. Sigala, D. Guyomard, A. Verbaere, Y. Piffard and M. Tournoux, Solid State Ionics, 1995, 81, 167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kawai, M. Nagata, H. Tukamoto and A. R. West, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Amine, H. Tukamoto, H. Yasuda and Y. Fujita, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ein-Eli, S. H. Lu and M. A. Rzeznik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3383 .
G. T. K. Fey, W. Li and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2279 CAS .
J. Wolfenstine, J. Read and J. L. Allen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wolfenstine and J. Allen, J. Power Sources, 2005, 142, 389 CrossRef CAS .
R. Santhanam and B. Rambabu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5442 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunduraci, J. F. Al-Sharab and G. G. Amatucci, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3585 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariyoshi, S. Yamamoto and T. Ohzuku, J. Power Sources, 2003, 959, 119 .

          J. B. Goodenough, in Advances in Lithium ion Batteries, ed. W. Van Schalkwijk and B. Scrosati, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2002, p. 147 Search PubMed .
S. Patoux, L. Daniel, C. Bourbon, H. Lignier, C. Pagano, F. Le Cras, S. Jouanneau and S. Martinet, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 344 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhong, A. Bonakdarpour, M. Zhang, Y. Gao and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 205 CAS .
B. J. Hwang, Y. W. Wu, M. Venkateswarlu, M. Y. Cheng and R. Santhanam, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, J. Wang, X. Ye and J. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 103, 19 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Arrebola, A. Caballero, M. Cruz, L. Hernan, J. Morales and E. R. Castellon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1904 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Xu, S. Xie, N. Ding, B. L. Liu, Y. Shang and C. H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4352 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alcantara, M. Jaraba, P. Lavela, J. T. Tirado, Ph. Biensan, A. de Gulbert, C. Jordy and J. P. Peres, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. T. Myung, C. S. Yoon, I. H. Oh and Y. K. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1911 CrossRef CAS .
T. Noguchi, I. Yamazaki, T. Numataa and M. J. Shirakata, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 35 .
J. Liu and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patoux, L. Sannier, H. Lignier, Y. Reynier, C. Bourbon, S. Jouanneau, F. le Cras and S. Martinet, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621 CrossRef CAS .
R. Komiya, A. Hayashi, H. Morimoto, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 140, 83 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weiser, Sci. Am., 1991, 265, 66 .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Dudney, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 116, 245 CrossRef .
H. Nishide and T. Suga, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2005, 14, 32 Search PubMed .
K. T. Nam, D.-W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond, Y.-M. Chiang and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.powerpaper.com/
        .

          http://www.enfucell.com/
        .
J. B. Bates, N. J. Dudney, D. C. Lubben, G. R. Gruzalski, B. S. Kwak, Y. Xiaohua and R. A. Zuhr, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 58 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574 CrossRef .
C. C. Ho, K. Murata, D. A. Steingart, J. W. Evans and P. K. Wright, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 094013 CrossRef .
M. Hilder, B. Winther-Jensen and N. B. Clark, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nystrom, A. Razaq, M. Stromme, L. Nyholm and A. Mihranyan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3635 CrossRef .
N. J. Dudney, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 44 Search PubMed .

          http://www.cymbet.com/
        .

          http://http/www.excellartron.com/
        .
L. Hu, H. Wu, F. L. Mantia, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Long, B. Dunn, D. R. Rolison and H. S. White, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4463 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. L. Notten, F. Roozeboom, R. A. H. Niessen and L. Baggetto, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4564 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baggetto, R. A. H. Niessen, F. Roozeboom and P. H. L. Notten, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, C. K. Erdonmez, T. F. Marinis, C. K. Bjune, N. J. Dudney, F. Xu, R. Wartena and Y.-M. Chiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E139 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Goojin Jeong	Goojin Jeong received his BS, MS and PhD degrees in the Department of Mineral and Petroleum Engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2001. He did his postdoctoral work at the Arizona State University (2002–2003), and also worked as a senior researcher at Battery Development Team in Samsung SDI (2003–2010). Currently he is a research professor at Green Energy System Center in Kumoh National Institute of Technology. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials related to energy conversion and storage system, and recently he focused on alternative electrode materials for Li secondary batteries.
Young-Ugk Kim	Young-Ugk Kim received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Utah studying nanoparticle synthesis using high temperature processes. His research interests are in the secondary battery electrode material development and, since 2006, he has been working as a Senior Researcher of Samsung SDI, the world's leading lithium secondary battery company.
Hansu Kim	Hansu Kim received his BS, MS and PhD degrees in mineral and petroleum engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2000. He joined Energy Lab. of Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology as a member of research staff in 2001 and moved to Hanyang University in 2011. Currently he is an associate professor in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and printable flexible battery for the future mobile device applications.
Young-Jun Kim	Young-Jun Kim is currently a director of Advanced Batteries Research Center at Korea Electronics Technology Institute. He received his BS, MS and PhD (1999) from Seoul National University. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher at Kyushu University of Japan and also worked as a research engineer at Samsung SDI and Hyundai Motor Company (2001–2006). His current research activities are focused on key materials for lithium-ion battery, redox flow battery and lithium–air battery. And he is a member of the committee to plan Korean National R&D Programs of secondary batteries.
Hun-Joon Sohn	Hun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. Also he earned PhD from University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same University and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently, he is the POSCO Chair Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials under various conditions and mainly focusing on the development and characterization of anode materials for the Li secondary batteries, recently.

Broader context
A worldwide effort to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and preserve the environment promotes the development of alternative clean energy sources, especially solar cells and wind power. These systems require energy storage units due to intermittent energy generation and consumption. Li rechargeable batteries are considered one of the most probable candidates to meet the requirements of energy storage cells, and research to develop novel electrode materials and electrolytes has been performed intensively throughout the world. This perspective article introduces the trends of emerging markets for Li secondary batteries and discusses the requirements of the materials and technological issues to be solved for Li secondary batteries to be implemented in these new applications, such as EVs and large electrical power storage systems. Since the requirements for each application are different, material problems for next generation high capacity Li–air and Li–S batteries and high power Li rechargeable batteries are reviewed and discussed. Also, recent progress with respect to thin and flexible, all-solid-state, and 3-dimensional (3D) Li batteries for future applications in information technology is introduced in this paper.


 	Fig. 1  The principle of operation of the first commercialized lithium-ion batteries. Lithium ions migrate back and forth between anode and cathode upon discharging/charging via the electrolyte, electrons do so similarly via the outer electrical circuit (© The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).3	 

 	Fig. 2  
          Li-ion battery market demand due to mobile IT devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Trend of capacity and energy density increase in 18650 cylindrical-type Li-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 4  Trends in the development of mobile IT devices and related power source types (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology).	 

 	Fig. 5  Market prospect of (a) eco-friendly cars (© OECD/IEA, reprinted with permission)5 and (b) power storage (Pike Research, reprinted with permission)6 (CNG: compressed natural gas, LPG: liquefied petroleum gas, NAS: Na–S battery, Pumped Hydro: pumped-storage hydroelectricity, CAES: compressed air energy storage).	 

 	Fig. 6  Three main applications of Li rechargeable batteries.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of the increase of power required for mobile electronic devices and the actual increase of battery power (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology).	 


Application	Advanced HEV	
                  PHEV
                	Advanced PHEV	Pure EV

Performance
	1	×1.5	×3	×7
Energy density/W h kg−1	70	100	200	700
Specific power/W kg−1	2000	2000	2500	1000
Cost ($ per kW h)	1220	370	240	60

 	Fig. 8  Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), Si (Li3.75Si), Sn (Li4.4Sn), Al (LiAl), P (Li3P), and Sb (Li3Sb). The volume expansion of the lithiated phases was considered in calculating the volumetric capacities.	 
2Li + O2 → Li2O2, Eo = 3.10 V	(1)
4Li + O2 → Li2O, Eo = 2.91 V	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Schematics of four different architectures of Li–air batteries (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).19	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of (a) the structure and (b) redox processes of a mesoporous carbon/sulfur composite cathode (© Nature publishing group, reprinted with permission).98	 
MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O (M: transition metal)

LiCr0.5Mn1.5O4	Spinel	
                      Cr3+/Cr4+	4.8

                      LiCrMnO4	Spinel	
                      Cr3+/Cr4+	4.8
LiFe0.5Mn1.5O4	Spinel	
                      Fe3+/Fe4+	4.9
LiCo0.5Mn1.5O4	Spinel	
                      Co3+/Co4+	5.0

                      LiCoMnO4	Spinel	
                      Co3+/Co4+	5.0
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4	Spinel	
                      Ni2+/Ni4+	4.7
LiCu0.5Mn1.5O4	Spinel	
                      Cu2+/Cu3+	4.9

                      LiCoPO4	Olivine	
                      Co2+/Co3+	4.8

                      LiNiPO4	Olivine	
                      Ni2+/Ni3+	5.1–5.3

 	Fig. 11  Voltage profile of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 high-voltage material compared with other several cathode materials (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).188	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of a thin film lithium rechargeable battery (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).204	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Inkjet printed thin and flexible lithium ion battery (used with permission from Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology), and (b) Li-ion battery integrated on paper (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).217	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
