MnO 2 -based nanostructures for high-performance supercapacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA05523G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05523G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21380-21423MnO2-based nanostructures for high-performance supercapacitors

        
          
            Ming 
            Huang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Dong
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu Xin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Li Li 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *d
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangyuxin@cqu.edu.cn
bChongqing Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Functional Organic Molecules, College of Environmental and Biological Engineering, Chongqing Technology and Business University, Chongqing 400067, P. R. China
cNational Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science of Micro/Nano-Devices and System Technology, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, P. R. China
dInstitute of Chemical and Engineering Sciences, A*STAR, 1 Pesek Road, Jurong Island, 627833, Singapore. E-mail: zhang_lili@ices.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      20th July 2015
    , Accepted 7th September 2015First published on 7th September 2015AbstractMnO2-based materials have been intensively investigated for use in pseudocapacitors due to their high theoretical specific capacitance, good chemical and thermal stability, natural abundance, environmental benignity and low cost. In this review, several main factors that affect the electrochemical properties of MnO2-based electrodes are presented. Various strategic design and synthetic methods of MnO2-based electrode materials for enhanced electrochemical performance are highlighted and summarized. Finally, the challenges and future directions toward the development of MnO2-based nanostructured electrode materials for high performance supercapacitors (SCs) are discussed.Ming HuangMing Huang received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from Chongqing University in 2011 and 2014 (Prof. Yu Xin Zhang's group), respectively. Currently, he is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) under the supervision of Prof. Rodney S. Ruoff. His research interests involve self-assembled nanostructures for energy storage materials, and CVD synthesis of graphene and their applications in electronic and optical devices.Fei LiFei Li received his B. Eng. from Chongqing University in 2013. He is continuing his master study in the college of materials science and engineering of Chongqing University (Prof. Yu Xin Zhang's group) to get his master's degree in 2016. His research interest focuses on fabrication of novel metal oxide nanomaterials for supercapacitors.Fan DongDr Fan Dong received his Ph.D. in Environmental Engineering in 2010 from Zhejiang University. Currently, he is a Professor at Chongqing Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Functional Organic Molecules, College of Environment and Resources, Chongqing Technology and Business University. He was a visiting scholar from 2009 to 2010 at Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include functional nanomaterials, photocatalysis, air pollution control and supercapacitors.Yu Xin ZhangDr Yu Xin Zhang received his B. Eng. and M. Eng. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2000 and 2003, respectively. He received his Ph.D. degree in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2008, and continued to work as a research fellow in Prof. Hua Chun Zeng's group at NUS until 2009. Now Dr Zhang is a full professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering in Chongqing University. Dr Zhang's research interest is self-assembled nanostructures for energy storage materials and photocatalysts.Li ZhangDr Li Zhang received her B. Eng. in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2004. After two years of industrial experience in Micron, she continued her Ph.D. study in the same department at NUS and received her Ph.D. degree in 2011. She worked as a research engineer from 2010 to 2011 at NUS and a research fellow in Professor Ruoff's group at The University of Texas at Austin from 2011 to 2012. Now Dr Zhang is a research scientist in the Institute of Chemical and Engineering sciences in Singapore. Dr Zhang's research interest is advanced materials for energy storage and conversion, fundamental materials chemistry and physics, electrochemistry, electrocatalysis, and synthesis and study of novel catalytic materials.
1. Introduction
The rapid growth of the population and global economy has significantly increased the demand for energy consumption. Due to concerns about the severe environmental impacts of fossil fuels and the increasing demand for grid energy storage and consumer electronic devices, efficient energy storage systems are highly desired.1–6 Electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices are particularly useful for portable electronic devices and hybrid electric vehicles.7–9 Among various emerging EES technologies, supercapacitors (SCs), also known as electrochemical capacitors (ECs), have attracted tremendous attention because of their high power density (>10 kW kg−1), high rate capability, long cycling life (>100000 cycles) and safe operation.10–12 A Ragone plot (Fig. 1) illustrates the power density and energy density of various EES systems,1 in which SCs occupy an important position since they bridge the power–energy gap between traditional capacitors and batteries/fuel cells. With a combination of high power density and relatively high energy density, SCs have been widely used in a variety of applications ranging from portable consumer electronic devices, memory back-up systems, automotives, to industrial power and energy management, and many more.13–15
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot of specific power versus specific energy for various electrochemical energy storage systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
Based on the energy storage mechanism, SCs can be classified into two categories, namely, electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.16,17 In EDLCs, the capacitance comes from the adsorption of both anions and cations at the electrode/electrolyte interface (Fig. 2a),18 thus it is strongly dependent on the surface area of the electrode materials that is accessible to electrolyte ions. During the charging process, electrons move from the negative electrode to the positive electrode through the external loop, with anions moving to the positive electrode, while cations move towards the negative electrode. The moving direction of electrons and ions would be reversed in the discharging process.12,19 Typical electrode materials for EDLCs are porous carbons, such as activated carbon,20–25 xerogels,26–31 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),32–36 carbon nanofibers (CNFs),37–41 mesoporous carbon,42–46 graphene,47–50 and carbide-derived carbons.51–56 Previous research has shown several important factors affecting the performance of carbon-based electrodes: specific surface area, electrical conductivity, and pore size and distribution. In most cases, porous carbon materials exhibit a high specific surface area and good conductivity. However, the low energy density, especially the low volumetric energy density of carbon-based materials is yet to be improved. In contrast to EDLCs, pseudocapacitors store energy through a faradaic process that involves fast and reversible redox reactions occurring at or near the electrode surface.57 As shown in Fig. 2b, when a potential is applied, the electrode materials undergo reversible redox reactions, generating charges and resulting in faradaic current passing through the supercapacitor cell.18 Since the capacitance depends on the faradaic charges generated at or near the electrode surface, it is extremely important to use pseudo-capacitive materials with high charge generation and storage ability in a short period of time. The most widely explored pseudo-capacitive electrode materials include conducting polymers (polyaniline, polypyrrole, and polythiophene)58–64 and transition metal oxides or hydroxides (RuO2, MnO2, Co3O4, NiO, CuO, Fe2O3, Ni(OH)2, and Co(OH)2).65–72 Compared with EDLCs, pseudocapacitors can achieve much higher energy densities as they can provide a variety of oxidation states for efficient redox charge transfer which could satisfy the needs of high-energy SCs. The challenges associated with pseudocapacitors are rate capability and cycling stability.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of two different charge storage mechanisms via (a) electrochemical double-layer capacitance (EDLC) or (b) redox reaction based pseudocapacitance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2011, Materials Research Society. 
Among electrode materials for pseudocapacitors, MnO2 has been extensively investigated due to its low cost, natural abundance, large theoretical capacity (∼1370 F g−1), and low toxicity.73–79 In 1999, Lee and Goodenough first used the amorphous MnO2·nH2O in a mild KCl aqueous electrolyte as a possible electrode for supercapacitors, and a specific capacitance of about 200 F g−1 was obtained.80 In order to increase the specific capacitance of MnO2-based electrodes, synthesis of nanostructured MnO2-based electrodes with novel morphologies, hierarchical porous structures, large pore volume and high specific surface area has been explored by various methods. Until now, manganese oxides with various structures and morphologies such as nanosheets,81 nanospheres,82 nanoflowers,83 nanowires/nanorods,84,85 thin films,86 and nanotubes87 have been fabricated and their electrochemical properties have been investigated. The studies have indicated that MnO2-based nanomaterials with controllable particle size, morphology, crystallinity, high specific surface area and good electrical conductivity are critical for improving capacitance, rate capability and cycling stability. Another effective approach to improve the performance of MnO2-based electrodes is the design of MnO2-based composites by using highly conductive materials such as porous metal substrates,88 conducting polymers,89,90 carbon nanotubes/nanofibers/spheres,91–93 and graphene94 as scaffolds. Very recently, an emerging attractive strategy is the synthesis of multi-component MnO2-based mixed oxides with a smart design to improve the performance based on the synergistic effects from their individual constituents.
In this review, we first discuss several important factors affecting the electrochemical properties of MnO2-based materials. Then various fabrication strategies to make advanced MnO2-based nanostructures and MnO2-based composite electrodes are summarized. Finally, the challenges and the promising future of MnO2-based electrodes for SCs are presented.
2. Factors affecting the pseudocapacitance of MnO2-based materials
The charge that MnO2-based pseudocapacitor electrodes stores arises from the III/IV oxidation state change at or near the surface of MnO2 nanostructures and the charge storage mechanism can be described by eqn (1): MnO2 + C+ + e− ↔ MnOOC(1)where C represents electrolyte cations such as H+, K+, Na+ and Li+.95,96 For the surface charge storage, the faradaic reaction is achieved by adsorption/desorption of electrolyte cations and protons on the surface of MnO2.95,97 The bulk pseudo-capacitive reaction relies on the intercalation/deintercalation of protons and cations into the bulk of MnO2.98,99 However, due to the poor electrical conductivity and slow proton and cation diffusivity of the solid MnO2 phase, the bulk pseudo-capacitive reaction is limited to a thin subsurface layer of MnO2, for instance, ca. 420 nm in thickness according to Bélanger's study.95 The electrochemical properties of MnO2-based electrodes are influenced by the crystallinity, crystal structure, morphology, conductivity, mass loading of the active material, and the electrolyte used for the electrode.
2.1. Crystallinity
The pioneering studies on the capacitive behavior of MnO2 are focused on amorphous MnO2 and nanocrystalline compounds for the application in electrochemical capacitors, with the belief that a porous morphology can enhance the ion accessibility and cation diffusion.100,101 Xue et al.102 adopted a direct precipitation approach to get the polymorphs of α-, δ-, γ- and β-MnO2 by a simple redox reaction between NaNO2 and KMnO4. It was found that the capacitance performances of any particular MnO2 phase decrease with increasing crystalline nature, and the poorly crystallized α-MnO2 demonstrated the highest specific capacitance (200 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1). Nevertheless, the poorly crystallized MnO2 contains intergrowths of different tunnel structures, leading to more difficult cation diffusion and resulting in higher resistance.103 The capacitance of the amorphous MnO2 is due to faradaic processes localized at the surface and subsurface regions of the electrode. The maximum capacitance of MnO2 is limited by the upper limit of the BET surface area it can achieve, further increasing the surface area does not provide additional capacitance.99
Many attempts have been made to explore the crystallized MnO2 materials since the capacitance of the crystallized materials is clearly dependent on the crystalline structure, especially on the size of the tunnels able to provide limited cation intercalation.103 Brousse and co-workers have synthesized different MnO2 polymorphs with the aim of investigating the crystallinity/electrochemical property relationship by evaluating the capacitance of these materials.103 Since capacitance comes mainly from the intercalation/deintercalation of protons or cations in MnO2, only some crystallographic structures, which possess sufficient gaps to accommodate these ions, are expected to be useful for further improving the capacitance. Also, a recent study reported the electrochemical properties of Nb2O5 and established that crystalline phases of the material underwent fast faradaic reactions that led to higher specific capacitance than that of the amorphous phase, suggesting that the faradaic reactions which led to additional capacitive energy storage were associated with ion insertion along preferred crystallographic pathways.104 Ran et al.105 reported a facile and cost-effective strategy for the synthesis of a novel bird nest-like nanostructured MnO2 material. The obtained nano-MnO2 possesses a well-designed loosely assembled hierarchical nanoarchitecture with an appropriate crystallinity which gives rise to excellent performances as an electrode material for supercapacitors. A maximum specific capacitance of 917 F g−1 has been obtained at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. Based on the above analysis, it is a great challenge and also of great significance to prepare novel MnO2 nanostructures with high specific surface area and good crystallinity.
2.2. Crystal structure
Manganese oxide has several crystalline structures, including α-, β-, γ-, δ-, and λ-MnO2, the different structures can be described by the size of their tunnels determined by the number of octahedral subunits (n × m), as depicted in Fig. 3.106 α-MnO2 consists of double chains of edge-sharing MnO6 octahedra, which are linked at corners to form 1D (2 × 2) and (1 × 1) tunnels in the tetragonal unit cell. The size of the (2 × 2) tunnel is ∼4.6 Å, which is a large tunnel for insertion/extraction of alkali cations.107 β-MnO2 is composed of single strands of edge-sharing MnO6 octahedra to form a 1D (1 × 1) tunnel. Because of the narrow (1 × 1) tunnel of size (∼1.89 Å), β-MnO2 cannot accommodate cations.108 The structure of γ-MnO2 is random intergrowths of ramsdellite (1 × 2) and pyrolusite (1 × 1) domains.109 δ-MnO2 is a 2D layered structure with an interlayer separation of ∼7 Å.110 It has a significant amount of water and stabilizing cations such as Na+ or K+ between the sheets of MnO6 octahedra. λ-MnO2 is a 3D spinel structure.
 Fig. 3  Crystal structures of α-, β-, γ-, δ-, and λ-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Since the energy stored in MnO2 relies on the insertion/extraction of protons or cations in MnO2, the crystallographic structures with sufficient space to accommodate these ions play a crucial role in determining the electrochemical properties. Brousse et al.103 first reported the systematic comparison of the capacitive properties of MnO2 with five different types of crystal structures. They found that the capacitance of MnO2 was clearly dependent on the tunnel sizes of different crystalline structures, More significantly, the tunnel sizes of 1D α-MnO2 (4.6 Å) and 2D δ-MnO2 (7 Å) are suitable for fast insertion of hydrated K+ cations (3 Å), leading to relatively high capacitance values (110 F g−1) considering their moderate BET surface area of 17 m2 g−1. However, 1D tunnel structures such as λ or β-MnO2 provide only a pseudofaradaic surface capacitance of less than 110 μF cm−2 since their tunnel sizes are smaller than the hydrated K+ cations, thus limiting the diffusion process. 3D tunnel structures such as λ-MnO2 with a more open three-dimensional (3D) structure permit partial cationic diffusion, exhibiting some intermediate behavior between 2D birnessite and 1D tunnel structures. The results of their work suggest that the tunnel space should be sufficiently large to accommodate a high rate insertion/extraction of electrolyte ions for charge storage. A similar conclusion was reported by Munichandraiah106 that the specific capacitance measured for the MnO2 electrode is found to depend strongly on the crystallographic structure, and it decreases in the following order: α ≈ δ > γ > λ > β. A wide tunnel size and large interlayer separation of the crystalline structure are ascribed as favorable factors for high specific capacitance. A specific capacitance value of 297 F g−1 is obtained for α-MnO2, whereas it is 9 F g−1 for β-MnO2. A wide (∼4.6 Å) tunnel size and large surface area of α-MnO2 are ascribed as favorable factors for its high capacitance. A large interlayer separation (∼7 Å) also facilitates insertion of cations in δ-MnO2 resulting in a specific capacitance close to 236 F g−1. A narrow tunnel size (1.89 Å) does not allow intercalation of cations into β-MnO2. As a result, it provides a very small specific capacitance.
However, Ghodbane et al.99 found that the relationship between the specific capacitance and tunnel sizes of various crystal structures does not always follow the rule described above. They prepared a series of MnO2 allotropic phases and conducted a systematic study dealing with the crystal structure effects on the charge-storage properties of MnO2 electrode materials. The results show that the 3D spinel λ-MnO2 exhibits the highest specific capacitance (241 F g−1) followed by 2D δ-MnO2 (225 F g−1), and finally, the 1D tunnel structure exhibits the poorest electrochemical performance. For the 1D tunnel group, the larger the cavity, the larger the measured capacity. However, the Ni–todorokite compound exhibits a poor electrochemical performance despite its large 3 × 3 channel size. This is due to the high stability of solvated Ni ions inside the channel cavity that hinder the ionic diffusion through the cage. However, the overall trend is somewhat identical (i.e. specific capacitance increases with an increase in the tunnel size).
Therefore, the charge storage process is not only confined to the crystal structures, but is also affected by other factors, such as the specific surface area of electrode materials, electric conductivity, and ionic conductivity. These factors play important roles in affecting the final capacitive property, which make it difficult to compare the specific capacitance by direct comparison of the tunnel sizes of different crystal structures.
2.3. Morphology
The specific capacitance is closely related to the morphology of the electrode, but there have been few systematic studies on morphology-dependent electrochemical properties. Different morphologies result in different specific surface areas and surface to volume ratios which may lead to different specific capacitances. Many different morphologies of MnO2 have been synthesized and the corresponding electrochemical properties are investigated. Depending on the morphology, the obtained specific surface areas of the MnO2 nanostructures are in the range from 20 to more than 200 m2 g−1, thus altering the specific capacitances of various MnO2 nanostructures.
Several morphologies of MnO2 and their effects on capacitive properties are discussed in this part. The first one is the one-dimensional nanostructured MnO2 with short transport/diffusion path lengths for both ions and electrons, offering large specific surface areas, and thus resulting in high capacitance.111 For example, Wu et al.112 reported the synthesis of MnO2 nanorods (15–35 nm in diameter) and MnO2 nanowires (8–16 nm in diameter). The electrochemical results showed that the nanowires exhibited a higher specific capacitance (350 F g−1) than that of nanorods (243 F g−1) when tested under the same conditions. They concluded that the MnO2 nanowire electrode has the smallest diameter which could provide more active sites for charge transfer and shorten proton diffusion, thus benefitting high-rate charge/discharge. Other examples are MnO2 nanobelts and nanotubes.87,113 Both of them offer large surface area and provide conductive ways for ions, leading to enhanced capacitive properties. Furthermore, MnO2 nanotubes can also accommodate large volume changes during the charge–discharge cycle and thereby improve the life of the electrode.87 The second type of MnO2 morphology is hollow spheres and hollow urchins. For example, Xu et al.114 synthesized α-MnO2 hollow spheres and hollow urchins via a simple hydrothermal process without using any template or organic surfactant. The hollow sphere or urchin structured MnO2 materials possess a high loosely mesoporous cluster structure with a high specific surface area, which leads to enhanced rate capacity and cycling stability. The third morphology is the MnO2 thin film, which is always fabricated as a robust hybrid MnO2 electrode for achieving large areal capacitances. Yi and co-workers reported a facile synthesis of a robust MnO2 thin film involving agarose gel-mediated electrodeposition.115 The resulting electrode exhibited, not only an enhanced areal loading capacity (52.55 mF cm−2), but a high utilization rate of MnO2 as well. These improvements can be explained by a robust film structure and excellent contact with the metallic current collector. The fourth morphology is the MnO2 nanopillar array, which enhances the surface area nearly 4.5 times compared to that of the planar electrode and the structural stability is improved during the intercalation and de-intercalation process, thus leading to remarkable enhancements in specific capacitance, charge/discharge ability, as well as cyclic stability.116 The fifth morphology is 3D porous MnO2 nanostructures, which have gained more and more attention because of their advantages over the bulk counterparts such as higher surface area and less dead volume. These characters are beneficial for reducing the ion diffusion resistance and optimizing the transport kinetics, which could ensure that MnO2 possesses both high energy density and power capability.117
As the functionalities of nanomaterials are largely affected by their structures, especially in an electrode, the morphologies of nanomaterials directly affect their surface areas interacting with the electrolyte. The rational manipulation of the morphologies of nanostructured MnO2 electrodes with high specific surface area and porous structure seems to be very promising in further improvement of the performances of electrodes.
2.4. Conductivity
The conductivity of the electrode material is a vital factor. During the charging process, the electrode–electrolyte interface is balanced by the counter ions from the electrolyte to store charges. It is crucial to control the electrical conductivity of the MnO2 electrodes in order to achieve high specific capacitance and rate capability. It can be observed that the resistance to electron conduction will be more noteworthy in an electrode with low conductivity when the charge/discharge rate increases, which would result in the localized charge/discharge process in a limited volume near the current collector, leading to low specific capacitance and low rate capability. However, it is highly challenging to improve the capacitive property of MnO2 due to its low electrical conductivity (∼10−5 to 10−6 S cm−1). In this case, incorporation of other metal elements (Cu, Ni, Co, Fe, Al, Zn, Mo and Sn) into MnO2 could be an effective way to enhance its electrical conductivity and charge-storage capability.77,118–121 The electrochemical properties after doping indicate that the manipulation of defect chemistry by the chemical modification has a significant influence on the electrical conductivity and, in turn, on the specific capacitance and rate capability. In addition to doping, the utilization of carbon black as the conductive agent in the MnO2 electrode and the design of a free-standing MnO2-based nanocomposite122,123 using conducting polymers or conductive carbon as supporting substrates can be promising solutions to improve the conductivity of MnO2 electrodes. The recent efforts are mostly focused on depositing various MnO2 nanostructures onto highly conductive porous substrates by using a variety of approaches, such as thermal deposition, chemical deposition and electrochemical deposition.
In summary, to achieve high specific capacitance and rate capability for supercapacitors, MnO2-based electrodes can be modified by metal ion doping and depositing onto conducting substrates with high surface area and porous structure.
2.5. Mass loading
In general, the specific capacitance decreases with increasing mass loading of the MnO2 electrode because a large mass loading may cause lower electrical conductivity, limited access of electrolyte ions and higher series resistance due to longer transport paths for the diffusion of protons. Kang et al.124 studied the effect of MnO2 loading on the electrochemical performances by cyclic voltammetry (CV), impedance measurements and the galvanostatic charging/discharging technique. The average specific capacitance decreases linearly from 539 to 188 F g−1, while the corresponding mass loading of MnO2 deposits increases from 0.33 to 3.41 mg cm−2. The results show that an ultrathin MnO2 deposit is indispensable to achieve better electrochemical performance. Another example is the investigation of the electrochemical performance of the carbon nanotube/MnO2/conducting polymer ternary composite electrodes with different MnO2 mass loadings.125 The specific capacitance of the electrodes decreases from 481 to 374 F g−1 with the corresponding MnO2 mass loading range from 0.71 to 3.11 mg cm−2. In addition, a conceptually new colloidal method for the fabrication of MnO2-based composites with high surface area carbon was proposed by Zhitomirsky's group to obtain relatively high material loading electrodes.126,127 To date, most reported research studies of MnO2 electrodes having good electrochemical performances showed a small mass loading of nanoscale MnO2 (<1 mg cm−2) due to the limited supporting surface area or non-uniform porous structure of the conductive substrates.116,128–135 However, a large mass loading of active materials is needed for achieving high power and energy performance of the capacitor device in practical application. Therefore, applying optimal substrates that provide large specific surface areas for a high mass loading of active materials and good electric conductivity for full utilization of MnO2 would be a promising route.
2.6. Electrolyte
Electrolytes are an indispensable element in capacitors since the positive and negative electrodes are interconnected by an electrolyte that determines the charge transport during the charge/discharge process. Until now, there are three types of electrolytes that have been used in MnO2-based SCs, which are aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes, and ionic electrolytes, respectively. Among these three types of electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes are the most widely-used electrolytes since they can provide higher ionic concentration and smaller solvated ions which could promote high conductivity and power delivery. However, a large disadvantage is their small voltage window below 1.2 V because water molecules start to decompose above this voltage, which thus results in a low energy density since the energy density is proportional to the square of the voltage. To solve this problem, organic electrolytes with a higher voltage window up to 1.5–2.0 V have been used, which give rise to energy densities six to nine times that of aqueous electrolytes.136 However, organic electrolytes generally exhibit a poor ion conductivity in comparison with the aqueous electrolyte,137 thus leading to a low power density. Moreover, the use of organic electrolytes also brings in environmental concerns. A further increase in the voltage window can be achieved by using ionic electrolytes. A potential window of 3.0 V of the MnO2 asymmetric supercapacitor has been successfully achieved by using different kinds of ionic electrolytes as electrolytes,138,139 which also exhibited a high energy density of more than 163 W h kg−1. Nevertheless, practical applications of ionic electrolytes still seem difficult as a number of limitations such as high viscosity and poor wettability with electroactive materials are yet to be overcome.
3. Synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures for SCs
Nanostructured MnO2 electrode materials have received extensive interest due to their potential in improving the performance of SCs. It has been demonstrated that the performance of supercapacitors depends on not only the micro-structure but also the morphology of the active material. Hence, control over the dimensions and morphology of electrode materials is very important for manipulating their electrochemical properties.140 The most promising and extensively used method for achieving novel structures is the self-assembly process. Much effort has been focused on the self-assembly of low-dimensional building blocks into hierarchical structures.141–143 To date, many self-assembly processes driven by chemical or physical principles have been developed to construct unique structures by different methods such as the template-assisted method and template-free method.
3.1. Hard template method
Hard templates are those materials which are either used as scaffolds for the deposition or employed not only as shape-defined templates, but also as chemical reagents that react with other chemicals to produce desired nanomaterials. In the development of various MnO2 nanostructures, the hard template method is widely used, and coupled with solvothermal/hydrothermal methods. There are quite a lot of hard templates have been used for the synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures, such as SiO2 spheres,82 mesoporous silica,144 naturally-existing diatomite,145 porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO),146 polycarbonate membranes (PC),87 carbon spheres,147 and carbon nanotubes.148 For example, Tang et al.82 synthesized hierarchical hollow MnO2 nanospheres by a template-assisted hydrothermal process. In this work, SiO2 spheres were used as the template to obtain SiO2@MnO2 core–shell nanospheres, and then hollow MnO2 nanospheres were obtained after etching away the SiO2 core in the NaOH solution. The as-prepared hollow MnO2 nanospheres exhibited good capacitive behavior (299 F g−1) and cycling stability (97.6% retention after 1000 charge/discharge cycles) in a neutral electrolyte system. Using the same strategy, mesoporous MnO2 with uniform nanorod morphology has been synthesized using mesoporous silica SBA-15 as the template.149,150 The electrochemical properties of the prepared MnO2 material are studied using cyclic voltammetry in a mild aqueous electrolyte, which shows that such a mesoporous MnO2 nanostructure has a high specific capacitance of 258 F g−1 and a good reversibility due to its favorable phase and hierarchically porous structure as well as high surface area. The naturally occurring diatomite with an extraordinary 3D structure is one of the promising templates for the preparation of porous nanostructures, because of its high porosity, low bulk density, stable chemical properties, and large specific area.151,152 Recently, different types of hierarchical hollow MnO2 patterns with both a large surface area and a 3D structure are successfully prepared by a diatomite template-assisted hydrothermal process (Fig. 4).153 The proposed process is based on a hydrothermal reaction where in the first step KMnO4 is used to obtain the nanostructured layer of MnO2 on the surface of diatoms. In the second step, diatom silica is removed and MnO2 with the diatom preserved shape and morphology is achieved. The electrochemical characterization of the MnO2 diatom replicas used as electrodes for the supercapacitors showed a high specific capacitance (371.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1), good cycling stability (93.9% retention after 2000 cycles) and rate capability (54.7% capacitance retention). However, these silica-based hard templates can be just used for the synthesis of MnO2 powders which are less suitable for the preparation of MnO2 thin film electrodes. This is a serious disadvantage of silica-templating methods, limiting their usefulness in the development of numerous thin film-based light-weight supercapacitor devices with nanoporous MnO2 components.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of diatomite structures with different morphologies (a, d, and g) and the corresponding hierarchical hollow MnO2 patterns by replica molding from diatomites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) film is also one of the attractive templates since it possesses very regular and highly anisotropic porous structures with pore diameters ranging from below 10 to 200 nm, pore length from 1 to 50 μm, and pore densities in the range of 109 to 1011 cm−2.154 The pores have been found to be uniform and nearly parallel, which is useful for the synthesis of one-dimensional MnO2 nanostructures, affording short ion diffusion paths and fast kinetics during the electrochemical reactions. Using the AAO as the template, MnO2 nanotubes and nanowires arrays can be prepared by a sol–gel method or electrodeposition method (Fig. 5).155–159 The as-prepared MnO2 nanotube and nanowire arrays are investigated as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications and show a good electrochemical performance. However, the cost of AAO templates limits their large-scale application for the production of well-organized MnO2 nanostructured electrodes. In addition to the AAO template, polycarbonate membranes (PC) with different pore diameters were also developed to prepare MnO2 nanotubes. For instance, Huang et al.87 first reported that porous MnO2 nanotubes comprised of nanosheets could be fabricated by using a polycarbonate membrane as the template after the hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 6). The diameter and thickness of nanotubes can be controlled by the choice of the membrane pore size and the chemistry. The specific capacitance of the MnO2 nanotube-based electrode was 365 F g−1 at a current density of 0.25 A g−1 with a capacitance retention of 90.4% retention after 3000 cycles in a three-electrode cell system. Similarly, MnO2 tubular arrays with different sizes and morphologies have been synthesized by tuning the size of the PC template and reaction temperature.160 The results showed that the sample of MnO2-200-100 which is synthesized from the PC template with 200 nm diameter at a temperature of 100 °C exhibited the best performance among those MnO2 nanotubes. MnO2-200-100 exhibits a porous structure with an inner diameter of 80 nm. Such a porous structure ensures efficient electrolyte diffusion throughout the tubes, leading to enhanced capacitive properties. Moreover, carbon nanospheres, nanotubes, and nanofibers can be used as sacrificial templates for the synthesis of hollow MnO2 nanostructures.161–164 The morphology of MnO2 nanostructures can be adjusted by changing the reaction time or annealing process.
 Fig. 5  MnO2 nanotube and nanowire arrays made from AAO templates: (a and b) AAO template and MnO2 nanotube arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c and d) MnO2 nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2010, Elsevier B.V. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the procedure to synthesize porous MnO2 nanotubes. SEM images of MnO2 nanotubes. (b) Detailed images of the MnO2 nanotubes. (c) Side-view of MnO2 nanotube arrays. (d) Enlarged view of the MnO2 nanotube arrays. (e) The energy density vs. power density of the MnO2 nanotubes//AG asymmetric supercapacitor in a Ragone plot for fuel cells, conventional batteries, conventional capacitors, and ultracapacitors. (f) Digital image of a red-light-emitting diode (LED) lighted by the MnO2 nanotubes//AG device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
In summary, hard templates can be used for the controlled synthesis of ordered MnO2 nanostructures, which could be quite useful for the scientific understanding of some fundamental issues. However, these templates always suffer from high cost and complicated removal processes through acid or base etching and calcination. Therefore, a great challenge is the development of low-cost and simple templating methods to fabricate unique MnO2 nanostructures.
3.2. Soft template method
The soft template method is also applied to the synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures. Soft templates include surfactants, flexible organic molecules, microemulsions or block copolymers,165 which can act as structure-directing agents in the formation of MnO2. Compared to the hard template method, the soft-template method has advantages such as a simple process and relatively low cost. During the self-assembly process in the synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures, the surface tension can be reduced largely by surface adsorption of the surfactant with unique amphiphilic structure. In addition, the long molecular chains of surfactants generate steric effects which can reduce the agglomeration phenomenon, thus controlling the particle size and maintaining a high specific surface area. Furthermore, owing to their self-assembly function, surfactants can be used as micro-reactors to regulate and control materials morphology and the structure of MnO2, thus improving its capacitance performance.166 Until now, various MnO2 nanostructures have been synthesized by different surfactants, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),167–171 hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB),172–174 polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP),175–178 Pluronic P123 (PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO triblock copolymer),179–181 tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB),182–184 and polyethylene glycol (PEG).185–187
Yin's group synthesized single-layer MnO2 nanosheets via a redox reaction between KMnO4 and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The gradual hydrolysis of SDS is found to be the key factor for the successful formation of single-layer nanosheets. SDS not only serves as the precursor of dodecanol to reduce KMnO4, but also aids the formation of single-layer MnO2 nanosheets as a structure-inducing agent.188 Single-crystal α-MnO2 ultralong nanowires with a length of ∼40 μm were synthesized by Hu's group using a PVP assisted hydrothermal route.189 The MnO2 nuclei are formed during the decomposition of KMnO4 and then adsorb on the PVP long chains, which can act as a template and stabilizer for the MnO2 crystal growth, preventing the precipitation and aggregation of MnO2 nuclei. Thus, the PVP and MnO2 nuclei assemble together. As the reaction proceeds, MnO2 NWs are formed due to Ostwald ripening. The as-prepared ultra-long α-MnO2 nanowires exhibited an enhanced specific capacitance of 345 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with high rate capability and good cycling stability. Triblock copolymer P123 is one of the popular structure-directing agents, which acts as a soft template during the preparation of MnO2 nanostructures. When Mn2+ ions are added into the P123 solution, Mn2+ first coordinates with the polymer to form the Mn2+–P123 complex and then MnO2 particles grow along the polymer chains when Mn2+ is oxidized by KMnO4, forming nanorods that pile up to secondary particles. Wang et al.190 synthesized porous MnO2via an ultrasound-microwave-intensified precipitation method with the soft template of triblock polymer P123. The MnO2 particles showed a loose sphere-network structure with tiny pores (4–5 nm in diameter) inside the spheres, and architectural mesopores and macropores among the secondary particles. The specific capacitance of the as-prepared MnO2 was as high as 214 F g−1 and the capacitance reduction was less than 10% after 5000 cycles.
Although conceptually simple and versatile, the soft template has its own limitations. It usually requires surface modification of the template and the template removing process is time-consuming. The soft template often has the difficulty to control the size, shape and uniformity of the product. Besides, the residual surfactant may envelop MnO2 particles, increase the ion resistance and reduce the charge storage capability of MnO2 electrodes.166 Therefore, it still remains a major challenge to develop a facile low cost, and environmentally benign method for the controllable synthesis of MnO2 for supercapacitors.
3.3. Template-free method
Apart from the above mentioned template-assisted methods, there are many other techniques that can be used to synthesize MnO2 nanostructures, such as hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, sol–gel methods, microwave-assisted methods, electrodeposition methods, and electrospinning methods.

3.3.1 Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods. 
Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods have been widely used to synthesize MnO2 nanostructures with specific sizes and morphologies. Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are similar synthetic methods, except for the reaction medium. They both apply high temperature and high pressure to promote the reaction. The temperature adopted is often higher than 100 °C in order to reach the pressure of vapor saturation, so that autogenous pressure will be developed in a closed system. In addition to the temperature, other experimental factors, such as the type and amount of solvent and dissolved salts, also have a significant effect on the morphology and structure of prepared MnO2 products.191 Until now, hydrothermal/solvothermal methods have achieved great success in the preparation of MnO2 with various nanostructures, such as nanowires/nanorods/nanobelts,192–200 micro/nanoflowers,201–204 micro/nanospheres,205–209 nanotubes,210–212 nanosheets,213–215 nanoparticles,216–218 and so on. Recently, Wei et al.219 synthesized a novel 2D β-MnO2 network with long-range order through a one-pot hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 7). Such a novel structure makes efficient contact of β-MnO2 with the electrolyte during the electrochemical process, decreases the polarization of the electrode and thus increases the discharge capacity and high-rate capability. The as-prepared 2D β-MnO2 network exhibited a specific capacitance of 453 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1.
 Fig. 7  (a–d) SEM images with different magnifications of the obtained β-MnO2 network. (e and f) HRTEM images of the obtained β-MnO2 network. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.3.2 Sol–gel method. 
The sol–gel technique also attracts significant attention for the synthesis of MnO2 because it offers controllable purity, composition, homogeneity of the products. It can be briefly summarized to be the transformation from the manganese precursor solution to solid MnO2 powders or thin films. Although there are many merits of sol–gel methods, their large scale application is still hindered by the requirement of large amounts of organic solvents and reagents. Pang et al.98,220 first used the sol–gel technique to prepare MnO2 thin film electrodes for capacitors. The cyclic voltammograms of the sol–gel-derived MnO2 films showed specific capacitance values as high as 698 F g−1. In 2003, Reddy et al.221 used a sol–gel method to get two forms of MnO2, namely xerogel and ambigel. After that, various MnO2 nanostructures have been synthesized by sol–gel methods with different precursors.222–225 In the recent study by Sarkar et al.,226 a mesoporous manganese oxide film was fabricated by a sol–gel method followed by an annealing process. The amorphous MnO2 film shows a specific capacitance of 360 F g−1 at a current of 0.82 A g−1 and a large density of 48.8 W h kg−1 at a power density of 1.16 W kg−1.


3.3.3 Microwave-assisted method. 
Microwave-assisted methods have been used in the preparation of inorganic materials due to their wide applicability such as short reaction times (can reduce the reaction time often by orders of magnitude), low cost, and high yields.227,228 Unlike conventional oil bath or hydrothermal heating, an inverted temperature gradient takes place during the microwave-assisted process. A rapid dielectric heating is generated internally within the material due to applied microwave radiation with a commonly used frequency of 0.3 to 2.45 GHz.229 Microwave-assisted synthesis has been adopted to prepare MnO2 with highly uniform microstructures.230–234 For example, Nyutu et al.230 prepared α-MnO2 nanofibers in mixed aqueous and dimethyl sulfoxide solvent by use of microwave reflux. This process required about 10 min to start crystallizing the α-MnO2 phase and about 90 min to fully crystallize the phase. Yu et al.231 developed a microwave-assisted emulsion process to synthesize one-dimensional (1D) birnessite-type MnO2 nanostructures. As a consequence of the small size, such MnO2 nanostructures exhibit a high specific capacitance of 277 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2. Zhang et al.233 reported that γ-MnO2 nanoparticles and α-MnO2 urchin-like nanostructures have been successfully synthesized by the microwave-assisted reflux in as short as 5 min under neutral and acidic conditions, respectively. γ-MnO2 nanoparticles obtained from the neutral conditions exhibited a capacitance of 311 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1, which is much higher than that of α-MnO2 urchin-like nanostructures (163 F g−1).
In microwave synthesis, the morphologies and phases are difficult to control. An emerging attractive concept is to combine the microwave method with the hydrothermal method. The coupled microwave-hydrothermal method possesses advantages of both hydrothermal and microwave conditions, which can dramatically reduce the reaction time from 10 h or even several days down to 30 min, and also keep the ability to control the morphology and size distribution of the products.235 Ming et al.236 reported a rapid and scalable synthesis of birnessite-type MnO2 nanospheres by the microwave-hydrothermal method at 75 °C for 30 min under low pressure. The electrochemical test results show that the specific capacitance is 210 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 in 1.0 M Na2SO4 electrolyte, and the SC retention and coulombic efficiency are over 96% and 98% respectively after 300 cycles at 1.6 A g−1. Using a similar method, Xue's group reported a coupled microwave-hydrothermal process to crystallize polymorphs of MnO2 such as α-, β-, and γ-phase samples with plate-, rod-, and wire-like shapes, using a controllable redox reaction in the MnCl2–KMnO4 aqueous solution system.237


3.3.4 Electrodeposition methods. 
The electrodeposition method proceeds in the solution containing the targeting ions which will be deposited on the anodic or cathodic electrode substrates by controlling the deposition rate, and thus the target material films with different densities and morphologies will be obtained.238,239 The electrodeposition technique has been widely used because of its simplicity, the elimination of polymer binders, non-polluting nature and modest reaction conditions.240–243 In fact, the electrodeposition of MnO2 can be generally divided into galvanostatic (GS),244,245 potentiostatic (PS),246 and cyclic voltammetric (CV)247 techniques according to the different styles of applied voltage or current. These different deposition routes significantly influence the surface morphology and crystal structure of the final product, which are also related to the capacitive properties. Using the electrodeposition method, many interesting MnO2 nanostructures or films have been prepared. For example, manganese oxide nanostructures are synthesized by the pulse reverse electrodeposition technique for electrode materials for SCs. The morphology and composition of MnO2 can be controlled by the pattern of the applied potential.248 Dupont et al.249 reported the anodic electrodeposition of manganese dioxide from a solution of 0.01 M MnSO4 in 0.1 M H2SO4 onto a platinum substrate. Electrochemical data indicate that the dilute acid solution favors the formation of MnO2via a MnOOH intermediate (hydrolysis).
A facile 3D hierarchically structured MnO2 nanowire supported on hollow Ni dendrites was prepared via an electrodeposition method.250 The resultant 3D hierarchical Ni@MnO2 structure is highly porous and like a forest of pine trees grown vertically on a substrate (Fig. 8). In addition, the as-prepared MnO2 electrode shows a remarkable high-rate performance (1097 and 766 F g−1 at discharge current densities of 12.5 and 100 A g−1, respectively). Yang et al.251 fabricated a nanostructured porous MnO2 film on a Ni foam substrate via a cyclic voltammetric electrodeposition route for the first time. The obtained MnO2 film had a 3D network structure and a high mass loading from 6 to 18 mg cm−2. This material achieved a maximum specific capacitance of 2790 mF cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2 and 864 mF cm−2 at 20 mA cm−2, and the specific capacitance can be retained above 90% after 1000 cycles at 5 mA cm−2. Hu and co-workers prepared a porous hybrid manganese oxide electrode on porous electroformed nickel by applying a current density of 1 to 14 mA cm−2 in a solution bath of 0.1 M manganese acetate and 0.1 M sodium sulphate.245 With increasing deposition current densities, the manganese oxide electrode changed from porous and fibrous to a denser film. The relationship among the deposition parameters, morphology and electrochemical characteristics of MnO2 electrodes is also discussed.
 Fig. 8  (a–c) SEM images of hollow Ni dendrites. (d–f) Hollow Ni dendrite-supported MnO2 nanowires (Ni@MnO2) grown on Ni foil. The corresponding insets are low-magnification images. (g–i) Electrochemical measurements of Ni@MnO2 structures prepared on Ni foils. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.5 Electrospinning method. 
The electrospinning method is a versatile technique to produce nanofibers with a controllable diameter, morphology and surface topology from a variety of organic and inorganic materials. It gives the impression of being a very simple and, therefore, easily controllable technique for the production of fibers with dimensions down to the nanometer range. First, polymers will be surveyed as fiber-forming materials. Later, materials such as metals, ceramics, and glasses will be considered as fiber precursors.252 Electrospinning mainly makes use of the electrostatic repulsions between surface charges to reduce the diameter of a viscoelastic jet or a glassy filament. A number of functions can be incorporated into the nanofibers by electrospinning to expand their potential applications with the only prerequisite that the second phase can be soluble or well dispersed in the initial solution.253 This simple, cheap, and scalable method has been successfully applied to produce MnO2-based nanostructures.175,254,255 Li et al.255 adopted the electrospinning method to fabricate ordered nanofibers with the MnO2 precursor on the glass-collector with two parallel grounded electrodes. The solution used for this step was a mixture of 8 wt% poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP, Mw ≈ 360000, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 g Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O in a 4 mL alcohol–deionized water solvent mixture (volume ratio = 3:7). The as-fabricated supercapacitor possesses an electrochemical capacitance as high as 645 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, as well as good stability, retaining 95% of its initial capacitance after 2000 consecutive cycles. Zhang and co-workers fabricated manganese oxide/carbon nanofiber (MnOx/CNF) composites as freestanding electrodes through incorporating different manganese sources of nanostructured MnO2 or Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O into polyacrylonitrile (PAN) solution by electrospinning and a subsequent carbonization method.175 The resulting MnOx/CNFs demonstrated excellent electrochemical performance with great rate capability, low internal resistance and long-term cycling stability.
Morphology, crystallinity and microstructures are important factors in affecting the final electrochemical performance of MnO2 electrodes. It is extremely crucial to explore the optimal synthesis method. In this chapter, the fundamentals and different methods for the synthesis of various MnO2 structures have been summarized. Three types of strategies, including hard-template, soft-template and template-free methods, have been reviewed and discussed in detail. Among these methods, the hard template method involves the deposition of MnO2 on various hard templates (porous silica, AAO, PC and carbon nanotubes), followed by the removal of these hard templates by either dissolution or calcination. The hard template method can be highly useful for the synthesis of ordered MnO2 nanostructures, but it always suffers from high cost and complicated removal processes through acid or base etching and calcination. The soft template method is also employed for the synthesis of various MnO2 structures by altering the type and concentration of surfactant. The use of the soft template method always results in the formation of mesoporous MnO2, which makes them promising candidates for supercapacitor electrodes. The soft template method can overcome some disadvantages of the hard template method but the control over size, shape and uniformity of MnO2 is limited in comparison to hard templating. By contrast, template-free methods are investigated in the synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures considering the fact that template removal is a critical problem in template-based methods, which makes them complicated. Furthermore, the composition, defect chemistry, various morphologies and even crystal structure can be manipulated through adjusting different template-free methods.

4. MnO2-based composite for SCs
4.1. MnO2–carbon composites for SCs
Forming MnO2-based hybrid structures with highly conductive carbons is one of the most adopted methods to improve the capacitor performance of MnO2 electrodes whose poor conductivities limit their capacitance, cycling life and rate performance. Carbon materials (carbon nanotubes, graphene, porous carbon, carbon nanofibers, carbon spheres, carbon nanofoam/aerogel) are promising candidates to couple with MnO2 nanostructures in view of their good electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical/electrochemical stability.

4.1.1 MnO2–carbon nanotube (CNTs) composite. 
CNTs are the most representative nanostructured carbons with one-dimensional tubular structure and exhibit outstanding structural and electrical properties such as high electrical conductivity, high mechanical strength, high chemical stability, and high activated surface areas, which hold great promise in constructing MnO2–CNT architectures with enhanced energy storage capability. The incorporation of MnO2 on CNT architectures can be realized through many effective synthetic protocols such as electrodeposition techniques, hydrothermal treatment, microwave-assisted methods, chemical co-precipitation, and thermal decomposition.256–260 Zhang et al.261 reported a controllable synthesis of manganese oxide nanoflower/carbon nanotube array (CNTA) composite electrodes with hierarchical porous structure, large surface area, and superior conductivity by using an electrodeposition technique. This binder-free manganese oxide/CNTA electrode presents good rate capability (50.8% capacity retention at 77 A g−1), high capacitance (199 F g−1 and 305 F cm−3), and long cycle life (3% capacity loss after 20000 charge/discharge cycles). Li et al.262 prepared the MnO2/CNT composite by a modified chemical method in a mild one-pot reaction process. The MnO2 layer with about 50 nm thickness attaches to the sidewalls of the inner nanotubes uniformly. The composite exhibits a specific capacitance of 201 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, with good rate capability (140 F g−1 at 20 A g−1) and capacitance retention upon cycling (no decay after 10000 cycles).
Recently, Mai and co-workers developed a flexible, low-cost and high-performance hybrid electrode based on MnO2 nanotubes (NTs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) by employing a facile vacuum-filtering method.263 The CNTs in the film not only provide a mechanical reinforcement effect, but also act as an electron transport medium. The as-synthesized capacitor devices by the freestanding CNT/MnO2 NT hybrid electrodes exhibited an excellent volumetric capacitance of 5.1 F cm−3 and a high energy density of 0.45 mW h cm−3 for the entire supercapacitor volume. Huang et al.264 fabricated three-dimensional carbon nanotubes@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures grown on Ni foam for binder-free capacitor electrodes by a floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition process and a facile hydrothermal approach. Ultrathin layered MnO2 nanosheets are uniformly coated on the surface of the carbon nanotubes (CNTs), directly grown on Ni foam (Fig. 9). This unique well-designed binder-free electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance (325.5 F g−1 at a current density of 0.3 A g−1), good rate capability (70.7% retention), and excellent cycling stability (90.5% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles). However, this scalable synthesis of MnO2-coated CNTs may cause problems related to carbon consumption in the redox reaction and collapse of the carbon–carbon bonding structure of CNTs that degrade the electrical conductivity. To decrease the chemical degradation of CNTs, Shi et al.265,266 developed a new approach by using a N-doped activated carbon layer as a sacrificial material to protect the CNTs in the composite, which also allowed a relatively high mass content of MnO2. The approach offered the advantages of a small size of MnO2 nanoparticles, good electrical contact of MnO2 and MWCNTs and a fibrous microstructure of the material. The electrochemical results showed a remarkably high specific capacitance of 6.29 F cm−2 (311.7 F g−1) at a mass loading of 20 mg cm−2, good capacitance retention at high charge/discharge rates and good cycling stability.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) SEM images of CNTs@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures grown on Ni foam. Insets show the corresponding local 3D structures in low magnifications. (c and d) TEM and HRTEM images of a partial coverage of the MnO2 nanosheets on the surface of CNTs. (e and f) Electrochemical properties of the as-prepared CNTs@MnO2 core–shell nanocomposite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.2 MnO2–graphene composite. 
Graphene, a two-dimensional carbon layer with one atom thickness, is attractive for developing high-performance SCs due to its large theoretical specific area (2630 m2 g−1), high electrical conductivity (104 S cm−1), abundant raw material resources, and good electrochemical stability.267 These fascinating properties have motivated extensive efforts to use graphene as the conductive supporting material for MnO2-based SCs. The combination of graphene and MnO2 can generate a synergistic effect to overcome their inherent drawbacks, thus improving the capacitive performance. Until now, various hybrid structures such as graphene nanosheets/MnO2,268–274 graphene nanoribbon/MnO2,275–277 partially exfoliated graphite/MnO2,278,279 3D graphene hydrogel/MnO2,193,280,281 and 3D graphite foam/MnO2 (ref. 282–284) have been studied. For example, Cheng and co-workers reported the preparation of a graphene nanosheets/MnO2 nanowire composite by solution-phase assembly of graphene sheets and MnO2 nanowires (Fig. 10a).268 Huang et al.269 synthesized graphene nanoplate–MnO2 composites by oxidizing part of the carbon atoms in the framework of graphene nanoplates at ambient temperature. Dai et al.273 reported the fabrication of a highly uniform graphene oxide nanosheets/MnO2 nanowire composite on a gram-scale through a hydrothermal process without any catalysts or templates. The results showed that the product consisted of α-MnO2 nanowires with diameters of 20–40 nm and lengths of 0.5–2 μm that were well dispersed on the surfaces of graphene oxide sheets. The electrochemical specific capacitance of the GO/MnO2 composite electrode is as high as 360 F g−1. Liu and co-workers demonstrated a novel hybrid material of graphene nanoribbons and MnO2 nanoparticles (GNR–MnO2) by a one-step method.277 By tuning the amount of oxidant (KMnO4) used in the synthesis process, not only have the pristine CNTs been totally unzipped resulting in the formation of GNR, but also MnO2 nanoparticles have been deposited simultaneously and controllably on the surface or interlayer of GNRs (Fig. 10b). With the GNR–MnO2 hybrid material and pure GNR sheets as the positive and negative electrodes respectively, a high-performance asymmetric supercapacitor, with a widened operating potential window (2.0 V) and a specific capacitance of 212 F g−1, has been fabricated.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of MnO2–graphene composites with different structures. (a) Graphene nanosheets/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Graphene nanoribbons/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Partially exfoliated graphite/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) 3D graphene hydrogel/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Song et al.279 developed a synthesis route to deposit MnO2 nanosheets onto a functionalized exfoliated graphite substrate (Fig. 10c). Ultrathin and functionalized graphene sheets anchored on the graphite provide a large conductive surface area for loading pseudo-capacitive MnO2 nanosheets. The functionalized exfoliated graphite/MnO2 (FEG/MnO2) electrode achieved an excellent areal capacitance of 244 mF cm−2, corresponding to an estimated MnO2 based gravimetric capacitance of 1061 F g−1. The FEG/MnO2 preserved 92% of its initial capacitance after 5000 cycles. Li and co-workers reported a facile method to assemble a hierarchical and interconnected reduced graphene oxide/β-MnO2 (rGO/β-MnO2) nanobelt hybrid hydrogel by dispersion of pre-synthesized ultrathin β-MnO2 nanobelts in graphene oxide precursor solution by a hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 10d).193 The obtained typical rGO/β-MnO2 nanobelt hybrid hydrogel with 54.2% ultrathin β-MnO2 nanobelts exhibits a high specific capacitance of 362 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1, good rate performance and cycling stability. In addition, the highly conductive three-dimensional graphite network produced by chemical vapor deposition using commercially available Ni foam as the sacrificial template was also investigated as an efficient supporting material for MnO2 deposition.285 He et al. developed a type of MnO2-coated free-standing, flexible, lightweight, and highly conductive 3D graphene network. The high specific surface area (392 m2 g−1) allows for the large mass loading of 92.9% MnO2 (Fig. 11).282 The hybrid flexible electrodes exhibit a high areal capacitance of 1.42 F cm2 and a high specific capacitance of 130 F g−1 (based on the total weight of the electrode). Moreover, the flexible supercapacitor exhibits an energy density of 6.8 W h kg−1 at a power density of 62 W kg−1 with a 1 V potential window. It preserves 55% of its energy density when the power density increases to 2500 W kg−1. These properties were found to be superior to those of other MnO2-based symmetric flexible SCs (Fig. 11d) and can be further improved by an asymmetric supercapacitor design.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) SEM image of 3D graphene networks and 3D graphene/MnO2 composite networks. Inset shows the high-magnification SEM image. (c) Schematic of the flexible supercapacitors. The two digital photographs show the flexible supercapacitors when bended. (d) Ragone plots of the flexible supercapacitor, compared with the values of similar symmetrical systems from other references. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.3 MnO2–porous carbon composite. 
Porous carbon is another attractive supporting material for MnO2 due to its desirable electrolyte transport routes. Yang and co-workers reported the synthesis of a series of MnO2/carbon nanocomposites with varying amounts of ultrathin MnO2 nanofibers grown on a three-dimensional ordered macroporous carbon framework via the redox reaction occurring between the KMnO4 solution and the sacrificial carbon substrate.286 Liu et al.287 developed MnO2/porous carbon microspheres with a partially graphitic structure for high performance supercapacitor electrode materials. In this hybrid structure, micro- and mesoporous carbon microspheres were fabricated based on a hydrothermal emulsion polymerization and common activation process. Manganese nitrate was introduced into the pores of the carbon microspheres, followed by thermal treatment to transform it into amorphous MnO2. As a result, the MnO2/porous carbon microspheres as supercapacitor electrodes exhibited excellent electrochemical performance (459 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 and 354 F g−1 at 20.0 A g−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte). Li et al.288 developed a facile strategy for the synthesis of MnO2 nanoflakes/hierarchical porous carbon spheres nanocomposites (HPCs) via a two-step redox process. The external MnO2 nanoflakes with a thickness of 10 nm were deposited on the surface of the HPCs, resulting in the formation of a hierarchical architecture of the composites. The MnO2 nanoflakes/HPC composite possessed a capacitance of 417 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1 with good cycling stability (slightly over 100% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles). Wang et al.289 reported a simple and industry-scalable approach to prepare the MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid structure (Fig. 12). The 3D porous carbon not only provided a conductive network to enhance the charge transport and mass transfer during the electrochemical process, but also allowed for a large MnO2 mass loading. As a result, the as-prepared MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid electrode exhibits a high specific capacitance of 416 F g−1 and a large areal capacitance of 2.77 F cm−2 (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of 3D porous carbon. (b–d) SEM images of the MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid structure after MnO2 deposition. (f) Specific capacitance vs. scan rate for samples with different areal mass densities for MnO2. (b) Areal capacitance of the MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid electrode vs. MnO2 mass loading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.4 MnO2–carbon nanofiber composite. 
Carbon fiber is also a promising backbone for the conformal coating of MnO2 for SCs. The single carbon fibers can connect with each other to form a conductive network with appropriate pore channels, which give rise to efficient electron and ion transportation. Kang and co-workers reported the synthesis of carbon nanofibers (CNFs)/MnO2 nanocomposites as freestanding electrodes.290,291 The maximum specific capacitance (based on pristine MnO2) was 557 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. This freestanding electrode also exhibited good rate capability (power density of 13.5 kW kg−1 and energy density of 20.9 W h kg−1 at 30 A g−1) and long-term cycling stability (retaining 94% of its initial capacitance after 1500 cycles). Zhi et al.292 presented highly conductive carbon nanofiber/MnO2 coaxial cables in which individual electrospun carbon nanofibers are coated with an ultrathin hierarchical MnO2 layer (Fig. 13). In the hierarchical MnO2 structure, a 4 nm thick sheath surrounds the carbon nanofiber (CNF) with a diameter of 200 nm, and nano-whiskers grow radically outward from the sheath in view of the cross-section of the coaxial cables, giving a high specific surface area of MnO2. The MnO2–carbon nanofiber composite electrode shows a specific capacitance of 311 F g−1 for the whole electrode and 900 F g−1 for the MnO2 shell at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Chen et al.92 developed a simple and scalable approach to fabricate a binder-free asymmetric supercapacitor using bacterial-cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers loaded with MnO2 and nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers as electrode materials. The optimal device can be reversibly charged/discharged at an operation voltage of 2.0 V in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte, delivering a high energy density of 32.91 W h kg−1 and a maximum power density of 284.63 kW kg−1, possessing a remarkable cycling stability with approximately 95.4% capacity remaining after 2000 continuous cycles.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images of the carbon nanofibers and carbon nanofiber@MnO2 composite. (c and d) TEM images of a single carbon nanofiber@MnO2 nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2012, Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.5 MnO2–carbon sphere composite. 
Carbon spheres are one of the representative nanostructured carbons to serve as the cores to fabricate carbon sphere@MnO2 core–shell nanocomposites for enhanced electrochemical performance of supercapacitor electrodes.293–296 Zhao and co-workers prepared MnO2 nanofibers on graphitic hollow carbon spheres (GHCS) by refluxing GHCS in a KMnO4 aqueous solution.294 The stoichiometric redox reaction between GHCS and MnO4− yields GHCS–MnO2 composites with controllable MnO2 content. It is found that these ultrathin MnO2 nanofibers are vertically grown on the external surface of the GHCS, yielding a composite electrode showing good electron transport, rapid ion penetration, fast and reversible faradaic reaction, and excellent rate performance when used as a supercapacitor electrode material. Zhao et al.295 presented a facile, efficient and low-cost preparation of carbon@MnO2 core–shell nanospheres as the electrode material for SCs with improved electrochemical performances (Fig. 14). First, carbon nanospheres were produced by aromatization and carbonization of glucose under hydrothermal conditions. Subsequently, MnO2 nanoshells can be in situ anchored on the surfaces of the carbon spheres through a facile redox reaction between KMnO4 and carbon. By simply controlling the reaction time, various nanostructure MnO2 shells with different morphologies and crystalline structures are obtained. Typically, the hybrid nanospheres with flower-like birnessite-type MnO2 shells exhibit a highest capacitance of 252 F g−1 (based on the mass of MnO2) at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, and an excellent rate performance with a specific capacitance of 175 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1. Recently, Li et al.296 developed a facile approach to directly grow MnO2 nanosheets on hollow carbon frameworks with the aid of the redox reaction between KMnO4 and carbon. The hollow carbon spheres were produced through a simple and inexpensive template-directed coating method with resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF) resin as the carbon source. Due to the synergistic effect between hollow carbon spheres and MnO2, the carbon spheres@MnO2 composites exhibit a high specific capacitance of 306 F g−1, good rate capability, and desirable cycling performance (95.2% after 5000 cycles).
 Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images of carbon spheres and the carbon sphere@MnO2 core–shell composite. (c–g) TEM and corresponding EDS of the carbon sphere@MnO2 core–shell composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.6 MnO2–carbon nanofoam/aerogel composite. 
Carbon nanofoams and carbon aerogel nanoarchitectures are particularly attractive for electrochemical capacitor applications due to their inherent structural characteristics that include high specific surface areas, through-connected networks of mesopores and/or macropores, tunable pore sizes ranging from nanometers to micrometers, durable monolithic, moldable forms, and reasonable electronic conductivity.297,298 Manganese oxide is easy to form a composite on the surface or in the large aperture of the carbon nanofoams/aerogels due to the physical characteristics, thus the active sites of the MnO2 electrodes can be optimized and the specific capacitance can be improved. For example, Fischer et al.297 demonstrated the self-limiting deposition of homogeneous MnO2 throughout macroscopically thick porous carbon nanofoams. The MnO2 coating contributes additional capacitance to the carbon nanofoam while maintaining the favorable high-rate electrochemical performance inherent to the ultraporous carbon structure of the nanofoam. Such a three-dimensional design exploits the benefits of a nanoscopic MnO2–carbon interface to produce an exceptionally high area-normalized capacitance (1.5 F cm−2), as well as high volumetric capacitance (90 F cm−3). Lv et al.299 prepared the nano-sized amorphous α-MnO2-dispersed carbon aerogels (CAs) by a liquid phase co-precipitation technique. Filamentous nano-MnO2 has been formed and homogeneously dispersed among the three-dimensional mesoporous network of CA. The as-prepared MnO2-dispersed CAs exhibit a specific capacitance of 219 F g−1, and that for the MnO2 ingredient in the composite is as high as 401 F g−1. Tong and co-workers explored a novel route to prepare mesoporous MnO2/carbon aerogel composites by electrochemical deposition assisted by gas bubbles.300 The growth rates of deposits can easily be well controlled by deposition potentials, current densities, or salt concentrations. The prepared mesoporous MnO2/carbon aerogel composites have been successfully employed as supercapacitor electrodes and give a high specific capacitance (515.5 F g−1). Ren et al.301 presented a facile and scalable method to synthesize MnO2 loaded carbonaceous aerogel (MnO2@CA) composites via the hydrothermal carbonaceous process. The obtained MnO2@CA displays a specific capacitance of 123.5 F g−1. The enhanced capacity of MnO2@CA nanocomposites could be ascribed to both electrochemical contributions of the loaded MnO2 nanoparticles and the porous structure of three-dimensional carbonaceous aerogels.
Various carbon materials have been investigated as supporting materials for the deposition of MnO2 nanostructures due to their outstanding properties, such as high electrical conductivity, chemical stability in both acidic and alkaline medium, and light weight. These features enable carbon materials to be the most popular scaffold materials for fabrication of MnO2 electrodes. As discussed above, the current MnO2–carbon composite electrodes are mainly focusing on loading MnO2 on carbon nanotubes, graphene, porous carbon, carbon nanofibers, carbon spheres and carbon nanofoams. These carbons can act both as high surface area mechanical supports and current collectors for the active MnO2 phase to improve the conductivity of the electrode. It is noted that the carbon scaffolds can also act as active materials for charge storage, simultaneously increasing the whole capacitance of the composite electrodes.
However, the largely enhanced specific capacitance of MnO2 is due to the relatively low mass loading of MnO2, resulting in a low energy density of the overall supercapacitor cell. Besides, the measurement and report of the capacitive properties of MnO2 based electrodes should follow industrial procedures and standards. Therefore, it is essential to optimize the mass loading of MnO2 materials to achieve high specific capacitance without sacrificing the good conductivity and rate capability in terms of both gravimetric and volumetric bases.

4.2. MnO2–conducting polymer composites for SCs
Conducting polymers, such as polyaniline (PANI), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polypyrrole (PPy), are also considered as a category of promising supporting materials to couple with MnO2 for advanced electrochemical energy storage.302–304 The advantages of conducting polymers mainly include good conductivity, controllable synthesis, feasibility of forming uniform and porous structures, and pseudo-capacitive characters. Based on these properties, the combination of conducting polymers with MnO2 would harvest the synergetic effects between polymers and oxides, thus providing some superiority for the supercapacitor application.

4.2.1 MnO2–polyaniline (PANI) composite. 
Polyaniline (PANI) is one candidate for supercapacitors due to its electrochemical reversibility, easy synthesis, high stability, good conductivity, and good stability. By introducing PANI into MnO2 nanostructures to form the MnO2–PANI composite, the conductivity and pseudo-capacitive properties can be improved.305–307 Jafri et al.308 reported the preparation of a novel binary hybrid nanocomposite based on polyaniline (PANI) and α-MnO2 nanotubes by in situ polymerization. The polymerization is carried out in acidic medium using α-MnO2 nanotubes as the oxidant. The obtained MnO2–PANI nanocomposite shows the maximum specific capacitance of 626 F g−1 and the corresponding energy density of 17.8 W h kg−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 in the potential range of 0–0.7 V. Guo and c-oworkers proposed a facile and scalable one-step strategy for patterning ultrathin MnO2 nanorods (3 nm in diameter) on the surfaces of PANI nanofibers by using polymer nanofibers and KMnO4 as raw materials (Fig. 15).309 The loading amount and patterning of MnO2 nanorods on the surfaces of PANI nanofibers can be controlled by simply altering the KMnO4 concentration. In comparison with PANI nanofibers, the specific capacitance of MnO2–PANI composites has substantially increased by almost four-fold, with values as high as 417 F g−1 achieved. Using the same method, Jiang et al.310 demonstrated the facile loading of ultrafine and loosened K-birnessite MnO2 floccules on the surface of polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers by simply soaking the polyaniline nanofibers in a KMnO4 aqueous solution. The as-prepared PANI–MnO2 coaxial nanofibers with optimal composition, when applied as an electrode, exhibited a high specific capacitance (383 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) with good rate and cycling stability. Such intriguing electrochemical performance is mainly attributed to the synergistic effects of the combined pseudo-capacitive contributions from the PANI core and MnO2 shell.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of 1D conducting polymer–MnO2 composites. TEM images of (b) PANI and (c and d) PANI–MnO2 composites. (e) SAED pattern, and EDS maps of (f) Mn and (g) O from a single composite nanofiber. Scale bars: (b and c) 100 nm; (d, f and g) 20 nm. (h and i) Electrochemical properties of the PANI–MnO2 composite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 MnO2–poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) composite. 
Due to the excellent conductivity, high stability, good capacitive behavior and mechanical flexibility of PEDOT, the MnO2–PEDOT composite has received extensive attention in SCs. Lee and co-workers demonstrated the synthesis of a coaxial manganese oxide/poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene) (MnO2/PEDOT) nanowire composite by performing electrodeposition of MnO2 and PEDOT on Au-sputtered nanoelectrodes with different shapes (ring and flat-top, respectively) within the 200 nm diameter pores of an anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template.311 The as-prepared MnO2/PEDOT coaxial nanowires showed the highest specific capacitance of 270 F g−1 when synthesized at a potential of 0.70 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Rios et al. prepared the composite electrodes of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and manganese oxide (PEDOT/MnO2) by electrodeposition of manganese oxide over a PEDOT-modified titanium substrate. Tang et al.312 developed a class of novel composite electrodes based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and manganese dioxide (MnO2) by step-by-step anodic deposition on nickel foam. The optimized PEDOT/MnO2/PEDOT sandwich electrode shows excellent capacitive behavior, and MnO2 species in the optimized sandwich electrode possesses a high specific capacitance of 487.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Zhang and co-workers presented a facile and scalable method to synthesize a core–shell-branch hierarchical MnO2@PEDOT@MnO2 composite by using a simple electrochemical deposition strategy.313 The maximum specific capacitance of 449 F g−1 is achieved through the galvanostatic charge/discharge test at a current density of 0.5 A g−1.


4.2.3 MnO2–polypyrrole (PPy) composite. 
Polypyrrole (PPy) is also a commonly used conducting polymer for constructing the MnO2–PPy composite due to its large specific surface area, high conductivity, and good stability.314,315 Zhang et al.316 reported the preparation of MnO2–PPy composites through chemical oxidation of the pyrrole monomer and MnO2 suspension with ammonium peroxysulfate at low temperature. The electrochemical results indicated that the MnO2–PPy composite electrode exhibited a specific capacitance of 352.8 F g−1 at a current density of 8 mA cm−2. Bahloul et al.89 synthesized a polypyrrole-covered MnO2 composite by electrochemical polymerization of pyrrole deposited onto γ-MnO2 particles. The asymmetric supercapacitor using the MnO2–PPy composite material showed a higher specific capacitance of 141.6 F g−1 compared with 73.7 F g−1 for γ-MnO2 before PPy coating. The electrochemical performance improvement is not only due to the electronic conductivity of the polymer, but also due to the increase of the specific surface area of the composite. Liu and co-workers developed a MnO2 nanosheet–PPy composite film through the direct reaction of a carbon cloth with potassium permanganate (KMnO4) and the subsequent chemical polymerization.90 The electrochemical results revealed that PPy with high electrical conductivity had promoted the charge transfer in the MnO2 nanofilm and thus enhanced the electrode performance (45.6 mF cm−2). An areal capacitance of 25.9 mF cm−2 and an excellent rate performance (∼50.1% of the initial capacitance when the scan rate increases 100 times from 2.5 to 250 mV s−1) can be achieved for an aqueous symmetric supercapacitor that was assembled from the MnO2–PPy nanofilm.
Conducting polymers have been widely investigated as electrode materials by researchers because of their good electrical conductivity, low cost, mechanical stability and flexibility. They are normally used to form core–shell hybrid structures, where conductive polymers act either as intermediates or outer shells. Besides enhancing the electrical conductivity of the electrodes and providing pseudo-capacitance, the intermediate conductive polymer shell could also act as a sacrificing material for conformal in situ deposition of MnO2, while the conductive polymer could protect the MnO2 active phase from dissolution in the acidic electrolyte (H2SO4). Furthermore, MnO2–polymer–carbon composites have also been intensively explored as flexible electrodes with high electrochemical performance. However, the fundamental synergic effects are yet to be clarified and not all the attempts in combining conducting polymers and MnO2 yielded positive results.

4.3. MnO2–conductive metal composites for SCs
Another effective way to improve electrical conductivity and to boost electrochemical performance is to conformally deposit MnO2 nanostructures onto highly conductive and well-ordered metal micro-/nanostructures, which can serve as the mechanical support with greatly enhanced electron and ionic transport.

4.3.1 MnO2–noble metal (Au, Ag) composites. 
Since the electrical conductivity of nanoporous metals (Au or Ag) is ∼3 to 5 orders of magnitude higher than that of carbon materials, nanoporous metals are expected to dramatically enhance the electronic and ionic conductivity of MnO2 to give high specific capacitance in non-aqueous electrolytes.136,317 Lang et al.318 fabricated 100 nm-thick nanoporous Au/MnO2 composite films in a two-step procedure, which involved de-alloying Ag65Au35 (at%) using HNO3 to produce conductive nanoporous gold and then plating nanocrystalline MnO2 into the nanopores (Fig. 16). The nanoporous gold allows electron transport through MnO2, and facilitates fast ion diffusion between MnO2 and the electrolyte while also acting as a double-layer capacitor. The hybrid structures made of nanoporous gold and nanocrystalline MnO2 have enhanced conductivity, resulting in a specific capacitance of the constituent MnO2 (∼1145 F g−1) that is close to the theoretical value. Yan et al.319 described the fabrication of arrays of nanowires on glass in which a gold core nanowire is encapsulated within a hemi-cylindrical shell of manganese dioxide. They first prepared Au nanowire arrays on glass using the lithographically patterned nanowire electrodeposition (LPNE) method. Au nanowires were then used to deposit MnO2 by potentiostatic electrooxidation from Mn2+ solution, forming a conformal, hemicylindrical shell with a controllable diameter ranging from 50 to 300 nm surrounding each Au nanowire. These hybrid nanostructures showed both an ultrahigh specific capacity of 1020 ± 100 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and 450 ± 70 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 coupled with absolute cycle stability of this capacity to 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic showing the fabrication process of nanoporous gold/MnO2 hybrid materials by directly growing MnO2 (orange) onto nanoporous gold. (b) Photograph of a nanoporous gold/MnO2-based supercapacitor. (c) SEM image of as de-alloyed nanoporous gold films. (d) SEM image of a nanoporous gold/MnO2 film with a MnO2 plating time of 10 min. (e) Bright-field TEM image of the nanoporous gold/MnO2 hybrid with a MnO2 plating time of 20 min. (f and g) Electrochemical properties of the Au/MnO2 composite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
Recently, Fan and co-workers reported a freestanding MnO2/Au/MnO2 nanospike electrode based on 3D gold nanospike (NSP) films (Fig. 17a–c).320 The large surface area of NSPs is utilized to achieve respectable pseudocapacitance together with a thin layer of MnO2 coating. The all-solid-state symmetric SCs based on MnO2/Au/MnO2 NSP (MAMNSP) electrodes showed that the devices have a volumetric capacitance of 20.35 F cm−3 and the highest specific energy and specific power of 1.75 × 10−3 W h cm−3 and 13.46 W cm−3, respectively. Qiu et al.321 developed for the first time a novel Au@MnO2 core–shell nanomesh structure on a flexible polymeric substrate through nanosphere lithography combined with electrodeposition processing (Fig. 17d–f). The direct growth of MnO2 on a well-conformed Au nanomesh, which acts as a transparent flexible electrode with high transparency, not only introduces metal oxides successfully but realizes an efficient contact between the current collector and the active materials needed for a fast charge transport during charging and discharging processes. As a result, a high areal capacitance of 4.72 mF cm−2 and an ultrahigh rate capability have been achieved on such hybrid films. Li et al.322 synthesized one-dimensional (1D) tubular Ag/MnOx nanocomposites by the solvothermal method via the Kirkendall effect between potassium permanganate (KMnO4) and Ag nanowire templates. The morphology and electrochemical performance of Ag/MnOx composites were tuned by varying the pH levels. When tested as electrodes for SCs, the hierarchical tubular Ag/MnOx nanosheet composites prepared in an acidic environment exhibited an optimized electrochemical performance, with a specific capacitance of 180 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1, and still maintained 80% of initial capacity after 1000 cycles. The proposed synthetic mechanism and the developed synthetic strategy in this work may provide design guidelines for synthesizing other hierarchical transition metal/transition metal oxide nanocomposites for supercapacitors.
 Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the free-standing Au nanospike film transferred onto a regular Xerox printing paper and the SEM image (inset) shows the microstructure upon bending. (b) Top-view SEM image of the as-prepared MnO2/Au/MnO2nanospikeelectrode. (c) CV measurements when the device is folded and released.Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) SEM image of the Au nanomesh and Au@δ-MnO2 core–shell nanomesh peeled from the PET substrate. Inset shows the optical image of a transparent flexible supercapacitor. (f) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the device at flat and bent state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.3.2 MnO2–transition metal (porous Cu and Ni, stainless steel, Mn film) composites. 
Transition metals (porous Cu and Ni, stainless steel, Mn film)250,323–326 are also good scaffolds to form MnO2-based hybrid films or composites by conformal coating or penetration for SCs. Pang and co-workers prepared a novel Cu–MnO2 composite through facile coating of a thin MnO2 nanofilm onto the highly electronically conductive Cu superstructures.325 The Cu superstructures were synthesized by using natural sapless leaves. Benefiting from their unique structures, the composite superstructures have a high specific capacity of 1024 F g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 and a good capacity retention of around 96% after 2000 electrochemical cycles. Xiao et al.88 reported a MnO2/3D dendrite-like Ni core–shell electrode for high-performance SCs. The MnO2/3D-Ni electrode exhibits a large areal capacitance (837.6 mF cm−2), excellent rate capability and high cycling stability (16% degradation after 2000 cycles). The high electrochemical properties of the MnO2/3D-Ni electrode can be attributed to the high conductivity of the Ni metal core, high porosity and large specific surface area of the MnO2/3D-Ni nanocomposites, which facilitate electrolyte diffusion, electron transport, and material utilization. Wu and co-workers proposed a novel architecture, MnO2 nanowires grown on an ordered macroporous conductive Ni scaffold, to enhance the capacitive behavior of the MnO2 electrode.241 This MnO2–macroporous Ni composite expedites the electron conduction and electrolyte transport through film electrode and consequently improves the pseudocapacitive property of MnO2 nanowires. Su et al.327 fabricated ultrathin and flexible supercapacitor electrodes containing a manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanostructure deposited onto 3D nickel nanocone arrays (NCAs) (Fig. 18). The MnO2–NCA electrode was prepared by an electrodeposition technology, which involves the cathode deposition of NCAs on a titanium carrier film as the current collector and subsequent anode deposited from the MnO2 nanostructures as the active material. The resulting freestanding electrode exhibited outstanding mechanical robustness, high specific capacitance (632 F g−1), enhanced energy density (52.2 W h kg−1) and excellent cycle performance (95.3% retention after 20000 cycles).
 Fig. 18  (a–c) SEM images of Ni nanocones and the MnO2 nanostructure deposited on Ni nanocones (MNN). (d–f) TEM images of the MnO2nanostructure deposited on Ni nanocones. Inset is the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of MnO2. (g)A photographic image of the as-prepared MNN/AC ionogel supercapacitor electrode (1.3 m). (h) Photographic image of a fully packed supercapacitor device. (i) Photograph showing a MNN/AC ionogel supercapacitor driving a red LED under a bending state. (j)Energy and power densities of the MNN-based asymmetric supercapacitors compared to some available energy storage systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dubal et al.328 provided a simple and efficient route for the selective growth of branched MnO2 nanorods on flexible stainless-steel substrates at ambient temperature without sacrificial templates or surfactants. The branched α-MnO2 materials possess a loose mesoporous cluster and show enhanced rate performance and cyclability. Excellent supercapacitive properties coupled with low production costs and the environmentally friendly nature of MnO2 make this material promising for a wide range of applications. Deng et al.329 presented a nanoarchitecture consisting of a three-dimensionally ordered macroporous Mn core–MnO2 shell inverse-opal structure using electrodeposition of metallic Mn within a polystyrene (PS) bead template in an ionic liquid (IL), subsequently anodized in KCl aqueous solution (3 M) with varied anodization courses to construct a nano-architectured pseudocapacitive electrode (Fig. 19). The varied anodization courses were confirmed to cause variations of the material characteristics of the prepared 3D macroporous Mn core/MnO2 electrodes and thereby in their pseudocapacitive performance. These unique electrodes anodized with the cyclic voltammetric method showed the most promising specific capacitance, 1200 ± 60 F g−1 (based on the mass of Mn/MnO2), with a satisfactory rate capability and cycling performance.
 Fig. 19  (a) Scheme of preparing a high-porosity 3D ordered macroporous Mn/MnO2 electrode. SEM images of (b) polystyrene opals covering the Au/ITO substrate, (c) 3D ordered macroporous Mn inverse opals structure (inset: large magnification), (d) 3D ordered macroporous Mn/MnO2 electrode structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As discussed above, the current strategies for the design of MnO2–transition metal composite electrode architectures are mainly focused on loading MnO2 on these scaffolds, which act as both the high surface area mechanical support and current collector for the MnO2 phase and are the main physical links between the electrode and the external structures of the supercapacitor. However, there are some key issues of these composite electrodes. (i) The first one is the chemical stability in aqueous electrolytes, because porous Cu and Ni are not stable in acidic electrolytes which would cause corrosion of the metal scaffolds, thus leading to the degradation of the conductivity of the composite electrode. The way to avoid this problem is the combination of conducting polymers to prepare metal–polymer–MnO2 ternary composites in which the metal scaffolds are protected by the polymers to achieve a high conductivity and flexible supercapacitor. (ii) The potential window may be decreased due to the low electrochemical stability of the porous metal during the charge/discharge process, which could be accommodated by using organic electrolytes. (iii) The last one is the size of the porous metals. The small size of the porous metal would possibly lead to the collapse of the electrode after sufficient active material loading, whereas with a large size, the porous metal itself would inevitably occupy too much volume, ultimately lowering the volumetric energy density of the composite electrode. Therefore, optimizing the size of the porous metal in the composite represents a significant challenge.


4.3.3 MnO2–nickel foam (Ni) composite for binder-free electrodes. 
Highly conductive 3D porous materials as electrodes that enable enhanced penetration of electrolyte cations during charge and discharge cycles are crucial to improve the capacity performance of MnO2 films. Nickel foam with a large electronic conductivity and a 3D porous structure is a promising candidate for a capacitive electrode substrate material, and thus has been extensively studied for emerging binder-free electrode in the past several years.330–333 Liu and co-workers prepared well-defined mesoporous MnO2 nanosheet arrays on Ni foam current collectors using one-step electrodeposition, followed by a low-temperature thermal annealing process.334 The MnO2 nanosheet arrays grown on Ni foam were used as binder-free electrodes, which exhibited a specific capacitance as high as 201 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Huang et al.335 developed a facile one-pot hydrothermal method for the large scale synthesis of MnO2 nanosheets arrays grown on Ni foam (Fig. 20). In this work, the deposition of MnO2 nanosheets did not need any surfactant or the electrochemical deposition due to the fact that MnO2 can be produced via self-decomposition of KMnO4 during the hydrothermal reaction. Benefiting from the favorable mesoporous structure as well as the rational design of a binder-free electrode, the MnO2 nanosheet arrays on the Ni foam electrode exhibit a relatively high capacitance (595.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1) and excellent cycling ability (89% retention after 3000 cycles). Pang et al.213 reported the synthesis of δ-MnO2 nanosheets grown on nickel foam by using a one-pot chelation-mediated aqueous method at a low temperature. The as-prepared 3D hierarchical δ-MnO2 nanosheet on Ni foam can be directly used as an additive-free and binder-free electrode for SCs, which exhibited excellent favorable electrochemical performance, such as high specific capacitance (325 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1), good long-term cycle stability and low equivalent series resistance and charge transfer resistance.
 Fig. 20  SEM images of the Ni foam (a), MnO2 nanosheets arrays on Ni foam (b–d) with different magnifications. The insets show the corresponding optical images of the pristine Ni foam, and MnO2 nanosheets on Ni foam. (e and f) Electrochemical performance of the MnO2 nanosheet arrays on the Ni foam electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. 
The porous metal scaffold is a good supporting material to form MnO2-based hybrid films/arrays by conformal coating. Different types of metal scaffolds, such as noble Au, Ag, porous Cu, Ni and Mn, have been introduced in this chapter. According to the discussion on the previous studies, there are several aspects that determine the electrochemical properties of MnO2-based composite electrodes. First of all, porous metals can serve as current collectors which have much larger surface area than bulky metal film current collectors. This enables the high mass loading of MnO2 materials, thus improving the energy density per unit area. Second, these porous metal structures are capable of providing efficient pathways for both ion and electron through the entire electrode, which can avoid the dead-volume of the whole electrode. More importantly, the good mechanical robustness of these metal scaffolds can ensure the stability of the composite electrodes during the repeated charge/discharge cycles. The challenge of the application of the porous metal for preparing the MnO2-conducting metal composite electrode is the high production cost, which limits its practical applications.

4.4. MnO2–metal oxide/hydroxide composites for SCs
Incorporation of certain metal oxide/hydroxide with MnO2 to fabricate MnO2-based composite is one of the effective ways to improve the electrochemical properties. Through optimizing the preparation parameters, generated synergistic effects may enlarge the specific surface area, facilitate electrons and ion transport, add active sites or improve cycling stability. Until now, various MnO2–metal oxide/hydroxide composites with different geometrical attributes and morphological forms have been employed as electrodes for SCs.

4.4.1 MnO2–Co3O4 composite. 
An alternative route to improve the performance of the MnO2 electrode is constructing a novel MnO2–Co3O4 composite nanostructure, in which electrochemical activities of each component are fully manifested and the kinetics of ion/electron transport are guaranteed. Liu et al.336 reported the preparation of Co3O4@MnO2 core/shell nanowire composites on Ti foil by using 3D ordered amorphous carbon layers as a sacrificial reactive template to anchor MnO2 nanostructures onto Co3O4 nanowire scaffolds, leading to a well-designed hybrid architecture. The as-prepared Co3O4@MnO2 composite electrode exhibited a high capacitance (480 F g−1 at 2.67 A g−1) with good cycle performance (2.7% capacitance loss after 5000 cycles) and remarkable rate capability. In the same way, Kong et al.337 demonstrated the fabrication of the 3D hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 core–shell composite arrays for binder-free electrodes used in supercapacitors. Huang et al.338 proposed a two-step hydrothermal reaction to design and fabricate hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 composite arrays on Ni foam, in which the mesoporous Co3O4 arrays served as the “core” and the ultrathin branch MnO2 nanosheets were the “shell” layer (Fig. 21). The unique designed MnO2–Co3O4 composite electrodes exhibited a high specific capacitance (560 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1), good rate capability, and excellent cycling stability (95% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles). Lin and co-workers prepared nano-Co3O4/MnO2 composites by anodic composite deposition from Mn(NO3)2 solutions containing different amounts of suspended Co3O4 particles.339 The specific capacitance of the composite reached 317 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Recently, Wang et al. fabricated the Co3O4 nanowires@MnO2 nanoflake core–shell composite supported on carbon fiber paper and further investigated its performance as the electrode for SCs. The composite electrode possessed a high specific capacitance as high as 1200 F g−1 (based on a low loading of MnO2) at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 2 M KCl electrolyte.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step synthesis of hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 core–shell arrays directly on Ni foam. (b and c) Low-magnification and enlarged SEM images of the Co3O4 nanowire arrays on Ni foam. (d and e) Low-magnification and enlarged SEM images of the hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowire arrays on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 338. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 


4.4.2 MnO2–NiO/Ni(OH)2 composite. 
The composites of MnO2 and nickel oxides/hydroxides exhibited enhanced capacitance performance compared with their individual components.340–342 Liu et al.341 prepared a nanostructured MnO2–NiO composite by the sol–gel and chemical deposition method. They found that introducing an appropriate proportion of NiO into MnO2 to form an electroactive material is an effective method to achieve a high performance electrochemical capacitor. Fan and co-workers reported the synthesis of a MnO2–NiO nanoflake-assembled tubular array on a stainless steel substrate to function as a pseudocapacitor electrode by programmed three-dimensional (3D) interfacial reactions, in which the ZnO nanowire array was employed as the low-cost sacrificial template.343 With the smart combination of MnO2 and NiO, a synergistic effect can be observed: the firstly-grown MnO2 flake-assembled array provides a scaffold for the later NiO growth, avoiding the conventional aggregation and ensuring sufficient ion diffusion; while the further introduction of NiO reduces the charge-transfer resistance of MnO2, leading to fast electron transport within active materials. Consequently, an areal specific capacitance of 0.35 F cm−2 can be achieved, four orders of magnitude higher than the areal specific capacitance values of carbonaceous materials (10–40 μF cm−2). Jiang et al.344 presented a novel hybrid structure of the porous MnO2–Ni(OH)2 composite with a nanoflake surface using a green, surfactant-free and scalable strategy. The optimal MnO2–Ni(OH)2 composite exhibited a very high specific capacitance with excellent rate and cycling stability in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (355.5 F g−1), and even in 1 M KOH aqueous solution (487.4 F g−1). Chen et al.345 developed a facile one-step hydrothermal co-deposition method for the growth of ultrathin Ni(OH)2–MnO2 composite nanosheet arrays on three-dimensional (3D) macro-porous nickel foam (Fig. 22). Due to the highly hydrophilic and ultrathin nature of hybrid nanosheets, as well as the synergetic effects of Ni(OH)2 and MnO2, the fabricated Ni(OH)2–MnO2 composite exhibited an ultrahigh specific capacitance of 2628 F g−1.
 Fig. 22  (a) Possible formation mechanism of Ni(OH)2–MnO2 composite nanosheets on Ni foam and the structural schematic diagram of a single hybrid nanosheet. (b and c) Typical SEM images of the Ni(OH)2–MnO2 hybrid film supported on Ni foam. (e and f) Typical TEM images of the composite nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.4.3 MnO2–TiO2 composite. 
TiO2 is abundant, low cost and environmentally benign with a stable chemical nature, so it has been widely studied in many domains, especially in electrochemical devices. Furthermore, it has higher electrical conductivity (10−5 to 10−2 S cm−1) than MnO2.346,347 Hence, introducing TiO2 to construct the MnO2–TiO2 composite will be an excellent strategy.348–350 For example, hierarchical TiO2 nanobelts@MnO2 ultrathin nanoflakes core–shell composite arrays were fabricated on a Ti foil substrate by a hydrothermal approach and further investigated as the electrode for a supercapacitor.351 The composite electrode exhibited a specific capacitance as high as 557.6 F g−1 at a scan rate of 200 mV s−1 (454.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1) in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. In particular, hydrogenation can greatly improve the electrical conductivity of TiO2.347 Lu et al.352 reported the use of hydrogen-treated TiO2 (H–TiO2) NWs as the core (conducting scaffold) to support electrochemically active MnO2 to form H–TiO2@MnO2 composite NWs (Fig. 23). The H–TiO2@MnO2 yielded a high specific capacitance of 449.6 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Significantly, the CV curves collected for the ASC device under flat, bent, and twisted conditions were similar (Fig. 23d), indicating their excellent mechanical stability as flexible energy storage devices. Moreover, the maximum volumetric energy and volumetric power density of the flexible ASC device were calculated to be 0.30 mW h cm−3 (59 W h kg−1) and 0.23 W cm−3 (45 kW kg−1), which were substantially higher than values reported for other solid-state SCs (Fig. 23e). Recently, Zhang and co-workers synthesized an ultrathin layer (about 5 nm) of MnO2 coated on the H–TiO2 nanowires (NWs) grown on flexible carbon microfibers (labeled as MnO2/H–TiO2/CMF NWs), and then quantitatively studied the effect of the hydrogenation temperature varying from 400 °C to 800 °C on the electrochemical performance of MnO2/H–TiO2/CMF NW composite electrodes.353 Typically, for a MnO2–TiO2 composite electrode hydrogenated at 600 °C, the specific capacitance reached 630.1 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 and a high energy density of 46.0 W h kg−1 was obtained at a high power density of 21.8 kW kg−1.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the growth processes of H–TiO2@MnO2 composite nanowires on a carbon cloth substrate. (b and c) SEM and TEM images of H–TiO2@MnO2 composite NWs. Insets are the magnified SEM image, TEM image and SAED pattern, respectively. (d) CV curves of the ASC device under flat, bent, and twisted conditions. Insets are the device pictures under test conditions. (e) Ragone plots of the ASC devices measured in the aqueous and gel electrolyte. Inset shows a red LED powered by a solid-state ASC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.4.4 MnO2–ZnO composite. 
ZnO, as one of the most attractive functional semiconductor materials, is widely used for the efficient mechanical support and electron conducting pathway to develop the ZnO@MnO2 core–shell composite structure because of its high chemical stability in neutral and alkaline electrolytes, conductivity, and mechanical flexibility.354–357 He et al.358 developed a simple and quick approach to synthesize a novel single-crystal ZnO nanorod/amorphous MnO2 shell composite for supercapacitor applications. The single-crystal ZnO nanorods as cores experienced less structural stress or damage during electrochemical cycling, and they served as mechanical supports and effective electron transport pathways and increased the electrochemical utilization of MnO2. Yang et al.359 designed a novel hierarchical structure of the MnO2/ZnO composite on carbon-fabric by a simple three-step-solution method. The design comprised ZnO nanowires radially grown on each micron-size fiber of a carbon-fabric electrode, with a thin MnO2 shell on each ZnO nano-core (Fig. 24). The as-prepared MnO2/ZnO composite electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 886 F g−1, a specific energy of 16 W h kg−1, a specific power of 27 kW kg−1, and good long-term cycling stability. Recently, hierarchical ZnO@MnO2 composite pillar arrays on Ni foam have been fabricated by a facile two-step hydrothermal approach.360 The core–shell hybrid nanostructure was achieved by decorating ultrathin self-standing MnO2 nanosheets on ZnO pillar arrays grown radically on Ni foam. This unique well-designed binder-free electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance (423.5 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1), and excellent cycling stability (92% capacitance retention after 3000 cycles). The facile design of the unique composite architectures provides a new and effective approach to fabricate high-performance binder-free electrodes for SCs.
 Fig. 24  (a and b) SEM images of the ZnO/MnO2 composite nanowires on the carbon fiber substrates. (c) The TEM image of a single ZnO/MnO2 core–shell NW. (d) The EDS pattern of ZnO/MnO2 NWs. (e) The HRTEM image of a ZnO/MnO2 core–shell NW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 


4.4.5 MnO2–other transition metal oxide (SnO2, CuO, Fe2O3, Fe3O4) composites. 
The novel composite pseudo-capacitive systems are also developed by combining MnO2 with many other transition oxides (SnO2, CuO, MnO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4).215,361–366 For example, Kim and co-workers synthesized size- and thickness-tunable two-dimensional (2D) MnO2 nanosheets on SnO2 backbone arrays by a one-step enhanced chemical bath deposition (ECBD) method at a low temperature (∼50 °C).215 The SnO2–MnO2 composite electrode achieved a specific capacitance of 162 F g−1 at an extremely high current density of 20 A g−1, and good cycling stability of 92% capacitance retention, along with a coulombic efficiency of almost 100% after 5000 cycles. Huang et al.362 developed a simple and cost-effective method to fabricate hierarchical CuO@MnO2 core–shell heterostructures as electrode materials for high-performance SCs (Fig. 25). They systematically probed structures at different reaction times and therefore proposed a possible growth mechanism for the CuO@MnO2 composite structure (Fig. 25a), which could be divided into three stages. Firstly, the MnO4− nuclei were produced and adsorbed on the surfaces of Cu nanowires, forming MnO2 nuclei. With the increase of reaction time, the MnO2 nuclei were aggregated and transformed to nanosheets. In the meanwhile, Cu nanowires were oxidized to CuO nanowires, followed by a transformation to CuO nanotubes. Finally, the MnO2 nanosheets were compact and totally covered the surfaces of CuO nanotubes, resulting in the formation of the hierarchical CuO nanotube@MnO2 nanosheet nanocomposites. The complex heterostructures were found to show a high specific capacitance of 276 F g−1 at a current density of 0.6 A g−1, much improved rate performance, and long-term cycling stability (92.1% of its original value after 1000 cycles). An asymmetric supercapacitor with the CuO@MnO2 core–shell nanocomposite as the positive electrode and activated microwave exfoliated graphite oxide (MEGO) as the negative electrode yielded an energy density of 22.1 W h kg−1 and a maximum power density of 85.6 kW kg−1, rendering such heterostructures promising for the application as high-performance SCs.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of the CuO@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures. (b–d) TEM images of the hierarchical CuO nanotube@MnO2 nanosheet nanostructures. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern taken from the edge of nanosheets. (e) STEM image and EDS mapping of the hierarchical CuO nanotube@MnO2 nanosheet nanostructures. (f) Ragone plots of the asymmetric supercapacitor. The inset shows the digital image of a red-light-emitting diode (LED) lighted by the CuO@MnO2//MEGO device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 362. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Zhu et al.365 reported the synthesis of hierarchically porous MnO2 microspheres doped with Fe3O4 nanoparticles by a one-step ultrasound assisted method. The scalable synthesis is based on Fe2+ and ultrasound assisted nucleation and growth at a constant temperature in a range of 25–70 °C. A systematic optimization of reaction parameters results in isolated, porous, and uniform MnO2–Fe3O4 composite spheres. The uniform MnO2–Fe3O4 composite spheres exhibited a superior specific capacitance of 448 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, which is nearly 1.5 times that of the extremely high reported value for pure MnO2. An isomorphous MnO2@MnO2 core–shell nanostructure had also been developed for the first time by using MnO2 nanowires as seed crystals.363 These unique nanoarchitectures consisting of an isomorphous layer of β-MnO2 nanosheets well grown on the surface of β-MnO2 nanowires exhibit remarkable electrochemical performance with high capacitance and ultra-long cycle life, i.e., nearly 92.2% retention after 20000 cycles at a current density of 5 A g−1. Furthermore, Huang et al.367 reported a facile and cost-effective approach to fabricate the Co3O4/SnO2@MnO2 core–shell nanocomposite, in which the mesoporous Co3O4/SnO2 nanoboxes acted as the “core” and the ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets worked as the “shell” layer (Fig. 26). This unique core–shell nanostructure was anticipated to manifest excellent capacitive performance because of the superior structural advantages. On the one hand, the Co3O4/SnO2 nanoboxes could serve as the hard template, providing a large surface area for the growth of MnO2 nanosheets and avoiding the aggregation of active materials that degrades the cycle stability. On the other hand, the porous MnO2 nanosheets possessed a large specific surface area and multiple oxide sites, which would facilitate ion diffusion and provide high-energy storage capacity. The resultant Co3O4/SnO2@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures exhibited a high specific capacitance of 225 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability (90.7% retention after 6000 cycles), suggesting that such core–shell architectures could be expected to be promising candidates for supercapacitor applications.
 Fig. 26  (a and b) SEM images of Co3O4/SnO2nanoboxes. (c and d) SEM images of the Co3O4/SnO2@MnO2core–shell nanostructures. (e–g) TEM images of the nanocomposite. The inset in (f) shows the corresponding SAED pattern taken from the edge of MnO2nanosheets.Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.4.6 MnO2–binary metal oxide composite. 
Binary metal oxides (BTMOs) contain at least one transition metal ion and one or more electrochemically active/inactive ions. BTMOs can utilize the synergistic effect of pure oxides, which can improve the capacitive property with a widened potential window, superior conductivity, more active sites and improved stability.165 Therefore, many studies of combining MnO2 with BTMOs (NiCo2O4, CuCo2O4, ZnCo2O4, NiMoO4, and Zn2SnO4)368–378 for SCs have been conducted and a series of good results were achieved. For instance, Yu et al.368 fabricated hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell heterostructured nanowire (NW) arrays on Ni foam as a binder-free electrode, which exhibited a large areal specific capacitance of 3.31 F cm−2, desirable rate performance and cycling stability in a 1 M LiOH solution. Xu et al.369 demonstrated the design and fabrication of hierarchical mesoporous NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowire arrays on nickel foam via a facile hydrothermal and electrodeposition process for supercapacitor applications (Fig. 27a and b). The NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowires possessed a high areal capacitance up to 2.244 F cm−2, while the NiCo2O4 nanowires only showed an areal capacitance of 1.428 F cm−2. Zou et al.372 used a one-step hydrothermal reaction followed by a post-annealing treatment, we synthesized networked NiCo2O4/MnO2 branched nanowire heterostructure arrays on Ni foam substrates (Fig. 27c and d). The as-prepared NiCo2O4/MnO2 electrode showed a specific capacitance of 2827 F g−1 at a current density of 2 mA cm−2, which was still maintained at 2339 F g−1 at 20 mA cm−2. The electrode also presented excellent cycling stability with only 1.6% loss of specific capacity after 3000 cycles at a high charge/discharge current density. Recently, a hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanosheet array hybrid composite integrated electrode for SCs was designed and synthesized via a facile two-step hydrothermal method (Fig. 27e and f).373 Electrochemical characterizations indicated that the unique nano-architecture possesses excellent electrochemical properties, exhibiting a capacitance of 2.39 F cm−2 as well as high cycling stability (7.4% loss after 2000 cycles).
 Fig. 27  (a and b) SEM images of NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays and hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) SEM images of networked NiCo2O4/MnO2-precursor and NiCo2O4/MnO2 branched nanowire heterostructure arrays on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e and f) SEM images of NiCo2O4 nanosheet arrays and NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanosheet arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. 
To boost the electrochemical utilization and area-specific capacitance, core–shell CuCo2O4@MnO2 nanocomposite arrays on carbon fabrics were synthesized and utilized as high-performance, binder-free, positive electrodes for electro-chemical capacitors.374 The electrode takes advantage of the synergistic effects contributed from both the porous CuCo2O4 nanowire core and the MnO2 shell layer. The as-prepared electrode had a high cell-specific capacitance of 327 F g−1 at a current density of 1.25 A g−1 with excellent rate capability (90% capacitance retention at a current density of 6.25 A g−1) in aqueous electrolytes. ZnCo2O4/MnO2 nanocone forests with a mesoporous, hierarchical core–shell structure and a large surface area were hydrothermally grown on 3D nickel foam (Fig. 28).376 The supercapacitor electrodes prepared from the unique structure exhibits exceptional specific capacitances of 2339 and 1526 F g−1 at current densities of 1 and 10 A g−1, respectively, and long-term capacity retention of 95.9% after 3000 cycles at 2 A g−1 and 94.5% after 8000 cycles at 10 A g−1. Li and co-workers demonstrated the design and fabrication of a novel flexible nanoarchitecture by coating ultrathin MnO2 films on highly electrically conductive Zn2SnO4 nanowires grown radially on carbon microfibers (CMFs).377 The maximum specific capacitance of 642.4 F g−1 (based on pristine MnO2) by chronopotentiometry at a current density of 1 A g−1 was achieved in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. Guo et al.378 reported the synthesis of a hybrid structure of core/shell NiMoO4@MnO2 on carbon cloth by a two-step hydrothermal route for SCs. The NiMoO4@MnO2 electrode yielded high-capacitance performance with a high areal capacitance of 3.90 F cm−2 at a current density of 8 mA cm−2 and a desirable cycling ability (90.5% capacitance retention after 4000 cycles). The as-prepared NiMoO4@MnO2 composite electrode with remarkable electrochemical performance could be a promising pseudocapacitive electrode material for high-performance SCs.
 Fig. 28  (a–d) SEM and TEM images of ZnCo2O4/MnO2 nanocone forests. (e) Cyclic performance of the ZnCo2O4/MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 2 A g−1. (f) Rate performance of the electrodes at progressively increased current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. 
Fabrication of the MnO2–metal oxide/hydroxide composite electrode with high specific surface area and porous configuration has been intensively studied, and a series of good results has been achieved. In this section, hierarchical porous composites containing MnO2 as the electrode material for supercapacitors have been reviewed briefly. As described above, many metal oxides or hydroxides (Co3O4, NiO, Ni(OH)2, TiO2, ZnO, etc.) have higher electrical conductivity than MnO2, but with a narrower operating potential window. Therefore, by combining these different metal oxide/hydroxides with MnO2, synergic properties are expected. Research has shown that the combination of two types of materials not only provides the composite electrode material with stronger redox ability, but also enhances the stability. Most importantly, the higher conductivity of the other metal oxide/hydroxides can serve as the backbone to support and provide effective electrical connection to MnO2, which can produce a synergistic effect of all individual constituents. According to these reasons, tuning the microstructure, crystallinity, and conductivity of the MnO2-based electrodes by constructing binary or ternary composites could be an efficient way to improve the performance of MnO2-based supercapacitors.

5. MnO2-based microsupercapacitors
Microsupercapacitors (MSCs) are a new type of supercapacitor with typical device feature sizes in the range of micrometers. It is considered to be one of the promising power sources for driving miniaturized electronic devices such as sensors, actuators, energy-harvesting microsystems, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) or on-chip electronic devices.52 Compared to conventional SCs, MSCs have high energy density, power density and a good charge/discharge rate due to the reduced diffusion length.379 Moreover, MSCs can be directly coupled with other energy storage units (microbatteries and fuel cells), microsensors, and biomedical implants to offer sufficient peak power.380 Therefore, a great deal of attention has been focused on MSCs, for which a series of nanostructured active materials have been developed.381–388 Among them, MnO2-based materials have been exploited as active materials for MSCs by taking advantage of the unique properties of environmental friendliness, high theoretical capacitance, good stability within a reasonable potential range.389 For instance, Cao and co-workers described a low-cost method for fabricating flexible and all-solid-state MSCs by microfluidic etching.390 The micro-supercapacitor configuration is composed of sub-10 nm-scale MnO2 nanoparticle interdigital microelectrode fingers prepared by microfluidic etching with H3PO4–PVA thin films as both the solid-state electrolyte and the flexible substrate. Shen et al.391 demonstrated an asymmetric microsupercapacitor that combined the advantages of both the MnO2 positive electrode and carbon negative electrode for energy storage on a chip. A self-supporting composite containing MnO2 and another nanoporous activated carbon (AC) was separated in an interdigital structure by using micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) fabrication technologies. Measurements of the prototype show that the asymmetric MSC had well-performed capacitive behavior, and its working voltage range was extended from 1 V to 1.5 V in aqueous electrolyte due to the MnO2-AC configuration. Wang et al.392 constructed a symmetric microsupercapacitor by electrochemically depositing manganese oxide onto micro-patterned current collectors. Benefiting from high surface-to-volume ratio of manganese oxide and short diffusion distance between electrodes, the synthesized microsupercapacitor showed an ultra-high areal capacitance of 56.3 mF cm−2 at a current density of 27.2 μA cm−2.
Yang and co-workers developed a screen printing technology for fabricating all-solid flexible MSCs, which consisted of a printed Ag electrode, MnO2/onion-like carbon (MnO2/OLC) as the active material and a polyvinyl alcohol:H3PO4 (PVA:H3PO4) as the solid electrolyte.379 A capacity of 7.04 mF cm−2 was achieved for the screen printed MnO2/OLC MSCs at a current density of 20 μA cm−2. Kaner and co-workers demonstrated 3D high-performance hybrid MSCs based on graphene and MnO2 by rationally designing the electrode microstructure and combining active materials with electrolytes that operate at high voltages (Fig. 29).393 These microdevices enabled an ultrahigh capacitance per footprint approaching 400 mF cm−2 with a high energy density of up to 22 W h L−1. These developments are promising for micro-electronic devices such as biomedical sensors and radiofrequency identification tags where high capacity per foot print is crucial. Recently, a reduced graphene oxide (RGO)/manganese dioxide (MnO2)/silver nanowire (AgNW) ternary hybrid film (RGMA ternary hybrid film) was successfully fabricated by a facile vacuum filtration and subsequent thermal reduction. The hybrid film was used directly as a binder-free electrode for MSCs (Fig. 30).394 In this work, a flexible, transparent, all-solid state RMGA–MSC was also built, and its electrochemical performance in an ionic liquid gel electrolyte was investigated in depth. Notably, the RGMA–MSCs displayed superior electrochemical properties, including exceptionally high rate capability (up to 50000 mV s−1), high frequency response (very short corresponding time constant τ0 = 0.14 ms), and excellent cycle stability (90.3% of the initial capacitance after 6000 cycles in ionic liquid gel electrolyte). Dubal et al.395 reported a novel architecture design of hierarchical MnO2@silicon nanowire (MnO2@SiNW) hetero-structures directly supported on silicon wafer for MSCs. The as-prepared 3D mesoporous MnO2@SiNWs in Li-ion doped ionic liquid electrolyte could be cycled reversibly across a voltage of 2.2V and exhibited a high areal capacitance of 13 mF cm−2. They found that the high conductivity of the Si NW arrays together with the large surface area of ultrathin MnO2 nanoflakes were responsible for the good performance of the microsupercapacitor device. The design concept in this work opens up a novel avenue to fabricate electrode materials for high-performance MCSs.
 Fig. 29  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of an asymmetric microsupercapacitor based on LSG–MnO2 as the positive electrode and LSG as the negative electrode. (b) Photograph showing the asymmetric micro-supercapacitor. (c) Optical microscopy image showing the LSG– GO–LSG–MnO2 interface. (d) SEM image of the interface between GO and LSG shows the selective electrodeposition of MnO2 on LSG only. (Inset) Magnified view of the GO and LSG area. (e) Integration of a supercapacitor array with solar cells for efficient solar energy harvesting and storage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 393. Copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences, USA. 
 Fig. 30  (a) Fabrication of the GMA ternary hybrid film through vacuum filtration of the mixture of GO, MnO2, and AgNW suspension. (b) Digital photograph of the as-obtained GMA film supported on the cellulose acetate membrane after the vacuum filtration. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedures for RGMA–MSCs on an alumina substrate. (d–f) SEM images of the RGMA ternary hybrid film on silicon wafer. (g and h) Digital photograph of the RGMA–MSC microsupercapacitor electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
6. Summary and perspectives
MnO2-based SCs have experienced rapid development in recent years and have demonstrated immense potential as highly efficient energy storage devices. In this review, we have summarized the latest progress in this field, highlighting the important factors affecting the performance of MnO2-based electrodes and the challenges as well as future perspectives in designing MnO2-based composites as advanced electrodes.
Despite some significant progress made in MnO2-based SCs, there are still practical challenges and obstacles to overcome to satisfy the requirements of future power sources (such as high energy and power densities, long lifetime, low cost, good safety, and environmental benignity, etc.). Several important issues have to be considered in the development of next generation MnO2-based electrodes. The first challenge is the low energy density of MnO2-based electrodes, especially on the whole electrode basis, which cannot meet the demands of practical application. Thus, future research should be directed towards the development of high energy density supercapacitor devices by widening the device operating voltage and increasing the loading of MnO2. Asymmetric configurations and the use of ionic liquids with an electrochemically stable window of 4 V is one way to widen the operating voltage. For example, by designing the MnO2//activated graphene asymmetric capacitor and using ionic liquids as electrolytes, the potential window can be maximized to 3.6 V. A higher cell voltage improves both energy and power densities, as they are proportional to the voltage window (V2). The other challenge, especially for large-scale energy storage applications, is the high cost of the production. There are two strategies to solve this problem: (1) incorporating earth-abundant carbon materials with MnO2; (2) one-step synthesis or highly scalable approaches to produce MnO2-based electrodes, such as facile solution-based methods and printing techniques, will be of great importance for designing scalable and low-cost devices.
Besides the research in electrode materials, it is also necessary to investigate the fundamental science. For instance, we need to study the chemical and physical interactions of MnO2-based composite materials since the interactions can strongly affect the morphology, size and crystalline structure of the composite, thus affecting the electrochemical properties. In particular, it is important to understand the electrochemical mechanisms of MnO2-based composites and to investigate the characteristics of the two levels of the interface, namely the interface between electrolyte and composite electrodes and the interface within the composite between MnO2 and another component. Furthermore, the development of flexible SCs has attracted great attention due to their high power density along with the unique properties of being flexible, lightweight, shape versatile, and eco-friendly. However, the deployment of flexible SCs based on MnO2-based electrodes is still at the early stage and the state-of-the-art electrodes show limited energy densities. Therefore, the fabrication of flexible devices based on MnO2-based nanostructures is highly desirable.
Based on the challenges discussed above, several possible future trends for MnO2-based high-performance SCs are listed below:
(1) Improve the overall electricity of MnO2-based electrodes to the largest extent by utilizing various conducting agents, for example, designing hierarchical architectures of MnO2@carbon/conducting polymers or MnO2@carbon/porous metals. The desired composite structures are assembled by numerous tiny units composed of the MnO2 core and carbon/polymer or carbon/metal shell. This design can accommodate the electrolyte throughout the electrode and thus produce a large surface area for ion transfer between the electrolyte and the active material, thus achieving ultra-fast energy storage.
(2) For the MnO2-based film electrode, it is promising to integrate synergetic nanomaterials into the remaining free space. The main aim is to further increase the specific energy density of the electrodes by minimizing the dead volume within the electrode. We should also consider that sufficient space still needs to be maintained for electrolyte penetration.
(3) Designing lightweight and mechanically flexible electrodes for future applications. We should pay close attention to MnO2-based hybrid electrodes that combine the advantages of both pseudo-capacitance MnO2 materials with the use of cost-effective flexible substrates.
(4) Highly scalable, facile, solution-based methods and printing techniques will be a good solution for making large-scale and low cost MnO2-based high-performance microsupercapacitor devices.
In conclusion, supercapacitor devices will play an important role in energy storage and harvesting, which is expected to complement batteries in certain applications to reduce environmental pollution problems and minimize the use of hydrocarbon fuels. With recent achievements in MnO2-based electrodes, high performance SCs with safe operation and environmentally friendly characteristics that are suitable for practical energy storage and power supply may be commercialized in the near future.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 51104194 and 21576034), International S&T Cooperation Projects of Chongqing (CSTC2013gjhz90001), National Key laboratory of Fundamental Science of Micro/Nano-device and System Technology (2013MS06, Chongqing University), and State Education Ministry and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Project no. CDJZR14135501, Chongqing University, PR China).
References
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Holdren, Science, 2007, 315, 737–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ginley, M. A. Green and R. Collins, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 355–364 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Arunachalam and E. L. Fleischer, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 264–276 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3088–3113 RSC .
G. Yu, X. Xie, L. Pan, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 213–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983–5992 RSC .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shi, L. Li, X.-L. Wang, C.-D. Gu and J.-P. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
P. J. Hall, M. Mirzaeian, S. I. Fletcher, F. B. Sillars, A. J. R. Rennie, G. O. Shitta-Bey, G. Wilson, A. Cruden and R. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1238–1251 CAS .
R. Kotz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Sun and X.-Z. You, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2037–2045 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
M. J. Young, A. M. Holder, S. M. George and C. B. Musgrave, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1172–1180 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Long, D. Bélanger, T. Brousse, W. Sugimoto, M. B. Sassin and O. Crosnier, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 513–522 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, J. W. Suk and R. S. Ruoff, Small, 2010, 6, 210–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cougnon, E. Lebegue and G. Pognon, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 551–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Timperman, A. Vigeant and M. Anouti, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 164–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Z. Shi and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 76–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yun, M. H. Park, S. J. Hong, M. E. Lee, Y. W. Park and H.-J. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3684–3690 CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Chang, C.-Y. Wu and P.-W. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 147–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, J. Shen, H. Ma, B. Yan, Z. Li, M. Shi and M. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 340–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-F. Ju, W.-L. Song and L.-Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10895–10903 CAS .
T.-T. Chen, W.-L. Song and L.-Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 92–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Song, K. Song and L.-Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4257–4264 CAS .
Z. Ling, G. Wang, Q. Dong, B. Qian, M. Zhang, C. Li and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14329–14333 CAS .
P. J. King, T. M. Higgins, S. de, N. Nicoloso and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1732–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Z. Peng, Y. Yang, H. Zhou and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10077–10084 CAS .
A. Ghosh, L. Viet Thong, J. J. Bae and Y. H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2939 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Wang, H. Yi, X. Wang, X. Yan and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8262–8270 CAS .
C. Choi, J. A. Lee, A. Y. Choi, Y. T. Kim, X. Lepro, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2059–2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Dou, Z. Wu, H. Liu, X. Qian, D. Gu, Y. Xia, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 382–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jost, D. Stenger, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, K. Lian, Y. Gogotsi and G. Dion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2698–2705 CAS .
J. Ren, W. Bai, G. Guan, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5965–5970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, K. Zhou, X. Liu, R. Hu, H. Liu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7250–7255 CAS .
P. He, L. Liu, W. Song, G. Xiong, T. S. Fisher and T. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31837–31844 RSC .
A. B. Fuertes and M. Sevilla, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4344–4353 CAS .
Y. Liang, L. Cai, L. Chen, X. Lin, R. Fu, M. Zhang and D. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3971–3975 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Wan, S. Liu, L. Pan, D. Wu and D. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 526–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shen, C. Ruan, Y. Chen, C. Jiang, K. Ai and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1207–1218 CAS .
T. Zhu, Y. Lu, S. Zheng, Y. Chen and H. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 456–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. Ji, M. D. Stoller, L. Lai, S. Murali, S. Mcdonnell, B. Cleveger, R. M. Wallace and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9618–9625 CAS .
Y. Wen, B. Wang, C. Huang, L. Wang and D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Muellen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 Search PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Yin and D. Xue, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1161–1166 RSC .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, M. Heon, D. Pech, M. Brunet, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi, S. Lofland, J. D. Hettinger and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 240–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Oschatz, L. Borchardt, K. Pinkert, S. Thieme, M. R. Lohe, C. Hoffmann, M. Benusch, F. M. Wisser, C. Ziegler and L. Giebeler, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300645 Search PubMed .
K. Pinkert, M. Oschatz, L. Borchardt, M. Klose, M. Zier, W. Nickel, L. Giebeler, S. Oswald, S. Kaskel and J. R. Eckert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2922–2928 CAS .
J. Xu, R. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Zhao, X. Ye and S. Ge, Carbon, 2014, 74, 226–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-E. Miao, W. Fan, D. Chen and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4423–4428 CAS .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Arcila-Velez and M. E. Roberts, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1601–1607 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, P. Gai, C. Liu, X. Wang, H. Xu, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12587–12594 CAS .
G. P. Pandey, A. C. Rastogi and C. R. Westgate, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 857–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng and Z. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Tu and S. Jiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 122–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Chen, T.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Wei, C.-C. Hu and T.-L. Lin, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2861–2871 RSC .
S. Santhanagopalan, A. Balram and D. D. Meng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2114–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, Y.-J. Kim, D. J. Lee, J. Song, Y. M. Lee, H.-T. Kim and J.-K. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11891–11898 CAS .
M. Huang, F. Li, J. Y. Ji, Y. X. Zhang, X. L. Zhao and X. Gao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2878–2884 RSC .
Y. X. Zhang, M. Huang, F. Li and Z. Q. Wen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 8645–8661 CAS .
M. Zhang, K. Chen, X. Chen, X. Peng, X. Sun and D. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1917–1922 RSC .
J. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Sun, F. Lei, L. Liang, J. Liu, W. Bi, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12789–12793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhai, S. Xie, M. Yu, P. Fang, C. Liang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 255–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, J. Yu, W. Li, S. Wang, C. Dai, J. Wu, X. Bai and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 39–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, J. Wang, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, W. She, Y. Li and R. Che, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20729–20738 CAS .
C.-L. Tang, X. Wei, Y.-M. Jiang, X.-Y. Wu, L. N. Han, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8465–8471 CAS .
F. Li, G. Li, H. Chen, J. Q. Jia, F. Dong, Y. B. Hu, Z. G. Shang and Y. X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 86–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zhu, J. Q. Jia, T. Wang, D. Zhao, J. Yang, F. Dong, Z. G. Shang and Y. X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015 10.1039/c5cc03976b .
H. Y. Lee and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 144, 220–223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 394–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, Z.-H. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Yang and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 939–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, K. Xu, B. Li, J. Sun, F. Jiang, Z. Yu, R. Zou, Z. Chen and J. Hu, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1003–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Li, P. Qiang, M. Ebrahimi, W. Mai, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 731–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, D. Zheng, T. Zhai, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Xie and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2915–2921 CAS .
Y. Qiu, P. Xu, B. Guo, Z. Cheng, H. Fan, M. Yang, X. Yang and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64187–64192 RSC .
M. Huang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, L. Zhang, R. S. Ruoff, Z. Wen and Q. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3878 Search PubMed .
K. Xiao, J.-W. Li, G.-F. Chen, Z.-Q. Liu, N. Li and Y.-Z. Su, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 341–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bahloul, B. Nessark, E. Briot, H. Groult, A. Mauger, K. Zaghib and C. M. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 267–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Zhan, L. Wu, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 305401 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Choi, S. H. Kim, H. J. Sim, J. A. Lee, A. Y. Choi, Y. T. Kim, X. Lepro, G. M. Spinks, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, Q.-F. Guan and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Xu, L. Lu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1127–1132 CAS .
X. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5404–5412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ghodbane, F. Ataherian, N.-L. Wu and F. Favier, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 454–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, F. Kang, B. Li and H. Du, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 1421–1432 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Pang, M. A. Anderson and T. W. Chapman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 444–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ghodbane, J.-L. Pascal and F. Favier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1130–1139 CAS .
C.-C. Hu and T.-W. Tsou, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, H. Zhu, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20207–20214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Sun, P. Lu, K. Li, S. Song and D. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5892–5897 RSC .
T. Brousse, M. Toupin, R. Dugas, L. Athouël, O. Crosnier and D. Bélanger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2171–A2180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kim, V. Augustyn and B. Dunn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 141–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ran, H. Fan, L. Wang, L. Zhao, Y. Tan, X. Zhang, L. Kong and L. Kang, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 928–934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Devaraj and N. Munichandraiah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4406–4417 CAS .
S. L. Brock, N. G. Duan, Z. R. Tian, O. Giraldo, H. Zhou and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2619–2628 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1997, 25, 1–71 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Dewolff, Acta Crystallogr., 1959, 12, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Ma, Y. Bando, L. Q. Zhang and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 918–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2942–2943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 153102 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, K. Xu, L. An, F. Jiang, X. Zhou, J. Yang, Z. Chen, R. Zou and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1443–1447 CAS .
M. Xu, L. Kong, W. Zhou and H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19141–19147 CAS .
S. Park, I. Nam, G.-P. Kim, J. W. Han and J. Yi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9908–9912 CAS .
Z. Yu, B. Duong, D. Abbitt and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3302–3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, C. Zhang, M.-B. Wu, Y. Tao, W. Lv and Q.-H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11092–11094 RSC .
A. M. Hashem, H. M. Abuzeid, N. Narayanan, H. Ehrenberg and C. Julien, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 130, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Poonguzhali, N. Shanmugam, R. Gobi, A. Senthilkumar, R. Shanmugam and K. Sathishkumar, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45407–45415 RSC .
Y.-S. Wang, D.-S. Tsai, W.-H. Chung, Y.-S. Syu and Y.-S. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 68, 95–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Liu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Ionics, 2013, 19, 689–695 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, L. Hu, N. Liu, H. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Y. Cheng, T. Hobson and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2727–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9240–9247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lv, Y. Y. Feng, Y. Li and W. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Shi and I. Zhitomirsky, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 446, 15–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. S. Ata, K. Shi, G. Z. Zhu, G. A. Botton and I. Zhitomirsky, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 29652–29659 RSC .
S. Hassan, M. Suzuki, S. Mori and A. A. El-Moneim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20479–20488 RSC .
J. Yan, E. Khoo, A. Sumboja and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4247–4255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bordjiba and D. Bélanger, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3428–3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, J. Kim, S. Chen, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3889–3896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, F. Tang, Y. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Lim, L. Zhang and G. M. Lu, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1534–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-W. Nam, C.-W. Lee, X.-Q. Yang, B. W. Cho, W.-S. Yoon and K.-B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 323–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Amade, E. Jover, B. Caglar, T. Mutlu and E. Bertran, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5779–5783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, H. Jin, B. Chen, M. Lin, W. Lu, W. M. Tang, W. Xiong, L. W. H. Chan, S. P. Lau and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6800–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Kang, Y. Hou, P. Liu, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9202–9207 CAS .
P. Simon and A. Burke, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 38–43 CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Zhao, Y. Zhao, P. Tang, Y. Shen, C. Xu, H. Li and Y. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3706–3712 CAS .
S. Maiti, A. Pramanik and S. Mahanty, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41617–41626 RSC .
M. Cao, X. He, J. Chen and C. Hu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 170–174 CAS .
X. Feng, N. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Ma, Q. Shen, L. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9178–9184 CAS .
Y. Liu, D. He, H. Wu, J. Duan and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 164, 154–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, A. A. Chitre and X. Lu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4672–4678 RSC .
H. Chen, X. Dong, J. Shi, J. Zhao, Z. Hua, J. Gao, M. Ruan and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 855–860 RSC .
Y. X. Zhang, M. Huang, F. Li, X. L. Wang and Z. Q. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 449–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Yang, F. Li and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7575–7577 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. Dong, S. Zhu, C. Liu and Z. Wen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 49, 448–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Q. Cheng, V. Pavlinek, P. Saha and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 722–728 RSC .
L. Li, P. Hua, X. Tian, C. Yang and Z. Pi, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1682–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, H. Chen, J. Shi, J. Gu, X. Dong, J. Gao, M. Ruan and L. Yu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 116, 432–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Losic, J. G. Mitchell, R. Lal and N. H. Voelcker, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2439–2446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, F. Li, M. Huang, Y. Xing, X. Gao, B. Li, Z. Y. Guo and Y. M. Guan, Mater. Lett., 2014, 120, 263–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Xing, M. Huang, K. L. Li, T. T. Yu, Y. X. Zhang and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7855–7861 CAS .
N. W. Liu, A. Datta, C. Y. Liu, C. Y. Peng, H. H. Wang and Y. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Grote, R.-S. Kühnel, A. Balducci and Y. Lei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 053904 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, B. Lu, S. Wei, M. Bao, Y. Wen and F. Wang, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 789–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Wang, W. Huang, P. Sebastian and S. Gamboa, J. Power Sources, 2005, 140, 211–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, J. Feng, H. Wang, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4410–4413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duay, S. A. Sherrill, Z. Gui, E. Gillette and S. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1200–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. X. Zhang, M. Huang, Y. Xing and L. L. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 329–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Bian, Y.-P. Zhao and C.-Y. Xian, Mater. Lett., 2013, 111, 75–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-D. Dang, A. N. Banerjee, S. W. Joo and B.-K. Min, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 9743–9753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, W. Shi, N. Xiao, X. Rui, H. Tan, X. Lu, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and Q. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2769–2774 CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Huang, Z. Liang and Y.-E. Miao, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 159–166 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Su, W. Huang and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 43–59 CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Gu, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Zhang and C. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 86, 605–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, J. Li, G. Yan, G. Xu, Q. Xue and F. Kang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 621, 86–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Coustan, A. Le Comte, T. Brousse and F. Favier, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 520–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Gu, Y. Jiang, J. Zhao, X. Zhang and C. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 235–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Jafta, F. Nkosi, L. le Roux, M. K. Mathe, M. Kebede, K. Makgopa, Y. Song, D. Tong, M. Oyama and N. Manyala, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 110, 228–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sawangphruk, S. Pinitsoontorn and J. Limtrakul, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Liu and H. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 517, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Cai and W. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 306–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Yu, M. Sun, F. Ye, B. Lan, G. Diao and J. He, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 198, 371–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, X. Zhao, Z. Huang, Y. Li and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39087–39094 RSC .
D. Zheng, S. Sun, W. Fan, H. Yu, C. Fan, G. Cao, Z. Yin and X. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16439–16443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, X. Cao, G. Lin and Y. Shihe, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 475605 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, L. Yu, M. Sun, S. Yang, F. Ye, J. He and Z. Hao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 9586–9593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, T. Huang, J. Liu, J. Zhuang and A. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3047–3052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, L. Hou, L. Yang, D. Li, L. Shen, F. Zhang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16035–16041 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Gu, J. Tong, C. Ma, J. Zhao, X. Zhang and C. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 91, 120–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dong, Y. X. Zhang, H. F. Song, X. Qiu, X. D. Hao, C. P. Liu, Y. Yuan, X. L. Li and J. M. Huang, Phys. E, 2012, 45, 103–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jana, S. Pande, A. K. Sinha and T. Pal, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 5558–5560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Ede, S. Anantharaj, U. Nithiyanantham and S. Kundu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5474–5484 RSC .
B. G. S. Raj, A. M. Asiri, A. H. Qusti, J. J. Wu and S. Anandan, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2014, 21, 1933–1938 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lashanizadegan and H. Mirzazadeh, Asian J. Chem., 2013, 25, 1425 CAS .
B. Lu, S. Chen and K. Kawamoto, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3619–3624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Xu, H. Sun and S. Yin, Small, 2015, 11, 2182–2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Sun, R. Zou, G. Li, X. Hu, G. Song, G. Ma and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14864–14867 RSC .
P. Wang, Y.-J. Zhao, L.-X. Wen, J.-F. Chen and Z.-G. Lei, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 20116–20123 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Ko, L.-J. Chen, Y.-H. Chen and K.-J. Lin, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Indrawirawan, X. Duan, H. Sun, H. M. Ang, M. O. Tade and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 266, 12–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, H. Zhang, P. Chen, L.-H. Nie, C.-H. Li and S.-K. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1540–1548 CAS .
W. Li, R. Zeng, Z. Sun, D. Tian and S. Dou, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Toufiq, F. Wang, Q. Li and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 116, 1127–1132 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Li, S.-S. Li, D.-L. Zhou, A.-J. Wang, P.-P. Zhang, C.-G. Li and J.-J. Feng, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 2521–2527 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lan, M. Sun, T. Lin, G. Cheng, L. Yu, S. Peng and J. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 234–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sinha, M. Pradhan and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23976–23986 CAS .
Z. Song, W. Liu, M. Zhao, Y. Zhang, G. Liu, C. Yu and J. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 560, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Su, H.-J. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4845–4850 CAS .
X. Su, L. Yu, G. Cheng, H. Zhang, M. Sun, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2014, 134, 439–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, P. Yu, H. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 523–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Yan, L. Song, Q. Yue, F. Qu and X. Zhang, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2012, 4, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Dai, J. Deng, G. Bai, K. Ji and Y. Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 4034–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, J. Yang, W. Tang, X. Wu, L. Wei and Y. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 26796–26803 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Yu and W. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11682–11690 CAS .
D. Li, X. Wu and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11040–11046 CAS .
Y. Munaiah, B. G. S. Raj, T. P. Kumar and P. Ragupathy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4300–4306 CAS .
L. Jin, L. Xu, C. Morein, C. H. Chen, M. Lai, S. Dharmarathna, A. Dobley and S. L. Suib, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3373–3382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Q. Wang, A. Umar, S. Sun, L. Huang, J. Wang and Y. Gao, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4420–4426 RSC .
H. Zhao, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Li and C. Feng, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1743–1750 RSC .
W. Xiao, H. Xia, J. Y. Fuh and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pang, G. Long, S. Jiang, Y. Ji, W. Han, B. Wang, X. Liu and Y. Xi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 297–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Cao, Y. Wang, S. Yang, D. Zhang, K. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Yin, G. Wang and Y. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 138–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, H.-W. Shim, C. W. Lee, H. J. Song, I. J. Park, J.-C. Kim, K. S. Hong and D.-W. Kim, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 990–1004 CrossRef CAS .
K. Selvakumar, S. M. S. Kumar, R. Thangamuthu, K. Ganesan, P. Murugan, P. Rajput, S. N. Jha and D. Bhattacharyya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6604–6618 CAS .
S. Ghasemi, R. Hosseinzadeh and M. Jafari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1037–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Moon, H. Munakata, K. Kajihara and K. Kanamura, Electrochemistry, 2013, 81, 2–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, H. Pang, B. Zhang, Q. Lu, S. Liang and F. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2193 Search PubMed .
S.-C. Pang and M. A. Anderson, J. Mater. Res., 2000, 15, 2096–2106 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Reddy and R. G. Reddy, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chen, S.-C. Wang, Y.-H. Tien, W.-T. Tsai and C.-K. Lin, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 1557–1560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chen, C.-Y. Tsay, H.-S. Lin, W. D. Jheng and C.-K. Lin, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 503–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yu, J. J. Zhu and J. T. Zhao, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 2013, 3719–3725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Poyraz, W. Song, D. Kriz, C.-H. Kuo, M. S. Seraji and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10986–10991 CAS .
A. Sarkar, A. K. Satpati, V. Kumar and S. Kumar, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 167, 126–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bilecka and M. Niederberger, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1358–1374 RSC .
T. T. Truong, Y. Liu, Y. Ren, L. Trahey and Y. Sun, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8067–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Pahalagedara, S. Dharmarathna, C. K. King'ondu, M. N. Pahalagedara, Y. Meng, C.-H. Kuo and S. L. Suib, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20363–20373 CAS .
E. K. Nyutu, C.-H. Chen, S. Sithambaram, V. M. B. Crisostomo and S. L. Suib, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6786–6793 CAS .
P. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Ma and Z. Qi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 118, 303–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, D. Geng, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 369, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Sun, H. Zhang, D. Zhang and Y. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 637–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Meher and G. R. Rao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 317–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bello, O. Fashedemi, M. Fabiane, J. Lekitima, K. Ozoemena and N. Manyala, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ming, J. Li, F. Kang, G. Pang, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, J. Xu and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 428–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Y. Dong Noh, K. Li, S. Komarneni and D. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10770–10779 CAS .
M. Nakayama, T. Kanaya and R. Inoue, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1154–1158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Wu, Z.-S. Guo and J.-J. Jow, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21861–21867 CAS .
W. Yan, T. Ayvazian, J. Kim, Y. Liu, K. C. Donavan, W. Xing, Y. Yang, J. C. Hemminger and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8275–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Ho and M.-S. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22068–22074 CAS .
J. Xiao, S. Yang, L. Wan, F. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, Y. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Ding, S. Yue, C. P. Wong, X. Cai, S. Tan and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 595–599 CAS .
B. Babakhani and D. G. Ivey, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10762–10774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Lin, Z. Ling, Y. Li and X. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 138, 132–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hassan, M. Suzuki, S. Mori and A. A. El-Moneim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 21–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, S.-Y. Chew, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1724–1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, H. Lee, M. S. Cho, J.-D. Nam and Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14606–14611 CAS .
M. F. Dupont and S. W. Donne, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, S. Firdoz, E. Y.-X. Yap, L. Li and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4379–4387 RSC .
J. Yang, L. Lian, H. Ruan, F. Xie and M. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 189–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5670–5703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
H.-Q. Liu, X.-L. Yu, B. Cai, S.-J. You, Z.-B. He, Q.-Q. Huang, L. Rao, S.-S. Li, C. Liu and W.-W. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 093703 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, G. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li and J. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10103–10106 CAS .
H. Huang, W. Zhang, Y. Fu and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 480–488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Chang, Y.-R. Lu, J.-L. Chen, C.-L. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-M. Chen, Y.-C. Tsai, C.-M. Chang, P.-H. Yeh and W.-C. Chou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1725–1735 RSC .
X. Li and B. Wei, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 479–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Chen, X. Xie, N. Liu, Y. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Yao, M. Pasta, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8904–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mo, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang and J. Ye, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 373–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. A. Hu, N. An, Y. Y. Yang, Z. M. Li and H. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22865–22872 CAS .
L. Du, P. Yang, X. Yu, P. Liu, J. Song and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17561–17567 CAS .
M. Huang, R. Mi, H. Liu, F. Li, X. L. Zhao, W. Zhang, S. X. He and Y. X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 760–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shi, M. Ren and I. Zhitomirsky, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1289–1298 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shi and I. Zhitomirsky, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 396–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3185–3191 RSC .
X. Feng, Z. Yan, N. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Liu, Q. Fan, L. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12818–12825 CAS .
S. Yang, X. Song, P. Zhang and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3317–3322 CAS .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, J. Dai, Q. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Zhu and Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 111–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Ran, J. He, Y. Huang, Z. Liu, W. Liu, Y. Tang, L. Zhang, D. Gao and F. Gao, Small, 2015, 11, 1310–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Wu and Y.-H. Fu, Carbon, 2013, 60, 236–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, A. R. O. Raji and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6298–6302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, W. W. Tjiu, J. Pan, C. Zhang, W. Gao and T. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4233–4242 RSC .
H. R. Naderi, H. R. Mortaheb and A. Zolfaghari, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 719, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, D.-Y. Feng, T.-Y. Liu, Y. Li and X.-X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3581–3587 RSC .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2801–2810 CAS .
Y. Sun, Y. Cheng, K. He, A. Zhou and H. Duan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 10178–10186 RSC .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 174–182 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhai, F. Wang, M. Yu, S. Xie, C. Liang, C. Li, F. Xiao, R. Tang, Q. Wu and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6790–6796 RSC .
X. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Lei, Z. Liu and L. Wei, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30233–30240 RSC .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, M. Zhou and Q. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19730–19740 RSC .
M. Liu, L. Gan, W. Xiong, Z. Xu, D. Zhu and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2555–2562 CAS .
H. Li, L. Jiang, Q. Cheng, Y. He, V. Pavlinek, P. Saha and C. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 164, 252–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zheng, S. Chen, Y. Ye, F. Xu, H. Tan, Z. Li, H. Hou and Y. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 86–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, Carbon, 2013, 61, 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhi, A. Manivannan, F. Meng and N. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 345–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Ma, W. Yang, Z. Gao, J. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Liu and X. Jing, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4016–4022 RSC .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 153–160 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Meng and P. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 219–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, R. Li, S. Gai, S. Ding, F. He, M. Zhang and P. Yang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7119–7126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Fischer, K. A. Pettigrew, D. R. Rolison, R. M. Stroud and J. W. Long, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 281–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697–1721 RSC .
G. Lv, D. Wu and R. Fu, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2009, 355, 2461–2465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-R. Li, Z.-P. Feng, Y.-N. Ou, D. Wu, R. Fu and Y.-X. Tong, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2209–2213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Q. Xu, J. Zhang, H. Yang, B. Wang, D. Yang, J. Hu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9689–9697 CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang, C. Yuan and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, C. Yang, C. Xu, H. Wu, Z. Zhang, T. Liu, C. Zhang, Q. Yang, B. Li and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12432–12440 CAS .
P. Sen, A. De, A. D. Chowdhury, S. Bandyopadhyay, N. Agnihotri and M. Mukherjee, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 265–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pandey and A. Rastogi, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 71–78 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meng, X. Yan, Y. Zhu and P. Si, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 236–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Jafri, A. K. Mishra and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17601–17605 RSC .
J. Han, L. Li, P. Fang and R. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15900–15907 CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Ma and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16939–16942 RSC .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5608–5619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tang, Y. Zhao and C. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 300–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tang, L. Han, L. Zhang, S. Wang, W. Feng, G. Xu and L. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 949–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sharma, A. Rastogi and S. Desu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7690–7695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, W. Meng, M. Zhu, H. Xue, C.-S. Lee and C. Zhi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2569–2574 CAS .
A. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Xiao, L. Z. Lu, L. Z. Wang and F. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 128, 1327–1331 CAS .
J. Kim, H. Ju, A. I. Inamdar, Y. Jo, J. Han, H. Kim and H. Im, Energy, 2014, 70, 473–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, J. Y. Kim, W. Xing, K. C. Donavan, T. Ayvazian and R. M. Penner, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2382–2390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, H. Jin, Q. Lin, X. Li, M. M. Tavakoli, S.-F. Leung, W. M. Tang, L. Zhou, H. L. W. Chan and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10199–10204 CAS .
T. Qiu, B. Luo, M. Giersig, E. M. Akinoglu, L. Hao, X. Wang, L. Shi, M. Jin and L. Zhi, Small, 2014, 10, 4136–4141 CAS .
Y. Li, H. Fu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6604–6611 CAS .
S. Hassan, M. Suzuki and A. A. El-Moneim, Am. J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 2, 11–14 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, Q. Wang, L. Qiao, F. Li, D. Wang, Z. Yang and D. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 483–487 RSC .
H. Pang, S. Wang, G. Li, Y. Ma, J. Li, X. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and H. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5053–5060 CAS .
Q. Li, Z.-L. Wang, G.-R. Li, R. Guo, L.-X. Ding and Y.-X. Tong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3803–3807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, C. Yang, B. Xie, Z. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Li, F. Kang and C. P. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2652–2659 CAS .
D. P. Dubal, J. G. Kim, Y. Kim, R. Holze and W. B. Kim, Energy Technol., 2013, 1, 125–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. Deng, P.-J. Ho, C.-Z. Song, S.-A. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-M. Chen and K.-T. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2178–2185 CAS .
D. Yan, Z. Guo, G. Zhu, H. Yang, R. Wei, H. Xu and A. Yu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 82, 156–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, S. Zheng, Y. Chen, J. Luo, H. Guo and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 6118–6126 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Deng, J.-K. Chang, C.-C. Wang, K.-W. Chen, C.-M. Lin, M.-T. Tang, J.-M. Chen and K.-T. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3942–3946 CAS .
D. Yan, Z. Guo, G. Zhu, Z. Yu, H. Xu and A. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 409–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kundu and L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, X. L. Zhao, F. Li, L. L. Zhang and Y. X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 36–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, C. Cheng, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, J. Luo, Y. Wang, W. Ren, T. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3815–3826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Wen and Q. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 98–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, H. Lin, H. Lu, E. Xing, Y. Zhang and B. Xie, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64675–64682 RSC .
W. Song, G. Shao, G. Wang, Z. Ma, S. Liu, J. Song and C. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 3173–3180 CrossRef CAS .
E.-H. Liu, W. Li, J. Li, X.-Y. Meng, R. Ding and S.-T. Tan, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1122–1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, S. Zhou and L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8621–8630 CAS .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, M. Bosman and H. J. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2419–2426 RSC .
H. Jiang, C. Li, T. Sun and J. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2606–2608 RSC .
H. Chen, L. Hu, Y. Yan, R. Che, M. Chen and L. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leshuk, R. Parviz, P. Everett, H. Krishnakumar, R. A. Varin and F. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1892–1895 CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 866–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramadoss and S. J. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 12201–12212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, M. Kuang, X. D. Hao, Y. Liu, M. Huang, X. L. Guo, J. Yan, G. Q. Han and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 675–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, D. Kong, J. Luo, S. Chen, D. Zhang, K. Qiu, X. Qi, H. Zhang, C. M. Li and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14413–14422 RSC .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 267–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, X. Xing, N. Zhang, H. Gao, M. Zhang, Y. Shang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3785–3793 CAS .
M. Yu, H. Sun, X. Sun, F. Lu, G. Wang, T. Hu, H. Qiu and J. Lian, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 2313–2329 CAS .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu and T. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zilong, Z. Zhu, J. Qiu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1331–1336 RSC .
Y. Zhao and P. Jiang, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 444, 232–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. He, G.-R. Li, Z.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Su and Y.-X. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1288–1292 CAS .
Q. Yang, X. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Gao, H. Gao, X. Liu, H. Liu, K. Wong and W. Lau, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 654–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, F. Li, X. L. Zhao, D. Luo, X. Q. You, Y. X. Zhang and G. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 172–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, F. Li and M. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 203–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Wang, N. Hu, Z. Wen and Q. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4518 Search PubMed .
J. Shao, X. Zhou, Q. Liu, R. Zou, W. Li, J. Yang and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6168–6176 CAS .
T. Zhu, S. Zheng, Y. Lu, Y. Chen, Y. Chen and H. Guo, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 1–10 CAS .
J. Zhu, S. Tang, H. Xie, Y. Dai and X. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17637–17646 CAS .
D. Sarkar, G. G. Khan, A. K. Singh and K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15523–15531 CAS .
M. Huang, X. L. Zhao, F. Li, W. Li, B. Zhang and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12852–12857 CAS .
L. Yu, G. Zhang, C. Yuan and X. W. D. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 137–139 RSC .
K. Xu, W. Li, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. Liu, L. An, Z. Chen, R. Zou and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4795–4802 CAS .
G. Li, W. Li, K. Xu, R. Zou, Z. Chen and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7738–7741 CAS .
M. Kuang, Z. Q. Wen, X. L. Guo, S. M. Zhang and Y. X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 426–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zou, M. F. Yuen, Z. Zhang, J. Hu and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1717–1723 CAS .
F. Bao, Z. Zhang, W. Guo and X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 31–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Xu, X. Wang, B. Liu, X. Hou, G. Yu, P. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 559–564 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, H. Nan, Z. Gu, B. Geng and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5442–5448 CAS .
K. Qiu, Y. Lu, D. Zhang, J. Cheng, H. Yan, J. Xu, X. Liu, J.-K. Kim and Y. Luo, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 687–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao, J. Zang and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1215–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, W. Ren, Z. Chen, M. Mao, Q. Li and T. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 10681–10687 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, C. X. Zhao, J. I. Wong, X. W. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 094010 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Makino, Y. Yamauchi and W. Sugimoto, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 153–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, J. Maeng, S. W. John and P. P. Irazoqui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301269 Search PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Hong, J. Yoon, S. W. Jin, Y. Lim, S.-J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8844–8855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kim, B. Hsia, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, Carbon, 2014, 74, 163–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 131–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, B. Wei, Z. Cao, J. Zheng, K. Gong, F. Li, J. Yu, Q. Li, W. Lu and J.-H. Byun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6088–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Moon, D. Kim, G. Lee, S. Y. Hong, K. K. Kim, S. M. Park and J. S. Ha, Carbon, 2015, 81, 29–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xue, Z. Xie, L. Zhang, X. Ma, X. Wu, Y. Guo, W. Song, Z. Li and T. Cao, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2703–2708 RSC .
C. Shen, X. Wang, S. Li, W. Zhang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 302–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. D. Myers, J. Yan, G. Shekhawat, V. Dravid and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4119–4122 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, M. Ihns, M. Li, J. Y. Hwang, M. F. Mousavi, L. Chaney, A. T. Lech and R. B. Kaner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4233–4238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, C. Lu, X. Wang, R. Y. Tay and B. K. Tay, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1528–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, D. Aradilla, G. Bidan, P. Gentile, T. J. Schubert, J. Wimberg, S. Sadki and P. Gomez-Romero, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Ming Huang	Ming Huang received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from Chongqing University in 2011 and 2014 (Prof. Yu Xin Zhang's group), respectively. Currently, he is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) under the supervision of Prof. Rodney S. Ruoff. His research interests involve self-assembled nanostructures for energy storage materials, and CVD synthesis of graphene and their applications in electronic and optical devices.
Fei Li	Fei Li received his B. Eng. from Chongqing University in 2013. He is continuing his master study in the college of materials science and engineering of Chongqing University (Prof. Yu Xin Zhang's group) to get his master's degree in 2016. His research interest focuses on fabrication of novel metal oxide nanomaterials for supercapacitors.
Fan Dong	Dr Fan Dong received his Ph.D. in Environmental Engineering in 2010 from Zhejiang University. Currently, he is a Professor at Chongqing Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Functional Organic Molecules, College of Environment and Resources, Chongqing Technology and Business University. He was a visiting scholar from 2009 to 2010 at Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include functional nanomaterials, photocatalysis, air pollution control and supercapacitors.
Yu Xin Zhang	Dr Yu Xin Zhang received his B. Eng. and M. Eng. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2000 and 2003, respectively. He received his Ph.D. degree in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2008, and continued to work as a research fellow in Prof. Hua Chun Zeng's group at NUS until 2009. Now Dr Zhang is a full professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering in Chongqing University. Dr Zhang's research interest is self-assembled nanostructures for energy storage materials and photocatalysts.
Li Zhang	Dr Li Zhang received her B. Eng. in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2004. After two years of industrial experience in Micron, she continued her Ph.D. study in the same department at NUS and received her Ph.D. degree in 2011. She worked as a research engineer from 2010 to 2011 at NUS and a research fellow in Professor Ruoff's group at The University of Texas at Austin from 2011 to 2012. Now Dr Zhang is a research scientist in the Institute of Chemical and Engineering sciences in Singapore. Dr Zhang's research interest is advanced materials for energy storage and conversion, fundamental materials chemistry and physics, electrochemistry, electrocatalysis, and synthesis and study of novel catalytic materials.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot of specific power versus specific energy for various electrochemical energy storage systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of two different charge storage mechanisms via (a) electrochemical double-layer capacitance (EDLC) or (b) redox reaction based pseudocapacitance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2011, Materials Research Society.	 
MnO2 + C+ + e− ↔ MnOOC	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Crystal structures of α-, β-, γ-, δ-, and λ-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of diatomite structures with different morphologies (a, d, and g) and the corresponding hierarchical hollow MnO2 patterns by replica molding from diatomites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  MnO2 nanotube and nanowire arrays made from AAO templates: (a and b) AAO template and MnO2 nanotube arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c and d) MnO2 nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2010, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the procedure to synthesize porous MnO2 nanotubes. SEM images of MnO2 nanotubes. (b) Detailed images of the MnO2 nanotubes. (c) Side-view of MnO2 nanotube arrays. (d) Enlarged view of the MnO2 nanotube arrays. (e) The energy density vs. power density of the MnO2 nanotubes//AG asymmetric supercapacitor in a Ragone plot for fuel cells, conventional batteries, conventional capacitors, and ultracapacitors. (f) Digital image of a red-light-emitting diode (LED) lighted by the MnO2 nanotubes//AG device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–d) SEM images with different magnifications of the obtained β-MnO2 network. (e and f) HRTEM images of the obtained β-MnO2 network. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–c) SEM images of hollow Ni dendrites. (d–f) Hollow Ni dendrite-supported MnO2 nanowires (Ni@MnO2) grown on Ni foil. The corresponding insets are low-magnification images. (g–i) Electrochemical measurements of Ni@MnO2 structures prepared on Ni foils. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) SEM images of CNTs@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures grown on Ni foam. Insets show the corresponding local 3D structures in low magnifications. (c and d) TEM and HRTEM images of a partial coverage of the MnO2 nanosheets on the surface of CNTs. (e and f) Electrochemical properties of the as-prepared CNTs@MnO2 core–shell nanocomposite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of MnO2–graphene composites with different structures. (a) Graphene nanosheets/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Graphene nanoribbons/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Partially exfoliated graphite/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) 3D graphene hydrogel/MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) SEM image of 3D graphene networks and 3D graphene/MnO2 composite networks. Inset shows the high-magnification SEM image. (c) Schematic of the flexible supercapacitors. The two digital photographs show the flexible supercapacitors when bended. (d) Ragone plots of the flexible supercapacitor, compared with the values of similar symmetrical systems from other references. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of 3D porous carbon. (b–d) SEM images of the MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid structure after MnO2 deposition. (f) Specific capacitance vs. scan rate for samples with different areal mass densities for MnO2. (b) Areal capacitance of the MnO2/3D porous carbon hybrid electrode vs. MnO2 mass loading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images of the carbon nanofibers and carbon nanofiber@MnO2 composite. (c and d) TEM images of a single carbon nanofiber@MnO2 nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2012, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images of carbon spheres and the carbon sphere@MnO2 core–shell composite. (c–g) TEM and corresponding EDS of the carbon sphere@MnO2 core–shell composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of 1D conducting polymer–MnO2 composites. TEM images of (b) PANI and (c and d) PANI–MnO2 composites. (e) SAED pattern, and EDS maps of (f) Mn and (g) O from a single composite nanofiber. Scale bars: (b and c) 100 nm; (d, f and g) 20 nm. (h and i) Electrochemical properties of the PANI–MnO2 composite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic showing the fabrication process of nanoporous gold/MnO2 hybrid materials by directly growing MnO2 (orange) onto nanoporous gold. (b) Photograph of a nanoporous gold/MnO2-based supercapacitor. (c) SEM image of as de-alloyed nanoporous gold films. (d) SEM image of a nanoporous gold/MnO2 film with a MnO2 plating time of 10 min. (e) Bright-field TEM image of the nanoporous gold/MnO2 hybrid with a MnO2 plating time of 20 min. (f and g) Electrochemical properties of the Au/MnO2 composite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the free-standing Au nanospike film transferred onto a regular Xerox printing paper and the SEM image (inset) shows the microstructure upon bending. (b) Top-view SEM image of the as-prepared MnO2/Au/MnO2nanospikeelectrode. (c) CV measurements when the device is folded and released.Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) SEM image of the Au nanomesh and Au@δ-MnO2 core–shell nanomesh peeled from the PET substrate. Inset shows the optical image of a transparent flexible supercapacitor. (f) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the device at flat and bent state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a–c) SEM images of Ni nanocones and the MnO2 nanostructure deposited on Ni nanocones (MNN). (d–f) TEM images of the MnO2nanostructure deposited on Ni nanocones. Inset is the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of MnO2. (g)A photographic image of the as-prepared MNN/AC ionogel supercapacitor electrode (1.3 m). (h) Photographic image of a fully packed supercapacitor device. (i) Photograph showing a MNN/AC ionogel supercapacitor driving a red LED under a bending state. (j)Energy and power densities of the MNN-based asymmetric supercapacitors compared to some available energy storage systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Scheme of preparing a high-porosity 3D ordered macroporous Mn/MnO2 electrode. SEM images of (b) polystyrene opals covering the Au/ITO substrate, (c) 3D ordered macroporous Mn inverse opals structure (inset: large magnification), (d) 3D ordered macroporous Mn/MnO2 electrode structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of the Ni foam (a), MnO2 nanosheets arrays on Ni foam (b–d) with different magnifications. The insets show the corresponding optical images of the pristine Ni foam, and MnO2 nanosheets on Ni foam. (e and f) Electrochemical performance of the MnO2 nanosheet arrays on the Ni foam electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step synthesis of hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 core–shell arrays directly on Ni foam. (b and c) Low-magnification and enlarged SEM images of the Co3O4 nanowire arrays on Ni foam. (d and e) Low-magnification and enlarged SEM images of the hierarchical Co3O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowire arrays on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 338. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Possible formation mechanism of Ni(OH)2–MnO2 composite nanosheets on Ni foam and the structural schematic diagram of a single hybrid nanosheet. (b and c) Typical SEM images of the Ni(OH)2–MnO2 hybrid film supported on Ni foam. (e and f) Typical TEM images of the composite nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the growth processes of H–TiO2@MnO2 composite nanowires on a carbon cloth substrate. (b and c) SEM and TEM images of H–TiO2@MnO2 composite NWs. Insets are the magnified SEM image, TEM image and SAED pattern, respectively. (d) CV curves of the ASC device under flat, bent, and twisted conditions. Insets are the device pictures under test conditions. (e) Ragone plots of the ASC devices measured in the aqueous and gel electrolyte. Inset shows a red LED powered by a solid-state ASC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a and b) SEM images of the ZnO/MnO2 composite nanowires on the carbon fiber substrates. (c) The TEM image of a single ZnO/MnO2 core–shell NW. (d) The EDS pattern of ZnO/MnO2 NWs. (e) The HRTEM image of a ZnO/MnO2 core–shell NW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of the CuO@MnO2 core–shell nanostructures. (b–d) TEM images of the hierarchical CuO nanotube@MnO2 nanosheet nanostructures. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern taken from the edge of nanosheets. (e) STEM image and EDS mapping of the hierarchical CuO nanotube@MnO2 nanosheet nanostructures. (f) Ragone plots of the asymmetric supercapacitor. The inset shows the digital image of a red-light-emitting diode (LED) lighted by the CuO@MnO2//MEGO device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 362. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a and b) SEM images of Co3O4/SnO2nanoboxes. (c and d) SEM images of the Co3O4/SnO2@MnO2core–shell nanostructures. (e–g) TEM images of the nanocomposite. The inset in (f) shows the corresponding SAED pattern taken from the edge of MnO2nanosheets.Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a and b) SEM images of NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays and hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) SEM images of networked NiCo2O4/MnO2-precursor and NiCo2O4/MnO2 branched nanowire heterostructure arrays on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e and f) SEM images of NiCo2O4 nanosheet arrays and NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanosheet arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a–d) SEM and TEM images of ZnCo2O4/MnO2 nanocone forests. (e) Cyclic performance of the ZnCo2O4/MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 2 A g−1. (f) Rate performance of the electrodes at progressively increased current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of an asymmetric microsupercapacitor based on LSG–MnO2 as the positive electrode and LSG as the negative electrode. (b) Photograph showing the asymmetric micro-supercapacitor. (c) Optical microscopy image showing the LSG– GO–LSG–MnO2 interface. (d) SEM image of the interface between GO and LSG shows the selective electrodeposition of MnO2 on LSG only. (Inset) Magnified view of the GO and LSG area. (e) Integration of a supercapacitor array with solar cells for efficient solar energy harvesting and storage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 393. Copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences, USA.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Fabrication of the GMA ternary hybrid film through vacuum filtration of the mixture of GO, MnO2, and AgNW suspension. (b) Digital photograph of the as-obtained GMA film supported on the cellulose acetate membrane after the vacuum filtration. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedures for RGMA–MSCs on an alumina substrate. (d–f) SEM images of the RGMA ternary hybrid film on silicon wafer. (g and h) Digital photograph of the RGMA–MSC microsupercapacitor electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
