Stability investigations of electrocatalysts on the nanoscale  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22550F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22550F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9319-9330Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStability investigations of electrocatalysts on the nanoscale

        
          
            Josef C. 
            Meier
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ioannis 
            Katsounaros
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Carolina 
            Galeano
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hans J. 
            Bongard
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Angel A. 
            Topalov
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Aleksander 
            Kostka
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Arndt 
            Karschin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ferdi 
            Schüth
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Karl J. J. 
            Mayrhofer
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Interface Chemistry and Surface Engineering, Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH, Max-Planck-Strasse 1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany. E-mail: meier@mpie.de; mayrhofer@mpie.de;  Fax: +49 211 6792 218;   Tel: +49 211 6792 160
bDepartment of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Max-Planck-Institut für Kohlenforschung, Kaiser-Wilhelm-Platz 1, 45470 Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany
cCenter for Electrochemical Sciences, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany
dDepartment of Microstructure Physics and Alloy Design, Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung, Max-Planck-Strasse 1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany
Received 
      14th June 2012
    , Accepted 30th July 2012First published on 31st July 2012AbstractThe search for more stable electrocatalyst materials for electrochemical energy conversion requires a fundamental understanding of the underlying degradation processes. Advanced characterization techniques like identical location transmission electron microscopy (IL-TEM) can provide invaluable insight into the stability of electrode materials on the nanoscale. In this review, the basic principles and the methodology of IL-TEM are described, and its capabilities are revealed by demonstrating the recent progress that has been achieved in research on the stability of fuel cell catalysts. Moreover, we provide future perspectives of the identical location approach towards implementing other electron microscopic and tomographic applications, which will help us to gain an even broader view of the degradation of electrocatalysts.

Broader context
Fossil fuels, such as oil, coal and natural gas, are currently the most important energy sources worldwide. The combustion of such fuels, however, inevitably produces CO2 emissions, which are considered to play a major role in climate change. Moreover, dwindling fossil energy resources in conjunction with the fact that they are located in a limited number of geographical regions, endangers the long-term energy supply for the growing world population. Because of this, major efforts have recently been directed to advance alternative energy sources and develop sustainable and environmentally friendly technologies. Renewable sources, such as wind or solar power, which directly provide electrical energy, are, however, variable or intermittent, which causes new challenges for energy storage and conversion devices. Electrochemical systems like batteries, electrolyzers and fuel cells are believed to be the key elements to meet these challenges in our future energy landscape. While the efficiency of electrochemical energy conversion devices is typically quite high, the durability and long-term performance are often the decisive bottlenecks. In particular the often highly expensive electrocatalyst materials require significant advances in terms of stability to make large-scale applications economically feasible. This requires an improved fundamental understanding of their degradation mechanisms, based on accurate investigations on the nanoscale.

1. Introduction
The 21st century will bring about a slow but steady transition in the energy supply of our societies towards clean and sustainable technologies and among these, electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices such as batteries, electrolyzers, supercapacitors or fuel cells are believed to play a crucial role.1,2 For the time being, however, electrochemical reactors like fuel cells and electrolyzers are still not economically feasible for large scale deployment. Expensive high performance materials have to be utilized to increase practical efficiency, i.e. minimize energy losses, and to withstand the often harsh operating conditions, such as demanding pH, temperature and especially potential conditions, to provide just a few examples.3,4 The high requirements with respect to durability and lifetime are still a substantial challenge, and major efforts are directed to address these problems.5 The developments are typically guided by experience from long-term performance evaluations coupled with post mortem analysis or even in situ investigations of degradation during operation.5,6 While it is essential to investigate such energy conversion systems for their performance as one entity, the strong interdependency of the different components during operation can often impede the interpretation of degradation processes. Considering the varying operation conditions and the complex manufacturing processes, it becomes even more difficult to draw firm conclusions from different studies. Thus, in order to develop a fundamental understanding and thereby further improve individual functional parts, more specialized ex situ approaches have to be applied in parallel. This is particularly true for the electrocatalyst materials that are decisive for the crucial electron transfer processes, which are very difficult to analyze in detail within the complex matrix of a complete device. Moreover, since catalysts are typically employed as highly dispersed particles with a high surface area that form extended reaction zones, also quite different experimental methodologies become necessary for a detailed investigation of their degradation on the nanoscale.
Due to the high spatial resolution, electron microscopy is best suited for this purpose and has been widely utilized for studying changes in the structure and morphology of electrocatalysts.7,8 Conventional approaches based on the comparison of pristine and degraded materials, where the electrocatalyst is mechanically removed from the electrode after application, are useful but not always straightforward. Especially the pronounced heterogeneity of high-surface area catalysts allows firm conclusions only in conjunction with extensive statistical evaluations. This difficulty in understanding degradation by observing different catalyst locations was recently circumvented by the introduction of a transmission electron microscopy approach where identical locations of an electrocatalyst material before and after electrochemical aging can be studied and compared, i.e. identical-location transmission electron microscopy (IL-TEM).9,10 Thus, the direct visual tracking of structural and morphological changes in the catalyst has become feasible, which has led to an enhanced understanding of the degradation processes of nanoparticles under various operating conditions. In combination with ex situ aging studies in electrochemical cells, this provides valuable information for material design and synthesis as well as system operation to enhance the overall stability and performance of electrochemical reactors.
In this perspective we review the approach of investigating identical locations with electron microscopy as a powerful tool to reveal catalyst degradation processes during electrochemical energy conversion on the nanoscale. Moreover, we provide an overview of the state of the art in the understanding of the degradation mechanisms of electrocatalyst materials, based on results from low-temperature fuel cell cathode catalysts, for which IL-TEM has been predominantly employed so far. In addition, the most recent developments and future directions of the identical-location electron microscopy methods as well as their potential to advance electrocatalyst research will be described.
2. Stability investigations of electrocatalysts
2.1 Standard ex situ investigations
Ultimate tests of the performance of individual components such as the electrocatalyst have naturally to be performed in situ in the complete multicomponent system. The complex interactions between the components of the overall system can be fully and accurately captured only under real life conditions. This is particularly important for stability investigations of proton exchange membrane fuel cells, which feature an extreme complexity in preparation, composition and operational parameters. While they certainly cannot replace system evaluations, ex situ investigations can often provide a better understanding about the intrinsic properties particularly of the catalyst materials and the fundamentals of the degradation processes. Moreover, they enable significantly faster and more selective studies of the performance of different electrocatalysts compared to in situ investigations, besides reducing the amount of material required. Ex situ catalyst degradation experiments are typically performed in a three-electrode electrochemical setup, the working electrode consisting of an inert but conducting substrate (such as glassy carbon) on which a thin film of the catalyst material has been directly deposited.11–14 Depending on the application and the process that needs to be simulated, the degradation experiments may be performed under galvanostatic/potentiostatic as well as potentiodynamic control. Thereby, the long-term behaviour of catalysts can be simulated in a shorter timescale by imposing artificially harsh conditions in so-called “accelerated aging tests”.11 The effects of the degradation conditions on the catalyst aging are then macroscopically studied by measuring the loss of active surface area or catalyst activity over time.
An example of a typical three-electrode electrochemical cell with a rotating disc electrode (RDE) that can be used for reliable ex situ stability tests is illustrated in Scheme 1A. The cell consists of three compartments that geometrically separate the electrodes from each other, so that the counter reaction and the reference electrode do not artificially influence the half-cell stability investigation at the working electrode, which typically lasts over extended periods of time. As even minor amounts of impurities in the electrolyte can significantly impact performance studies of electrocatalysts, special precautions often have to be taken into account with respect to the purity of the used chemicals and even for the construction and the materials used in the cell. For instance, glass must be completely eliminated when working with alkaline solutions,15 or reference electrodes containing halides should be thoroughly separated from the main compartment,16 to avoid any contamination.
 Scheme 1  (A) shows a typical three-compartment electrochemical cell for accurate investigation of the macroscopic electrocatalyst stability utilizing a thin-film on a rotating disc electrode. The working electrode tip including the Teflon cap to clamp the TEM finder grid (C) is magnified in (B). (D)–(G) show the tracking process of identical electrocatalyst particles by the letters and numbers on the grid within an electron microscope. The TEM grid acts as a shuttle, which allows the transfer of the electrode material between the electron microscope and the electrochemical cell. 
2.2 The IL-TEM method
Non-destructive IL-TEM can complement the standard macroscopic investigations of the loss of catalyst material during degradation, enabling multiple analyses of the same catalyst location during the degradation experiment. To achieve this, prior to the degradation experiment a very low amount of catalyst (sub μg cm−2 range) is deposited on the top side of a gold finder grid (Scheme 1C) instead of the glassy carbon disc.10 The amount of catalyst material on the grid is typically kept very low to avoid overlapping catalyst aggregates that could impede the interpretation of the electron micrographs at a later stage. The gold finder grid is thereafter inserted in the electron microscope to capture the initial state of the electrocatalyst. The catalyst locations are tracked using the alphabetical or numerical code included on commercially available TEM finder grids. The tracking of a catalyst location is exemplified in Scheme 1(C)–(G) by means of a series of electron microscopy images at different magnifications. The red rectangles in Scheme 1 always mark the region which is zoomed in on the following image (in this particular case a specific catalyst region within the letter O was investigated). After recording of electron microscope images at multiple locations (for statistical reasons), the TEM finder grid is transferred, for instance, onto the glassy carbon disc of the RDE tip where it becomes clamped with the aid of a Teflon cap (Scheme 1B). The RDE tip can thereafter be screwed on the rotator and the same degradation experiments as for thin catalyst films can be performed. Note that other ways of contacting the gold finder grid have also been reported.9,17
After a given period of the aging test, the grid is removed from the glassy carbon disc, rinsed carefully with ultrapure water, dried thoroughly, and then transferred to the electron microscope again. Note that the handling at this stage has to be performed with great care in order not to destroy the coating of the TEM grid or to avoid introduction of any artefacts. After recording the TEM images at identical locations the same procedure can be repeated by transferring the grid back to the electrochemical cell, thus enabling sequential identical location electron microscopy at different stages of the degradation process.
An example of such a sequential IL-TEM investigation of a commercial nanoparticulate carbon-supported platinum catalyst is given below.9 The accelerated aging test protocol included continuous potential cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE with a scan rate of 1 V s−1. A protocol of this type is intended to simulate repeated start up and shut down procedures in a fuel cell, which is known to be responsible for local potential fluctuations up to 1.5 V at the cathode. These conditions are harmful for fuel cell catalysts and are therefore subject of many degradation tests.5Fig. 1A and D were recorded before the electrochemical treatment, Fig. 1B and E after 2 hours of treatment (3600 cycles) and Fig. 1C and F were recorded after 4 hours of treatment (7200 cycles). Fig. 1D–F display a magnification of a subsection of Fig. 1A–C.
 Fig. 1  Sequential IL-TEM with two accelerated degradation treatment steps, each of them lasting for 2 h and each consisting of 3600 degradation cycles for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 at room temperature and in 0.1 M HClO4. 1A and D were recorded before the electrochemical treatment, 1B and E after 2 h and 1C and F after a total of 4 h. (Reprinted from ref. 9, with permission from Elsevier.) 
The characteristic shape of the support allows an easy recognition of the identical catalyst locations, despite the obvious drastic changes of the catalyst particles. Even a tracking of individual nanoparticles is possible, if the structural changes are not excessive. As a consequence, a direct visual comparison of the images before and after the treatment can already provide information on the underlying degradation mechanisms caused by the applied electrochemical treatment conditions. For example, from a comparison of Fig. 1D–F it can be seen that a significant number of particles is lost after each step, without any change of the support or the average particle size. The visual impression can be further substantiated quantitatively by determining and comparing the particle size distributions derived from several identical catalyst locations before and after the electrochemical treatment. In the particular case of Fig. 1, the number of nanoparticles decreases to about 71% after 2 h of treatment, while after 4 h only around half of the particles are still located on the support (Fig. 2). The average particle size changes slightly from 4.9 nm to 5.6 nm after 4 h of treatment. This is in good agreement with X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigations which indicated a minor increase in the particle size from 4.8 nm to 5.3 nm, corroborating the reliability of the method.9 It needs to be emphasized that the overall change in the average particle diameter for particles of this size is comparably small and only slightly exceeds the error of the measurements.
 Fig. 2  Particle size distributions at unambiguous identical catalyst locations for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) before (A), after 2 h (B) and after a total of 4 h (C) of accelerated aging according to the conditions in Fig. 1. (Reprinted from ref. 9, with permission from Elsevier.) 
In a standard degradation experiment that was performed to macroscopically monitor the change in the active surface area (as described in Section 2.1), using the identical experimental protocol as applied in the IL-TEM experiment, the active surface area decreased to about 69% after 2 h and 50% after 4 h, in line with the decrease in the total number of particles observed in the IL-TEM images.9 In the standard degradation test all missing platinum was found quantitatively in the electrolyte after the aging procedure, which indicates that no significant re-deposition of platinum occurred for the investigated electrocatalyst under the applied conditions. It should be noted, however, that the platinum loading in such a standard thin-film experiment is typically on the order of several μg cm−2, which is approximately two orders of magnitude higher than that used in the IL-TEM experiment. This may lead to some inconsistencies, if effects related to the thickness of the catalyst layer influence the degradation behaviour.
A precondition for successful IL-TEM investigations is to ensure that the mere transfer process between the electrochemical cell and the electron microscope does not affect the investigated material. This should always be confirmed by comparing the IL-TEM images of the catalyst before and after an electrochemical experiment using a potential window where no significant catalyst degradation is expected. Moreover, as the TEM finder grid is often exposed to corrosive environments, special care must be placed on the chemical stability of the grid itself under the conditions of the aging test. Since interfering effects from its degradation must be avoided, gold is typically the grid material of choice for IL-TEM. Standard gold finder grids have been shown to be stable in accelerated aging tests with potential cycles up to 1.4 VRHE at room temperature.18 In addition, Schlögl et al. found that potential hold experiments can still be performed up to a maximum positive potential of 1.3 VRHE at a temperature of 75 °C; under these conditions no increased rupture was observed for the carbon coating of the TEM grids. However certain signs of degradation of the coating can already be seen, and at even higher potentials artefacts resulting from gold dissolution can be observed at such elevated temperatures.18 Therefore even the stability window of the gold grid has to be considered for performing reliable IL-TEM measurements.
3. Capabilities of IL-TEM
The identical location approach for otherwise conventional TEM opens up new opportunities for the visualisation of degradation processes of electrode materials on the nanoscale. The progress that has been made by the investigation of the stability of low-temperature fuel cell catalysts, for which IL-TEM was originally developed, is reviewed below. Furthermore, its potential for improving the understanding of the complex parameter field influencing fuel cell catalyst degradation is described.
3.1 Fuel cell catalyst degradation mechanisms
A variety of degradation mechanisms has been discussed for typical fuel cell catalysts based on highly dispersed Pt and Pt alloy nanoparticles supported on high surface area carbons. A direct visual confirmation of the consequences of these processes has become feasible with the recent introduction of the identical location approach. Thus, sound conclusions on particle detachment, platinum dissolution, carbon corrosion, or agglomeration were drawn, which have led to a significant improvement in fundamental understanding.

Particle detachment. 
Detachment of whole particles has received considerable attention after it was first visualized with IL-TEM.9,10 The observation of a loss in the absolute number of particles and the only slight change in the average particle size in these studies (see also Fig. 1 and 2) is a strong indication of particle detachment. Platinum dissolution, which could also explain the decrease in the number of particles, does not seem to play a major role in this particular case, as the particle size distribution remains unperturbed and no increase in the number of smaller particles occurs. Additional evidence for particle detachment is provided by Fig. 3, an IL-TEM illustration from another catalyst location of the same experiment series as that in Fig. 2. The black arrows in Fig. 3B and C draw attention to platinum nanoparticles which had detached from the carbon support and were captured by the coating of the TEM finder grid, where no particles were located before the degradation test (see Fig. 3A). The majority of particles, however, does not re-deposit on the coating of the TEM grid after losing contact with the carbon support, but is directly washed in the electrolyte.10
 Fig. 3  Visualization of platinum particle detachment: sequential IL-TEM for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) with two degradation treatment steps, each of them lasting for 2 h and each consisting of 3600 degradation cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. 3A was recorded before the electrochemical treatment, 3B after 2 h and 3C after a total of 4 h. Black arrows point at detached platinum particles lying next to the support after the electrochemical treatment. (Reprinted from ref. 10, with permission from Elsevier.) 
For the described catalyst, particle detachment was observed as the only major degradation mechanism under the applied conditions, at all locations studied. Particle migration was also seen to a certain degree, but did not usually result in coalescence. The occurrence of particle detachment was identified also in further IL-TEM studies of other catalysts; however, in most cases it was only one out of several degradation processes taking place in parallel.18–21 In all studies where particle detachment was observed, rather harsh accelerated aging conditions and high potentials were applied, like potential cycling at room temperature between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4.19–21 Furthermore a test of the above mentioned catalyst at temperatures up to 75 °C and potential hold conditions at +1.3 VRHE indicated particle detachment as one of several degradation mechanisms, in this case as a consequence of strong carbon support corrosion.18
It is remarkable, that in several IL-TEM studies particle detachment occurred in combination with migration of platinum nanoparticles without9,10 or with18–21 significant coalescence. Particle detachment and migration are related to each other, as they can be seen as a consequence of a weakening of the interactions between the metal nanoparticles and the carbon support.


Particle dissolution. 
Platinum dissolution is an important degradation mechanism for fuel cell catalysts. Despite its character as a noble metal, platinum can dissolve at pH values lower than 2 and potentials higher than 0.85 VSHE according to its Pourbaix diagram (at 25 °C).22 Dissolved platinum was, for instance, found to re-deposit in the ionomer of proton exchange membrane fuel cells as a result of reduction with hydrogen permeating the membrane from the anode side.7,23 The dissolution rate thereby strongly depends on many material and operation parameters such as platinum particle size, temperature, pH and especially potential.4,5,8,24
While no indications of platinum nanoparticle dissolution were found for the aforementioned high surface area catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan), dissolution was clearly observed via IL-TEM by Perez-Alonso et al. for a Pt/C catalyst with an average particle size of 2.3 nm (2.3 nm; 10 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R).17Fig. 4 is an IL-TEM illustration of the catalyst before (Fig. 4A) and after (Fig. 4B) 3000 degradation cycles between +0.6 and +1.2 VRHE at 0.2 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. A significant loss of platinum nanoparticles is evident from the IL-TEM illustration; however in contrast to Fig. 1 and 3, the degradation behaviour depicted in Fig. 4 cannot be explained with plain particle detachment. Particles not only vanished (red circles), but were also found to decrease in size (green circles), an observation which was also confirmed statistically by evaluating particle size distributions at the identical locations. These observations are strong indications of platinum dissolution.17
 Fig. 4  Visualization of platinum dissolution with IL-TEM: Pt/C catalyst (2.3 nm; 10 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3000 cycles between +0.6 and +1.2 VRHE at 0.2 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Red circles point out vanished nanoparticles and green circles mark nanoparticles decreasing in size. (Reprinted from Perez-Alonso et al., ref. 17, after permission from Elsevier.) 
IL-TEM was additionally used to visualise the dissolution behaviour of platinum nanoparticles alloyed with transition metals, which typically exhibit higher oxygen reduction activities than pure platinum nanoparticles. Arenz and coworkers observed shrinking of Pt3Co nanoparticles (4–5 nm, 48.3 wt% Pt, 4.1 wt% Co, HSA, TKK), if subjected to potential cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. In this case the shrinking of the nanoparticles was explained by the leaching of cobalt under the harsh degradation conditions applied, while no changes in size were observed if the catalyst was just exposed to an acidic environment.19
It must be emphasized that visualising dissolution with IL-TEM is not always a straightforward task, for example if the resolution of the TEM instrument is not sufficient to detect shrunk particles, or if overlapping detachment impedes the qualitative and quantitative estimation of the contributions of both processes. In this respect sequential IL-TEM can be advantageous, offering a better time resolution of the degradation processes and thus a tracking of eventually dissolving particles.
Ostwald ripening, a consequence of Pt dissolution, has been suggested as a degradation mechanism to explain the often observed particle growth occurring in fuel cells.7 According to this mechanism, smaller particles dissolve and the dissolved platinum is again reduced and re-deposited on larger particles, which eventually leads to an increase in the overall particle size. The driving force for Ostwald ripening is the reduction in surface energy. A direct visualization of Ostwald ripening with IL-TEM is not possible so far although many IL-TEM investigations clearly indicate particle growth (this was in most cases rather attributed to agglomeration; see the Agglomeration section).17–21,25 An experimental indication of Ostwald ripening should be the dissolution of small platinum particles in proximity to larger particles, which increase in size due to re-deposition of dissolved platinum. Another more quantitative indication of Ostwald ripening, which might be identified with IL-TEM, could be an increase in the overall particle size with a tail in the particle size distribution towards smaller particles.26 However, none of these indications could be reported using IL-TEM till now. The lack of observation of Ostwald ripening, however, cannot be seen as evidence that Ostwald ripening does not occur in real fuel cells, but is rather related to an artefact of the IL-TEM measurement. Even though almost all IL-TEM degradation tests reported so far were performed without rotation, and convective transport of dissolved platinum away from the electrode should therefore be at a minimum, it cannot be expected that comparable concentrations of dissolved platinum are obtained at the electrode–electrolyte interface as in a real fuel cell. The reason for this is the already mentioned low catalyst (and therefore platinum) loading at the TEM grid in an IL-TEM measurement, which does not allow the formation of an extended 3D catalyst layer. Even more important is the fact that the catalyst is immersed in a large electrolyte volume, and thus dissolved platinum species may not re-deposit on larger particles due to their low concentration in solution. As a consequence it is less likely or even impossible to observe Ostwald ripening in an IL-TEM investigation.20 This demonstrates that this technique has to be employed with a certain awareness concerning its potential limitations, and the general differences between small scale simulations and large and complex real systems must be taken into consideration for an appropriate data interpretation.


Agglomeration. 
Agglomeration is the second degradation mechanism besides Ostwald ripening that can explain particle growth. In general, two types of agglomeration have to be distinguished: (i) agglomeration due to strong carbon corrosion and (ii) agglomeration due to particle migration. In the first case, the carbon support is oxidized to carbon dioxide; so platinum particles adjacent to each other come into contact and finally agglomerate when the support shrinks, as it was for instance visualised by Schlögl et al.18 In this study, the catalyst was subjected to potential hold conditions at 1.3 VRHE at 75 °C, resulting in severe carbon support corrosion of the Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan), with successive platinum particle detachment and agglomeration. In such a case, agglomeration can be understood as a secondary degradation mechanism, which is a consequence of the primary degradation mechanism of carbon support corrosion.18
The second type of agglomeration is illustrated in Fig. 5. The Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) was subjected to potential cycling between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4.20 In this case many particles changed their positions on the support as a consequence of particle migration. Especially the observation of particle mobility is a particular strength of IL-TEM, as it is impossible with other techniques to directly reveal changes in interparticle distances and particle positions on the carbon support.
 Fig. 5  Visualization of nanoparticle migration and agglomeration: Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Blue circles are examples of agglomeration resulting in “string-shaped” clusters. The experimental details are the same as reported previously.20 
Examples of agglomeration are highlighted by blue circles in Fig. 5. The figure shows platinum nanoparticles, which are originally separated, but result in “string-shaped” clusters after aging. “String-shaped”, “L-shaped” or even “T-shaped” clusters were observed for the same catalyst at more locations, providing strong proof for coarsening due to coalescence.
The “necking” (meaning the presence of a “bridge” with a lower diameter connecting two platinum particles) observed in conventional post mortem TEM studies after degradation of fuel cell catalysts was ascribed to particle agglomeration. However, it was not clear to what extent this originated from the degradation itself or the catalyst synthesis procedure, since agglomerates can often also be observed for catalysts before aging.8 Utilizing IL-TEM, it can be clearly distinguished whether the observed “necking” is the result of coalescence in the course of the degradation process, or if it was present already after the synthesis. Coalescence was mostly found using IL-TEM to occur in areas of high particle density.20,21 After contact is established between coalescent particles, a reshaping process – similar to a melting process – is observed, driven by a reduction in surface energy.20,21,25
A more quantitative evaluation of the catalyst region visualized in Fig. 5 is provided in Fig. 6, which compares the particle size distributions before and after the electrochemical aging test. The average particle size increases from 3.5 nm to 4.5 nm. In contrast to the particle size distributions in Fig. 2, where degradation was assigned to platinum particle detachment as the prevailing mechanism, the bell shape of the distribution curve does change its shape significantly. The most striking feature is the tailing of the particle size distribution towards larger particle sizes after the degradation test, which is considered as a strong indication of agglomeration in the general literature.8
 Fig. 6  Particle size distribution of the region visualized in the IL-TEM image in Fig. 5, before (A) and after (B) degradation. The average particle size increases from 3.5 nm to 4.5 nm and a tail towards larger particle sizes (encircled region), which is an indication of agglomeration, is clearly observed. 
Particle coalescence was also observed as the prevailing degradation mechanism under milder potential cycling conditions for a Pt3Co alloy catalyst (3–4 nm, 30 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72, TKK, Japan) by Abruña and co-workers. The electrocatalyst was treated with 30000 potential cycles between 0.6 and 1.0 VRHE at 0.05 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. In this study it was even possible to suggest trajectories for some migrating particles by utilizing IL-TEM and IL-tomography (see Section 4) investigations.25


Carbon support corrosion. 
Carbon corrosion is another important degradation mechanism, which is observed in fuel cells under operation. A break-down of the carbon support reduces porosity in the catalyst layer and can cause mass transfer limitations as nicely shown, for instance, by Schulenburg et al.27 It is known that carbon corrosion depends on many parameters like potential and temperature, and also the pre-treatment of the carbon.5 IL-TEM can also be helpful in this context, namely to visualize the forms and consequences of carbon corrosion, especially the interrelation of carbon corrosion and secondary processes resulting from this. Even a quantitative evaluation of changes in the carbon support morphology is feasible by this approach (see also IL-SEM and IL-tomography).
Carbon black supports which are typically used for fuel cell applications consist of primary carbon particles forming aggregates. The aggregates with their branched structures finally form a three-dimensional catalyst layer with the porosity necessary for the transport of the substrates. The primary particles themselves are built from graphene-like sheets, which are well ordered at the surface, but less ordered in the middle of the particles.28 Gruver found “shell-like structures” for corroded Vulcan, indicating a degradation mechanism according to which the less ordered carbon within the primary particles first starts to corrode.29 Arenz and co-workers were able to confirm this degradation mechanism with an IL-TEM study. Fig. 7A and B are IL-TEM illustrations of a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) before and after 16 h of potential hold at 1.3 VRHE at 75 °C.18 The measurement was part of a set of tests at various potentials (1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 VRHE). While for previous IL-TEM measurements only room temperature was applied, elevated temperatures were chosen to aim for a more appropriate simulation of the temperatures as found in a real PEMFC. As only slight degradation was detected for the lower potentials, the comparatively high value of 1.3 VRHE was selected to obtain significant degradation in a time window in which secondary effects (for instance from impurities) still do not influence the degradation investigation.18 The black circles in Fig. 7B highlight primary carbon particles, with lower carbon density in the middle, indicating the formation of hollow spherical structures during the aging protocol. In the same experiment, but at another catalyst location, carbon corrosion was observed with IL-TEM as a shrinking of the support (Fig. 7C and D). IL-TEM illustrated agglomeration and detachment of platinum nanoparticles in this experiment, which in this particular case can be seen as the consequence of the primary carbon corrosion.
 Fig. 7  Visualization of carbon corrosion processes for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 16 h potential hold at 1.3 VRHE at 75 °C. 7A and B indicate formation of sphere-like structures and therefore a corrosion starting from the centre of the primary carbon particles, while 7C and D show a catalyst location with shrinkage of the carbon support. (Reprinted from Schlögl et al., ref. 18, after permission from Elsevier.) 
The majority of IL-TEM studies performed at room temperature do not indicate significant carbon support corrosion.9,10,19,21 However, two IL-TEM studies reveal carbon support corrosion at certain catalyst locations also at room temperature under harsh potential conditions.20,30 Shrinking of carbon particles was, for instance, seen in an IL-TEM investigation by Makharia and coworkers,30 who also reported faster carbon corrosion of areas with very high platinum loadings under potentiostatic conditions. Another mechanism of carbon corrosion, namely a breaking off of a fraction of a carbon aggregate, was recently observed by our group with IL-TEM and IL-tomography (see Section 4).20 In this case small connecting bridges linking two parts of the carbon support aggregate were severely corroded.

3.2 The complexity of degradation on electrocatalyst materials
The large number of potential operation conditions (cell potential, potential dynamics, temperature, pH, gas humidity and pressure, fuel or air impurities) and material properties (platinum loading, particle size, interparticle distance) span a vast parameter space with influence on the degradation pathways.4,5,24 Moreover the degree of graphitization of the carbon support, surface functional groups and support morphology can also influence stability.5,31 The effect of many of these aspects on catalyst aging, and their influence on the individual degradation pathways still remain controversial. Depending on the aging conditions, a variety of different degradation mechanisms of fuel cell catalysts has been visually confirmed with IL-TEM. However, in the majority of IL-TEM studies, the complexity of the degradation behaviour typically leads to overlapping of two or more degradation mechanisms even during a single degradation protocol, and thereby obscures straightforward conclusions.17–21 In a recent accelerated aging study by our group, we observed several simultaneous degradation processes on the same catalyst aggregate, including even locations on which four degradation pathways were taking place in parallel, as shown in Fig. 8.20
 Fig. 8  Visualization of four degradation mechanisms overlapping at one single catalyst location: Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Green circles indicate particle growth due to agglomeration. The red circle points at a detached platinum particle. Blue arrows highlight platinum particles which decreased in size due to dissolution. Furthermore changes in the support due to carbon corrosion are visible. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Even if the fundamental mechanisms are often not directly accessible, the identical location approach can still provide invaluable information on the effect of catalyst modification on the overall catalyst stability. In comparative IL-TEM studies, Arenz and coworkers19,21 were, for instance, able to visualize the differences in degradation processes for a set of different catalysts (for example, the effect of heat treatment of the catalyst, of higher degrees of graphitization of the carbon support, of platinum loading, of alloying platinum with another metal and the effect of modification of the carbon support with a transition metal). An example of the benefits of such comparative studies is provided in Fig. 9. The support of the catalyst depicted in Fig. 9C and D was modified with a transition metal, while the support of a second catalyst (Fig. 9A and B) remained unmodified. The IL-TEM illustrations before and after 3600 potential cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4 reveal strong differences in the degradation behaviour, resulting from the different material properties. For instance, the support modified with a transition metal suffered less from platinum particle detachment, while agglomeration was shown to be a decisive degradation mechanism for both materials.21 Such comparative studies can therefore direct further development of new electrocatalyst materials and the optimization of operating conditions.
 Fig. 9  (A) and (B) are IL-TEM images of a Pt/C catalyst (about 3 nm, 28 wt% Pt, low surface area carbon support, not modified). (C) and (D) are IL-TEM images of a Pt/C catalyst modified with a transition metal (about 3 nm, 30 wt% Pt, low surface area carbon support, modified by a transition metal). Both catalysts were subjected to potential cycling between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4 and the respective images before (A and C) and after the aging test (B and D) are shown. (Reproduced from Hartl et al.21 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
4. Toolbox-approach
The section above demonstrates the potential of IL-TEM to reveal and visualize degradation mechanisms occurring on electrode materials for energy conversion on the nanoscale and to effectively compare the stabilities of different catalyst materials. The simple concept of using a TEM finder grid as a shuttle between an electrochemical cell and an electron microscope can, however, also be extended easily to other techniques. In combination with modern electron microscopy instruments that are equipped with additional characterisation methods, this opens further perspectives for the IL-approach, and in this section we will draw attention to the versatility offered by this concept.
4.1 IL-SEM and IL-STEM
Scanning electron microscopy on identical locations before and after electrochemical treatment (IL-SEM) can be utilized to study changes in the surface structure and morphology of electrocatalysts. An example for an IL-SEM investigation and a comparison of identical location scanning transmission electron microscopy (IL-STEM) is shown in Fig. 10. Note that in the STEM mode, the specimen is scanned in a raster point-by-point with a small electron probe unlike the conventional transmission mode of TEM in which the whole imaged specimen area is illuminated simultaneously. With STEM both the Bragg contrast (bright field i.e. BF mode) and the atomic Z-number contrast (high-angle annular dark-field i.e. HAADF technique) can be shown and used in the IL-approach. The images in this perspective however were all recorded with BF-STEM, even though identical location HAADF might also be applied in similar studies.32
 Fig. 10  (A) and (B) are bright field scanning transmission electron microscopy (BF-STEM), and (C) and (D) high resolution SEM images of an identical catalyst location of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 degradation cycles (0.4–1.4 VRHE, 1 V s−1). The scale provided in 10C is valid for all four electron microscope images. SEM images were recorded with a Hitachi S-5500 ultra-high resolution cold field emission scanning electron microscope with a standard SE-detector at a maximum acceleration voltage of 30k. 
The selected electrode material was in this case again a Pt/Vulcan catalyst, for which the degradation behaviour was described in detail in a recent study.20Fig. 10 compares IL-STEM (10A and 10B) and IL-SEM (10C and 10D) for an identical catalyst location before (10A and 10C) and after 3600 potential degradation cycles (10B and 10D) between 0.4 and 1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. While the BF-STEM images show the 2D projection of the entire catalyst aggregates, the IL-SEM only visualizes the surface of the Vulcan support and the particles thereon. In the majority of the locations studied on this catalyst, the predominant degradation mechanism is agglomeration of platinum particles, clearly visible with both methods. The morphology of the support does not change as best visualized with the IL-SEM.

Fig. 11 is a magnification of a subsection of Fig. 10. Fig. 11A and C show the catalyst before and Fig. 11B and D after the accelerated degradation test. The significant particle growth, which is already visible in Fig. 10, becomes even more obvious at this higher magnification. In addition, the agglomeration of mainly adjacent, but initially separate particles, resulting in often “string-shaped” clusters, is evident. The particles marked with a yellow circle in Fig. 11A appear to be in close proximity to each other in the BF-STEM image, and, as adjacent particles are observed to agglomerate in many catalyst regions, one might expect the formation of one large cluster in this case, too. However, the BF-STEM image after the degradation treatment of the catalyst surprisingly does not indicate the formation of a larger cluster. IL-STEM alone is not able to disclose the reason for this unexpected behaviour; however IL-SEM can reveal the reason for this case: a closer inspection of the region in the yellow circle in the SEM image before the treatment (Fig. 11C) shows that only some of the platinum particles are visible compared to the corresponding BF-STEM image (Fig. 11A). Hence, it is reasonable to conclude that these particles are located on the front side of the support and do not agglomerate with those that only appear in the BF-STEM image simply because the latter were at the back or inside and thus physically separated from each other.
 Fig. 11  (A) and (B) are BF-STEM, and (C) and (D) SEM images of an identical catalyst location of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 degradation cycles (0.4–1.4 VRHE, 1 V s−1). The scale provided in 11C is valid for all four electron micrographs. 
4.2 IL-tomography
IL-tomography has been developed and presented in two recent studies on Pt and Pt alloys.20,25 In electron tomography the TEM sample holder is tilted within the electron microscope and multiple images of the investigated electrode material are recorded at various tilting angles. The information from these 2D projections can afterwards be used for reconstructing a stereoscopic vision of the material.33 An example can be seen in Fig. 12, which shows IL-TEM (Fig. 12A and B) and IL-tomography images (Fig. 12C and D) of a Pt/Vulcan catalyst before (Fig. 12A and C) and after (Fig. 12B and D) 3600 degradation cycles between 0.4 and 1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. The representations in Fig. 12C and D are shown in the same orientation as the images in Fig. 12A and B, with the opacity set to visualize the platinum particles only.20
 Fig. 12  (A) and (B) are IL-TEM images, and (C and D) are IL-tomography illustrations of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. See supporting movies in ref. 20. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Degradation mechanisms, such as particle detachment (red circles), carbon corrosion (orange dashed line) and the prevailing mechanism of agglomeration can in this case already be observed from the standard IL-TEM image of the material. The more detailed tomography illustration provides additional three-dimensional insight and can clarify issues related to 2D projection. Independently it was also demonstrated that a comparison of cross sections from an IL-tomography experiment before and after degradation can help to gain valuable information about changes in the support and catalyst at any position, even in the bulk of the material. A real 3D impression of the changes of electrode materials due to an electrochemical aging procedure at an identical location can best be obtained with movies before and after degradation, providing a more direct and intuitive understanding of microstructural properties and changes.20 (See supporting movies in ref. 20.)
4.3 Versatility of the IL-approach
The IL-approach for electron microscopic techniques offers various possibilities for degradation studies in electrochemical energy conversion. Depending on the characteristics of the material under investigation and the specific degradation issues to be addressed, the suitable technique can be selected like a tool from a tool box as illustrated in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  While the standard IL-TEM approach only provides a 2D projection, the 3D microstructural information can be revealed with IL-tomography. Surface morphologies of electrode materials can best be visualized at identical locations with IL-SEM and the elemental composition at identical locations before and after electrochemical treatment is accessible, for instance, with IL-EELS or IL-EDX. 
The different techniques are complementary and the combination of them may be used to reveal complex degradation processes. IL-TEM provides a 2D projection of an identical location of a complete bulk electrode material before and after electrochemical aging. It benefits from the excellent resolution that can be obtained with modern TEM instruments. In IL-SEM the surface and its morphology can be visualized before and after electrochemical treatment, since the electron beam does not transmit through the specimen. This property of IL-SEM is of special interest for systems with complex support morphology, for instance porous systems. Also materials consisting of heavy elements or massive catalytic layers that do not allow transmission experiments are thus accessible by IL-SEM. Both IL-TEM and IL-SEM are less time-demanding than other IL approaches, enabling more representative investigations on several catalyst locations. Combined with suitable reconstruction algorithms, IL-tomography is a powerful tool for 3D and/or volume information on catalyst degradation.25 As it requires more user effort it is most suitable for investigations of selected catalyst locations of interest. Moreover, a combination with further electron microscopic methods, for instance EELS or EDX, to study the elemental composition of an electrode material before and after an electrochemical aging test, appears feasible. This might be of particular interest for studying the degradation behaviour of multimetallic electrocatalysts or the complex elemental composition of oxide supports. Furthermore chemical information beyond the composition can be obtained, for instance changes in support interactions due to a certain electrochemical treatment might become accessible for various systems. Note, however, that the risk of beam damage is one general aspect which has to be considered for all electron microscopic techniques, since it can cause artefacts, or even destroy the catalyst sample, especially for techniques which require longer recording times.
Instead of combining the IL-approach with further electron microscopic techniques another important field of development is the sequential IL-method, to obtain more visualization points on the timescale of the degradation process. It has already been shown that an identical location can in principle be tracked several times. Even though this procedure is time consuming, for studying a complex degradation process such a repeated tracking with several visualization steps throughout the degradation experiment can provide invaluable information. Therefore, minimizing the time for one interval of EM imaging, electrochemical testing and again EM imaging will be very helpful for more advanced investigations. The ideal case would certainly be to perform electrochemical aging tests within the electron microscope in a similar way as in situ high temperature aging tests.34,35 However, this currently remains a dream due to the severe technical problems with the handling of an electrolyte film within a high vacuum chamber without compromising high resolution at the same time. Furthermore, protection of the sensitive electron microscopes from the highly aggressive conditions in electrochemical aging tests is critical. It will be a future challenge to address these technical problems and therefore allow more than a mere comparison of the status of an electrode material before and after electrochemical aging.
Besides aiming for a real time investigation of degradation events another equally important and much more practicable direction of IL-TEM research lies in the increase in magnification and resolution. While changes in support aggregates can already be identified with comparatively low magnifications, catalyst particle mobility and other phenomena on sub-regions of the carbon aggregates can be usually reasonably followed at magnifications around 100k. If processes occurring for a single nanoparticle or even particle sub-regions are of interest, even higher magnifications are required. Such investigations, like changes in crystal facets or even defect sites at identical locations due to a selected electrochemical treatment, can only be obtained with top-class high resolution microscopes. The potential of HR-IL-TEM is currently explored and it might become a further helpful instrument in the IL-toolbox.
5. Conclusions
In this perspective we have presented the capabilities of utilizing an advanced electron microscopy approach to study the stability of electrocatalyst materials and gain a detailed fundamental understanding of their degradation mechanisms on the nanoscale. The main principle of conventional electron microscopy techniques is thereby extended to allow sequential investigation of identical sample locations during a catalyst degradation process. The identical location approach has so far been used mainly in TEM investigations for the understanding of fuel cell catalyst degradation mechanisms, for which the approach had originally been developed. Significant progress has been made in this field using mainly one technique in only one particular application. The variety of electron microscopy techniques that can be adapted to the identical location approach opens up highly promising opportunities to address different degradation issues in a wide range of catalytic applications. This can eventually provide a comprehensive understanding of catalyst degradation on the nanoscale, which is a prerequisite for designing more stable materials for clean electrochemical energy conversion technologies.
Acknowledgements
Josef C. Meier acknowledges financial support by the Kekulé Fellowship from the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie (FCI).
References
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS .

          M. M. Mench, E. C. Kumbar and T. N. Veziroglu, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Degradation, Elsevier,  2012 Search PubMed .
X. Yu and S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Ferreira, G. J. La O', Y. Shao-Horn, D. Morgan, R. Makharia, S. Kocha and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2256–A2271 CrossRef .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, J. C. Meier, S. J. Ashton, G. K. H. Wiberg, F. Kraus, M. Hanzlik and M. Arenz, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1144–1147 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, S. J. Ashton, J. C. Meier, G. K. H. Wiberg, M. Hanzlik and M. Arenz, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 734–739 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, X.-Z. Yuan, J. N. C. Hin, H. Wang, K. A. Friedrich and M. Schulze, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 588–600 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stab, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb and R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134–145 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, G. K. H. Wiberg and M. Arenz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, P1–P5 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, S. J. Ashton, J. Kreuzer and M. Arenz, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2009, 4, 1–8 CAS .
F. J. Perez-Alonso, C. F. Elkjaer, S. S. Shim, B. L. Abrams, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6085–6091 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schlögl, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, M. Hanzlik and M. Arenz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 662, 355–360 CrossRef .
K. Schlögl, M. Hanzlik and M. Arenz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B677–B682 CrossRef .
J. C. Meier, C. Galeano, I. Katsounaros, A. A. Topalov, A. Kostka, F. Schüth and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 832–843 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hartl, M. Hanzlik and M. Arenz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 234–238 CAS .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, 2nd edn,  1974 Search PubMed .
J. Aragane, H. Urushibata and T. Murahashi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26, 147–152 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sheng, S. Chen, E. Vescovo and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B96–B103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, D. Wang, E. D. Rus, J. A. Mundy, D. A. Muller and H. D. Abruña, Nano Lett., 2011 DOI:10.1021/nl203920s .
Y. Shao-Horn, P. J. Ferreira, G. J. La O, D. Morgan, H. Gasteiger and R. Makharia, ECS Trans., 2006, 1, 185–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schulenburg, B. Schwanitz, N. Linse, G. G. Scherer, A. Wokaun, J. Krbanjevic, R. Grothausmann and I. Manke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14236–14243 CAS .
M. Wissler, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 142–150 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gruver, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 1719–1720 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Liu, J. L. Zhang, P. T. Yu, J. X. Zhang, R. Makharia, K. L. More and E. A. Stach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B906–B913 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kinoshita, Carbon: Electrochemical and Physicochemical Properties, Wiley,  1988 Search PubMed .

          K. H. Reimer Ludwig, Transmission Electron Microscopy Physics of Image Formation, Springer, Münster, 5th edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. Grothausmann, G. Zehl, I. Manke, S. Fiechter, P. Bogdanoff, I. Dorbandt, A. Kupsch, A. Lange, M. P. Hentschel, G. Schumacher and J. Banhart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18161–18171 CrossRef CAS .
T. Akita, M. Okumura, K. Tanaka, M. Kohyama and M. Haruta, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 3101–3106 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Lee, J. Lee, T. Tanaka and H. Mori, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 075504 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
Fossil fuels, such as oil, coal and natural gas, are currently the most important energy sources worldwide. The combustion of such fuels, however, inevitably produces CO2 emissions, which are considered to play a major role in climate change. Moreover, dwindling fossil energy resources in conjunction with the fact that they are located in a limited number of geographical regions, endangers the long-term energy supply for the growing world population. Because of this, major efforts have recently been directed to advance alternative energy sources and develop sustainable and environmentally friendly technologies. Renewable sources, such as wind or solar power, which directly provide electrical energy, are, however, variable or intermittent, which causes new challenges for energy storage and conversion devices. Electrochemical systems like batteries, electrolyzers and fuel cells are believed to be the key elements to meet these challenges in our future energy landscape. While the efficiency of electrochemical energy conversion devices is typically quite high, the durability and long-term performance are often the decisive bottlenecks. In particular the often highly expensive electrocatalyst materials require significant advances in terms of stability to make large-scale applications economically feasible. This requires an improved fundamental understanding of their degradation mechanisms, based on accurate investigations on the nanoscale.


 	Scheme 1  (A) shows a typical three-compartment electrochemical cell for accurate investigation of the macroscopic electrocatalyst stability utilizing a thin-film on a rotating disc electrode. The working electrode tip including the Teflon cap to clamp the TEM finder grid (C) is magnified in (B). (D)–(G) show the tracking process of identical electrocatalyst particles by the letters and numbers on the grid within an electron microscope. The TEM grid acts as a shuttle, which allows the transfer of the electrode material between the electron microscope and the electrochemical cell.	 

 	Fig. 1  Sequential IL-TEM with two accelerated degradation treatment steps, each of them lasting for 2 h and each consisting of 3600 degradation cycles for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 at room temperature and in 0.1 M HClO4. 1A and D were recorded before the electrochemical treatment, 1B and E after 2 h and 1C and F after a total of 4 h. (Reprinted from ref. 9, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Particle size distributions at unambiguous identical catalyst locations for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) before (A), after 2 h (B) and after a total of 4 h (C) of accelerated aging according to the conditions in Fig. 1. (Reprinted from ref. 9, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Visualization of platinum particle detachment: sequential IL-TEM for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) with two degradation treatment steps, each of them lasting for 2 h and each consisting of 3600 degradation cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. 3A was recorded before the electrochemical treatment, 3B after 2 h and 3C after a total of 4 h. Black arrows point at detached platinum particles lying next to the support after the electrochemical treatment. (Reprinted from ref. 10, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Visualization of platinum dissolution with IL-TEM: Pt/C catalyst (2.3 nm; 10 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3000 cycles between +0.6 and +1.2 VRHE at 0.2 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Red circles point out vanished nanoparticles and green circles mark nanoparticles decreasing in size. (Reprinted from Perez-Alonso et al., ref. 17, after permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Visualization of nanoparticle migration and agglomeration: Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Blue circles are examples of agglomeration resulting in “string-shaped” clusters. The experimental details are the same as reported previously.20	 

 	Fig. 6  Particle size distribution of the region visualized in the IL-TEM image in Fig. 5, before (A) and after (B) degradation. The average particle size increases from 3.5 nm to 4.5 nm and a tail towards larger particle sizes (encircled region), which is an indication of agglomeration, is clearly observed.	 

 	Fig. 7  Visualization of carbon corrosion processes for a Pt/C catalyst (4.9 nm, 50.6 wt% Pt, HSA carbon support, TKK, Japan) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 16 h potential hold at 1.3 VRHE at 75 °C. 7A and B indicate formation of sphere-like structures and therefore a corrosion starting from the centre of the primary carbon particles, while 7C and D show a catalyst location with shrinkage of the carbon support. (Reprinted from Schlögl et al., ref. 18, after permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Visualization of four degradation mechanisms overlapping at one single catalyst location: Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A) and after (B) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. Green circles indicate particle growth due to agglomeration. The red circle points at a detached platinum particle. Blue arrows highlight platinum particles which decreased in size due to dissolution. Furthermore changes in the support due to carbon corrosion are visible. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) and (B) are IL-TEM images of a Pt/C catalyst (about 3 nm, 28 wt% Pt, low surface area carbon support, not modified). (C) and (D) are IL-TEM images of a Pt/C catalyst modified with a transition metal (about 3 nm, 30 wt% Pt, low surface area carbon support, modified by a transition metal). Both catalysts were subjected to potential cycling between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4 and the respective images before (A and C) and after the aging test (B and D) are shown. (Reproduced from Hartl et al.21 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) and (B) are bright field scanning transmission electron microscopy (BF-STEM), and (C) and (D) high resolution SEM images of an identical catalyst location of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 degradation cycles (0.4–1.4 VRHE, 1 V s−1). The scale provided in 10C is valid for all four electron microscope images. SEM images were recorded with a Hitachi S-5500 ultra-high resolution cold field emission scanning electron microscope with a standard SE-detector at a maximum acceleration voltage of 30k.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) and (B) are BF-STEM, and (C) and (D) SEM images of an identical catalyst location of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 degradation cycles (0.4–1.4 VRHE, 1 V s−1). The scale provided in 11C is valid for all four electron micrographs.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) and (B) are IL-TEM images, and (C and D) are IL-tomography illustrations of a Pt/C catalyst (3.6 nm, 20 wt% Pt, VulcanXC72R) before (A and C) and after (B and D) 3600 cycles between +0.4 and +1.4 VRHE at 1 V s−1 in 0.1 M HClO4. See supporting movies in ref. 20. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Scheme 2  While the standard IL-TEM approach only provides a 2D projection, the 3D microstructural information can be revealed with IL-tomography. Surface morphologies of electrode materials can best be visualized at identical locations with IL-SEM and the elemental composition at identical locations before and after electrochemical treatment is accessible, for instance, with IL-EELS or IL-EDX.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
