Long persistent phosphors—from fundamentals to applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00582E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00582E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2090-2136Long persistent phosphors—from fundamentals to applications

        
          
            Yang 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mindaugas 
            Gecevicius
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jianrong 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: qjr@scut.edu.cn; msliyang@scut.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, College of Optical Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Received 
      25th July 2015
    First published on 3rd February 2016AbstractOwing to the unique mechanism of photoelectron storage and release, long persistent phosphorescence, also called long persistent luminescence or long lasting afterglow/phosphorescence, plays a pivotal role in the areas of spectroscopy, photochemistry, photonics and materials science. In recent years, more research has focused on the manipulation of the morphology, operational wavebands and persistent duration of long persistent phosphors (LPPs). These desired achievements stimulated the growing interest in designing bio-labels, photocatalysts, optical sensors, detectors and photonic devices. In this review, we present multidisciplinary research on synthetic methods, afterglow mechanisms, characterization techniques, materials system, and applications of LPPs. First, we introduce the recent developments in LPPs for the synthesis of nanoparticles from the aspects of particle sizes, monodispersity and homogeneity based on the urgent application of bio-imaging. In the later sections, we present the possible mechanisms, which involve the variation of trap distribution during the trapping and de-trapping process, complicated photo-ionization reaction of trap site levels and impurity centers together with their corresponding migration kinetics of carriers. Meanwhile, we emphasize the characterization techniques of defects, used to qualitatively or quantitatively describe the types, concentrations and depths of the traps. This review article also highlights the recent advances in suggested LPPs materials with a focus on the LPPs' hosts and optically active centers as well as their control, tuning and intrinsic links. We further discuss the classification of LPPs based on the different emission and excitation wavebands from the ultraviolet to the near-infrared region along with an overview of the activation mode of afterglow. Afterwards, we provide an exhibition of new products towards diverse application fields, including solar energy utilization, bio-imaging, diagnosis, and photocatalysts. Finally, we summarize the current achievements, discuss the problems and provide suggestions for potential future directions in the aforementioned parts.
Yang Li
Yang Li obtained his PhD degree in materials science in 2014 from South China University of Technology (SCUT) under the supervision of Prof. Jianroug Qiu. The topic of his PhD dissertation was the design, preparation, properties and applications of near-infrared (NIR) long phosphorescent phosphors. He then joined the same group as a postdoctoral researcher at SCUT in 2014, where he focused on the research of new NIR long phosphorescent phosphors, functional nanomaterials and bio-imaging application.
Mindaugas Gecevicius
Mindaugas Gecevicius received his BSc degree in physics from Vilnius University, Lithuania, in 2010. From 2007 to 2010, during his undergraduate studies, he did research at the Laser Research Center, Vilnius University. His research covered fiber amplification and laser frequency conversion in nonlinear crystals. He got his PhD in 2015 at the Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, under the supervision of Prof. Peter G. Kazansky. The topic of his PhD dissertation was the modification of transparent materials with femtosecond lasers and laser fabrication of polarization sensitive optical elements. Currently he is doing post-doctorate studies in South China University of Technology.
Jianrong Qiu
Jianrong Qiu received his PhD from Okayama University, Japan in 1992. He worked at the Japan Science and Technology Agency as chief researcher, Cornell University as a research associate fellow and Zhejiang University as a professor from 1995 to 2008. He was Cheung Kong chair professor of South China University of Technology from 2009 to 2014, and is now chair professor of Zhejiang University. He has authored more than 450 articles and has around 10000 citations to his papers. He received the Young Scientist Award from the Rare-earth Society of Japan in 1999, the Otto-Schott Research Award from the Ernst Abbe Fund in 2005, the Academic Award from the Ceramics Society of Japan in 2007, and the G. W. Morey Award from the American Ceramic Society in 2015. He serves as associate editor or editor of the Int. J. Appl. Glass Sci., J. Non-Cryst. Solids, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., J. Chinese Ceram. Soc., and Front. Mater.-Glass. Sci. His current research interests are photonic materials and femtosecond laser interaction with materials.
1. Introduction
Long phosphorescent phosphors/long persistent phosphors (LPPs) continuously stimulate the extensive research interest of materials scientists, chemists, physicists, and even biologists because of their mysterious optical phenomenon and the widespread applications. Especially, after recent decades of development, the applications of LPPs have spread from the initial civil uses, i.e. decoration, safety displays, dials, etc., to a wide range of advanced scientific application fields, such as life sciences, biomedicine, clinical medicine, energy and environmental engineering.1–49 The corresponding overwhelming contributions have been made to the development of near-infrared (NIR) LPPs or nano-scale LPPs, with the advent of new material systems, design methodology, and synthesis and functionalization routes. Furthermore, physicists have proposed many theoretical and experimental models to understand the trapping–detrapping process along with the capture, migration and release kinetics of charge carriers.11,50–73 Up to now, the related research has made great progress, thus we think it is the right time to provide this review to further stimulate the motivation of developing novel LPPs and open up new applications of LPPs.
In this review article, we focus on the recent progress in the aspects of synthetic techniques, characterizations, afterglow mechanisms, applications and new materials of LPPs with emphasis specifically on:
(1) Afterglow mechanisms. Long persistent phosphorescence (LPP) is a phenomenon in which a material emits in the ultraviolet (UV), visible (VIS) or NIR spectral regions for minutes, hours or even days after ceasing the excitation irradiation. Sometimes it is simply called afterglow. The relatively long fluorescent lifetime (millisecond to second magnitude) of inorganic luminescent materials is owing to the forbidden transitions within the luminescent center, while the long phosphorescent duration of organic compounds is related to the triplet-to-singlet transitions. The mechanism of LPP is different from that of fluorescence and phosphorescence. LPP can be divided into four parts: (a) Excitation of charged carriers. Upon effective optical charging (UV, VIS or NIR light), electronic implantation (electron beam) or high-energy-ray irradiation (X-ray, beta ray or gamma radiation etc.), charge carriers (electrons or holes) are generated, with the delocalization and migration of charge carriers. (b) Storage of charged carriers. The excited carriers are firmly captured on the trapping states, while the storage capacity of trapping states strongly depends on the types and numbers of carriers and defects. (c) Release of charged carriers. Captured carriers escape from the traps. In addition to the depths of traps in hosts, the release rate of carriers captured in traps also can be influenced by the disturbance in the external fields (thermal, optical or mechanical disturbance), giving a control of persistent duration. (d) Recombination process of charged carriers.
Though charge carrier traps play a crucial role in all the suggested afterglow mechanisms, there is still no universal way to describe the properties of traps for a given persistent phosphor. The main features of trap types (whether the defects effectively participate in the captured process of charge carrier), concentrations (the number of effective traps), and depths (the releasing rate of the carriers captured by the traps) should be considered. Various in-depth research into afterglow mechanisms, including the hole model, the electron model, the energy band gap model and the quantum tunneling model, has been commenced with a special focus on the types of charge carrier, the possible valence variation of dopants and co-dopants as well as the routes of electronic migration.
(2) Defect characterization. To assist in precisely describing the trap properties and modeling the afterglow mechanism, we discuss the importance of defect characterization techniques and the relevant frontier research fields. These techniques are believed to supplement and improve the older afterglow mode, even accessing the possibility to build new and generally accepted afterglow models, for example, electron spin resonance is used to probe the species of traps, not only referring to the attribution of electron/hole traps, but also indicating what these traps are. The newly proposed multidisciplinary measurements also include photoconduction (used to detect the species of traps as well as excitation, migration, and release kinetics of carriers), positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (used to calculate the concentration of traps), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (used to identify whether valence variation of dopants occurs during the trapping and detrapping process, also referring to the excitation, migration, and release kinetics of carriers), and thermoluminescence and its excitation spectra (used to calculate the depth of traps, then potentially getting the release rate of the carriers). In fact, prior to defect characterization, it is also necessary to carry out spectroscopic and structural measurements, which are also proved to be able to obtain more qualitative and quantitative information regarding the host, activators and defects.
(3) Applications. Initially, this phenomenon was concentrated on applications in displays and safety signage. Shortly afterwards, other applications of optical storage, sensors and detectors were proposed towards the utilization of the characteristic of trapping-storage-releasing. In the past few years, the development of optical bio-imaging proposed LPPs as the new generation bio-labels to take full advantage of their distinctive features of low auto fluorescence, high signal-to-noise ratio, and deep tissue penetration in cells, tissues and other complex systems. In addition to optical imaging, LPPs also have been applied in diverse bioassays, drug delivery and therapy. Other in-depth investigations on LPPs need to be conducted for their potential applications in high performance photocatalysis and photonic devices by embedding LPPs into the intrinsic system and realizing the functional scheme.
(4) Synthetic techniques. New applications spontaneously set more requirements on design methodology, morphology and functionalization of LPPs. To satisfactorily meet these demands, more and more synthetic routes are suggested to prepare small-sized, homogeneous and persistent phosphorescent nanomaterials. In this part, we outline the proposed synthesis routes of nanoparticles with LPP. Substantial progress has been made from 2009 to now for their size/morphology/homogeneity control, functionalization design, as well as afterglow property optimization. This emerging research trend follows two main directions: wet-chemical reaction, including sol–gel procedure, combustion synthesis, hydro(solvo)thermal route, coprecipitation, microwave synthesis, and template method, and physical route (i.e. laser ablation and electron beam process etc.).
(5) New materials. New applications also promote the development of new materials. On the one hand, the research pays close attention to synthesizing new LPPs with different activators, hosts and emission/excitation bands (UV-VIS-NIR) to meet the practical demands. On the other hand, the research does its best to define the fundamental design-methodology of LPPs from the aspects of coordination configuration, band theory, and redox. In this review, the reported LPPs exhibit the violet-to-red range and even near-infrared emission wavebands, which can be excited by a wide range of excitation sources, ranging from high energy rays to UV-VIS-NIR light. Notably, long-wavelength-emitting LPPs have become the interesting newcomers to the world of LPPs. Referred strategies of extending the emission wavebands to biological tissue window include varying the activators, modulating the crystal field and transferring the persistent energy from one activator to another. In addition, we also review here recent progress of hosts and activators of LPPs. The involving hosts correspond to oxides (aluminates, silicates, stannates, phosphates, gallates, germinates etc.), non-oxides (sulfides, nitrides etc.), and organic carbon nanostructures, while the activators refer to rare earth ions (Eu, Ce, Pr, Sm, Tb, Dy, Tm, Yb), transition metal ions (Cr, Mn, etc.) and main group elements (Bi, etc.). Furthermore, the concept of VIS-NIR light excitation involving the different excitation mode is proposed to better meet the unique needs of in vivo imaging.
(6) Perspectives. At the end of this review, we discuss the main challenges, the research directions into the origin of the unique optical phenomenon, and provide systematic perspectives regarding plausible design methodologies.
In the beginning, we give a brief discussion on the history of LPPs. This unique phenomenon of LPPs has been known for nearly a thousand years. The main development of LPPs may be divided into 4 stages.
(1) In some ancient Chinese legends, paintings or so-called “luminous pearls” were found to have lasting visible light during the night by mixing the colors with a special kind of pearl shell. The first well-documented description of LPP could be traced back to the beginning of the 17th century. LPP certainly became the best documented kind of luminescence because of the discovery of the famous Bologna Stone. It was finally speculated that a lot of different impurities played an important role in the persistent emission and the host material was barium sulfide, not barium sulfate. Fortunius demonstrated the responsibility of natural impurities for the long persistent duration in barium sulfide.74
(2) After the discovery of BaS, research into LPPs was concentrated on the sulfides, but only a few reports were available. At the end of the 20th century, a series of different sulfide materials, such as ZnS:Cu or Co, was reported. The first commercial applications came with ZnS:Cu about 100 years ago. The emission was modified with the partial substitution of Zn with Cd. Similar materials, including CaS:Eu (Ca, Sr)S:Bi, appeared later. They were applied in safety signage, dials, displays and decoration. However, the LPP of these materials was too weak and short to satisfactorily meet the demand of practical purposes. Their utility was also hampered by their extreme sensitivity to moisture.75,76
(3) The boom in the research and applications of LPPs came in the mid-1990s with the introduction of efficient Eu2+, R3+ co-doped aluminates—CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ and SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ emitting in the blue and green, respectively. Matsuzawa et al. discovered the green-emitting phosphor SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+.124 By co-doping Dy3+, the green LPPs demonstrated a far higher initial intensity and a much longer lifetime (hours after ceasing the excitation) compared to the commercially used ZnS:Cu,Co (Victor first showed the long-lasting afterglow of Eu2+ singly doped SrAl2O4 LPPs in 1971). Today, different hosts (aluminates, silicates, stannate, etc.) and activators (Tb3+, Mn2+, etc.) have been proposed to enrich the family of green LPPs. Meanwhile, each of the main colors of blue, green, and red have also been developed to fulfill the requirements of practical purposes except NIR LPP. The number of NIR LPPs was still low, limiting their applications in some advanced application fields, such as night-vision surveillance or in vivo medical imaging.77
(4) Now there is increasing interest in the use of NIR LPP in the biologically transparent window to drive photonic bio-labels for tracing cancer cells, since the long emission lifetime of LPPs can effectively increase the signal-to-noise ratio and decrease photon-induced deterioration of analytes. In 2012, Pan et al. published an article that paved path-breaking directions in this field by using gallates as the system, thereby realizing the super-long NIR afterglow emission of 360 h in Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ phosphor, and firmly establishing an extra edge in the choice of gallates as the preferred material system for the fabrication of Cr3+-activated NIR LPPs. This shockwave encouraged researchers to turn their attention to research remarkable NIR LPPs with different host (stannates, etc.) and activators (Bi2+, Yb3+, Mn4+, etc.), as well as the nanocrystallization, functionalization and biotechnological application of NIR LPPs.78–80
2. Synthesis methods
The synthesis method for LPPs plays a significant role in determining the features of microstructure, afterglow properties, fluorescent quantum efficiency and the distribution of defects. It is also strongly associated with the field of LPPs application. The conventional method of synthesizing LPPs is a solid-state reaction, during which powdered raw materials are considered as the starting materials. Owing to their relatively rough grains, these phosphors require a high sintering temperature to obtain the LPP with designed compositions, but a high sintering temperature can lead to a heterogeneous distribution and a larger size of crystalline grain. In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the use of LPPs as bio-labels and photocatalysts. These applications require high homogeneity, monodispersity and small cluster size of LPPs. Conventional synthesis conditions seemingly propose a conflict between the optimized morphology and afterglow time, i.e. a high synthesis temperature is beneficial to improve the persistent duration, but leads to agglomerated products with irregular morphologies.81,82
The emerging research trend of high-quality nanoparticles with controlled crystalline phases, shapes, and sizes as well as long persistent duration follows two main directions:
(1) First, synthesizing the nano-materials and then activating the LPP.
(2) First, preparing the LPPs and then improving the morphology and particle size.
For the first direction, the common routes correspond to many wet chemical methods, including sol–gel procedure, combustion synthesis, hydro(solvo) thermal route, coprecipitation, microwave synthesis and template method. As a final step, the post-treatment temperature can be raised until the appearance of size limitation and the collapse of the nanostructure. In contrast, some researchers suggest another distinctive way of preparing nanoparticles with persistent phosphorescence (NPPs) via the laser ablation method. By choosing the correct parameters of laser source (wavelength, repetition rate, peak power, intensity, irradiation time etc.), it is possible to obtain the desired nanoparticles with different morphologies and sizes.

Table 1 gives a comparison of synthesis methods in terms of particle size, required temperature, homogeneity, morphology, and afterglow time. Although significant progress has been achieved, it is still a challenge to improve the monodispersity and size distribution undergoing a high synthesis temperature. Here we give a systematic discussion of the influence of different synthesis methods on the afterglow properties and morphology of NPPs.
Table 1 Comparison of synthesis methods of LPPs in terms of the particle size, homogeneity, morphology control, synthesis temperature, and afterglow time




Synthesis methods
Particle size
Homogeneity
Morphology
Synthesis temperatures (°C)
Afterglow time
Ref.




Solid–solid reaction
Micrometer-scale
Bad
Bad
>1000
Long

83 and 84



Sol–gel method
Nano to micrometer-scale
Medium
Bad
≤1000
Medium

2 and 85



Combustion method
Nano to micrometer-scale
Medium
Medium
>1000
Short

86 and 87



Hydrothermal method
Nano to micrometer-scale
Good
Medium
<1000
Short

11 and 29



Co-precipitation
Nano to micrometer-scale
Good
Medium
>1000
Short

16



Template method
Nano to micrometer-scale
Good
Good
<1000
Short

56 and 88



Electrospinning
Nano to micrometer-scale
Medium
Medium
>1000
Short

89



Laser technique
Nano to micrometer-scale
Medium
Medium
None
Medium

90



Electron beam irradiation
Nano to micrometer-scale
Medium
Medium
None
Medium

91





2.1 Solid-state reaction
Solid–solid reaction, which occurs between powders in the solid state, has been the most widely used approach for the preparation of LPPs including oxides, (oxy)sulfide and (oxy)nitrides because it is comparatively simple, very suitable for mass production, and it is easy to obtain a long persistent duration. In fact, high temperature sintering is essential for activating the afterglow because a higher sintering temperature can generally increase the population of intrinsic thermal defects. These lattice defects and distortions corresponding to cation vacancy, anion vacancy, interstitial etc. (i.e. Schottky imperfections, Anti-Schottky imperfections and Frenkel imperfections etc. of the point defects) could improve the afterglow properties. Though the solid-state method has many advantages in synthesizing the LLPs with remarkable afterglow properties, it still has inevitable shortcomings. The grain size of phosphor powders prepared by this method is several tens of micrometers. High calcination temperature leads to poor homogeneity and morphology control. These disadvantages have greatly limited the development and application of nano-scale LPPs in the area of biomedicine, bioscience, energy engineering and environmental sciences.92,93
2.2 Chemical synthesis-liquid phase reaction

2.2.1 Sol–gel method. 
The sol–gel process has attracted much attention in synthesizing inorganic nanoparticles. The main procedures include the sol–gel route (based on the hydrolysis and condensation of molecular precursors), the gelation route (based on concentration of aqueous solutions containing metal-chelates) and the polymerizable complex route. Generally, this process uses metal salts or alkoxide as precursors, citric acid as a chelating ligand, and alcohol as a cross-linking agent to form a polymeric resin on the molecular level. Sol–gel technology is useful as the preferred preparation route for NPPs since it requires heat treatment. During this process, small nanocrystallines are packed into the discrete space offered by the complexing agent, thereby limiting the growth of nanocrystallines under a higher synthesis temperature, which is beneficial in improving the afterglow property. Much attention has been directed to the inorganic-salt-based sol–gel approach in aluminate and silicate-based phosphorescent materials.94,95 The representative syntheses process is illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Sol–gel synthesis of persistent phosphorescent phosphors (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences). 
Chermont et al. first proposed a bio-imaging method by using NIR NPPs, Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+,Mn2+ prepared via sol–gel method as the bio-labels.85 They chose chloride, nitrate, and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) as the raw materials. All of the salts were dissolved in deionized water acidified at pH 2 by addition of concentrated nitric acid. Citric acid was then added rapidly as the complexant. Electronic microscopy analysis showed that the NPPs exhibit a quite narrow distribution in size, with particle diameters ranging from 50 to 200 nm (Fig. 2). Gradually, many publications about NPPs with different hosts (aluminate, silicate, oxysulfide, etc.) and activation centers prepared by sol–gel technique were reported, such as Zn3Ga2Ge3O10:Cr,Pr,2 ZnSiO4:Mn,96 and CaMgSi2O6:Mn,97 In addition to the size distribution, the sol–gel method also provides an opportunity to control the morphology (nanosphere,98 nanowire,99etc.) of as-prepared materials by varying the synthesis conditions, including precursors, solvents, ligands, PH value, and treatment temperature. Fu et al. synthesized LiGa5O8:Cr nanoparticles (NPPs) by a typical sol–gel method. They investigated the influence of synthesis temperature (700–800–900–1100 °C) on the morphology and size distribution of LiGa5O8:Cr nanoparticles, and demonstrated the distribution variation of particle size from 50 nm to 300 nm with the increase of synthesis temperature.100
 Fig. 2  Physical characteristics of long afterglow nanoparticles. (A) NPPs showed a clinoenstatite-like structure. (B) Transmission electronic microscopy images of the synthesized NPPs (scale bar: 200 nm). (C) Excitation spectrum. (D) Long afterglow emission spectrum. (E) Time dependence of the luminescence intensity of the NPPs. NPPs (10 mg) were put in 96-well plates under direct exposure to a 6 W UV lamp for 5 min. The luminous decay data were fit by a power law function for time >100 s (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2007, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences). 
To better inhibit the growth of nanocrystallites, some compositional approaches are proposed to develop NPPs, such as, sol–gel-microwave route,101 sol–gel-combustion processing102 and sol–gel-template technology (discussed in Section 2.2.5). Red Sr3Al2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanorods with a width of about 80 nm were synthesized by using the sol–gel-microwave method. The advantage of microwave irradiation is that it can effectively shorten the reaction time, accordingly decreasing the particle size. In sol–gel-combustion processing of synthesizing SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+, the raw materials were dissolved in concentrated nitric acid. After the mixed solution was heated (up to 90 °C), a small amount of ethanol was slowly dropped into the solution until no rufous gases (NO2) evaporated out. Finally, spontaneous ignition occurred and underwent combustion with enormous swelling. Electronic microscopy analysis showed that the nanoparticles exhibit a size distribution with a diameter ranging from 90 to 250 nm.


2.2.2 Hydrothermal method. 
Hydrothermal synthesis refers to the preparation by chemical reaction of a substance in a sealed heated solution above ambient temperature and pressure. Different from sol–gel and co-precipitation methods, hydrothermal synthesis is usually carried out within specialized reaction vessels, defined as autoclaves, that are used to provide a high-pressure and sealed environment and thus to promote reactions between solid precursors. As a result, this approach enables the synthesis of highly crystalline nanomaterials under relatively mild conditions when compared to other synthesis routes. The hydrothermal method is a promising method, which can be better controlled from the molecular precursor to the reaction parameters, such as the reaction time and temperature, to give highly homogeneous products. In a typical hydrothermal synthesis procedure for synthesizing NPPs, some organic additives and/or surfactants with specific functional groups like oleic acid OA, polyethylenimine (PEI), EDTA, and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) are generally added along with the reaction precursors to achieve simultaneous control over the crystalline phases, sizes and morphologies. Finally, a high treat temperature is indispensable to form the target NPPs.103,104
Several reports about the different morphologies are available on the synthesis of NPPs, such as SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanosheets,105 Y2O2S:Eu3+M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), and Ti4+ nanotubes.106 The most successful example for hydrothermal synthesis of NPPs was demonstrated by Maldiney and co-workers.11 They synthesized ZnGa1.995O4:0.5%Cr NPPs with size of 50–100 nm by hydrothermal method. Their experimental results showed that the critical factors for the pure products are dependent on the pH value, the initial composition, and the reaction temperature (Fig. 3a–c). Recently, Li et al. reported on a hydrothermal chemical synthesis route to ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. The specific solution-phase reaction procedure is outlined in Fig. 3d, and this method led to monodisperse NPPs s as small as ca. 8 nm. They demonstrated that such sub-10 nm nanocrystals were readily dispersed and functionalized, and can form stable colloidal solutions in aqueous solution (Fig. 3e–h).29
 Fig. 3  (a) A transmission electron micrograph of ZnGa1.995O4:0.5%Cr nanoparticles. Scale bar, 100 nm. (b) The hydrodynamic diameter measured by dynamic light scattering in 5% glucose before and after PEG coverage. (c) The evolution of zeta potential as a function of surface coverage (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (e) TEM image and size distribution of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (f) HR-TEM image of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (g) SAED. (h) X-ray diffraction pattern of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 


2.2.3 Template method. 
The template method is another well-developed synthesis method to fabricate NPPs.107 An important strategy is to deposit the long phosphorescent phosphor layer on the surface of mesoporous silica nanospheres (MSNs) resulting in the formation of the MSNs@LPPs composite material (Fig. 4A).56 This material, which combines the mesoporous structure of MSNs and the phosphorescent property, can be used as a novel duel-functional bio-label and drug delivery system. Up to now, MSNs have found applications as templates on the synthesis of many luminescent materials, such as noble metals, metal oxides, carbon materials, and phosphors.56 Following this method and adding a process of high temperature treatment, the template method is seemingly the most promising candidate for synthesizing high-quality NPPs. Zhang and Han et al. recently developed a convenient template method to synthesize persistent phosphorescent nanospheres (SiO2/SrMgSi2O6:Eu,Dy,SiO2/ZnGa2O4:Cr,SiO2/CaMgSi2O6:Eu,Pr,Mn,CaTiO3:Pr) with a narrow size distribution (Fig. 4B and C).56,108–110 Firstly, metal ions were impregnated into the mesopores of the MSNs templates by immersing the MSNs into an aqueous solution of metal ions. Then ion impregnated MSNs were annealed under certain conditions to form phosphorescent nanomaterials with a narrow size distribution. The key feature of this method was that mesoporous silica nanoparticles acted not only the silicon source, but also as hard templates to control the morphology and the size of nanoparticles (50–100 nm).56
 Fig. 4  FESEM images of (A) SiO2 and (B) SiO2/ZnGa2O4:Cr3+ prepared by template method. (C) TEM of SiO2/ZnGa2O4:Cr (reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2015, Wiley). (D) FESEM images of BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ synthesized by co-precipitation method. (E) Long persistent duration of bulk-form and nano-BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphor (reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 


2.2.4 Co-precipitation. 
Co-precipitation is carried out with a precipitate of substances normally soluble under the conditions employed. All the raw materials are dissolved in solutions and all the cations are co-precipitated by adding some certain reagent. The precipitates are separated, heat-treated to decompose the precursor and finally annealed to crystallize the powder. This approach is an efficient technique for the preparation of inorganic nanomaterials owing to the good mixing of starting materials, which provides a good interspersion of the elements in the precursor, and results in more homogeneous products. Now this technology has also been used to fabricate fluoride-based and oxide-based luminescent nanoparticles. After a higher temperature treatment, this modified co-precipitation technology can certainly be extensively adopted by researchers to prepare NPPs, such as (Y1−xGdx)2O3:Eu3+,Sm3+,Si4+, and Mg2+.111 Cheng et al. synthesized the hexagonal SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ and BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ polynary complex nanotubes with LPP by a co-precipitation method, followed by heat treatment in a reducing atmosphere. Their TEM results demonstrated that a great quantity of nanotubes, with about 30–60 nm wall thickness and about 80–200 nm diameter, exist in the sample. However, it is a pity that tube-form nanomaterials are not suitable for use as bio-labels applied in optical imaging (Fig. 4D and E).16,112


2.2.5 Combustion method. 
Another popular synthesis technique for the preparation of NPPs is the combustion method. This technique is based on exothermic redox reactions that undergo self-sustaining combustion. Mixtures of metal nitrates (oxidizers) and a fuel (reducer; e.g., urea, citric acid or glycine) undergo spontaneous combustion under heating, and the chemical energy from the exothermic reaction heats the precursor mixture to high temperatures. The detailed synthesis process can be found in Fig. 5.86
 Fig. 5  Synthesis process of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,Cr3+ samples via a combustion method. 
A high temperature treatment is necessary after getting the precursors. Such a high temperature leads to the formation and crystallization of NPPs. By careful adjustment of experimental variables (like nature of solvents, concentration of precursors, reaction temperature and time), NPPs with narrow size distribution, good crystallinity, and afterglow properties can be obtained. Cheng et al. investigated the influence of organic fuel and post-annealing temperature on the variation of morphology and crystallographic structure.87 They demonstrated that triethanolamine (TEA) can not only be used as an organic fuel, but could also control the morphology of the nanostructured combustion products. With an increase of post-annealing temperature, their morphology transformed from nanosheets into semi-curled nanobelts owing to the crystal growth, whose transition presented the following rule: amorphous/hexagonal β-SrAl2O4 (1000 °C)/monoclinic SrAl4O7 (1100 °C)/orthorhombic Sr4Al14O25 (1300 °C). In fact, for the synthesis of main aluminium-based NPPs, this method is widely accepted nowadays. Several reports are available on the synthesis of other NPPs, such as SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy,Er,113 and Y2O2S:Sm,114 using a high temperature combustion technique.


2.2.6 Others. 
While high-temperature co-precipitation, hydrothermal syntheses, combustion, template method and sol–gel are currently well established for the fabrication of monodisperse NPPs, quite a few groups also attempted to develop other synthesis strategies, like solvothermal,115 electrospinning,89,107 hydrothermal ion exchange reaction,6 and microwave synthesis.116
Our group successfully in situ synthesized the red CaTiO3:Pr3+, green SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ and blue CaAl2Si2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanofibers by electrospinning (Fig. 6d–f).89 A schematic diagram of the electrospinning equipment is illustrated in Fig. 6a. By randomly choosing a total number of ten nanofibers in the SEM image, the average diameter was estimated to be 800 nm (Fig. 6b and c). When the as-prepared nanofibers were calcined at 1100 °C, the size of the nanofibers decreased owing to the degradation and combustion of the PVP polymer and organic solvents. We further pointed out that by controlling the electrospinning parameters (the concentration of emission activator, the feeding rate of the solution, the dielectric constant of the precursor solution, etc.), the relative emission intensity of CaTiO3:Pr3+,SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ and CaAl2Si2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+ nanofibers can be easily controlled. Consequently, the integrated emitting color of microstructural fibers can be widely tuned from blue, green, red light to white light. Moreover, regular arrays can be built by using the ternary microstructural fibers as the basic unit. By controlling the relative amount of red, green and blue emitting nanofibers, the integrated emitting colors of electrospun array mats can also be conveniently tuned (Fig. 6g).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the electrospinning equipment. (b) SEM images of CaTiO3:Pr3+ electrospun nanofibers calcined at 1100 °C. (c) SEM images of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers calcined at 1100 °C. (d) Afterglow decay curve for the 615 nm emission of CaTiO3:Pr3+ electrospun nanofibers. Inset shows the digital photographs of electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (e) The digital photographs of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (f) The digital photographs of CaAl2Si2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (g) Schematic diagrams of microstructural fibers and array. 
Yan et al. synthesized zinc gallogermanate by hydrothermal ion exchange reaction.6 The precursor, K0.9Ga0.9Ge0.1O2, was first prepared by solid state reaction and dispersed in water to form a colloidal suspension. After Zn2+ from Zn(CH3COO)2 aqueous solution was introduced into the K0.9Ga0.9Ge0.1O2 colloidal suspension, hydrothermal treatment was carried out to obtain the zinc gallogermanate. They also indicated that the cubic zinc gallogermanate formed via the ion exchange reaction of 10K0.9Ga0.9Ge0.1O2 + 6.5Zn(CH3COO)2 → 4.5(ZnGa2O4):(Zn2GeO4) + 9CH3COOK + 4CH3COOH. The high-resolution TEM image showed that the microstructure resulted from aggregation of the nanocrystals with a particle size of about 10 nm.
Microwave heating is also a powerful technique that can be used to synthesize a wide variety of homogeneous nanoparticles. It presents several advantages over conventional heating techniques, such as: rate enhancement fast synthesis, no grinding process, less time, homogeneous heating, selective heating, indirect contact between the heating source and the reactants and/or solvents, and improved reproducibility. Microwave chemistry definitely fulfils the promise of being a fast synthesis technique. These early applications of microwave radiation have been applied to the synthesis of modern, advanced materials, such as nano-materials, thin films, and porous ceramics. This new microwave-assisted method allows the synthesis of SrAl2O4:Eu:Dy,CaTiO3:Pr, etc. in less time.116

2.3 Physical process

2.3.1 Laser technique (ablation/deposition). 
The route of firstly preparing the LPPs and then improving the morphology and particle size refers to a plasma etching process and laser ablation/deposition, where the phosphors are formed or “broken off” from a larger structure (Fig. 7a).117 Laser ablation seems to combine many advantages compared to other synthesis techniques with respect to the size distributions of the nanoparticles. In fact, the processing of various nanomaterials has already been reported by using this method, such as noble metal nanoparticles and semiconductors. The representative equipment used for laser ablation in liquid is shown in Fig. 7c. The target is first placed in a cell filled with water or ethyl alcohol, and then irradiated with a focused laser beam. By controlling the parameters of the laser source (wavelength, repetition rate, peak power, focusing conditions and irradiation), it is easy to obtain the desired nanoparticles with different morphologies and sizes.
 Fig. 7  (a) Proposed sequential growth pathway model involving structural and morphology modifications by using laser ablation (reproduced with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). (b) Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of the obtained nanoparticles from the laser ablation technique (reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2012, American Optical Society). (c) Equipment for laser ablation in liquid (reproduced with permission from ref. 90, copyright 2011, Elsevier). (d) Biodistribution of Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+-OH and Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+-PEG, 15 minutes after tail vain injection (reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2012, American Optical Society). (e) Schematic of an afterglow nanoparticle and of PEG molecules. An afterglow nanoparticle without the addition of PEG. An afterglow nanoparticle capped with PEG molecules at a high PEG concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 90 copyright 2011, Elsevier). 
Yoshimura et al. prepared Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ NPPs by using this technique.90 They demonstrated that the size of nanoparticles could be controlled by the energy density of the laser. During this process, some by-products were also produced, depending on the liquid used. The amount of by-product was reduced by a decrease in the energy density, which also decreased the particle size of the nanoparticles. To improve the quantum yield and biocompatibility to be more suitable for application in bioimaging, they added PEG as the auxiliary. An increase in the amount of PEG increased the quantum yield of the nanoparticles and improved the afterglow property at the same time (Fig. 7e). Thus, it can be seen that this technique is a good candidate for synthesizing high-quality NPPs, ignoring the cost.
Maldiney et al. further demonstrated the main three syntheses of Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+ bio-label with LPP: first preparing the bulk-form LPPs, second synthesizing nanoparticles with the pulsed laser ablation method in liquid and finally surface modification (Fig. 7b). Meanwhile, they revealed the influence of surface functionalization on the biodistribution of the bio-marker after systematic injection and discussed the potential application in in vivo imaging of these functionalized nanoparticles (Fig. 7d).118


2.3.2 Swift heavy ion irradiation and electron beam bombardment. 
In fact, the third strategy of synchronously activating afterglow and limiting the size of nanoparticles is more ideal. However, it is very hard to realize this goal. Swift heavy ion (SHI) irradiation and other electron beam bombardment techniques have a wide variety of applications in many fields, such as biology, medicine, physics, and material science.40,119 They are always used to evaporate materials that are hard to evaporate by thermal evaporation owing to their high melting points. The intense energy deposition in the target material is several orders of magnitude higher than that of conventional ionizing radiation processes, thus resulting in loss of some atoms and leading to vacancy defects formation during the process. The formation of defects has been observed in many materials, including semiconductors, insulators and various metals. Therefore, SHI irradiation or electron beam bombardment is a strong candidate for the synthesis of NPPs through the formation of suitable lattice defects. Xu et al. presented an approach for improving the afterglow of long-lasting phosphors with swift heavy ion irradiation. The afterglow time of famous SrAl2O4:Eu2+ NPPs was dramatically enhanced with swift heavy ion irradiation.120 Smet et al. found that electron-beam annealing was a viable option to reduce the europium ions in CaAl2O4:Eu,Nd LPPs and it led to well-crystallized nanoparticles with a long and bright afterglow. Though this method was highly efficient, energy saving, very low contamination, and uses or produces no hazardous byproducts, it also had to face the stringent requirement of high cost.91

2.4 Brief summary
In summary, up to now, there is still no perfect synthesis technology to prepare nanoparticles with long afterglow time, small particle size, high homogeneity, and highly controllable morphology. Solid-state reaction, with its high synthetic temperature, is certainly beneficial for improving the persistent duration, but leads to micro-grade products. Liquid phase reaction is more suitable for synthesizing the nanomaterials, but the smaller particle size, higher homogeneity, and highly controllable morphology are only obtained without high temperature treatment or under a lower sintering temperature. Meanwhile, such conditions certainly lead to a shorter persistent time. Therefore, liquid phase reaction used to synthesize NPPs is a technology that first synthesizes the nano-materials and then activates the long persistent phosphorescence, while the related physical process follows a reverse order, i.e. first preparing the LPPs and then reducing the particle size. The post-processing of the physical method has already partly improved the size distribution and the monodispersity, but the morphology of the as-prepared nanoparticles is uncontrollable. More notably, this physical irradiation requires advanced equipment and is high cost, which limits its wider application. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new technology for synthesizing nanoparticles with longer persistent duration, smaller particle size, higher homogeneity, and highly controllable morphology.
3. Mechanisms
As discussed above, for the trapping and de-trapping process of a given persistent phosphor, usually three important issues should be considered, i.e. trap types, concentrations and depths.121–123
(1) The types of effective traps. Generally speaking, the involved traps correspond to some lattice defects, i.e. intrinsic defects, intentionally introduced defects or both. There are essentially four processes by which crystal defects can be formed: (a) as the result of thermal dissociation and disorder, when the material is heated to a high temperature; (b) by exposing the material to an excess pressure of one of its constituents, usually at an elevated temperature; (c) by bombarding with electron beam, high-energy rays, nuclear particles or high intensity laser; and (d) by incorporating impurities that require a simultaneous formation of crystal defects to permit their incorporation. Even if the traps can be formed during the above conditions, it is still not easy to identify the species of traps. Moreover, it is also very hard to accurately predict which defect is authentically responsible for the capture of carriers.
(2) The concentration of effective traps, i.e. the number of traps that have the ability to capture carriers. Introducing more effective traps is beneficial for capturing more electrons. Increasing the capacity of the electron reservoir is a considerable issue for improving the persistent duration.
(3) The depth of effective traps, i.e. the release rate of the carriers captured in traps, which determines the phosphorescent intensity and afterglow time. Shallow traps are fast emptied at room temperature, and a high release rate is beneficial to get a strong phosphorescent intensity. Deep traps with a slower release rate, on the other hand, are hardly emptied at room temperature. Parts of carriers are even stored in deep traps at room temperature. Such a slow release rate leads to a weaker phosphorescent intensity and long persistent duration.
Though different mechanisms have been suggested, ranging from the basic theoretical models to complex experimental models, there is still controversy in explaining the trapping and de-trapping process of carriers. In this part, we review the three most widely accepted models, i.e. conduction band (CB)-valence band (VB) model, quantum tunneling model, and oxygen vacancy model.
3.1 Conduction band-valence band model
Trapping is a fundamental process for energy storage in LPPs. This energy storage is accomplished by the spatial localization of the excited carriers near to the CB/VB. When the trapped electron or hole is released into the CB/VB, it is free to move until captured by a recombination center or by another trap. This model is proposed based on the fact that the CB or VB has participated in the excitation, capture, migration and release process of carriers, and the involved traps should be near to CB/VB. The main CB/VB models include the hole model, the electron model and the energy-band engineering model.

3.1.1 Hole model. 
Matsuzawa et al. explained the origin of the extraordinary LPP of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ LPPs (Fig. 8a).124 In their model, holes were assumed to be the main charge carriers. Abbruscato et al. supported this assumption, i.e. holes in the valence band had to be the main charge carriers based on earlier measurements of SrAl2O4:Eu2+, which also showed a weak afterglow. Matsuzawa et al. subsequently performed photoconductivity measurements to support the hole model.125 They further pointed out that when an Eu2+ ion was excited by a photon, there was a possibility that a hole escaped to the VB, thereby leaving behind an Eu+ ion. The hole was then captured by a trivalent rare earth ion, such as Dy3+, thus creating a Dy4+ ion. After a while, thermal energy caused the trapped hole to be released into the VB again. From there it moved back to an Eu+ ion, allowing it to return to the Eu2+ ground state with emission of a photon.
 Fig. 8  (a) Hole model: Afterglow mechanism proposed by Matsuzawa et al. for SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. (b) Electron model: Afterglow mechanism proposed by Aitasalo et al. for CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. (c) Persistent phosphorescence mechanism proposed by Dorenbos et al. for aluminate and silicate compounds. (d) Energy level scheme of the divalent lanthanides in CaBPO5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, copyright 2005, Electrochemical Society. 


3.1.2 Electron model. 
In 2003, Aitasalo proposed that electrons were excited directly from the VB into trap levels of unspecified origin (Fig. 8b).126 Since the CB was located too high above the energy level of the oxygen vacancy trap to enable a thermally assisted transition to the CB, they assumed that the energy released on recombination of the electron and the hole was delivered directly to the Eu ions by means of energy transfer. The electron model also successfully elaborated the doping influence of trivalent rare earth co-dopants. However, they disagreed with the existence of Eu+ and Dy4+ in aluminate or silicate compounds. They pointed out that the reduction of Eu2+ to Eu+ and the oxidation of Dy3+ to Dy4+ would result in chemically unstable ions. They suggested that trivalent rare earth co-dopants increased the number of lattice defects, because they occupied the divalent alkaline earth sites, leading to spontaneous defect creation for charge compensation.127
Holsa et al. also agreed that Eu+ species were unstable in aluminate.126 They proposed that the co-doping of R3+ ions, such as Dy3+ maybe only serve as the trap centers to modulate the trap distribution via charge compensation. They also prepared the additional SrAl2O4:Eu,Sm LPPs and found that adding Sm3+ into SrAl2O4:Eu was detrimental for the persistent duration. The reason was that Sm3+ ions were easily reduced to Sm2+ in the N2–H2 atmosphere, thus leading to a lower concentration of traps. Based on this assumption, they gave a plausible mechanism for LPP of CaAl2O4:Eu,Nd and ZrO2:Ti. In their investigation, their employed EPR, XPS, and XANES techniques, indicating the facts that except for the Eu2+ → Eu3+ oxidation during excitation, no changes in the co-dopants' valence were observed experimentally during the persistent duration. In fact, some phosphors with co-dopant e.g. Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu,Dy and SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy etc. showed intense and longer persistent phosphorescence compared with single-doped phosphors. The reason is that the introduced co-dopant Dy3+ is just used to regulate the trap parameters.94
Clabau et al. also did not accept the Matsuzawa model. EPR measurements presented a decrease in the Eu2+ concentration during excitation, followed by an increase as soon as the excitation was terminated, continuing until the afterglow ended. Thus, they suggested that Eu2+ participated in the trapping and de-trapping process, which contradicted the idea of energy transfer to Eu2+ after the trapping, as suggested by Aitasalo.128


3.1.3 Energy band engineering model. 
Dorenbos et al. agreed with the Aitasalo model, and they further pointed out that the suggested carrier on the ground state of Eu2+ after excitation was based on faulty reasoning (Fig. 8c).129 The energy levels of lanthanides were localized, in contrast to the delocalized Bloch states of the valence and conduction band. They revised the electron model and suggested a different model in 2005.130 In this model, another obvious distinction was that electrons were excited from divalent europium ions, but from the valence band. Since the 5d level of divalent europium was located very close to the conduction band, these excited electrons were easily released into the CB and subsequently caught by a trivalent rare earth ion. This revised electron model also didn't explain the existence of LPP in Eu2+ singly doped SrAl2O4 phosphors.
Further, they offered some strategies and methods to quantitatively calculate the lanthanide energy levels of different LPPs.103,131 The involved factors included: (i) the energy level positions of the R2+ and R3+ ions, (ii) the band gap energy of hosts, and (iii) the trap level positions with respect to the bottom of the conduction band of hosts. Diffuse reflection spectra gave the data of band gap energy of hosts, while the trap level positions could be evaluated by the measurement of thermoluminescence spectra, as will be discussed later. A big problem was getting the energy level positions of the R2+ and R3+ ions. Holsa et al. provided a route for estimating the ground level and excitation level energies for R2+ and R3+ ions in the host band structure using CdSiO3:Tb3+ as an example.23,30,132 They pointed out that (a) a previous empirical model was based on the idea that the trends in ground state energies for both R2+ and R3+ ions were independent of the host. This meant that once the energy of ground level for a R3+ ion in one host was found, these data for any other R3+ ion were easily obtained according to the Dorenbos model (Fig. 8d). For instance, the position of the Tb3+ (7F6) ground level could be thus estimated using the corresponding data for the Eu3+ (7F0) ground level in CdSiO3, even though only the energy level of Eu3+ (7F0) in CdSiO3 could be identified via the experimental data. (b) Transition intensity of different excitation peaks needs to be considered in order to give an accurate judgment of afterglow excitation bands. Such as, the intensity of 4f8 → 4f75d1 (or 4f1 → 5d1) transitions in the excitation spectra of Tb3+ was suppressed when the 4f75d1 levels were in the host's conduction band.
Based on the above method, they investigated the ground energy level positions for the R2+ and R3+ ions in Sr2MgSi2O7 materials and pointed out that the best candidates for afterglow centers were (in this order) Eu2+, Ce3+, Tb3+ and Pr3+. First of all, all these ions are known to be strong emitters with a weak tendency to lose the excitation energy in cross relaxation or multiphonon de-excitation processes. As for LPP, most present day applications prefer excitation (daylight or artificial lighting) with visible light or, if not possible, with UV radiation with as low energy as possible. The Eu2+, Ce3+, Tb3+ and Pr3+ had the lowest 5d energies known in the rare earth series ensuring the low excitation energies. Further, the overlap between the excited 5d levels and the host's CB was required and achieved by these ions for efficient electron transfer through CB to traps. Though the excitation of the trivalent ions (Ce3+, Tb3+ and Pr3+) usually requires the use of UV radiation, Eu2+ can be excited in many hosts by blue light as well.133–135
Thermoluminescence (TL) measurement is usually considered as a powerful tool for calculating trap level positions. The calculated data from the TL peak corresponds to trap level positions. Bos et al. and Lecointre et al. measured glow curves of YPO4:Ce3+,R3+ (R = Nd, Sm, Dy, Ho, Er and Tm) phosphors and YPO4:Pr3+,R3+ (R = Nd, Dy, Ho and Er) phosphors, respectively.27,136 It was noticed that TL peaks of YPO4:Pr3+,R3+ were exactly matched to the corresponding TL peaks in YPO4:Ce3+,R3+. There are some similar values of activation energies for electron detrapping from R2+ for both Pr3+-doped and Ce3+-doped YPO4. Although this was not a typical Eu2+-based compound, these results seemingly confirmed that the codopant indeed played the role of traps in some materials.

3.2 Quantum tunneling model
Quantum tunneling refers to the quantum mechanical phenomenon where a particle tunnels through a barrier that it classically could not surmount. This process may occur between the traps and near excited state levels of activators. In contrast to CB–VB model, this model doesn't require a physical proximity to the traps' level and the CB/VB. This means that such model is mainly used to explain the afterglow mechanism related to deep traps. In 1958, Hoogeustraten et al. proposed the existence of quantum tunneling in sulfide.137 Subsequently, Tanabe et al. presented the similar model related to SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ LPPs.138 They found most of the 5d levels of Eu2+ at the Sr site with weak crystal field were located within the conduction band by measuring photocurrent excitation spectra. Based on this discovery, they suggested that an effective path for trapping and de-trapping is found to be achieved by quantum tunneling path not through the conduction or valance band.
Pan et al. reported a series of Cr3+-doped zinc gallogermanate NIR LPPs that exhibit strong emission at 650–1000 nm and with a super-long afterglow of more than 360 h.12 The effective activation of afterglow by ultraviolet light revealed that the approximate energy of the ionization threshold level in the Zn3Ga2Ge2O10 host was near the conduction band. This was consistent with the CB–VB model (processes 2 and 3 in Fig. 9a and processes 2 and 4 in Fig. 9b). However, low-energy visible light (400–630 nm), whose energy was below the ionization threshold, could still produce weak but super long persistent phosphorescence. They thus proposed another mechanism involving the electron trapping and detrapping processes, i.e. quantum tunneling process (processes 4, 6, and 7 in Fig. 9a and process 5 in Fig. 9b). Under low-energy visible-light excitation, the ground state electrons of Cr3+ ions were promoted to energy levels of deep traps below the ionization threshold and the traps were filled through the tunneling process from the energy-matched Cr3+ energy levels. The reverse tunneling recombination produced weak but super long afterglow. Subsequently, they reported a similar phenomenon from a Cr3+-doped LiGa5O8 NIR persistent phosphor, which exhibits a longer persistent duration of more than 1000 h.139
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of persistent NIR luminescence mechanism. The straight-line arrows and curved-line arrows represent optical transitions and electron transfer processes, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (b) Representation of the NIR persistent phosphorescence and photo stimulated NIR persistent phosphorescence mechanisms (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group). 
3.3 Oxygen vacancy model
Our group discovered photo stimulated luminescence from Eu2+-doped fluoroaluminate glasses,140 Eu2+-doped strontium aluminosilicate glasses,141 Ce3+-doped alkali borate and silicate glasses,142 as well as gold nanoparticles-doped glasses.143 We proposed an afterglow model, the oxygen vacancy model, to explain the trapping and de-trapping progress by analyzing the EPR spectra. The oxygen vacancy model involves oxygen vacancy as the electron trap to capture the electron, which is universally suitable for analyzing the afterglow mechanism of oxide-based LPPs. Such a model was built based on the identification and confirmation of trap types, other than the CB/VB and quantum tunneling models. In earlier research, Aitasalo et al. suggested an oxygen vacancy as the important electron trap in their electron model.126 Clabau et al. also agreed that oxygen vacancies acted as an efficient electron trap in SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+.128 By comparing the glow curves of Eu2+ singly doped SrAl2O4 and Eu2+/Dy3+ co-doped SrAl2O4, they found that the two TL peaks differed in size and location, but were very similar in shape. From this, they concluded that the chemical nature of the traps was not influenced by co-doping, and only oxygen vacancies still worked for the store and release of electrons in all the phosphors. In fact, point defects existed extensively within oxide-based materials. Lim et al. studied the afterglow properties of Ti-doped spinel phosphor powders. From their investigation, the observed 620 nm red emission should be ascribed to Mg2+ and O2− vacancies, because a pure spinel was reported to have many intrinsic defects, such as Mg2+ and O2− vacancies, and they often appeared in pairs, known as Schottky defects.92
3.4 Brief summary
Until now, the suggested models have failed to satisfactorily explain all of the observed phenomena. The model about energy level schemes was a major breakthrough. At least it made it possible to predict the following: (1) charge carriers' species of the trapping and detrapping process; (2) identification of the most probable centers for persistent phosphorescence; (3) the role of (rare earth) co-dopants, i.e. traps capturing electrons in the conduction band; (4) the afterglow excitation band. Now it allows designing an efficient long phosphorescent phosphor via a comprehensive consideration of the band gap energy of hosts and energy level structure of luminescence centers. Though some experimental difficulties still exist, the relationship between the two now can be partly controlled. The biggest problem of the research in afterglow mechanisms needing to be faced is a comprehensive understanding of trap type, trap concentration and de-trapping probability of captured electrons. The physicists or material scientists need to answer three questions: what are the efficient traps that have the ability to capture the excited electrons; what is the concentration of such traps; and what is the released ratio of stored electrons?
4. Characterization
In an optical material, the luminescent and phosphorescent properties should be firstly determined with spectrophotometer in order to identify which activator is taking part in the optical process. The related measurements include photoluminescent/phosphorescent spectra, photoluminescent/phosphorescent excitation spectra, and decay curves in the UV-VIS-NIR wavelength ranges. When multiple peaks or bands are presented in the photoluminescence (PL) or PL excitation (PLE) spectra, the corresponding emission and excitation spectra for each peak or band should be measured. Not only the PL and PLE spectra during excitation, but also the afterglow spectra need to be investigated. In this way, it is clear which activators are taking part in the persistent phosphorescence and which are not. If the afterglow emission spectrum changes over time, it might be valuable to show the spectrum at different time intervals after the excitation, since different defects have different trapping time. Another important consideration is structural characterization, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermal analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Raman spectrum, or X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) etc.9,144,145
Comparing to structural characterization, the nature of traps as well as the trapping and de-trapping process is more important for understanding the afterglow mechanism, since crystal defects can play an important role as traps in determining the optical, electrical, and photoconductivity properties of materials. In this part, characterization methods for the investigation of trapping and de-trapping processes are discussed. These methods include both spectroscopy techniques and special measurements (electron spin resonance, photocurrent and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy). The related spectroscopy studies refer to UV-VUV synchrotron radiation emission and excitation spectroscopy, thermoluminescence (or thermally stimulated luminescence, TL) and its excitation spectra, X-ray absorption spectroscopy as well as afterglow kinetics curves. With these methods, we are able to obtain some important qualitative and quantitative information regarding defect parameters. A targeted collection for characterization methods of long phosphorescent phosphors is beneficial to identify the trap types, concentrations and depths, and set up an accurate afterglow model.
4.1 Electron spin resonance
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), also called electron spin resonance (ESR), deals with the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and magnetic moments of electrons. It is a technique applicable to systems in a paramagnetic state. The species exist either in a paramagnetic ground state or may be temporarily excited into a paramagnetic excited state, for instance, by irradiation. Typical systems that have been studied include:
(1) Free radicals in the solid, liquid or gaseous phases. A free radical is herein defined as an atom, molecule or ion containing one unpaired electron.
(2) Transition ions including actinide ions.
(3) Various point defects (localized imperfections, with electron spin distributed over relatively few atoms) in solids. Best known in this class is the F center, an electron trapped at a negative-ion vacancy in crystals and glasses. Deficiency of an electron (a ‘positive hole’) may also give rise to a paramagnetic entity.
(4) Systems with more than one unpaired electron. Excluding ions in category 2, these include: triplet-state systems, biradicals and multiradicals.
An EPR spectrum is observed making the magnetic field vary (abscissa of the spectrum) and recording the absorption of the microwave irradiation. This EPR signal appears at the resonant field where the energy between the two electronic spin sublevels created by the magnetic field (gβH, where g is the lande factor, β the Bohr magneton and H the magnetic field applied to the sample containing radicals with spin S = 1/2 for instance) is equal to the energy of the fixed microwave (hν, where h is the Planck constant and ν the microwave frequency). This equality is the fundamental equation in EPR: hν = gβH.
EPR has proved to be an important tool in the study of semiconductors, particularly in identifying and elucidating the structures of point defects and impurity ions. Now many researchers are trying to explore the species of traps in LPPs by using EPR. Here we focus primarily on solids containing independent unpaired-electron species, limited to relatively few atoms in each center. Depending on the anisotropy, some important classes of paramagnetic systems mainly include free radicals, transition ions surrounded by ligands, and point defects. Table 2 lists the investigations about the parameters of X-band EPR spectra of different LPPs. EPR signals of LPPs are all in correlation with various point defects or doping ions (transition metal and rare earth). It should be specially mentioned that if the g value of the new EPR signal is smaller than that of the g factor of the free electron, which is 2.0023, the signal is owing to the trapped electron. However, if the g value is bigger than 2.0023, the new signal is ascribed to the trapped holes.
Table 2 Parameters of X-band EPR spectra of different LPPs




Phosphor

g-factors
Attribution
Ref.




CaYAl3O7:Ce3+
2.002
An electron is trapped at an oxygen vacancy

146





2.012
A hole is self-trapped around a single Al3+ ion


ZnGa2O4:Cr3+
1.976
Cr3+–Cr3+ pairs

49 and 147



Ca10.43Mn0.07(PO4)7
2
Mn2+ ions located in octahedral sites

148



CaMgSi2O6:Mn2+
2
Typical hyperfine sextet of Mn2+

149



Zn2P2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+
2.031
Holes trapped by 

150



1.997
Electrons captured by 


Zn3Ga2SnO8:Cr3+
2.004
Defect agglomerate composed by single ionized Zn interstitial and the Zn vacancy capturing an electron

62



2.08
Cr3+–Cr3+ exchange-coupled pairs or small clusters of several exchange-coupled pairs


2.45
isolated Cr3+ centers at strongly-distorted octahedral sites




Our group has done a lot of work in explaining the nature of defects in Cr3+ and Mn4+-doped LPPs (Zn3Ga2SnO8:Cr,Zn3Ga2GeO8:Cr,Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr,LaAlO3:Mn,GdAlO3:Mn), and BCNO (BN-based phosphor containing impurity of carbon and oxygen).62,151,152 EPR spectra of Zn3Ga2SnO8:0.5Cr3+ powders at different time intervals (30 min, 6 h, 24 h and 96 h) were measured after irradiation by a xenon lamp for 10 min (Fig. 10a). Signals with g = 2.004, g = 2.08 and g = 2.45 could be detected before and after the irradiation. Signals with g = 2.08, and g = 2.45 remained unchanged at different time intervals, only the signal intensity with g = 2.004 was seen to decrease. The ESR signal with g = 2.45 in Li2B4O7:Cr3+ glass belonged to isolated Cr3+ centers at strongly distorted octahedral sites. The signal with g = 2.08 was attributed to the Cr3+–Cr3+ exchange-coupled pairs or small clusters of several exchange-coupled pairs. The line in the ESR spectra at g = 2.0024 was attributed to the Zn vacancy in zinc oxide, ESR signals owing to singly negatively charged Zn vacancy (VZn) and zinc vacancy interstitial zinc complex (VZn:Zni) were with a g value very close to 2 in zinc oxide phosphor. The signal with g = 2.0046 may be assigned to a single ionized interstitial Zn (Zni, monovalent Zn or Zn+) in Zn2GeO4 phosphor. To sum up, considering the point that the value of the signal with g = 2.004 was close to the g-factor (g = 2) of a single electron ion, it should be attributed to the defect agglomerate composed by single ionized interstitial Zn and the Zn vacancy capturing an electron.62
 Fig. 10  (left) Electron spin resonance spectra of Zn3Ga2SnO8:0.5Cr3+ (a–e) and Zn3Ga2GeO8:0.5Cr3+ (f) powders measured at 100 K, (a) Before irradiation, (b–e) 0.5, 6, 24, 96 h after the stoppage of irradiation, and (f) 96 h after the stoppage of irradiation. Two phosphors were pre-irradiated by a xenon lamp for 5 min. (right) Electron spin resonance spectra of sample LaAlO3:Mn4+ measured at 100 K: (a) before irradiation, and (b) 5 and (c) 20 min after the stoppage of irradiation; the samples were pre-irradiated by a xenon lamp for 10 min. 
In addition to the EPR singles of the Cr3+ ion, we also investigated the Mn-related EPR singles (Fig. 10b). We obtained the EPR signals of Mn2+ in Mn4+/Ge4+-co-doped MAlO3 (M = La, Gd). The typical hyperfine sextet arising from the Mn2+ ion remained the same at the different time intervals, verifying that the Mn2+ center was indeed detained in the phosphor, but it was not an efficient defect center and did not work at all for the afterglow emitting. Unfortunately, no EPR single of Mn4+ was observed.151
French scientists from UPMC laboratory also made a great effort to develop the afterglow mechanism by investigating the EPR signals of transition metal ions, (Cr3+, Mn2+, etc.).49,147–149 EPR spectra of NIR CaMgSi2O6:Mn diopsides displayed a central set of 6 hyperfine lines (g = 2) corresponding to the Mn2+.149 Subsequently, they investigated the experimental X-band (9.4 GHz) EPR spectra of Cr-doped ZnGa2O4 phosphors. They pointed out that g = 1.976 should be ascribed to the Cr3+–Cr3+ pairs (a transition between effective Ms = ±1/2 states in the 4A2 ground state of Cr3+ ions with C3 crystal field axis perpendicular to the magnetic field).147
Su et al. observed the long lasting phosphorescence in Eu2+-activated MO–B2O3 (M = Ca, Sr, and Ba) glasses. They showed that a new light-induced EPR signal was brought after the excitation, and the values of the g-factor (2.0013, 1.9947, and 2.0022, respectively) were smaller than 2.0023. Therefore, they assigned the EPR signals in Eu2+-activated glasses to the electron-trapping center.153 They also investigated the EPR spectra of Zn2P2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+ phosphors. Two weak EPR signals at g = 2.031 and g = 1.997 are assigned to holes trapped by  and electrons captured by , respectively.150
4.2 Photocurrent/photoconductivity
Photoconductivity is an optical and electrical phenomenon in which a material becomes more electrically conductive owing to the absorption of electromagnetic radiation, such as visible light, ultraviolet light, infrared light, or gamma radiation. When light is absorbed by a material, the number of free electrons and holes increases and raises its electrical conductivity. To cause excitation, the light that strikes the semiconductor must have enough energy to raise electrons across the band gap or to excite the impurities within the band gap. Photocurrent is the electric current that flows as a result of a photoconductivity or a photovoltaic effect. The photocurrent discussed here is not related to the photovoltaic effect, but concerns the generation, migration and recombination of free carriers in the conduction and valence bands, i.e. photoconductivity.
Photoconducting materials can be divided into two classes: idiochromatic and allochromatic (Fig. 11a). Idiochromatic materials are those that show photoconductivity when are in a pure condition, the photoconductivity being associated directly with the intrinsic properties of the material itself. Such materials exhibit photoconductivity when energy is absorbed by the atoms of the crystal, but in general show a maximum photosensitivity at the wavelength corresponding to the minimum energy required producing a free electron (the intrinsic absorption edge). Allochromatic materials are those in which the photoconductivity is associated directly with impurities or with crystal imperfections, such as vacancies. The photoconductivity associated with absorption in the characteristic band of the F center in alkali halides is typical of allochromatic behavior. The absorption band and the corresponding photoconductivity excitation spectra are very similar to each other.
 Fig. 11  (a) Wavelength dependence of absorption and photoconductivity for an idiochromatic effect (intrinsic) or an allochromatic effect (imperfection). (b) Schematic diagram of photocurrent measurement system as function of temperature and excitation wavelength. All the equipment was automatically controlled by a PC program. (c) Afterglow intensity I10s monitored at 713 nm for Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr as a function of the excitation wavelengths over the 300–650 nm spectral range. The inset shows an enlargement of the 400 to 650 nm region. The grey line shows the excitation spectrum monitored at 713 nm (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (d) Temperature-dependent photocurrent excitation spectra of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr for the range of 20–300 K. 
The incorporation of defects in a photoconductor crystal may have one or more of the following effects: (1) change the conductivity; (2) change the photosensitivity; imperfections, which act as efficient recombination centers, decrease the sensitivity; (3) change the speed of response (imperfections, which act as trapping centers, or which increase the sensitivity, decrease the speed of response); and (4) extend the spectral response. Quantitatively the location and density of defect levels may be determined by one or more of the following experimental measurements: (1) the variation of free-carrier density with temperature; (2) the appearance of new absorption, associated with direct absorption by the imperfection centers; (3) the appearance of new photoconductivity excitation bands, associated with direct ionization of imperfection centers; (4) the appearance of new luminescence emission bands, corresponding to radiative recombination transitions involving the imperfection centers; (5) the appearance of new luminescence excitation bands, associated with direct excitation of imperfection centers; (6) the dependence of the measured carrier lifetime on carrier density, when the imperfection centers act as recombination centers; and (7) the appearance of new peaks in curves of thermally stimulated current (TSC) or TL emission. The increased conductivity or luminescence emission obtained when a pre-excited crystal is heated to release trapped carriers can be used to determine the ionization energies of the trapping centers.
Photoconductivity curves (or photoconductivity excitation curves) could be used to identify the trap species and the possible trapping and detrapping processes. Prof S. Tanabe and co-workers from Kyoto University developed an automatic measurement system of photoconductivity in inorganic phosphors. Through this system, the wavelength and temperature-dependence of photocurrents could be measured automatically (Fig. 11b).17 The numerical values of photocurrents were measured and recorded as a function of temperature and excitation wavelength automatically. They investigated the photocurrent features of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,CaTiO3:Pr3+, etc.154,155 The excitation wavelength dependence of photocurrent showed a similar profile to the PLE spectrum of Eu2+. The result clearly indicated the interaction between the 5d level of Eu2+ with the conduction band. The activation energy of the photocurrent was evaluated from its temperature dependence for each wavelength. While most 5d levels of Eu2+ at the Sr site with a weak crystal field were located within the conduction band, only the 5d levels of Eu2+ above 3.1 eV (400 nm) at the Sr site with a strong crystal field were located within the conduction band.156
The long NIR phosphorescent phosphor Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ could be excited by ultraviolet and visible light, revealing that some shallow traps are near the CB while others are far away from the CB (Fig. 11c).12 The corresponding photocurrent excitation spectra are provided in Fig. 11d. Depending on the distance between the traps and the conduction band, only one excitation peak responsible for the electrons released from the shallow traps near the conduction band could be observed in the photocurrent excitation spectra. The photocurrent single may correspond to the intrinsic defects in Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+.15
4.3 Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
Up to now, there have been few reports giving an accurate description for determining trap concentrations. It is shown that positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy has tremendous potential as a powerful tool for quantifying the types and densities of defects in solids. Positron lifetime, τ, is a function of the electron density at the annihilation site. Positron lifetime, τ, is inversely proportional to the local electron density at the site of positron annihilation. Positrons are trapped in open-volume defects, such as in vacancies and their agglomerates, and the positron lifetime, τ, can increase with respect to the defect-free sample owing to the locally reduced electron density of the defect. Thus, a longer lifetime component, which is a measure of the size of the open volume, appears. The strength of this component, i.e. its intensity, is directly related to the defect concentration. In principle, both pieces of information, i.e. the kind and concentration of the defect under investigation, can be obtained independently by a single measurement. This is the major advantage of positron lifetime spectroscopy compared with angular correlation of annihilation radiation or Doppler-broadening spectroscopy with respect to defect issues.
The time-dependent positron decay spectrum, M(t), is given by: (1) κ = μC(2)where, τi is the lifetime of every component after decomposing the positron decay spectrum using an analysis program, Ii is the strengths of the different components, C is the defect concentration and κ is the annihilation probability of the positron in one defect. Thus, τi gives information on the types of defect. The strength of this component, Ii, and the captured probability, κ, are in direct proportion to the defect concentration.
Our group systematically investigated the trap concentrations of Cr-doped gallates (Zn3Ga2GeO8:Cr, SZG and Zn3Ga2SnO8:Cr, GZG) by positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy.62 The decomposition results of SZG and GZG powders are shown in Table 3. The short lifetime component, τ1, reflected the characteristics of free-state annihilation for the perfect crystal lattice. The long lifetime component, τ2, was attributed to the combined effect of positrons annihilating in vacancy-type defects, mainly including the cationic deficiency, oxygen vacancy and interfaces. Inconspicuous variations in the lifetime components τ1 and τ2 between two phosphors further provided proof of similarity in traps. However, the intensity, I2, and the captured probability, κ, of the SZG powders were both superior to those of the GZG powders, showing the total concentration of vacancies in the SZG powders is higher than those in the GZG powders.
Table 3 Parameters of positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy




Composition

τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

I
1 (%)

I
2 (%)

κ (ns−1)




GZG
0.324
1.7
80.05
15.95
3.086


SZG
0.38
1.964
65
35
17.241




4.4 X-ray absorption spectroscopy
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a widely used technique for determining the local geometric and electronic structure of matter. The experiment is usually performed with synchrotron radiation sources, which provide intense and tunable X-ray beams. XAS data are obtained by tuning the photons' energy to a range where core electrons can be excited. X-ray absorption spectra are especially sensitive to the formal oxidation state, coordination chemistry and distances, coordination number and species of the atoms surrounding the selected element. XAS includes both “Extended X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure” (EXAFS) and “X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure” (XANES). Generally speaking, XANES spectra include three parts: pre-edge, edge and near-edge (Fig. 12a). EXAFS spectra are displayed as graphs of the absorption coefficient of a given material versus energy, typically in the 150–1000 eV range, beginning before an absorption edge of an element in the sample. This region usually shows the largest variations in the X-ray absorption coefficient and is often dominated by intense, narrow resonances. It is notable that XANES is strongly sensitive to formal oxidation state and coordination chemistry (e.g., octahedral, tetrahedral coordination) of the absorbing atom, while the EXAFS is used to determine the distances, coordination number, and species of the neighbors of the absorbing atom.
 Fig. 12  (a) Three regions of XAS data. (b) Eu LIII XANES spectra of SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy at 120 K and SrS:Eu. EuS and Eu2O3 were measured as reference compounds. The spectra are shifted vertically for clarity (reproduced with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2011, American Physical Society). 
The interpretation of XANES is complicated owing to the fact that there is not a simple analytical description of XANES. Still, much chemical information can be obtained from the XANES region, notably formal valence (very difficult to experimentally determine in a nondestructive way) and coordination environment. Though the lack of a simple analytic expression complicates XANES interpretation, XANES can be described qualitatively (and nearly quantitatively) in terms of: (a) coordination chemistry: regular, distorted octahedral, tetrahedral coordination, as for Cr, Fe, Ti, etc. (b) Molecular orbitals: p–d orbital hybridization, crystal-field theory, and so on. (c) Band-structure: the density of available electronic states. (d) Multiple-scattering: multiple bounces of the photo-electron.
An important and common application of XANES is to use the shift of the edge position to determine the valence state (Fig. 12b). For ions with unfilled d-electron bands, the orbit hybridization is dramatically altered depending on the coordination environment, with much stronger hybridization for tetrahedral coordination than for octahedral coordination. Prof. Holsa from the University of Turku and co-workers have experience in identifying the transient species in the charging and discharging persistent phosphorescence process by using this technique (Fig. 13a).30 They explained the role of the emission center (Eu2+, etc.) and the other co-doping R ions (R2+/R3+/R4+) in the mechanism of the persistent phosphorescence of different LPPs, such as, CdSiO3:R3+ (R = La–Lu, excluding Pm),23 ZrO2:Yb3+,Er3+,157 M2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,R3+ (M = Ca, Sr and Ba, R = Ce, Dy and Yb),158 SrAl2O4:Eu2+,R3+ (R = La, Ce, Nd, Sm and Yb),158 and BaAl2O4:Eu2+,R3+,159 by employing XANES. In line with the experimental observations of CdSiO3:R3+ (R = La–Lu, excluding Pm), the in situ synchrotron radiation XANES spectra indicated the presence of only the trivalent Pr3+ and Tb3+ species, thus excluding the direct R3+ → R4+ oxidation during the charging process of persistent phosphorescence.23
 Fig. 13  (a) Rare earth LIII edge XANES spectra of CdSiO3 doped with selected R3+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 23, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Emission of MnIIMg at 685 nm and (b) emission of MnIICa at 585 nm. (reproduced with permission from ref. 149, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
For Eu2+-activated LPPs, XANES at room temperature showed different results for the valence state of the emission centers. Both Eu2+ and Eu3+ were present in the XANES spectra of Eu singly doped and co-doped Ca2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,R3+,Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,R3+, as well as SrAl2O4:Eu2+,R3+ phosphors. However, for CaAl2O4:Eu2+,R3+, the co-doped phosphors all contained Eu2+ and Eu3+ species, while Eu singly doped material only had Eu2+ in their XANES spectra. On the other hand, XANES results also offered some important information on the valence state of co-dopants. XANES measurements of BaAl2O4:Eu2+,R3+ confirmed the presence of only the trivalent form of the co-dopant R3+.158,159 Dy and other co-dopants in Eu2+-activated LPPs were considered only as trivalent, suggesting that no change in the co-dopant valences occurred during persistent phosphorescence. Smet demonstrated a similar result by analyzing XANES results, that is, parts of the europium ions ionized from Eu2+ to Eu3+ during the charging process, and immediately Eu3+ turned back to Eu2+ after ceasing the excitation, while no reduction or oxidation of Dy3+ ions were detected, indicating that the electrons or holes could not be captured by co-dopant ions.66 EXAFS and XANES were also employed to evidence the existence of actual defects in CaMgSi2O6:Mn2+ phosphors. Distinct features within the five manganese-doped diopsides were extracted from Ca K-edge and Mn K-edge EXAFS/XANES investigation. Several converging results from Ca EXAFS/XANES and Mn EXAFS evidenced the formation of oxygen vacancies, which were not in the first neighboring position with respect to manganese ions (Fig. 13b).149
4.5 Thermoluminescence and its excitation spectra
Thermoluminescence (TL) techniques are usually employed to give an estimate of the trap depth. TL is defined as the emission of light during heating of a solid following the previous absorption of energy during irradiation. The alternative radiation source is high energy ray (X-ray, gamma-ray), ultraviolet-visible-infrared light and electron beam. In fact, this radiation is the energy store; whereas the heating is just a trigger to help release the absorbed energy. Irradiation source, irradiation duration, interval after ceasing the irradiation and environmental temperature all influence the electrons distribution in different traps (from shallow traps to deep traps).160,161
By performing a series of TL experiments with varying excitation durations and at varying excitation temperatures, and employing the initial rise analysis method, the depth and shape of trap distribution can be estimated (Fig. 14B).162 Smet et al. pointed out the main steps that should be taken for such a trap depth probing: (a) measuring the thermal quenching of the sample in order to properly correct the TL data. (b) Measuring the dose dependence of the TL glow curves to verify the presence of higher order kinetics. (c) Measuring the TL glow curves after exciting at various temperatures (T). The initial rise analysis can be performed to estimate the trap depth. An estimated trap depth that varies continuously as a function of T is a strong indication for the presence of a continuous trap depth distribution. (d) If the trapping process is not thermally activated, the area under the glow curves obtained in (c) can be used to estimate the shape of the continuous trap depth distribution. If thermal activation of the trapping is seen, the areas should first be corrected for this.163–166
 Fig. 14  (A) 3D drawing of the TL excitation part of the set-up with the Xe-lamp, focusing mirrors, monochromator, shutter, and optical fiber (reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2011, Elsevier). (B) The density of the continuous trap depth distribution at a certain depth can be estimated from the difference between the integrated intensities at two different excitation temperatures (reproduced with permission from ref. 162, copyright 2013, American Physical Society). (C) PL excitation (black solid line) and emission (black dotted line) spectra compared with TSL excitation (green open points) and emission (green dotted lines) spectra of Cr3+ doped n-ZnGa2O4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (D) TL intensity of ZnS:Cu+ as a function of excitation wavelength and temperature as contour plot (top) and in 3D representation (bottom) (reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2011, Elsevier). 
Apart from TL spectra, if we plot the integrated TL signal intensity as a function of excitation wavelength, we will get a TL excitation (TLE) spectrum (Fig. 14D). Bos et al. presented their TLE facility (Fig. 14A).167 In detail, the tunable monochromatic UV-VIS light was used to excite the electrons into the conduction band. The created free electrons would be captured in the intrinsic or introduced trapping centers of the sample. Traps were subsequently read out by heating the sample while the TL was recorded. By varying the monochromatic wavelength, repeating the TL read out, and displaying the temperature integrated TL yielded as a function of the subsequent wavelengths, the TLE spectrum was obtained.
Bessiere et al. showed a distinctive application of TLE spectra, i.e. analyzing the attribution of the PLE band by comparison of TLE spectra and PLE spectra. The total area of each glow curve was reported as well as the TSL excitation intensity of Cr3+-doped ZnGa2O4 phosphors (red open circles in Fig. 14C). The TSL excitation spectrum was divided into five wavelength ranges. By comparing the PLE and TLE spectra, the former four ranges could be assigned to the 4A2 → 4T2(4F) of Cr3+, the 4A2 → 4T1(4F) transitions of Cr3+, the 4A2 → 4T1(4P) transitions of Cr3+, and band-to-band transition, respectively.11
In addition to PLE band, TLE measurements could also be used to identify the afterglow excitation band. For example, the broad 320–380 nm TLE band corresponded to the 5d2 and 5d3 bands of Ce3+ by analyzing the TLE spectra of Sr2.98Al0.02Si0.98O5:0.01Ce3+,0.01Dy3+.131Fig. 15 shows a representative 3D TLE spectrum (the TL excitation contour plots for M2Si5N8:Eu (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) phosphors).164 The TLE band is located round 260 nm, which also corresponded to the most effective afterglow excitation band. Now, this technique has been widely applied in the study of the afterglow excitation band of LPPs, such as Lu2SiO5:Ce3+, SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+, Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+,Dy3+, CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+, M2Si5N8:Eu (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) and the classical ZnS:Cu+ LPPs. The SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+, Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+,Dy3+, CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+, and ZnS:Cu+ phosphors exhibit TLE spectra with maxima at 300–360 nm, 380–420 nm, 300–400 nm, 330 nm in accordance with previous reports about the PLE and diffuse reflection spectra.27,131,150,168–170
 Fig. 15  Normalized TL excitation contour plots for M2Si5N8:Eu (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) excited at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 164, copyright 2012, Elsevier). 
4.6 UV-VUV synchrotron radiation emission and excitation spectroscopy
Vacuum ultraviolet-ultraviolet (UV-VUV) synchrotron radiation emission and excitation spectroscopy is a powerful tool for investigating the relationships between the energy levels of (co-)dopants and the electronic host band structure. By using this route, the f–d transition and charge transfer energy of rare earth ions, and the relation with the band gap of compounds, can be identified. Holsa et al. estimated the band gap of non-doped CdSiO3 materials by using UV-VUV synchrotron radiation excitation spectroscopy. In this excitation spectrum, a sharp edge was observed at 230 nm (5.4 eV).23 Since the CdSiO3 host did not contain any emitting ion, this edge could only be the excitation from the top of the VB to the bottom of the CB, i.e. the band gap energy. A similar method was also used to estimate the band gap of non-doped hosts in SrAl2O4:Eu2+ (6.6 eV), Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ (7.1 eV), ZrO2:Yb3+,Er3+ (5.3 eV), BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ (6.5 eV), CaAl2O4 (6.84 eV), CaAl2O4:Eu2+ (6.74 eV) LPPs.30,132,159,171
5. Classifications
In this part, we review the recent developments of LPPs and discuss the classification of LPPs. Such developments follow two directions: materials and operational wavebands. First, we provide a full list of the most popular LPPs in Tables 4–14. With a few exceptions, the fabrication of most of these listed LPPs was reported after 2009, the year when the new NIR LPPs were synthesized and an in vivo imaging method using phosphorescent nanoparticles as the bio-labels was proposed. The number of related activators and hosts is expected to highly increase in the coming years. In addition to materials, another important research direction is extending the emission and excitation waveband to the longer-wavelength region. Especially for the emission waveband, this subject is a critical issue, to promote the development of bio-labels with LPP. Related strategies for realizing the goal of longer-wavelength emitting are also discussed. That is, varying the activators, modulating the crystal field and transferring the persistent energy from one activator to another.
Table 4 Binary oxide-based long phosphorescent phosphors. “ET” means the energy transfer; “CE” means the coherent excitation; “ICE” means the incoherent excitation; “HR” means the excitation of high energy rays; “UV” means ultraviolet excitation; “Vis” means visible excitation; “NIR” means near-infrared excitation; “E” means “observed by eye”; “M” means “the detection intensity reach to 0.032 mcd m−2”; “R” means “response of spectrometer detector”




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow (band)/[peak] (color) (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




CaO
Eu3+


[594, 616] (reddish orange)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

172



Lu2O3
Eu3+


[528, 611] (reddish orange)
[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉
[60 min] R

173



SnO2
Sm3+
Zr4+
(550–700) (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[900 s] R

104



ZrO2
Sm3+
Sn4+
(550–700) (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[900 s] R

161



Lu2O3
Pr3+
Hf2+
[610, 631] (red)
[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉
[200 s] R

169 and 174



Lu2O3
Tb3+
Ca2+, Sr2+
[543] (green)
[270] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[20–30 h] E

175



ZrO2
Er3+
Yb3+
(630–720) [650] (red)
[980] (NIR) 〈CE〉
[16 ms] R

157



Ga2O3
Cr3+


(650–850) [713] (NIR)
[300] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4 h] R

75 and 176



ZrO2
Ti3+


(350–700) [496] (bluish-green)
[300] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[800 s] R

177





Table 5 Silicate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow (band)/[peak] (color) (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




Ba13Al22Si10O66
Eu2+


(350–700) (blue)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[43.5 min] R

178



Sr3MgSi2O8
Eu2+
Dy3+
[460] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] R

133



Sr3Al10SiO20
Eu2+
Ho3+
[465] (blue)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[6 h] M

179



Ca3MgSi2O8
Eu2+
Dy3+
[470] (blue)
[Standard lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] M

180



Sr2MgSi2O7
Eu2+
Dy3+
[470] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] M

181



Ba4(Si3O8)2
Eu2+
Er3+
[481] (blue)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2500 s] E

182



Ba4(Si3O8)2
Eu2+
Dy3+
(400–700) (bluish-green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[24 h] M

44



Ba4(Si3O8)2
Eu2+
Ho3+
[496] (green)
[390] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4 h] E

183



Sr2Al2SiO7
Eu2+
Dy3+
[485] (blue-green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] E

184



Ba2MgSi2O7
Eu2+
Tm3+
[505] (green)
[355] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] M

185



BaMgSiO4
Eu2+


[537] (green)
[310] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1.5 h] M

186



Ca2MgSi2O7
Eu2+


[535] (green)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[12 h] M

187



CaAl2Si2O8
Eu2+
Pr3+
(375–600) (green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

188 and 189



Sr2SiO4
Eu2+
Dy3+
[570] (yellow)
[160, 310] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[60, 10 min] R

57 and 190



Sr3SiO5
Eu2+
Lu3+
[574] (yellow)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[20 h] M

191 and 192



Ca2ZnSi2O7
Eu2+
Dy3+
[580] (yellow)
[460] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[12 h] E

193



MgSiO3
Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)


[665] (Red)
Mercury lamp (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4 h] R

194



Sr3MgSi2O8
Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)


[457, 670] (red)
[375] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

195



Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6
Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)


(600–800) (NIR)
[340] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] R

85



CaAl2Si2O8
Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)
Dy3+
[418, 580] (white)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] R

196 and 197



Lu2SiO5
Ce3+


[400, 430] (blue)
[355] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] R

198



Ca2Al2SiO7
Ce3+ → Mn2+(ET)


[550] (green)
Mercury lamp (UV) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] M

199



Sr2Al2SiO7
Ce3+ → Dy3+(ET)


[408, 491, 573] (white)
[343] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] M

184



CaMgSi2O6
Dy3+


[480, 575, 667] (white)
[343] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

200 and 201



CaxMgSi2O5+x (x = 1, 2, 3)
Dy3+


[475, 580] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

58 and 200



Ca2MgSi2O7
Dy3+


[458, 580, 660, 755] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

200 and 202



Sr2SiO4
Dy3+


[480, 575, 665] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] M

203



Gd9.33(SiO4)6O2
Sm3+


[606] (red)
[273] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1400 s] R

204



Sr2ZnSi2O7
Sm3+


[561, 598, 644] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[30 min] M

205



CdSiO3
Mn2+
Nd3+
[587] (yellow)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[300 s] R

206



CdSiO3
Bi3+


[360] (UV)
[221] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[60 s] R

122 and 207



CdSiO3
Defect
Gd3+
[435] (blue)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

23





Defect → Tb3+(ET)


[545] (green)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

23





Defect → Sm3+(ET)


(530–680) (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

23





Defect → Pr3+(ET)


(580–680) (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

23





Defect → Dy3+(ET)


[480, 580] (white)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

23



CaSnSiO5
Defect


[420] (Purple Blue)
[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[200 s] R

208





Defect → Tb3+(ET)


[486, 542] (green)
[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4600 s]R

208





Defect → Sm3+(ET)


[600] (orange)
[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[700 s] R

208





Defect → Dy3+(ET)


[482, 572] (white)
[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3600 s]R

208



Ca3SnSi2O9
Defect


[426] (blue)
[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[700 s] R

209





Defect → Pr3+(ET)


[488] (green)
[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1200 s] R

209





Defect → Sm3+(ET)


[600] (orange)
[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1200 s] R

209





Defect → Dy3+(ET)


[572] (white)
[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1200 s] R

209



Ca2ZrSi4O12
Defect


[490] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4800 s] M

144





Defect → Sm3+(ET)


[616] (orange)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[843 s] M

144





Table 6 Aluminate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




CaAl2O4
Eu2+
Nd3+
[440] (blue)
[350] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] M

124



Sr4Al14O25
Eu2+
Dy3+
(490) (blue)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[20 h] R

210



SrAl2O4
Eu2+
Dy3+
[520] (green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[30 h] R

124



BaAl2O4
Eu2+
Dy3+
[500] (green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

16



Sr4Al14O25
Eu2+ → Cr3+(ET)
Dy3+
[495, 695] (green, NIR)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[10 h, 20 min] R

211



SrAl2O4
Eu2+ → Er3+(ET)
Dy3+
[525, 1530] (green, NIR)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[100 min] R

113



SrAl2O4
Eu2+ → Nd3+(ET)
Dy3+
[515, 882] (green, NIR)
[370] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[15 min] R

212



CaAl4O7
Ce3+


[325, 420] (Purple Blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] M

121 and 213



CaYAl3O7
Ce3+


[430] (blue)
[266, 355] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] R

121 and 122



Sr4Al14O25
Ce3+


[472, 511] (blue-green)
[γ-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉
[600 s] E

121 and 122



Y3Al5O12
Ce3+


[520] (green)
[460] (UV) 〈ICE〉



214



Y3Al5−xGaxO12 (x = 2.5–3.5)
Ce3+


[505] (green)
[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉
[200–1000 min] R

215



Gd3Al2Ga3O12
Ce3+
Cr3+
[540] (yellow)
[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉
[120 min] R

216 and 217



SrAl2O4
Ce3+ → Mn2+(ET)


[375, 515] (green)
[Artificial light] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

196 and 218



CaAl2O4
Ce3+ → Tb3+(ET)


[543] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] R

219



Y3Al2Ga3O12
Ce3+ → Cr3+(ET)


[505, 700] (green, NIR)
[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉



41 and 81



Y3Al2Ga3O12
Ce3+ → Nd3+(ET)


[808, 1064, 1335] (NIR)
[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉
[10 h] R

81



CaAl2O4
Tb3+


[493, 543, 590, 621] (green)
[Mercury lamp]
[1 h] M

73



Y3Al5O12
Pr3+


[490, 610] (yellow)
[240,290] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[600 s] R

220



CaAl2O4
Dy3+


[477, 491, 577, 668] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[30 min] M

221



Y3Al5O12
Mn2+


[580] (yellow)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[400 s] R

222



MAlO3 (M = La, Gd)
Mn4+
Ge4+
(600–800) (NIR)
(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[20 h] R

151





Table 7 Gallate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




Y3Sc2Ga3O12
Ce3+


[500] (Green)
[400] (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[100 min] R

32 and 215



La3Ga5GeO14
Cr3+


(700–1300) (NIR)
[240–480] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[8 h] R

31, 77, 79 and 223



Zn3Ga2Ge2O10
Cr3+


(650–1000) (NIR)
(300–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[360 h] R

12 and 80



LiGa5O8
Cr3+


(600–850) (NIR)
[250–350] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 h] R

139, 224 and 225



SrGa12O19
Cr3+


(650–950) (NIR)
[254] (UV)
[2 h] R

22



MgGa2O4
Cr3+


(650–770) (NIR)
[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉
[1200 s] R

53 and 95



Zn3Ga2SnO8
Cr3+


(650–1000) (NIR)
(300–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[300 h] R

62



ZnGa2O4
Cr3+


(600–800) (NIR)
(250–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

17, 20, 49, 147 and 226–228



Ca3Ga2Ge3O12
Cr3+
Yb3+, Tm3+
(650–850) (NIR)
(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[7000 s] R

18 and 229



ZnGa2O4
Mn2+


[504] (green)
[352.6] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[15 min] R

74



Zn3Ga2Ge2O10
Mn2+


[520] (green)
[290] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[8 h] R

230



ZnGa2O4
Bi3+


[410, 550] (yellow)
[360] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[40 min] R

231





Table 8 Phosphate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




Sr2P2O7
Eu2+
Y3+
[420] (Purple Blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[8 h] E

232



Ca2P2O7
Eu2+
Y3+
[415] (Purple Blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[6 h] E

233



SrMg2(PO4)2
Eu2+
Tb3+
[411] (Purple Blue)
[254, 365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] R

234



Ca3Mg3(PO4)4
Eu2+


[433] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] R

235



Ca9Bi(PO4)7
Eu2+
Dy3+
[475] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] E

236



Zn2P2O7
Tm3+


[365, 452, 478] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] M

68 and 150



YPO4
Pr3+
Nd3+, Er3+, Ho3+, Dy3+
[612] (orange)
[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉
[1800 s] R

27



SrMg2(PO4)2
Eu3+
Zr4+
[500, 588] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1.5 h] R

237



Zn3(PO4)2
Mn2+
Ga3+
[507, 620] (green, red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

238



Ca3(PO4)2
Mn2+
Dy3+
[660] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] R

52



Ca9.5Mn(PO4)7
Mn2+


[645] (red)
(UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] R

148





Table 9 Germanate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




CaZnGe2O6
Tb3+


[488, 552, 583] (green)
[236] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4 h] R

122



CaZnGe2O6
Dy3+


(white)
[240] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

239



Na2CaSn2Ge3O12
Sm3+


[566, 605, 664] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4.8 h] E

78



CdGeO3
Pr3+


(470–510, 580–620) (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] R

240



Li2ZnGeO4
Mn2+


[530] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[8 h] R

63



Zn2GeO4
Mn2+


[528] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

241



Cd2Ge7O16
Mn2+


[585] (yellow)
[258] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] R

242



MgGeO3
Mn2+
Bi3+
[680] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[100 min] R

243



CaZnGe2O6
Mn2+


[648] (red)
[250] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

244



Zn2GeO4
Bi3+


[455] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[500 s] R

245





Table 10 Stannate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




Ca2SnO4
Sm3+


[566, 609, 633] (red)
[252] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

246



Sr2SnO4
Sm3+
Dy3+
[582, 624, 672] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

34



Sr3Sn2O7
Sm3+


[580, 621, 665, 735] (red)
[267] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

247



Ca2SnO4
Tm3+


[468] (blue-green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] E

80



CaSnO3
Tb3+


[491, 545, 588, 622] (green)
[264] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[4 h] E

248



Ca2SnO4
Tb3+


[483, 545] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

249



Ca2SnO4
Pr3+


[496, 605, 625, 658] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[20 min] E

250



CaSnO3
Pr3+


[488, 541, 620, 653] (white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] M

251



Ca2SnO4
Eu3+


[617, 633] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[100 min] R

252



Sr2SnO4
Nd3+


(850–1400) (NIR)
(250–450) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] R

253



Mg2SnO4
Ti4+


[458] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

254 and 255



Mg2SnO4
Mn2+


[500] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] M

256



Zn2SnO4
Cr3+


(650–1200) (NIR)
(270–420) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[35 h] R

13



SrSnO3
Bi2+


(700–850) (NIR)
(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[30 min] R

257



Ca2SnO4
Defect
Gd3+
[410, 466] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

258



Mg2SnO4
Defect


[470–550] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[5 h] E

204





Table 11 Niobate/titanate/zirconate/wolframate/borate-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




SrZrO3
Pr3+


[350, 499, 612] (green)
[238] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[600 s] R

259



CaTiO3
Pr3+


[612] (orange)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] M

260



Ca2Zn4Ti16O38
Pr3+


[614] (orange)
[380, 473] (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉



35



NaNbO3
Pr3+


[620] (red)
[350] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[40 s] R

261



CaWO4
Tb3+


[550] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[400 s] R

262 and 263



LiSr4(BO3)3
Eu2+


[630] (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[20 min] E

264 and 265



CaWO4
Eu2+


[618] (orange)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[40 min] E

214



La2Ti2O7
Sm3+, Ti4+


[460, 570, 605, 660] (Blue-red-white)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[540 s] M

266



CaWO4
Bi3+


[440] (violet)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] R

267 and 268



BaZrO3
Defect
Mg2+
(350–500) (blue)
[275] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2000 s] M

269



ZnTa2O6
Pr3+


(590–670) (red)
(beta-ray) (HR) 〈HR〉
[1200 s] R

270





Table 12 Sulfide-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




SrS
Eu2+
Pr3+
[611] (orange)
[440] (VIS) 〈ICE〉
[1000 min] R

83 and 121



CaS
Eu2+
Tm3+
[650] (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

103



Ca2SiS4
Eu2+
Nd3+
[660] (red)
[320] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[30 min] R

121



Y2O2S
Eu3+
Mg2+, Ti4+
[590, 614, 627, 710] (orange-red)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] R

114 and 271



Gd2O2S
Eu3+


[627] (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[600 s] R

272



Y2O2S
Sm3+
Mg2+, Ti4+
[570, 606, 659] (orange)
[269] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2.5 h] M

114



La2O2S
Sm3+


[605, 665] (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[120 s] R

273



Y2O2S
Dy3+
Mg2+, Si4+
[486, 557] (white)
[357] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[36 min] M

274



Y2O2S
Tm3+
Mg2+, Ti4+
[495, 545, 588] (yellow)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] E

275



SrS
Yb2+


(550–700) (orange)
[465] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[450 s] R

82 and 276



ZnS
Cu+
Co2+
[525] (green)
[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉 [360] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] R

121



Gd2O2S
Ti3+


[590] (yellow)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] M

277



Y2O2S
Ti3+
Mg2+, Gd3+, Lu3+
(540–594) (yellow)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[5 h] R

278





Table 13 Nitride-based long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




SrSi2O2N2
Eu2+


[539] (green)
(250–300) (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2.5 h] M

279



BaSi2O2N2
Eu2+


[498] (green)
(250–500) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉
[50 min] E

280



BaAlSi5N7O2
Eu2+


(400–650) (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[40 min] M

281



Ca2Si5N8
Eu2+
Tm3+
(500–750) [620] (orange)
[420] (VIS) 〈ICE〉
[200 min] M

37, 164 and 282



SrCaSi5N8
Eu2+
Tm3+
[647] (red)
[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉
[30 min] M

283



AlN
Mn2+


(570–700) (red)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] M

284



C3N4
Defect


[553] (green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1.5 h] R

285



BCNO
Defect


[520] (green)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[2 h] R

152





Table 14 Other long phosphorescent phosphors




Host material
Activator
Co-dopant
Afterglow band/[peak] (nm)
Excitation band/[peak] (nm)
Afterglow duration (E, M, R)
Ref.




Sr5(PO4)3Cl
Eu2+


[467] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1040 s] M

286



Ba5(PO4)3Cl
Eu2+
Gd3+
[435] (blue)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1000 s] M

287



Ca8Mg(SiO4)4Cl2
Eu2+


[505] (green)
[320] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] E

288



Ca2BO3Cl
Eu2+
Dy3+
[580] (yellow)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[48 h] M

25



Sr3Al2O5Cl2
Eu2+
Tm3+
[620] (orange)
[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[220 min] M

26



Sr5(BO3)3Cl
Eu2+


[610] (orange)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[15 min] R

289



KY3F10
Tb3+


[542] (green)
(X-ray/Cathode-ray) (HR) 〈HR〉
[108 s] E

290



Sr3Al2O5Cl2
Tb3+


[544] (green)
[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[1 h] M

291



Sr3Al2O5Cl2
Ce3+


[435] (blue)
[352] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] M

292



Sr3Al2O5Cl2
Ce3+ → Eu2+(ET)


[435, 620] (orange)
[352] (UV) 〈ICE〉
[3 h] M

287





5.1 Activators
In LPPs, emitters are centers capable of emitting radiation after being excited, which is responsible for the emission wavebands. A wide variety of activation ions are used as luminescent centers, but when it comes to persistent luminescence, the number of known activators is relatively low. Only some rare earth ions (Ce3+, Pr3+, Sm3+, Eu2+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+, Tm3+, Yb2+, Yb3+, etc.), transition metal ions (Cr3+, Mn2+, Mn4+, Ti4+etc.) and main group element (Bi3+etc.), as well as parts of crystal defects, have been reported to exhibit their characteristic phosphorescence.

5.1.1 Rare earth ions. 
5.1.1.1 Eu2+ and Ce3+. 
Eu2+ ion is the most famous isolated phosphorescent center. Depending on the crystal field effect (i.e., the predominantly electrostatic effect of neighboring ions on Eu2+), the emission color of the Eu2+ ion in the solid state differs. The main blue LPPs activated by Eu2+ include CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+,124 Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+,Dy3+,210 Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+,181 and Sr3MgSi2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+.133 Other Ba2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Tm3+,185 Ca2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+,187 SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,124 LPPs are famous for their strong green phosphorescence. The strong crystal field is required to lower the lowest emitting level of the 4f65d1 electron configuration and to produce yellow, orange, to red emissions. Among these potential candidates, Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+,25 Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Lu3+,191,192 Ca2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+,193 Sr3Al2O5Cl2:Eu2+,Tm3+,26 CaS:Eu2+,103 and Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+,86,234,235 seem to be the most promising ones. The LPP of most Eu2+-doped oxides could only be activated by ultraviolet light, while under the irradiation of ultraviolet-visible light Eu2+-doped sulfides and nitrides exhibit the red LPP. Obviously, the research of Eu2+-activated LPPs mainly concentrates on the Eu2+-doped aluminates and silicates, and in all the LPPs, Eu2+-doped LPPs are also the greatest.
Ce3+ is the second important afterglow activator of the lanthanide series that has 4f1 configuration and is, therefore, capable of producing a broad emission band, owing to the strong crystal field dependence of its 5d–4f transition energy.14 The Ce3+-doped Lu2SiO5,198 Ca2Al2SiO7,199 SrAl2O4,196,218 CaAl2O4,196,218 CaAl4O7,121,122 Sr4Al14O25,121,122 Sr3Al2O5Cl2,292etc. all have blue-green LPP with long persistent times >3 h under the excitation of UV light. The characteristics of typical Ce3+-activated LPPs are as follows: (1) the host mainly concentrates on aluminate; (2) the afterglow emission band is located in the blue light region. The green-yellow LPP are shown in Ce3+-doped Y3Sc2Ga3O12 (blueish green),32,215 Lu3Al2Ga3O12 (blueish green),157 Y3Al2Ga3O12 (green),41,81 and Gd3Al2Ga3O12 (yellow)216,217 garnet transparent ceramics. Most notably, the LPP of these materials could be activated under the excitation of 460 nm blue light along with UV light.
5.1.1.2 Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+, Tb3+ and Dy3+. 
The research about Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+, Tb3+ and Dy3+-activated LPPs is not so abundant compared to that for Eu2+ and Ce3+-doped LPPs. Eu3+-doped LPPs are studied as efficient red emitting phosphors owing to the abundant transitions from the excited 5D0 level to the 7FJ (J = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) levels of 4f6 configuration in the orange-red light area. Most research about Eu3+-doped LPPs focuses on Eu3+-doped oxysulfides, such as, Gd2O2S:Eu3+ (Gd2O2S:Eu3+,Si4+,Ti4+,293 Gd2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+272) and Y2O2S:Eu3+ (Y2O2S:Eu3+,M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), Ti4+, Y2O2S:Eu3+,Zn2+,Ti4+)114,271 phosphors. In Y2O2S/Gd2O2S host, Eu3+ replaces the site of Y3+/Gd3+ as the emission center, while Mg2+ and Ti4+ also replace the site of Y3+/Gd3+ to form traps that store energy and gradually transfer it to Eu3+. In addition, many Eu3+-doped oxides are also reported, such as SrMg2(PO4)2:Eu3+,Zr4+,294 Lu2O3:Eu3+,173 MO:Eu3+ (M = Ca, Sr, Ba)172 and Ba5Gd8Zn4O21:Eu3+.295,296
Among the rare earth ions, Sm3+ is famous for generating an intense reddish orange emitting light, which is ascribed to the typical transitions between the ground state and the excited state electron configuration of Sm3+. In fact, as an important red emitting center, the LPP of Sm3+ has been found in various material systems from oxides (CaO:Sm3+,297 La2Zr2O7:Sm3+,Ti4+,266 Sr2ZnSi2O7:Sm3+,205) to oxysulfide (La2O2S:Sm3+),273 then to fluoride (KY3F10:Sm3+).290 The systematic investigations of the afterglow properties of Sm3+ focus on Sm3+-doped stannate (Ca2SnO4:Sm3+,246 Sr2SnO4:Sm3+,34 and CaSnSiO5:Sm3+,208etc.). After ultraviolet irradiation for 5 min, Sr3Sn2O7:Sm3+ phosphor emitted an intense reddish-orange afterglow from 4G5/2 to 6HJ (J = 5/2, 7/2, 9/2) transitions, and its afterglow could be seen with the naked eye in the dark clearly for more than 1 h.247 A 4.8 h persistent duration of Sm3+ transition from the ground state 4G5/2 level to its lower multiplets was presented in Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Sm3+ red LPPs after being irradiated by 254 nm UV light.78
The Pr3+ ion is another ion for generating red light because it shows an emission with chromaticity coordinates (CIE 1931) x = 0.68, y = 0.31 owing to Pr3+ 1D2 → 3H4, 3P0 → 3H6 and 3P0 → 3F2 transitions. The red afterglow of Pr3+ ions was initially found in Pr3+-doped perovskite-type oxides with a chemical formula ABO3 (CaTiO3,260 NaNbO3,261 and SrZrO3259etc.). Afterwards, other Pr3+ activated LPPs were also reported to emit the red LPP, such as CdGeO3:Pr3+,240 ZnTa2O6:Pr3+,270 Y3Al5O12:Pr3+,220 La2Ti2O7:Pr3+,266 Ca2Zn4Ti16O38:Pr3+,35 CaSnSiO5:Pr3+,208 Ca2SnO4:Pr3+,250 and YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy).27 Tb3+ doped LPPs always present an efficient green LPP, owing to the 4f inter-transition 5D4 to 7FJ (J = 6, 5, 4, 3) of Tb3+. The green LPP resulted from a radiative relaxation of the excited Tb3+ ion and the only transitions from 5D4 to 7FJ states. The cross-relaxation between two adjacent Tb3+ ions weakens 5D3 → 7FJ transitions and enhances the 5D4 → 7FJ transitions, leading to a long green afterglow of the phosphors.30 The reported green Tb3+-doped LPPs refer to Lu2O3:Tb3+,175 CdSiO3:Tb3+,23 CaSnSiO5:Tb3+,208 Ca2SnO4:Tb3+,248 CaZnGe2O6:Tb3+,122 Y2O2S:Tb3+,Sr2+,Zr4+,298 Sr3Al2O5Cl2:Tb3+,291etc.
Owing to the appropriate transitions 4F9/2 → 6H15/2 and 4F9/2 → 6H15/2 of Dy3+, Dy3+-doped luminescent materials are usually selected as the white-light candidate. Generally speaking, white long lasting phosphors can be obtained by combination of the currently available blue, green and red phosphors. However, it is difficult to fabricate such a phosphorescent phosphor that retains the persistent white color all the time. The reason is that different phosphors seldom have very similar decay times. Dy3+ offers an opportunity to achieve a white-light afterglow emission. Two main groups of emission lines of Dy3+ are in the wavelength ranges of 470–500 nm (blue) and 570–600 nm (yellow), corresponding to the 4F9/2 → 6H15/2 and 4F9/2 → 6H15/2 transitions, respectively. Now, Ca3SnSi2O9:Dy3+,209 Sr2Al2SiO7:Dy3+,184 CdSiO3:Dy3+,23 CaAl2O4:Dy3+,221 CaMgSi2O6:Dy3+,200,202 CaSnSiO5:Dy3+,208 Sr2SiO4:Dy3+,57,190 Y2O2S:Dy3+,Mg2+,Si4+,274etc. have shown their white afterglow by singly doping Dy3+ ions.
5.1.1.3 Tm3+, Yb2+ and Yb3+. 
There are seldom reports on LPPs employing Tm3+, Yb2+, and Yb3+ as the phosphorescent center owing to the possible difficulty of finding a suitable host for Tm3+, Yb2+, and Yb3+ to yield the phosphorescence. Su et al. investigated the blue LPP in Tm3+-doped Zn2P2O7 LPPs.68,150 The blue afterglow emission was related to the characteristic transitions of Tm3+ 1D2 → 3H6, 1D2 → 3H4 and 1G4 → 3H6. After the UV light excitation source was switched off, bright blue LPP was observed, which could last for more than 1 h (0.32 mcd m−2). The green LPP was observed in Sr4Al14O25:Yb2+,Dy3+,82 and SrAlxO(1+1.5x):Yb2+ (x = 3, 4, 5)56 phosphors, while the red LPP was presented in SrS:Yb2+.276 The afterglow emission should be assigned to the Yb2+ 4f135d1 → 4f14 transition. Recently, Caratto et al. developed a series of phosphorescent Yb3+-doped hexagonal II-type Gd oxycarbonate phosphors, Gd2−xYbxO2CO3, with a persistent duration of 144 h.299 Such phosphors demonstrated a high afterglow intensity in the NIR region, which was independent of the temperature and made this material particularly attractive as an optical bio-label for bio-imaging.
5.1.1.4 Brief discussions. 
Besides the above summary, it is necessary to find the similarities in emission centers that have the ability to activate afterglow. As we know, rare earth ions have atomic numbers that range from 57 to 71. Lanthanide elements adopt either the [Xe]4fn6s2 or [Xe]4fn−15d16s2 configuration depending on the relative energy level of these two electronic configurations. They tend to lose three electrons and exhibit a +3 valence state. According to Hund's rule, electron shells are stable when empty, full or half-full. For example, the configurations 4f0 (La3+), 4f7 (Gd3+), and 4f14 (Lu3+) are stable. Ce3+, Pr3+, and Tb3+ have one or two more electrons than required for stable electronic configurations so they can be further oxidized to a +4 state. In contrast, Sm3+, Eu3+, and Yb3+ have one or two fewer electrons than required for a stable electronic configuration and they, therefore, tend to receive one or two electrons and undergo a reduction to a +2 state. Standard reduction potentials, ER4+/R3+ and ER3+/R2+, represent the driving force stability of the reduction state. The more positive the value of Ered, the greater the driving force for reduction. The standard reduction potentials of rare earths are shown in Table 15.
Table 15 Standard reduction potentials Ered of rare earths




Electro-pair

E (V)
Electro-pair

E (V)




Ce4+/Ce3+
+1.74
Eu3+/Eu2+
−0.35


Tb4+/Tb3+
+3.1 ± 0.2
Yb3+/Yb2+
−1.15


Pr4+/Pr3+
+3.2 ± 0.2
Sm3+/Sm2+
−1.55


Nd4+/Nd3+
+5.0 ± 0.4
Tm3+/Tm2+
−2.3 ± 0.2


Dy4+/Dy3+
+5.2 ± 0.4









Fig. 16 visualizes the trend. The transverse axis is the atomic number and the length of the short lines along the vertical axis represents the trend of valence state variation. Coincidentally, the well-known Ce, Eu, Pr, Sm, Tb, Dy, Yb and Tm all have a strong tendency for valence state variation. Up to now, there have been few reports about LLPs with Er, Nd, Pm, Ho, La, Lu and Gd as the isolated phosphorescent center.
 Fig. 16  Valence states of lanthanide elements. 


5.1.2 Transition metal ions. 
5.1.2.1 Mn2+ and Mn4+. 
Mn2+ has a 3d5 electron configuration with a broad emission band varying from blue-green (490 nm) to far red (750 nm). The emission from the Mn2+ transition is ascribed to the parity-forbidden 3d–3d intra-atomic transition from the lowest excited level 4T1 (4G) to the ground state 6A1 (6S). Tetrahedral coordinated Mn2+ ion gives a green emission, while octahedral coordinated Mn2+ ion exhibits an orange-to-red emission.1,285 Therefore, the emission color strongly depends on the coordination number (CN) of Mn2+ in hosts. A distinct sample was presented in the afterglow spectra of β-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+ and γ-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+.238 β-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+ phosphor was a good, red, long lasting phosphor, while γ-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+ phosphor presented green and red long lasting phosphorescence. The reason was that two kinds of coordination number (CN = 4 and 6) were observed in γ-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+ while only one coordination number (CN = 6) was presented in β-Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+ phosphor. In addition, Zn2GeO4:Mn2+ showed a green afterglow,241 while CdSiO3:Mn2+,206 Li2ZnGeO4:Mn2+,63 CaZnGe2O6:Mn2+,244 Ca3(PO4)2:Mn2+,52 Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+,Mn2+,85 CaMgSi2O6:Mn2+,196,197 MgGeO3:Mn2+,243etc. presented an orange-red LPP. Apart from Mn2+-doped oxides, Mn2+-activated phosphorescence is also observed in Mn2+-doped glasses and glass ceramics as well as nitrides (AlN:Mn2+).284
Mn4+ is another highly desirable NIR doping candidate because its 3d3 electron configuration allows a stabilized NIR emission from 600 to 800 nm in different hosts, which also strongly depends on the crystal-field environment of the host lattices. Our group fabricated a series of novel Mn4+-doped MAlO3 (M = La, Gd) LPPs with the emission maximum around 730 nm and long persistent duration >20 h (Fig. 17d).151
 Fig. 17  (a) Normalized excitation and emission spectra of the Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:0.5%Cr3+ phosphor at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (b) Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of the SrSnO3:5%Bi2+ phosphor at room temperature. (c) Normalized VIS-NIR long-persistence phosphorescence spectra of Zn2SnO4:0.2%Cr3+. (d) Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of the LaAl0.999O2.9985:0.1%Mn4+ phosphor. 
5.1.2.2 Cr3+. 
Cr3+ ion is an ideal NIR emitter in solid since its 3d3 electron configuration allows a narrow-band emission (700 nm) owing to the spin-forbidden 2E → 4A2 transition, and a broadband emission (650–1000 nm) ascribed to the spin-allowed 4T2 → 4A2 transition (Fig. 17a). In 2011, Bessiere et al. first reported the LPP peaking at 695 nm in ZnGa2O4:Cr3+ crystals.228 In 2012, Pan et al. broke new ground in the field by using Zn3Ga2Ge2O10 as the host, thereby achieving a super-long NIR afterglow emission time of 360 h.12 Our group and the Allix research group independently carried out the work of improving the afterglow properties by partially substituting Zn and Sn for Ga to form a Zn–Ga–Sn–O solid solution. We demonstrated that Zn3Ga2SnO8:0.5Cr3+ powder with bright and long persistent phosphorescence over 300 h in the NIR region permitted an enabling long-term, reproducible, real-time and reliable structural imaging of deep tissues.62
Interestingly, all of the known Cr3+-activated LPPs are gallate compounds. In addition to La3Ga5GeO14:Cr3+,31,77,79,223 and LiGa5O8:Cr3+59 phosphors, the afterglow properties of many other Cr3+-activated gallate phosphors, such as MgGa2O4:Cr3+,53,95 Ca3Ga2Ge3O12:Cr3+18,229 and SrGa12O19:Cr3+,22 were also investigated because of the excellent ability of Cr3+ ions to substitute for Ga3+ ions in distorted octahedral coordination. The predominance of Cr3+-activated gallates might suggest that only gallates can be used as the hosts in Cr3+-doped NIR LPPs, but recently our group presented a series of efficient NIR Cr3+-doped non-gallate LPPs (Zn2SnO4:Cr and Zn(2−x)Al2xSn(1−x)O4:Cr) and highlighted their special optical characteristics of broad emission band (650–1200 nm, peaking at 800 nm) and long afterglow time >35 h (Fig. 17c).13


5.1.3 Main group elements. 
Several kinds of Bi3+-activated crystals have been reported for their potential applications in white light emitting diodes. Though luminescent emission bands cover various wavelength regions from blue to red, also depending on the coordination states of the active centers, the reported Bi3+-activated LPPs, including CaWO4:Bi3+,267,268 ZnGa2O4:Bi3+,231 Zn2GeO4:Bi3+,245 and CdSiO3:Bi3+,122,207 all offered an ultraviolet-blue afterglow emission. In addition to Bi3+, the luminescent behaviors of Bi2+ are also easily influenced by the nearby chemical environment, thus generating visible-NIR luminescent emission. Recently, our group synthesized a new long phosphorescent phosphor SrSnO3:Bi2+. The phosphor showed deep red-NIR persistent luminescence with a broad emission band from 700 to 900 nm peaking at 808 nm, as well as a persistence time of >30 min (Fig. 17b).257

5.2 Hosts
For the activation of long persistent phosphorescence, the host serves as the trap carrier. Different hosts have various store abilities for electrons owing to the different trap contents. There are two avenues to achieving this goal of introducing traps into the host: adding intrinsic thermal defects or extrinsic defects.

Table 16 lists the volatilization temperatures and boiling points of metals and their corresponding oxides. The intrinsic defects refer to the thermal defects, including cation vacancies, anion vacancies and interstitial ions, which are easily generated during the high-temperature treatment. Therefore, volatilization is a considerable factor. It is clear that traps can be formed in the oxides with lower melting points and high volatility, such as ZnO, WO3, CaO, SrO, P2O5, and GeO2. In fact, another situation also needs to be considered. Traps are also produced in SnO2, Al2O3, Ga2O3, etc. because the corresponding metal ion has a lower volatilization temperature compared to the oxides, prompting the possible faster volatilization of the metal ion in the oxides. The reported LPPs also mainly focused on these hosts (silicate, aluminate, phosphate, germinate, gallate, stannate, etc.).
Table 16 Volatilization temperatures and boiling points of metals and their corresponding oxides




Oxide
Metal


Materials
Temperature (°C)
Boiling point (°C)
Volatility
Materials
Temperature (°C)
Boiling point (°C)
Volatility




CaO
1297
2580
Middle
Ca
459
1484
Middle


SrO
1517
>3000
Middle
Sr
394
1384
Middle


Lu2O3


2510
Low
Lu


3395
Low


SnO2


1800
High
Sn
997
2602
Middle


ZrO2
2077
4300
Low
Zr


4377
Low


Ga2O3


1900
Middle
Ga
907
2072
Middle


SiO2


2230


Si
1337
2287




Al2O3
1905
2980
Middle
Al
972
2056
Middle


P2O5


360
High
P
129
280
High


GeO2


1200
High
Ge
1137
2833
Middle


TiO2
1780
2972
Middle
Ti
1442
3287
Middle


WO3
1079
1837
High
W
2757
5555
Low


ZnO
871
1949
High
Zn
247
906
High




In addition to synthesis conditions, the generation of these defects is also closely correlated with the crystal structure and coordination geometry of activators in hosts. ZnGa2O4 (ZGO) was an AB2O4 compound with spinel structure and Zn2+ and Ga3+ ions occupying tetrahedral A and octahedral B sites, respectively (Fig. 18A). Although it was most widely considered as a normal spinel, it exhibited a slight inversion character, wherein a few percent of Zn2+ and Ga3+ occupied B and A sites, respectively. Such defects in the host matrix were called antisite defects and were just a Zn ion at a Ga site and a Ga ion at a Zn site in an ideal normal spinel structure type. ZGO exhibited about 3% inversion, which meant that ∼3% of Zn2+ occupied Ga sites, and correlatively the same amount of Ga3+ occupied Zn sites. They further pointed out that a Ga ion in a Zn site is a positively charged defect  and a Zn in a Ga site is a negatively charged defect  in Kröger–Vink notation. Trapping of a defect pair (electron–hole) could be related to a permutation of Ga and Zn (antisite defects) close to Cr3+ ions (Fig. 18B).20,49
 Fig. 18  (A) Cubic spinel structure of ZGO (reproduced with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (B) Proposed mechanism for the persistent luminescence induced by LED excitation (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (C) Octahedral and tetrahedral geometry of Zn2SnO4. 
Our group synthesized a series of Zn2SnO4:Cr phosphors. Zn2SnO4 was employed as the host to take advantage of its characteristic inverse spinel crystal structure, easy substitution into Zn2+ and Sn4+ sites by Cr3+ in distorted octahedral coordination and non-equivalent substitution (Fig. 18c). Compared with a normal spinel, the inverse spinel structure featured an alternative cation arrangement. In Zn2SnO4, all of the Sn octahedron (SnVI) cations and half of the Zn octahedron (ZnVI) cations occupied octahedral sites, whereas the other half of the Zn tetrahedron (ZnIV) cations occupied tetrahedral sites. Based on this arrangement, in addition to the intrinsic Zn vacancies and Zn interstitials, some antisite defects (such as [SnVI] and [ZnVI] cations, which can freely exchange places in octahedral sites) and non-equivalent substitutional defects (SnCr or ZnCr) were expected to be formed.13
The third factor influencing the capacity of traps in hosts is the doping ions used to provide the extrinsic defects. Modern investigations into LPPs revealed that doping ions (here, the doping ions refer to co-dopants) could influence the trap distribution, such as, increasing traps' concentration or deepening the depth of traps. One of the most remarkable examples is SrAl2O4:Eu and SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy phosphors. The weak afterglow intensity and short persistent time is exhibited in Eu-singly doped SrAl2O4 phosphor, while co-doping with Dy improves the afterglow properties. The generation of intentionally introduced defects, which come from the co-dopant, is not in correlation with the treatment temperature, but is closely associated with the properties of the dopant, i.e. atomic radius, valence state, doing content etc. In this mechanism, charge compensation is a key part that needs to be considered for producing traps.
In fact, the intrinsic thermal defects and extrinsic defects often work together to improve the trap distribution in most LPPs. Holsa et al. studied the optical properties of ZrO2:Ti3+ and ZrO2:Ti3+,Lu3+ LPPs.157 In these phosphors, Ti3+ was the luminescence center, while the introduction of Lu3+ obviously extended the afterglow time. Lu3+ ion replaced Zr4+ in ZrO2:Ti3+,Lu3+ and an oxygen vacancy (VO) was created as a result of charge compensation. These defects directly influenced the trap distribution of the ZrO2 host, acting as traps for electrons (VO) or holes (MZr) in the lattice. The intrinsic and extrinsic lattice defects are also found in Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,R3+ material.300 In this phosphor, the intrinsic defects included cation vacancies, VM (with double negative net charge), and oxygen vacancies, VO (double positive), as well as interstitial ions. Cation vacancies also appeared and existed owing to the charge compensation when the introduced R3+ replaces M2+ (RM). Similar trap distributions were also observed in non-doped and trivalent rare earths-doped CdSiO3 LPPs, including the intrinsic defects in non-doped hosts (e.g. cadmium and oxide vacancies created by the evaporation of CdO) and the charge compensation defects related to the presence of R3+ in the Cd2+ sites (creating interstitial oxide ions or Cd2+ vacancies).23
5.3 Emission bands

5.3.1 Visible long persistent phosphorescence. 
ZnS:Cu,Co was the pioneer green long phosphorescent phosphor. In 1996, Matsuzawa et al. reported a SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphor with bright green persistent phosphorescence.124 After this report, many remarkable green LPPs with a long afterglow time >10 h doped with Eu2+ as a phosphorescent center were further studied, including the silicates-(Ca2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+,187 Ba4(Si3O8)2:Eu2+,Dy3+,183) and aluminate-based (Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+,Dy3+,210) LPPs. In addition to Eu2+, Tb3+, Ce3+, and Mn2+ ions were also selected as common green phosphorescent activators. Blue LPP is also important for practical applications in emergency displays etc. The presently available commercial blue phosphor is CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+.124 In fact, Ce3+, Tm3+ and defects-activated LPPs as well as other Eu2+-doped LPPs with long persistent duration >6 h were also suitable as blue materials, such as, Sr2P2O7:Eu2+,Y3+,232 Sr3MgSi2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+,133 as well as CaAl4O7:Ce3+,121,213 and defect site-doped LPPs (Ca2ZrSi4O12,144 Li2ZnGeO4,63 BaZrO3:Mg269) (Table 17).
Table 17 Afterglow color and corresponding activators




Afterglow color
Activators
Afterglow color
Activators




Green afterglow
Eu2+, Tb3+, Ce3+, Mn2+
Blue afterglow
Eu2+, Ce3+, Tm3+, defects


Red afterglow
Eu3+, Eu2+, Yb2+, Sm3+, Pr3+, Mn2+,
White afterglow
Dy3+


NIR afterglow
Nd3+, Bi2+, Yb3+, Mn2+, Mn4+, Cr3+








At present, LPPs exhibiting high brightness of blue and green phosphorescence are commercially available. However, red LPPs are in great scarcity and none of them are good enough to be applied to practical applications, since the sensitivity of the human eye is lower for red light than for blue or green light. In recent years, many researchers have focused on improving the afterglow properties of red LPPs by employing Eu3+, Eu2+, Yb2+, Sm3+, Pr3+, Mn2+ as the activating ions. At this stage, most of the LPPs are based on Eu2+ doped sulfides and nitrides (Ca2SiS4:Eu2+,Nd3+,121 SrCaSi5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+,87,235,236) as well as Eu3+-activated oxysulfides (Gd2O2S:Eu3+,223 Y2O2S:Eu3+,272), Sm3+-activated oxysulfides and stannates (La2O2S:Sm3+,273 Sr2SnO4:Sm3+,34), Pr3+-activated stannates and perovskite-type compounds (CaTiO3:Pr3+,260 Ca2SnO4:Pr3+,250 NaNbO3:Pr3+,261 CdGeO3:Pr3+,240), Mn2+-activated LPPs (MgGeO3:Mn2+,243 Zn3(PO4)2:Mn2+/Ga3+,238 AlN:Mn2+,284 Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+,Mn2+85) and Yb2+-activated sulfides s (SrS:Yb2+276).
White-color (full-color) LPPs as persistent emitting light sources are important in many dark-environment applications. One possible strategy is by combining three individual blue, green, and red LPPs activated by different centers. For example, Y2O2S:Tb3+,Eu3+,Sr2+,Zr4+ phosphor offered a scheme of blue-green and orange light activated by Tb3+ and Eu3+ ions gaining the white afterglow, respectively.301 Alternatively, energy transfer is considered as another effective route to realize the white-afterglow emitting. Energy transfer from Eu2+ to Mn2+ provided the blue-green and orange afterglow from the Eu2+ and Mn2+ transitions, respectively, making CaAl2Si2O8:Eu2+,Mn2+,Dy3+ phosphor suitable for synthesizing a white phosphor.196,197 Another idea for integrating several afterglow emissions with similar decays in one single material seems more attractive. Dy3+ ion features its characteristic white photoluminescence, thus offering the possibility of white-afterglow emitting.


5.3.2 NIR long persistent phosphorescence. 
In the past few years, NIR afterglow activated by transition metals or rare earth ions has received much attention. The research was triggered by a recently proposed in vivo imaging application and it might show more significance in the future. Optical imaging is a promising method to visualize biological tissues because it is a radioactive material-free technique. NIR long persistent phosphors are used because of the high transmittance of these signals through biological tissues. Over the past few years, substantial strides have been made in the research and development of LPPs for NIR wavelengths, with the focus of the research being Nd3+,Bi2+,Yb3+,Mn2+,Mn4+ and Cr3+-activated NIR LPPs (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  (A) NIR images of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:0.5Cr discs taken at different afterglow times (5 min to 360 h) after irradiation by direct sunlight for 10 s, 1 min and 5 min without cutoff filters, and for 5 min (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (B) NIR images of Zn3Ga2GeO8:0.5Cr,GZG (left) and Zn3Ga2SnO8 SZG (right) powders after being pressed acquired at different time intervals (from 5 min to 300 h) after the irradiation using a xenon lamp for 30 min. (C) Long persistent luminescence imaging of samples LaAlO3:Mn4+,Ge4+ (right) and GdAlO3:Mn4+,Ge4+ (left). 
In 2007, Chermont et al. proposed a novel bio-imaging method using red-to-NIR persistent nanoparticles, Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+,Mn2+, and opened a new application area for NIR LPPs.85 In 2011, Bessiere reported the NIR persistent phosphorescence at 695 nm in Cr3+-doped ZnGa2O4 crystals.228 In 2012, Pan and Allix greatly improved the NIR persistent phosphorescence by partially substituting Zn2+ and Ge4+ for Ga3+ to form a Zn1+xGa2−2xGexO4 solid solution.12,20 This breakthrough firmly established gallates as the preferred material system for the fabrication of Cr3+-activated NIR LPPs and stimulated the research interest in developing new Cr3+-doped NIR LPPs. Meanwhile, other NIR LPPs with different activators were also proposed. Our group fabricated a series of Ge4+/Mn4+ co-doped MAlO3 (M = La, Gd) LPPs and Bi2+-doped SrSnO3 LPPs, proposing two new afterglow activators, Mn4+ and Bi2+.151 In addition, rare earth doped LPPs are also a good choice for NIR LPPs. Xu et al. recently found a Sr2SnO4:Nd3+ material, which exhibited NIR LPP ranging from 850 to 1400 nm,253 while Caratto et al. synthesized Yb3+-doped Gd-oxycarbonate LPPs with a NIR afterglow-emitting and long persistent duration of >144 h.299
As mentioned above, emission waveband is a critical issue to promote the development of bio-labels. Varying the activators has been proven to be an efficient strategy to realize the goal of long-wavelength emitting. Recently, our group proposed a new strategy, i.e. modulating the crystal field to tune the emission band. We developed a kind of Cr3+-doped non-gallate, Zn2SnO4:Cr3+.13 The Zn and Sn octahedrons surrounding the Cr3+ center presented a weaker crystal field strength. As we know, the electronic configuration of Cr3+ was affected strongly by the arrangement of surrounding ligands. The dominant emission peak of a Cr3+ center produced a shift arising from the altered crystal field strength by adding Al and forming a Zn(2−x)Al2xSn(1−x)O4:Cr3+ solid solution. Al3+ ions were incorporated into the crystal phase by replacing octahedral Zn2+ and Sn4+ in the disordered ZnO6 and SnO6 octahedron. By shortening the Cr3+–O2− distances, achieved by the incorporation of Al3+ (53 pm) with its smaller ionic radii compared with Zn2+ (74 pm) and Sn4+ (69 pm), the crystal field strength of Cr3+ increased.
In addition, the NIR LPP also could be obtained by transferring the persistent energy from one activator to another. Most reported persistent energy transfer was demonstrated in the energy transfer between rare earth ions. (a) Eu2+ → Nd3+. Strong afterglow of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,Nd3+ and CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ LPPs at 882 nm attributed to the Nd3+ 4f–4f transition was observed as a consequence of irradiation by ultraviolet light at 365 nm owing to the persistent energy transfer from excited Eu2+ ions to Nd3+ ions.212 (b) Ce3+ → Dy3+. Energy transfer from Ce3+ to Dy3+ strongly supported the white light emitting in Sr2Al2SiO7:Ce3+,Dy3+ phosphor.184 (c) Eu2+ → Er3+. A near infrared LPP at 1530 nm was activated via the persistent energy transfer process from Eu2+ ions to Er3+ ions in SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,Er3+ phosphor.113 (d) Other energy transfer between rare earths, such as Eu2+ → Sm3+,184 Ce3+ → Tb3+,219 Ce3+ → Dy3+,184 Ce3+ → Dy3+,81 was also investigated in the hosts of silicates and aluminates.
In addition to rare earth ions, transition metal ions involving Cr3+ (Y3Al5−xGaxO12 [x = 2.5, 3, 3.5]:Ce3+,Cr3+,Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+,Dy3+,Cr3+,SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,Cr3+,)41,81 and Mn2+ (Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6:Eu2+,Dy3+,Mn2+,85 and CaAl2O4:Ce3+,Mn2+,196,218) were also commonly selected as activators and emitted the intrinsic phosphorescence via the PET R3+ → Cr3+/Mn2+. Meanwhile, the self-activated afterglow was also observed in some un-doped LPPs, such as, CdSiO3,23 CaSnSiO5,208 Ca3SnSi2O9,209 with the corresponding PET from defects to activators (Tb3+,Sm3+,Dy3+etc.)

5.4 Excitation bands and excitation modes
For the same activator, the photoluminescent excitation spectra may be different from the excitation spectra of LPP. The reason maybe involves the energy-level configuration of activators and band gap of hosts. The afterglow of LPPs with relatively broad band gap is easily excited by high energy rays (X-ray or cathode-ray), such as fluorides, while high energy rays and ultraviolet light have been widely used as the excitation source to activate the afterglow of oxides-based LPPs. By analogy, visible light could effectively activate the afterglow of sulfide (CaS:Eu2+) or nitride (Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+)-based LPPs with narrow band gaps, but less effectively activated the afterglow of oxides-based LPPs.302
Experimental data confirmed that KY3F10:Tb3+,290 Lu2O3:Pr,169,174 Sr4Al14O25:Ce3+,121,122 YPO4:Pr3+,27 MgGa2O4:Cr3+,53,95etc. could be excited by X-ray or beta rays. In fact, most oxides-based LPPs could be more effectively activated by UV light (250–400 nm). Only a few oxide-based LPPs could be activated by visible light, mainly referring to Ce3+-doped (or Ce3+–Cr3+,Ce3+–Pr3+ co-doped) and Cr3+-doped oxides. Su et al. reported the LPP of Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ under the excitation of UV light at 254 nm.214 However, they did not find that the phosphorescence could also be excited by visible light. Tanabe et al. developed bright LPPs of Ce3+-doped Y3Al5−xGaxO12 (x = 2.5, 3, 3.5) ceramics with green luminescence (Ce3+:5d → 4f) via blue-light excitation.216,217 The persistent luminance value 5 min after ceasing blue-light excitation was many times better than that from compact SrAl2O4:Eu2+–Dy3+ powders. Afterwards, sunlight-activated Cr3+-doped zinc gallogermanate LPPs were reported, and NIR persistent phosphorescence can be effectively achieved under ultraviolet illumination (300–400 nm), but less effectively achieved under visible light (400–630 nm). It is notable that in the afterglow excitation spectra of Eu2+-doped LPPs, few Eu2+-doped oxides exhibit a visible excitation band, while with Eu2+-doped sulfides and nitrides we can easily observe the existing visible excitation band.12
Recently, Liu et al. proposed the concept of up-converted persistent luminescence (UCPL) by energy transfer (Fig. 20a–c).28 Guided by the UCPL concept, they fabricated the Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+,5%Yb3+,0.5%Er3+ material by incorporating an up-converting ion pair Yb3+–Er3+ into a Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+ near-infrared persistent phosphor. After being excited by a 980 nm laser, the phosphor emitted long-lasting (>24 h) near-infrared persistent emission peaking at 700 nm. In fact, the proposed strategy in this work involved not only a new long-wavelength excitation band (NIR region), but also a new excitation mode (incoherent excitation and coherent excitation). Coherent excitation has the advantage of large power density compared to a Xe lamp, thus offering the potential of improving the excitation efficiency of the afterglow. Earlier, our group first proposed a coherent excitation mode. Our research results demonstrated that NIR photo-stimulated luminescence and phosphorescence could be repeatedly obtained under the excitation of NIR incoherent (780 to 900 nm light of Xe lamp) and coherent light (980 and 808 nm laser) in Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ and Zn3Ga2GeO8:Cr3+ phosphors (Fig. 20d–f).15
 Fig. 20  (a) UCPL schematic diagram in the Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+,5%Yb3+,0.5%Er3+ system. (b) Up-converted luminescence emission spectrum (curve with yellow shadow) under a 980 nm laser excitation and photoluminescence excitation spectrum of Cr3+ (blue solid-line curve) by monitoring the 700 nm emission. (c) UCPL emission spectrum of Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+,5%Yb3+,0.5%Er3+ recorded at 5 s after the stoppage of a 980 nm laser excitation (reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2014, American Physical Society). (d) Luminescence image of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ taken at an interval of 24 hours after charging of the sample for illumination with an incoherent LED operating at a wavelength of 800 nm. (e) Photo-stimulated luminescence spectrum under excitation at 800 nm and (f) the corresponding photo-stimulated luminescence excitation spectrum monitored at 700 nm of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+. 
6. Applications
6.1 Displays and safety signs
The earliest application of LPPs was luminous Pearl, a peculiar phosphorescent material emitting green phosphorescence at night. Until now, many green LPPs have been used as night displays and safety signs. A prototype of ZnS-type phosphors, an important class of phosphors for television tubes, was first prepared in 1866 by Theodore Sidot, a young French chemist. But now the commercial materials applied in the field of emergency signs, luminous paints in highways, airports, buildings and ceramics, textile printing, textile fibers, dial plates of glowing watches, warning signs and escape routes are not sulfides, but Eu doped aluminates (SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+etc.) since they are safer, chemically stable and emit no radiation. It is notable that powder-form LPPs have more advantages in these applications than bulk-form LPPs, such as being mixed into the pigment or glaze coated onto a ceramic surface, even though the bulk-form LPPs have larger afterglow intensity and longer persistent duration than powder-form LPPs.3,21
Phosphorescent studies have been done in Turkey by Karasu and his co-workers.303 The studies included the production of phosphorescent pigments and their application in ceramic materials. Subsequently, phosphorescent ceramics and glasses were produced by adding a phosphorescent pigment in the producing process. Compared to the common materials, these products could glow in the dark after ceasing the excitation lights. These materials were free from radioactivity, nontoxic and harmless. A certain brightness of emergency lighting can guide people to evacuate in an orderly manner in an emergency and reduce confusion as well as being energy-saving. The application of phosphorescent ceramics and glasses in domestic houses and public buildings can not only decorate and beautify the houses and working environments, but can also bring more convenience to residents with its glow in the dark.
6.2 Optical storage, sensor and detector
A storage phosphor is exposed to high-energy radiation, such as X-ray or ultraviolet (UV) light. A part of the excitation energy will be stored in this phosphor by capturing charge carriers (electrons or holes) into traps. The stored energy can then be liberated by thermal, optical or mechanical force, resulting in stimulated emissions from the emitting centers in such phosphors. With the assistance of thermal disturbance, the captured electrons can be sequentially released from the traps, leading to long persistent phosphorescence, while a fast heating will empty the traps and exhaust the captured electrons, resulting in thermo-luminescence. In addition, photons and mechanical strains are also the important induction force for releasing the captured electrons. Thermo-, photo-, and mechano-stimulated storage phosphors exhibiting thermo-luminescence (TL), photo-stimulated luminescence (PSL) and mechanoluminescence (ML) phenomenon can act as excellent imaging plates, temperature sensors, stress sensors, and high energy-ray detectors for important information write-in and read-out.192,236,304,305
It is clear that the whole process requires the implementation of an external force twice. For the application of imaging plates, the first exposure to an X-ray beam or a UV light “writes” a latent image in the form of trapped electrons on the phosphor plate. The number of trapped electrons is proportional to the amount of radiation absorbed locally and the latent image is optically readable within a certain time frame after the exposure. The second illumination with a light of appropriate wavelength, typically with an intense light with low energy, “reads” the image in the form of higher energy visible PSL signal. Most of the trapped electrons are extracted during the read-out process and the residual electrons remaining on the phosphor plate can be erased through illumination with bright fluorescent light so that the plate can be used again. For example, Liu et al. reported the optical read-out phenomenon of PSL and photostimulated persistent phosphorescence (PSP) in the NIR region from a Cr3+-doped LiGa5O8 NIR phosphor. An Intense signal with an emission peaking at 716 nm could be repeatedly obtained in a period of more than 1000 h when a UV light (250–360 nm) pre-irradiated LiGa5O8:Cr3+ phosphor was repeatedly stimulated by a light between 380–1000 nm (Fig. 21).139 A similar mechanism is also used in temperature and stress sensors, high energy-ray detectors etc. Owing to the variation of the external field, the desired information can be extracted from one or several parameters. Therefore, these storage phosphors that exhibit the PSL, TL and ML phenomenon can be used as erasable and rewritable optical, electrical and magnetic memory, sensors and detectors.
 Fig. 21  Optical write-in and read-out spectra for photostimulated luminescence and phosphorescence in LiGa5O8:Cr3+. (a) Persistent luminescence decay curves monitored at 716 nm with (colored solid-line curves) and without (grey dash-line curves) photo stimulation. The write-in wavelengths are 320 nm, 340 nm and 360 nm. The read-out wavelength is 400 nm. (b) Persistent luminescence decay curves monitored at 716 nm with (colored solid-line curves) and without (grey dash-line curve) photo stimulation. The write-in wavelength is 300 nm. The read-out wavelengths vary between 380 nm and 660 nm. For the measurements in (a) and (b), the read-out process (i.e., stimulation) starts at 5 min after ceasing the write-in process (i.e., UV pre-irradiation). The vertical double arrowheads in (a) and (b) represent the PSP intensities. (c) PSP write-in spectrum (the ball curve in the left panel) and read-out spectrum (the triangle curve in the right panel) plotted according to the data from (a) and (b), respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group). 
6.3 Biomedical applications

6.3.1 
            In vivo imaging. 
There is increasing interest in the use of fluorescence in the biologically transparent window to drive photonic bio-label for tracing cancer cells.7,306 Advanced optical imaging has already become an indispensable tool in bio-science, bio-medicine and life-science over the last few decades owing to its distinct merits of high sensitivity, portability, non-invasiveness, and time effectiveness.2,76 To date, various advanced fluorescent tags, such as fluorescent dyes, metal nanoparticles, semiconductor quantum dots, upconversion nanoparticles and long phosphorescent phosphors, have been proposed and successfully applied to in vivo bio-imaging.307
Therein, LPPs are unique and have already proven their superiority over other labels since their emission lifetime is sufficiently long to permit late time-gated imaging.3 Especially for the phosphorescent phosphors in the biologically transparent window (650–1350 nm), they successfully avoid the challenging requirement for high-intensity illumination during the signal collection, which often leads to a decreased signal-to-noise ratio and increased photon-induced deterioration of analytes.309,310 However, optical imaging techniques employing LPPs as labels have stagnated since the existing LPPs only have visible afterglow-emitting. Generally speaking, living tissues contain strong UV-VIS absorbers, such as skin, fat, water, lipids oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin, which prove challenging for optical imaging. To overcome these barriers, intense research has focused on developing highly sensitive and efficient fluorescent labels that function in the first and second biologically transparent windows (NIR I, 650–950 nm, and NIR II, 1050–1350 nm). NIR light in the first transparency window can penetrate biological tissues more efficiently than visible light, yet the second region has even lower absorption and scattering, and therefore offers more efficient tissue penetration (Fig. 22D).43,308
 Fig. 22  (A) A suspension containing a proper amount of NPPs is excited with a 6 W UV lamp and is directly injected to an anesthetized mouse. The signal is then acquired with an intensified charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. (B) Image of the injections of NPPs. The acquisition was performed during the 2 min after injection. (C) Image of an intramuscular injection corresponding to a 90 s acquisition (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2009, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences). (D) Optical windows in biological tissues. Top: These plots of effective attenuation coefficient (on a log scale) versus wavelength show that absorption and scattering from oxygenated blood, deoxygenated blood, skin and fatty tissue are lowest in either the first (pink shaded area) or second (grey) near-infrared window. Bottom: Sensitivity curves for typical cameras based on silicon (Si), indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) or mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) sensors. Si and InGaAs cameras are sensitive within the first and second near-infrared windows, respectively, whereas HgCdTe is most sensitive at longer wavelengths (reproduced with permission from ref. 308, copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group). 
In 2009, le Masne de Chermont et al. first developed an alternative optical imaging technique by using persistent luminescent nanoparticles (NPPs) suitable for small animal imaging (Fig. 22A–C).85 These nanoparticles could be excited before injection and their in vivo distribution can be followed in real-time for more than 1 h without the need for any external illumination source. They also showed that these NPPs were easily amenable to chemical surface modification. This opened a whole area of potential applications for biological applications. Li et al. synthesized new promising long afterglow nanospheres with a narrow size distribution by using mesoporous silica nanospheres as morphology-controlling templates. The as-prepared afterglow nanospheres had a nominal composition of SiO2/SrMgSi2O6:1%Eu,2%Dy. After the surface was modified with amino groups, grafted by PEG–COOH and irradiated with 365 nm UV light for 10 min, the afterglow signal could be observed in real time for more than 1 h in a live mouse after peritoneal injection (Fig. 23a).42
 Fig. 23  (a) Optical imaging in vivo; 60 s acquisition at intervals of every 5 min over 1 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b and c) In vivo imaging with ZnGa2O4-based NPPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publications Group). (b) A schematic representation of in vivo imaging after in situ activation of NPPs. (c) The detection of NPPs after in vivo activation. 
Maldiney et al. introduced a new generation of optical nanolabels based on chromium doped zinc gallate whose persistent luminescence could be activated in vivo through living tissues using highly penetrating low energy NIR photons (Fig. 23b and c).11 They demonstrated that the signal from persistent luminescence remained largely detectable 2 h after the end of ultraviolet excitation and gently decayed until complete extinction. After 15 h, the animals were irradiated with an orange/red LED source. Mice were then immediately placed on their back under the photon-counting system for persistent luminescence acquisition. Such a simple illumination through living tissues with visible light was sufficient to activate the persistent luminescence of zinc gallate nanocrystals and retrieve an intense signal, even in deep tissues. Activation of the nanoparticles under the LED source was carried out to restore the persistent luminescence signal after longer periods (4 h and 6 h post injection). A major accumulation of stealth nanoparticles within the liver was observed 6 h after the injection.
Such distributed imaging with a wide field of view is not only utilized to realize body imaging, but can also be employed to extract information from local tissue, for instance, cell imaging, tissue imaging and targeted imaging. Our group demonstrated an efficient anti-Stokes fluorescent label with incoherent (Fig. 24d and e) or coherent (Fig. 24a–c) excitation and clear deep tissue imaging by employing pork as the vehicle. Actually this deep tissue imaging provided important information on penetration depth as the reference to set up a new bio-imaging model.15
 Fig. 24  (a–c) Long persistent phosphorescent and photo-stimulated luminescent imaging of pork tissue under the excitation of 980 nm LD. (d and e) Long persistent phosphorescent and photo-stimulated luminescent tissues imaging of pork tissue under the excitation of 800 nm LED. (f) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of FA-ZGSC nanoparticles. (g–l) In vivo NIR images of U87MG tumor-bearing mice. (white circles locate the tumor site): (g and h) and normal mice, (i and j) after intravenous injection of PEG-NPPs (g and i) and RGD-NPPs (h and j) (0.4 mg, 10 min irradiation with a 254 nm UV lamp before injection). (k) Representative ex vivo NIR optical images of isolated organs and tumor from a U87MG tumor-bearing mouse at 6 h post-intravenous injection of RGD-NPPs (0.4 mg): (1) heart, (2) lung, (3) liver, (4) spleen, (5) kidney, (6) stomach, (7) pancreas, (8) intestine, (9) bladder, (10) bone, (11) tumor. (l) Semi-quantification of RGD-NPPs in the isolated organs and tumor of mice; error bars represent one standard deviation of triplicate measurements from individual animals (reproduced with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society). 
Targetable bio-labels have become more and more important because the detection and tracing of tumor cells at an early stage represents a powerful weapon against cancer.54 A typical strategy to develop tumor-specific nanolabels has focused on the synthesis of targeting ligands conjugated with nanomaterials, which will efficiently bind the specific protein overexpressed on cancer cells.33 Folic acid (FA) and RGD have emerged as attractive specific ligands for targeted cancer imaging. For example, folate receptors (FRs) are highly selective tumor labels overexpressed in many human cancerous cells, such as endometrial, lung, mesothelioma, brain, ovarian and breast carcinomas cell. FRs are a kind of cysteine-rich cell-surface glycoprotein that binds FA with high affinity to mediate cellular uptake of FA.
Our group recently synthesized the FA-conjugated Zn1.1Ga1.8Sn0.1O4:Cr3+ (ZGSC) nanoparticles with NIR LPP for targeted optical imaging of cancer cells (Fig. 24f). These nanoparticles showed easy dispersibility, small size, good crystallinity, and remarkable long persistent luminescence over 10 h in the NIR region. The surface modification by coating the activated functional groups of NH2, PEG and FA ensured the functionalized targeted imaging. The functionalized nanoparticles exhibited highly selective tumor localization and cause an enabling long-term, real-time, reliable deep-tissues/cell/in vivo imaging with high resolution and signal to noise ratio.45 Yan et al. synthesized functional Pr3+/Cr3+ co-doped NIR nanoparticles with super long lasting afterglow (>360 h) for in vivo bio-imaging (Fig. 24g–i). To evaluate the targeting capability of RGD-conjugated functionalized phosphorescent nanoparticles, they performed targeted cell imaging and in vivo tumor imaging. The results indicated that the conjugated polypeptide with the function of navigation offered the opportunity to accurately trace cancer cells owing to the high affinity of RGD-conjugated functionalized phosphorescent nanoparticles for integrin αvβ3 on tumor vasculature.2


6.3.2 Bio-detection. 
LPP is not only chosen as an optical label to trace cancer cells, but also as a bio-probe to monitor and identify the variation of biotic habitat.311 Ascorbic acid (AA) is an essential micronutrient required for numerous physiological and biochemical functions in the human body and is a potent water-soluble antioxidant capable of readily scavenging a number of reactive species and effectively protecting other biomolecules from oxidative damage. Oxidative damage to lipids, DNA, and proteins is implicated in many chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and cataracts. In addition, a variety of epidemiologic studies and clinical trials show that AA is associated with a reduction in the incidence of chronic disease and mortality. A nanoprobe was successfully applied for imaging reactive species in vivo without external excitation. Tang et al. developed a novel nanoprobe for the determination and screening of ascorbic acid (AA) in living cells and in vivo by using CoOOH-modified persistent luminescence nanoparticles. Based on the specific reaction of CoOOH and AA, which could detect and image AA in living cells and in vivo, NPPs were employed as the optical unit, and CoOOH nanoflakes were used as the quencher. Because the emission spectrum of NPPs overlapped with the absorption spectrum of CoOOH nanoflakes, the afterglow of the NPPs could be efficiently quenched by CoOOH via Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET). In the presence of AA, the CoOOH nanoflakes on the surface of the PLNPs were reduced to Co2+ and the phosphorescence of PLNPs was restored with the relative amounts of AA. The details of this strategy are described in Fig. 25. Moreover, detection and imaging of AA in living cells and in vivo without external excitation could be achieved because of the long-lasting afterglow nature, which allowed the removal of autofluorescence and scattering of light from biological matrixes produced by in situ excitation.50
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the design for AA detection using CoOOH-modified NPPs. (b) Optical image of a mouse treated with 0.1 mL of normal saline and the nanoprobe (left) and a mouse treated with 0.1 mL of AA (0.1 mol L−1) and the nanoprobe (right) without excitation. (c) Optical image of the same mice in (A) using 420 nm excitation. The concentration of the nanoprobe was 1 mg mL−1. The optical signals were collected at 520 ± 20 nm. The center of the black dashed circle is the injection site. The color change from purple to red for the intensity bar represents the increase in the luminescence intensity (reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (d) In vivo T1-weighted MR images of the mouse before and after intravenous injection of Gd(III)-NPPs (0.3 mg); the yellow arrow indicates the liver (reproduced with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). 
α-Fetoprotein (AFP) is the serum biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which is the sixth most common cancer worldwide in terms of numbers of cases and has almost the lowest survival rates because of its very poor prognosis. Serum levels of AFP often increase under conditions such as periods of rapid liver cancer cell growth, cirrhosis, and chronic active hepatitis, as well as carbon tetrachloride intoxication. Therefore, detection of serum levels of AFP can lead to early diagnosis of HCC. To probe AFP with high selectivity and sensitivity, Yan et al. designed a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) inhibition assay for AFP excreted during cancer cell growth using water-soluble functionalized NPPs based on Eu2+ and Dy3+-doped Ca1.86Mg0.14ZnSi2O7. Polyethyleneimine-coated NPPs were conjugated with AFP antibody-coated gold nanoparticles as a sensitive and specific persistent photoluminescence probe for the detection of AFP in serum samples and imaging of AFP excreted during cancer cell growth.4
Recently, they also reported a novel multimodal nanoprobe based on gadolinium complexes functionalized PLNPs (Gd(III)-NPPs) for in vivo MRI and NIR luminescence imaging. The Gd(III)-NPPs not only exhibit a relatively higher longitudinal relaxivity over the commercial Gd(III)-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid complexes but also have super long persistent luminescence. The prepared Gd(III)-PLNPs multimodal nanoprobe offers great potential for MRI/optical imaging in vivo.46

6.4 Photocatalysis
Extensive research shows that TiO2 is an intriguing material for photocatalytic environmental purification under ultraviolet illumination. One of the most significant environmental applications of TiO2 is to decompose volatile organic compounds to clear the air. However, the photocatalytic degradation efficiency on the surface of TiO2 particles is still low, which is owing to the fast recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs and the finity of the light source. TiO2 could only absorb the light only in the near-UV region, which was about 3% of the solar spectrum. In order to slow down the electron–hole pairs, broaden the photo-response of TiO2 and enhance interfacial charge-transfer efficiency, several approaches have been proposed, including transition metal doping, coupled semiconductor systems, noble metal deposition, and rare earth ion doping.19
Li et al. proposed an approach to improve the photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2, which attempted to synthesize composed TiO2 catalysts using a long phosphorescent phosphor as the material support. In this case, the goal was achieved by associating an afterglow-emitting center to support the continuous photocatalytic reaction after turning off the light (Fig. 26a). The coupling of the LPPs with photocatalysts was a conceptually simple and promising approach to improve the performance of photocatalytic reactions. CaAl2O4:Eu,Nd@TiO2 photocatalyst, which generated luminescence with a short wavelength of 440 nm and had along emission lifetime >10 h, was beneficial for the gaseous photocatalytic reaction and complete degradation of acetaldehyde and NO pollutants. To date, the reported afterglow-assisted TiO2 photocatalysts mainly consist of Eu2+-doped LPPs, such as CaAl2O4:(Eu,Nd)/TiO2−xNy, SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy/TiO2−xNy, Sr4Al14O25:(Eu,Dy)/TiO2−xNy composites, CaAl2O4:(Eu,Nd)/TiO2/Fe2O3, and Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu,Dy/TiO2−xNy.19,312–316
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of setup for the photocatalytic experiment (reproduced with permission from ref. 316, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic band structures of (left) Cr-doped SrTiO3 and (right) nonstoichiometric SrTiO3 (Sr/Ti = 1.67) (reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright 2013, Elsevier). (c) Gaseous product generation over the zinc gallogermanate solid solution and ZnGa2O4 as a function of irradiation time: CH4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 6, copyright 2013, Wiley). 
In addition to the composed catalysts, some nanoparticles with long persistent phosphorescence or the host of LPPs were directly proposed as photocatalysts. The related materials used to degrade gaseous acetaldehyde pollutants in air were BaZrO3:Mg2+,269 ZnxGa2O3 (0.8 < x < 1),226 Ga2O3:Cr3+,75 Zn2+,SrTiO3:Cr,313 nonstoichiometric SrTiO3 (Sr/Ti = 1.67) and zinc gallogermanate solid solution.6 One of the most famous was zinc gallogermanate solid solution, which is the host of the super long NIR persistent phosphor Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ (Fig. 26c).6 It was widely accepted that constructing a solid-solution photocatalyst was beneficial to enhance the photocatalytic activity of a given semiconductor photocatalyst. The solid solutions would exhibit better performance than the single components. A series of solid-solution photocatalysts, such as AgGa1−xAlxO2 and (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2, Zn1−xCuxS, has been developed and successfully applied in photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation. Zinc gallogermanate solid solution had a light-hole effective mass band gap narrowing, which was beneficial to improving hole mobility, and thus enhancing the ability of photocatalyst in water oxidation to provide protons for CO2 photoreduction, i.e. converting CO2 and H2O into CH4 and O2.
6.5 Solar cell
He et al. described a CdS sensitized solar cells (DSSC) device assisted by SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ LPPs. SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphors can convert near ultraviolet light from 250 to 400 nm with lower sensitivity than that of the solar cell to green light, which matched the peak absorption region of the most common dye N719 (Fig. 27a). TiO2 nanoparticle-based DSSCs were modified by depositing a layer of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ on top of the TiO2 nanoparticle layer to prepare the working electrodes of the DSSCs. SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ red-shifted the short UV wavelengths into the main absorption range of the dye commonly used in DSSCs. The SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ layer acted as a light-scattering layer to reduce the loss of visible light. The open-circuit voltage was found to be higher in the modified DSSCs. The performance of the modified DSSC device was improved compared with the cell using a working electrode without this phosphor layer. An overall 13% improvement in the conversion efficiency of the modified DSSCs was achieved owing to the presence of the phosphor layer.35,38,61
 Fig. 27  (a) Working mechanism of the DSSC with an FTO/TiO2/phosphor multilayered electrode. Three functions of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ in the working process of a DSSC: (1) down-converting of UV light to green light, (2) scattering of light, and (3) recombination centers (reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of QDSSCs with P25/SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy/CdSe electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2014, Elsevier). (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the cells with P25/CdSe and P25/SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy/CdSe electrodes. (reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2014, Elsevier). 
Sun et al. fabricated an efficient bifunctional structured layer composed of LPPs SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy on top of a transparent layer of nanocrystalline TiO2 and CdSe solar cells.318 The photovoltaic performances showed that higher power conversion efficiency was achieved for the cell with SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy at one sun illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2), which was an increase of 48% compared to the cell without SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy. After one sun illumination for 1 min and subsequent turning off of the light source, the cell with SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy still showed a weak conversion efficiency under dark condition owing to the irradiation by the long persistent light. In addition, they also introduced Sr4Al14O25:Eu,Dy LPPs into the TiO2 photoanode of CdS quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) as a scattering and down converting layer (Fig. 27b).317 The results showed that the cell with Sr4Al14O25:Eu,Dy achieved an increase of 38% power conversion efficiency compared to the cell without Sr4Al14O25:Eu,Dy. A similar strategy was also found to increase the conversion efficiency of a crystalline silicon photovoltaic module by using SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+/SiO2 composite films as spectral down-shifting shifters instead of the bare glass substrate.
7. Prospective and conclusions
In this work, we provided a full-scale review of LPPs from fundamental aspects to all possible scientific applications. The main objective of this contribution is to present the very recently made advances in the field of synthesis techniques, characterizations, afterglow mechanisms, applications and materials of LPPs. Although substantial and rapid progress has been made in these fields, there are still many areas that need additional work, including but not limited to: (a) achieving control of new-wavelength emission and excitation bands; (b) tailoring luminous efficacy, initial afterglow intensity and persistent duration; (c) exploring new activators and matrices; (d) structuring the standard afterglow model; (e) developing new technology for synthesizing nanocrystals; and (f) opening up novel multi-functional application fields.
(1) Synthesizing route: it is fundamentally important to develop general and economic protocols for the synthesis, surface modification and bio-conjugation of high-quality phosphorescent nano-biolabels, which are optimized for bio-applications without any concerns of biocompatibility, stability and long-term toxicity. The reported methods are, in our opinion, not the most perfect and suitable for the production of afterglow nanoparticles because they still don't completely get away from universal crystal nucleus aggregation and growth under a higher synthesis temperature. As shown above, all of the reported routes cannot simultaneously control the shape, morphology and homogeneity of nanoparticles as well as the long persistent duration. The involved process just partly improves the properties of afterglow nanophosphors.
(2) Characterization and mechanism analysis: another big problem lies in the potential of data modeling of afterglow mechanisms by developing advanced characterization techniques. The investigations and analysis towards the species, concentration and depth of traps as well as the probability and rate of electrons being captured and released should be conducted as a whole by means of multiple measurement methods. For fundamental physical and chemical insights into the afterglow mechanism, much detailed information needs to be revealed and extracted, i.e. what are the species of defects, how to assess and then precisely control the trap concentration, how do the defects work in the matrix and what is the process of electrons being captured and released. The energy level diagram model proposed by Dorenbos can successfully explain and predict some of the observed phenomena, especially in rare-earth doped phosphor systems. It is still necessary to study how defects are involved in the long persistent phosphorescence process.
(3) Application: long persistent phosphorescence should be given some more consideration in advanced scientific applications. One key area will be the integration of long persistent phosphorescence with other peculiarities or special characteristics (such as magnetization, photo-thermal response) to open the door to novel multifunctional applications, i.e. tracing and therapy, or tracing and monitoring cancer cells in the fields of bio-medicine and life science. If possible, it is highly desirable to develop NIR phosphorescent bioprobes, monitoring the levels of toxins or nutrient substances in the living body. On the other hand, LPPs over a wide range of wavelengths and long persistent time offer more possibilities for incorporation in solar photovoltaic, optical information storage and displays, environmental sensing and monitoring, and photocatalysis on flexible platforms.
(4) Material design: firstly, the emission waveband of NIR LPPs should be further improved and extended to the second transparency window in order to increase their detection sensitivity for diverse disease biomarkers. The considerable strategies of extending the waveband to the long-wavelength region are altering the emission center, tailoring the crystal field surrounding the activator as well as transferring the persistent energy of sensitizers to acceptors. Secondly, although NIR LPPs have been extensively investigated, more basic studies of activators' species (transition metal or rare earth ions) should be carried out because the known number of NIR phosphorescent centers is very low. Thirdly, for NIR LPPs, Cr3+ and gallate are commonly used as the optimized emission centers and hosts. The predominance of Cr3+-activated gallates might suggest that only gallates can be used as the hosts in Cr3+-doped NIR LPPs. Such dependence would result in the trapping and de-trapping processes being closely associated with the crystalline or energy band structures of gallates. It is challenging to identify the nature of defects and it is difficult to predict the actual effectiveness and impact of intrinsic and substituted defects in gallates because comparison with Cr3+-doped non-gallate phosphors is missing. In addition, can we expect the discovery of new and even better persistent luminescent matrices, apart from the gallates, aluminates and silicates? Fourthly, some UV-VIS light-excitation LPPs are available, but there is still plenty of room for improvement of the excitation waveband, since red-NIR light offers much higher excitation efficiency in vivo owing to the lower absorbance of biological tissue and higher depth of penetration. Though Pan et al. proposed a kind of LPPs that can be excited under visible light, it is obvious that the dominant afterglow excitation peak in the afterglow excitation spectrum is still located in the ultraviolet region, approximately matching the absorption around the interband transition. For major oxide-LPPs, the dominant afterglow excitation bands all follow this rule. Thus, it is very necessary to develop phosphors with narrow energy band gaps that can be excited by long-wavelength light. (Oxy)sulfides and (oxy)nitrides may be considered as effective VIS-NIR-excitation LPPs because of their relatively narrow energy band gaps.
(5) In order to be able to compare experimental results obtained by different research groups on identical or different phosphor compositions, there is an urgent need for a more standardized way of measuring and defining LPPs properties. The existing definition of 0.32 mcd m−2 is not applicable for UV- or NIR-emitting persistent phosphors, where the luminous emission is zero by default and no clear definition exists for the afterglow duration. Therefore, a uniform standard is needed for quantifying the performance of UV-NIR emitters. A possible suggestion is looking for one device that has a stable response from the ultraviolet to the NIR region.
In brief, a great number of new concepts and novel materials are still in the research stage. Some of them may lead to much better afterglow properties in the coming decades. In our opinion, a long way is still ahead to achieving the goal from a “top-down” strategy, which is a concept of guiding the material design based on a clear mechanism and model. The energy band structures of hosts and activators, valence and redox ability of dopants, crystal structures of hosts, and even the volatility of raw materials have been proposed as the important and considerable factors in such a strategy. The prospects of reaching this goal have been found to be satisfactory and more interesting against the backdrop of the emergence of different and new promising materials and concepts.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Lakshmi Narayana for the English check. This work is financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51132004, 51072754, 51472091), Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. S2011030001349, 2014A030310444), National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2011CB808100), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2015M570707) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2013ZM0001, 2015ZM089). This work is also supported by the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, East China Normal University.
References
H. Terraschke and C. Wickleder, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11352–11378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abdukayum, J. T. Chen, Q. Zhao and X. P. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14125–14133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maldiney, A. Lecointre, B. Viana, A. Bessiere, M. Bessodes, D. Gourier, C. Richard and D. Scherman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11810–11815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Wu, H. F. Wang, J. T. Chen and X. P. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 686–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirata, K. Totani, J. X. Zhang, T. Yamashita, H. Kaji, S. R. Marder, T. Watanabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3386–3397 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yan, J. J. Wang, H. L. Gao, N. Y. Wang, H. Yu, Z. S. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1839–1845 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Yi, X. L. Li, Z. L. Xue, X. Liang, W. Lu, H. Peng, H. R. Liu, S. J. Zeng and J. H. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7119–7129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Gong, G. Chen, Q. Peng, W. Z. Yuan, Y. J. Xie, S. H. Li, Y. M. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6195–6201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Palner, K. Y. Pu, S. Shao and J. H. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11477–11480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Tao, G. S. Hong, C. Shinji, C. X. Chen, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris, B. Zhang, Y. P. Zou and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13002–13006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maldiney, A. Bessiere, J. Seguin, E. Teston, S. K. Sharma, B. Viana, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos, M. Bessodes, D. Gourier, D. Scherman and C. Richard, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 418–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Pan, Y. Y. Lu and F. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 58–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Y. Li, R. C. Chen, K. Sharafudeen, S. F. Zhou, M. Gecevicius, H. H. Wang, G. P. Dong, Y. L. Wu, X. X. Qin and J. R. Qiu, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e180 CrossRef .
H. Lin, J. Xu, Q. M. Huang, B. Wang, H. Chen, Z. B. Lin and Y. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21835–21843 CAS .
Y. Li, S. F. Zhou, G. P. Dong, M. Y. Peng, L. Wondraczek and J. R. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 04059 Search PubMed .
B. C. Cheng, L. T. Fang, Z. D. Zhang, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1708–1713 CAS .
Y. X. Zhuang, J. Ueda, S. Tanabe and P. Dorenbos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5502–5509 RSC .
D. Q. Chen, Y. Chen, H. W. Lu and Z. G. Ji, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 8638–8645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang and T. Sato, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3234–3236 RSC .
M. Allix, S. Chenu, E. Veron, T. Poumeyrol, E. A. Kouadri-Boudjelthia, S. Alahrache, F. Porcher, D. Massiot and F. Fayon, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1600–1606 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Guo, Y. H. Wang, W. B. Chen, W. Zeng, S. C. Han, G. Li and Y. Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11212–11218 RSC .
J. Xu, D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, W. J. Zhu, J. C. Zhou and Y. S. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. V. Rodrigues, J. Holsa, M. Lastusaari, M. C. F. C. Felinto and H. F. Brito, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1612–1618 RSC .
B. Wang, H. Lin, J. Xu, H. Chen, Z. B. Lin, F. Huang and Y. S. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 11299–11306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zeng, Y. H. Wang, S. C. Han, W. B. Chen, G. Li, Y. Z. Wang and Y. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3004–3011 RSC .
Y. Q. Li, Y. H. Wang, Y. Gong, X. H. Xu and M. J. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 24853–24858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lecointre, A. Bessiere, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos, B. Viana and S. Jacquart, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4217–4227 CAS .
F. Liu, Y. J. Liang and Z. W. Pan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 177401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, L. Huang, D. Li, W. Fan and G. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5304–5307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. V. Rodrigues, H. F. Brito, J. Holsa, R. Stefani, M. C. F. C. Felinto, M. Lastusaari, T. Laamanen and L. A. O. Nunes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11232–11240 CAS .
Y. L. Wu, Y. Li, X. X. Qin, R. C. Chen, D. K. Wu, S. J. Liu and J. R. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 649, 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo and Z. G. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23297–23305 CAS .
T. Maldiney, C. Richard, J. Seguin, N. Wattier, M. Bessodes and D. Scherman, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 854–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Xu, Y. H. Wang, Y. Gong, W. Zeng and Y. Q. Li, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 16989–16994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Lian, Y. Qi, C. Y. Rong, L. P. Yu, A. L. Zhu, D. L. Yin and S. B. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7196–7204 CAS .
X. D. Shi, L. Sho, M. Z. Li, J. Hou, L. F. Chen, C. Q. Ye, W.
Z. Shen, L. Jiang and Y. L. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6317–6321 CAS .
J. Wang, H. R. Zhang, B. F. Lei, Z. G. Xia, H. W. Dong, Y. L. Liu, M. T. Zheng and Y. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4445–4451 RSC .
W. He, T. S. Atabaev, H. K. Kim and Y. H. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17894–17900 CAS .
E. J. Guidelli, O. Baffa and D. R. Clarke, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Z. Zhan, C. N. Xu, H. Yamada, Y. Terasawa, L. Zhang, H. Iwase and M. Kawai, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 328–332 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Ueda, K. Kuroishi and S. Tanabe, Scr. Mater, 2015, 102, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Li, H. W. Zhang, M. Shi, J. S. Sheng and H. X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24713–24720 RSC .
B. H. Dong, C. Y. Li, G. C. Chen, Y. J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. J. Deng and Q. B. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2503–2509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Y. H. Wang, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Xu and W. Zeng, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 4310–4315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. C. Chen, Y. Y. Li, K. Sharafudeen, S. J. Liu, D. K. Wu, Y. L. Wu, X. X. Qin and J. R. Qiu, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1827–1834 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abdukayum, C. X. Yang, Q. Zhao, J. T. Chen, L. X. Dong and X. P. Yan, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4096–4101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang, T. Sekino, S. W. Lee and T. Sato, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1123–1126 CAS .
D. A. Hammer, M. Therien, I. Dmochowski, N. Kamat and G. Robbins, Abstr. Pap., Jt. Conf. – Chem. Inst. Can. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 239, 374 Search PubMed .
A. Bessiere, S. K. Sharma, N. Basavaraju, K. R. Priolkar, L. Binet, B. Viana, A. J. J. Bos, T. Maldiney, C. Richard, D. Scherman and D. Gourier, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1365–1373 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. H. Li, Y. Y. Han, W. Pan, T. T. Zhang and B. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Zou, J. Wu, H. Xu, J. C. Zhang, Z. P. Ci and Y. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8030–8038 RSC .
A. Bessiere, A. Lecointre, R. A. Benhamou, E. Suard, G. Wallez and B. Viana, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1252–1259 RSC .
N. Basavaraju, K. R. Priolkar, D. Gourier, S. K. Sharma, A. Bessiere and B. Viana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1790–1799 RSC .
T. Maldiney, M. U. Kaikkonen, J. Seguin, Q. L. de Chermont, M. Bessodes, K. J. Airenne, S. Yla-Herttuala, D. Scherman and C. Richard, Bioconjugate Chem., 2012, 23, 472–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Hong, J. T. Robinson, Y. J. Zhang, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris, Q. B. Wang and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9818–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, X. Wu, R. Maudgal, H. Zhang and G. Han, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500001 Search PubMed .
K. Szczodrowski, A. Chruscinska, J. Barzowska, K. Przegietka, K. Anders, R. Piramidowicz and M. Grinberg, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65236–65244 RSC .
C. Rosticher, B. Viana, G. Laurent, P. Le Griel and C. Chaneac, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kandpal, B. Goundie, J. Wright, R. A. Pollock, M. D. Mason and R. W. Meulenberg, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3482–3486 CAS .
H. F. Li, W. Z. Sun, Y. L. Jia, T. F. Ma, J. P. Fu, D. Li, S. Zhang, L. H. Jiang, R. Pang and C. Y. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 2361–2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Sun, L. K. Pan, G. Zhu, X. Q. Piao, L. Zhang and Z. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14936–14941 RSC .
Y. Li, S. F. Zhou, Y. Y. Li, K. Sharafudeen, Z. J. Ma, G. P. Dong, M. Y. Peng and J. R. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2657–2663 RSC .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, H. Duan, L. Chen and X. J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11360–11366 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Du, K. Sharafudeen, C. X. Liao and J. R. Qiu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2014, 123, 7–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chenu, E. Veron, C. Genevois, A. Garcia, G. Matzen and M. Allix, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10002–10010 RSC .
K. Korthout, K. Van den Eeckhout, J. Botterman, S. Nikitenko, D. Poelman and P. F. Smet, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085140 CrossRef .
G. Li, Y. H. Wang, W. Zeng, W. B. Chen, S. C. Han, H. J. Guo and X. C. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 17572–17578 RSC .
R. Pang, W. Z. Sun, J. P. Fu, H. F. Li, Y. L. Jia, D. Li, L. H. Jiang, S. Zhang and C. Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 82704–82710 RSC .
S. A. Zhang, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, G. F. Ju, T. Wang and Z. H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37172–37179 RSC .
J. P. Shi, H. X. Fu, X. Sun, J. S. Shen and H. W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 635–641 RSC .
D. Kulesza and E. Zych, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2013, 117, 26921–26928 CAS .
X. L. Wang and H. Riesen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85506–85510 RSC .
K. K. Satapathy, G. C. Mishra, R. S. Kher and S. J. Dhoble, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79391–79396 RSC .
Y. X. Zhuang, J. Ueda and S. Tanabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 191904 CrossRef .
X. S. Wang, W. S. Li, J. Q. Situ, X. Y. Ying, H. Chen, Y. Jin and Y. Z. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 12886–12889 RSC .
J. P. Shi, X. Sun, J. L. Li, H. Z. Man, J. S. Shen, Y. K. Yu and H. W. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2015, 37, 260–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yi, Z. T. Chen, S. Ye, Y. Li, E. H. Song and Q. Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 49680–49687 RSC .
J. Xu, Z. H. Ju, X. P. Gao, Y. Q. An, X. L. Tang and W. S. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 13875–13881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Y. Lu, X. J. Wang, M. Yin and Z. W. Pan, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 20215–20221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Wu, Y. Li, X. X. Qin, R. C. Chen, D. K. Wu, S. J. Liu and J. R. Qiu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 151, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Tanabe, A. D. Sontakke and J. Ueda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 081903 CrossRef .
H. Kanno, K. Noda and K. Matsui, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 580, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Luo, A. J. J. Bos, A. Dobrowolska and P. Dorenbos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15419–15427 RSC .
Z. G. Xia, Q. Li, G. W. Li, M. Xiong and L. B. Liao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 318, 958–961 CrossRef CAS .
Q. le Masne de Chermont, C. Chaneac, J. Seguin, F. Pelle, S. Maitrejean, J. P. Jolivet, D. Gourier, M. Bessodes and D. Scherman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 9266–9271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Teng, J. J. Zhou, S. N. Khisro, S. F. Zhou and J. R. Qiu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 147, 772–776 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Cheng, Z. D. Zhang, Z. H. Han, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3545–3550 RSC .
C. Hou, Y. Wang, H. Zhu and L. C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2883–2891 RSC .
G. P. Dong, X. D. Xiao, L. L. Zhang, Z. J. Ma, X. Bao, M. Y. Peng, Q. Y. Zhang and J. R. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2194–2203 RSC .
F. Yoshimura, K. Nakamura, F. Wakai, M. Hara, M. Yoshimoto, O. Odawara and H. Wada, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2170–2175 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Smet, N. Avci, K. Van den Eeckhout and D. Poelman, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 1306–1313 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lim, B. N. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Kang, R. J. Xie, I. S. Chong, K. Morita, H. Yoshida and K. Hiraga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 031104 CrossRef .
L. Jin, H. Y. Zhang, R. Q. Pan, P. Xu, J. C. Han, X. H. Zhang, Q. Yuan, Z. H. Zhang, X. J. Wang, Y. Wang and B. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6575–6581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gluchowski, W. Strek, M. Lastusaari and J. Holsa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17246–17252 RSC .
N. Basavaraju, K. R. Priolkar, D. Gourier, A. Bessiere and B. Viana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10993–10999 RSC .
M. Milde, S. Dembski, A. Osvet, M. Batentschuk, A. Winnacker and G. Sextl, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 148, 1055–1063 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bessière, A. Lecointre, K. R. Priolkar and D. Gourier, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19039–19046 RSC .
D. Wei, L. Qin, Y. Huang and H. J. Seo, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 2383–2387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lu, F. Liu, Z. Gu and Z. Pan, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 2784–2787 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, C. Liu, J. Shi, H. Man, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1792–1797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, P. Zhang, Z. Zheng and Y. Chai, Mater. Lett., 2012, 73, 157–160 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, Q. Zhang, C.-e. Cui and J. Li, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Rodriguez Burbano, S. K. Sharma, P. Dorenbos, B. Viana and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 551–557 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Kong, W. Zheng, Y. S. Liu, R. F. Li, E. Ma, H. M. Zhu and X. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11048–11054 RSC .
Y. F. Xu, D. K. Ma, M. L. Guan, X. A. Chen, Q. Q. Pan and S. M. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 502, 38–42 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, C. e. Cui, P. Huang, L. Wang and G. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 583, 530–534 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Xin, Y. H. Wang, P. Y. Dong, W. Zeng and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 8156–8160 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Shi, H. Zhang and M. Sun, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 10509–10518 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. K. Xu, G. T. Duan, H. W. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, L. Xu and W. P. Cai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14264–14271 RSC .
Z. J. Li, Y. J. Zhang, H. W. Zhang and H. X. Fu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 176, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S.-x. Liu, M.-w. Wang, W.-j. Li, T. Zhang and X. Zhang, Int. J. Miner., Metall. Mater., 2010, 17, 347–352 CrossRef .
B. Cheng, H. Liu, M. Fang, Y. Xiao, S. Lei and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 944–946 RSC .
N. Y. Yu, F. Liu, X. F. Li and Z. W. Pan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 231110 CrossRef .
Y. J. Li, M. W. Wang, L. D. Zhang, D. Gao and S. X. Liu, Int. J. Miner., Metall. Mater., 2013, 20, 972–977 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Li, S. Yin and T. Sato, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2013, 39, 1501–1507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elsagh, M. Rajabi and E. Amini, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, P. W. May, L. Yin, R. Brown and T. B. Scott, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5058–5064 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maldiney, G. Sraiki, B. Viana, D. Gourier, C. Richard, D. Scherman, M. Bessodes, K. Van den Eeckhout, D. Poelman and P. F. Smet, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Noto, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, J. J. Terblans and H. C. Swart, Powder Technol., 2014, 256, 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
T. Z. Zhan, C. N. Xu, H. Yamada, Y. Terasawa, L. Zhang, H. Iwase and M. Kawai, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 032116 CrossRef .
K. Van den Eeckhout, P. F. Smet and D. Poelman, Materials, 2010, 3, 2536–2566 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van den Eeckhout, D. Poelman and P. F. Smet, Materials, 2013, 6, 2789–2818 CrossRef CAS .
J. Botterman and P. F. Smet, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A868–A881 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yamamoto and T. Matsuzawa, J. Lumin., 1997, 72–74, 287–289 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, K. Kaiya, N. Takahashi, T. Matsuzawa, C. C. Rowlands, V. Beltran-Lopez, G. M. Smith and P. C. Riedi, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2566–2569 RSC .
T. Aitasalo, P. Deren, J. Holsa, H. Jungner, J. C. Krupa, M. Lastusaari, J. Legendziewicz, J. Niittykoski and W. Strek, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 171, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Holsa, T. Aitasalo, H. Jungner, M. Lastusaari, J. Niittykoski and G. Spano, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 374, 56–59 CrossRef .
F. Clabau, X. Rocquefelte, S. Jobic, P. Deniard, M. H. Whangbo, A. Garcia and T. Le Mercier, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3904–3912 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dorenbos, J. Lumin., 2003, 104, 239–260 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dorenbos, J. Lumin., 2005, 111, 89–104 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. You, A. J. J. Bos, Q. F. Shi, S. H. Huang and P. Dorenbos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115101 CrossRef .
L. C. V. Rodrigues, H. F. Brito, J. Holsa and M. Lastusaari, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lastusaari, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos, T. Laamanen, M. Malkamaki, L. C. V. Rodrigues and J. Holsa, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2015, 121, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kale, M. Lastusaari, J. Holsa and T. Soukka, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 35858–35865 RSC .
L. U. Khan, H. F. Brito, J. Holsa, K. R. Pirota, D. Muraca, M. C. F. C. Felinto, E. E. S. Teotonio and O. L. Malta, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12902–12910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. J. Bos, N. R. J. Poolton, J. Wallinga, A. Bessiere and P. Dorenbos, Radiat. Meas., 2010, 45, 343–346 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hoogeustraten, Philips Res. Rep., 1958, 13, 515–693 Search PubMed .
S. Tanabe, S. Watanabe, F. Saif and M. Matsuzawa, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2002, 65, 033420 CrossRef .
F. Liu, W. Z. Yan, Y. J. Chuang, Z. P. Zhen, J. Xie and Z. W. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 01554 Search PubMed .
J. H. Si, K. Kitaoka, J. R. Qiu, T. Mitsuyu and K. Hirao, Opt. Lett., 1999, 24, 911–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Qiu, K. Kojima, K. Miura, T. Mitsuyu and K. Hirao, Opt. Lett., 1999, 24, 786–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shimotsuma, P. G. Kazansky, J. R. Qiu and K. Hirao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 247405 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Qiu, X. W. Jiang, C. S. Zhu, M. Shirai, J. Si, N. Jiang and K. Hirao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Feng, J. C. Zhang, C. Q. Wu, X. Liu and Y. H. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 141, 495–501 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Gou, X. H. Xu, D. C. Zhou, J. B. Qiu and X. Yu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12595–12604 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yamaga, Y. Ohsumi and N. Kodama, J. Ceram. Process. Res., 2013, 14, S52–S56 Search PubMed .
D. Gourier, A. Bessiere, S. K. Sharma, L. Binet, B. Viana, N. Basavaraju and K. R. Priolkar, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2014, 75, 826–837 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lecointre, R. Ait Benhamou, A. Bessiére, G. Wallez, M. Elaatmani and B. Viana, Opt. Mater., 2011, 34, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bessiere, A. Lecointre, K. R. Priolkar and D. Gourier, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19039–19046 RSC .
R. Pang, Y. L. Jia, R. Zhao, H. F. Li, J. P. Fu, W. Z. Sun, L. H. Jiang, S. Zhang, C. Y. Li and Q. Su, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 9661–9668 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Y. Li, K. Sharafudeen, G. P. Dong, S. F. Zhou, Z. J. Ma, M. Y. Peng and J. R. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2019–2027 RSC .
X. F. Liu, Y. B. Qiao, G. P. Dong, S. Ye, B. Zhu, Y. X. Zhuang and J. R. Qiu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, P81–P84 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Y. Li, S. B. Wang and Q. Su, J. Lumin., 2007, 126, 551–555 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, Y. Katayama, J. Ueda, T. Honma, S. Tanabe and T. Komatsu, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2011, 119, 609–615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Katayama, J. Ueda and S. Tanabe, J. Lumin., 2014, 148, 290–295 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, K. Watanabe, J. Ueda, K. Fushimi, S. Tanabe and Y. Hasegawa, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 98, 423–429 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pihlgren, T. Laihinen, L. C. V. Rodrigues, S. Carlson, K. O. Eskola, A. Kotlov, M. Lastusaari, T. Soukka, H. F. Brito and J. Holsa, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1698–1704 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lastusaari, H. F. Brito, S. Carlson, J. Holsa, T. Laamanen, L. C. V. Rodrigues and E. Welter, Phys. Scr., 2014, 89, 044004 CrossRef .
L. C. V. Rodrigues, R. Stefani, H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, J. Holsa, M. Lastusaari, T. Laamanen and M. Malkamaki, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 2365–2371 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Wang, X. H. Xu, D. C. Zhou, X. Yu and J. B. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1690–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhang, X. L. Ma, Q. S. Qin, L. R. Shi, J. Y. Sun, M. J. Zhou, B. T. Liu and Y. H. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 320–324 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van den Eeckhout, A. J. J. Bos, D. Poelman and P. F. Smet, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 045126 CrossRef .
F. T. You, A. J. J. Bos, Q. F. Shi, S. H. Huang and P. Dorenbos, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 215502 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Smet, K. Van den Eeckhout, A. J. J. Bos, E. van der Kolk and P. Dorenbos, J. Lumin., 2012, 132, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Botterman, K. Van den Eeckhout, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos and P. F. Smet, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 341–349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fleniken, J. Wang, J. Grimm, M. J. Weber and U. Happek, J. Lumin., 2001, 94, 465–469 CrossRef .
A. J. J. Bos, R. M. van Duijvenvoorde, E. van der Kolk, W. Drozdowski and P. Dorenbos, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 1465–1471 CrossRef CAS .
T. Katsumata, H. Kubo, S. Komuro and H. Aizawa, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 1704–1707 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wiatrowska and E. Zych, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11449–11458 CAS .
T. Wang, W. J. Bian, D. C. Zhou, J. B. Qiu, X. Yu and X. H. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14047–14055 CAS .
H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, J. Holsa, T. Laamanen, M. Lastusaari, M. Malkamaki, P. Novak, L. C. V. Rodrigues and R. Stefani, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 420–431 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Li, Y. H. Wang, W. X. Zhang, X. S. Wang and H. Zhao, Acta. Phys. Sin-Ch. Ed., 2012, 61, 1823 Search PubMed .
J. Trojan-Piegza and E. Zych, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4215–4220 CAS .
A. Wiatrowska and E. Zych, Materials, 2014, 7, 157–169 CrossRef .
J. Trojan-Piegza, J. Niittykoski, J. Holsa and E. Zych, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2252–2261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lu, F. Liu, Z. J. Gu and Z. W. Pan, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 2784–2787 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Chandra, J. Lumin., 2010, 130, 2218–2222 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Shen, X. H. Xu, B. H. Zhang, T. Wang, J. B. Qiu and X. Yu, ECS Solid State Lett., 2015, 4, R31–R33 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kuang, Y. L. Liu and J. X. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 5500–5503 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lin, Z. T. Zhang, Z. L. Tang, X. X. Wang, J. Y. Zhang and Z. S. Zheng, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 21, 683–685 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, X. Chen, B. Lei, Y. Xiao, R. Liu, H. Zhang, H. Dong, Y. Liu and X. Liu, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, R19–R22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wang, Y. Gong, X. H. Xu and Y. Q. Li, J. Lumin., 2013, 133, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Yang, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen and X. J. Wang, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 1264–1267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Y. H. Wang, Y. Q. Li and X. H. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, J208–J211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, L. X. Ning, Y. C. Huang, C. M. Liu, D. J. Hou, B. B. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Tao and H. B. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8328–8332 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Gong, X. Xu and F. Zhang, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 3174–3183 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, R. L. Fu, X. F. Song, R. Li, Z. W. Pan, X. R. Zhao, Z. H. Deng and Y. G. Cao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, J69–J73 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Ju, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang and Z. F. Mu, J. Lumin., 2014, 146, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Dai, M. Zhou, Z. Y. Xian and L. K. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 25470–25478 RSC .
A. Madej and E. Zych, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 104441 RSC .
Y. Li, B. H. Li, C. C. Ni, S. X. Yuan, J. Wang, Q. Tang and Q. Su, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 494–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. H. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. D. Hao, J. Qiao and X. L. Dong, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 148–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Jiang, S. G. Xiao, X. L. Yang, X. A. Zhang, X. H. Liu, B. Y. Zhou and X. L. Jin, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178, 123–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, C. S. Shi, Z. F. Wang, W. P. Zhang and M. Yin, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 466, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Y. H. Wang, X. H. Xu, Y. Q. Li, S. Y. Xin and L. R. Shi, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1781–1785 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Dai, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11206–11215 RSC .
J. S. Zhang, B. J. Chen, J. S. Sun, X. P. Li, L. H. Cheng and H. Y. Zhong, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 1632–1637 Search PubMed .
M. Yamaga, Y. Ohsumi, T. Nakayama and T. P. J. Han, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, D. D. Jia and W. M. Yen, J. Lumin., 2003, 102, 34–37 CrossRef .
Y. H. Chen, X. R. Cheng, M. Liu, Z. M. Qi and C. S. Shi, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 531–535 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Sahu, P. Chandrakar, R. N. Baghel, D. P. Bisen, N. Brahme and R. K. Tamrakar, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 649, 1329–1338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, M. K. Lei, X. X. Luo and Z. G. Xiao, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2008, 28, 41–46 Search PubMed .
M. A. Tshabalala, F. B. Dejene, S. S. Pitale, H. C. Swart and O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, Physica B, 2014, 439, 126–129 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. H. Wang, S. C. Han, W. Zeng, W. B. Chen and Y. Gong, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, R161–R164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, R. Pang, C. Y. Li, C. Y. Zang and Q. A. Su, J. Rare Earths, 2010, 28, 705–708 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Qu, L. X. Cao, W. Liu, G. Su, P. P. Wang and I. Schultz, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 1598–1603 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Lai, Z. W. Yang, H. J. Wu, J. Y. Liao, J. B. Qiu, Z. G. Song, Y. Yang and D. C. Zhou, Optoelectron.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2015, 9, 48–52 CAS .
X. H. Xu, J. B. Qiu and Y. Xue, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, R9–R11 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. H. Wang, W. Zeng, Y. Gong and B. T. Liu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 3632–3635 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chang and D. L. Mao, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 460, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Zhong, J. H. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Z. Lu and X. J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 201916 CrossRef .
Y. Teng, J. J. Zhou, Z. J. Ma, M. M. Smedskjaer and J. R. Qiu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, K17–K19 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Jia, X. J. Wang and W. M. Yen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 235113 CrossRef .
R. Pang, C. Li, L. Jiang and Q. Su, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 471, 364–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ueda, K. Aishima, S. Nishiura and S. Tanabe, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4, 042602 CrossRef .
J. Xu, J. Ueda, Y. X. Zhuang, B. Viana and S. Tanabe, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 042602 CrossRef .
J. Ueda, K. Kuroishi and S. Tanabe, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 062201 CrossRef .
X. H. Xu, Y. H. Wang, X. Yu, Y. Q. Li and Y. Gong, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 24–27 CrossRef .
D. Jia, R. S. Meltzer, W. M. Yen, W. Jia and X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1535–1537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Y. Li, R. Pang, L. H. Jiang, L. L. Shi and Q. Su, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 2730–2734 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, C. S. Shi and Z. M. Qi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 191111 CrossRef .
Z. F. Mu, Y. H. Hu, Y. H. Wang, H. Y. Wu, C. J. Fu and F. W. Kang, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 676–681 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jia, L. A. Lewis and X. J. Wang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, J32–J34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chuang, Z. P. Zhen, F. Zhang, F. Liu, J. P. Mishra, W. Tang, H. M. Chen, X. L. Huang, L. C. Wang, X. Y. Chen, J. Xie and Z. W. Pan, Theranostics, 2014, 4, 1112–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 34, 4069–4075 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Li, Y. H. Wang, K. Xu, H. Zhao and Z. F. Hu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 20972–20975 RSC .
Y. X. Zhuang, J. Ueda and S. Tanabe, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7849–7855 RSC .
A. Bessiere, S. Jacquart, K. Priolkar, A. Lecointre, B. Viana and D. Gourier, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 10131–10137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Liu, Z. G. Xia, M. S. Molokeev and Q. L. Liu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 98, 1870–1876 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Xu, J. Ren, G. R. Chen, D. S. Kong, C. J. Gu, C. M. Chen and L. R. Kong, Opt. Mater. Express, 2013, 3, 1727–1732 CrossRef .
Y. X. Zhuang, J. Ueda and S. Tanabe, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 1378–1383 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pang, C. Y. Li, L. L. Shi and Q. Su, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pang, C. Y. Li, S. Zhang and Q. Su, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Ju, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang and L. H. Hung, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 114, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Ju, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang and Z. F. Mu, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1183–1188 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, M. M. Shang, Y. Zhang, J. Fan, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7096–7104 RSC .
X. G. Wang, F. P. Du, D. L. Wei, Y. L. Huang and H. J. Seo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 158, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Liu and R. X. Zhong, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 556, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Che, C. B. Liu, Q. W. Wang and Z. L. Xu, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 136–137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, Y. R. Fu, Z. F. Mu, T. Wang and J. Lin, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 616, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi, M. Ando, R. Ihara and T. Fujiwara, Opt. Mater. Express, 2011, 1, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Che, X. Y. Li, C. B. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Liu and Z. L. Xu, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 194–198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhuang, Y. Katayama, J. Ueda and S. Tanabe, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1907–1912 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Che, C. B. Liu, X. Y. Li, Z. L. Xu, Y. Liu and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2091–2095 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. F. Cao, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 630–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Ju, R. P. Wei, J. R. Zheng, X. P. Gao, S. H. Zhang and W. S. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 1906 CrossRef .
B. F. Lei, S. Q. Man, Y. L. Du and S. Yue, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 912–915 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Liu and Y. L. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 93, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang, G. F. Ju and Z. F. Mu, J. Lumin., 2013, 138, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang and G. F. Ju, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 1378–1384 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, M. Shima, M. Yasukawa and K. Ueda, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Gao, Z. Y. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Xu, Z. H. Ju, Y. Q. An and W. S. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, J405–J408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kamimura, C. N. Xu, H. Yamada, N. Terasaki and M. Fujihala, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 062403 CrossRef .
J. C. Zhang, Q. S. Qin, M. H. Yu, M. J. Zhou and Y. H. Wang, J. Lumin., 2012, 132, 23–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Zhang, M. H. Yu, Q. S. Qin, H. L. Zhou, M. J. Zhou, X. H. Xu and Y. H. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 123518 CrossRef .
B. F. Lei, B. Li, X. J. Wang and W. Li, J. Lumin., 2006, 118, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Qin, Y. Li, D. K. Wu, Y. L. Wu, R. C. Chen, Z. J. Ma, S. J. Liu and J. R. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 101347 RSC .
M. M. Shi, D. Y. Zhang and C. K. Chang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 639, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang, G. F. Ju and Z. F. Mou, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 3821–3827 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Noto, S. S. Pitale, M. A. Gusowki, J. J. Terblans, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa and H. C. Swart, Powder Technol., 2013, 237, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boutinaud, L. Sarakha and R. Mahiou, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 025901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang, G. F. Ju and Z. F. Mu, Radiat. Meas., 2013, 51–52, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Su, L. P. Li and G. S. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6060–6067 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, L. Y. Zhou and M. L. Gong, Luminescence, 2014, 29, 104–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, X. L. Chen, H. Li, M. He, Y. P. Xu and X. Z. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6409–6414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Shao, S. Saitzek, P. Roussel and R. Desfeux, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24894–24901 RSC .
M. Kubus, A. M. Klonkowski, A. Lotnyk and L. Kienle, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 149, 424–429 CrossRef .
F. W. Kang and M. Y. Peng, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 277–284 RSC .
X. L. Ma, J. C. Zhang, H. H. Li, B. C. Duan, L. N. Guo, M. D. Que and Y. H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 580, 564–569 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Noto, M. L. Chitambo, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa and H. C. Swart, Powder Technol., 2013, 247, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Cui, G. W. Jiang, P. Huang, L. Wang and D. Liu, J. Lumin., 2014, 145, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hang, Q. Liu, D. L. Mao and C. K. Chang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 107, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, H. Z. Wang and Y. G. Li, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2012, 177, 316–320 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, X. Q. He, C. Cui and L. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 2663–2668 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Lei, Y. L. Liu, G. B. Tang, Z. R. Ye and C. S. Shib, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, G225–G227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Yang, X. D. Li, X. Y. Su, Z. Q. Li, L. L. Liu, Y. Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Mi and F. Yu, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1822–1825 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Zhang, Y. L. Liu, J. X. Zhang, D. S. Yuan, J. H. Rong and L. H. Huang, Rare Met. Mater. Eng., 2006, 35, 766–769 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. D. Huang, D. Z. Jia and J. J. Lu, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 1032–1035 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Zhang, B. F. Lei, J. L. Qin, J. F. Li, Y. L. Liu, X. T. Liu, M. T. Zheng, Y. Xiao and H. W. Dong, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 1810–1814 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Qin, H. R. Zhang, B. F. Lei, C. F. Hu, J. F. Li, Y. L. Liu, J. X. Meng, J. Wang, M. T. Zheng and Y. Xiao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 3149–3154 CAS .
H. R. Zhang, M. T. Zheng, B. F. Lei, Y. Xiao, H. W. Dong, Y. L. Liu, X. T. Liu, J. J. Deng, J. W. Deng and Z. L. Huang, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, R16–R18 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Smet, J. Botterman, K. Van den Eeckhout, K. Korthout and D. Poelman, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1913–1919 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. R. Zhang, B. F. Lei, H. W. Dong, H. M. Zhang, Y. L. Liu, N. L. Lai, Y. Fang and Z. J. Chen, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36, 1855–1858 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Zhang, M. T. Zheng, B. F. Lei, Y. L. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. W. Dong, Y. C. Zhang and S. P. Ye, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, R117–R120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Tang, H. J. Song, Y. Y. Su and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 11876–11884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Wu, J. C. Zhang, P. F. Feng, Y. M. Duan, Z. Y. Zhang and Y. H. Wang, J. Lumin., 2014, 147, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Ju, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen and X. J. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 113508 CrossRef .
B. F. Lei, L. Sha, H. R. Zhang, Y. L. Liu, S. Q. Man and S. Yue, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 2177–2181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen and X. J. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 2573–2579 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, S. L. Guo, B. K. Moon, B. C. Choi and J. H. Jeong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 609–615 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, N. Choi, K. Park and J. Kim, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Ning, C. C. Zhou, W. P. Chen, Y. C. Huang, C. K. Duan, P. Dorenbos, Y. Tao and H. B. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6785–6792 CAS .
F. Wang, B. Yang, D. C. Liu, W. H. Ma, X. M. Chen and Y. N. Dai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2014, 126, 46–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Wu, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen and X. J. Wang, Acta Phys.–Chim. Sin., 2011, 27, 1201–1206 CAS .
H. Suo, C. F. Guo, Z. Yang, S. S. Zhou, C. K. Duan and M. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7379–7385 RSC .
Y. M. Yang, Z. Q. Li, Z. Q. Li, F. Y. Jiao, X. Y. Su and D. Y. Ge, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 577, 170–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jin, Y. H. Hu, L. Chen, X. J. Wang, G. F. Ju, Z. F. Mou and F. Liang, Opt. Commun., 2014, 311, 266–269 CrossRef .
B. Liu, C. S. Shi and Z. M. Qi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1674–1677 CrossRef CAS .
V. Caratto, F. Locardi, G. A. Costa, R. Masini, M. Fasoli, L. Panzeri, M. Martini, E. Bottinelli, E. Gianotti and I. Miletto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17346–17351 CAS .
M. Lastusaari, H. Jungner, A. Kotlov, T. Laamanen, L. C. V. Rodrigues, H. F. Brito and J. Holsa, Z. Naturforsch., B: J. Chem. Sci., 2014, 69, 171–182 CAS .
P. Huang, F. Yang, C. E. Cui, L. Wang and X. Lei, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 5615–5621 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, X. J. Zou, B. Bui, W. Chen, K. H. Song and T. Solberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 013702 CrossRef .
S. Y. Kaya, E. Karacaoglu and B. Karasu, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 3701–3706 CrossRef .
P. C. Ricci, C. M. Carbonaro, D. Chiriu and A. Anedda, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18425–18430 RSC .
H. J. Guo, W. B. Chen, W. Zeng, G. Li, Y. H. Wang, Y. Y. Li, Y. Li and X. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5844–5850 RSC .
F. Luo, G. M. Sun, A. M. Zheng, S. X. Lian, Y. L. Liu, X. F. Feng and Y. Y. Chu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13280–13283 RSC .
Y. Tsukasaki, M. Morimatsu, G. Nishimura, T. Sakata, H. Yasuda, A. Komatsuzaki, T. M. Watanabe and T. Jin, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41164–41171 RSC .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. M. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Hong, S. O. Diao, A. L. Antaris and H. J. Dai, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10816–10906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. P. Zou, M. Gong, H. Chen, G. S. Hong, A. L. Antaris, X. Y. Li, C. L. Liu, C. X. Chen and H. J. Dai, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4070–4075 RSC .
J. Y. Niu, X. Wang, J. Z. Lv, Y. Li and B. Tang, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2014, 58, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Li and Y. H. Wang, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2010, 36, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang, M. Kobayashi, S. Tezuka, M. Kakihana and T. Sato, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2013, 39, 1615–1621 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang, T. Sekino, S. W. Lee and T. Sato, J. Catal., 2013, 297, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang and T. Sato, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132, 487–492 CrossRef .
H. H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang and T. Sato, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7741–7745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Sun, L. K. Pan, X. Q. Piao and Z. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 416, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Wang, T. T. Xuan, J. Q. Liu, H. L. Li and Z. Sun, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2015, 12, 722–727 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Yang Li
	Yang Li obtained his PhD degree in materials science in 2014 from South China University of Technology (SCUT) under the supervision of Prof. Jianroug Qiu. The topic of his PhD dissertation was the design, preparation, properties and applications of near-infrared (NIR) long phosphorescent phosphors. He then joined the same group as a postdoctoral researcher at SCUT in 2014, where he focused on the research of new NIR long phosphorescent phosphors, functional nanomaterials and bio-imaging application.

Mindaugas Gecevicius
	Mindaugas Gecevicius received his BSc degree in physics from Vilnius University, Lithuania, in 2010. From 2007 to 2010, during his undergraduate studies, he did research at the Laser Research Center, Vilnius University. His research covered fiber amplification and laser frequency conversion in nonlinear crystals. He got his PhD in 2015 at the Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, under the supervision of Prof. Peter G. Kazansky. The topic of his PhD dissertation was the modification of transparent materials with femtosecond lasers and laser fabrication of polarization sensitive optical elements. Currently he is doing post-doctorate studies in South China University of Technology.

Jianrong Qiu
	Jianrong Qiu received his PhD from Okayama University, Japan in 1992. He worked at the Japan Science and Technology Agency as chief researcher, Cornell University as a research associate fellow and Zhejiang University as a professor from 1995 to 2008. He was Cheung Kong chair professor of South China University of Technology from 2009 to 2014, and is now chair professor of Zhejiang University. He has authored more than 450 articles and has around 10000 citations to his papers. He received the Young Scientist Award from the Rare-earth Society of Japan in 1999, the Otto-Schott Research Award from the Ernst Abbe Fund in 2005, the Academic Award from the Ceramics Society of Japan in 2007, and the G. W. Morey Award from the American Ceramic Society in 2015. He serves as associate editor or editor of the Int. J. Appl. Glass Sci., J. Non-Cryst. Solids, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., J. Chinese Ceram. Soc., and Front. Mater.-Glass. Sci. His current research interests are photonic materials and femtosecond laser interaction with materials.

Solid–solid reaction	Micrometer-scale	Bad	Bad	>1000	Long	
83 and 84

Sol–gel method	Nano to micrometer-scale	Medium	Bad	≤1000	Medium	
2 and 85

Combustion method	Nano to micrometer-scale	Medium	Medium	>1000	Short	
86 and 87

Hydrothermal method	Nano to micrometer-scale	Good	Medium	<1000	Short	
11 and 29

Co-precipitation	Nano to micrometer-scale	Good	Medium	>1000	Short	
16

Template method	Nano to micrometer-scale	Good	Good	<1000	Short	
56 and 88

Electrospinning	Nano to micrometer-scale	Medium	Medium	>1000	Short	
89

Laser technique	Nano to micrometer-scale	Medium	Medium	None	Medium	
90

Electron beam irradiation	Nano to micrometer-scale	Medium	Medium	None	Medium	
91


 	Fig. 1  Sol–gel synthesis of persistent phosphorescent phosphors (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 2  Physical characteristics of long afterglow nanoparticles. (A) NPPs showed a clinoenstatite-like structure. (B) Transmission electronic microscopy images of the synthesized NPPs (scale bar: 200 nm). (C) Excitation spectrum. (D) Long afterglow emission spectrum. (E) Time dependence of the luminescence intensity of the NPPs. NPPs (10 mg) were put in 96-well plates under direct exposure to a 6 W UV lamp for 5 min. The luminous decay data were fit by a power law function for time >100 s (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2007, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A transmission electron micrograph of ZnGa1.995O4:0.5%Cr nanoparticles. Scale bar, 100 nm. (b) The hydrodynamic diameter measured by dynamic light scattering in 5% glucose before and after PEG coverage. (c) The evolution of zeta potential as a function of surface coverage (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (e) TEM image and size distribution of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (f) HR-TEM image of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs. (g) SAED. (h) X-ray diffraction pattern of ZnGa2O4:0.4%Cr3+ NPPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  FESEM images of (A) SiO2 and (B) SiO2/ZnGa2O4:Cr3+ prepared by template method. (C) TEM of SiO2/ZnGa2O4:Cr (reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2015, Wiley). (D) FESEM images of BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ synthesized by co-precipitation method. (E) Long persistent duration of bulk-form and nano-BaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphor (reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis process of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,Cr3+ samples via a combustion method.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the electrospinning equipment. (b) SEM images of CaTiO3:Pr3+ electrospun nanofibers calcined at 1100 °C. (c) SEM images of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers calcined at 1100 °C. (d) Afterglow decay curve for the 615 nm emission of CaTiO3:Pr3+ electrospun nanofibers. Inset shows the digital photographs of electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (e) The digital photographs of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (f) The digital photographs of CaAl2Si2O8:Eu2+,Dy3+ electrospun nanofibers (after grinding) taken (1) upon irradiation with a 365 nm LED and (2) 1 min after the removal of irradiating light. (g) Schematic diagrams of microstructural fibers and array.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Proposed sequential growth pathway model involving structural and morphology modifications by using laser ablation (reproduced with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). (b) Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of the obtained nanoparticles from the laser ablation technique (reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2012, American Optical Society). (c) Equipment for laser ablation in liquid (reproduced with permission from ref. 90, copyright 2011, Elsevier). (d) Biodistribution of Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+-OH and Ca2Si5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+-PEG, 15 minutes after tail vain injection (reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2012, American Optical Society). (e) Schematic of an afterglow nanoparticle and of PEG molecules. An afterglow nanoparticle without the addition of PEG. An afterglow nanoparticle capped with PEG molecules at a high PEG concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 90 copyright 2011, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Hole model: Afterglow mechanism proposed by Matsuzawa et al. for SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. (b) Electron model: Afterglow mechanism proposed by Aitasalo et al. for CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. (c) Persistent phosphorescence mechanism proposed by Dorenbos et al. for aluminate and silicate compounds. (d) Energy level scheme of the divalent lanthanides in CaBPO5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, copyright 2005, Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of persistent NIR luminescence mechanism. The straight-line arrows and curved-line arrows represent optical transitions and electron transfer processes, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (b) Representation of the NIR persistent phosphorescence and photo stimulated NIR persistent phosphorescence mechanisms (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group).	 

CaYAl3O7:Ce3+	2.002	An electron is trapped at an oxygen vacancy	
146


	2.012	A hole is self-trapped around a single Al3+ ion
ZnGa2O4:Cr3+	1.976	Cr3+–Cr3+ pairs	
49 and 147

Ca10.43Mn0.07(PO4)7	2	Mn2+ ions located in octahedral sites	
148

CaMgSi2O6:Mn2+	2	Typical hyperfine sextet of Mn2+	
149

Zn2P2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+	2.031	Holes trapped by 	
150

1.997	Electrons captured by 
Zn3Ga2SnO8:Cr3+	2.004	Defect agglomerate composed by single ionized Zn interstitial and the Zn vacancy capturing an electron	
62

2.08	Cr3+–Cr3+ exchange-coupled pairs or small clusters of several exchange-coupled pairs
2.45	isolated Cr3+ centers at strongly-distorted octahedral sites

 	Fig. 10  (left) Electron spin resonance spectra of Zn3Ga2SnO8:0.5Cr3+ (a–e) and Zn3Ga2GeO8:0.5Cr3+ (f) powders measured at 100 K, (a) Before irradiation, (b–e) 0.5, 6, 24, 96 h after the stoppage of irradiation, and (f) 96 h after the stoppage of irradiation. Two phosphors were pre-irradiated by a xenon lamp for 5 min. (right) Electron spin resonance spectra of sample LaAlO3:Mn4+ measured at 100 K: (a) before irradiation, and (b) 5 and (c) 20 min after the stoppage of irradiation; the samples were pre-irradiated by a xenon lamp for 10 min.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Wavelength dependence of absorption and photoconductivity for an idiochromatic effect (intrinsic) or an allochromatic effect (imperfection). (b) Schematic diagram of photocurrent measurement system as function of temperature and excitation wavelength. All the equipment was automatically controlled by a PC program. (c) Afterglow intensity I10s monitored at 713 nm for Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr as a function of the excitation wavelengths over the 300–650 nm spectral range. The inset shows an enlargement of the 400 to 650 nm region. The grey line shows the excitation spectrum monitored at 713 nm (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (d) Temperature-dependent photocurrent excitation spectra of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr for the range of 20–300 K.	 
	(1)
κ = μC	(2)

GZG	0.324	1.7	80.05	15.95	3.086
SZG	0.38	1.964	65	35	17.241

 	Fig. 12  (a) Three regions of XAS data. (b) Eu LIII XANES spectra of SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy at 120 K and SrS:Eu. EuS and Eu2O3 were measured as reference compounds. The spectra are shifted vertically for clarity (reproduced with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2011, American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Rare earth LIII edge XANES spectra of CdSiO3 doped with selected R3+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 23, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Emission of MnIIMg at 685 nm and (b) emission of MnIICa at 585 nm. (reproduced with permission from ref. 149, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) 3D drawing of the TL excitation part of the set-up with the Xe-lamp, focusing mirrors, monochromator, shutter, and optical fiber (reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2011, Elsevier). (B) The density of the continuous trap depth distribution at a certain depth can be estimated from the difference between the integrated intensities at two different excitation temperatures (reproduced with permission from ref. 162, copyright 2013, American Physical Society). (C) PL excitation (black solid line) and emission (black dotted line) spectra compared with TSL excitation (green open points) and emission (green dotted lines) spectra of Cr3+ doped n-ZnGa2O4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (D) TL intensity of ZnS:Cu+ as a function of excitation wavelength and temperature as contour plot (top) and in 3D representation (bottom) (reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2011, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  Normalized TL excitation contour plots for M2Si5N8:Eu (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) excited at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 164, copyright 2012, Elsevier).	 

CaO	Eu3+	
	[594, 616] (reddish orange)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
172

Lu2O3	Eu3+	
	[528, 611] (reddish orange)	[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉	[60 min] R	
173

SnO2	Sm3+	Zr4+	(550–700) (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[900 s] R	
104

ZrO2	Sm3+	Sn4+	(550–700) (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[900 s] R	
161

Lu2O3	Pr3+	Hf2+	[610, 631] (red)	[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉	[200 s] R	
169 and 174

Lu2O3	Tb3+	Ca2+, Sr2+	[543] (green)	[270] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[20–30 h] E	
175

ZrO2	Er3+	Yb3+	(630–720) [650] (red)	[980] (NIR) 〈CE〉	[16 ms] R	
157

Ga2O3	Cr3+	
	(650–850) [713] (NIR)	[300] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4 h] R	
75 and 176

ZrO2	Ti3+	
	(350–700) [496] (bluish-green)	[300] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[800 s] R	
177


Ba13Al22Si10O66	Eu2+	
	(350–700) (blue)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[43.5 min] R	
178

Sr3MgSi2O8	Eu2+	Dy3+	[460] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] R	
133

Sr3Al10SiO20	Eu2+	Ho3+	[465] (blue)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[6 h] M	
179

Ca3MgSi2O8	Eu2+	Dy3+	[470] (blue)	[Standard lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] M	
180

Sr2MgSi2O7	Eu2+	Dy3+	[470] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] M	
181

Ba4(Si3O8)2	Eu2+	Er3+	[481] (blue)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2500 s] E	
182

Ba4(Si3O8)2	Eu2+	Dy3+	(400–700) (bluish-green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[24 h] M	
44

Ba4(Si3O8)2	Eu2+	Ho3+	[496] (green)	[390] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4 h] E	
183

Sr2Al2SiO7	Eu2+	Dy3+	[485] (blue-green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] E	
184

Ba2MgSi2O7	Eu2+	Tm3+	[505] (green)	[355] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] M	
185

BaMgSiO4	Eu2+	
	[537] (green)	[310] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1.5 h] M	
186

Ca2MgSi2O7	Eu2+	
	[535] (green)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[12 h] M	
187

CaAl2Si2O8	Eu2+	Pr3+	(375–600) (green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
188 and 189

Sr2SiO4	Eu2+	Dy3+	[570] (yellow)	[160, 310] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[60, 10 min] R	
57 and 190

Sr3SiO5	Eu2+	Lu3+	[574] (yellow)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[20 h] M	
191 and 192

Ca2ZnSi2O7	Eu2+	Dy3+	[580] (yellow)	[460] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[12 h] E	
193

MgSiO3	Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)	
	[665] (Red)	Mercury lamp (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4 h] R	
194

Sr3MgSi2O8	Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)	
	[457, 670] (red)	[375] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
195

Ca0.2Zn0.9Mg0.9Si2O6	Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)	
	(600–800) (NIR)	[340] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] R	
85

CaAl2Si2O8	Eu2+ → Mn2+(ET)	Dy3+	[418, 580] (white)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] R	
196 and 197

Lu2SiO5	Ce3+	
	[400, 430] (blue)	[355] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] R	
198

Ca2Al2SiO7	Ce3+ → Mn2+(ET)	
	[550] (green)	Mercury lamp (UV) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] M	
199

Sr2Al2SiO7	Ce3+ → Dy3+(ET)	
	[408, 491, 573] (white)	[343] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] M	
184

CaMgSi2O6	Dy3+	
	[480, 575, 667] (white)	[343] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
200 and 201

CaxMgSi2O5+x (x = 1, 2, 3)	Dy3+	
	[475, 580] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
58 and 200

Ca2MgSi2O7	Dy3+	
	[458, 580, 660, 755] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
200 and 202

Sr2SiO4	Dy3+	
	[480, 575, 665] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] M	
203

Gd9.33(SiO4)6O2	Sm3+	
	[606] (red)	[273] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1400 s] R	
204

Sr2ZnSi2O7	Sm3+	
	[561, 598, 644] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[30 min] M	
205

CdSiO3	Mn2+	Nd3+	[587] (yellow)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[300 s] R	
206

CdSiO3	Bi3+	
	[360] (UV)	[221] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[60 s] R	
122 and 207

CdSiO3	Defect	Gd3+	[435] (blue)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
23


	Defect → Tb3+(ET)	
	[545] (green)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
23


	Defect → Sm3+(ET)	
	(530–680) (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
23


	Defect → Pr3+(ET)	
	(580–680) (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
23


	Defect → Dy3+(ET)	
	[480, 580] (white)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
23

CaSnSiO5	Defect	
	[420] (Purple Blue)	[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[200 s] R	
208


	Defect → Tb3+(ET)	
	[486, 542] (green)	[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4600 s]R	
208


	Defect → Sm3+(ET)	
	[600] (orange)	[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[700 s] R	
208


	Defect → Dy3+(ET)	
	[482, 572] (white)	[312] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3600 s]R	
208

Ca3SnSi2O9	Defect	
	[426] (blue)	[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[700 s] R	
209


	Defect → Pr3+(ET)	
	[488] (green)	[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1200 s] R	
209


	Defect → Sm3+(ET)	
	[600] (orange)	[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1200 s] R	
209


	Defect → Dy3+(ET)	
	[572] (white)	[316] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1200 s] R	
209

Ca2ZrSi4O12	Defect	
	[490] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4800 s] M	
144


	Defect → Sm3+(ET)	
	[616] (orange)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[843 s] M	
144


CaAl2O4	Eu2+	Nd3+	[440] (blue)	[350] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] M	
124

Sr4Al14O25	Eu2+	Dy3+	(490) (blue)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[20 h] R	
210

SrAl2O4	Eu2+	Dy3+	[520] (green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[30 h] R	
124

BaAl2O4	Eu2+	Dy3+	[500] (green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
16

Sr4Al14O25	Eu2+ → Cr3+(ET)	Dy3+	[495, 695] (green, NIR)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[10 h, 20 min] R	
211

SrAl2O4	Eu2+ → Er3+(ET)	Dy3+	[525, 1530] (green, NIR)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[100 min] R	
113

SrAl2O4	Eu2+ → Nd3+(ET)	Dy3+	[515, 882] (green, NIR)	[370] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[15 min] R	
212

CaAl4O7	Ce3+	
	[325, 420] (Purple Blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] M	
121 and 213

CaYAl3O7	Ce3+	
	[430] (blue)	[266, 355] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] R	
121 and 122

Sr4Al14O25	Ce3+	
	[472, 511] (blue-green)	[γ-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉	[600 s] E	
121 and 122

Y3Al5O12	Ce3+	
	[520] (green)	[460] (UV) 〈ICE〉	
	
214

Y3Al5−xGaxO12 (x = 2.5–3.5)	Ce3+	
	[505] (green)	[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉	[200–1000 min] R	
215

Gd3Al2Ga3O12	Ce3+	Cr3+	[540] (yellow)	[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉	[120 min] R	
216 and 217

SrAl2O4	Ce3+ → Mn2+(ET)	
	[375, 515] (green)	[Artificial light] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
196 and 218

CaAl2O4	Ce3+ → Tb3+(ET)	
	[543] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] R	
219

Y3Al2Ga3O12	Ce3+ → Cr3+(ET)	
	[505, 700] (green, NIR)	[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉	
	
41 and 81

Y3Al2Ga3O12	Ce3+ → Nd3+(ET)	
	[808, 1064, 1335] (NIR)	[460] (Blue) 〈ICE〉	[10 h] R	
81

CaAl2O4	Tb3+	
	[493, 543, 590, 621] (green)	[Mercury lamp]	[1 h] M	
73

Y3Al5O12	Pr3+	
	[490, 610] (yellow)	[240,290] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[600 s] R	
220

CaAl2O4	Dy3+	
	[477, 491, 577, 668] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[30 min] M	
221

Y3Al5O12	Mn2+	
	[580] (yellow)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[400 s] R	
222

MAlO3 (M = La, Gd)	Mn4+	Ge4+	(600–800) (NIR)	(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[20 h] R	
151


Y3Sc2Ga3O12	Ce3+	
	[500] (Green)	[400] (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[100 min] R	
32 and 215

La3Ga5GeO14	Cr3+	
	(700–1300) (NIR)	[240–480] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[8 h] R	
31, 77, 79 and 223

Zn3Ga2Ge2O10	Cr3+	
	(650–1000) (NIR)	(300–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[360 h] R	
12 and 80

LiGa5O8	Cr3+	
	(600–850) (NIR)	[250–350] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 h] R	
139, 224 and 225

SrGa12O19	Cr3+	
	(650–950) (NIR)	[254] (UV)	[2 h] R	
22

MgGa2O4	Cr3+	
	(650–770) (NIR)	[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉	[1200 s] R	
53 and 95

Zn3Ga2SnO8	Cr3+	
	(650–1000) (NIR)	(300–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[300 h] R	
62

ZnGa2O4	Cr3+	
	(600–800) (NIR)	(250–600) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
17, 20, 49, 147 and 226–228

Ca3Ga2Ge3O12	Cr3+	Yb3+, Tm3+	(650–850) (NIR)	(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[7000 s] R	
18 and 229

ZnGa2O4	Mn2+	
	[504] (green)	[352.6] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[15 min] R	
74

Zn3Ga2Ge2O10	Mn2+	
	[520] (green)	[290] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[8 h] R	
230

ZnGa2O4	Bi3+	
	[410, 550] (yellow)	[360] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[40 min] R	
231


Sr2P2O7	Eu2+	Y3+	[420] (Purple Blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[8 h] E	
232

Ca2P2O7	Eu2+	Y3+	[415] (Purple Blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[6 h] E	
233

SrMg2(PO4)2	Eu2+	Tb3+	[411] (Purple Blue)	[254, 365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] R	
234

Ca3Mg3(PO4)4	Eu2+	
	[433] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] R	
235

Ca9Bi(PO4)7	Eu2+	Dy3+	[475] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] E	
236

Zn2P2O7	Tm3+	
	[365, 452, 478] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] M	
68 and 150

YPO4	Pr3+	Nd3+, Er3+, Ho3+, Dy3+	[612] (orange)	[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉	[1800 s] R	
27

SrMg2(PO4)2	Eu3+	Zr4+	[500, 588] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1.5 h] R	
237

Zn3(PO4)2	Mn2+	Ga3+	[507, 620] (green, red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
238

Ca3(PO4)2	Mn2+	Dy3+	[660] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] R	
52

Ca9.5Mn(PO4)7	Mn2+	
	[645] (red)	(UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] R	
148


CaZnGe2O6	Tb3+	
	[488, 552, 583] (green)	[236] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4 h] R	
122

CaZnGe2O6	Dy3+	
	(white)	[240] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
239

Na2CaSn2Ge3O12	Sm3+	
	[566, 605, 664] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4.8 h] E	
78

CdGeO3	Pr3+	
	(470–510, 580–620) (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] R	
240

Li2ZnGeO4	Mn2+	
	[530] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[8 h] R	
63

Zn2GeO4	Mn2+	
	[528] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
241

Cd2Ge7O16	Mn2+	
	[585] (yellow)	[258] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] R	
242

MgGeO3	Mn2+	Bi3+	[680] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[100 min] R	
243

CaZnGe2O6	Mn2+	
	[648] (red)	[250] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
244

Zn2GeO4	Bi3+	
	[455] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[500 s] R	
245


Ca2SnO4	Sm3+	
	[566, 609, 633] (red)	[252] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
246

Sr2SnO4	Sm3+	Dy3+	[582, 624, 672] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
34

Sr3Sn2O7	Sm3+	
	[580, 621, 665, 735] (red)	[267] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
247

Ca2SnO4	Tm3+	
	[468] (blue-green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] E	
80

CaSnO3	Tb3+	
	[491, 545, 588, 622] (green)	[264] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[4 h] E	
248

Ca2SnO4	Tb3+	
	[483, 545] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
249

Ca2SnO4	Pr3+	
	[496, 605, 625, 658] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[20 min] E	
250

CaSnO3	Pr3+	
	[488, 541, 620, 653] (white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] M	
251

Ca2SnO4	Eu3+	
	[617, 633] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[100 min] R	
252

Sr2SnO4	Nd3+	
	(850–1400) (NIR)	(250–450) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] R	
253

Mg2SnO4	Ti4+	
	[458] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
254 and 255

Mg2SnO4	Mn2+	
	[500] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] M	
256

Zn2SnO4	Cr3+	
	(650–1200) (NIR)	(270–420) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[35 h] R	
13

SrSnO3	Bi2+	
	(700–850) (NIR)	(250–400) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[30 min] R	
257

Ca2SnO4	Defect	Gd3+	[410, 466] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
258

Mg2SnO4	Defect	
	[470–550] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[5 h] E	
204


SrZrO3	Pr3+	
	[350, 499, 612] (green)	[238] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[600 s] R	
259

CaTiO3	Pr3+	
	[612] (orange)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] M	
260

Ca2Zn4Ti16O38	Pr3+	
	[614] (orange)	[380, 473] (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	
	
35

NaNbO3	Pr3+	
	[620] (red)	[350] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[40 s] R	
261

CaWO4	Tb3+	
	[550] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[400 s] R	
262 and 263

LiSr4(BO3)3	Eu2+	
	[630] (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[20 min] E	
264 and 265

CaWO4	Eu2+	
	[618] (orange)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[40 min] E	
214

La2Ti2O7	Sm3+, Ti4+	
	[460, 570, 605, 660] (Blue-red-white)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[540 s] M	
266

CaWO4	Bi3+	
	[440] (violet)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] R	
267 and 268

BaZrO3	Defect	Mg2+	(350–500) (blue)	[275] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2000 s] M	
269

ZnTa2O6	Pr3+	
	(590–670) (red)	(beta-ray) (HR) 〈HR〉	[1200 s] R	
270


SrS	Eu2+	Pr3+	[611] (orange)	[440] (VIS) 〈ICE〉	[1000 min] R	
83 and 121

CaS	Eu2+	Tm3+	[650] (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
103

Ca2SiS4	Eu2+	Nd3+	[660] (red)	[320] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[30 min] R	
121

Y2O2S	Eu3+	Mg2+, Ti4+	[590, 614, 627, 710] (orange-red)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] R	
114 and 271

Gd2O2S	Eu3+	
	[627] (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[600 s] R	
272

Y2O2S	Sm3+	Mg2+, Ti4+	[570, 606, 659] (orange)	[269] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2.5 h] M	
114

La2O2S	Sm3+	
	[605, 665] (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[120 s] R	
273

Y2O2S	Dy3+	Mg2+, Si4+	[486, 557] (white)	[357] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[36 min] M	
274

Y2O2S	Tm3+	Mg2+, Ti4+	[495, 545, 588] (yellow)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] E	
275

SrS	Yb2+	
	(550–700) (orange)	[465] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[450 s] R	
82 and 276

ZnS	Cu+	Co2+	[525] (green)	[X-ray] (HR) 〈HR〉 [360] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] R	
121

Gd2O2S	Ti3+	
	[590] (yellow)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] M	
277

Y2O2S	Ti3+	Mg2+, Gd3+, Lu3+	(540–594) (yellow)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[5 h] R	
278


SrSi2O2N2	Eu2+	
	[539] (green)	(250–300) (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2.5 h] M	
279

BaSi2O2N2	Eu2+	
	[498] (green)	(250–500) (UV-VIS) 〈ICE〉	[50 min] E	
280

BaAlSi5N7O2	Eu2+	
	(400–650) (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[40 min] M	
281

Ca2Si5N8	Eu2+	Tm3+	(500–750) [620] (orange)	[420] (VIS) 〈ICE〉	[200 min] M	
37, 164 and 282

SrCaSi5N8	Eu2+	Tm3+	[647] (red)	[Xe lamp] 〈ICE〉	[30 min] M	
283

AlN	Mn2+	
	(570–700) (red)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] M	
284

C3N4	Defect	
	[553] (green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1.5 h] R	
285

BCNO	Defect	
	[520] (green)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[2 h] R	
152


Sr5(PO4)3Cl	Eu2+	
	[467] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1040 s] M	
286

Ba5(PO4)3Cl	Eu2+	Gd3+	[435] (blue)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1000 s] M	
287

Ca8Mg(SiO4)4Cl2	Eu2+	
	[505] (green)	[320] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] E	
288

Ca2BO3Cl	Eu2+	Dy3+	[580] (yellow)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[48 h] M	
25

Sr3Al2O5Cl2	Eu2+	Tm3+	[620] (orange)	[365] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[220 min] M	
26

Sr5(BO3)3Cl	Eu2+	
	[610] (orange)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[15 min] R	
289

KY3F10	Tb3+	
	[542] (green)	(X-ray/Cathode-ray) (HR) 〈HR〉	[108 s] E	
290

Sr3Al2O5Cl2	Tb3+	
	[544] (green)	[254] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[1 h] M	
291

Sr3Al2O5Cl2	Ce3+	
	[435] (blue)	[352] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] M	
292

Sr3Al2O5Cl2	Ce3+ → Eu2+(ET)	
	[435, 620] (orange)	[352] (UV) 〈ICE〉	[3 h] M	
287


Ce4+/Ce3+	+1.74	Eu3+/Eu2+	−0.35
Tb4+/Tb3+	+3.1 ± 0.2	Yb3+/Yb2+	−1.15
Pr4+/Pr3+	+3.2 ± 0.2	Sm3+/Sm2+	−1.55
Nd4+/Nd3+	+5.0 ± 0.4	Tm3+/Tm2+	−2.3 ± 0.2
Dy4+/Dy3+	+5.2 ± 0.4	
	


 	Fig. 16  Valence states of lanthanide elements.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Normalized excitation and emission spectra of the Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:0.5%Cr3+ phosphor at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (b) Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of the SrSnO3:5%Bi2+ phosphor at room temperature. (c) Normalized VIS-NIR long-persistence phosphorescence spectra of Zn2SnO4:0.2%Cr3+. (d) Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of the LaAl0.999O2.9985:0.1%Mn4+ phosphor.	 


CaO	1297	2580	Middle	Ca	459	1484	Middle
SrO	1517	>3000	Middle	Sr	394	1384	Middle
Lu2O3	
	2510	Low	Lu	
	3395	Low
SnO2	
	1800	High	Sn	997	2602	Middle
ZrO2	2077	4300	Low	Zr	
	4377	Low
Ga2O3	
	1900	Middle	Ga	907	2072	Middle
SiO2	
	2230	
	Si	1337	2287	

Al2O3	1905	2980	Middle	Al	972	2056	Middle
P2O5	
	360	High	P	129	280	High
GeO2	
	1200	High	Ge	1137	2833	Middle
TiO2	1780	2972	Middle	Ti	1442	3287	Middle
WO3	1079	1837	High	W	2757	5555	Low
ZnO	871	1949	High	Zn	247	906	High

 	Fig. 18  (A) Cubic spinel structure of ZGO (reproduced with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (B) Proposed mechanism for the persistent luminescence induced by LED excitation (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). (C) Octahedral and tetrahedral geometry of Zn2SnO4.	 

Green afterglow	Eu2+, Tb3+, Ce3+, Mn2+	Blue afterglow	Eu2+, Ce3+, Tm3+, defects
Red afterglow	Eu3+, Eu2+, Yb2+, Sm3+, Pr3+, Mn2+,	White afterglow	Dy3+
NIR afterglow	Nd3+, Bi2+, Yb3+, Mn2+, Mn4+, Cr3+	
	


 	Fig. 19  (A) NIR images of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:0.5Cr discs taken at different afterglow times (5 min to 360 h) after irradiation by direct sunlight for 10 s, 1 min and 5 min without cutoff filters, and for 5 min (reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). (B) NIR images of Zn3Ga2GeO8:0.5Cr,GZG (left) and Zn3Ga2SnO8 SZG (right) powders after being pressed acquired at different time intervals (from 5 min to 300 h) after the irradiation using a xenon lamp for 30 min. (C) Long persistent luminescence imaging of samples LaAlO3:Mn4+,Ge4+ (right) and GdAlO3:Mn4+,Ge4+ (left).	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) UCPL schematic diagram in the Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+,5%Yb3+,0.5%Er3+ system. (b) Up-converted luminescence emission spectrum (curve with yellow shadow) under a 980 nm laser excitation and photoluminescence excitation spectrum of Cr3+ (blue solid-line curve) by monitoring the 700 nm emission. (c) UCPL emission spectrum of Zn3Ga2GeO8:1%Cr3+,5%Yb3+,0.5%Er3+ recorded at 5 s after the stoppage of a 980 nm laser excitation (reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2014, American Physical Society). (d) Luminescence image of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+ taken at an interval of 24 hours after charging of the sample for illumination with an incoherent LED operating at a wavelength of 800 nm. (e) Photo-stimulated luminescence spectrum under excitation at 800 nm and (f) the corresponding photo-stimulated luminescence excitation spectrum monitored at 700 nm of Zn3Ga2Ge2O10:Cr3+.	 

 	Fig. 21  Optical write-in and read-out spectra for photostimulated luminescence and phosphorescence in LiGa5O8:Cr3+. (a) Persistent luminescence decay curves monitored at 716 nm with (colored solid-line curves) and without (grey dash-line curves) photo stimulation. The write-in wavelengths are 320 nm, 340 nm and 360 nm. The read-out wavelength is 400 nm. (b) Persistent luminescence decay curves monitored at 716 nm with (colored solid-line curves) and without (grey dash-line curve) photo stimulation. The write-in wavelength is 300 nm. The read-out wavelengths vary between 380 nm and 660 nm. For the measurements in (a) and (b), the read-out process (i.e., stimulation) starts at 5 min after ceasing the write-in process (i.e., UV pre-irradiation). The vertical double arrowheads in (a) and (b) represent the PSP intensities. (c) PSP write-in spectrum (the ball curve in the left panel) and read-out spectrum (the triangle curve in the right panel) plotted according to the data from (a) and (b), respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) A suspension containing a proper amount of NPPs is excited with a 6 W UV lamp and is directly injected to an anesthetized mouse. The signal is then acquired with an intensified charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. (B) Image of the injections of NPPs. The acquisition was performed during the 2 min after injection. (C) Image of an intramuscular injection corresponding to a 90 s acquisition (reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2009, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences). (D) Optical windows in biological tissues. Top: These plots of effective attenuation coefficient (on a log scale) versus wavelength show that absorption and scattering from oxygenated blood, deoxygenated blood, skin and fatty tissue are lowest in either the first (pink shaded area) or second (grey) near-infrared window. Bottom: Sensitivity curves for typical cameras based on silicon (Si), indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) or mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) sensors. Si and InGaAs cameras are sensitive within the first and second near-infrared windows, respectively, whereas HgCdTe is most sensitive at longer wavelengths (reproduced with permission from ref. 308, copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Optical imaging in vivo; 60 s acquisition at intervals of every 5 min over 1 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b and c) In vivo imaging with ZnGa2O4-based NPPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright 2014, Nature Publications Group). (b) A schematic representation of in vivo imaging after in situ activation of NPPs. (c) The detection of NPPs after in vivo activation.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a–c) Long persistent phosphorescent and photo-stimulated luminescent imaging of pork tissue under the excitation of 980 nm LD. (d and e) Long persistent phosphorescent and photo-stimulated luminescent tissues imaging of pork tissue under the excitation of 800 nm LED. (f) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of FA-ZGSC nanoparticles. (g–l) In vivo NIR images of U87MG tumor-bearing mice. (white circles locate the tumor site): (g and h) and normal mice, (i and j) after intravenous injection of PEG-NPPs (g and i) and RGD-NPPs (h and j) (0.4 mg, 10 min irradiation with a 254 nm UV lamp before injection). (k) Representative ex vivo NIR optical images of isolated organs and tumor from a U87MG tumor-bearing mouse at 6 h post-intravenous injection of RGD-NPPs (0.4 mg): (1) heart, (2) lung, (3) liver, (4) spleen, (5) kidney, (6) stomach, (7) pancreas, (8) intestine, (9) bladder, (10) bone, (11) tumor. (l) Semi-quantification of RGD-NPPs in the isolated organs and tumor of mice; error bars represent one standard deviation of triplicate measurements from individual animals (reproduced with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the design for AA detection using CoOOH-modified NPPs. (b) Optical image of a mouse treated with 0.1 mL of normal saline and the nanoprobe (left) and a mouse treated with 0.1 mL of AA (0.1 mol L−1) and the nanoprobe (right) without excitation. (c) Optical image of the same mice in (A) using 420 nm excitation. The concentration of the nanoprobe was 1 mg mL−1. The optical signals were collected at 520 ± 20 nm. The center of the black dashed circle is the injection site. The color change from purple to red for the intensity bar represents the increase in the luminescence intensity (reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (d) In vivo T1-weighted MR images of the mouse before and after intravenous injection of Gd(III)-NPPs (0.3 mg); the yellow arrow indicates the liver (reproduced with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of setup for the photocatalytic experiment (reproduced with permission from ref. 316, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic band structures of (left) Cr-doped SrTiO3 and (right) nonstoichiometric SrTiO3 (Sr/Ti = 1.67) (reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright 2013, Elsevier). (c) Gaseous product generation over the zinc gallogermanate solid solution and ZnGa2O4 as a function of irradiation time: CH4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 6, copyright 2013, Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Working mechanism of the DSSC with an FTO/TiO2/phosphor multilayered electrode. Three functions of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ in the working process of a DSSC: (1) down-converting of UV light to green light, (2) scattering of light, and (3) recombination centers (reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of QDSSCs with P25/SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy/CdSe electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2014, Elsevier). (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the cells with P25/CdSe and P25/SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy/CdSe electrodes. (reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2014, Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
