Recent advances in anion-doped metal oxides for catalytic applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09913H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09913H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7280-7300Recent advances in anion-doped metal oxides for catalytic applications

        
          
            Yu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaomin 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Pierre 
            Marcel Veder
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *ac
aWA School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering (WASM-MECE), Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
bJohn de Laeter Centre, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia
cJiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, No. 5 Xin Mofan Road, Nanjing 210009, P. R. China
Received 
      14th October 2018
    , Accepted 12th December 2018First published on 13th December 2018AbstractMetal oxides have been extensively applied as heterogeneous catalysts in various chemical processes, including conventional heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis, and membrane catalysis. The catalytic performance of an oxide heterogeneous catalyst can be affected by its lattice structure, electronic structure, surface properties, bulk defects, and metal–oxygen bond strength. As a catalytic membrane, the catalytic performance of an oxide may also strongly depend on its oxygen-ion diffusion properties. Cation doping has been extensively adopted to tailor, both physically and chemically, the properties of oxide materials, such as lattice structure, electronic structure, lattice defects and diffusion behavior, so as to alter their catalytic performance for various redox reactions. Very recently, anion doping into the oxygen site has emerged as a new strategy for tuning the chemical and physical properties of metal oxides, and thus for regulating their catalytic behavior. Here, a timely review of recent progress in the development of advanced oxide catalysts based on oxygen-site anion doping is provided. Emphasis is given to the effect of doping anions into the metal oxide lattice on the physical and chemical properties, and consequently the performance in various catalytic applications, including the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane (ODE), oxidative coupling of methane (OCM), photocatalytic reduction of dyes, and ceramic membrane-based oxygen separation. The aim of the current review is to offer some insightful perspectives to guide the development of functional oxide materials based on the anion site doping strategy toward application in heterogeneous catalysis. The knowledge gained here may also be useful for other application fields, such as electrochemical energy storage devices and sensors.Yu LiuYu Liu is a Visiting Research Associate in Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his Ph.D degree in Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia in 2018. His research interests include supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, solid oxide fuel cells and electrochemical catalysis.Zongping ShaoZongping Shao is a professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at the Institut de Recherches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France and postdoc at the California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 till 2005. His current research interests include solid-oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices.
1 Introduction
The rate and efficiency of a chemical reaction can be substantially improved through the participation of an additional agent, known as a catalyst.1–5 A typical feature of a catalyst is that it is not consumed in the chemical reaction and yet increases the rate of reaction via reducing the activation energy.6–10 Most of the important chemical reactions are thermodynamically uphill processes that require an additional energy input for the reaction to proceed. Catalysis is viewed as a route where less energy is applied to initiate and complete the reaction. As such, catalytic processes are critical for industry as they support the rapid development of various industries. For example, the catalytic oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons is a major industrial process that has evolved in the last decade.11–15 The demand for light alkenes, especially ethylene (ethene) as well as propylene (propene) – arguably the most crucial types of compounds in the chemical industry – is anticipated to grow significantly in the near future.16 Moreover, alkenes are primarily yielded from fluid catalytic cracking, steam cracking and catalytic dehydrogenation, and metal oxide-based catalysts have been demonstrated to be desirable dehydrogenation catalysts to improve the production efficiency.17
Apart from traditional chemical reactions or production methods, the rapid development of new energy forms (e.g., biofuels, solar cells, fuel cells, etc.) has also benefitted from catalytic processes.18–22 For instance, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the air electrode, a typical electrochemical catalytic process in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, is well accepted as the main rate-determining step of the fuel cell process.19,23,24 Additionally, the highly efficient electrochemical catalytic reactions occurring at the cathode of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) can also provide an abundant source of oxygen ions to achieve the efficient and continuous conversion of chemical energy to electric power.25–27 On the other hand, in photocatalysis, a typical photoreaction is accelerated in the presence of a catalyst, as in the case of hydrogen production via photocatalytic water splitting using active catalysts.28–30 Finally, degradation of pollutants in contaminated water also involves photocatalysis and photo-electrochemical catalysis. Meanwhile, a variety of environmental issues can be realistically resolved by conventional heterogeneous catalysis.31–34
In recent times, the growing importance of catalysis has been demonstrated in environmental applications. For example, environmental catalysis plays an important role in the control of mobile emission,35 elimination of NOx from stationary fossil fuel power plants,36 conversion of sulfur-containing products and volatile organic compound (VOC),37 and disposal of solid and liquid waste (polymers and other solid waste),38 as well as reduction or conversion of greenhouse gas.39 Moreover, environmental catalysis also has importance in the new ecologically compatible refineries, where catalytic processes are applied to minimize waste, in addition to their application in producing valuable products with no harmful pollutants.40–44
In the past, noble metal-based catalysts have been widely used in many chemical processes, as they typically show high catalytic activity.45–49 However, the drawbacks of high cost and unstable activity have motivated research into viable substitute catalysts that are not comprised of noble metals. Metal oxides are alternative catalysts to precious metals for various chemical reactions.50–52 The constantly and rapidly growing rate of chemical reactions demonstrated by metal oxide catalysis reflects that using a metal oxide catalyst can improve the rate of a wide range of chemical reactions.47 Metal oxides, such as alkaline earth oxides, rare earth oxides, transition metal oxides and perovskite oxides, are materials with interesting properties and are promising candidates as catalysts in a range of applications, including redox reactions, materials for high-temperature oxygen permeation membrane reactors, electrode materials for SOFCs, and photocatalysts for water splitting or remediation of wastewater.25,53–55 Catalytic processes that are applicable to metal oxide-based catalysts, including photosynthesis, alkylation, liquid hydrocarbon formation, and transesterification as well as environmental applications (e.g., oxidizing VOCs and reducing NOx), are widely regarded as some of the most important reaction processes.37,56–58 In photocatalysis, metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, and CeO2 are abundant in nature, and have often been applied as heterogeneous photocatalysts over the past few decades.59–65 The advantages of such materials are that they are biocompatible, exceptionally stable under various conditions, and able to generate charge carriers by stimulation with light energy. The performance of such metal oxides as photocatalysts can be further improved by optimizing their electronic structure, light absorption characteristics and long lifetimes.59 These materials have been used as photocatalysts for the catalytic decomposition of various pollutants into degradable compounds before subsequently breaking them down into the relatively benign components of carbon dioxide and water.66 Additionally, some other oxides, such as TiO2 and CeO2, have also been widely used as catalysts in energy conversion processes, such as the solar-thermal conversion of solar power to chemical fuels.67–69
Metal oxide catalysts are characterized by various surface/bulk structures that exert an influence on their surface energy as well as their physicochemical characteristics.70–75 For example, the coordination of cations and oxygen anions in metal oxides affects the relative acidity and basicity of the atoms on the metal surface and changes the catalytic characteristics of these compounds. As a result, their catalytic properties are significantly influenced by the structural defects present in the transition metal oxides. High-performance metal oxide catalysts can also have other interesting features, such as large surface area, improved nonlinear optical properties, and a high level of geometric surface defects, as well as optimized electronic structures.76
Considering that there are a number of factors influencing the catalytic performance, it is important to understand the underlying catalytic mechanism of metal oxides.77,78 In heterogeneous catalysis, reactants adsorb at the catalyst surface through chemical bond formation. The products then desorb from the surface and diffuse away after the reaction. Hence, heterogeneous catalysis between reactants and active sites occurs on the catalyst surface instead of on the bulk; so in order to achieve an understanding of the basic catalytic mechanism, it is important to understand that catalysis takes place at active sites at the interface between the solid catalyst surface and the liquid or gas molecules involved in the reaction. Catalytic performance can be obviously affected by different oxidation states, compatible bulk and surface phases, changeable local coordination and surface functionalities like MO, M–O–M or M–OH. Consequently, the electronic as well as molecular structures present on the catalyst surface are important to the process. For example, the applicability of an oxide as a photocatalyst depends on the arrangement of electronic structure, sunlight absorption characteristics, and charge transport properties. Therefore the suitable band gap (BG), appropriate morphology, large surface area, excellent stability, and reusability are considered as favorable properties in terms of a photocatalytic system.79
In recent times, metal oxides have received increasing attention in the field of catalysis because of their favorable chemical and physical properties.80–87 In particular, the properties of metal oxides can be simply modulated or altered by partial or total replacement of trivalent elements or quadrivalent elements by other cations of lower oxidation states (e.g., Yb, Eu, Cu, Zr, Ce, Ni, Y, Nd, Sm, Pr, Gd, and In).80,88–92 The introduction of foreign cations into the oxide lattice can change the concentration of oxygen vacancies, and cause phase transition or even structural distortion; consequently, this results in a change in their transport and other properties. For example, incorporation of Nd ions into the BaZr0.8Y0.2O3 lattice increased its protonic conductivity and hence also improved its function as an electrolyte in SOFCs; the Ti1−xMxO2−δ (M = Fe, V, Cu, Zr, W, and Ce) series of oxides doped with several different ions have been shown to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency; Mo doping of the cathode material of lithium ion batteries has been shown to improve capacity performance.80–82
Apart from cation-site doping and substitution, some researchers have focused on the doping of fluorine, chlorine, sulfur or nitrogen elements into the oxygen site of metal oxides to optimize the lattice structure with a view to modifying their physical and chemical properties, consequently altering their catalytic capability in the selective oxidation of ethane, photocatalysis-based reactions and oxygen permeable membranes.93–100 Anion doping can be simply defined as the incorporation of anion dopants, such as F−, Cl−, S2−, N3−, etc., into the crystal lattice of the parent material for the purpose of modulating its electrical, optical, and structural properties. From a theoretical standpoint, partial substitution of oxygen by an anion in an oxide is expected to increase the surface basicity, which may improve the catalytic performance for oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) and oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane (ODE). Furthermore, anions located at the oxygen site can not only cause the creation of lattice defects that increase the activity of gaseous reactants, but can also suppress the deep oxidation of hydrocarbons.101 In addition, anion doping such as halide, nitrogen, carbon, and sulfur doping or their co-doping is regarded as an efficient strategy to enhance the photocatalytic performance of metal oxide catalysts under visible light irradiation.102–104 Nevertheless, up until now, a systematic review of the various anion doping strategies aimed at enhancing the development of advanced oxide catalysts is still lacking in the open literature.
Herein, we provide a timely review on the recent progress related to the field of anion doping of metal oxides, with a special focus on the development of advanced catalytic materials for application in environment and energy-related redox reactions, photocatalytic reactions, and membrane catalytic reactions, among others. The aim of this review is to present some valuable perspectives on the future development of non-metal element doped metal oxide-based catalysts for various catalytic reactions.
2 Anion doping process
2.1. Anion doping site
There are two ways that anions can be doped into the oxide lattice, by either replacing the lattice oxygen or making them occupy the interstitial sites between different layers in the crystal structure. The way an anion is introduced into the oxide system determines the exact doping site of the anion. In turn, the different doping sites may critically influence the catalytic, electrocatalytic and photocatalytic performance of the oxide materials.105–107
The insertion of non-oxygen anions (such as F−, Cl−, S2−, N3−, Br−, etc.) into a mixed metal oxide lattice typically occurs via one of the following four mechanisms: (1) one of the O2− anions in the oxide lattice is replaced by one non-oxygen anion, leading to a smaller lattice in the metal oxide; (2) two non-oxygen anions are substituted in place of one O2− anion in the lattice, resulting in either a reducing lattice or an oxidizing lattice in the metal oxide; (3) the introduction of non-oxygen anions into interstitial sites along with the generation of an oxidizing lattice in the metal oxide; (4) the oxygen and non-oxygen anion site preferences may rearrange the structure of the metal oxide.108,109 In theory, the incorporation of anions into the oxide lattice could make them (i) expand the interstitial sites, (ii) take up oxygen vacancies, or (iii) take the place of some of the O2− anions. If an O2− anion is replaced by a halide ion to retain electroneutrality, this could lead to a drop in the oxidation state of an adjacent or nearby cation; otherwise, the oxidation state of an adjacent or nearby cation will rise when the interstitial site at the oxygen position is occupied by the halide ions.110 For example, O(A) and O(B), referring to oxygen coordinated with A site and B site metals respectively, are two lattice oxygen atoms in the mixed oxides of K2NiF4-type A2BO4, with oxygen vacancies approximately located at the O(A) or O(B) site. The F− ion enters different oxygen sites for different compounds. For example, two different mechanisms have been reported for the formation of orthorhombic La2CuO4Fδ and tetragonal Nd2CuO4−xFx. Through intercalation, F− ions were introduced into interstitial sites by the formation of La2CuO4Fδ between LaO layers of the La2CuO4 structure, but Nd2CuO4−xFx was the result of replacement of O2− by F−. The F− ions were located at O(B) sites surrounded by the Nd3+ ions and they exerted an influence on the lattice parameters of Nd2CuO4−xFx.111 Additionally, both O(A) and O(B) can be occupied by F− ions in the Nd2CuO4−xFx oxide.112,113 However, compared to the original structures, no obvious change to their crystal structures has been observed.111,114 With respect to Sr2CuO2F2+δ, although F− ions inserted into the empty channels did not cause a significant change of the crystal structure, they tended to occupy the O(A) sites and to partially occupy the interstitial sites between the SrF layers.115–117Fig. 1a shows a schematic transformation during the formation of Sr2CuO2F2+δ from Sr2CuO3. To form the superconducting oxide fluoride Sr2CuO2F2+δ, substitution and insertion of fluorine can be conducted simultaneously by the insertion of F atoms into the vacant channels that exist via the Sr2CuO3 structure.
 Fig. 1  (a) Structural transformation in the crystal of Sr2CuO3 after fluorine doping. (b) Crystal structure of the halide doped and original structures of La2−xSrxCuO4 and Nd2−xSrxCuO4. (c) The structure of Ba2ZrO4−xF2x. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 1998, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2001, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
There are two approaches for the synthesis of Sr2CuO2F2+δ. They involve either substitution of oxygen ions or insertion of fluorine into Sr2CuO3. It has been observed that the outcomes of fluorination of this phase are determined by the fluorination method employed. The solid-state reaction, which usually happens at a low temperature between Sr2CuO3 and NH4F, generates superconducting Sr2CuO2F2+δ, but is frequently accompanied by the generation of secondary phase SrF2.118 Therefore, the apical oxide ions in Sr2CuO3 migrate to the equatorial sites in the Cu plane that are unoccupied in the fluorination process and take the place of fluoride ions, as shown in Fig. 1b. Essential for superconductivity, the CuO2 layers were formed by the fluorine insertion and divided by SrF blocks.119 Compared to the synthesis of La2CuO4Fδ, fluorination not only provides hole doping but also significantly influences the transformation of the anion sublattice of the former Sr2CuO3 phase, which is related to the La2CuO4 structure. Replacing La3+ with Sr2+ in La2CuO4 results in the generation of one oxygen in the ab plane, which forms isolated chains of corner-linked CuO4 by transformation from the CuO6 octahedra. The anion sublattice was completed by inserting fluorine to generate an oxide fluoride in the structure of K2NiF4, and one of the three pristine oxygen ions was replaced by another fluorine ion. The partial occupation of interstitial sites by additional fluorine provides the superconductivity necessary for hole doping. The calculations of bond distances as well as Madelung energy strongly suggest that only the apical sites had the residue of the F− ions on the normal sites of the anion.114 Additionally, the replacement of one of the oxygens in Ba2ZrO4 by two fluorine ions increases the anion content and greatly expands the unit cell in the c direction (Fig. 1c). Owing to the enlargement in the unit cell along the c direction by fluorination, Ba2ZrO3F2·xH2O, with the occupation of interstitial sites by extra anions within the layers of rock salt, possesses a similar K2NiF4-type structure to that of the parent material, as observed via X-ray diffraction (XRD).120
Compared to F− and Cl−, S2− theoretically possesses a larger ionic radius. In the preparation of S-doped YBa2Cu3O7, CuS was reported to act as the S source. Due to a large initial proportion of CuS and high temperature treatment in an O2 atmosphere, sulfur was not completely doped into the lattice, generating an impurity phase of BaSO4, as evidenced by XRD. To avoid the formation of the impurity phase, more complex methods have to be applied to guarantee that all of the S element can be incorporated into the crystal lattice. After the O site is occupied by the S dopant, a superconducting behaviour is observed. The preparation temperature also has a significant effect on the introduction of S element into the crystal lattice.121 It has been reported that the proportion of S dopants has an obvious influence on the structure of La2−xSrxCuO4−ySy. When the sulfur content is lower than 20%, the S-doped La2−xSrxCuO4 displays a single phase with a K2NiF4 structure, which is the same structure as that of fresh La2−xSrxCuO4. However, a higher proportion of S dopants can lead to the formation of an additional impurity phase. The crystal structure changes from tetragonal to orthorhombic at room temperature as the amount of sulfur increases. Specifically, the lattice constant increases with increasing S proportion and this constant will suddenly decrease upon the appearance of the orthorhombic phase.122 In addition, the S element was introduced into TiO2 by heating TiS2 powder. The characterization results from XRD, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) suggest that S was incorporated into the O site of the TiO2 lattice and was homogeneously distributed at the O site.123
The nitridation of oxide, which means the introduction of the nitride ion into the oxide lattice, has emerged as an attractive way to modify the structures and electronic properties of materials. In addition, the possibility of crystallographic ordering between the oxide and nitride anions offers the prospect of realizing polar noncentrosymmetric materials or materials with layered characteristics.124 In these materials, when atomic nitrogen is introduced into the oxygen site, the increase in negative charge upon replacing O with N is compensated for by simultaneously replacing the cation with metals having higher cationic charge. Therefore, the N doping can shift the VB edge potentials to a more negative region via the hybridization of N 2p and O 2p orbitals and the target materials are electronically equivalent to d0 in the original materials.125 For example, structural investigation of the ZnTaON compound by XRD refinement and transmission electron microscopy indicated that the oxygen and nitrogen atoms were randomly distributed at the 18e site. As displayed in Fig. 2, the crystal structure of ZnTaO2N is quite similar to that of MnTaO2N, and can be fully indexed based on a HTLN-type structure with an Rc space group. The O/N occupancy was constrained to be unity, and the isotropic thermal parameters of O and N were set to be equal.126 An advanced technology of pair distribution function was applied in the investigation of the local structure and O/N ordering of BaTaO2ON. As a result, it is suggested that short-range ordering of O and N exists in BaTaO2N. However, no evidence for long range anion ordering was detected in BaTaO2N.125
 Fig. 2  (a) Structures of MnTaO2N with an LN-type structure (R3c) and ZnTaO2N with an HTLN-type structure (Rc); gray, brown, purple, red, and green balls represent Zn, Ta, Mn, O, and N. (b) Coordination environment around A and B sites in ZnTaO2N and MnTaO2N. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016, ACS Publications. 
2.2. Synthesis method of anion doped oxides
There are several ways to synthesize anion-doped metal oxides. In order to introduce F− or Cl−, the parent oxide is typically, but not always, treated to high temperatures or high vacuum conditions in the presence of a fluorine or chlorine source. For example, the chlorination and fluorination of La1.85Sr0.15CuO4−δ and Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4−δ powder samples have previously been achieved using a vacuum tube furnace within the temperature range of 300 to 400 °C for 12 hours and subsequently heated to above 600 °C for another 12 hours with NH4F or NH4Cl as the reactants for anion doping.127 In another instance, F-doped La0.7Sr1.3CuO3.25 was instead prepared by mixing the parent oxides with the solid phase of CuF2 at relatively low temperatures.117 The synthesis of LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 has been demonstrated via a polyglycol gel approach where the obtained precursor of the parent oxide was first calcined at 650 °C for 6 h and subsequently combined with LaF3 in an appropriate stoichiometry. The mixture was then pelletized under high pressure and calcined again at 900 °C in air for 12 h.128 After that, most of the halide-doped metal oxides were prepared with chloride, fluoride or bromide as the raw materials for the introduction of halide anions. Murphy et al. explored several routes for the preparation of Nd2CuO4−xFx with the best results achieved by heating a mixture of CuO, Nd2O3 and freshly produced NdF3 at a stoichiometric ratio in air at 900 °C after pelletizing and heating at 890 °C for 14 h in a N2 flow.111 Generally, compared to that of binary cobalt based oxo-halides, the synthesis of Ba6Co6−yMnyX1−xO16−δ hybrids is fairly difficult and not well reproducible. At best, the approach involves heating at high temperatures and various regrinding procedures, beginning from BaCO3, Co3O4, MnO, and BaCl2·H2O or BaF2. This procedure has been demonstrated in previous studies, where following high-temperature treatment at 700 °C for 12 h and rapid quenching to room temperature, the mixtures were pressed into pellets, subsequently heated at 1000 °C for 72 h and finally cooled to room temperature.129 A solid-state reaction method was demonstrated for the preparation of La1−xSrxMnO3−2x+δF2x samples. LaO, SrF, and MnO were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio and subsequently sintered at 1000 °C in a muffle furnace for 2 days. Following this, the samples were further ground, pelletized and sintered at 1200 °C to obtain a powder which was subsequently ground two more times before cooling to room temperature.130 A citric acid complexing method was adopted to prepare La1−xSrxFeO3−δXσ (X = F, Cl), but lanthanum nitrate in the starting material was partially replaced by lanthanum fluoride or lanthanum chloride at the desired stoichiometric ratio. After that, the precursor was treated at high temperatures to obtain the target material.131
Unlike the halogen dopants, the introduction of S into the crystal lattice normally involves a solid-state reaction. In the preparation of La1.84Sr0.16CuO4−ySy perovskite materials, powders of La2O3, SrCO3, CuO and CuS were mixed and sintered by heating at a constant rate to 900 °C. Among these raw materials, CuS acted as the S source to insert S element into the O position. The S content in the target materials is dependent on the batch sulfur content and the calcination temperature.122 Asai and co-workers incorporated S into TiO2 by oxidation of titanium disulfide at high temperature in an air atmosphere. After the calcination, the color of the powder changed from black to grey or white, which depended on the treatment temperature.123 Li1.02Al0.25Mn1.75O3.97S0.03 with a spinel structure was synthesized by a sol–gel procedure or a solid-state method, which used Li2S as the S source.132 In addition, the wet chemical method can also be applied in the process of sulfidation. To synthesize Cu2S nanowires, Cu(OH)2/Cu was placed into an appropriate amount of aqueous solution of 0.05 M Na2S mixed with methanol and deionized water at room temperature. Then, the obtained Cu2S/Cu was washed with deionized water and dried under a nitrogen gas flow to remove the residual impurities on the surface. Using NaS2 as the S source in the sulfidation is also viable for the preparation of other materials, such as S-doped NiCo2O4 and CoO.133,134 Ni et al. reported a novel method to prepare S-doped TiO2, which involves sintering properly placed TiO2 nanotubes (mid-side) and S powder (upstream side) in a tube furnace under an Ar atmosphere at 500 °C. The as-prepared S-doped TiO2 nanotubes exhibited a core–shell structure composed of a core of TiO2 and a shell layer associated with S–Ti and S–Ti–O bonds. The sulfidation reaction using S vapor is a kinetically driven process; thus, S is preferentially consumed on the surface rather than diffusing into the bulk of the nanotubes.135
In a number of cases the lattice oxygen can be partially replaced by nitrogen leading to modifications of the crystal and electronic structures. N-doped oxides are normally prepared by high-temperature ammonolysis reactions using high purity powder reagents. For instance, BaTaO2N was prepared by treating completely mixed high-purity powders of BaCO3 and Ta2O5 in a flow of anhydrous ammonia gas at high temperature. No impurities can be detected in the as-obtained product as revealed by the analysis of the time of flight neutron diffraction data.125 For the synthesis of N-doped BaSc1/3Ta2/3O8/3N1/3, LaMg1/2Ta1/2O5/2N1/2, and LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N, the powder raw materials of BaCO3, La2O3, MgO, Sc2O3, and Ta2O5 were appropriately mixed in acetone and then sintered in an ammonia atmosphere from 800 to 1000 °C. The process of the ammonolysis heating cycle has to be repeated to get a high-purity phase.136 Additionally, N-doped TiO2 can be prepared by a different way, which is through the oxidative annealing of TiN in an oxygen gas flow at around 500 °C for several hours. The concentration of the TiN precursor phase in the target materials decreased to zero with increasing treatment temperature.137 Introduction of N into oxides can also be achieved in N2 gas other than ammonia gas, as reported in the preparation of N-doped CeO2, TiO2 or Cu2O.102,138,139 The conversion of CsCa2Ta3O10 into layered oxynitride CsCa2Ta3O10−xNy has also been shown to be achievable by calcination at 800 °C with an NH3 flow rate of 100 mL min−1 for 6 h.140
Notably, the incorporation of carbon into the oxygen site can also be achieved via specialized synthetic methods to obtain pure and stable samples. For instance, a microorganism chelate approach was employed to synthesize C-doped LaCoO3 photocatalysts. In this method, Bacillus licheniformis R08 biomass, rather than citric acid, functioned as the complexing reagent, in the presence of infrared irradiation throughout the preparation process.141 Carbon-doped NaTaO3 has also been prepared via a facile solvothermal reaction in a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. In this approach, a mixed solution of proportionate water and ethylene glycol was used as the solvent without the requirement for any other carbon precursors.142 The synthesis of carbon-doped TiO2 micro-/nano-spheres has also been demonstrated by chemical vapor deposition using a single source applied in an inert atmosphere. The titanium, oxygen, and carbon originated from the organic compound Ti(OC4H9)4 with the carrier gas being argon.143
3. Impact of anion doping on the physical and chemical properties of the oxides
3.1. Physical properties

3.1.1 Lattice structure. 
Introducing anions into the lattice often results in significant changes in the crystal lattice structure or stability of the oxides. For instance, the stability of the perovskite structure in pure La1−xSrxMnO3 decreased following the introduction of fluorine into the lattice. The transformation from a perovskite structure to a distorted rhombohedral structure was observed when x ≤ 0.2; however, a phase change occurred and even a small amount of impurity appeared in these samples at the condition of x > 0.2.130 The replacement of one O2− by two F− ions per formula unit has also been shown to result in the transformation of the unit cell of La1.9Sr1.1Cu2O6 from tetragonal to orthorhombic.109 In another study, XRD patterns showed that AMn1−xCuxO3−δFσ (A = Na, Ba, Sr, Li, Pb, Ca, K and Bi) and AMn1−xCuxO3−δClσ are both comprised of a predominant cubic structure. However, at x ≥ 0.5, the phases of orthorhombic La3CuO4 and monoclinic CuO were regarded as impurities. Importantly, the stability and formability of halide perovskites may have a correlation with their tolerance factors and octahedral factors.144,145
Despite F-doped LaFePO and pristine LaFePO possessing the same tetragonal structure, one study demonstrated that the a-axis decreases by only 0.15% after fluorination.146 Inserting F− into the oxygen can lead to the expansion of the c-axis lattice. For example, the F-doped Sr3Fe2O7 with an I4/mmm structure possessed a longer c-axis than the parent Sr3Fe2O7 and the F− dopant also enlarged the unit cell, which is displayed in Fig. 3a.147 Another material, Li3xLa2/3−xTiO3, has attracted significant attention due to its excellent ionic conductivity as a lithium battery solid-state electrolyte at room temperature.148 After incorporating F− ions into the perovskite-type structure for partially replacing O2−, the compound was dominated by a tetragonal perovskite cell with an alternating arrangement of layers rich in La and those rich in Li vacancies along the c-axis.149 For Ln1.2Sr1.8Mn2O7F2 (Ln = Sm, Nd, Gd, Eu and Pr) materials, the expansion of the spacing along the c-axis in the layered perovskite increased notably. Yet it also decreased slightly in the c direction in samples when one catalyst material proceeded from La to Gd after inserting fluorine into the oxygen site.150 With smaller ionic size of the Sr ions and F ions compared to the ionic radii of La ions and O ions, respectively, alterations in lattice parameters as well as unit cell volumes may produce samples with multiple phases.130 In hexagonal perovskites based on Ba, halide-anion-deficient (BaOX1−δ) layers were produced by introducing halide ions, favoring a hexagonal-type layer instead of a cubic-type layer.151,152 As S2− has a larger ionic radius than O2− (1.84 Å vs. 1.40 Å), another study found that substitution of S enlarged the cell volume by a nearly linear increase in the crystal structure of double perovskite oxide La2FeMoO6. La2FeMoO6−xSx exhibited a tetragonal structure with I4/mmm symmetry and I4mm symmetry upon the incorporation of different contents of S as revealed by density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. The analysis of enthalpy indicated that the I4/mmm symmetry structure was more stable.153 Finally, the distortion from a hexagonal to an orthorhombic structure has also been observed for the Ba6Co6−yMnyClO16−δ series, which is dependent on the doping level of Mn.129
 Fig. 3  (a) Structures of Sr3Fe2O6 and Sr3Fe2O6F0.87. Oxide ions are shown in white, and the mixed oxide/fluoride site in dark grey. (b) Crystal structures of original YBa2Cu3O7 and anion-doped YBa2Cu3O7. (c) A possible mechanism of oxide migration and F-displacements activated by structural fluctuations. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 1999, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2010, ACS Publications. 


3.1.2 Oxygen vacancy concentration. 
Oxygen vacancies are regarded as one of the most critical defects in various oxides. The structures together with the properties of oxygen vacancies can be substantially different depending on the material in question. The oxygen vacancy concentration can give evidence for the electronic structure demonstrated by both oxides and anion-doped oxides. For LaSrCoO3.6F0.4, F ions could take the place of the oxygen ions in the lattice or they could occupy the sites of interstitial and oxygen vacancies. If the oxygen ions are replaced by fluorine ions, the decrease of valence from Co3+ to Co2+ would be accompanied by neighboring Co ions in order to balance the electrovalence; if oxygen vacancies or interstitial sites are occupied by F ions, the increase of valence from Co2+ to Co3+ would instead occur in neighboring Co ions.128 In the case of YBa2Cu3O7−δXσ oxides, the halide ions take the place of several O2− anions or some of the oxygen vacancies. To retain electroneutrality, the substitution of O2− by F− or Cl− results in a drop in the oxidation state from Cu3+ to Cu2+; alternatively, the occupation of an oxygen vacancy by a halide ion would lead to an increase in the oxidation state from Cu2+ to Cu3+ for a nearby copper cation.154 The structures of undoped and doped YBa2Cu3O7 are shown in Fig. 3b.


3.1.3 Specific surface area. 
The catalytic performance of a catalyst is directly associated with the surface active sites, and is also closely related to the surface area. Recent experimental investigations have shown that the surface area of an oxide can also be influenced by the dopant on the oxygen site. In spite of the fact that there was no significant change in surface area when introducing halide ions with a limited amount, larger surface areas were exhibited by undoped catalysts than their halide-doped counterparts.155 According to Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) measurements, the surface areas of SrFeO3−0.190 and SrFeO3−0.382Cl0.443 were 3.3 and 3.1 m2 g−1, respectively.156 The surface area of La1.85Sr0.15CuO4−δ decreased from 2.04 m2 g−1 to 1.92 m2 g−1 and 1.97 m2 g−1 after doping with F and Cl anions, respectively. Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4−δ also suffered from a reduction in surface area after the oxygen site was occupied by other anions.127 Similarly, LaxSr1−xFeO3±δClσ series oxides exhibited smaller surface areas than their parent oxides.157 In fact, the insertion of fluorine ions or chlorine ions into LaxSr1−xFeO3±δ resulted in an increase of Fe4+ concentration, which resulted in a reduction of surface area.131

3.2. Chemical properties

3.2.1 Electronic structure. 
Anion dopants could also have an obvious influence on the electronic structure of metal oxides. In particular, Lewis and co-workers theoretically investigated the introduction of anion dopants into TiO2 along with the change in the electronic structure after anion doping.158 In their DFT calculation, an ab initio tight-binding approach was applied to explore the effects of electronic structure of TiO2 materials doped with anions such as C, N, and S. The electronic density of states (DOS) shows that the oxygen site in TiO2 occupied by carbon is the most promising because the DOS of the carbon state and that of O 2p overlap significantly near the valence band edge. In addition, the largest valence band was generated by the carbon dopant, which is red shifted among the three studied anion-doped TiO2.158 In separate experimental investigations, the electronic structure of TiO2 was effectively modified by anionic non-metal dopants. Electronic structures can greatly affect the light absorption capability of materials. Anion doping into the oxygen site was shown to change the light absorbing position of TiO2.159 Partial substitution of carbon for oxygen atoms in TiO2 resulted in light with a wavelength lower than 535 nm being absorbed, suggesting a lower BG energy of the new phase compared to rutile.160 In optical absorbance spectra, N-doped TiO2 resulted in tremendous absorption shoulder shifts from the invisible to the visible part of the light spectrum. In a scenario where 0.95% N atoms replace O atoms in TiO2, the existence of Ti3+ led to an increase in absorbance at wavelengths larger than 550 nm.161 Asahi et al. also found that the absorption edge shifted slightly to a lower energy and according to optical absorption spectra after the doping of nitrogen into TiO2 with the formation of TiO2−xNx, a noticeable absorption of light at lower than 500 nm was demonstrated by the TiO2−xNx films. From these examples it is clear that a promising route to narrowing the BG and enhancing the photocatalytic activity is doping nitrogen into substitutional sites of TiO2.102
Incorporating F− or Cl− ions into La1−xSrxFeO3−δ and La1.85Ce0.15CuO4−δ was shown to result in an increase of the Fe4+ and Cu3+ concentration, respectively, but a decrease of the Cu+ ratio in Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4−δ.127,131 Pomonis and co-workers demonstrated that more Fe3+ and fewer Fe4+ cations were present in the chlorine-doped La0.2Sr0.8FeO3±δ than in the parent oxide sample.157 Clearly, a change in the concentration of the various cations can thus lead to a variation of the electronic structure in oxides after anion doping.


3.2.2 Oxygen diffusion properties. 
As mentioned previously, the catalytic performance of some oxides for redox reactions is closely related to the oxygen diffusion rate. For some oxides, it is found that the oxygen diffusion rate can be remarkably enhanced by anion doping in metal oxides. For instance, efficient mobility of low-temperature O2− can result from the partial incorporation of the F− anion into fluorinated hexagonal perovskites. The fluorides are introduced into perovskite oxides and thus create extended defect structures (Fig. 3c). The resultant structures promote oxygen diffusion via an original mechanism different from that of the hopping of anionic-carriers induced by thermal activation.162 In the Sr0.63Ca0.27CuO2−δXσ (X = F, Cl) system, the lattice oxygen activity has been shown to improve by doping halide ions into the Sr0.63Ca0.27CuO2−δ lattice. The differences in electronegativity and ionic radii between halide ions and oxygen ions lead to different coulombic forces between a copper ion and an O2−. This coulombic force in halide-doped samples becomes weaker than that in the original oxide, leading to more active lattice oxygen ions. For example, adding fluorine or chlorine ions into Sr0.63Ca0.27CuO2−δ accelerates the diffusion rate of lattice oxygen.110 Studies on perovskite oxyfluorides SrFeO3−σ−δFσ and SrFe0.9Ti0.1O3−σ−δFσ also demonstrate that anion doping enhances bulk diffusion as well as the surface exchange properties, due to the modification of the electronic structure in perovskite oxides.101


3.2.3 Oxygen–metal bond strength. 
For some catalytic and electrocatalytic reactions, the catalyst performance is strongly related to the oxygen–metal bond strength, which may affect the energy of the bond between the reactants and the catalyst surface. In the Sr2FeMoO5.5S0.5 compound, Mo-(O,S) exhibits a larger bond distance than Fe-(O,S), which is a reflection of the Fe cations being in a low spin state due to S doping. This can be attributed to the fact that S2− is a stronger ligand than O2−, which accordingly increases the ligand field and changes a portion of Fe3+ from a high spin state to a low spin state. Moreover, it also illustrates the replacement of several oxygen atoms by sulfur atoms in Sr2FeMoO6.163 In addition, electrons are more easily attracted by fluorine than oxygen because fluorine has a higher electronegativity than oxygen (4.0 vs. 3.44). The F doping in perovskite oxides can decrease the valence electron density of O2− and restrict the chemical bonds between cations and anions from forming highly efficient O2− transport paths.

3.3. The interrelation between physical and chemical properties in anion-doped materials
Conclusively, anion doping has significant effects on both physical and chemical properties, and these properties can interact with each other as mentioned above. The lattice structure of oxide can reveal details about the unit-cell parameters, atomic positions, occupancy factors and atomic displacement parameters,164 while the oxygen diffusion rate can be determined from lattice structure information, such as unit cell parameters and atomic positional parameters. In addition, the oxygen vacancies can be created or eliminated by the lattice structure variation which is induced by the anion doping, and the increase of oxygen vacancy concentration in the oxides plays an important role in the oxygen diffusion rate. The anions occupying the oxygen vacancies in the lattice can often induce a variation of valence for the nearby cations. For example, F− doping into the oxygen vacancy sites and interstitial sites in LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 will lead to the increase of valence of Co from 2+ to 3+.128 This phenomenon is also observed for YBa2Cu3O7, where the anion dopants can induce a change of copper's valence from 2+ to 3+.154 In Sr0.63Ca0.27CuO2−δ, the interaction between the cation and anion can be changed by the anion doping due to the electronegativity differences of dopants and oxygen ions. This change in interaction can reduce the chemical bond between anions and cations in the oxide, leading to improved oxygen diffusion and surface exchange properties.110 Therefore, the effects of anion doping on the materials' properties appear to be results of an interconnected interaction.
4 Applications of anion-doped oxides in different reaction processes
4.1. Catalytic oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons
One of the most popular applications of anion-doped oxides in catalysis is in the field of heterogeneous redox reactions. Two significant chemical reactions involved in natural gas utilization are the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) and the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane (ODE). Fig. 4 displays a diagram of the reaction system. Ethylene, the product of the secondary reaction in OCM, may be oxidative or nonoxidative in nature.165 Many materials have been developed for OCM and ODE catalysis;166,167 among them oxide catalysts have been studied extensively and are generally characterized by excellent catalytic performance in completely oxidizing hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and ammonia.168,169 Several groups have proven that higher ethylene selectivity was achieved by incorporating halide ions into the oxide catalyst or by the attachment of a compound doped with anions over the catalyst in the reaction. Generally, most of the F− or Cl− containing catalysts have a strong effect on the ethylene selectivity with increasing F− or Cl− concentration in the reaction system. In 1991, Conway and co-workers introduced chlorine into a Li+–MgO catalyst to enhance the yield of ethylene during the ODE.170 With the addition of chlorine, C2H6 conversion rates ranged from 75 to 79% for the first 25 h and the C2H4 selectivity achieved was 70% after 50 h on stream. A C2H4 yield of more than 55% was obtained after a continuous 50 h reaction, and it remained relatively constant at 45% after a further 250 h of operation. As shown in Table 1, the evaporation rates of chlorine in the catalyst slowly decreased with the activity of the catalyst.
 Fig. 4  A diagram of a catalyst testing reactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 1982, Elsevier. 
Table 1 Physiochemical characteristics of Cl-doped Li+–MgO catalysts before and after reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 1991, Elsevier




Catalyst
Cl content (wt%)
Li/Mg atomic ratio
Surface area (m2 g−1)


Before
After
Before
After
Before
After




Cl–Li+–MgO (SG1)
12.3
1.2
0.19
n/a
n/a
1.8


Cl–Li+–MgO (SG2)
17.6
8.0
0.27
0.20
n/a
1.7


Cl–Li+–MgO (SG3)
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.13
n/a
1.2


Cl–Li+–MgO (1.9)
1.9
1.6
0.22
0.25
0.9
0.7


Cl–Li+–MgO (8.7)
8.7
5.6
0.21
0.17
0.7
1.6


Cl–Li+–MgO (19.4)
19.4
13.8
0.29
0.25
0.9
0.7


Cl–Li+–MgO (IS)
n/a
7.2
n/a
0.21
n/a
1.5


Li+–MgO
0
0
0.24
0.14
1.0
1.4




One reason for the improved performance of the catalyst following introduction of chlorine is that it decreases the gross basicity of the catalyst. This property can lead to an increase in the CO2 adsorption capacity of the catalyst. The reduction in basicity apparently increases the capability of the catalyst to avoid CO2 adsorption, which would otherwise usually lead to catalyst poisoning and deactivation.170 In another study, F− and Br− were doped into a Ba–La–O system (BaBr2/La2O3) with completely different behaviors being observed in the two catalysts as a result of the introduction of halide ions. 44.7% of CH4 was converted with a selectivity for C2 of 40.5% in the F-based catalyst, while in the case of the Br-based material, the results were 27.0% and 43.7%, respectively. Fig. 5a shows the curves of CH4 conversion, C2 selectivity, and C2 production in relation to the loading amount of BaBr2 on La2O3 at 750 °C. The maximum CH4 conversion and C2 selectivities were achieved at a BaBr2 loading of 10 mol% on the substrate. Despite the amount of BaBr2, O2 conversion was maintained at ca. 98%.171 The reason for this behavior may be a combination of the higher surface area of BaBr2/La2O3, the homogeneous dispersion of Br− on the La-based substrate, and the diffusion of F ions into the La2O3 lattice, resulting in the enhancement of the gross basicity of the catalyst and the generation of hexagonal LaF3 and rhombohedral LaOF. Another function of the Br ion is to decrease the decomposition temperature of La2O2CO3 from 790 °C to 690 °C in the OCM. This behavior not only prevents the poisoning of the catalyst by CO2, but also creates active sites which are beneficial to the OCM.171 Another way to reduce the negative effect of CO2 on the catalyst is by reducing the COx selectivity in OCM reactions. In Fig. 5b, compared to pure YBa2Cu3O6.72, the COx selectivity decreases from 55.5% to 22.5% and 16.4% for YBa2Cu3O6.79F0.16 and YBa2Cu3O6.82Cl0.13, respectively.154 Otsuka and co-workers conducted OCM reactions with NiO catalysts containing LiBr, LiCl, and LiF. With a ratio of C2H4 to C2H6 equal to 15, the NiO–LiBr catalyst showed 35% CH4 conversion and 46% C2 selectivity. However, the reaction over pure NiO produced only CO and CO2 in the absence of LiCl.172 The introduction of Ba–O–Br, possessing better catalytic properties than La2O3, into the BaCO3 system also gave rise to a C2 yield of 26.3% at 800 °C when the ratio of C2H4 to C2H6 was 4.3. It displayed a lower CO2 selectivity compared to pure La2O3.173 Au and co-workers compared the XRD patterns of perovskite-type un-doped La1−xSrxFeO3−δ and halide-doped La1−xSrxFeO3−δ, and deduced that these two materials exhibited similar crystal structures. There is no structural change, distortion or destruction due to the adsorption of CO2, which is produced in the reaction.131 Fortunately, F− and Cl− doping at the O sites increased the structural stability of perovskites during the reaction in this system. For example, La0.8Sr0.2FeO2.897F0.216 and La0.6Sr0.4FeO2.897Cl0.164 catalysts after use demonstrated negligible structural variation compared with the fresh ones.131 Although the purity of the perovskite crystalline phase was shown to be enhanced by the addition of Cl in La1−xSrxFeO3±δ with a low Sr proportion, the opposite tended to occur in the samples with higher Sr content.157 Halide-doped La1−xSrxFeO3−δXσ (X = F, Cl) perovskite catalysts performed much better than their monoxide counterparts. As shown in Fig. 5c, with a reactive molar ratio of C2H6:O2:N2 = 2:1:3.7 at 660 °C and a space velocity of 6000 mL h−1 g−1, the C2H6 conversion, C2H4 selectivity, and C2H4 yield reached 55.3, 45.1 and 24.9%, respectively, under the catalytic action of La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.048. This is in contrast to the higher conversion, selectivity and yield for La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−0.103F0.216 and La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.103Cl0.164 catalysts. For these two halide-doped catalysts, the enhancement of the space velocity reduced the C2H6 conversion but increased C2H4 selectivity.131
 Fig. 5  (a) The effects of BaBr2 on the catalytic performance of BaBr2/La2O3 catalysts. (b) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped YBa2Cu3O6.72. (c) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped La0.6Sr0.4FeO2.952. (d) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.846 (A = La0.8Ba0.2). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 1996, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2001, Elsevier. 
It is relatively well recognized that a higher oxygen vacancy concentration in perovskite oxides is beneficial for the complete oxidation of hydrocarbons and that the improvement in the redox capability of the B-site cations speeds up the selective oxidation of hydrocarbons. The optimal catalytic performance of a perovskite oxide material can be achieved by optimizing the number of oxygen vacancies and the concentration of ions occupying the B-site. Thus, the doping of F− and Cl− ions into perovskite-type oxides greatly decreases C2H4 conversion but substantially increases C2H6 conversion.168 Zhou et al. reported a range of fluoro-oxide catalysts active at 650 °C. The study indicated that O− ions and anion vacancies may be produced via the exchange of O2− and F− between lattices and that the generated vacancies exert an influence on the O2 activation and the selectivity of the OCM reaction.174 Compared with YBa2Cu3O7−δ, the Cl-doped YBa2Cu3O7−δClσ catalyst seems to increase the conversion of ethane from 84.1 to 92.5%, which was 8.4% higher than that of the F-doped YBa2Cu3O7−δFσ catalyst. However, the F-doped catalyst was prone to converting the ethane to ethylene. Despite having a similar triple-layered oxygen-deficient perovskite-type orthorhombic structure, the halide-doped YBa2Cu3O7−δ exhibited better durability compared to the undoped YBa2Cu3O7−δ. Introducing F− and Cl− into the oxygen site has no effect on the orthorhombic structure;154 instead, it improves the performance of lattice oxygen, which is favorable for the selective and total oxidation of ethane. An increase in the F content of F-doped catalysts decreased the amount of nonstoichiometric oxygen as well as the C2H6 conversion rate but increased the concentration of Cu3+ and the selectivity percentage of C2H4. The optimal catalytic performance was demonstrated by a F− containing catalyst with a nonstoichiometric oxygen amount of 0.05, indicating that excellent activity depends on an appropriate oxygen nonstoichiometry.154 Au and co-workers also compared the catalytic performance of hole-doped and electron-doped catalysts. For the La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.934 catalyst, its tetragonal structure remained unchanged after doping with halide ions.127 The coordination of Cu atoms was demonstrated to result in significant structural differences when using holes or electrons as the dopants in the catalysts. With regard to the La2−xSrxCuO4−δ structure, the Cu atom is situated at the center of the molecule and has a sixfold coordination with oxygen while La and Sr atoms have a ninefold coordination with oxygen. After 60 h of testing, the F− and Cl−-doped catalysts, La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.930Fσ and La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.930Clσ, displayed a more durable performance compared to the catalyst doped with electrons. The degree of deep oxidation of C2H4 was reduced by the doping of fluorine and chlorine ions into the oxide crystal lattice but the C2H4 selectivity was enhanced. By using XPS technology, 18O2-pulsing measurement and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), it is confirmed that the improvement in the activity of the lattice oxygen is achieved by incorporating halide ions into both electron-doped and hole-doped catalyst lattices. The researchers concluded that (i) selective oxidation of ethane could be promoted by the surface lattice O2− species; (ii) the total oxidation of ethane was likely to be induced by O2− species located at oxygen vacancies if present in excessive amounts; and (iii) optimal catalytic performance of the catalysts can be achieved at an appropriate Cu3+ or Cu+ concentration and oxygen nonstoichiometry.127 A similar situation was also observed in the perovskite-type oxide La0.8Ba0.2Mn1−xCuxO3−δ doped with halides. Under the same reaction conditions, La0.8Ba0.2Mn0.7Cu0.3O2.808F0.124 exhibited ca. 50% C2H6 conversion, approximately 67% C2H4 selectivity and about 33% C2H4 yield, while La0.8Ba0.2Mn0.7Cu0.3O2.817Cl0.114 displayed values of approximately 73, 70 and 51%, correspondingly. Fig. 5d depicts the catalytic performance of AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.846, AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.808F0.124, and AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.817Cl0.114 (A = La0.8Ba0.2) in relation to the temperature of reaction. Most probably owing to O2 deprivation, only tiny changes in C2H6 conversion, and C2H4, CH4, and COx selectivity were observed for catalysts free from halogen between 500 and 680 °C.155
In comparison to undoped materials, halide-doped perovskite oxides generally possess better performance and durability. This is because halide doping most probably leads to the elimination of adsorbed oxygen species and enhancement in the activity of lattice oxygen. The addition of halide ions into perovskite oxides reduces the deep ethane oxidation rate due to the fact that the adsorbed oxygen is the species that is likely to trigger the total oxidation of ethane, while lattice oxygen species are responsible for the selective oxidation of ethane.155 Surprisingly, F-doped perovskites such as LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 were successfully utilized in the selective oxidation of H2S by the addition of ammonia and water. Although LaSrCoO4 converted much more H2S than LaSrCoO3.6F0.4, LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 exhibited a much higher selectivity to solid products (S and (NH4)2S2O3) than LaSrCoO4. Based on literature reports, LaSrCoO4 and LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 have identical oxidation mechanisms. The adsorbed reactants on the Co3+ react with the lattice oxygen; meanwhile, the chemically adsorbed oxygen is converted into lattice oxygen to increase the consumption of lattice oxygen. Consequently, the researchers deduced that Co3+ was the active center, and lattice oxygen was the active oxygen species. Temperature-programmed desorption, temperature-programmed reduction and XPS experiments confirmed that the reduction capacity of Co3+, activities of O2− (or O−), concentration of oxygen vacancies, amount of moving lattice oxygen, the relative amount of cobalt and oxygen on the surface reduced with the addition of fluorine, and in particular, the catalytic oxidative activity of LaSrCoO3.6F0.4 decreased after F-doping.128 During the oxidation of hydrocarbons, oxygen could be adsorbed easily to form a range of oxygen species, such as O2−, O22− and O−, on the surface of oxides. Although O− acted as the active species in the oxidation reaction and lattice oxygen contributed to the selective oxidation of hydrocarbons, dioxygen species and mono-oxygen species played key roles in selectively oxidizing ethane to ethene. Therefore, a suitable concentration of oxygen vacancies, together with various valence states of the B-site cations, is beneficial to the high ethene selectivity. In a comparison of SrFeO3−δ and SrFeO2.618Cl0.443, the XRD pattern of halide-doped SrFeO3−δ was indexed to a cubic unit cell and no further changes were obtained after heating the sample at high temperature.175 It was found that the Cl-doped oxide was superior to the parent one in terms of ethane conversion and ethene selectivity. At 680 °C, the SrFeO2.618Cl0.443 catalyst showed 89.9% C2H6 conversion, 73.6% C2H4 selectivity and 62.2% C2H4 yield, while SrFeO3−δ showed values of 54.8%, 50.5% and 27.7%, correspondingly, under identical conditions.156
In an alternative approach to the doping of foreign anions directly into the O-site, some researchers have instead sought to mix the oxide catalysts with halides to exchange the halide ions and oxygen ions. The ionic exchange generates lattice defects and enhances the formation of adsorbed dioxygen species, leading to an observed enhancement of the catalytic performance. At 750 °C, a mixture of BaCl2 and Nd2O3 was shown to increase the CH4 conversion and C2 selectivity from 35.9 and 45.4% to 42.4 and 50.7%, respectively. Although BaF2/Nd2O3 and BaBr2/Nd2O3 showed superior catalytic activity to the parent Nd2O3 catalyst, they failed to display a better CH4 conversion relative to that of BaO/Nd2O3. Nevertheless, a somewhat concerning finding was that some of the halide ions in the catalysts leached during the OCM reaction.176 Similarly, the introduction of SrCl2 into CeO2, PrO1.83 and TbO1.75 catalysts witnessed a significant reduction in deep oxidation of C2H4 and an enhancement in C2H4 selectivity and C2H6 conversion.177 Y–Ba–X and Gd–Ba–X catalyst systems for the OCM reaction and Ho–Ba–X catalysts for the ODE reaction also enhanced the yield and selectivity. The exchange between the halide ions and oxygen ions in these catalyst systems not only generated lattice defects and facilitated the activation of gaseous reaction but also suppressed the deep oxidation of ethane and ethene.178–182 Hence it is apparent that the introduction of chloride ions into the oxide lattice would give rise to the reduction of the concentration of oxygen vacancies and cation valences, leading to the repression of ethane and ethene deep oxidation. This clearly indicates that oxides doped with anions are desirable catalytic materials for the selective oxidation of light hydrocarbons.
In summary, anions as the main dopants in oxide catalysts in the ODE or OCM reaction not only generated lattice defects and facilitated the activation of gases but also suppressed the deep oxidation of ethane and ethene. Table 2 summarizes the catalytic performance of some typical anion-doped oxides. In these anion-doped oxides, as more oxygen vacancies were generated due to cation substitution, more anions entered the oxygen vacancies and there was an increase in cation content. By comparing the activity data with the oxygen vacancy concentrations as well as the cation content, one may find that the best-performing catalyst in each of these series exhibits a specific bulk density of oxygen vacancies and the highest specific cation content. Therefore, the conversion of reactants and the selectivity and yield of the target product were improved significantly.
Table 2 The catalytic performance (conversion, selectivity and yield) of typical anion-doped oxides




Catalyst
Temp.a
ODE reaction (%)
OCM reaction (%)
Ref.


C2H6 conv.
C2H4 sel.
CH4 sel.
C2H4 yield
CH4 conv.
COx sel.
C2 sel.
C2 yield





a Temp. = temperature.





SrFeO2.81
680 °C
54.8
50.5
—
27.7
—
—
—
—

156



SrFeO2.618Cl0.443
89.9
73.6
—
62.2
—
—
—
—


AMn1−xCuxO2.713
680 °C
20.8
19.4
0.0
4.0
—
—
—
—

155



AMnO2.98F0.102
23.3
35.6
0.5
8.3
—
—
—
—


AMn0.9Cu0.1O2.2924F0.112
33.2
47.5
2.3
15.8
—
—
—
—


AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.808F0.124
49.2
66.8
4.9
32.9
—
—
—
—


AMn0.5Cu0.5O2.605F0.246
38.3
48.5
2.5
18.6
—
—
—
—


AMn0.3Cu0.7O2.425F0.338
30.9
32.8
2.2
10.7
—
—
—
—


AMn0.1Cu0.9O2.241F0.428
29.5
29.5
2.0
8.70
—
—
—
—


AMnO2.984Cl0.096
62.3
64.9
5.3
40.5
—
—
—
—


AMn0.9Cu0.1O2.921Cl0.103
66.0
67.6
7.3
44.6
—
—
—
—


AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.817Cl0.114
73.0
69.5
7.3
50.8
—
—
—
—


AMn0.5Cu0.5O2.605Cl0.206
63.1
63.1
7.8
39.8
—
—
—
—


AMn0.3Cu0.7O2.435Cl0.288
53.4
60.3
4.7
32.2
—
—
—
—


AMn0.1Cu0.9O2.280Cl0.349
48.8
58.4
5.9
28.5
—
—
—
—


La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.934
660 °C
41.8
28.8
0.0
15.1
—
—
—
—

127



La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.93Cl0.053
82.8
73.2
4.2
60.6
—
—
—
—


Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO3.98
34.9
26.3
0.0
12.1
—
—
—
—


Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO3.981F0.092
72.1
61.8
9.0
44.6
—
—
—
—


LaFO3−δ
660 °C
5.0
36.1
3.8
19.7
—
—
—
—

132



LaFeO3−0.045F0.122
70.6
43.3
6.6
30.6
—
—
—
—


LaFeO3−0.031Cl0.088
70.1
48.9
6.1
37.7
—
—
—
—


La0.2Sr0.8FeO3−0.110
68.1
29.1
3.6
19.8
—
—
—
—


La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−0.103F0.216
76.8
62.1
7.3
47.7
—
—
—
—


La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.130F0.238
70.6
64.2
6.6
45.3
—
—
—
—


La0.4Sr0.6FeO3−0.184F0.259
64.4
66.1
6.5
42.6
—
—
—
—


La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−0.062Cl0.114
73.2
52.7
7.5
38.6
—
—
—
—


La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.103Cl0.164
84.4
68.4
4.5
57.6
—
—
—
—


La0.4Sr0.6FeO3−0.165Cl0.202
72.7
71.1
6.6
51.7
—
—
—
—


YBa2Cu3O7−0.27F0.10
660 °C
66.5
66.8
0.0
44.4
—
—
—
—

154



YBa2Cu3O7−0.24F0.13
72.4
79.5
5.5
57.6
—
—
—
—


YBa2Cu3O7−0.21F0.16
82.2
82.3
0.0
67.7
—
—
—
—


YBa2Cu3O7−0.18F0.19
52.7
84.7
0.0
45.5
—
—
—
—


YBa2Cu3O7−0.18F0.22
48.4
85.7
0.0
41.5
—
—
—
—


Cl–Li+–MgO (SG1)
650 °C
65.4
69.4
1.3
45.4
—
—
—
—

170



Cl–Li+–MgO (SG2)
68.0
67.2
1.6
45.7
—
—
—
—


Cl–Li+–MgO (1.9)
32.9
77.3
0.0
25.4
—
—
—
—


Cl–Li+–MgO (8.7)
47.1
75.7
0.7
35.6
—
—
—
—


Cl–Li+–MgO (19.4)
54.6
72.0
1.8
39.3
—
—
—
—


30% BaO/Nd2O3
750 °C
—
—
—
—
35.9
54.6
—
16.3

176



30% BaF2/Nd2O3
—
—
—
—
33.8
47.4
—
17.8


30% BaCl2/Nd2O3
—
—
—
—
42.4
49.3
—
21.5


30% BaBr2/Nd2O3
—
—
—
—
35.9
53.1
—
16.8


LaF3
650 °C
—
—
—
—
6.8
0.0
12.1
0.8

174



LaOBr
750 °C
—
—
—
—
40.7
72.1
27.9
11.3

173



BaCO3/LaOBr
—
—
—
—
29.1
53.2
46.8
13.6


BaF2/La2O3
750 °C
—
—
—
—
27.0
56.8
43.7
11.8

171



BaBr2/La2O3
—
—
—
—
44.7
59.5
40.5
18.1


BaBr2/La2O3
—
—
—
—
35.0
78.3
21.6
7.6




4.2. Photocatalytic reactions
Perovskite oxides (ABO3) are highly promising in many photocatalytic applications. However, most perovskite oxide-based photocatalysts are white in color, and usually have a large BG. Generally, large BG materials require sunlight with high energy such as ultraviolet (UV) light to activate the photocatalyst in order to participate in photocatalytic reactions. Because UV light only constitutes a small amount of solar energy, equated to approximately 5%, compared to that of visible light (∼45%), the efficiency of perovskite oxide photocatalysts that possess a large BG is very low. Thus, enhancing the visible-light response of perovskite oxides is critical, and it can be achieved by tailoring the BG and/or band structures.183,184 The approaches of BG engineering in metal oxides have mainly focused on doping with non-metal elements in the O site ever since a breakthrough was reported in 2001 whereby nitrogen-doping was performed to improve the BG of TiO2.102,184 Since then, the doping of anions such as N, S and C into well-known perovskite oxides has been used to lower the BG to improve the visible light response.141,185,186
Among the various non-metal elements, nitrogen is the most heavily investigated element for doping perovskite oxides.184 For example, nitrogen-doping was shown to reduce the BG of BaTiO3 powders from 3.2 eV to 2.45 eV, and when evaluated as a catalyst for the methyl orange (MO) photo-degradation reaction under UV irradiation,187 BaTi(O,N)x showed a photocatalytic performance comparable to that of P25-TiO2 (Degussa) with the addition of H2O2. The photocatalytic capability of BaTi(O,N)x under UV light irradiation was 5 times higher than that of P25-TiO2 if normalized to the same surface area. Under visible light irradiation, BaTi(O,N)x exhibited a much higher photocatalytic activity of MO decomposition than P25-TiO2 in the presence of H2O2.
Yellowish NaNbO3−xNx oxides have been reported as photocatalysts under visible light irradiation to convert 2-propanol gases into CO2 and acetone.188 The nitrogen doping in NaNbO3 successfully increased the visible light response of NaNbO3 by reducing the BG. In contrast, NaNbO3 displayed a poor photocatalytic performance under illumination with visible light. Through the optimization of nitriding temperatures, NaNbO3−xNx (833 K) was shown to achieve the highest photocatalytic activity with a high evolution rate of acetone which reached 26.1 ppm h−1. The difference in the photocatalytic performance of NaNbO3−xNx photocatalysts results from the difference in nitrogen doping concentration obtained under various nitriding temperatures, which subsequently creates differences in visible-light absorption capability and the number of electron–hole recombination centers.
A nitrogen-doped layered perovskite oxide, Sr5Ta4O15−xNx, was shown to exhibit a much higher visible light response compared to Sr5Ta4O15 due to nitrogen doping of the oxygen site and the formation of Ta–N bonds.189 Sr5Ta4O15−xNx, which was generated by a thermal ammonolysis process, showed considerable photocatalytic activity for reactions of water reduction and oxidation under irradiation with visible light. Fig. 6a shows the UV-vis DRS of Sr5Ta4O15−xNx. Meanwhile, modification of Ba5Ta4O15−xNx and Sr2Ta2O7−xNx with co-catalysts such as Pt or CoOx resulted in narrow BGs of 1.97 and 2.22 eV, respectively (Fig. 6b and c). N doping can efficiently reduce the BG energy of the perovskite photocatalyst with different crystal structures. The parent perovskite oxides can only absorb UV light, while the N-doped ones can have a visible light response up to 600 to 700 nm. It was demonstrated that these materials were able to evolve H2 or O2. The same nitrogen doping strategy in perovskite oxides could also be applied in the preparation of photocatalysts for complete water splitting using sunlight. Several nitrogen-doped Ta-based perovskites have been evaluated for such applications.140,190–193 The exfoliation of a layered CsCa2Ta3O9.7N0.2 was employed to prepare calcium tantalum oxynitride [Ca2Ta3O9.7N0.2]− nanosheets.140Fig. 7a shows the UV-vis spectra of the parent layered oxynitride, CsCa2Ta3O9.7N0.2, and the oxynitride nanosheet suspension, respectively. N doping and Cs exchange with Ca in CaCa2Ta3O10 greatly enhanced the visible light absorption capability. The construction of the nanosheet morphology of this perovskite can also improve its visible light response. Owing to the nanosheet morphology and large surface area, these nanosheets showed higher photocatalytic activity than CsCa2Ta3O9.7N0.2 for H2 evolution from splitting of water under illumination with visible light, with methanol as a sacrificial agent. No decomposition of the photocatalyst was detected in the reaction of water splitting as evidenced by the unchanged nitrogen content before and after the photocatalytic reaction.
 Fig. 6  UV-vis DRS of (a) Sr5Ta4O15, (b) Ba5Ta4O15 and (c) Sr2Ta2O7 before and after nitridation. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of Ca2Ta3O9.7N0.2 based materials. (b) DRS of Ca2Nb2O7 and CaNbO2N nitride at different temperatures. (c) UV-visible DRS of SrTiO3, SrTi(N,O)3, SrTi(O,F)3 and SrTi(N,O,F)3. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2012, ACS Publications. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
Maeda et al. used single-phase perovskite structured BaTaO2N–BaZrO3-based solid solutions to photocatalytically split water under illumination with visible light.190–193 With the increase in the ratio of Zr/Ta, the band edge of BaTaO2N decreased due to the larger BG of BaZrO3 than BaTaO2N. These materials, when coupled with Pt and IrO2 co-catalysts, showed considerable photocatalytic capability in the redox reaction of water with methanol and AgNO3 as sacrificial agents, respectively. A high photocatalytic activity was obtained by addition of BaZrO3 into BaTaO2N (the ratio of Zr to Ta is about 100 to 5) while excessive BaZrO3 addition decreased the activity for water splitting, especially for water oxidation. However, as shown in Fig. 8a, the best ratios of Zr to Ta for redox reactions of water were not the same because of the decreased crystallinity caused by the increased Zr/Ta ratio as well as the generation of a reduced Ta species due to H2 produced from the decomposition of NH3. This phenomenon was more pronounced in the solid solutions with a lower ratio of Zr to Ta, despite the enhancement of the water oxidation reaction via a lower Zr/Ta ratio.190 In order to minimize the negative effects (large BG and low crystallinity) of excess BaZrO3 in the BaTaO2N–BaZrO3 solid solutions, a Zr-free BaTaOx was prepared. This was achieved by combining BaCl2 with ZrO(NO3)2 and then sintering at 800 °C for 2 h in air.190 The products of the BaZrOx/BaTaOx oxide precursor were then subjected to nitridation. As shown in Fig. 8a, for the new BaZrO3–BaTaO2N solid solutions, the evolution rates of oxygen and hydrogen both became greater with the improved ratio of Zr to Ta up to 0.05 but decreased subsequently with further increase in the ratio of Zr to Ta. The maximum photocatalytic capability for the oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions using the new BaZrO3–BaTaO2N mixed oxide was also superior to that using the one obtained by a polymerized complex method (shown in Fig. 8a as circular symbols with the same optimal ratio of Zr to Ta). The superior photocatalytic capability of the new BaZrO3–BaTaO2N mixed oxide catalyst was attributed to the lack of an obvious reduction in crystallinity and the generation of a reduced tantalum species. As shown in Fig. 8b, when the Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N and NaI suspension was modified with Pt/WO3, the new photocatalyst could effectively catalyze the water splitting into H2 and O2 under visible light. In addition, the activity of the photocatalyst is very stable, as indicated by the linear growth in gas evolution with increasing reaction time.191 For the mixture of PtOx/WO3 and Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N (Fig. 8c), the gas evolution rates of H2 and O2 display a nonlinear variation with changing the amount of Pt loaded on the photocatalyst. With increasing Pt loading, the rates of H2 and O2 evolution both increased sharply, reaching a maximum at around 0.3–0.5 wt% before decreasing with further increase in Pt loading.192
 Fig. 8  (a) The effects of Zr/Ta ratios on the photocatalytic activity of the BaZrO3–BaTaO2N catalyst. (b) Time courses of H2 and O2 evolution from aqueous NaI solution over a mixture of Pt/WO3 and Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N solid solution under visible light. (c) Dependence of the rates of H2 and O2 evolution over a mixture of PtOx/WO3 and Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2013, ACS Publications. 
Niobium oxynitrides in the form of perovskites, such as CaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, BaNbO2N, and LaNbON2, have been studied as photocatalysts in water splitting to produce oxygen and hydrogen under illumination with visible light.194 The materials showed visible-light absorption edges from 600 to 750 nm, which are largely influenced by the type of cation in the A site. The BG decreased in the order of Ca > Sr > Ba due to the change in the distortion of NbOxNy blocks in the perovskite structure, which was caused by the increase in the A-site cation size.195,196 The same phenomenon was also observed for Ta-based perovskite oxides such as LiTaO3, NaTaO3, and KTaO3.197 The BGs of CaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, and BaNbO2N were also consistent with results previously reported in the literature.198 The CaNbO2N oxynitride was active for the production of oxygen and hydrogen by illumination with visible light using methanol and AgNO3 as sacrificial agents. However, SrNbO2N produced a low O2 evolution rate and showed no evidence of H2 evolution. In addition, BaNbO2N and LaNbON2 showed no photocatalytic activity under irradiation with visible light, which was assigned to their extremely small BG, resulting in the overpotential being insufficient for the redox reactions in the splitting of water to happen on the surface of the photocatalyst.
SrTiO3 co-doped with nitrogen and sulfur was fabricated by physically mixing SrTiO3 and thiourea and subsequently calcining the mixture.199 A small BG of 2.37 eV in the visible light region (522 nm) was generated as a result of the co-doping process. The photocatalytic performance of SrTiO3 for nitrogen monoxide (NO) oxidation by illumination with visible light (>510 nm) was enhanced by 10.9 times after N and S co-doping because the BG was reduced under visible light. The co-doped SrTiO3 also possessed superior photocatalytic activity under UV light illumination, which was approximately 1.2 times greater than the value for SrTiO3. Similarly, a NaTaO3 photocatalyst doped with sulfur anions, possessing a well-crystallized nanocube morphology with 200–500 nm particle size, was prepared by a hydrothermal method for application in the MO photo-degradation reaction.186 Sulfur in the anionic state was fully doped into the lattice of NaTaO3 as revealed by XPS and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy analysis. The sulfur doping expanded the unit cell and stabilized the phase structure from a monoclinic to a cubic phase, resulting in a higher mobility of electron–hole pairs. The sulfur-doped NaTaO3 displayed a highly favorable photocatalytic performance for degrading MO and the related degradation rate constant (0.306 h−1) was much higher than the value for NaTaO3 (0.029 h−1). Notably, the UV-light activity was not reduced by its narrowed BG because the doping of sulfur anions caused a lower electron–hole recombination rate, which greatly enhanced its photocatalytic activity under full-spectrum sunlight. The sulfur-doped NaTaO3 was stable even after ten recycling processes and under a variety of conditions with different pH values, which makes it an attractive UV and visible-light photocatalyst. Fig. 7b shows the DRS of CaNbO2N nitrided at different temperatures. The parent Ca2Nb2O7 without N doping can only absorb UV light while N-doped samples have the capability of absorbing visible light. The visible light response of CaNbO2N increases with increasing nitridation temperature. However, the high visible light response did not ensure photocatalytic performance, due to the produced NbOxNy species, which functioned as recombination centers, during nitridation especially at high nitridation temperatures. Therefore, CaNbO2N (1023 K) exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction among the five N-doped samples.194
In another report, SrTiO3 and SrTi(O,F)3 perovskite oxides were prepared by a solid-state reaction, with partial substitution of oxygen by nitrogen achieved by a subsequent thermal ammonolysis method to form co-doped SrTi(N,O)3 and tri-doped SrTi(N,O,F)3.200 The extent of N doping increased through the existence of F in SrTi(N,O,F)3, compared to that of SrTi(N,O)3. Co-doping with N and F was highly effective in reducing the BG as compared with nitrogen-only or fluorine-only doped ones. The absorption edge wavelength for SrTiO3 was found to be 390 nm with a BG energy of 3.18 eV as indicated in Fig. 7c. SrTi(N,O)3 and SrTi(O,F)3 displayed a similar BG as compared with SrTiO3, while SrTi(N,O,F)3 showed a visible light absorption edge of 510 nm, corresponding to a BG reduction from 3.18 to 2.43 eV.
Carbon-doped perovskites have also been examined for photocatalysis-based reactions. For example, a microorganism chelate approach was used to prepare C-doped LaCoO3 with Bacillus licheniformis R08 biomass as a chelating agent.141 Carbon atoms were confirmed to be incorporated into the perovskite structure at the oxygen site (lattice oxygen) and a reduced BG was achieved in the region of visible light. The C-doped LaCoO3 photocatalyst was active for the photo-reduction of carbon dioxide to formic acid by illumination under visible light, producing a formic acid yield of 95 μmol h−1 g−1 due to the reduced BG and the binding of Co and C. In future, the photocatalytic activity of C-doped perovskite oxides may be significantly enhanced by rationally optimizing the preparation methods and the selection of carbon sources.
A solvothermal approach using an appropriate mixture of water and ethylene glycol as the solvent was used to synthesize a C-doped NaTaO3 (C-NaTaO3) photocatalyst.142 It was found that carbon was successfully doped into NaTaO3 during the solvothermal process, which led to visible light absorption. C-NaTaO3 displayed superior photocatalytic activity to NaTaO3 and P25-TiO2 when illuminated with visible light. To further enhance the photo-activity of C-NaTaO3, a novel C-NaTaO3/Cl-doped TiO2 (Cl-TiO2) photocatalyst with a core–shell structure was also synthesized. This composite photocatalyst displayed an excellent photocatalytic performance for the degradation of NOx gas by visible light, compared to C-NaTaO3 and Cl-TiO2 materials. This was attributed to the greatly suppressed recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs resulting from the heterojunction interface. Importantly, the C-NaTaO3/Cl-TiO2 composite at a weight ratio of 1:1 showed the best photocatalytic capability for NOx gas decomposition by illumination with visible light. This work should offer insightful guidance for the development of highly active perovskite-based composite photocatalysts with an excellent visible light response.
In brief, perovskite materials with a high BG energy have poor quantum efficiency in the visible light range, which is due to the fact that only UV and a small portion of visible light could be absorbed. However, anion doping such as nitrogen doping, sulfur doping, halide doping or co-doping with two or three elements was observed to be an effective approach for improving the photoactivity of perovskite catalysts under visible light irradiation, due to the lower BG energy of anion doped materials. Fig. 9 summarizes the BG reduction of anion doped materials. Among the various doping processes, nitrogen doping has attracted particular attention.
 Fig. 9  Summary of band gap reduction of photocatalysts after anion doping. 
4.3. Membrane catalysis and other applications
The state-of-the-art large-scale oxygen production by the cryogenic process suffers from several drawbacks such as high price and energy consumption. As a result, many researchers have focused on the development of membrane technologies for efficient, energy-saving oxygen production and separation at low cost. In particular, oxygen ion-conducting ceramic membranes have attracted significant attention recently and there are more than twenty laboratories globally that are currently active in this dynamic research field. Some oxides with a perovskite or fluorite structure have been demonstrated to possess good mixed ionic and electronic conducting (MIEC) properties, which may make them suitable candidates for oxygen-permeable membranes. Oxygen separation using ceramic membranes involves the catalytic reduction of oxygen to oxygen ions at the oxygen-rich side of the membrane surface. This is accompanied by the concurrent transportation of oxygen ions and electron holes accumulated on the surface of the oxygen-poor side of the membrane through the bulk of the membrane. Finally, the oxygen ions and electron holes recombine to form molecular oxygen. The performance of a ceramic membrane for oxygen separation is thus closely related to the catalytic performance of the membrane surface for oxygen reduction/oxygen ion electron–hole recombination and the oxygen diffusion rate of the oxide bulk. Both are closely related to the properties of membrane materials, which can be tailored by anion doping.101,201 Due to the rich surface oxygen species, ceramic conducting membranes can also be applied as catalytic membrane reactors for high-temperature oxidative coupling reactions, such as partial oxidation of methane to syngas,202,203 or oxidative coupling of ethane to ethylene.204,205
Considering that many oxidative reactions take place at intermediate temperatures, it is critical that innovative MIEC-based membranes continue to be explored and developed. Highly efficient oxygen ion conducting pathways should be developed to achieve good oxygen permeability in MIEC-based membranes at intermediate and low temperatures. Based on the literature, a useful strategy to enhance the oxygen permeability is to reduce the chemical bonding strength between the oxygen anion and metal cations (A and B sites). Apart from the conventional and widely used strategy based on cation doping in the perovskite oxides of A or B sites, a new anion doping strategy was reported using the rational doping of fluorine in Co-containing perovskite oxide-based membranes.201 The F doping in perovskite oxides can decrease the density of the valence electrons of O2− and then reduce the chemical bonding energy between cations and anions, which could remarkably improve the oxygen mobility and permeability. Jin et al. developed novel F−-doped SrCo0.9Nb0.1O3−δF0.1 (SCNF) and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δF0.1 (BSCFF) perovskite oxyfluoride membranes with excellent oxygen permeation performance at low temperatures.201 As shown in Fig. 10a, SCNF showed a much better oxygen permeation performance than SrCo0.9Nb0.1O3−δ(SCN), particularly at lower operating temperatures. As seen in Fig. 10b, the SCNF membrane exhibited more than double the oxygen permeation flux than SCN at low temperatures. Additionally, the activation energy (Ea) of oxygen permeation in SCNF was 80 kJ mol−1, which is significantly smaller than the value for SCN (102 kJ mol−1), and it contributes to the outstanding performance of SCNF at lower operational temperatures. The universal applicability of this new anion doping strategy was studied by developing a BSCFF membrane and it was found that the flux of oxygen permeation for the BSCFF membrane was about three times that of BSCF as shown in Fig. 10b.
 Fig. 10  (a) Oxygen permeation performance of SCN and SCNF. (b) Oxygen permeation fluxes of several perovskite membranes at 600 °C. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
The F doping strategy was also used in the preparation of highly effective perovskite oxide-based cathode materials in SOFCs for operation at intermediate temperatures.101 The cathode in SOFCs catalyzes the reduction of oxygen to oxygen ions, which then migrate to the anode to react with the fuel for power generation. The higher the catalytic activity of the cathode for oxygen reduction, the lower the cathodic polarization resistance. In turn, a higher fuel-to-power efficiency is expected. Zhang et al. reported that the perovskite oxyfluorides SrFeO3−σ−δFσ and SrFe0.9Ti0.1O3−σ−δFσ (σ = 0.05 and 0.10) showed improved oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity compared to SrFeO3−δ and SrFe0.9Ti0.1O3−δ. More specifically, the area specific resistance values for SrFeO3−δ, SrFeO2.95−δF0.05 and SrFeO2.90−δF0.10 at 600 °C in air were 0.875, 0.393 and 0.491 Ω cm2, respectively. This clearly showed that F doping greatly enhances the ORR activity of SrFeO3−δ due to the improved bulk diffusion and surface exchange capabilities. Furthermore, the fluorine-doped perovskite oxide also demonstrated an excellent ORR stability at 650 °C (≈200 h). These results demonstrate that there is scope to improve the transport rates of perovskite oxides, which could be significantly increased by anion doping. A combination of anion and cation doping, in particular, is likely to be useful for the development of highly active and stable perovskite-based cathodes for SOFCs.
To sum up, partial occupation of nonoxide anions at the oxygen site could lead to higher performance of oxygen permeability for perovskite ceramic membranes at intermediate temperatures. The introduction of anions has a significant effect on the electronic structure and provides a new route to control the functional properties of perovskite oxides. In particular, anion doping in perovskite oxides can lead to an obvious enhancement in the bulk diffusion and surface properties, thus resulting in improved oxygen reduction activity at intermediate temperatures compared to the parent oxide, while also maintaining sufficiently high stability.
5 Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, the influence of anion doping on the characteristics of oxides and their application as catalysts for a range of different chemical reactions are presented. As this is a broad field, the review focuses on three major areas that are of growing interest to researchers; they are (i) the catalytic oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane, (ii) photocatalysis-based reactions, and (iii) electrocatalysis for the high-temperature oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen separation via mixed conducting membrane technology.
Anions may be doped into oxides in two different ways, either by replacing the lattice oxygen or by making them occupy the interstitial sites between different layers in the crystal structure, with the exact nature being determined by the method of anion introduction. Different synthesis methods can result in different anion doping sites. The different anion doping sites and concentrations may result in differences in the phase structure, defect structure, specific surface area, surface state and electronic structure, consequently having a different impact on the catalytic performance for various reactions. For example, excessive anion dopants may give rise to phase transitions and changes in lattice parameters and even the spin states of the surrounding cations. The synthesis of anion-doped oxides with controllable doping sites and accurate dopant concentrations is highly important for the optimization of catalytic activity; yet it remains a significant challenge. Adding to this, the specific surface area usually decreases after anion doping, which is unfavorable as it is instead a higher area that leads to a larger number of active sites. Methods to prepare anion-doped materials with large specific surface area to create more active sites require more extensive research in the future.
For the application of oxides as catalysts for ODE and OCM reactions, anion doping not only increases the amount of lattice defects to facilitate the activation of gases, but also suppresses the deep oxidation of ethane and ethene. The exchange of O2− and other anions between lattices may lead to the production of defects or anion vacancies, which are beneficial for the activation of molecular oxygen. Anion doping can optimize the oxygen vacancy concentration and cation concentration. Generally, a higher oxygen vacancy concentration contributes to a better capability of the metal oxide catalyst. However, anion doping can also reduce the concentration of oxygen vacancies for suppressing complete oxidation, and can strengthen the redox capability of catalysts for enhancing selective oxidation. This is an excellent approach for tuning the properties of catalysts to achieve more desirable catalytic performances. In addition, by introducing anions like chlorine into oxides, the gross basicity of the catalyst is effectively reduced. The drop in basicity significantly prevents the poisoning of the catalyst in the presence of CO2. As a result, the conversion of reactants, the selectivity and the yield of the target product can be improved significantly. This anion doping strategy may also be applicable for other redox reactions; however, some challenges remain in this area, such as the function of active sites created by the anion doping, the mechanism of the reaction between the different types of oxygen species and hydrocarbons, the factors that control the selectivity of byproducts, the loss of halide in catalysis in some specific instances, and the ways to prevent the catalyst from being reduced by CH4.
Progress in the photocatalysis of anion-doped perovskite-type oxides is also discussed, such as photocatalytic water splitting and photocatalytic water treatment. Due to the large BG of many undoped perovskite oxides, only UV and a small portion of visible light can be absorbed, leading to poor quantum efficiency in the visible light range. Non-metal doping, such as nitrogen doping, sulfur doping, halide doping or co-doping with two or three elements, was demonstrated to effectively enhance the photocatalytic performance of perovskite catalysts by illumination with visible light. Among the various doping processes, nitrogen doping has attracted particular attention. Several candidates, such as CaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, and BaNbO2N, with a reduction of BG of nearly 2 eV, have been reported.194 Nonetheless, only CaNbO2N showed substantial photocatalytic activity among these catalysts. The presence of various energy sites of the valence and conduction bands leads to variation in the performance of a series of nitrogen-doped perovskite oxides with similar BGs. Even today, the photocatalytic performance and efficiency of oxygen site-doped perovskite oxides are still comparatively low. The poor performance is not only due to the relatively poor visible light absorption of anion-doped perovskite oxides, but also because of the oxygen vacancies introduced with increased non-metal-element doping content, which may serve as charge carrier traps and/or recombination centers and thus cause the photocatalytic performance and efficiency to deteriorate. Furthermore, some compositional restrictions still exist with metals such as Nb, Ti, and Ta with high oxidation states being the predominant cations occupying the B site in perovskite oxides. Taking the most investigated nitrogen-doped perovskite oxides as an example, the widely used traditional thermal ammonolysis method limits the possibility of formation of oxygen site-doped perovskite oxides with the 3d transition metals with higher electronegativity such as Ni, Fe, and Cu. The reaction between the gaseous ammonia and the above perovskite oxides leads to the formation of interstitial nitrides with lower oxidation states. Co-doping with several non-oxygen elements may be a better choice. For example, the tri-doped perovskite SrTi(N,O,F)3 with a low BG of 2.43 eV could be used in the photocatalytic reaction of water splitting and the degradation of organic compounds by photocatalysis in future research. In addition to the BG reduction, suppressing the recombination of the electron–hole pair is conducive to a high photocatalytic activity. Anion doping in combination with advanced synthesis techniques to reduce the particle size and to form special particle architectures may be a good approach for such suppression. Thus, one potential future direction is to develop new and advanced methods for synthesis of perovskite oxides doped with multiple anions.
In addition to general heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis, electrocatalysis may also be an important application field for anion-doped oxides. Up to now, the successful application of anion-doped oxides in high-temperature SOFCs for the oxygen reduction reaction and mixed conducting membranes for oxygen separation has been reported. The anion doping can alter the oxygen vacancy concentration and metal–oxygen bond strength, and hence also the catalytic activity and oxygen ion transportation capability. Importantly, the creation of high-efficiency oxygen ion transport paths after anion doping increases the lattice oxygen mobility and oxygen permeability. Furthermore, the use of anion-doped oxides as electrocatalysts in room-temperature oxygen redox reaction and water splitting in aqueous solutions is a highly promising direction for the future, although it has been exploited very little to date. However, the stability of anion-doped oxides in aqueous solutions is a big concern, and requires detailed investigation in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project Grants DP150104365 and DP160104835.
Notes and references
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 25, 872–882 CrossRef .
B. Jandeleit, D. J. Schaefer, T. S. Powers, H. W. Turner and W. H. Weinberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2494–2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Crooks, M. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 181–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. K. Hashmi and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7896–7936 CrossRef PubMed .
W. A. Herrmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1290–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
N. Mizuno and M. Misono, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 199–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dost and K. van Nes, Recl. Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas, 1951, 70, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Hickey, M. G. Crestani, A. R. Fout, X. Gao, C.-H. Chen and D. J. Mindiola, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 9834–9837 RSC .
A. Politano, L. Wang and G. Chiarello, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3885–3892 CrossRef CAS .
P. Quicker, V. Höllein and R. Dittmeyer, Catal. Today, 2000, 56, 21–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Wan, Y. Zhao and W. Wang, Catal. Today, 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2018.05.022 .
C. Baroi, A. M. Gaffney and R. Fushimi, Catal. Today, 2017, 298, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Burk and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 8025–8032 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Faur Ghenciu, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 389–399 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .
S. N. Naik, V. V. Goud, P. K. Rout and A. K. Dalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 578–597 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, W. Zhou and Z. Zhu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 804–874 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smitha, S. Sridhar and A. A. Khan, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 259, 10–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Z. Yuan, J. J. Martin, H. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Wu and W. Merida, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 104–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Guo, W. Wang, C. Su, R. Ran, H. Wang and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9246–9253 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Singhal, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 305–313 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Stambouli and E. Traversa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 433–455 CrossRef CAS .
I. Paramasivam, H. Jha, N. Liu and P. Schmuki, Small, 2012, 8, 3073–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and R. Amadelli, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3811–3836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peral, X. Domènech and D. F. Ollis, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1999, 70, 117–140 CrossRef .
M. Deborde and U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2008, 42, 13–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Herrmann, Catal. Today, 1999, 53, 115–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Herrmann, C. Guillard and P. Pichat, Catal. Today, 1993, 17, 7–20 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhong, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang, A. M. Cao, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2426–2431 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-f. Chang and J. G. McCarty, Catal. Today, 1996, 30, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
C. Resini, T. Montanari, L. Nappi, G. Bagnasco, M. Turco, G. Busca, F. Bregani, M. Notaro and G. Rocchini, J. Catal., 2003, 214, 179–190 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atkinson and J. Arey, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 4605–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abdullah and H. Mat, Reaktor, 2008, 12, 48–52 CrossRef .
T. Searchinger, R. Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, F. Dong, A. Elobeid, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, D. Hayes and T.-H. Yu, Science, 2008, 319, 1238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi, P. Ciambelli, S. Perathoner and P. Russo, Catal. Today, 2002, 75, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berndt and P. Landri, Catal. Today, 2002, 75, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
R. Di Monte and J. Kašpar, Catal. Today, 2005, 100, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Iwamoto, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. J. Weitkamp, H. G. Karge, H. Pfeifer and W. Hölderich, Elsevier,  1994, vol. 84, pp. 1395–1410 Search PubMed .
N. K. Labhsetwar, A. Watanabe and T. Mitsuhashi, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 40, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
T. Barakat, J. C. Rooke, H. L. Tidahy, M. Hosseini, R. Cousin, J.-F. Lamonier, J.-M. Giraudon, G. De Weireld, B.-L. Su and S. Siffert, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1420–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Fierro, O. Akdim and C. Mirodatos, Green Chem., 2003, 5, 20–24 RSC .
P. Gélin and M. Primet, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 39, 1–37 CrossRef .
R. W. van den Brink, M. Krzan, M. M. R. Feijen-Jeurissen, R. Louw and P. Mulder, Appl. Catal., B, 2000, 24, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zalc, V. Sokolovskii and D. G. Löffler, J. Catal., 2002, 206, 169–171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chia and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12233–12235 RSC .
C. S. MacLeod, A. P. Harvey, A. F. Lee and K. Wilson, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 135, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shao, W. Yang, Y. Cong, H. Dong, J. Tong and G. Xiong, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 172, 177–188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
Y. Liu, C. Wang, J.-P. Veder, M. Saunders, M. Tade, S. Wang and Z. Shao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 556–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Spivey, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1987, 26, 2165–2180 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Huang, Z. Zhao, G. E. Hoag, A. Dahmani and P. A. Block, Chemosphere, 2005, 61, 551–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Scirè, S. Minicò, C. Crisafulli, C. Satriano and A. Pistone, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 40, 43–49 CrossRef .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakrabarti and B. K. Dutta, J. Hazard. Mater., 2004, 112, 269–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cun, Z. Jincai, W. Xinming, M. Bixian, S. Guoying, P. Ping'an and F. Jiamo, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 39, 269–279 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Wang, Y. J. Zhu and L. X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 17, 59–64 CrossRef .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cieśla, P. Kocot, P. Mytych and Z. Stasicka, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 224, 17–33 CrossRef .
A. Primo, T. Marino, A. Corma, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6930–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, B. Li, C. Zhang, L. Cui, S. Kang, X. Li and L. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 130–131, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wetchakun, S. Chaiwichain, B. Inceesungvorn, K. Pingmuang, S. Phanichphant, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3718–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, R. K. Pandey and R. V. Jayaram, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1113–1125 RSC .
B. He, D. Ma, W. Hao, W. Xiao and Z. Tian, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Kazin, M. N. Rumyantseva, V. E. Prusakov, I. P. Suzdalev and A. M. Gaskov, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 2799–2805 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leng, J. Wei, Z. Liu, R. Xiong, C. Pan and J. Shi, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1643 CrossRef .
G. K. Mani and J. B. B. Rayappan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 183, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, S. Liu and Y. Deng, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1458–1462 CrossRef CAS .

          S. D. Jackson and J. S. J. Hargreaves, Metal oxide catalysis, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
S.-S. Lin and M. D. Gurol, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 1417–1423 CrossRef CAS .
S. Royer and D. Duprez, ChemCatChem, 2010, 3, 24–65 CrossRef .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. K. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Guo, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 391–398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagaveni, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 20204–20212 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yi, Y. Xie, L.-J. Jiang, J. Shu, C.-B. Yue, A.-N. Zhou and M.-F. Ye, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3541–3547 RSC .
E. M. Jabłońska, L. Buselli, E. M. Nocuń and R. Palkovits, ChemCatChem, 2017, 10, 296–304 CrossRef .
H. Lee, J. Lim, C. Lee, S. Back, K. An, J. W. Shin, R. Ryoo, Y. Jung and J. Y. Park, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2235 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Mutch, S. Shulda, A. J. McCue, M. J. Menart, C. V. Ciobanu, C. Ngo, J. A. Anderson, R. M. Richards and D. Vega-Maza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Oelerich, T. Klassen and R. Bormann, J. Alloys Compd., 2001, 315, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Singh, N. F. W. Thissen, W.-H. Kim, H. Johnson, W. M. M. Kessels, A. A. Bol, S. F. Bent and A. J. M. Mackus, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 663–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Guo, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 437, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Ran, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 467, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9415–9423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Wang, J.-P. M. Veder, Z. Xu, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, M. O. Tade, S. Wang and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702604 CrossRef .
E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4355–4369 RSC .
Y. Lin, S. Lin, M. Luo and J. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1169–1171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Hu, Z. Z. Jiang, K. G. Gao, G. F. Cheng, J. J. Ge, X. M. Lv and X. S. Wu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 534, 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Kang, W. Shen and X. Bai, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 1761–1765 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chikoidze, M. Nolan, M. Modreanu, V. Sallet and P. Galtier, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 8146–8149 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dogu, K. E. Meyer, A. Fuller, S. Gunduz, D. J. Deka, N. Kramer, A. C. Co and U. S. Ozkan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 90–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Konishcheva, D. I. Potemkin, P. V. Snytnikov, O. A. Stonkus, V. D. Belyaev and V. A. Sobyanin, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4463–4469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, L. Jiao, Y. Miao and H. Yuan, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 1541–1544 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700242 CrossRef .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
H. Luo, T. Takata, Y. Lee, J. Zhao, K. Domen and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 846–849 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, B. Wu Hao, Y. Xie and W. Lou Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1488–1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795–2806 RSC .
E. E. McCabe and C. Greaves, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 448–458 CrossRef CAS .
C. Greaves, J. L. Kissick, M. G. Francesconi, L. D. Aikens and L. J. Gillie, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 111–116 RSC .
H. X. Dai, H. He, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2001, 171, 217–227 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. W. P. James, D. W. Murphy and S. M. Zahurak, Nature, 1989, 338, 240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sugiyama, M. Kosuge, Y. Ojima, H. Yamauchi and S. Tanaka, Phys. C, 1991, 179, 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krol, Y. L. Soo, Z. H. Ming, S. Huang, Y. H. Kao, G. C. Smith, K. Lee, A. C. W. P. James and D. W. Murphy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chevalier, A. Tressaud, B. Lepine, K. Amine, J. M. Dance, L. Lozano, E. Hickey and J. Etourneau, Phys. C, 1990, 167, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Francesconi and C. Greaves, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 1997, 10, A29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ai-Mamouri, P. P. Edwards, C. Greaves and M. Slaski, Nature, 1994, 369, 382 CrossRef .
X. Chen, J. Liang, W. Tang, C. Wang and G. Rao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 16233–16236 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Slater, P. P. Edwards, C. Greaves, I. Gameson, M. G. Francesconi, J. P. Hodges, M. Al-Mamouri and M. Slaski, Phys. C, 1995, 241, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Greaves and M. G. Francesconi, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1998, 3, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Slater and R. K. B. Gover, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2035–2038 RSC .
R. Cloots, A. Rulmont, P. A. Godelaine, C. Hannay, H. W. Vanderschueren and M. Ausloos, Solid State Commun., 1991, 79, 615–619 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hiromitsu, F. Shinobu, Y. Toshinobu and S. Sumio, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1990, 29, L1608 CrossRef .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454–456 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marchand, R. Pastuszak and Y. Laurent, Rev. Chim., 1982, 19, 684–689 CAS .
K. Page, M. W. Stoltzfus, Y.-I. Kim, T. Proffen, P. M. Woodward, A. K. Cheetham and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4037–4042 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuno, C. Tassel, K. Fujita, D. Batuk, A. M. Abakumov, K. Shitara, A. Kuwabara, H. Moriwake, D. Watabe, C. Ritter, C. M. Brown, T. Yamamoto, F. Takeiri, R. Abe, Y. Kobayashi, K. Tanaka and H. Kageyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15950–15955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Dai, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 251–266 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, D. W. Park and M. I. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2007, 13, 265–271 CAS .
M. Iorgulescu, P. Roussel, N. Tancret, N. Renaut, N. Tiercelin and O. Mentré, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 198, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, X. Zhang and R. Wäppling, J. Alloys Compd., 2000, 306, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dai, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, J. Catal., 2000, 189, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, J. Hollingsworth, J. Shim, Y. J. Lee, K. Striebel, J. A. Reimer and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1060–A1066 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, M. Tade, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701229 CrossRef .
S.-H. Hsu, C.-T. Li, H.-T. Chien, R. R. Salunkhe, N. Suzuki, Y. Yamauchi, K.-C. Ho and K. C. W. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ni, S. Fu, C. Wu, J. Maier, Y. Yu and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2259–2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-I. Kim and P. M. Woodward, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 3224–3233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takeshi, A. Ryoji, O. Takeshi, A. Koyu and T. Yasunori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2001, 40, L561 CrossRef .
V. Prabhakaran and V. K. Ramani, ECS Trans., 2013, 58, 991–998 CrossRef .
Y. S. Lee, J. Heo, M. T. Winkler, S. C. Siah, S. B. Kim, R. G. Gordon and T. Buonassisi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15416–15422 RSC .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, M. Matsuka, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15773–15782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jia, J. Li, W. Fang, H. Song, Q. Li and Y. Tang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1230–1234 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Yin, Q. Dong and T. Sato, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20633–20640 RSC .
G. Wu, T. Nishikawa, B. Ohtani and A. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4530–4537 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Feng, L. Q. Jiang, M. Zhu, H. B. Liu, X. Zhou and C. H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 967–974 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, K. C. K. Soh and P. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 372, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kohama, Y. Kamihara, H. Kawaji, T. Atake, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2008, 77, 094715 CrossRef .
G. Simon Case, A. L. Hector, W. Levason, R. L. Needs, M. F. Thomas and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2821–2827 RSC .
O. Bohnke, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Wen, X. Xu and X. Zhu, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2269–2273 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sivakumar and J. B. Wiley, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 74–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. Darriet and M. A. Subramanian, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 543–552 RSC .
A. Bendraoua, E. Quarez, F. Abraham and O. Mentré, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, R. Lu, W. Tan, C. Xiao, K. Deng and Y. Qian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 132404 CrossRef .
H. X. Dai, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, J. Catal., 2000, 193, 65–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dai, C. T. Au, Y. Chan, K. C. Hui and Y. L. Leung, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 213, 91–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dai, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, Catal. Lett., 1999, 57, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Leontiou, A. K. Ladavos, A. E. Giannakas, T. V. Bakas and P. J. Pomonis, J. Catal., 2007, 251, 103–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and J. P. Lewis, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, 421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4908–4911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5483–5486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sturza, S. Daviero-Minaud, H. Kabbour, O. Gardoll and O. Mentré, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6726–6735 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huo, X. Ren, L. Qian, N. Zhang, S. Liu and X. Yan, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2013, 343, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chen, M. Yashima, T. Ohta, K. Ohoyama and S. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5246–5254 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Keller and M. M. Bhasin, J. Catal., 1982, 73, 9–19 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lunsford Jack, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 34, 970–980 CrossRef .
F. Cavani, N. Ballarini and A. Cericola, Catal. Today, 2007, 127, 113–131 CrossRef CAS .

          L. G. Tejuca and J. L. G. Fierro, Properties and applications of perovskite-type oxides, CRC Press,  1992 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, T. Yu, B.-s. Dou, C.-x. Wang, X.-f. Xie, Z.-l. Yu, S.-r. Fan, Z.-r. Fan and L.-c. Wang, J. Catal., 1989, 120, 88–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Conway and J. H. Lunsford, J. Catal., 1991, 131, 513–522 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, H. He, S. Y. Lai and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1996, 159, 280–287 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Otsuka, M. Hatano and T. Komatsu, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. D. M. Bibby, C. D. Chang, R. F. Howe and S. Yurchak, Elsevier,  1988, vol. 36, pp. 383–387 Search PubMed .
C. T. Au, H. He, S. Y. Lai and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1996, 163, 399–408 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, W. Zhang, H. Wan and K. Tsai, Catal. Lett., 1993, 21, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef .
P. C. T. Au, Y. W. Liu and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1998, 176, 365–375 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dai, C. F. Ng and C. T. Au, J. Catal., 2001, 199, 177–192 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, Y. W. Liu and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1997, 171, 231–244 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, X. P. Zhou, Y. W. Liu, W. J. Ji and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1998, 174, 153–163 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, K. D. Chen, H. X. Dai, Y. W. Liu and C. F. Ng, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 177, 185–191 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, K. D. Chen and C. F. Ng, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 171, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, K. D. Chen, H. X. Dai, Y. W. Liu, J. Z. Luo and C. F. Ng, J. Catal., 1998, 179, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. Nie, F. Li, Z. L. Wang and C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukherji, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15674–15678 CrossRef CAS .
F.-F. Li, D.-R. Liu, G.-M. Gao, B. Xue and Y.-S. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Ebbinghaus, H.-P. Abicht, R. Dronskowski, T. Müller, A. Reller and A. Weidenkaff, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2009, 37, 173–205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, X. Li, H. Iwai, Z. Zou and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 931–935 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Yang, C. Ding, R. Li, S. Jin, D. Wang, H. Han, F. Zhang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5651–5659 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2014, 310, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matoba, K. Maeda and K. Domen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14731–14735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, D. Lu and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1026–1033 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9865–9869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miseki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 306–314 RSC .
K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4813–4818 RSC .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4285–4292 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-I. Kim, P. M. Woodward, K. Z. Baba-Kishi and C. W. Tai, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1267–1276 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Li, H. Li, S. Yin and T. Sato, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, A. E. Maegli, L. Karvonen, S. K. Matam, A. Shkabko, S. Riegg, T. Großmann, S. G. Ebbinghaus, S. Pokrant and A. Weidenkaff, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 206, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, G. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Chu, W. Jin and N. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3511–3515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, Y. S. Lin and S. L. Swartz, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 150, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, A. G. Dixon, W. R. Moser, Y. H. Ma and U. Balachandran, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 170, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Akin and Y. S. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2002, 209, 457–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Coronas, M. Menendez and J. Santamaria, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 4229–4234 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Yu Liu	Yu Liu is a Visiting Research Associate in Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his Ph.D degree in Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia in 2018. His research interests include supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, solid oxide fuel cells and electrochemical catalysis.
Zongping Shao	Zongping Shao is a professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at the Institut de Recherches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France and postdoc at the California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 till 2005. His current research interests include solid-oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structural transformation in the crystal of Sr2CuO3 after fluorine doping. (b) Crystal structure of the halide doped and original structures of La2−xSrxCuO4 and Nd2−xSrxCuO4. (c) The structure of Ba2ZrO4−xF2x. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 1998, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2001, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structures of MnTaO2N with an LN-type structure (R3c) and ZnTaO2N with an HTLN-type structure (Rc); gray, brown, purple, red, and green balls represent Zn, Ta, Mn, O, and N. (b) Coordination environment around A and B sites in ZnTaO2N and MnTaO2N. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016, ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structures of Sr3Fe2O6 and Sr3Fe2O6F0.87. Oxide ions are shown in white, and the mixed oxide/fluoride site in dark grey. (b) Crystal structures of original YBa2Cu3O7 and anion-doped YBa2Cu3O7. (c) A possible mechanism of oxide migration and F-displacements activated by structural fluctuations. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 1999, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2010, ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 4  A diagram of a catalyst testing reactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 1982, Elsevier.	 


Cl–Li+–MgO (SG1)	12.3	1.2	0.19	n/a	n/a	1.8
Cl–Li+–MgO (SG2)	17.6	8.0	0.27	0.20	n/a	1.7
Cl–Li+–MgO (SG3)	n/a	n/a	n/a	0.13	n/a	1.2
Cl–Li+–MgO (1.9)	1.9	1.6	0.22	0.25	0.9	0.7
Cl–Li+–MgO (8.7)	8.7	5.6	0.21	0.17	0.7	1.6
Cl–Li+–MgO (19.4)	19.4	13.8	0.29	0.25	0.9	0.7
Cl–Li+–MgO (IS)	n/a	7.2	n/a	0.21	n/a	1.5
Li+–MgO	0	0	0.24	0.14	1.0	1.4

 	Fig. 5  (a) The effects of BaBr2 on the catalytic performance of BaBr2/La2O3 catalysts. (b) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped YBa2Cu3O6.72. (c) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped La0.6Sr0.4FeO2.952. (d) Catalytic performance of pure and anion-doped AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.846 (A = La0.8Ba0.2). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 1996, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2000, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2001, Elsevier.	 



SrFeO2.81	680 °C	54.8	50.5	—	27.7	—	—	—	—	
156

SrFeO2.618Cl0.443	89.9	73.6	—	62.2	—	—	—	—
AMn1−xCuxO2.713	680 °C	20.8	19.4	0.0	4.0	—	—	—	—	
155

AMnO2.98F0.102	23.3	35.6	0.5	8.3	—	—	—	—
AMn0.9Cu0.1O2.2924F0.112	33.2	47.5	2.3	15.8	—	—	—	—
AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.808F0.124	49.2	66.8	4.9	32.9	—	—	—	—
AMn0.5Cu0.5O2.605F0.246	38.3	48.5	2.5	18.6	—	—	—	—
AMn0.3Cu0.7O2.425F0.338	30.9	32.8	2.2	10.7	—	—	—	—
AMn0.1Cu0.9O2.241F0.428	29.5	29.5	2.0	8.70	—	—	—	—
AMnO2.984Cl0.096	62.3	64.9	5.3	40.5	—	—	—	—
AMn0.9Cu0.1O2.921Cl0.103	66.0	67.6	7.3	44.6	—	—	—	—
AMn0.7Cu0.3O2.817Cl0.114	73.0	69.5	7.3	50.8	—	—	—	—
AMn0.5Cu0.5O2.605Cl0.206	63.1	63.1	7.8	39.8	—	—	—	—
AMn0.3Cu0.7O2.435Cl0.288	53.4	60.3	4.7	32.2	—	—	—	—
AMn0.1Cu0.9O2.280Cl0.349	48.8	58.4	5.9	28.5	—	—	—	—
La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.934	660 °C	41.8	28.8	0.0	15.1	—	—	—	—	
127

La1.85Sr0.15CuO3.93Cl0.053	82.8	73.2	4.2	60.6	—	—	—	—
Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO3.98	34.9	26.3	0.0	12.1	—	—	—	—
Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO3.981F0.092	72.1	61.8	9.0	44.6	—	—	—	—
LaFO3−δ	660 °C	5.0	36.1	3.8	19.7	—	—	—	—	
132

LaFeO3−0.045F0.122	70.6	43.3	6.6	30.6	—	—	—	—
LaFeO3−0.031Cl0.088	70.1	48.9	6.1	37.7	—	—	—	—
La0.2Sr0.8FeO3−0.110	68.1	29.1	3.6	19.8	—	—	—	—
La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−0.103F0.216	76.8	62.1	7.3	47.7	—	—	—	—
La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.130F0.238	70.6	64.2	6.6	45.3	—	—	—	—
La0.4Sr0.6FeO3−0.184F0.259	64.4	66.1	6.5	42.6	—	—	—	—
La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−0.062Cl0.114	73.2	52.7	7.5	38.6	—	—	—	—
La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−0.103Cl0.164	84.4	68.4	4.5	57.6	—	—	—	—
La0.4Sr0.6FeO3−0.165Cl0.202	72.7	71.1	6.6	51.7	—	—	—	—
YBa2Cu3O7−0.27F0.10	660 °C	66.5	66.8	0.0	44.4	—	—	—	—	
154

YBa2Cu3O7−0.24F0.13	72.4	79.5	5.5	57.6	—	—	—	—
YBa2Cu3O7−0.21F0.16	82.2	82.3	0.0	67.7	—	—	—	—
YBa2Cu3O7−0.18F0.19	52.7	84.7	0.0	45.5	—	—	—	—
YBa2Cu3O7−0.18F0.22	48.4	85.7	0.0	41.5	—	—	—	—
Cl–Li+–MgO (SG1)	650 °C	65.4	69.4	1.3	45.4	—	—	—	—	
170

Cl–Li+–MgO (SG2)	68.0	67.2	1.6	45.7	—	—	—	—
Cl–Li+–MgO (1.9)	32.9	77.3	0.0	25.4	—	—	—	—
Cl–Li+–MgO (8.7)	47.1	75.7	0.7	35.6	—	—	—	—
Cl–Li+–MgO (19.4)	54.6	72.0	1.8	39.3	—	—	—	—
30% BaO/Nd2O3	750 °C	—	—	—	—	35.9	54.6	—	16.3	
176

30% BaF2/Nd2O3	—	—	—	—	33.8	47.4	—	17.8
30% BaCl2/Nd2O3	—	—	—	—	42.4	49.3	—	21.5
30% BaBr2/Nd2O3	—	—	—	—	35.9	53.1	—	16.8
LaF3	650 °C	—	—	—	—	6.8	0.0	12.1	0.8	
174

LaOBr	750 °C	—	—	—	—	40.7	72.1	27.9	11.3	
173

BaCO3/LaOBr	—	—	—	—	29.1	53.2	46.8	13.6
BaF2/La2O3	750 °C	—	—	—	—	27.0	56.8	43.7	11.8	
171

BaBr2/La2O3	—	—	—	—	44.7	59.5	40.5	18.1
BaBr2/La2O3	—	—	—	—	35.0	78.3	21.6	7.6

 	Fig. 6  UV-vis DRS of (a) Sr5Ta4O15, (b) Ba5Ta4O15 and (c) Sr2Ta2O7 before and after nitridation. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of Ca2Ta3O9.7N0.2 based materials. (b) DRS of Ca2Nb2O7 and CaNbO2N nitride at different temperatures. (c) UV-visible DRS of SrTiO3, SrTi(N,O)3, SrTi(O,F)3 and SrTi(N,O,F)3. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2012, ACS Publications. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The effects of Zr/Ta ratios on the photocatalytic activity of the BaZrO3–BaTaO2N catalyst. (b) Time courses of H2 and O2 evolution from aqueous NaI solution over a mixture of Pt/WO3 and Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N solid solution under visible light. (c) Dependence of the rates of H2 and O2 evolution over a mixture of PtOx/WO3 and Pt/BaZrO3–BaTaO2N. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2013, ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 9  Summary of band gap reduction of photocatalysts after anion doping.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Oxygen permeation performance of SCN and SCNF. (b) Oxygen permeation fluxes of several perovskite membranes at 600 °C. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
