CO 2 reduction: the quest for electrocatalytic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA09875D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09875D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8230-8246CO2 reduction: the quest for electrocatalytic materials

        
          
            Bahareh 
            Khezri
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Adrian C. 
            Fisher
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Pumera
          
        
      *ab
aDivision of Chemistry & Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: pumera@ntu.edu.sg; pumera.research@gmail.com
bCambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore, CREATE Tower, 1 Create Way, 138602, Singapore
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, New Museum Site, Cambridge University, Pembroke Street, Cambridge CB2 3RA, UK
Received 
      15th November 2016
    , Accepted 2nd April 2017First published on 21st April 2017AbstractRising levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) are of significant concern in modern society, as they lead to global warming and consequential environmental and societal changes. It is of importance to develop industries with a zero or negative CO2 footprint. Electrochemistry, where one of the reagents is electrons, is an environmentally clean technology that is capable of addressing the conversion of CO2 to value-added products. The key factor in the process is the use of catalytic electrode materials that lead to the desired reaction and product. Significant progress in this field has been achieved in the past two years. This review discusses the progress in the development of electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction achieved during this time period.
1. Introduction
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emitted from fossil fuels is responsible for the majority of anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Concerns of continuous increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration causing global warming are growing. As a result, environmentalists are seeking help to limit fossil fuel consumption to avoid and reduce CO2 emissions.1 However, technological advancements in renewable energy and nuclear power have been incorporated to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels. Nonetheless, renewable energies are not accessible in many regions, which continue heavy use of fossil fuels. Although new technologies are contributing significantly to lower CO2 emissions, the replacement of all current technologies is not yet possible. The capture and utilization of CO2 has attracted attention worldwide since this process can convert carbon dioxide to a wide range of value-added chemicals2,3 such as carbon monoxide, formic acid, methanol, ethanol, and ethylene through radiochemical,4 thermochemical,5,6 biochemical,5 photochemical,5–8 and electrochemical2,5,9–15 reactions using homogenous/heterogeneous catalysts where required. However, the use of electrochemical methods for CO2 reduction on a real scale remains a challenge;16,17 a great deal of research is going on in this field. Electrochemical conversion can be performed under ambient temperature and pressure conditions. In most cases, the co-reactant is water and the required electricity can be obtained by using renewable energy resources.2,10,18,19
The literature indicates that high overpotential, catalyst lifetime, and low selectivity are key challenges that this field still faces. The development of efficient electrocatalysts plays an important role in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in terms of activity and selectivity/faradaic efficiency (FE).9,20 In addition, the mechanism of reduction is not exactly known in most cases, it is only hypothetical. A fundamental understanding of the reaction kinetics and thermodynamics is necessary to overcome these challenges. Despite good progress and numerous studies in this field, large-scale electrochemical CO2 reduction is challenging. It requires new strategies, materials, and advancements in the fundamental understanding of the reactions involved to make it economical and practical.21
This review will discuss the most recent advancements in electrochemical CO2 conversion, focusing on years 2015–2016. CO2 conversion electrocatalysts are usually categorized into two main classes: homogenous and heterogeneous. Homogenous electrocatalysts have attracted increased attention; several reviews cover their advancement.10,22 In contrast, our review focuses on heterogeneous catalysts. Heterogeneous catalysts will be discussed in three main categories: (i) metallic catalysts including noble metals, copper, hydride catalysts, molecular metal catalysts, and carbon supported metal catalysts; (ii) metal-free catalysts; and (iii) transition metal dichalcogenide catalysts.
2. The chemistry behind CO2 reduction
The final products of CO2 reduction are mostly defined based on the electrocatalyst (cathode) employed in the electrochemical reaction. This multi-step reaction generally involves adsorption on the surface of the catalyst (cathode), electron/proton transfer and desorption from the electrocatalyst surface. Hori et al.23 suggested that the formation of CO2−˙ is the first step of CO2 multi-step reduction towards the final products on the surface of metals such as Au, Ag, Cu and Zn in aqueous media and Au, Ag, Cu, Zn, Cd, Sn and In in non-aqueous environments. While COOH˙ seems to be the favorable intermediate on the surface of Cd, Sn, In, Pb, Tl and Hg.23 The formation of CO2−˙ is thermodynamically unfavorable and requires a high potential (−1.9 vs. the SHE) to drive the reaction. The proton transfer step happens thermodynamically at much lower potentials; however, this makes whole CO2 reduction more complicated to lead towards desired products and in most of the studies a mixture of products has been obtained. The reduction of CO2 is more challenging in the presence of water due to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). H2 becomes the major product and the catalyst should be selected and designed in such a way that it kinetically suppresses H2 formation as much as possible while kinetically promoting CO2 reduction to increase the production of desirable products. All the mechanisms proposed by studies included in this review have been summarized in three categories in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the electroreduction of CO2 on metal surfaces. 
In group one, on the surface of noble metals, earlier studies suggested that CO2−˙ will be formed firstly which follow by protonation step and produce of COOH˙ intermediate for both bulk and nanostructured catalysts.24 However some recent studies have conflicting views with these findings and they have shown that the formation of CO2−˙ is most unlikely on the surface of the nanostructured Ag through experimental and computational data.25,26 In this stage, the rate determining step can be either the electron transfer or protonation step depending on the surface structure of the electrocatalyst. Further investigation is required to confirm the key intermediate and accordingly the reaction mechanism.
The only member of the group three catalysts is copper. On the copper surface, CO2 can be initially reduced to CO or COOH− through the CO2−˙ intermediate. CO is a crucial intermediate which can be reduced to alcohols and hydrocarbons at more negative potentials while COOH− does not undergo more reduction on the Cu surface.27–31 The formation of the CO2−˙ intermediate is considered as a control step in the overall reaction of CO2 reduction on the Cu surface followed by local rate determining steps (RDSs) in different pathways for each product. The proposed mechanisms need to be understood in more detail since still various studies reported various rate determining steps. For example Hori et al. reported first electron transfer as the RDS for ethylene formation and electron transfer coupled with a protonation step for methane; while Schouten et al. explained a CO dimerization step accompanied by first electron transfer as the control step for ethylene formation and breakage of the C–O bond (in the formyl intermediate) for methane.
Hori et al. showed that the final products of CO2 reduction on the copper surface are highly affected by the employed electrolyte as well.29
As it can be seen in Scheme 1, for each target product different pathways have been suggested. In most of the studies, proposed mechanisms are in accordance with the results of either the Tafel slope or DFT calculations and there isn't enough evidence to confirm the mechanism which is hypothesized.25,32–34 We believe that in this regard the combination of in situ spectroscopy and DFT calculations can be a solution for a better understanding of the reaction pathway and mechanism confirmation.
3. Metallic catalysts
Electrochemical reduction of CO2 on bulk metals was widely studied and reviewed by Hori in 2008.35 Recent studies have increasingly employed engineered surface structures of catalysts towards nanostructures to provide more active sites and subsequently to improve catalyst performance.
3.1 Noble metals
It has been reported that noble metals (Au and Ag) show good catalytic performance for CO2 conversion to CO at moderate overpotentials. Electrochemical reduction of CO2 on Au nanoparticles,36–38 films,39 and nanowires,40 and deposition of trace amounts on carbon based substrates (carbon nanotubes)41 have been extensively studied but due to the high cost of gold, usage on a large scale is challenging. In practice, Ag could be a replacement for Au as it has a lower cost and shows good selectivity for CO2 conversion to CO.24,26,42,43 Recently, it has been reported that oxide-derived nanostructured silver (OD-NP Ag) shows good catalytic performance (FE: 80%) for CO2 reduction at lower overpotentials compared to polycrystalline silver (400 mV lower). To understand the mechanism of CO2 reduction, Tafel measurements and electrolysis in different concentrations of electrolytes were carried out.25 The results showed (i) a lower Tafel slope (77 mV dec−1) for OD-NP Ag (compared to that of polycrystalline Ag, 133 mV dec−1), which according to the literature36,44 is an indication of initial fast electron transfer to a CO2 molecule and (ii) no difference in catalytic activity with a change in HCO3− concentration indicating that HCO3− proton donation is not a rate-determining step. It has been proposed that the improvement in the performance of the catalyst could be due to a higher local pH (suppressing the HER) and active sites for stabilizing the intermediate species (COOH˙) in the porous structure.
Based on these findings, R1.b (see Scheme 1) has been proposed as the reaction mechanism. In another study, the effect of the particle size and film thickness of silver particles on catalytic activity has been investigated.33 The catalyst material was prepared by the reduction and growth of AgCl electrochemically on an Ag substrate, which enables control of particle size and film thickness, key factors in controlling catalytic activity (Fig. 1.I). To investigate the mechanism of the reaction, Tafel curves have been analysed for different particle sizes. By increasing the particle sizes from 50 nm to 400 nm, the Tafel slope enhanced from 59.6 to 73.9 mV dec−1 proposing a different mechanism compared to polycrystalline Ag with a Tafel slope of 133 mV dec−1. According to the Tafel slopes, it has been suggested that due to the modification in the structure, the rate-determining step changed from one electron transfer (CO2−˙, polycrystalline Ag, see Scheme 1, R1.a) to a mixture of electron transfer and chemical reactions (COOH˙, see Scheme 1, R1.b). This shows that the binding energy of the intermediate to the catalyst surface will be defined by the structure and the control step will change accordingly. An Ag film with a thickness of 6 μm and particle sizes of 30–50 nm presented good catalytic performance (FE (CO): 82%, mass activity: 4.38 AgAg−1) at −0.5 V potential with 10.5 mA cm−2 current density comparable with that of efficient gold catalysts (Fig. 1.II).24,38,40
 Fig. 1  Impact of the particle size and film thickness of silver particles on catalytic performance. (I) SEM images of (I-a) AgCl grown on an Ag substrate at 0.2 mA cm−2 for 5 h in 0.1 M aqueous HCl and porous Ag (I-b–d) reduced from (I-a) under different current and electrolyte conditions: (I-b) 0.2 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M aqueous HCl; (I-c) 0.2 mA cm−2 in ethanol + 10% volume 0.1 M aqueous HCl; (I-d) 4 mA cm−2 in ethanol + 10% volume 0.1 M aqueous HCl. (II) Electrochemical performance of different Ag electrodes for CO2 reduction in 0.5 M aqueous KHCO3 saturated with CO2. (II-a) Cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The pAg-E6M was tested in the absence of CO2 for comparison. (II-b) Constant potential electrolysis curves at −0.5 V vs. the RHE with the faradaic efficiency (FE) of CO formation indicated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. 
Basic studies to understand the reaction pathway mechanism of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 are mainly performed on noble metal catalysts but, due to the need for catalysts with better performance (higher current density and selectivity) at lower cost for real applications, most recent studies have focused on the discovery of alternative non-precious metal catalysts.
3.2 Copper
Although numerous studies have been undertaken to synthesise new materials as catalysts for the electrochemical conversion of CO2, in most cases, the final products of the reduction reaction are formate and carbon monoxide, which require further reduction and processing to become useful chemicals/fuels.45 The only transition metal that has been reported to be able to convert CO2 to a variety of hydrocarbons and alcohols is copper, which requires a high overpotential (−1 V vs. RHE).29,30,35 Despite the high overpotential of Cu for CO2 reduction, its unique capability to catalyse the formation of hydrocarbons has drawn much attention to the design and synthesis of new Cu catalysts with controllable performance (controlling selectivity by changing the potential) and lower overpotential by altering the structure32,44,46–61 or the use of composite materials as discussed in Section 2.3.62–65
Earlier studies reveal that an oxide-derived copper (OD-Cu) catalyst is able to convert CO2 to CO and HCOOH at moderate potentials (∼−0.5 V vs. RHE).44 The improved selectivity is due to active sites that strongly bind CO.35,44,66 Recent studies show that oxide-derived Cu catalysts with nanostructure morphology synthesized through electrodeposition or activated with plasma have significantly improved catalytic performance for further reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons at lower overpotentials and higher current density.32,49 Mistry et al.49 developed Cu electrocatalysts using a plasma treatment approach (H2 and O2). Compared to earlier work, the results showed that the catalyst activity and selectivity were dramatically improved which was attributed to a stable oxide layer (Cu2O) that formed on the surface of the Cu foil during the plasma treatment. However the mechanisms which are able to explain the electroreduction of CO2 on the surface of the OD-Cu are still under discussion, and this is the first work that provided evidence of the stability of Cu+ during CO2 reduction using in situ, ex situ and operando techniques which suggested Cu+ plays a principal role in selective reduction. Hydrocarbon production selectivity was found to be the function of plasma treatment (Fig. 2). Both (i) surface roughness that forms sites with low coordination and (ii) strains that form on the surface due to reduction and oxidation result in strong binding to oxygen and control the selectivity of the plasma-treated catalyst (increasing ethylene production).49 On the other hand, it is thought that the local pH significantly increases surface roughness58,67 and plays an important role in selectivity (lowering the amount of methane, Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Tailoring the copper surface structure using plasma treatment. From left to right, the insets show the SEM images of the low surface area H2 plasma-treated metallic Cu foil, the O2 20W 2 min plasma-treated Cu foil with optimal ethylene selectivity, and the high surface area nanoneedles on the O2 100W 10 min oxidized sample after the reaction (500 nm scale bars). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. 
Engelbrecht et al.68 in their recent work used in situ modification of the copper surface electrode instead of ex situ treatment which has been done by Mistry et al.49 They modified the copper surface electrode using O2/CO2. The results showed that product selectivity is a function of O2 amount in the gas mixture. Adding a small amount of O2 decreases the hydrogen formation efficiently while no improvement in C2H4 has been observed. Once the amount of O2 reached above 10%, C2H4 formed and the FE increased to 30%. According to SEM and XRD analyses, it seems that these observations can be related to partial reduction of Cu2O on the surface of the electrode. Earlier studies66 have shown that oxide derived copper catalysts have a higher tendency to bind to CO which is a hydrocarbon intermediate. However the reason for this strong binding is still unclear. The overall idea of this study is very interesting. The oxygen produced at the anode can be used for cathode surface treatment and using this treatment renews the catalyst surface which is economical. The stability of the treatment and reaction pathway still needs to be investigated.
Recently, another group prepared oxide-derived Cu nanowires (OD-Cu NWs) through a simple synthesis method and showed the possibility of reducing CO2 to CO at a relatively low potential (−0.6 V vs. RHE).50 They found that at more negative potentials, some hydrocarbons are present in the gas phase. Then, in a later study, they explored the morphology effect of Cu nanowires as an electrocatalyst on the product selectivity of CO2 reduction (Fig. 3).32 They controlled the length and density of the OD-Cu NWs and investigated the electrocatalyst performance and selectivity at a fixed potential. The results showed that selectivity depended on the length of the OD-Cu NWs and that increasing the length resulted in the formation of more hydrocarbons and alcohols (Fig. 3.I). They were able to link the effect of morphology with local pH (Fig. 3.II) and proposed that the formation of C2 products at higher pH is due to CO dimerization (R3.h and R3.j; see Scheme 1).32
 Fig. 3  Oxide-derived Cu nanowires used as a catalyst for the reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons and alcohols. (I) Faradaic efficiency for C2H4, C2H6, CO, HCOOH, ethanol, n-propanol, and H2 on Cu nanowire arrays with different lengths at −1.1 V versus the RHE in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolytes (0 mm nanowire represents Cu foil). (II) Schematic illustration of the diffusion of electrolytes into Cu nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. 
It is evident that there is still room to work on altering the structure of polycrystalline Cu to obtain better catalytic activity.59,60 In their recent work, Loiudice et al.59 focused on the selectivity of C2 products in electrochemical CO2 reduction in competition with the hydrogen evolution reaction and used different sizes and shapes (cubic and spherical) of Cu nanocrystals as catalysts. They found that smaller cubes show the same catalytic activity for the HER and CO2 reduction and CH4 and CHOO− are the main products. Increasing the size of the cubes improves the catalytic performance for CO2 reduction and C2 species are the main products. However, the overall catalytic activity of the larger cubes is suppressed. XRD images revealed that the difference in catalytic activity is related to the difference in the morphology of the various sizes.59 They reported that edge sites play a key role in CO2 reduction based on surface analysis. The role of edge sites in catalyst performance as active sites to maintain intermediates had been reported previously.38,40,69–71 This study is in accordance with other studies that showed that the selectivity of CO2 reduction depends on the size of catalyst particles.33,72,73
3.3 Statistical analysis of the surface atom density suggests the key role played by edge sites in CO2RR
Roberts et al.55 have also reported the ability of the CuCube electrocatalyst for C–C coupling which leads to multicarbon products from CO2 reduction (R3.h and R3.j; see Scheme 1). In this work, a copper surface was structured in situ using an oxidative–reductive reaction during CO2 reduction in the presence of chloride. They have hypothesized that CuCl cubes convert to Cu2O in neutral or basic media with low Cl concentration. Subsequently the Cu2O surface reduced to metallic copper in a cubic structure which provided unique active sites for the catalyst. Comparing the onset potential of different Cu surfaces (single and poly) with that of CuCube in terms of ethylene selectivity showed the order of different surfaces as follows: CuCube > Cu(100) > Cu(poly) > Cu(211) > Cu(111).
It is nevertheless clear that the higher catalytic activity of CuCube is related to higher density sites or new unknown active sites. Since the local pH changes can play an important role in the selectivity of CO2 reduction, it can be another possible reason for shifting the selectivity towards ethylene in a cubic structure. To explore the reaction pathway and C–C coupling mechanism (R3.h; Scheme 1), more investigations on the morphology and pH effect need to be done. The same research group in their latest study investigated the CuCube formation mechanism with in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy whose results deny the earlier assumption.74 Interestingly their findings revealed that CuCubes are directly formed from Cu2O. They have investigated the catalytic activity of a copper nanostructured catalyst derived from a Cu(II)-carbonate/hydroxide precursor as well which resulted in the same catalytic activity as the CuCube catalyst towards ethylene formation. It seems that the role of the precursor in the formation of nanostructured Cu is insignificant and the enhanced activity and selectivity towards a multicarbon product can be related to increased local pH and other unknown reasons which manipulated the reaction mechanism.
Electroreduction of CO2 has been carried out using copper mesopore electrodes as well.75 Copper meshes with different pore sizes have been made by sputtering anodized aluminium oxide. Comparing catalytic activities revealed that their product selectivity is a function of the pore sizes (width and depth). As can be seen in Fig. 4 the FE of the C1 products decreases by narrowing the width while the FE of C2 products is enhanced by increasing the depth. To investigate the impact of the morphology, electrodes have been analysed theoretically (electrohydrodynamically) and experimentally. The results showed that the final product varies with morphology since the local pH is a function of morphology and reactions which do not involve protons due to an increase of local pH. The C–C coupling reaction has been suggested for both ethylene and ethane formation whose selectivity is defined by the morphology and consequently the local pH. In a mesh of 30 nm/70 nm the final product is C2H6 which required 2 more protonation steps compared to C2H4 which can be explained probably by a longer retention time of the intermediate in a confined structure (longer depth). Experimentally it has been shown that the catalytic activity is a function of rotation speed which provides evidence for retention time. Once the rotation speed was increased the catalytic activity decreased dramatically.75
 Fig. 4  Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction and hydrocarbon formation. (a) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of 30 nm/40 nm (red), 30 nm/70 nm (blue), 300 nm/40 nm (cyan), and polycrystalline Cu (black). (b) Chemical selectivities at −1.7 V vs. the NHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. 
In another study Ager and Bell et al.60 enhanced C2 product (ethylene and ethanol) selectivity by nanostructuring polycrystalline copper. They showed that oxidation/reduction cycles are able to change the structure of Cu (polycrystalline) and the catalytic performance can be improved in the presence of halides. The degree of structural changes decreased as they changed solution contents from F− to I− (F− > Cl− > Br− > I−). Consequently, due to this restructuring, the catalytic performance for CO2 was enhanced, while the HER and methane production were suppressed. Spectroscopic analysis revealed that, in the presence of halides, anodic corrosion occurs and a layer of Cu2O forms during the oxidation cycle. Then, during the reduction cycle, the oxide layer changes to Cu(0) in the form of non-homogenous nanoparticles with enhanced grain boundaries, which probably increase the active sites and catalytic performance.60
Fiber copper electrodes with a three-dimensional porous hollow structure were introduced by Kas et al.61 to study the electrochemical reaction of CO2, which has a CO production rate that is comparable with that of nanostructured copper electrodes and noble metals. The improved catalytic performance suggests the presence of more defect sites on the surface of the catalyst, which enhances activity and therefore, the formation of the HCOOH as an intermediate is favorable.61 The preparation of this catalyst is simple and easy (can be synthesized on a large scale) and opens new windows in electrocatalyst design and engineering in applications that involve gas reactants with low solubility.
Comparing the results from two recent studies which have used copper with dendrite structure as an electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction showed that beside the morphology of the copper electrode, the media also play an important role in the orientation of the CO2 reaction.76,77 It seems that using ionic liquids as electrolytes enables the reduction of CO2 to formate while a mixture of products is formed in aqueous media. In both studies further investigations are required to reveal the reaction mechanisms.
Interestingly another study has investigated the effect of temperature in the range of 2 °C to 42 °C on the product selectivity of CO2 electroreduction on a copper catalyst in polycrystalline form.78 It showed that pH (local and bulk), diffusion rates of intermediates and reactants, dissolved CO2 concentration and resistance of the solution are a function of the temperature which control the product selectivity. As can be concluded from Fig. 5 H2 is the dominant product at higher temperature while CH4 is a favorable product at lower temperature due to a higher concentration of dissolved CO2. R3.c (see Scheme 1) has been reported as the reaction pathway for CH4. It seems that simple protonation is preferred to CHO coupling at lower temperature. The higher faradaic efficiency of C2H4 at higher temperatures is in accordance with this fact that the reaction will shift through CO dimerization at higher temperature (R3.h, Scheme 1).
 Fig. 5  FE by the major product (i.e., >5%) produced at electropolished Cu as a function of electrolyte temperature and an applied potential of −1.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. 
3.4 Hybrid catalysts
Besides many studies that were conducted on different single metals as catalysts for electrochemical CO2 reduction, hybrid metals have recently attracted much attention due to their enhanced catalytic activity and selectivity. It has commonly been assumed that hybrid catalysts are able to alter the binding energy of intermediate species on the surface of the catalysts and consequently have a positive effect on the kinetics of the CO2 reaction.63,65,79–82 Since it has been proved that Cu has the lowest binding energy for absorbed CO and that further reduction of intermediates on the surface of Cu is possible, a large number of studies used Cu with various metals as hybrid catalysts.62–65 Electrodeposition has been used for catalyst synthesis for a long time because of its various advantages such as being low cost, simple (solution based synthesis that can be carried out under ambient conditions), and easily controllable. It is possible to alter the structure and morphology by changing the electrodeposition potential.83 Recent studies also reported that the electrodeposition of other elements such as Ag,84 In,85 Au86 and Sn87–89 on a Cu substrate (OD-Cu, Cu foam or foil) can improve catalytic performance (mass activity) and that the new catalysts include the properties of both the electrodeposited layer and the substrate.84–90 The experimental results showed that the deposition time and composition played important roles due to the effects of morphology and surface structure.84,87,88
Cu–In85 has been used as an electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction in studying the mechanism and surface changes during reduction. The results showed that Cu–In nanoalloy particles with a core–shell structure can be gradually developed by performing electrochemical cycles and improved catalytic activity is subsequently observed (jCO > 1.5 mA cm−2 at −0.6 V vs. the RHE). Characterization results explain the improved performance through the unique developed structure. It is implied that placing Cu in the core and surrounding it with In(OH)3, which describes this shell, enable selectivity towards CO.85
This work suggests that besides the metallic component of the electrocatalyst, OH− plays an important role in the electrochemical CO2 reduction mechanism as well.
Sarfraz et al.88 reported oxide-derived copper decorated with tin (Sn) and used it as a catalyst for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO, showing good catalytic performance in terms of faradaic efficiency (>90%) and current density (−1.0 mA cm−2) over a range of potentials (−0.4 to −0.8 V (vs. RHE)). The results showed that the FE for CO depends on the amount of Sn that is electrodeposited on the oxide-derived copper in which the HER was the favorable reaction when the amount of Sn was increased and consequently the current density decreased. XRD analysis suggested the alloying of Cu and Sn, which explains the higher selectivity for CO compared to monometallic Cu and Sn. DFT calculations proposed the replacement of Sn with Cu on the surface of OD-Cu, which leads to the formation of a Sn–Cu alloy.88 DFT analysis showed that the absorption of hydrogen has been suppressed by replacing Sn with Cu atoms which supports the low selectivity for hydrogen formation in the performed experiment. It seems that active sites favoring the binding of CO have not been changed. To confirm the real mechanism more investigation using operando spectroscopy techniques is required.
Wallace et al.90 decorated CuxO nanowires with Sn by immersing copper oxide nanowires in an electroless plating bath of tin in which catalytic activity is a function of immersion time. The hybrid catalyst presented excellent catalytic performance (in terms of selectivity and current density) at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) that could be related to the synergetic effect between the copper oxide nanowires and the tin nanoparticles. They found that the introduction of gold into a CuxO–Sn-NP hybrid catalyst increased catalytic activity.90
As shown in Fig. 6, the differences in the catalytic performances of the OD-Cu–Sn and CuxO–Sn-NP alloys can be related to structural differences. While the OD-Cu–Sn alloy has a homogenous structure, the distribution of the Sn nanoparticles in the oxide-derived copper nanowires is not uniform.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the structure of CuxO–Sn-NP and OD-Cu–Sn. (I-a) Illustration of the fabrication process of CuxO–Sn NWs; (I-b) XRD patterns of Cu foil, Cu(OH)2, CuxO, and CuxO–Sn20; (c) typical SEM images of CuxO–Sn20 NWs under various magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 (II-a) XRD patterns of Cu–Sn before and after 1 h of CO2 reduction, and after 14 h of CO2 reduction at −0.6 V vs. the RHE and SEM images of (II-b) Cu–Sn before CO2 reduction, (II-c) Cu–Sn after 1 h of CO2 reduction at −0.6 V vs. the RHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. 
Another family of hybrid catalysts has been introduced as “copper free,” which aim at the electrochemical reduction of CO2 at lower overpotentials compared to Cu. Ru–Pd,91 Au–Pd,92–94 Pd–Pt,95 Ni–Ga96 and W–Au97 are examples of this family. These studies found that although some pure metals alone do not show catalytic activity or they have high overpotential or poor selectivity, alloying them with other metals and tailoring the structure may significantly improve their catalytic performance. The electrocatalytic activity of Ni5Ga3/SiO2 in the conversion of CO2 to methanol was studied.96,98 Torelli et al.98 compared the results with polycrystalline Cu to evaluate catalytic performance. Although the current density of this new catalyst is lower than that of polycrystalline Cu, it is able to significantly reduce CO2 (8, 12 and 14 electron transfer products) at lower overpotentials. At this potential (−0.48 V), only Cu can drive reactions through products with transfer of one/two electrons (CO and HCOOH).
Kortlever et al.99 reported the ability of a Pd–Au electrocatalyst to reduce CO2 to a variety of hydrocarbons (C1–C5). The formation of hydrocarbons with a longer chain (C3–C5) is unique and proves that higher CO binding energy catalysts lead to higher hydrocarbon products. They suggested that higher hydrocarbons are the result of –CH2 intermediate polymerization. When the amount of Pd was increased on the surface of Au, the catalytic performance for hydrocarbon production also increased indicating that Pd plays an important role in the formation of hydrocarbons.
3.5 Molecular metal catalysts (heterogeneous)
Molecular metal catalysts are another category of electrocatalysts that are organic complexes of metals. This category is important as it considers the possibility of tailoring the molecular structure of the ligand toward improving catalytic performance. The literature shows that different metals such as Pd,100,101 Mn,102 Cu,103 Ni,104 Fe,105–107 Co,105,108 Ru109 and Ir110,111 in combination with organic complexes such as porphyrin, phosphine, cyclam, polypyridine, and phthalocyanine have been widely studied for electrochemical conversion of CO2.112 While those catalysts improved catalytic performance, the major products are CO and HCOOH, which implies the one/two electron transfer mechanism. On the other hand, most of these studies used homogenous catalysts that required dissolution in organic solvents. Thus, the separation of catalysts is another issue besides environmental concerns, all of which may limit the use of this category on a large scale. It seems that this family of electrocatalysts needs a further development to enable the use of a heterogeneous catalyst in aqueous media and further reduction of CO2 to useful fuels and chemicals.
Interestingly Chen et al.105 have shown that it's possible to switch the product of CO2 reduction by changing the metal center. They used Fe and Co with a pentadentate N5 ligand and investigated the catalytic performance photochemically and electrochemically where HCOOH and CO have been reported as products respectively. Based on DFT calculations, it seems that in both cases CO2 undergoes two-electron reduction where the interaction between the CO2 and center metal plays an important role in the final product. DFT calculations suggest that once Co is in the center the Co–CO2H intermediate (R3.b, Scheme 1) undergoes C–O partitioning while Fe(III) is a weak π donor and the Fe–CO2H intermediate (R3.a, Scheme 1) forms HCOOH since the C–O cleavage is slower than isomerization. In another study Costentin et al.107 have altered iron porphyrin structures by replacing paraphenyl hydrogen with trimethylammonio substitutes which makes a water soluble complex. The kinetic study of the CO2 reaction showed that H2 is the favorable product in acidic media however in pH neutral media (non-buffered) CO forms exclusively. Buffered media resulted in a mixture of H2 and CO. It has been assumed that CO2 reduction undergoes the same reaction mechanism as reported previously for FeTPP in the presence of phenol (Scheme 2).113
 Scheme 2  Likely mechanism of the CO2 to CO conversion pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. 
Recently, Weng et al.114 reported a molecular copper complex (porphyrin) that can be used as a heterogeneous electrocatalyst for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons such as methane and ethylene in aqueous media. The experimental data showed that the formation of products (catalytic performance) depended on the degree of Cu-porphyrin reduction that probably provides more active sites and available OH groups in the porphyrin structure, which perhaps facilitate the binding of intermediate species. However, further investigation is required for a more detailed study of the mechanisms involved.114
Bevilacqua et al.115 also used a molecular copper catalyst (copper phthalocyanine, CuPc@GDE) to reduce CO2 to CH4, C2H4 and HCOO− using an electrolyzer. Cu foil and CuPc@GDE have been compared for use as a cathodic electrocatalyst and the results showed that both selectivity and faradaic efficiency can be altered by changing the electrode morphology and structure. The turnover number (TON = 154, catalyst efficiency) which was calculated in this work after 6 h of electrolysis was much higher than TON data existing for homogenous molecular catalysts. Table 1 compares TON data for different homogenous molecular catalysts.
Table 1 Comparison of turnover numbers for different homogenous molecular catalysts




Catalyst
Product
TON
Electrolysis time (h)
Ref.





a HL: N-(2-mercaptopropyl)-N,N-bis(2-pyridylmethyl)amine.





CuPc@GDE
CH4, C2H4, CHOO−
154
6

115



Cu-HLa
C2O24−
7
7

116



(POCOP)Ir-(H)2(MeCN)
CHOO−
40
25

111



[Et2Al]+
CH4
14
216

117





3.6 Carbon-supported metal catalysts
Carbon-based nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes,118–120 graphene,121–124 and carbon nanofibers119,125 have drawn considerable attention as catalyst supports.126 Ma et al.127 used multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) containing Ag nanoparticles (Ag NPs) for electrochemical CO2 reduction in aqueous solution. They investigated the catalytic performance of two different structures (“mixed” and “layered,” as shown in Fig. 7) and compared their catalytic activity with that of only Ag NPs.
 Fig. 7  Three electrode structures that were applied in this work: (I-a) electrode structure 1 (ES1) is composed of a layer of AgNPs deposited directly on a gas diffusion layer (GDL); (I-b) electrode structure 2 (ES2, “layered”) is composed of a AgNP layer on top of a MWCNT layer deposited on a GDL; (I-c) electrode structure 3 (ES3, “mixed”) is composed of a layer of a uniform mixture of AgNPs and MWCNTs deposited on a GDL. (II) Nyquist plot obtained via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at a cell potential of −2.00 V for cells with different electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. 
The results indicated that the “mixed” catalyst with high current density (350 mA cm−2) and selectivity (FE (CO): 95%) presents excellent catalytic activity. However, both “mixed” and “layered” structures show higher performance compared to only Ag NPs. An electrochemical impedance spectroscopy study revealed that a “mixed” catalyst has lower resistance to charge transfer (higher charge transfer rate), which improves catalytic performance.127
In another study, Liu et al.128 used graphene as a catalyst substrate incorporated with Cu, Pd, and Pd–Cu.128 Electrochemical tests for the reduction performance of CO2 showed that Pd–Cu (1:2 wt%)/graphene has better catalytic performance compared to Pd or Cu (1 wt%)/graphene. The better performance of Pd–Cu/graphene is undoubtedly because of its structure (bimetallic). The enhanced conductivity of graphene (compared to monometallic) in a bimetallic structure, better crystallization of Pd in the presence of Cu (refer to HRTEM images), and higher reduction degree of Cu in a bimetallic structure (Pd catalysis Cu reduction) can explain the better catalytic performance of Pd–Cu/graphene.128 R3.a (Scheme 1) has been proposed as the reaction pathway where the adsorption of CO2 is reported as the control step.
Song et al.129 employed carbon nanospikes electronucleated with copper (Cu/N-doped CNS) as the electrode for the conversion of CO2 to ethanol electrochemically. They have hypothesized that ethanol formation is due to the synergetic effect of the Cu and CNS as this impact has been reported for Cu and carbon.130 The reaction pathway has not been explained since more investigation is required to explore the potential intermediates and understand the formation mechanism of ethanol.
4. Metal-free catalysts
Most studies on electrochemical CO2 reduction have employed base metals, their oxides, and noble metals as catalysts. Recent studies show that the focus of researchers is on the design and synthesis of a new class of catalysts called “metal free”.131,132 This new class has received much attention due to the possibility of engineering their structure and chemical stability as well as low-cost large-scale production.133–135 In recent work, the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO,133 CH4,133,134 and HCOO− (ref. 135) has been reported using heteroatom-doped carbon materials as catalysts. The catalytic activity of heteroatom-doped carbon is attributed to electronegative heteroatoms (usually N atoms in a pyridinic configuration) and positively charged C atoms. Product selectivity depends on the affinity of the active sites to stabilizing the intermediate species.131–138
Li et al.133 used S-doped (CPS) and S,N-doped (CPSN) carbon materials for electrochemical CO2 reduction in aqueous solution in which CPSN shows better catalytic performance compared with CPS and results in the formation of CO (11.3%) and CH4 (0.18%) at potential −0.99 V (vs. RHE).133 The surface chemistry reveals that the better catalytic activity of CPSN is due to increasing the number of active sites (nitrogen based) and the basic surface. It has been proposed that the pyridinic group (negative charge) facilitates electron transfer for the conversion of CO2−˙ to the COOH˙ intermediate which undergoes further reduction to form CO (R1.a, Scheme 1).
In another study, a N-doped graphene-like material was used as a catalyst for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 in ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes.134 It investigated the effects of the amount of N-doped material in the catalyst and water in ILs. As expected, both factors affect electrocatalytic performance such as current density, faradaic efficiency, and selectivity.131 A larger amount of N-doped material in the catalyst significantly increases faradaic efficiency and adding 3% water to the IL increases current density by 2.3%. It proposed a similar reaction pathway to that suggested previously for Cu (R3.g, Scheme 1)30 according to the experimental data. However, the application of metal-free graphene as a catalyst for electrochemical CO2 reduction is in the early stages. Earlier photochemical and photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction methods using graphene-based catalysts have been broadly reported.139,140 In their recent study, Tan's research group135 converted CO2 to formate electrochemically using N-doped graphene in aqueous solution resulting in a stable catalyst with good catalytic performance (FE (CH4) >70%) at a lower overpotential (0.78 V). It has been suggested that absorbed CO2 on the graphene (C atoms) converted to CO2−˙ through one electron transfer step and then protonated to the COOH˙ intermediate using the proton transferred from HCO3− followed by another electron transfer reaction (from the electrode) producing CHOO− (R1.a, Scheme 1). In another study, electrophoretic deposition was used for the deposition of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), graphene oxide (GO), and a mixture of GO and MWCNT on the surface of carbon paper.141 The prepared electrodes used for the reduction of CO2 and the results showed that GO/MWCNT-CP provides better performance (jCO 2.3 mA cm−2, FE: 85%) compared to two other electrodes (GO-CP and MWCNT-CP) in an ionic liquid/acetonitrile mixture (90/10 wt%), which is comparable with that of Au and Ag electrodes under the same conditions.
Although all these studies have shown good catalytic performances for “metal-free” carbon-based materials, which are comparable with noble and nanostructured metals for electrochemical CO2 reduction, Ager et al.142 discussed the possibility of the presence of metal impurities in carbon-based materials with reference to earlier studies of this issue that dealt with effects on electrochemical properties.143–149 Their study showed that carbon-based materials such as graphene, graphene oxide, graphite, and carbon nanotubes that are used without an acid wash (as received) can contain significant amounts of metal impurities that affect catalytic performance. Once a carbon-based material is washed with acid and used as a catalyst, the faradaic efficiency for CO2 reduction to chemicals and fuels is suppressed and adding metal impurities greatly improves catalytic activity. All of these recent research findings open avenues for exploring a different category of catalysts known as “metal/carbon-based materials” with higher faradaic efficiency, selectivity, and current density for electrochemical CO2 reduction. It is important to note that processed graphene materials always contain metallic impurities, which can act as electrocatalysts.144,149,150
5. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
In an earlier study, Asadi et al.151 reported that three-dimensional bulk MoS2 (3D) offers excellent catalytic performance in terms of overpotential and current density (FE (CO): 98% and current density 65 mA cm−2 at −0.764 V) for electrochemical reduction of CO2 in ionic liquids. Molybdenum-terminated edges are responsible for this enhancement due to the presence of d electrons with higher density. In their recent work,152 they investigated the electrocatalytic activity of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) with 2D structure (nanoflake) for CO2 reduction in ionic liquids. WSe2 showed 24% faradaic efficiency with a current density of 18.95 mA cm−2 at potential −0.764 V vs. the RHE. In their study, they compared their results with bulk MoS2, bulk Ag, and silver nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) and Au36 and Cu44 nanoparticles from other studies.
It seems that WSe2 shows better performance compared to any of these catalysts. Their study proved that electron transfer (the number of electrons) on the surface of the catalyst to the reactant and the formation of intermediate species depend on charge transfer resistance (Rct).153–158 Their electrochemical impedance measurements revealed that WSe2 has the lowest Rct among these catalysts, which can explain the better catalytic performance of WSe2.
6. Towards complete systems for CO2 reduction
Generally CO2 reduction devices (CO2 analyzers) include two compartments divided by a cation exchange membrane which are named as the cathode and anode for oxidation and reduction respectively. At the cathode CO2 reduces to final products while usually oxygen evolution occurs at the anode due to the oxidation of water.
However lots of efforts have been done in the electrochemical CO2 reduction field, the majority of these studies looking at cathode materials as electrocatalysts which are able to reduce CO2 and the whole electrolyzer and anode side have not been considered as much as the cathode side. Investigation and analysis of the overall CO2 electrolysis required a practical electroanalyzer. Currently only a few types of analyzers including proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs),159 and electrochemical flow systems160–162 have been introduced where all of these systems have their own benefits and drawbacks.163 Generally CO2 reduction is performed in pH-neutral media due to the strong reaction between CO2 and base/acids promoting the HER. In order to work in aqueous media the anode side needs to be stable in pH-neutral as well while the majority of the introduced catalysts for the OER have been working in strong basic media. In current stage of the research, it's a big challenge to make use of the existing CO2 electrocatalysts and OER catalysts to utilize an electrolyzer which works practically.
Recently Jiao's research group164 has introduced an electrolyzer which uses an IrO2/Ti electrode on the anode side that performs in aqueous media with good stability. They have coupled this anode with IR/n-particle Ag on the cathode side. Once the electrolyzer was operated at potential 2.6 V, the obtained current was 375 mA with minimum performance decline (24 h). Previously a few systems including photocathodes had been introduced for CO2 reduction however in terms of selectivity and efficiency they were not successful to draw the attention.165–167
This group in their recent work has demonstrated an alternative system which coupled a CO2 reduction cathode with a photoanode.168 This photoelectrochemical system includes a silver cathode and a Ni/Si photoanode which drive CO2 reduction electrochemically using solar energy and achieve a faradaic efficiency of 70% with 10 mA cm−2 current density at an external potential of 2.0 V. The durability of the cell has been reported to be 3 hours. Compared to a pure electrochemical cell it can save up to 17% energy using a Ni/Si photoanode.
Earlier in Section 2.4 we have pointed to a study done by Bevilacqua et al.115 using a molecular copper catalyst. It's interesting to note that they have combined the cathodic reaction (CO2 conversion over the molecular copper catalyst) with ethanol oxidation to acetate on the anode side (instead the OER) which leads to a lower working potential as well as the formation of useful chemicals. The Pd/Ti catalyst has been used for ethanol electrooxidation at the anode side. They have compared this system with a conventional one (in which the OER occurs on the anode side) and reported that the current system is able to save energy from 130 kW h to 70 kW h. Fig. 8 shows the schematic view of the CO2 electrolyzer.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the depolarized anode alkaline membrane CO2 electrolyzer (DAAM-CE) and (b) a photograph of its practical realization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. 
Asadi et al.'s study has been earlier discussed in Section 5.152 Interestingly, to evaluate the catalytic performance of WSe2, a custom solar cell was designed that was able to convert CO2 to CO without the application of any external potential (it uses only sunlight as energy). The cell was named an artificial leaf since it mimics photosynthesis (Fig. 9) including 3 components: (a) Co to catalyze the OER (anode side), (b) WS2/IL to catalyze CO2 reduction (cathode side) and two amorphous silicon layers for harvesting the light. At potential 2.12 V a current density of 6.1 mA cm−2 has been achieved by the cell. The cell was operated for 100 hours to examine the stability. The result showed the same product formation during 100 hours supporting the permanence of both the anode and cathode.
 Fig. 9  Artificial leaf. (A) Schematic of a cell design. (B) Rate of product formation (mol s−1) with respect to different Sun illumination conditions. (C) Calculated solar-to-fuel efficiency (SFE) of the photochemical process using the WSe2/IL cocatalyst system. Our calculation indicates ∼4.6% SFE, which is limited by the maximum efficiency of PV-a-si-3jn (∼6.0%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. 
7. Electrolyte effects
In general, selection of the appropriate solvent/electrolyte has always been an issue in electrochemical CO2 reduction. Different categories of solvents/electrolytes have been introduced over the years including aqueous, organic, and ionic liquids. The solubility of CO2 in an aqueous solution is low (0.033 M)169 and the majority of the researchers prefer using aqueous electrolytes, which offer advantages such as being environmentally friendly, inexpensive, and able to balance protons by anodic reaction(s). Some studies used non-aqueous, aprotic solvents to increase CO2 solubility and to control the amount of protons but such solvents have environmental and safety issues.
The third category of solvents, ionic liquids, were introduced to cover the weakness of aqueous and organic solvents in electrochemical CO2 reduction. However, their use on a real scale has been stalled due to high cost.170–176
Chen et al.177 introduced a distillable amine-based ion liquid, dimcarb, which is relatively inexpensive and can be readily synthesized in bulk. They used dimcarb as a supporting electrolyte for electrochemical CO2 reduction with over 17 metals as catalysts. The results showed that only Ag, Au, Zn, In and Sn are able to reduce CO2 electrochemically with relatively good catalytic performance. For the rest of the tested metals, the HER is the favorable reaction.177
Experimental and theoretical research studies have shown that electrochemical CO2 reduction is pH dependent and that aqueous electrolytes can play an important role in selectivity due to differences in buffer capacity.29,35,178 Recently, Varela et al.58 expanded on earlier studies of local pH (different concentrations of KHCO3)29,179 on a Cu surface as a function of potential. The results showed that the local pH does not affect the formation of ethylene at lower overpotentials, supporting the proposed mechanism for ethylene formation which explains that the proton/electron doesn't transfer in the rate-determining step. However methane formation is completely pH dependent. They compared their results with the study of Kas et al.179 that was carried out under the same conditions but with a different electrode structure (polished surface vs. NP-structure) and pointed out that the difference in the end product is not only due to a difference in morphology but also that the local pH contributed because of a difference in geometric current density.58,179
It is well known that the trace impurities (metal and organic) that are present in electrolytes can cause the deactivation of catalytic sites and affect catalyst performance.35,180 Long pre-electrolysis and anodic periodic pulses have been suggested for extending the lifetime of catalysts.35,180–183 However, both solutions are impracticable due to irreducibility, insufficiency, time and energy wastage, and changes to the surface structure.24,183,184 Recently, Wutting et al. found that despite using ultra-pure water and high purity reagents, Cu, Ag and Au (group 11) catalytic activity decreased due to the deposition of impurities. They demonstrated that a chelating agent (EDTA) can effectively remove impurities from the electrolyte and prevent catalyst surface deactivation.184
8. Conclusions
We have reviewed recent research that explored new electrocatalytic materials or engineered the structure of catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide. As can be seen in Table 2, the key issues such as overpotential and reaction selectivity still remain challenges. The electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO (two-electron reduction) is less complicated compared to other processes (multi-electron transfer) and in the current phase only Co and, in some cases, HCOO− can be produced with high selectivity, but they require further reduction through Karl Fischer titration. Certainly, direct reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbon and alcohols is more attractive.
Table 2 Summary of catalyst materials, main products, current densities, and faradaic efficiencies of corresponding potential and electrochemical conditions (electrolyte) for papers under review




Catalyst material
Product
Potential (V vs. HER)
Current density (mA cm−2)
Faradaic efficiency (%)
Electrolyte (M)
Stability (hour)
Ref.




OD-NP Ag
CO
−0.49
0.35
80
KHCO3 (0.1)
—

25



Hp Ag (6 μm)
CO
−0.5
10.5
82
KHCO3 (0.5)
—

33



Cu foil
CO, formate, ethylene
−0.9
−2.0
60
KHCO3 (0.1)
—

49



Cu nanowire
CO, HCOOH, C2H4, C2H6, CH3CH2OH
−1.1
4.0
17.5 (C2H4), 2.5 (C2H6)
KHCO3 (0.1)
5

32



Cu NCs
C2H4
−1.1
−5.5
41
KHCO3 (0.1)
—

59



Nanostructure polycrystalline copper
C2H4, CH3CH2OH
−1.0
9.35
15.2, 7.6
KHCO3 (0.1)
—

60



Cu (hollow)
CO
−0.4
2–17
75





61



Cu (dendrite)
HCOOH
−1.55 V (Fc+/Fc)
6.5
87
[EMIM](BF4)/H2O (85/15 v/v)
8

76



Cu (dendrite)
C2H4, C2H6
−0.8
5–7
55
Na2SO4 (1)



77



Cu–In
CO
−0.6
1.5
55
KHCO3 (0.1)
24

85



Sn/f-Cu
HCOOH
−1.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
−7.56
83.5
KHCO3 (0.1)



87



CuO–Sn
CO
−0.6
−1.0
90
KHCO3 (0.1)
14

88



Sn/Cu
HCOOH
−1.4 (vs. SCE)
1.0
91





89



CuxO–Sn
CO
−0.8
−1.0
82
KHCO3 (0.1)
6

90



Nix–Gay
CH4, C2H4, C2H6
−0.48
0.1
—
KH2PO4 (0.1)
—

98



Pd–Au
C1–C5
−0.80 to −1.4
—
0.07 to 2
KH2PO4 (0.1)/K2HPO4 (0.1)
—

99



[Co[L]](ClO4)2, [Fe[L]Cl2](ClO4)
CO, HCOOH
−1.5 (vs. SCE), −1.25 (vs. SCE)
0.4, 0.09
82, 75-80
DMF + NBu4PF6 (0.1)
—

105



Fe-porphyrin
CO
−0.97
0.1
90
Water (pH = 6.7)
72

107



Cu-porphyrin
CH4, C2H4
−0.976
13.2, 8.4
—
KHCO3 (0.5)
—

114



CuPc@GDE
CH4, C2H4, HCOO−
−1.75 (vs. Ag/AgCl)


7.7, 0.7, 3.0
KHCO3 (0.5)
6

115



Ag-MWCNT
CO
−0.8
1
95
KHCO3 (1)
—

127



1%Pd–2%Cu
HCOO−
−1.3
−2.0
—
KHCO3 (0.5)



128



Cu/N-doped CNS
CH3CH2OH
−1.2
63
−2.75
KHCO3 (0.1)



129



S,N-doped carbon
CO, CH4
−0.99
∼1.0
11.3 (CO), 0.18 (CH4)
KHCO3 (0.1)
27

133



N-doped carbon
CH4
−1.4
3.26
90.1
IL (97%)/water (3%)
5

134



N-doped graphene
HCOO−
−0.84
−7.0
73
KHCO3 (0.5)
12

135



WSe2
CO
−0.764
18.95
24
EMIM-BF4 (50%)/water (50%)
27

152





In recent years, there have been significant efforts to find new electrocatalysts with good catalytic performance and better stability for the electrochemical conversion of CO2. These studies require more insight into the structure and morphology of the materials used and the reactions that occur at the surface in order to explore the relationship between the structure and catalytic activity, leading to the design of new catalysts with enhanced performance. Any new catalyst that is introduced will require a fundamental understanding of the mechanism and different parameters involved that control electroactivity such as working potential, surface structure, and electrolyte effect. Besides improving the performance of current catalysts by altering their structure and changing the electrolyte, there are still many opportunities for exploring new catalysts that can reduce CO2 even further.
It should also be noted that the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) can compete with CO2 reduction in an aqueous solution and usually can surpass it. Thus, it is essential to look for catalysts that enhance the reaction rate for CO2 while slowing down the HER. In addition to research on electrocatalyst materials, we suggest that the design and engineering of suitable electrochemical cells, reactors, and electrodes must be optimized.
On the other hand only the study of the half reaction (cathode side) is not sufficient in order to achieve practical solutions in electrochemical CO2 reduction and the performance of the overall reaction (both the anode and cathode) needs to be investigated. Advanced studies and approaches are required to explore new potential candidates which promote the OER as well. In this stage most of the introduced anode catalysts for the OER are not able to combine with introduced cathode materials under the same conditions.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Singapore Research Foundation (NRF) under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological; Enterprise (CREATE) program and Cambridge Advance Research Centre in Energy Efficiency in Singapore (CARES), C4T project.
Notes and references

          F. Birol, World Energy Outlook Special Report 2016: Energy and Air Pollution, International Energy Agency,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 CAS .
B. H. Rotstein, S. H. Liang, J. P. Holland, T. L. Collier, J. M. Hooker, A. A. Wilson and N. Vasdev, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5621–5629 RSC .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 CAS .
G. P. Smestad and A. Steinfeld, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 11828–11840 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. An, K. H. Park, M. Khraisheh and J. Tang, Catal. Today, 2014, 224, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander Iii, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, C. Li and Y. Yamauchi, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 373–391 CrossRef CAS .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
H.-R. M. Jhong, S. Ma and P. J. A. Kenis, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 191–199 CrossRef .
R. J. Lim, M. Xie, M. A. Sk, J.-M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. H. Lim, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Spinner, J. A. Vega and W. E. Mustain, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 19–28 CAS .
B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White and J. M. Spurgeon, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pletcher, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 61, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
D. R. Kauffman, J. Thakkar, R. Siva, C. Matranga, P. R. Ohodnicki, C. Zeng and R. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15626–15632 CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen and F. Jiao, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 38–47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and Q. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600463 CrossRef .
J. Schneider, H. Jia, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2036–2051 RSC .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim.
Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 Search PubMed .
M. Ma, B. J. Trześniewski, J. Xie and W. A. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9748–9752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings, Q. Lu, S. Rivera, Y. Zhou, D. G. Vlachos and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4293–4299 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1902–1909 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, C. Shi, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2032–2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, K. Djanashvili and W. A. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6679–6683 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Wang, N. Mehio, X. Jin and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 428–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 2519–2522 CrossRef .

          Y. Hori, in Mod. Aspect. Of Electroc., ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2008, pp. 89–189,  DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-49489-0_3 .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, R. Reske, Z. Zeng, Z.-J. Zhao, J. Greeley, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16473–16476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, Ö. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Koh, H. S. Jeon, M. S. Jee, E. B. Nursanto, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 883–889 CAS .
W. Zhu, Y.-J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Huan, P. Prakash, P. Simon, G. Rousse, X. Xu, V. Artero, E. Gravel, E. Doris and M. Fontecave, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2317–2320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hatsukade, K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13814–13819 RSC .
A. Salehi-Khojin, H.-R. M. Jhong, B. A. Rosen, W. Zhu, S. Ma, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1627–1632 CAS .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, S. Lee, J. D. Ocon, B. Jeong, J. K. Lee and J. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 824–830 RSC .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 199, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12123 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ma, K. Djanashvili and W. A. Smith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 20861–20867 RSC .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, S. Kühl, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16009 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Chen, A. D. Handoko, J. H. Wan, L. Ma, D. Ren and B. S. Yeo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 161–168 CAS .
M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E45–E49 CrossRef CAS .
K. Manthiram, B. J. Beberwyck and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13319–13325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Roberts, K. P. Kuhl and A. Nilsson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 5268–5271 CrossRef .
S. Sen, D. Liu and G. T. R. Palmore, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3091–3095 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, A. A. Peterson, A. S. Varela, Z. P. Jovanov, L. Bech, W. J. Durand, S. Dahl, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 76–81 RSC .
A. S. Varela, M. Kroschel, T. Reier and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. Loiudice, P. Lobaccaro, E. A. Kamali, T. Thao, B. H. Huang, J. W. Ager and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5789–5792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kwon, Y. W. Lum, E. L. Clark, J. W. Ager and A. T. Bell, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 1012–1019 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kas, K. K. Hummadi, R. Kortlever, P. de Wit, A. Milbrat, M. W. J. Luiten-Olieman, N. E. Benes, M. T. M. Koper and G. Mul, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jedidi, S. Rasul, D. Masih, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19085–19092 CAS .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rasul, D. H. Anjum, A. Jedidi, Y. Minenkov, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2146–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watanabe, M. Shibata, A. Kato, M. Azuma and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 3382–3389 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, C. W. Li, T. P. Johansson, S. B. Scott, J. T. McKeown, M. Kumar, I. E. L. Stephens, M. W. Kanan and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9808–9811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. P. Schouten, E. Pérez Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 716, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Engelbrecht, M. Hämmerle, R. Moos, M. Fleischer and G. Schmid, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 642–648 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ni and X. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500085 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kas, R. Kortlever, A. Milbrat, M. T. M. Koper, G. Mul and J. Baltrusaitis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12194–12201 RSC .
S. Zhu and M. Shao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 861–873 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eilert, F. S. Roberts, D. Friebel and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1466–1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Yang, W. R. Ko, J. H. Lee, S. J. Kim, H. Lee, M. H. Lee and K. T. Nam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 796–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Huan, P. Simon, G. Rousse, I. Genois, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 742–747 RSC .
A. Dutta, M. Rahaman, N. C. Luedi, M. Mohos and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3804–3814 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ahn, I. Abu-Baker and G. T. R. Palmore, Catal. Today DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2016.09.028 .
S. Ishimaru, R. Shiratsuchi and G. Nogami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1864–1867 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friebel, F. Mbuga, S. Rajasekaran, D. J. Miller, H. Ogasawara, R. Alonso-Mori, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, T.-C. Weng and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7954–7961 CAS .
J. Christophe, T. Doneux and C. Buess-Herman, Electrocatalysis, 2012, 3, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, T. W. Kim, S. R. Kubota, A. C. Cardiel, H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12839–12887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, M. J. Kim, S. H. Ahn, I. Choi, J. H. Jang, Y. S. Ham, J. J. Kim and S. K. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 299, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Larrazábal, A. J. Martín, S. Mitchell, R. Hauert and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6265–6274 CrossRef .
S. Back, J.-H. Kim, Y.-T. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23022–23027 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhou, W. X. Lv, H. L. Fang and W. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 362, 394–398 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarfraz, A. T. Garcia-Esparza, A. Jedidi, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2842–2851 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Zhao and J. L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 293, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10710–10718 CAS .
N. Furuya, T. Yamazaki and M. Shibata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 431, 39–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hahn, D. N. Abram, H. A. Hansen, T. Hatsukade, A. Jackson, N. C. Johnson, T. R. Hellstern, K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, J. T. Feaster and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20185–20194 CAS .
J. J. L. Humphrey, D. Plana, V. Celorrio, S. Sadasivan, R. P. Tooze, P. Rodríguez and D. J. Fermín, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 952–960 CrossRef CAS .
D. Plana, J. Florez-Montano, V. Celorrio, E. Pastor and D. J. Fermin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10962–10964 RSC .
R. Kortlever, I. Peters, S. Koper and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3916–3923 CrossRef CAS .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abild-Pedersen, C. F. Elkjær, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Back, H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 965–971 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Torelli, S. A. Francis, J. C. Crompton, A. Javier, J. R. Thompson, B. S. Brunschwig, M. P. Soriaga and N. S. Lewis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kortlever, I. Peters, C. Balemans, R. Kas, Y. Kwon, G. Mul and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10229–10232 RSC .
D. L. DuBois, A. Miedaner and R. C. Haltiwanger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 8753–8764 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Therrien, M. O. Wolf and B. O. Patrick, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12962–12972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Agarwal, T. W. Shaw, H. F. Schaefer and A. B. Bocarsly, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5285–5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Huan, E. S. Andreiadis, J. Heidkamp, P. Simon, E. Derat, S. Cobo, G. Royal, A. Bergmann, P. Strasser, H. Dau, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3901–3907 CAS .
M. Rakowski Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. Guo, X.-G. Wei, C. Gallenkamp, J. Bonin, E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart, K.-C. Lau, T.-C. Lau and M. Robert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10918–10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taheri, E. J. Thompson, J. C. Fettinger and L. A. Berben, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7140–7151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Costentin, M. Robert, J.-M. Savéant and A. Tatin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6882–6886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, R. Kortlever, R. Kas, Y. Y. Birdja, O. Diaz-Morales, Y. Kwon, I. Ledezma-Yanez, K. J. P. Schouten, G. Mul and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8177 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Machan, M. D. Sampson and C. P. Kubiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8564–8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Onishi, S. Xu, Y. Manaka, Y. Suna, W.-H. Wang, J. T. Muckerman, E. Fujita and Y. Himeda, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5114–5123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kang, C. Cheng, Z. Chen, C. K. Schauer, T. J. Meyer and M. Brookhart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5500–5503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Savéant, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2348–2378 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Costentin, S. Drouet, G. Passard, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9023–9031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, J. Jiang, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Guo, K. L. Materna, W. Liu, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8076–8079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, A. Lavacchi, A. Marchionni, H. A. Miller, W. Oberhauser, E. Vesselli and F. Vizza, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 522–525 CrossRef CAS .
R. Angamuthu, P. Byers, M. Lutz, A. L. Spek and E. Bouwman, Science, 2010, 327, 313–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khandelwal and R. J. Wehmschulte, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 7435–7439 CrossRef .
M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3859–3875 CAS .
P. Serp, M. Corrias and P. Kalck, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 253, 337–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Miao, Z. Yang, F.-X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, B. Liu and Y. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3295–3346 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
J. Pyun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 46–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Su and K. P. Loh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2275–2285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Chinthaginjala, K. Seshan and L. Lefferts, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 3968–3978 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Serp and B. F. Machado, in Nanostructured Carbon Materials for Catalysis, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2015, pp. 1–45,  10.1039/9781782622567-00001 .
S. Ma, R. Luo, J. I. Gold, A. Z. Yu, B. Kim and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8573–8578 CAS .
X. Liu, L. S. Zhu, H. Wang, G. Y. He and Z. Y. Bian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38380–38387 RSC .
Y. Song, R. Peng, D. K. Hensley, P. V. Bonnesen, L. Liang, Z. Wu, H. M. Meyer, M. Chi, C. Ma, B. G. Sumpter and A. J. Rondinone, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 6055–6061 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Lim, J. H. Jo, D. Y. Shin, J. Wilcox, H. C. Ham and S. W. Nam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5087–5092 RSC .
B. Kumar, M. Asadi, D. Pisasale, S. Sinha-Ray, B. A. Rosen, R. Haasch, J. Abiade, A. L. Yarin and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 3819 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, C. S. Tiwary, L. Ma, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5364–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Li, M. Seredych, E. Rodriguez-Castellon and T. J. Bandosz, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 606–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, X. Kang, Q. Zhu, J. Ma, G. Yang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2883–2887 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Hou, C. Ma and T. Tan, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3250–3256 RSC .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 CAS .
M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 185–200 RSC .
Q. G. Zhu, J. Ma, X. C. Kang, X. F. Sun, J. Y. Hu, G. Y. Yang and B. X. Han, Sci. China: Chem., 2016, 59, 551–556 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lum, Y. Kwon, P. Lobaccaro, L. Chen, E. L. Clark, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi, S. Y. Chee, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 500–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, B. Khezri, Z. Sofer, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 12899–12904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ü. Anik, S. Çevik and M. Pumera, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 846–852 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Banks, A. Crossley, C. Salter, S. J. Wilkins and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2533–2537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6453–6458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera and H. Iwai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4401–4405 CAS .
C. H. A. Wong, Z. Sofer, M. Kubešová, J. Kučera, S. Matějková and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 13774–13779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 472–476 RSC .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CAS .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
G. Fishman and D. Calecki, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujita, H. Okada, K. Koyama, K. Watanabe, S. Maekawa and M. W. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 166601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, C. Huang, J. Miller, L. Cheng, Y. Hao, D. Cobden, J. Kim, R. S. Ruoff, R. M. Wallace, K. Cho, X. Xu and Y. J. Chabal, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11350–11357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Li, U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, D. S. Choi, W. J. Lee, Y. Oh, G. Y. Lee and S. O. Kim, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, P. Liu, L. Chen, W. Cong, Y. Ito, J. Han, X. Guo, Z. Tang, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42–B49 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, S. Ma, H.-R. Molly Jhong and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, R. Luo, S. Moniri, Y. Lan and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1124–F1131 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister and M. E. McIlwain, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, H. A. Miller and F. Vizza, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 197–210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luc, J. Rosen and F. Jiao, Catal. Today DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2016.06.011 .
D. H. Won, J. Chung, S. H. Park, E.-H. Kim and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1089–1095 CAS .
J. Yuan and C. Hao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arai, S. Sato, K. Uemura, T. Morikawa, T. Kajino and T. Motohiro, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6944–6946 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Luc, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24652–24658 CAS .
M. Jitaru, J. Univ. Chem. Technol. Metall., 2007, 42, 333–344 CAS .
C. Cadena, J. L. Anthony, J. K. Shah, T. I. Morrow, J. F. Brennecke and E. J. Maginn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5300–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alvarez-Guerra, J. Albo, E. Alvarez-Guerra and A. Irabien, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2574–2599 CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan, W. Zheng, S. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Watkins and A. B. Bocarsly, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 284–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Medina-Ramos, R. C. Pupillo, T. P. Keane, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5021–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, W. Zhu, G. Kaul, A. Salehi-Khojin and R. I. Masel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H138–H141 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. X. Guo, F. W. Li, C. Bentley, M. Horne, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1271–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gupta, M. Gattrell and B. MacDougall, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kas, R. Kortlever, H. Yılmaz, M. T. M. Koper and G. Mul, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Konishi, T. Futamura, A. Murata, O. Koga, H. Sakurai and K. Oguma, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5354–5369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori and S. Suzuki, J. Res. Inst. Catal., Hokkaido Univ., 1982, 30, 81–88 Search PubMed .
R. Shiratsuchi, Y. Aikoh and G. Nogami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 3479–3482 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jermann and J. Augustynski, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1891–1896 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wuttig and Y. Surendranath, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4479–4484 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the electroreduction of CO2 on metal surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 1  Impact of the particle size and film thickness of silver particles on catalytic performance. (I) SEM images of (I-a) AgCl grown on an Ag substrate at 0.2 mA cm−2 for 5 h in 0.1 M aqueous HCl and porous Ag (I-b–d) reduced from (I-a) under different current and electrolyte conditions: (I-b) 0.2 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M aqueous HCl; (I-c) 0.2 mA cm−2 in ethanol + 10% volume 0.1 M aqueous HCl; (I-d) 4 mA cm−2 in ethanol + 10% volume 0.1 M aqueous HCl. (II) Electrochemical performance of different Ag electrodes for CO2 reduction in 0.5 M aqueous KHCO3 saturated with CO2. (II-a) Cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The pAg-E6M was tested in the absence of CO2 for comparison. (II-b) Constant potential electrolysis curves at −0.5 V vs. the RHE with the faradaic efficiency (FE) of CO formation indicated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 2  Tailoring the copper surface structure using plasma treatment. From left to right, the insets show the SEM images of the low surface area H2 plasma-treated metallic Cu foil, the O2 20W 2 min plasma-treated Cu foil with optimal ethylene selectivity, and the high surface area nanoneedles on the O2 100W 10 min oxidized sample after the reaction (500 nm scale bars). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43.	 

 	Fig. 3  Oxide-derived Cu nanowires used as a catalyst for the reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons and alcohols. (I) Faradaic efficiency for C2H4, C2H6, CO, HCOOH, ethanol, n-propanol, and H2 on Cu nanowire arrays with different lengths at −1.1 V versus the RHE in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolytes (0 mm nanowire represents Cu foil). (II) Schematic illustration of the diffusion of electrolytes into Cu nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction and hydrocarbon formation. (a) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of 30 nm/40 nm (red), 30 nm/70 nm (blue), 300 nm/40 nm (cyan), and polycrystalline Cu (black). (b) Chemical selectivities at −1.7 V vs. the NHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 5  FE by the major product (i.e., >5%) produced at electropolished Cu as a function of electrolyte temperature and an applied potential of −1.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the structure of CuxO–Sn-NP and OD-Cu–Sn. (I-a) Illustration of the fabrication process of CuxO–Sn NWs; (I-b) XRD patterns of Cu foil, Cu(OH)2, CuxO, and CuxO–Sn20; (c) typical SEM images of CuxO–Sn20 NWs under various magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 (II-a) XRD patterns of Cu–Sn before and after 1 h of CO2 reduction, and after 14 h of CO2 reduction at −0.6 V vs. the RHE and SEM images of (II-b) Cu–Sn before CO2 reduction, (II-c) Cu–Sn after 1 h of CO2 reduction at −0.6 V vs. the RHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74.	 

 	Scheme 2  Likely mechanism of the CO2 to CO conversion pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113.	 


CuPc@GDE	CH4, C2H4, CHOO−	154	6	
115

Cu-HLa	C2O24−	7	7	
116

(POCOP)Ir-(H)2(MeCN)	CHOO−	40	25	
111

[Et2Al]+	CH4	14	216	
117


 	Fig. 7  Three electrode structures that were applied in this work: (I-a) electrode structure 1 (ES1) is composed of a layer of AgNPs deposited directly on a gas diffusion layer (GDL); (I-b) electrode structure 2 (ES2, “layered”) is composed of a AgNP layer on top of a MWCNT layer deposited on a GDL; (I-c) electrode structure 3 (ES3, “mixed”) is composed of a layer of a uniform mixture of AgNPs and MWCNTs deposited on a GDL. (II) Nyquist plot obtained via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at a cell potential of −2.00 V for cells with different electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the depolarized anode alkaline membrane CO2 electrolyzer (DAAM-CE) and (b) a photograph of its practical realization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115.	 

 	Fig. 9  Artificial leaf. (A) Schematic of a cell design. (B) Rate of product formation (mol s−1) with respect to different Sun illumination conditions. (C) Calculated solar-to-fuel efficiency (SFE) of the photochemical process using the WSe2/IL cocatalyst system. Our calculation indicates ∼4.6% SFE, which is limited by the maximum efficiency of PV-a-si-3jn (∼6.0%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152.	 

OD-NP Ag	CO	−0.49	0.35	80	KHCO3 (0.1)	—	
25

Hp Ag (6 μm)	CO	−0.5	10.5	82	KHCO3 (0.5)	—	
33

Cu foil	CO, formate, ethylene	−0.9	−2.0	60	KHCO3 (0.1)	—	
49

Cu nanowire	CO, HCOOH, C2H4, C2H6, CH3CH2OH	−1.1	4.0	17.5 (C2H4), 2.5 (C2H6)	KHCO3 (0.1)	5	
32

Cu NCs	C2H4	−1.1	−5.5	41	KHCO3 (0.1)	—	
59

Nanostructure polycrystalline copper	C2H4, CH3CH2OH	−1.0	9.35	15.2, 7.6	KHCO3 (0.1)	—	
60

Cu (hollow)	CO	−0.4	2–17	75	
	
	
61

Cu (dendrite)	HCOOH	−1.55 V (Fc+/Fc)	6.5	87	[EMIM](BF4)/H2O (85/15 v/v)	8	
76

Cu (dendrite)	C2H4, C2H6	−0.8	5–7	55	Na2SO4 (1)	
	
77

Cu–In	CO	−0.6	1.5	55	KHCO3 (0.1)	24	
85

Sn/f-Cu	HCOOH	−1.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	−7.56	83.5	KHCO3 (0.1)	
	
87

CuO–Sn	CO	−0.6	−1.0	90	KHCO3 (0.1)	14	
88

Sn/Cu	HCOOH	−1.4 (vs. SCE)	1.0	91	
	
	
89

CuxO–Sn	CO	−0.8	−1.0	82	KHCO3 (0.1)	6	
90

Nix–Gay	CH4, C2H4, C2H6	−0.48	0.1	—	KH2PO4 (0.1)	—	
98

Pd–Au	C1–C5	−0.80 to −1.4	—	0.07 to 2	KH2PO4 (0.1)/K2HPO4 (0.1)	—	
99

[Co[L]](ClO4)2, [Fe[L]Cl2](ClO4)	CO, HCOOH	−1.5 (vs. SCE), −1.25 (vs. SCE)	0.4, 0.09	82, 75-80	DMF + NBu4PF6 (0.1)	—	
105

Fe-porphyrin	CO	−0.97	0.1	90	Water (pH = 6.7)	72	
107

Cu-porphyrin	CH4, C2H4	−0.976	13.2, 8.4	—	KHCO3 (0.5)	—	
114

CuPc@GDE	CH4, C2H4, HCOO−	−1.75 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	
	7.7, 0.7, 3.0	KHCO3 (0.5)	6	
115

Ag-MWCNT	CO	−0.8	1	95	KHCO3 (1)	—	
127

1%Pd–2%Cu	HCOO−	−1.3	−2.0	—	KHCO3 (0.5)	
	
128

Cu/N-doped CNS	CH3CH2OH	−1.2	63	−2.75	KHCO3 (0.1)	
	
129

S,N-doped carbon	CO, CH4	−0.99	∼1.0	11.3 (CO), 0.18 (CH4)	KHCO3 (0.1)	27	
133

N-doped carbon	CH4	−1.4	3.26	90.1	IL (97%)/water (3%)	5	
134

N-doped graphene	HCOO−	−0.84	−7.0	73	KHCO3 (0.5)	12	
135

WSe2	CO	−0.764	18.95	24	EMIM-BF4 (50%)/water (50%)	27	
152


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
