Economically viable CO 2 electroreduction embedded within ethylene oxide manufacturing   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03310C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03310C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1530-1543Economically viable CO2 electroreduction embedded within ethylene oxide manufacturing†

        
          
            Magda H. 
            Barecka
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Joel W. 
            Ager
          
        
      bcd and 

        
          
            Alexei A. 
            Lapkin
          
        
      ae
aCambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore, CARES Ltd., 1 CREATE Way, CREATE Tower #05-05, 138602, Singapore. E-mail: magda.barecka@cares.cam.ac.uk
bBerkeley Educational Alliance for Research in Singapore (BEARS), Ltd., 1 CREATE Way, 138602, Singapore
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
dMaterials Sciences Division and Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0AS, UK
Received 
      19th October 2020
    , Accepted 2nd February 2021First published on 3rd February 2021AbstractElectrochemical conversion of CO2 (CO2R) into fuels and chemicals can both reduce CO2 emissions and allow for clean manufacturing in the scenario of significant expansion of renewable power generation. However, large-scale process deployment is currently limited by unfavourable process economics resulting from significant up- and down-stream costs for obtaining pure CO2, separation of reaction products and increased logistical effort. We have discovered a method for economically viable recycling of waste CO2 that addresses these challenges. Our approach is based on integration of a CO2R unit into an existing manufacturing process: ethylene oxide (EO) production, which emits CO2 as a by-product. The standard EO process separates waste CO2 from the gas stream, hence the substrate for electroreduction is available at an EO plant at no additional cost. CO2 can be converted into an ethylene-rich stream and recycled on-site back to the EO reactor, which uses ethylene as a raw material, and also the anode product (oxygen) can be simultaneously valorized for the EO production reaction. If powered by a renewable electricity source, the process will significantly (ca. 80%) reduce the CO2 emissions of an EO manufacturing plant. A sensitivity analysis shows that the recycling approach can be economically viable in the short term and that its payback time could be as low as 1–2 years in the regions with higher carbon taxes and/or with access to low-cost electricity sources.

Broader context
Reduction of anthropogenic CO2 emissions is one of the most complex problems of the 21st century. Although the negative effects of continuous emissions of unbalanced quantities of CO2 to the atmosphere are widely discussed, the dependence of current economies on fossil-fuel derivated products precludes their rapid substitution; consequently, CO2 emissions from any industrial process that uses basic molecules derived from petrochemicals are, at present, inevitable. A promising pathway to break this vicious circle is to use CO2 emissions as a production feedstock and convert it back to the necessary chemical products by means of Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU) technologies. This approach has a tremendous potential to prevent CO2 emissions, nevertheless, large-scale deployment has so far not happened. Many researchers point out its unfavourable process economics as a key challenge. We have discovered an economically viable way to implement CO2 conversion through its integration into an existing chemical production process. By exploring the synergies between the established bulk chemical production processes and CO2 conversion reactors, we significantly limit the investment and operational costs, while also reducing the input of petrochemical feedstocks. The technology described in this paper has a potential for rapid introduction in chemical industries.

1. Introduction
The chemical industry is a large consumer of oil, gas and coal, and is responsible for ca. 15% of industrial CO2 emissions.1 Consequently, there is a need for significant innovation in this sector in order to achieve necessary reduction targets such as the 2050 goal of carbon neutrality set by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).2 Conversion of waste CO2 back to raw materials is a promising path to minimize emissions and reduce the use of non-renewable resources for production, while responding at the same time to the need for chemical products. In this context, this study is motivated by recent reports that CO2 can be electrochemically converted to ethylene at or near the selectivity and conversion rates required for a technologically feasible process.3,4 We also note significant progress in scaling up CO2 reduction (CO2R) reactors.5–8 CO2R technology is rapidly approaching the state of commercial application, as exemplified by the introduction by Opus 12 of a 5 kW unit based on the industrially established reactor design for water splitting,9 and other small-scale commercial projects by e.g. Siemens and Evonik, Dioxide Materials, CERT Toronto, Skyre and Mantra Energy Alternative Ltd.10 In light of these advances, it is timely to consider if it is possible to bring this technology to economically viable operation on the scale of bulk chemicals manufacturing.
Catalyst selectivity, low solubility of CO2, and catalyst stability during extended operation under industrially relevant current densities are known barriers to commercialization and, consequently, are the focus of many research efforts.11–17 The general process techno-economics are being intensively discussed in literature, targeting identification of most promising products and configurations of electrochemical processes.18–22 However, from a large-scale deployment perspective, operation of plant-scale CO2R as a stand-alone system will also require additional up- and down-stream processing steps, increased logistic efforts, which contribute significantly to investment and operational costs.
To overcome this limitation, we consider here an alternative strategy for CO2R deployment: on-site CO2 recycling and integration of the electroreduction unit into an existing chemical production process. Waste CO2 produced on site can be directly used for conversion to raw materials and recycled back to the production unit. This approach creates synergies between the emerging CO2R technology and the established chemical industry and minimizes required separation steps and reduces logistical efforts. Furthermore, instead of competing with mature methods for bulk chemicals production, we propose here a CO2R-based retrofit of an existing manufacturing process. Such an approach must (1) significantly reduce CO2 emissions of the chemical plant, (2) ensure a short payback time for CO2R reactor and (3) match the production scale of the chemical. We will show that ethylene oxide is a favourable target for our approach, as all three criteria can be met.
To implement CO2R technology on industrially relevant scale, a high purity CO2 source is required. The majority of experimental studies report operation with a concentrated CO2 stream as a feedstock, hence costly separation of highly diluted CO2 from flue gas is needed, resulting in optimistic CO2 prices of ca. 40$ per ton.22 The challenge of CO2 capture costs is being addressed by the research community, targeting the use of CO2R units directly with flue gases or air as the CO2 source, though functional systems are currently not ready for implementation. Hence, we considered the opportunity of connecting a CO2R reactor to a production process that already generates a high-purity CO2 waste stream, consequently the raw material for CO2R reactor can be available at no additional cost.
Furthermore, the investment and operational costs related to the CO2R product separation must be carefully considered. Despite of tremendous improvement in catalysts selectivity,23–25 only few currently available systems are able to produce a single reaction product with >90% selectivity, and several by-products are found in the post-reactor stream. The feedstock conversion (CO2) rarely exceeds 50%;26 therefore, significant amount of CO2 is present in the product stream.
Separation costs were highlighted by Jouny et al.,22 who reported a techno-economic analysis for large-scale CO2R units for manufacture of a variety of bulk chemicals. Based on the results of short-cut modelling of ethanol manufacturing with 0.03$ per kW per h electricity, even a simplified two-step product separation would account for 40% of capital and 15% of operating costs. A deeper insight into the feasibility of complex flowsheets for CO2-based chemicals production was considered in a life cycle assessment by Greenblatt et al.,27 identifying that a minimum of five separation steps would be needed to recover CO2R products of commercially attractive purity. Furthermore, the operation of described up and downstream sections would include additional logistic efforts, which was determined by Yuan et al.28 to be one of the critical factors for large-scale deployment of CCU. Thus, we conclude it could be advantageous to look for alternative approach for CO2R operation other than directly making a commodity chemical in a stand-alone production plant.
Due to significant economic limitations in CO2R industrial application, valorisation of the reaction products on the anode side is also being explored, as exemplified by coupling CO2R with oxidation of organics, instead of water oxidation.29,30 Therefore, while designing a CO2R reactor embedded into an existing chemical production plant, we considered a process for which we can valorise both the cathode and anode outputs as a means of obtaining further processing cost reductions.
We conclude from this overview of prior art, that there is significant potential for increasing the technology's profitability by simultaneous reducing the costs of CO2 capture and of products separation and by implementing the on-site use of the cathode and anode side CO2R products. These costs can potentially be minimized by system integration of CO2 conversion, as concluded by Pérez-Fortes and Tzimas31 in their industrial study of chemical conversion of CO2 to methanol and formic acid. As outlined above, an attractive target process for CO2R integration should already generate a high purity CO2 waste stream and consume a mixture of products coming from CO2 electro-conversion. In this scenario, a multistep separation chain can be drastically reduced, as CO2 conversion products can be recycled back to the main production process as a mixture.
EO manufacturing (Fig. 1) is an excellent example of a production process into which CO2R can be embedded. Ethylene oxide (EO) is one of the most commonly used commodity chemical with an annual production rate of over 34.5 Mt.32 It is a key raw material for manufacturing ethylene glycol and specialty chemicals and is also widely used as a disinfectant.33 The molecule is primarily produced by ethylene epoxidation on silver catalysts.34 The conversion to EO (R1, Fig. 1 and Table 1) proceeds with up to 90% selectivity35 with complete oxidation of ethylene to CO2 (R2, R3 overall) as a competing process. As a result, ca. 0.4 tons of CO2 are emitted per each ton of EO produced, resulting in emissions of up to 180 kt CO2 annually from a single plant.33 Production of EO is ranked as one of the most CO2-emitting industries in the chemical sector, along with steam reforming of methane and synthesis of ammonia.2 Hence, reduction of CO2 emissions from this process can meaningfully contribute to achievement of sustainability goals of the IPCC.
 Fig. 1  Proposed pathway for CO2 recycling (R4) within EO manufacture (R1)–(R3). 
Table 1 Typical EO manufacturing operating conditions and composition of the reactor inlet stream.40 Excess quantities of ethylene and methane as a make-up chemical are used due to safety constraints; argon is introduced as impurity and partially accumulated for dilution purposes




Operating conditions




Reactor residence time
1.9 s


Temperature
202–210 °C


Feed pressure
10 bar






Component
Mole fraction




Water
0.010


Ethylene
0.389


Carbon dioxide
0.050


Oxygen
0.069


Methane
0.348


Argon
0.134




Here we report the discovered opportunity to recycle the waste CO2 in the EO process, specifically to regenerate ethylene, the feedstock for the reaction, R4 (Fig. 1). If the electricity used to drive this process can be sourced renewably, e.g. from wind or solar, CO2 recycling could reduce the overall carbon footprint of the process and enable to store the power of intermittent renewable energy sources in chemicals.36–39 While the process design and economic analysis of stand-alone CO2 electroreduction plants were already addressed in several papers discussed above, this is the first example of a proposal of integration of CO2R into a well-established bulk chemical production process.
Within this paper, we first describe a base-case EO process using an already optimized variant of the industrial benchmark EO production process.40 We then demonstrate that CO2R can be embedded into this production process and develop a conceptual flowsheet for integration of CO2 electroreduction (CO2R) into EO plants, based on experimental data for the CO2R reactor performance.24 The scale-up and cost calculations are derived from the model reported by Jouny et al.22 for a similar industrial scale stand-alone CO2R unit. These systems can also leverage existing infrastructure and development for polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) water electrolysis.41
Detailed assumptions for the modelling of the electrochemical reactor are described in Section 4, whereas Section 5 gives a summary of models used for assessment of the capital and operational costs of the integrated design. Next, Section 6 discusses the environment benefit of the integration of the CO2 recycling process and its potential to reduce CO2 emissions from EO plants. Lastly, through sensitivity analysis based on prices of ethylene, electricity, and CO2 taxes we determine the economic scenarios favourable for technology implementation, define techno-economic targets for CO2R units and review the deployment potential for different size of EO plants. Our findings confirm the potential of the recycling process to reduce EO plant CO2 emissions while renewable energies are being integrated, at least partially, into the electricity mix. Further, we identify a number of economic scenarios demonstrating that investment into the recycling process can return in less than 2 years, depending on the CO2 regulatory environment. Benchmarking against other electrolysis processes used in chemical industries (like for e.g. chlor-alkali production) we discuss that the scale of CO2R technology required for EO plant integration is feasible, hence the recycling process has a potential for rapid industrial introduction.
2. Ethylene oxide base-case production plant
The process flowsheet for the state-of-the-art EO technology (defined here as the base-case,40Fig. 2) consists of EO production (Section 1), EO removal and purification (Sections 2 and 3) and CO2 (by-product) removal (Section 4). The conversion reaction is direct catalytic oxidation of ethylene (frequently also called ethylene epoxidation) in the gas phase, using pure oxygen as the oxidant and silver-based catalysts.33 In addition to the desired partial oxidation of ethylene to EO, two side reactions occur that limit the EO yield: the complete oxidation to carbon dioxide (CO2) and water and the consecutive combustion of EO to CO2 (Fig. 1, R2 and R3). The reaction takes place at elevated temperature (>200 °C) and pressure (>10 bar). Due to safety constraints (high risk of explosion), the substrates (ethylene used in excess and oxygen) are diluted with methane and limited quantities of reaction by-products and impurities which are partially accumulated in the reactor. Table 1 lists typical feed composition and reaction conditions.
 Fig. 2  A simplified flowsheet of the optimized variant of the base case design technology for EO production33 (reprint from Barecka et al.40 with permission of Elsevier‡). 
The product mixture is sent to the downstream treatment section, which separates EO by means of high-pressure absorption with water (Section 2), after which EO is desorbed at low pressure in a stripper and further purified by distillation (Section 3). In the CO2 removal section, the side product is scrubbed by chemical absorption in a hot potassium carbonate (K2CO3) solution (Section 4). This is the most common, but not the only reagent used. Only partial removal of CO2 is necessary (quantity generated by side-reaction), as some CO2 is recycled back to the reactor and used for dilution purposes. CO2 is desorbed at atmospheric pressure and usually released into the atmosphere. The post-reaction stream depleted in EO and partially in CO2 is mixed with a fresh supply of ethylene, oxygen and make-up methane, preheated and recycled back to the reactor.
3. CO2 recycling: plant integration concept
For a typical EO plant, the cost of ethylene corresponds to over 90% of the overall manufacturing costs, hence generation of the side product CO2 limits profitability. To date, the majority of efforts aimed at reducing the amount of CO2 produced during ethylene epoxidation have focused on catalyst improvement and addition of inhibitors.42–45 These strategies have increased the selectivity towards EO and therefore have reduced CO2 generation; nevertheless, the highest selectivity achieved so far is around 90% and generation of the by-product seems inevitable.33 Therefore, we proposed a retrofit based on valorisation of this waste stream.
Within the proposed novel flowsheet (Fig. 3, Flowsheet Section 5) the waste CO2 stream, separated in the base-case EO process design through absorption and desorption, is sent directly to the CO2 electrolyzer, fed also with recycled catholyte. On the cathode side of the CO2 conversion reactor, an ethylene-rich stream is produced (stream nr 502), including also a minor amount of carbon oxide and hydrogen as well as unreacted CO2. The quantity of unreacted CO2 results from feed conversion, which is a key process operational parameter discussed in the reactor modelling (Section 4). In the EO plants, a specific quantity of CO2 is used as feed to the EO reactor (CO2 is used for dilution purposes in usual fraction of 5% of the feed stream), therefore unreacted CO2 can be recycled back to the EO reactor without violating the operational constraints. Other electroreduction products such as carbon oxide and hydrogen are obtained in minor quantities and once diluted with the remaining flow of the fresh ethylene send to the EO reactor, will be present in ppm levels, similarly to other impurities fed to the reactor (see ESI† for details). Existing impurities as well as additional quantity of carbon oxide and hydrogen can be removed by a purge stream already integrated in EO plants (see Fig. 2). On the anode side, the only compound recovered and send back to the EO reactor is oxygen (50% valorisation assumed). Both catholyte and anolyte streams are recycled upon venting off generated gaseous compounds (oxygen). The anode side is entirely exposed to liquid, with no need for carrier gas deployment, similar to water electrolyzers design.
 Fig. 3  A conceptual flowsheet of integration of the CO2 recycling process (Section 5) into EO manufacture (base-case design Sections 1–3 remain unchanged). 
Flowsheet Sections 1–3 of the base-case design for EO manufacturing are not affected by the CO2 electroreduction integration, and hence are not displayed in Fig. 3.
4. Process modelling
Due to the lack of applicable process simulators for the electroreduction unit, dedicated short-cut models were used to design each processing step and relate our findings to the scale of EO manufacturing. In the base-case EO plant,40 103 mol s−1 of waste CO2 are continuously emitted, corresponding to the amount of CO2 generated as EO production reaction by-product. The composition of the feed CO2 stream is considered as reported for the base-case EO design.40 Minor impurities accounting for ca. 0.3% of inlet stream are not modelled (see process streams summary Table 4).
The design of the CO2R unit is based on an electrode system with an excellent selectivity towards the desired ethylene product (faradaic efficiencies (FE) = 88.7% after the consideration of the potential experimental error)24 at the current density of 300 mA cm−2. Similar ethylene selectivity have been reported for different copper-based electrode systems46–51 with the newest findings reaching FE 65–75%4,23 at current densities as high as >1000 mA cm−2, and long-term stability testing demonstrated.3,46,52 The observed system of electrochemical reactions, along with the determined faradaic efficiencies (eqn (1)) are given in Table 2. Based on these experimental results, product flows are calculated. (1)εFar is faradaic efficiency, z is the number of electrons transferred, n is the amount of product, F is Faraday constant, Q is the total charge passed.
Table 2 Electrochemical reactions taking placed in the modelled electrolyzer and faradaic efficiencies reported,24 accounting for the possible measurement error




Reaction
Faradaic efficiency




CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ CO + H2O
3.8%


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− ↔ C2H4 + 4H2O
88.7%


2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2
7.5%




Precise design and sizing of the CO2R unit is not currently possible due to the lack of commercially developed CO2 electrolysers of sufficient capacity. Thus, to provide a complete process concept and to evaluate its economic potential, engineering approximations derived from commercialized technologies were used for scale-up calculations. Key process parameters (Table 3) were extracted from experimental reports and compared to two commercially established electroreduction processes: water splitting and Chlor-Alkali Cl2 production.53,54 This benchmarking enables us to verify if the assumed parameters are feasible to implement in the current state-of-the-art electroreduction reactor technology. For our modelling we fixed the current density at 300 mA cm−2, though leveraging from chemical electroreduction processes discussed above, there is a potential to increase the current density at least 2×, decreasing the necessary electrolyzer area. The need for high current operation (even up to 1000–2500 mA cm−2) was recently discussed19,55 and researcher's attention is being brought to testing CO2 reduction catalyst systems only at current densities relevant for industrial scale deployment.56 Cell voltage (2 V) was extrapolated from the experimental report24 as a value potential to be achieved in an optimized system; we anticipate also that an industrial scale system would operate under minimized potential losses as opposed to lab-scale systems. Therefore, our full cell voltage value is slightly lower than in other recent experimental demonstrations.3,24
Table 3 Selected CO2 electrolyzer parameters vs. industrial electroreduction benchmarks




Design parameters
Value used for modelling
Industrial benchmarks53,54




Current density
300 mA cm−2
Water splitting: 75–2000 mA cm−2


Chlor alkali: 700 mA cm−2


Chlor alkali: 700 mA cm−2


Cell voltage
2 V
Water splitting: 1.75–2.4 V


Chlor alkali: 3.1 V




Though of extreme importance,26 one-pass conversion of CO2 is infrequently reported, as single pass reactors with small electrode surface are used for lab-scale experiments. In work aimed specifically at optimizing one-pass efficiency, values between 22.5% to 68% have been reported57–59 and recent techno-economic analyses (TEAs) usually use values around 50% as ref. 19, 21 and 22, though the conversion is likely to be significantly improved upon scale-up efforts. Hence, we evaluate the environmental and economic performance for conversion varying between 50–100% and present different operational modes for the continuous process. 100% conversion of CO2 feed is a forward-looking scenario, which is though projected to be technically feasible based on the advances in the fuel cell design, where the molar flow is similarly decreasing over the electrode length.
In case of conversion close to 100%, whole waste CO2 stream is converted to ethylene-rich stream and directly recycled back to the EO reactor. If lower conversions are achieved (e.g. 50%), unreacted CO2 is recycled back to EO reactor in the ethylene-rich stream. Whereas this recycling does not impose any limitation to the EO reactor, already operating with certain CO2 quantity, removal of the complete amount of CO2 generated as a by-product must be ensured to avoid the compound build-up. Consequently, the stream of CO2 separated in the absorption column needs to be slightly increased, since instead of venting the whole CO2 stream, some CO2 is recycled back to the reactor together with the CO2R products. The cost of the altered operation of the absorption–desorption is not considered in the following design, as the section is responsible for a negligible part of the operational costs for the EO process (0.1%). Hence, any change in these costs has an insignificant impact. Additionally, a purge of CO2 before the electrolyzer is used to remove a part of separated CO2. Notably, after mixing the post electrolysis streams with other streams recycled back to the EO reactor (Streams 412 and 408, Fig. 3), the final amount of CO2 is equal to 5% as required per ethylene oxide reactor specifications (see ESI,†Table 1).
Key electroreduction reactor parameters such as the necessary electrode area, current, power and process streams (Table 4) are calculated based on the assumptions listed above, applying the model proposed by Jouny et al.22 In contrast, our process design is based on an experimentally demonstrated reaction selectivity for a complex system and not assumed on the best-case values for the single product CO2 conversion. We also consider the effect of the potential measurements error and extracted the worst-case scenario data from the experiments (see ESI†).
Table 4 A summary of main components for process streams for the integrated CO2 conversion section for two scenarios: (a) 50% conversion and (b) 100% conversion




Component
Waste CO2 (mol s−1) & catholyte
Anode-side output (mol s−1)
Cathode-side output (mol s−1)




A: 50% CO2 feed conversion


CH4
0.7


0.7


C2H4
2.1


24.9


CO




5.85


H2




11.6


H2O
114.4






CO2
103.0


51.5


O2


77.15








B: 100% CO2 feed conversion


CH4
0.7


0.7


C2H4
2.1


47.7


CO




11.7


H2




23.2


H2O
114.4






CO2
103.0






O2


154.3






Several properties of the reactor system are strongly dependent on temperature. Intriguingly, Dufek et al.60 have found that temperature rise from 18 to 70 °C increased the overall cell efficiency by 18% for the liquid phase operation, whereas Lee et al.61 observed doubling of the partial current density at the same voltage as a result of elevated temperature of a gas-phase electrolyzer. The operation in elevated temperatures might be favourable as an increasing share of the energy requirement for the reaction can be covered by thermal energy, being intensively explored in high-temperature electrolysis design.62 In order to rigorously evaluate the heat balance of the large scale CO2R reactor, modelling approach reported for another electrochemical process (alumina reduction) was used.63 The total enthalpy required for a conversion reaction is converted first to the voltage equivalent (eqn (2)). The difference between the cell voltage (2 V) and the enthalpy voltage equivalent represents total potential losses throughout the electrochemical activation, Ohmic heating effect and other minor sources. These potential losses correspond to the maximum heat produced by CO2R reactor (eqn (3)). EΔH0 = ΔH0(x)/(nF)(2) Q = ECell − EΔH0(3)where EΔH0 is the voltage equivalent of enthalpy, ΔH0 is standard enthalpy of reaction, x is faradaic efficiency, n is the number of electrons transferred, F is Faraday constant, E is the cell voltage, Q is dissipated heat.
Despite the potential benefit of high-temperature operation, the total heat generated in the CO2 rector was assumed to be removed to follow the economically worst-case scenario (high cooling requirement). Consequently, our model assumes an isothermal operation. The investment cost for the heat management system is already included in the reference stack cost. The operational cost of heat removal with the cost indicator for cooling extracted from EO base-case design process was evaluated and proves to have a minimal impact on the operational cost. Notably, due to the dependence of ohmic losses on geometry of a cell, ohmic heating effect can be engineered to certain extent, allowing for optimal heat management. Therefore, a deeper understanding of thermal processes occurring on the electrode surface, and rigorous optimization of the reaction would provide further margin for improvement of the system’ performance. The recovered heat stream could be also potentially integrated and used on-site in the EO plant.
Before the recycling of the cathode output, the stream is send to a phase split unit. Both cathode and anode side gaseous outputs are subsequently compressed to meet the EO reactor’ feed requirements (10 bar, 202 °C). Energy consumption for compressors (eqn (4) and (5)), are calculated using engineering approximations for similar scale systems.64 (4) (5)Wc is the power required by the compressor, ηc is compression efficiency, γ is adiabatic expansion coefficient, R is the universal gas constant, Tin/Tout is the ratio of inlet to outlet temperatures.
5. Capital and operational costs calculation
5.1. Capital costs
Rigorous verification of the technology feasibility requires a detailed analysis of capital costs. The electrolyzer capital cost calculation is performed with the US Department of Energy Hydrogen analysis (H2A),65 implemented into the CO2 electroreduction cost model.22 Importantly, this model already integrates catalysts cost, as well as necessary pumps and control systems for catholyte and anolyte recycling. Catalysts prices are of similar range for water splitting and CO2 reduction for the cathode side (water electrolysis deploys noble metals e.g., Pt; CO2 electrolysis uses Cu66,67). On the anode side, both systems integrate the same catalyst (IrO2), making a PEM a comparable model for cost estimation.
The benchmark electrolyzer costs 250.25 $ per kW and operates at 0.175 A cm−2; 1.75 V (Norsk Hydro HPE Atmospheric Type No. 5040 alkaline electrolyzer). This cost was recalculated per surface area, calculated for 100% conversion (with installation factor of 1.2) and multiplied by the necessary area of the CO2 electrolyzer. The sum of the costs of the supporting components (balance of the plant) is assumed to be 35% of the total cost.
The cost of compressor and heat exchangers units are leveraged from economic coefficients for a comparable system.64 The overall investment cost comprises the costs of the electrolyzer unit, balance of the plant, and the connected compressors and heat exchangers. The costs of site preparation, engineering and design, up-front permitting cost are out of scope of this analysis as these contributors are due to significant location and business-model dependent variations and hence cannot be taken into account with sufficient accuracy.
5.2. Operational costs and income calculations
Key operating costs account for energy consumption by the electrolyzer unit and supporting equipment, whereas the added value generated by the integrated flowsheet is roughly equal to the cost of ethylene and oxygen which are recycled back to EO production reactor and minimize the need for fresh reactants. For the sake of comparability with the base-case design process, the cost indicators for electricity and ethylene are taken from EO base-case design.40 The cost of water for the reaction of 0.0054 $ per gal is extracted from a recent TEA analysis.22 Based on the process modelling results and the determined energy requirements, the overall operational cost is calculated. Further, maintenance costs of 2.5% of capital costs per year are added.

Table 5 gives a complete overview of all cost calculations for the scenario of 100% CO2 conversion. We summarized here the key price indicators determining the investment cost into the electrolyzer stack, as well as the total operational costs for the different parts of the system sized to recycle all emissions from an EO plant with the capacity of 330 kt per annum (being a representative large-scale manufacture33). Detailed evaluation of the operational costs (electricity to power the electrolyzer, water as feedstock) is subsequently subtracted from the savings through on-site generation of ethylene feedstock. Based on the yearly savings and estimated investment costs, we projected the payback time for the investment into the CO2 recycling process in the base-case plant.
Table 5 A summary of capital and operational costs for the CO2 recycling process assuming 100% CO2 conversion. The payback time evaluated as the overall investment cost divided by the early profit is not conversion-scale dependent




Capital costs




Electrolyzer unit


H2A base cost
250.25
$ per kW ($2010)


Base case electrolyzer voltage
1.75
V


Installed cost for CO2 electrolyzer (300 mA cm−2, 2 V)
919.7
$ per m2


Electrolyzer maintenance cost:
2.5
% capital per year


Total electrolyzer cost:
18.3
M$


Balance of plant
9.83
M$






Additional equipment


Compressors (M$)
0.008
M$






Operating costs


Cost of electricity
0.00124
$ per MJ


Power required for electrolyzer
4.255
M$ per year


Power required for compressors
0.12
MW


Cost of compressors operation
0.0043
M$ per year


Cost of water
0.00003
$ per mol


Water consumption
0.190
M$ per year


Maintenance cost (M$ per year)
0.46
M$ per year


Overall operating costs (M$ per year)
4.8
M$ per year


Yearly profit (M$ per year)
28.34
M$ per year


Payback time (year)
1.0
year




In case of a lower conversion, the electrode area is proportionally decreased, thus reducing both the investment costs and the savings throughout the generated ethylene stream. Consequently, payback time evaluated as the overall investment cost divided by the early profit is not conversion-scale dependent is equal to 1 year for the base-case cost indicators scenario.
6. Potential for reduction of CO2 emissions
Throughout the complete conversion of waste CO2 back to ethylene, the EO production plant with the integrated recycling process does not vent CO2 to the atmosphere, as opposed to the current state-of-the-art EO flowsheet. In the case of a lower conversion being achieved (e.g. 50%), the direct emissions are reduced proportionally to CO2 conversion. Nevertheless, from the perspective of the overall CO2 cycle, both direct and indirect CO2 emission sources must be taken into account. Hence, we evaluate the CO2 emissions balance for the new recycling section considering the additional consumption of utilities (electricity). Fig. 4 shows the potential for CO2 emissions reduction for recycling with 50% and 100% conversions, powered by different energy sources. Additionally, on a global scale, recycling results also in savings through the on-site generation of the main product – ethylene, which avoids production of this amount of ethylene from petrochemical feedstocks (not quantified in our CO2 emissions balance). CO2 emission coefficients for different sources of electricity were extracted from the most detailed industrial reports available.68,69
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the potential for reduction of CO2 emissions in EO plants for different sources of energy used for electroreduction under (a) 50% and (b) 100% CO2 conversion. 
The recycling process offers an excellent opportunity to reduce the impact of direct CO2 emissions by ca. 80%, provided that low-carbon power such as solar photovoltaics, geothermal or hydropower is used. Such sources need to be at least partly integrated in the grid to allow for optimal CO2 balancing, or be available on-site. For example, electricity coming from gas combined cycle need to be mixed with ca. 60% of hydro-originating power to ensure zero overall CO2 balance for the recycling section. This emerging technology both levels the use of intermittent electricity from renewables and provides economic incentive for renewable electricity industry by establishing new long-term fixed-price contracts. Our findings on CO2 emissions reduction potential are in line with previously published recommendations to introduce carbon capture and utilization within the chemical industry.70,71
7. Cost sensitivity analysis
7.1. Investment cost
Following the demonstrated potential of the recycling process to reduce CO2 emissions, we discuss different economic scenarios favourable for the technology deployment. Firstly we analyse the investment costs, constituting mainly of the CO2R reactor stack cost, with its cost being estimated from the large-scale electroreduction model analysed in the US Department of Energy Hydrogen Analysis (H2A) project.65 This approach covers a wide range of manufacturing scales and models and has been used as a basis for a number of recent CO2R TEA studies.19,22 Different scenarios can be extracted from this report,65 resulting in the overall stack cost ranging from 1000 to 15000 $ per m2. In the analysis of Jouny et al.,22 the averaged cost indicator for optimized large scale production is being considered. Our analysis targets similar scale, hence, the same benchmark is used in this study.
However, as the electrolyzer stack cost indicator could vary depending on manufacturing scenario, we investigate how these variations influence the total investment cost. Notably, the latter cost is also strong function of the applied current, which determines the total area of the required electrode. The presented CO2R design is based on experimentally proved density of 300 mA m−2, however the parameter could be significantly increased with the development of large scale electrolysers (up to 1000–2500 mA cm−2).19,55Fig. 5 shows that higher electrolyzer stack costs could be balanced by operation under increased current densities, which is being intensively investigated with first reports4 on operation at over 1000 mA cm−2. Cost-optimization of large-scale units along with high current density operation can secure viable investment costs, supporting large-scale technology deployment.
 Fig. 5  Sensitivity analysis for investment cost: dependence of the overall investment cost on the cost indicator for the stack unit and the applied current density. White dotted line represents the investment cost considered in this case-study. Results are given for a system designed for maximum (100%) CO2 conversion. 
7.2. Operational costs
The operational manufacturing cost for the recycling process are supported by low electricity prices, minimizing the operational cost of the electroreduction unit as well as by high ethylene cost which makes CO2R manufacturing competitive. The cost indicators for those industrial utilities are dependent on project location, scale of manufacturing and available electricity mix. Furthermore, electricity price for the industrial use is significantly lower than for the domestic use. The base-case design process for EO production has low cost indicators for both ethylene (0.021 $ per mol) and electricity (0.004 $ per kW per h), reported specifically for EO manufacturing72 and used in different reports on EO manufacturing optimization.40,73 We therefore rigorously consider the effect of the grid electricity and ethylene price and the return on investment (ROI) throughout the sensitivity analysis. We do not evaluate the effect of oxygen price changes, as this raw material is in many cases produced on-site from ambient air and its price is not due to significant fluctuations related to the crude oil market dynamics. However, we consider that in response to raising concerns about climate change and as a matter of support for deployment of novel CCU technologies,74 several countries have introduced CO2 emissions taxes ranging between few cents up to $130 per tonne of CO2.
Based on the review of different CO2 restriction policies adapted worldwide,75 we defined four relevant levels of CO2 taxes (zero/low/medium/extreme). For each of the CO2 tax scenarios, we highlight the ROI time (being not CO2 conversion scale dependent) for the current averaged prices of electricity, including renewables (0.03 $ per kWh)76–78 and averaged price of ethylene (0.032 $ per mol).22,79 From this staring point, economically viable scenarios defined by ROI ≈ 3 years and benchmarked by a lower limit for ethylene price and an upper limit for electricity price:
Zero CO2 tax economies. Ethylene price >0.025 $ per mole or electricity price <0.040 $ per kWh.
Low CO2 tax economies (taxes up to $15 per tonne CO2, for e.g. Singapore, Japan, South Africa). Ethylene price >0.023 $ per mole or electricity price <0.042 $ per kWh.
Medium CO2 tax economies (taxes between $15–$50 per tonne CO2, for e.g. Canada, various EU countries). Ethylene price >0.020 $ per mole or electricity price <0.045 $ per kWh.
Extreme CO2 tax economies (taxes between $50–$130 per tonne CO2, for e.g. Switzerland, Sweden). Ethylene price >0.013 $ per mole or electricity price <0.057 $ per kWh.

Fig. 6 presents the outcomes of our sensitivity analysis, where the payback time for the proposed integrated flowsheet is evaluated under different values of key performance factors such as grid electricity and ethylene prices for the determined level of CO2 taxes.
 Fig. 6  Relationship between electricity and ethylene prices and investment payback for different CO2 taxes scenario: (a) no CO2 tax, (b) $15 per ton of CO2, (b) 50$ per ton of CO2, (b) 130$ per ton of CO2. Grey areas represent inviable scenarios, white dot reflects current electricity and ethylene prices and resulting ROI time. 
As highlighted throughout our analysis, a promising ROI (<two years) is determined for this technology with current prices of ethylene and electricity and zero CO2 tax. The ROI can be further reduced, provided that at least medium CO2 taxes are to be paid. Numerous countries applying currently middle and high CO2 taxes are planning its step-wise increase in next years, which increases the economic viability of the CO2 recycling process. For the already highly restricted CO2 economies, the recycling scenario is viable for deployment under a wide range of ethylene and electricity prices with currently a very short ROI (<one year). As demonstrated, to balance the life-cycle CO2 emissions, CO2R should operate mainly with renewable or nuclear energy sources. Higher integration of these energy sources into the energy infrastructure is forecasted to reduce electricity production costs down and consequently, increase profitability of CO2 electroreduction.
Lastly, fluctuations in ethylene prices are complex to predict, however due the ongoing depletion of fossil fuels, the increase of the cost of the key raw materials is inevitable, which favours efforts towards increasing the efficiency of the use of raw materials and its recycling by means of dedicated CO2R retrofit.
Benchmarking our results toward the lifetime of a typical chemical plant (>25 years), the projected short return on investment suggests that it will be economically more attractive in invest in the recycling process rather than allow for venting the waste CO2 into the atmosphere and purchasing more ethylene. Key cost calculations are summarized in the ESI† and can be used to accurately assess the technology costs for different prices of electricity and raw materials.
8. Discussion of the results
The presented conceptual design illustrates how to integrate CO2 electroreduction into an established process flowsheet and simultaneously satisfy the EO manufacturing constraints. We showcase that CO2R integration enables to increase the overall mass efficiency of ethylene conversion, being the key bottleneck in EO production plants40,80 and in many other bulk chemicals production processes.81 On-site generation of ethylene facilitates logistic efforts and provides a strategy to respond to highly fluctuating ethylene prices.
In contrast to stand-alone CO2R plants, our design does not rely on CO2 separation or purchase cost, as a high-purity CO2 stream is already available at EO plants. In a recent review,82 de Luna et al. highlight the dependence of CO2R on the maturity of carbon capture technologies, hence deployment-wise it is of crucial importance to remove this bottleneck. To further improve CO2R economics, we optimally integrate key CO2R products both on cathode and on anode side and reduce necessary downstream processing operations. The emerging CO2 electroreduction technology is applied on large-scale in the most simplified manner, in an environment matching the need for CO2R feed and products at the same place and time.
As industrial-scale CO2 electroreduction is an emerging technology, the developed process model is based on several assumptions and analogies derived from similar commercialized units. Consequently, successful implementation of the process requires first further stride to ensure long-term operational stability of CO2R units and high selectivity under industrially relevant conversion (>50%). Recently published experimental reports demonstrate significant progress in the field and that the technology benchmarks used in this study (faradaic efficiency, cell voltage, current density) are achievable on a short-time scale.3,22,83 Nevertheless, a targeted experimental investigation is necessary for a pilot-plant scale CO2R unit to demonstrate a stable reactor scale-up, engineer the thermal effects and scrutinize the process sensitivity to minor impurities present in the recycled gases. The stability of the catalyst is assumed here is similar to the water electrolysis systems, what requires maintaining the selectivity of the catalyst during the time approximately 30 times longer than currently demonstrated in the laboratory, which seems a plausible improvement to achieve in a scaled-up demonstration.
Though the CO2 electroreduction system considered here does not produce sulphur and acetylene, being well known poisons to the silver catalyst used in EO production,33 other impurities like e.g. CO could potentially have an impact on the lifetime of the EO catalyst. We investigated literature reports for other chemical reactions that use silver catalysts and available reports show no major CO poisoning effect, despite high concentrations used.84 Nevertheless, further experimental validation will be necessary to confirm our assumptions.
To identify most promising techno-economic scenarios for the deployment of the CO2 recycling process, sensitivity analysis for both investment and operational cost is presented. Throughout the maximum use of existing infrastructure, the investment costs are reduced to mainly the cost of CO2R stack. The stack price is complex to evaluate with high accuracy given the currently available data, and is likely to be higher for the very first large scale CO2 electrolysis project and decrease along with the growing market and accumulated experience. Recent analysis by National Renewable Energy Laboratory has shown 2.5 times stack cost reduction while increasing the production of PEM electrolyzers from 10 to 50000 units annually.85 Thus, we believe that upon successful scale-up, projected here ROI will be a plausible scenario.
As the ROI is demonstrated not to be dependent on the achieved conversion, the process has a potential to be first implemented within smaller scale electroreduction reactors and gradually increase the conversion scale in parallel to accumulating the large scale processing experience.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that in case of integrated CO2R units, the dependence of the investment costs on the applied current density is significantly higher than for stand-alone CO2R plants.19 Therefore, significant reduction of investment costs will be possible if further strides are made to demonstrate selective CO2R operation under current densities higher than considered in this study.
The operational costs are primary a function of the electricity and ethylene prices. From carbon abatement perspective, the recycling process should operate with low-carbon energy sources. Recently renewable electricity is being available at more attractive prices: wind power purchase dropped below 0.02 $ per kWh,86 utility-scale photovoltaic solar dropped the cost by almost 80% between 2000 and 2017 and further reduction is foreseen in close future.87 Availability of such low cost sources of carbon-neutral energy enables our process to operate in an economically viable way regardless of ethylene price and applied CO2 levies policy. Importantly, as our technology operates as an add-on to the existing production process, the CO2 recycling does not have to operate continuously and can be activated only upon the availability of the renewable energy.
In addition to the economic benefit of integration of renewable resources, the constant and long-term electricity requirements created by the proposed CO2 recycling process support establishing new fixed-price contracts and penetration of renewable energy into the electricity supply mix.88 The concept and economics of using renewable electricity for cycling CO2 in the chemical industry are increasingly being discussed, with different configurations of the future combined electricity-chemical manufacturing system being presented.18,82,88–90 Large-scale deployment of power-to-chemicals concept is being considered in the long-term action catalogue of German Enquete Commission, identifying electrochemical processes as key contributors to sustainable chemistry.91 Our recycling process can meaningfully contribute to this strategic transition within the chemical industry sector.
To connect our results to the scale of worldwide EO manufacturing, we calculated the required electrode area for different capacities of EO plants (from 5 to ca. 400 kt of EO annually), varying from our case study. Intriguingly, Fig. 7 shows that we can relate the scale of electrodes necessary for such production to the existing industrial examples of other electrolysis unit. A PEM electrolyzer of 167 m2 was reported,55 which would be roughly the scale necessary to integrate CO2R based recycling for a 5 kt per annum small-scale on demand EO plant. However, majority of EO plants operate on scales of 100 kt per annum and higher. A 345 kt per annum plant such BASF EO unit in Ludwigshafen (Germany) would require over 19000 m2; this may seem large, though the existing water electrolyzers or Chlor-Alkali Plants do operate at even higher scale (up to 37500 m2). In recent review, Smith et al.55 analyse the power to fuel system on a scale capable of influencing the energy system and recognize that the largest electro catalytic systems are available are far smaller than required for producing for e.g. 10000 t of methanol per day, concluding that a significant gap exists between available systems and what is necessary on global scale. Significantly, our design addresses this challenge, as for retrofit purposes we require a smaller electrode area, yet we are able to limit the impact of big-scale chemicals processing by use of CO2R technologies on feasible scales. The experience from proposed CO2R deployment can be leveraged in future to even higher processing scales.
 Fig. 7  Perspective of deployment process for EO manufacturing: relationship between EO plant capacity and the required electrode area for the integrated CO2 recycling process with complete CO2 conversion. 
9. Conclusions
We show that integration of a CO2 electroconversion unit into EO manufacturing can both reduce costs and lower the carbon footprint. As our approach deploys CO2R by means of integration with an existing manufacturing process, it becomes possible to significantly reduce the capital and operational costs of the promising, yet economically challenging CO2 electroconversion technology. As a result, one of the key bottlenecks in the industrial implementation of CO2R can be significantly reduced. A sensitivity analysis incorporating electricity and ethylene prices and considering a number of CO2 tax scenarios shows payback times in the range of five years to as short as one year depending on local conditions. From a sustainability perspective, our process will drastically reduce CO2 emissions from the production of one of the most important bulk chemicals and, further, creates an economic incentive for penetration of renewable energy into the well-established bulk chemicals market.
The proposed method is potentially transformative and deployable over the full range of sizes of EO manufacturing plants, following necessary validation and optimization efforts. We show how to reduce the risk of the application of an emerging technology as we target valorising of a waste stream with minimized interruption to the existing manufacturing process. A significant advantage of this approach is that it does not compete with existing methods of making commodity chemicals but rather provides an overall strategy to retrofit existing processes on a carbon constrained market. This scheme has the potential to be adapted to other integrated processes through exploiting synergies of waste CO2 streams and other process streams, with the emerging new catalytic technologies for conversion of CO2. In the long-term, we envision that with the large-scale CO2 electrolysis experience gathered by deployment of our technology, less mature electrocatalytic systems such as e.g., ethylene oxide or propylene oxide production92 from CO2 can become feasible to deploy on a large scale, transforming the chemical industry towards a sustainable production powered with green energy.
Conflicts of interest
The authors filed patent applications US 62/987,369 and US 63/036,477 for CO2 recycling in different ethylene-based plants, including ethylene oxide, and several recycling process configurations, including impurities removal. The are no other conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme through the eCO2EP project (NRF2016-ITC001-005) operated by the Cambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore (CARES) and the Berkeley Educational Alliance for Research in Singapore (BEARS).
Notes and references

          P. Levi, Technology Roadmap The global iron and steel sector, International Energy Agency,  2019 Search PubMed .

          V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield, IPCC, 2018.
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. D. Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. García de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, A. R. Kirmani, D.-H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661 CrossRef .
A. J. Martín, G. O. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 5114 RSC .
O. G. Sánchez, Y. Y. Birdja, M. Bulut, J. Vaes, T. Breugelmans and D. Pant, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2019, 16, 47 CrossRef .
D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, K. Jiang, N. Ta, Y. Hu, J. Zeng, J. Liu and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 265 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Cave, 2019, https://netl.doe.gov/sites/default/files/netl-file/E-Cave-Opus-12-Pem-Electrolyzer-Conversion.pdf.
S. Garg, M. Li, A. Z. Weber, L. Ge, L. Li, V. Rudolph, G. Wang and T. E. Rufford, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1511 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. A. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075 Search PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 43, 631 Search PubMed .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442 RSC .
P. Jeanty, C. Scherer, E. Magori, K. Wiesner-Fleischer, O. Hinrichsen and M. Fleischer, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 454 CrossRef CAS .
B. Endrődi, E. Kecsenovity, A. Samu, F. Darvas, R. V. Jones, V. Török, A. Danyi and C. Janáky, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1770 CrossRef .
S. Malkhandi and B. S. Yeo, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2019, 26, 112 CrossRef .
O. S. Bushuyev, P. D. Luna, C. T. Dinh, L. Tao, G. Saur, J. van de Lagemaat, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2018, 2, 825 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807166 CrossRef .
S. Verma, B. Kim, H.-R. M. Jhong, S. Ma and P. J. A. Kenis, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1972 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Spurgeon and B. Kumar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1536 RSC .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 86 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Vennekoetter, R. Sengpiel and M. Wessling, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 364, 89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, K. Tran, Y. Min, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, P. D. Luna, Z. Yu, A. S. Rasouli, P. Brodersen, S. Sun, O. Voznyy, C.-S. Tan, M. Askerka, F. Che, M. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, A. Ip, Z. Ulissi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 581, 178 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Dinh, Y. C. Li and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2019, 3, 13 CrossRef .
J. B. Greenblatt, D. J. Miller, J. W. Ager, F. A. Houle and I. D. Sharp, Joule, 2018, 2, 381 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, M. R. Eden and R. Gani, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 3383 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H.-S. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193 CrossRef .

          M. Pérez-Fortes and E. Tzimas, Joint Research Centre Institute for Energy and Transport, 2016.

          S. Smith, Global and China Ethylene Oxide (EO) Industry Report, 2017–2021. Global Reports, 2017.

          S. Rebsdat and D. Mayer, Ullmann’s encyclopedia of industrial chemistry,  2012, p. 74 Search PubMed .
J. R. H. Carucci, V. Halonen, K. Eränen, J. Wärnå, S. Ojala, M. Huuhtanen, R. Keiski and T. Salmi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 10897 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Özbek and R. A. van Santen, Catal. Lett., 2013, 143, 131 Search PubMed .
S. Hernández, M. A. Farkhondehfal, F. Sastre, M. Makkee, G. Saracco and N. Russo, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2326 RSC .
S. Perathoner and G. Centi, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
K. Roh, J. H. Lee and R. Gani, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2016, 47, 250 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kongpanna, D. K. Babi, V. Pavarajarn, S. Assabumrungrat and R. Gani, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2016, 87, 125 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Barecka, M. Skiborowski and A. Górak, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2017, 123, 295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. F. Khosrowabadi Kotyk and S. W. Sheehan, Chemistry, 2018, 4, 2571 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Soo, P. Y. Chou and M. M. Bhasin, Catalyst composition for oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide, US5102848A,  1990 Search PubMed .

          R. P. Nielsen and J. H. La Rochelle, Ethylene oxide process, US4012425A,  1972 Search PubMed .

          E. Titzenthaler, Production of ethylene oxide, US3585217A,  1967 Search PubMed .

          A. M. Lauritzen, Ethylene oxide catalyst and process for the catalytic production of ethylene oxide, EP0266015B1,  1986 Search PubMed .
F. Li, A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernández, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, A. Ozden, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. McCallum, L. Tao, Z.-Q. Liang, M. Luo, X. Wang, H. Li, C. P. O’Brien, C.-S. Tan, D.-H. Nam, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T.-T. Zhuang, Y. C. Li, Z. Han, R. D. Britt, D. Sinton, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2019, 1 CrossRef .
Y. Huo, X. Peng, X. Liu, H. Li and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
R. L. Cook, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, A. Ozden, M. Golam Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-S. Tan, C. M. Gabardo, M. Luo, H. Zhou, F. Li, Y. Lum, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, M. Liu, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, P. Todorovic, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 98 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, C.-T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, P. D. Luna, T. Burdyny, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, F. P. García de Arquer, P. Yang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804867 CrossRef .
M. Liu, M. Liu, X. Wang, S. M. Kozlov, Z. Cao, P. D. Luna, H. Li, X. Qiu, K. Liu, J. Hu, C. Jia, P. Wang, H. Zhou, J. He, M. Zhong, X. Lan, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Li, A. Seifitokaldani, C. T. Dinh, H. Liang, C. Zou, D. Zhang, Y. Yang, T.-S. Chan, Y. Han, L. Cavallo, T.-K. Sham, B.-J. Hwang and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2019, 3, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Botte, Interface Magazine, 2014, 23, 49 CrossRef .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Smith, T. Burdyny, D. A. Vermaas and H. Geerlings, Joule, 2019, 3, 1822 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, W. A. Smith and T. Burdyny, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ripatti, T. R. Veltman and M. W. Kanan, Joule, 2019, 3, 240 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, J. P. Edwards, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Joule, 2019, 3, 2777 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister and M. E. McIlwain, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 623 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, Y. E. Kim, M. H. Youn, S. K. Jeong and K. T. Park, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 6999 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427 RSC .

          W. Haupin and H. Kvande in Essential Readings in Light Metals: Aluminum Reduction Technology, ed. G. Bearne, M. Dupuis and G. Tarcy, Springer International Publishing; Imprint, Springer, Cham,  2016, vol 2, p. 160 Search PubMed .
P. Mores, A. Arias, N. Scenna, J. Caballero, S. Mussati and M. Mussati, Processes, 2018, 6, 221 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Saur, T. Ramsden, B. James, W. Coella and J. Moton, US Department of Energy,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. Shiva Kumar and V. Himabindu, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 442 Search PubMed .
ARGUS, 2020, https://www.argusmedia.com/en/metals/argus-metal-prices.
NEA, Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions Measurement and Reporting Guidelines, 2018. https://www.nea.gov.sg/docs/default-source/our-services/climate-change/m-r-appendix-(ver-14-feb-2018).pdf.

          T. Bruckner, I. A. Bashmakov, Y. Mulugetta, H. Chum, A. de la Vega Navarro, J. Edmonds, A. Faaij, B. Fungtammasan, A. Garg, E. Hertwich, D. Honnery, D. Infield, M. Kainuma, S. Khennas, S. Kim, H. B. Nimir, K. Riahi, N. Strachan, R. Wiser and X. Zhang, Energy Systems, Climate Change: Mitigation of Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,  2014 Search PubMed .
N. Thonemann and A. Schulte, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 12320 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Stouten, A. Anastasopoulou, V. Hessel and Q. Wang, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 688 RSC .
Nexant-Inc. Ethylene Oxide/Ethylene Glycol, PERP Program 04/05-5, 2006.

          A. Peschel, Model-based design of optimal chemical reactors, PhD thesis, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. J. Martín and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Joule, 2019, 3, 2602 CrossRef .

          C. Ramstein, G. Dominioni and S. Ettehad, State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2019. World Bank Group Report, Washington, DC, World Bank,  2019. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/10986/31755/7/9781464814358.pdf Search PubMed .
Eddison Electric Institute, Typical Bills and Average Rates Report. Summer 2018. https://www.rockymountainpower.net/about/rar/ipc.html, 2018.

          L. Graves, 2016, https://www.thenational.ae/business/record-low-bids-submitted-for-abu-dhabi-s-350mw-solar-plant-in-sweihan-1.213135.
US Department of Energy, 2018, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/.
Independent Commodity Intelligent Services, 2019, https://www.icis.com/explore/resources/.
A. Peschel, A. Jörke, K. Sundmacher and H. Freund, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 207–208, 656 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sitter, Q. Chen and I. E. Grossmann, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2019, 25, 87–94,  DOI:10.1016/j.coche.2018.12.006 .
P. D. Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, 1–9,  DOI:10.1126/science.aav3506 .
J. C. Abanades, E. S. Rubin, M. Mazzotti and H. J. Herzog, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2491 RSC .
N. Cant, J. Catal., 1975, 37, 531 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Mayyas, M. Ruth, B. Pivovar, G. Bender and K. Wipke, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2019.

          R. Wiser and M. Bolinger, Wind Technologies Market Report, Department of Energy, 2018.
DOE, New Solar Opportunities for a New Decade. https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/sunshot-2030.
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711 RSC .
J. W. Ager and A. A. Lapkin, Science, 2018, 360, 707 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi, G. Iaquaniello and S. Perathoner, BMC Chem. Eng., 2019, 1, 6 CrossRef .
V. Hessel, Green Process Synth., 2015, 4, 257 CAS .
W. R. Leow, Y. Lum, A. Ozden, Y. Wang, D.-H. Nam, B. Chen, J. Wicks, T.-T. Zhuang, F. Li, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 368, 1228 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed calculations for CO2R unit, process streams, capital costs, investments costs and CO2 balance. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03310c‡ Reprinted from Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 123, Magda Helena Barecka, Mirko Skiborowski, Andrzej Górak, “A novel approach for process retrofitting through process intensification: ethylene oxide case study”, Pages 295–316 (2017) with permission from Elsevier.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Reduction of anthropogenic CO2 emissions is one of the most complex problems of the 21st century. Although the negative effects of continuous emissions of unbalanced quantities of CO2 to the atmosphere are widely discussed, the dependence of current economies on fossil-fuel derivated products precludes their rapid substitution; consequently, CO2 emissions from any industrial process that uses basic molecules derived from petrochemicals are, at present, inevitable. A promising pathway to break this vicious circle is to use CO2 emissions as a production feedstock and convert it back to the necessary chemical products by means of Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU) technologies. This approach has a tremendous potential to prevent CO2 emissions, nevertheless, large-scale deployment has so far not happened. Many researchers point out its unfavourable process economics as a key challenge. We have discovered an economically viable way to implement CO2 conversion through its integration into an existing chemical production process. By exploring the synergies between the established bulk chemical production processes and CO2 conversion reactors, we significantly limit the investment and operational costs, while also reducing the input of petrochemical feedstocks. The technology described in this paper has a potential for rapid introduction in chemical industries.


 	Fig. 1  Proposed pathway for CO2 recycling (R4) within EO manufacture (R1)–(R3).	 

Reactor residence time	1.9 s
Temperature	202–210 °C
Feed pressure	10 bar

Water	0.010
Ethylene	0.389
Carbon dioxide	0.050
Oxygen	0.069
Methane	0.348
Argon	0.134

 	Fig. 2  A simplified flowsheet of the optimized variant of the base case design technology for EO production33 (reprint from Barecka et al.40 with permission of Elsevier‡).	 

 	Fig. 3  A conceptual flowsheet of integration of the CO2 recycling process (Section 5) into EO manufacture (base-case design Sections 1–3 remain unchanged).	 
	(1)

CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ CO + H2O	3.8%
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− ↔ C2H4 + 4H2O	88.7%
2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2	7.5%

Current density	300 mA cm−2	Water splitting: 75–2000 mA cm−2
Chlor alkali: 700 mA cm−2
Chlor alkali: 700 mA cm−2
Cell voltage	2 V	Water splitting: 1.75–2.4 V
Chlor alkali: 3.1 V

A: 50% CO2 feed conversion
CH4	0.7	
	0.7
C2H4	2.1	
	24.9
CO	
	
	5.85
H2	
	
	11.6
H2O	114.4	
	

CO2	103.0	
	51.5
O2	
	77.15	



B: 100% CO2 feed conversion
CH4	0.7	
	0.7
C2H4	2.1	
	47.7
CO	
	
	11.7
H2	
	
	23.2
H2O	114.4	
	

CO2	103.0	
	

O2	
	154.3	

EΔH0 = ΔH0(x)/(nF)	(2)
Q = ECell − EΔH0	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

Electrolyzer unit
H2A base cost	250.25	$ per kW ($2010)
Base case electrolyzer voltage	1.75	V
Installed cost for CO2 electrolyzer (300 mA cm−2, 2 V)	919.7	$ per m2
Electrolyzer maintenance cost:	2.5	% capital per year
Total electrolyzer cost:	18.3	M$
Balance of plant	9.83	M$


Additional equipment
Compressors (M$)	0.008	M$


Operating costs
Cost of electricity	0.00124	$ per MJ
Power required for electrolyzer	4.255	M$ per year
Power required for compressors	0.12	MW
Cost of compressors operation	0.0043	M$ per year
Cost of water	0.00003	$ per mol
Water consumption	0.190	M$ per year
Maintenance cost (M$ per year)	0.46	M$ per year
Overall operating costs (M$ per year)	4.8	M$ per year
Yearly profit (M$ per year)	28.34	M$ per year
Payback time (year)	1.0	year

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the potential for reduction of CO2 emissions in EO plants for different sources of energy used for electroreduction under (a) 50% and (b) 100% CO2 conversion.	 

 	Fig. 5  Sensitivity analysis for investment cost: dependence of the overall investment cost on the cost indicator for the stack unit and the applied current density. White dotted line represents the investment cost considered in this case-study. Results are given for a system designed for maximum (100%) CO2 conversion.	 

 	Fig. 6  Relationship between electricity and ethylene prices and investment payback for different CO2 taxes scenario: (a) no CO2 tax, (b) $15 per ton of CO2, (b) 50$ per ton of CO2, (b) 130$ per ton of CO2. Grey areas represent inviable scenarios, white dot reflects current electricity and ethylene prices and resulting ROI time.	 

 	Fig. 7  Perspective of deployment process for EO manufacturing: relationship between EO plant capacity and the required electrode area for the integrated CO2 recycling process with complete CO2 conversion.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed calculations for CO2R unit, process streams, capital costs, investments costs and CO2 balance. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03310c
‡ Reprinted from Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 123, Magda Helena Barecka, Mirko Skiborowski, Andrzej Górak, “A novel approach for process retrofitting through process intensification: ethylene oxide case study”, Pages 295–316 (2017) with permission from Elsevier.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
