Theme issue: new energy materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B708980P View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B708980P
(Editorial)
J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3069-3070Theme issue: new energy materialsAbstractThis theme issue of Journal of Materials Chemistry highlights some of the latest innovative research on the chemistry of new materials for clean energy applications. M. Saiful Islam, the Guest Editor, introduces the issue and the importance of the field.One of the major challenges in the twenty-first century is the development of cleaner, sustainable sources of energy. Alternative energy systems are crucial in order to deal with the environmental threat of global warming and the declining reserves of fossil fuels. But there is no one universal solution. A range of energy conversion and storage technologies, including fuel cells, lithium batteries and solar cells, are being developed to help cut carbon emissions.The performance of these energy systems depends crucially on the properties of their component materials. Indeed, innovative materials chemistry lies at the centre of advances that have already been made in this field; an excellent example is the rechargeable lithium battery, which has helped power the revolution in portable electronics (e.g., phones, laptop computers). For the next generation of energy devices, the discovery and optimisation of high performance materials are critical to future breakthroughs.This theme issue is therefore a timely opportunity to highlight some of the latest research on new energy materials by renowned international authors, covering four major themes:• Fuel cells• Lithium-ion batteries• Solar cells• Hydrogen storageFirst, low temperature polymer-based fuel cells are being developed for zero-emission vehicles and portable electronics, while high temperature solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are suitable for heat and power generation in homes and other stationary applications.1 In this issue, contemporary work on Materials for Fuel Cells is illustrated by studies on SOFCs encompassing new anodes for direct utilisation of hydrocarbon fuels (Gorte); defect and transport properties of apatite oxide-ion conductors (Slater; Fig. 1); and layered perovskite oxides as promising cathodes (Tarancon). Topical issues on polymer-exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells are highlighted by articles on main-chain, statistically sulfonated polymers (Holdcroft); superacid ZrO2-doped composite membranes (Scrosati); and the underlying gas diffusion layer (GDL) structure (Wang; Fig. 2). Other important fuel cell systems include studies on the dehydration behaviour of the superprotonic conductor CsH2PO4 for solid acid fuel cells (Haile); and the synthesis and characterisation of mesoporous carbon as a catalyst support for direct methanol fuel cells (Chang). Fig. 1  Apatite–silicate oxide-ion conductor for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs).  Fig. 2  Liquid water distribution for a hydrophobic gas diffusion layer (GDL) in polymer-based fuel cells. Next generation lithium batteries are essential to meet the requirements of future portable consumer equipment, implantable medical devices and hybrid electric vehicles.2Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries are the subject of several contributions. The important theme of positive electrodes is explored by work on the Li2MnO3-stabilized LiMO2 layered oxides (Thackeray; Fig. 3); the local structure and cation ordering in the Li(Ni,Mn)O2 system (Grey); and the synthesis of nanocrystals and morphology control of the olivine-phosphate LiFePO4 (Nazar). Different features of negative electrodes are examined by studies on silicon-based composites (Kumta); and electrochemical lithium reactions of ZnP2 (Cho). Recent advances in developing novel materials for rechargeable lithium batteries are illustrated by an article on doping of crystalline polymers with glymes (Bruce) and the reaction of lithium with CuCr2S4 spinel (Dupont). Fig. 3  Layered Li(Ni,Mn)O2 lithium battery material. Solar cells or photovoltaics offer sources of renewable energy by harnessing the power of sunlight.3 Different aspects of Materials for Solar Cells are demonstrated by studies on size and shape control of TiO2 nanocrystallites for dye-sensitized solar cells (Frank); photoinduced electron injection in black dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 (Katoh; Fig. 4); and energy harvesting in titania-based systems (Corma). The topical theme of polymer-based solar cells is nicely illustrated by a review on routes to improved efficiency in polymer solar cells (Yang); and recent work on hybrid polymer/oxide materials for photovoltaics (Nelson). Fig. 4  Dye sensitized TiO2 films for solar cells. Hydrogen storage technology is a major challenge for the widespread use of vehicles powered by hydrogen (PEM) fuel cells.4 This important area of Materials for Hydrogen Storage is explored by a review of porous metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) (Zhou); and recent studies on a benchmark for hydrogen adsorption in MOFs (Yaghi; Fig. 5). Fig. 5  Metal-organic frameworks for hydrogen storage. I would like to thank all the authors for their efforts in submitting a rich variety of high-quality peer-reviewed contributions. I also wish to thank the editorial and production staff at the RSC for their superb assistance. Finally, I hope that this timely issue will provide a valuable reference and perspective for the research community working in this important field. Plate1  Guest Editor M. Saiful Islam, University of Bath, UK ReferencesB. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345 CrossRef CAS; A. Atkinson, S. Barnett, R. J. Gorte, J. T. S. Irvine, A. E. Mcevoy, M. Mogensen, S. C. Singhal and J. Vohs, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 17 CrossRef CAS.J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS; A. S. Arisco, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef CAS.M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS; Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. Mcculloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS.N. L. Rosi, J. Eckert, M. Eddaoudi, D. T. Vodak, J. Kim, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2003, 300, 1127 CrossRef CAS; L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353 CrossRef.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Apatite–silicate oxide-ion conductor for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs).	 

 	Fig. 2  Liquid water distribution for a hydrophobic gas diffusion layer (GDL) in polymer-based fuel cells.	 

 	Fig. 3  Layered Li(Ni,Mn)O2 lithium battery material.	 

 	Fig. 4  Dye sensitized TiO2 films for solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  Metal-organic frameworks for hydrogen storage.	 

 	Plate1  Guest Editor M. Saiful Islam, University of Bath, UK	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
