Solution processing of chalcogenide materials using thiol–amine “alkahest” solvent systems  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CC02226C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CC02226C
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4888-4902Solution processing of chalcogenide materials using thiol–amine “alkahest” solvent systems

        
          
            Carrie L. 
            McCarthy
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Richard L. 
            Brutchey
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA. E-mail: brutchey@usc.edu
Received 
      23rd March 2017
    , Accepted 18th April 2017First published on 18th April 2017AbstractMacroelectronics is a major focus in electronics research and is driven by large area applications such as flat panel displays and thin film solar cells. Innovations for these technologies, such as flexible substrates and mass production, will require efficient and affordable semiconductor processing. Low-temperature solution processing offers mild deposition methods, inexpensive processing equipment, and the possibility of high-throughput processing. In recent years, the discovery that binary “alkahest” mixtures of ethylenediamine and short chain thiols possess the ability to dissolve bulk inorganic materials to yield molecular inks has lead to the wide study of such systems and the straightforward recovery of phase pure crystalline chalcogenide thin films upon solution processing and mild annealing of the inks. In this review, we recount the work that has been done toward elucidating the scope of this method for the solution processing of inorganic materials for use in applications such as photovoltaic devices, electrocatalysts, photodetectors, thermoelectrics, and nanocrystal ligand exchange. We also take stock of the wide range of bulk materials that can be used as soluble precursors, and discuss the work that has been done to reveal the nature of the dissolved species. This method has provided a vast toolbox of over 65 bulk precursors, which can be utilized to develop new routes to functional chalcogenide materials. Future studies in this area should work toward a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the dissolution and recovery of bulk materials, as well as broadening the scope of soluble precursors and recoverable functional materials for innovative applications.
Carrie L. McCarthy
Carrie McCarthy received her BS in chemistry in 2012 from the University of Wyoming where she conducted research on organometallic catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction. She then did a research internship at BASF in Ludwigshafen, Germany. Since 2013, she has been a graduate student at the University of Southern California in Prof. Richard L. Brutchey's group. Her research is focused on developing sustainable alternatives for the processing of functional inorganic thin films including solution processing of crystalline films from bulk materials. In 2014 she was awarded an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship for her PhD work.
Richard L. Brutchey
Richard L. Brutchey received his PhD degree in 2005 from the University of California, Berkeley under the direction of T. Don Tilley and was a postdoctoral fellow with Daniel Morse from 2005–2007 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He began his independent career in 2007 at the University of Southern California, where is a Professor of Chemistry. His research focuses on the synthesis of inorganic materials and their application to sustainable energy solutions. More information about the Brutchey group can be found at http://twitter.com/brutcheygroup.
Introduction
Macroelectronics has emerged as a powerful industry in recent years with the widespread deployment of technologies such as photovoltaic (PV) cells and flat panel displays. These applications require new and innovative approaches to large area electronics, as the drivers are not compatible with microelectronic architectures and fabrication facilities and costs.1 High-quality functional thin films (thickness ca. 10 nm for thin film transistors (TFTs) and up to 2 μm for PV) are the key component of these technologies, making inexpensive and light-weight products a possibility.1 For example, although the traditionally high processing costs of conventional Si solar cells (single crystalline Si, commercial power conversion efficiency (PCE) = 16–25%, lab = 26.3% single cell, and 24.4% module) have been greatly reduced with the introduction of polycrystalline silicon modules (commercial PCE = 14–18%, lab PCE = 21.3% single cell, and 19.9% module), next generation thin film PV modules, using alternative absorber materials such as CdTe or Cu(In1−xGax)(S2−ySey) (CIGS), are making their way back into the market as their efficiencies have risen to comparable values (commercial PCEs = 7% for a-Si, 16.8% for CdTe, and single cell lab PCEs = 14% for a-Si, 22.1% for CdTe, and 22.6% for CIGS) while their material processing costs remain significantly lower.2–5 Additionally, flat panel displays are a second leading thrust in commercially available macroelectronic applications. This technology relies on uniform distributions of TFTs over a substrate to govern the electronic switching of pixels. Previous efforts toward the advancement of this industry have focused on the uniform deposition of TFT components (e.g., 10 nm thin film semiconductors, <1 μm channel widths) over a wide substrate area while retaining high electronic performance (e.g., high semiconductor mobilities and high switching frequencies), with more recent research focusing on developing lower temperature (e.g. <300 °C) semiconductor deposition methods that are compatible with versatile substrates such as plastics, foils, and paper for flexible display applications.1,6
The prospective innovations pushing the macroelectronics industry forward reach beyond displays and solar energy harvesting to include other large area technologies such as sensors, imaging devices, electronic textiles, and radio frequency tags, which cannot feasibly be brought to fruition via traditional semiconductor chip fabrication.1 Therefore, leading research in next-generation macroelectronics materials deposition and processing, in general, is focusing on two main challenges whose combined value will continue to grow the market share for thin film macroelectronics: (1) increased device efficiencies and (2) low-temperature, high-throughput processing.2,7 Using these parameters as a guiding framework, innovation in the field of thin film functional materials requires working within the space of known materials to develop techniques for optimizing thin film quality and composition, studying thin film materials properties in order to realize the ideal functionality for each material, searching for new material compositions using both theoretical and experimental approaches, and improving upon the thin film deposition techniques with the goal of low-temperature, inexpensive processing for scalable production.
Currently, some of the most widely used methods for depositing thin films include physical vapor deposition (e.g., sputter coating and thermal evaporation) and chemical vapor deposition; these two methods continue to dominate the thin film deposition market valued at $7.35 billion in 2015, and forecasted to nearly double to $14.2 billion by 2020.8 While these methods are capable of depositing very high-quality thin films, they require a large amount of energy input as a result of the ultra high vacuum and/or high temperature deposition conditions. Additionally, these deposition methods necessitate processing equipment with high capital costs, and the operational cost of the deposition methods is a major barrier for companies looking to drive the overall cost of thin film technologies down to a competitive level for the market.8 Therefore, new, cost-effective processing strategies are needed.
Solution processing is an excellent approach being developed for thin film deposition, as it is a low-energy, low-cost method. Effective solution processing would allow for high-throughput manufacturing, using inexpensive deposition equipment such as roll-to-roll or ink jet printers and spray coaters. Ideally, this could be performed under mild conditions (i.e., low temperature and ambient pressure) leading to lower overall energy use and cost. Additionally, solution processing enables the execution of new device architectures and versatile form factors like non-planar or irregular coatings and flexible substrates. Two of the most straightforward methods for solution processing involve the use of precursor inks: (1) colloidally stable nanocrystal inks and (2) molecular precursor inks. While nanocrystal inks require the initial preparation of nanocrystals, often including several washing steps prior to formulation of the solution processable ink, molecular precursor inks offer a simpler preparation requiring only the dissolution of precursors into an appropriately processable and volatile solvent. Additionally, molecular inks allow for homogeneous mixing of the precursor atoms such that a uniform thin film may be achieved.
One of the most versatile groups of functional inorganic materials available for thin film applications, both in terms of composition and functionality, are chalcogenide compounds. These materials are valuable for applications including, but not limited to, PV, thermoelectrics, TFTs, and catalysts.1,9,10 Certainly, the dissolution of bulk chalcogenide materials to give molecular inks with the ability to subsequently recover phase-pure thin films at low temperatures would be a valuable mechanism for the deposition of solution processed functional thin films. In particular, the ideal system would have the capability to dissolve a wide range of bulk materials quickly, and under benign conditions, thus building a versatile toolbox of precursor options for depositing a wide variety of functional thin films. Unfortunately, though, chalcogenides are generally insoluble in most traditional solvents, and therefore, until recently, have not been studied as direct precursors for molecular inks for thin film deposition.
To this end, Mitzi and coworkers first reported on the ability of hydrazine to dissolve bulk SnS2 and SnSe2 in the presence of excess elemental chalcogen via the mechanism of dimensional reduction. The process is facilitated by the in situ reduction of the elemental chalcogen by hydrazine to produce chalcogenide anions that subsequently begin a series of nucleophilic reactions with the bulk chalcogenide, breaking it down to eventually yield soluble molecular metal chalcogenide species. This method yields molecular inks, soluble in hydrazine and other polar solvents, that can be spin coated and thermally annealed to temperatures <300 °C to yield phase-pure SnS2−xSex thin films, the functionality of which was demonstrated in high-mobility TFT devices.11 Since that flagship report, a series of bulk chalcogenide materials have been shown to dissolve in a similar way in hydrazine (e.g., SnS2, SnSe2, In2Se3, ZnTe, In2Te3, GeS2, GeSe, GeSe2, Cu2S, Sb2Se3, Sb2S3, Sb2Te3, Bi2S3, HgSe), and many useful chalcogenides have been solution processed from these precursors (e.g., SnSe2−xSx, In2Se3, GeS2, GeSe2, Cu2S, Sb2Se3, Sb2Te3, CuInSe2, Cu(In1−xGax)Se2, CuInTe2, Ga2Se3, GeSbSe, KSb5S8, ZnTe, LiA5S2, and MoS2).11–23
The advantage of the hydrazine method for recovering functional chalcogenide thin films lies in the carbon-free and volatile nature of the solvent.23 These characteristics allow for the low-temperature volatilization of solvent molecules to proceed without the possibility of carbonaceous impurities being left behind in the thin film, thus leading to high-quality thin films. For example, thin film PV devices using hydrazine solution processed CIGS as an absorber layer (ca. 1–2 μm thick) have reported remarkable gains in PCE, from the first report in 2008 at ca. 10% PCE to the current hydrazine solution processed CIGS record of 17.3% reported in 2016.24,25 In addition, several groups have deposited high-quality semiconductor thin films (<10 nm thick) for TFT devices using this hydrazine solution processing method.11,12,15,17 Unfortunately, hydrazine is toxic and explosive, making the direct scale-up of this method for commercial applications impractical. Still, this gives an example of how a simple dissolution and recovery technique for bulk chalcogenides can be advantageous toward solution processing of functional thin films. Thus, the search has continued for solvent systems with analogous solvation power and volatility, while additionally being less toxic and safer to work with.
Our group wished to develop such an “alkahest”, or universal solvent, finding inspiration in previous literature reports. For example, Vineyard et al. reported the mechanism for the dissolution of bulk sulfur by thiol/amine mixtures, which was proposed to occur via an amine-catalyzed reaction resulting in alkyl di-, tri-, and tetrasulfides (Scheme 1).26 In this reaction, the amine deprotonates the thiol and the resulting nucleophilic thiolate reacts with the bulk sulfur (in the form of 8-membered rings) to create alkyl hydrogen polysulfide chains that further iteratively react with thiolate molecules to produce a mixture of smaller polysulfide products. Similarly, Liu et al. reported that bulk Se is soluble in a mixture of dodecanethiol and oleylamine as a result of a redox reaction where dodecanethiol reduces selenium to yield oleylamine–polyselenide complexes and didodecyldisulfide.27 They showed that while slow oxidation of the solution occurred in air to precipitate elemental selenium, this was reversible when excess dodecanethiol was added back into the solution as an antioxidant.
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the base-catalyzed thiol–sulfur reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 1967 American Chemical Society. 
In 2013, our group first reported on the remarkable ability of a binary solvent mixture of ethanedithiol (EDT) and ethylenediamine (en) to dissolve nine bulk V2VI3 chalcogenide materials at room temperature, ambient pressure, in air, and on the order of minutes (Fig. 1).28 In the following Feature Article, we will review the work that has been done to investigate this alkahest solvent system. First, we discuss the early reports that revealed the powerful and wide-ranging solvent ability of the alkahest. Next, we review the studies that have demonstrated the utility of the alkahest as a powerful tool for solution processing of thin films for applications including PV devices, electrocatalysts, flexible photodetectors, and thermoelectrics. Then, we review the studies that have focused on the chemistry of alkahest solutions, including mechanisms of dissolution and the identity of the resulting molecular solutes. Finally, we conclude by discussing future research directions toward fully understanding and utilizing this alkahest solvent system.
 Fig. 1  Nine V2VI3 semiconductor inks prepared from bulk precursors. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In our first report on the alkahest system, saturated solutions of each chalcogenide material were studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), revealing impressively high solubility limits for As2S3, As2Se3, As2Te3, Sb2S3, Sb2Se3, and Sb2Te3 (21–32 wt%), a moderate solubility limit for Bi2S3 (9.8 wt%), and lower but still significant solubility limits for the heavier Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 congeners (0.75 and 1.5 wt%, respectively).28 Furthermore, in the case of the sulfides and selenides (As2S3, As2Se3, Sb2S3, Sb2Se3, Bi2S3, Bi2Se3), upon mild thermal annealing (270–350 °C) under a nitrogen atmosphere the initial crystalline and phase-pure materials were recovered. Most significantly for the purpose of thin film applications, we demonstrated how these precursor inks could be used for solution processing by spin coating thin films from the Sb2Se3 and Bi2S3 inks onto glass and silicon substrates followed by an annealing step to yield uniform and high-quality crystalline thin films of phase-pure Sb2Se3 and Bi2S3 as observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD).
Following this initial account, we further reported on the alkahest showing the ability to dissolve bulk gray selenium and tellurium.29 The solubility limits of gray Se in a 1:4 (v/v) thiol/en mixture using ethanethiol, mercaptoethanol, or EDT were quite high (38, 40, 44 wt%, respectively) while the solubility limits for Te were a bit lower (9.3, 2.2, and 4.6 wt%, respectively). Interestingly, phase-pure Te (with no organic residues detected by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy) was recovered by simply allowing the ink to dry at room temperature. Upon mild annealing (250 °C), phase-pure gray Se was also recoverable. We showed that in the presence of dissolved Se and gentle heating at 60 °C, elemental antimony could also be incorporated into the ink, which upon thermal annealing under flowing nitrogen yielded phase-pure Sb2Se3. Under similar conditions, elemental tin was combined with dissolved Te to give an ink from which SnTe could be recovered. Thin films of both Sb2Se3 and SnTe were easily deposited on glass substrates by spin coating their respective inks followed by mild thermal annealing.
We next moved to the group IV monochalcogenide semiconductor SnS as a target for alkahest solution processing because of its attractive optoelectronic properties for PV applications. A typical ink was prepared by dissolving bulk SnS in a mixture of EDT/en under a nitrogen atmosphere at 50 °C to yield a clear pale yellow solution as shown in the image in Fig. 2a (maximum room temperature solubility of 12 wt% SnS).30 TGA and FT-IR analysis indicated the end point of decomposition at 350 °C, and powder XRD data confirmed that annealing to this temperature under flowing nitrogen facilitated recovery of phase-pure orthorhombic SnS with a composition of 52 at% Sn and 48 at% S by SEM-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX). Conversely, when annealed in the presence of air, the ink gave a mixture of SnS, SnS2, and SnO. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data of the recovered SnS matched well with expected literature values for SnS, and indicated a small contribution of surface oxidation (as evidenced by the presence of Sn4+). Diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectroscopy was used to determine both indirect (Eg,ind = 1.1 eV) and direct (Eg,dir = 1.3 eV) band gaps that are in good agreement with literature values (Fig. 2b). The ink was ideal for solution processing because the SnS films were not appreciably soluble in the alkahest at room temperature on a short timescale, so multiple coats could be layered onto an FTO/glass substrate (annealing to 350 °C after each coat) allowing for ca. 245 nm thick films of SnS to be prepared (example film shown in Fig. 2a). A final treatment at 500 °C was added to improve the film quality. The p-type transient photocurrent response of the films was measured using a Eu(NO3)3(aq) electrolyte and 1 Sun chopped illumination to demonstrate the potential use of the films for solar-energy conversion. As shown in Fig. 2c, switchable photocurrent response was observed as the light was cycled on and off (maximum photocurrent density of 170 μA cm−2 at −700 mV vs. SCE), and the stability of the films toward photodegradation was confirmed by a 3 h stability test.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of the SnS/EDT/en ink (left) and a SnS thin film on a glass substrate recovered from the SnS ink (right); (b) diffuse reflectance UV-vis-NIR spectrum and corresponding Tauc plot measured for the recovered SnS; (c) transient photocurrent response of a spin coated SnS thin film. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Further broadening the scope of alkahest chemistry, in 2015 we reported on the dissolution of ten bulk oxide materials in thiol/en (where the thiol was ethanethiol, mercaptoethanol, or EDT), all at room temperature, ambient pressure, in air, and all in less than 24 h to give inks that were stable for up to several months.31 The room temperature solubility limits of the inks were found to be 25–30 wt% for PbO, 15–20 wt% for Ag2O, CdO, Sb2O3, and Bi2O3, 10–15 wt% for ZnO and SnO, and 5–10 wt% for Cu2O, GeO2, and As2O3. Phase-pure sulfides (i.e., ZnS, Ag2S, CdS, SnS, Sb2S3, and PbS) were recovered by annealing the inks under a nitrogen atmosphere (300–375 °C), where the sulfur source was the thiol in the solvent system. In some cases, the phase of the recovered material was dependent upon which thiol was used in the ink formulation. For example, ethanethiol or mercaptoethanol/en inks of CdO and ZnO yielded phase-pure zinc blende CdS and ZnS, respectively, while EDT/en inks gave a mixture of the zinc blende and wurtzite phases when annealed to the same temperature, thus indicating that the alkahest's composition may have a kinetic effect on the recovered phase. Compound inks were prepared by mixing the metal(oid) oxide inks with dissolved selenium or tellurium. In this way, Cu2Se, ZnSe, CdSe, and Sb2Se3 were recovered after annealing an ink obtained by mixing dissolved selenium with the corresponding oxide ink. Phase-pure Ag2Se, Ag2Te, and PbTe immediately precipitated out of solution upon combining the respective oxide and chalcogen inks.
As an example of the practicality of this method, alloys relevant for PV applications with the composition Sb2Se3−xSx (confirmed by elemental analysis) were recovered by simply adjusting the nominal amount of selenium in various Sb2O3/Se compound inks. The recovered solid solutions followed Vegard's law for ideal alloys as confirmed by powder XRD, and a systematic decrease in their direct band gap from 1.63–1.22 eV with decreasing x value was observed (Fig. 3). This highlights the utility of the alkahest for facile tuning of relevant material properties. Finally, the functionality of the prepared thin films was demonstrated by the cycled on/off p-type transient photocurrent response observed for Sb2Se3 thin films on FTO/glass using a standard 3-electrode electrochemical cell and Eu(NO3)3(aq) redox mediator (maximum photocurrent density of ca. 130 μA cm−2 under 1 Sun illumination with applied bias of −700 mV vs. Ag wire).
 Fig. 3  (a) Lattice parameter and unit cell volume vs. composition for a series of Sb2Se3−xSx alloys prepared by thermally annealing Sb2O3/Se thiol/amine inks; (b) Tauc plots for the same series of alloys showing band gap tunability. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
With such a diverse toolbox of precursors, we sought to push our exploration toward the possibility of using the alkahest method to synthesize more complex materials. We reported on alkahest-solution processed CuSbS2, an earth abundant and non-toxic alternative to CIGS or CdTe for PV applications.32 Both Sb2S3 and Cu2S were dissolved in a mixture of mercaptoethanol/en to formulate an ink with slightly Cu-poor stoichiometry that yielded phase-pure orthorhombic CuSbS2 (by powder XRD) upon annealing to 400 °C under nitrogen. The band gap and visible range absorption coefficient of the recovered CuSbS2 were determined by diffuse reflectance spectroscopy to be 1.6 eV and ca. 1 × 105 cm−1, respectively, in agreement with previous reports on this material and nearly ideal for a single junction PV device. Multiple coats could be layered (with annealing at 350 °C between layers), allowing for thickness-tuned uniform thin films to be deposited. The van der Pauw method was used to determine the free hole concentration (n = 3.18 × 1019 cm−3), and resistivity (ρ = 3.04 × 10−3 Ω cm) of the films, indicating the characteristics of a heavily doped p-type semiconductor. Additionally, the hole mobility of the films was found to be 64.6 cm2 V−1 S−1, one of the highest reported for thin films of CuSbS2.
Following our initial report on the alkahest system, there have been reports on similar derivative solvent systems.43 For example, Pan's group has reported on the thiolglycolic acid/ethanolamine system, which they used to formulate inks from CuO, Ag2O, ZnO, SnO, In(OH)3, Ga(acac)3, Cd(OH)2, B2O3, Sb2O3, Bi2O3, MnO, Fe(acac)2, Ni(acac)2, Cu2O, CuCl2, Cu(Ac)2, and Cu(acac)2 precursors, and have since further developed the use of such thiolglycolic acid/amine solvent mixtures to formulate inks using various other precursors and to prepare alloyed and doped materials.33,44–47 In their initial report, they demonstrated the utility of this system by depositing thin films of CdS, SnS, CuInS2, CuSbS2, Cu(InGa)S2, and Cu2ZnSnS4. Luminescent Ag-doped ZnxCd1−xS quantum dot films were also prepared. Most notably, though, the authors reported on the first working PV device where the absorber layer was solution processed using a thiol/amine molecular ink. The specific details regarding the devices in this work will be described in detail in the following section. This work was the beginning of a steady stream of PV device reports using thiol/amine solution processing of absorber layers that continues to expand upon the functionality of thin films derived this way. The following section on PV devices will present key reports in chronological order of their publication, drawing attention to the significant findings of each. Table 1 includes ink formulations, annealing conditions, and corresponding device performances.
Table 1 Precursor ink formulations, annealing conditions, and device performances for PV devices using a thiol/amine-solution deposited absorber layer




Entry
Absorber material
Precursors
Ink formulationa
Dissolution conditionsb (temperature, time, atmosphere)
Recovery conditionsb,c (°C)
PCEd (%)

V
ocd (V)

J
scd (mA cm−2)
FFd (%)

E
gb,e (eV)
Ref.





a All ratios are vol/vol. HA = hexylamine, TA = thioglycolic acid, EA = ethanolamine, MOEt = 2-methoxyethanol.
b NA = not reported.
c Between coats temperature (°C)/selenization temperature (°C), in entry 11 the second value is a final annealing step without excess chalcogen.
d Champion device data. All devices had the typical structure, glass/Mo/absorber/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/contact electrode, except entries 9 and 10 which did not have an ITO layer, entry 7 which included a MgF2 antireflective layer, and entry 11 which had the structure FTO/CdS/CdTe/Cu/Au.
e As extrapolated from device EQE data.





1
CZTSSe
CuO, ZnO, SnO
0.6:1:2 TA/EA/MOEt
65 °C, 30 min, air
320/540
6.83
0.424
31.5
51.1
1.11

33



2
CZTSSe
Cu2O, SnO, ZnO
1:1:2 EDT/EA/MOEt, diluted with MOEt to 0.66 M total metal
RT, NA, air
320/540
7.34
0.436
34.0
49.5
1.12

34



3
CZTSe
Cu, Zn, Sn, Se
1:2 TA/EA, diluted with MOEt to 0.35 M total metal
55 °C, hours, air
320/540
8.02
0.408
33.4
58.8
1.00

35



4
CZTSSe
CuCl, ZnCl2, SnCl2, Se, S
1:4 or 1:2 propanethiol/HA
RT, 2 h, nitrogen
250/500
7.86
0.382
34.4
60.1
1.08

36



5
CIGSe
Cu, In, Ga, Se
1:10 EDT/en
60 °C, hours, argon
350/550
9.50
0.528
26.6
67.5
1.17

37



6
CZTSSe
Cu2Se, SnSe, Zn, S
1:1 EDT/HA, dilution with HA to [Sn] = 0.1
RT, hours-days, nitrogen
300/500
6.84
0.360
35.5
53.5
1.08

38



7
CZTSSe
Cu, Sn, Zn, S, Se
1:1 EDT/HA, dilution with HA to [Sn] = 0.1
RT, hours-days, nitrogen
300/500
7.02
0.390
33.0
56.1
NA

38



8
CIGSe
Cu2Se, In(OAc)3, Ga(acac)3, Se
1:10 EDT/HA
RT, overnight, nitrogen
325/500
12.2
0.560
33.3
65.4
1.17

39



9
CISe
Cu2S, In2S3
1:10 EDT/en, dilution with ethyl acetate
RT, overnight, nitrogen
310/550
8.0
0.452
31.4
56.2
1.03

40



10
CIGSe
In2S3, Cu2S, Ga, Se
1:10 EDT/en, dilution with ethyl acetate
RT, overnight, nitrogen
310/NA
9.80
0.528
30.7
60.2
1.15–1.2

41



11
CdTe
Te, CdCl2
1:3 propanethiol/en
RT, overnight, nitrogen
500/550
0.50
0.460
3.89
30
1.44

42





Photovoltaic devices
The predominant demonstration of functionality for alkahest-processed thin films has been their use as absorber layers in PV devices. This is not surprising as many chalcogenide materials are semiconductors with optimal band gaps for single junction devices, and are especially fit for thin film devices as they have direct band gaps with visible region absorption coefficients on the order of 104 cm−1.48 Thin film PV arrays based on CIGS (lab record 22.6% by ZSW), CdTe (lab record 22.1% by First Solar) and a-Si (lab record 14% by AIST) are already commercially available with efficiencies up to 16% (CdTe, vide supra).3 Kesterite materials, with reported efficiencies up to 12.6% (lab record for CZTSSe, IBM),3,49 such as CZTS, CZTSe, and CZTSSe are very promising earth abundant alternatives to CIGS and are less toxic than CdTe.
In the first devices reported by the Pan group, a CZTSSe absorber layer was prepared using a 2-methoxyethanol/thioglycolic acid/ethanolamine mixture with CuO, ZnO, and SnO as bulk precursors. After dissolution, the solution was spin coated as multiple layers on Mo/glass substrates, to produce ca. 2 μm thick CZTS films that were then selenized to incorporate selenium and facilitate grain growth. The devices were completed by chemical bath depositing a CdS layer, RF sputtering intrinsic ZnO, DC-sputtering ITO, and thermally evaporating an Al collection grid electrode to achieve a device with a PCE of 6.83%.
The Pan group followed their initial work with a second report on CZTSSe devices, this time exchanging the thioglycolic acid for EDT, and using the ternary mixture of EDT/ethanolamine/2-methoxyethanol to dissolve Cu2O, SnO, and ZnO precursors.34 To formulate the final CZTS precursor ink, the initial solution was further diluted with 2-methoxyethanol to yield a total metal concentration of 0.66 M. TGA of this ink showed the end of decomposition by 320 °C, at which temperature XRD confirmed that tetragonal CZTS was obtained. Approximately 2 μm thick CZTS thin films on Mo coated glass were obtained after eight cycles of spin coating and annealing. XRD analysis confirmed the phase purity of kesterite CZTSSe films achieved via selenization of the as-prepared CZTS films, and Raman spectroscopy further verified that no impurity phases were present. EDX analysis revealed ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn), Zn/Sn, and S/(S + Se) as 0.94, 1.22, and 0.047, respectively. XPS data suggested the valence states for Cu, Zn, and Sn were +1, +2, and +4, respectively, for both as-prepared and selenized films. Field emission-SEM (FE-SEM) images confirmed that upon selenization, the films coarsened into large grains with sizes on the order of the film thickness, as shown in Fig. 4c and d. Additionally, a smaller fine-grained layer was observed directly under this large-grained layer (Fig. 4d). While their champion device (PCE = 7.34%) showed an increased PCE from their previous report, the authors attribute the lower fill factor (FF) of 49.5% (values from literature devices possess FF ∼ 60%) to a high series resistance, R = 2.1 Ω cm2, resulting from recombination and insufficient carrier transport at the fine-grained CZTSSe sub-layer. Device EQE data indicated a band gap of 1.12 eV for the CZTSSe material, while UV-vis diffuse reflectance data gave an optical band gap of 1.03 eV.
 Fig. 4  SEM micrographs of CZTS films prepared by the method in ref. 34. (a and c) Are top-down images before and after selenization, respectively. (b and d) Are cross-sectional images before and after selenization, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bulk elemental metals were used to prepare precursor inks for the deposition of PV absorber layers in a thiol/amine solution for the first time by the Pan group in late 2014.35 Cu, Zn, and Sn metal were co-dissolved with Se in a solution of thioglycolic acid and ethanolamine. To decrease the viscosity of the solution for solution processability, they diluted the ink with 2-methoxyethanol to give a total metal concentration of ca. 0.35 M. Several coats were iteratively spin coated/annealed to yield CZTSe films with a thickness of ca. 1.6 μm. XRD analysis showed that the as-deposited films were comprised of ca. 8 nm CZTSe nanoparticles, while selenized films had increased crystallinity and grain size (also seen by SEM). Although XRD indicated phase-pure kesterite CZTSe (Fig. 5a), Raman spectroscopy was used to detect a small amount of a ZnSe impurity (251 cm−1) in addition to kesterite CZTSe (172, 196, and 234 cm−1) in the selenized films, as seen in Fig. 5b. The ink formulation targeted Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn ratios of 0.77 and 1.2, respectively, and EDX analysis of pre- and post-selenization films both showed increased ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.91 and Zn/Sn = 1.25. The as-prepared films contained a small amount of sulfur from the decomposed thioglycolic acid, but after selenization no sulfur remained in the material (within the detection limits of EDX analysis), and XPS verified the expected valence states of Cu1+, Zn2+, Sn4+, and Se2−. SEM/EDX line scans of the selenized films show a ca. 1 μm-thick large-grained layer on top of an ca. 850 nm-thick carbon-rich fine-grained layer, consistent with other reports on solution processed CZTS/Se films.33,34,50,51 Devices with a standard CZTS/Se structure were fabricated, with an average PCE of 7.7% and champion PCE of 8.0%.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD diffractograms of as-prepared (red) and selenized (black) CZTSe thin films prepared using a Cu/Zn/Sn/Se-based ink on Mo substrates; (b) Raman spectrum of selenized CZTSe thin film showing an additional peak associated with a ZnSe impurity at 251 cm−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
As an extension of the original alkahest system, various mono- or dithiols with primary monoamines and/or diamines can also be utilized in binary solvent mixtures to formulate molecular inks, though it is important to keep in mind the need for a mixture with sufficient volatility for low-temperature recovery of the desired material. The Agrawal group demonstrated the solubility of several metal precursors (e.g., Zn, ZnO, Zn(OAc)2, Cu2O, Cu(OAc)2, CuCl2, Cu(acac)2, and Sn(acac)2Cl2) in such solutions.36 They used propanethiol and hexylamine to make a CZTSSe precursor ink by combining separate solutions of CuCl + ZnCl2 + SnCl2 and Se + S. The resulting inks were spin cast in multiple coats followed by selenization to give high quality ca. 1 μm thick CZTSSe films as observed by SEM. Similar to our previous finding that the identity of the thiol in the alkahest formulation could affect the recovered phase of the chalcogenide, when propanethiol and butylamine, instead of hexylamine, were used in the ink formulation, wurtzite phase CZTS was obtained with low temperature annealing. Selenization converted the material to the kesterite phase, however these films gave lower device performances compared to the propanethiol/hexylamine-processed films as a result of the observed pinholes formed during the wurtzite to kesterite phase transition. Variation in Cu content in chalcogenide materials is known to affect defect densities.52 The effect was studied by varying the concentration of Cu in the precursor ink, which allowed for simple tuning of the Cu content in the final selenized films such that an optimum formulation of Cu/Sn = 1.53 was reached, leading to a CZTSSe film with a band gap of 1.08 eV and a champion device efficiency of 7.9%. Such a simple yet effective ink modification once again exemplifies the versatility of this method for fine-tuning material properties to affect application optimization.
The first report of a solution processed purely selenide CIGSe device (and first alkahest-processed chalcopyrite-type device) was published by the Pan group in 2015.37 They utilized the EDT/en system to simultaneously dissolve elemental Cu, In, Ga, and Se at 60 °C to formulate a precursor ink that could be used at room temperature to spin coat CIGSe thin films. While Cu and In were soluble on their own within ca. 20 min, it was found that elemental Ga was not, and that it required the presence of Se for dissolution to occur. Nine iterations of spin casting/annealing followed by selenization to improve film quality yielded CIGSe films with a bilayer structure of ca. 600 nm-thick large grains on top of a fine-grained layer (Fig. 6d). These absorber layers were integrated into a typical CIGS device architecture to achieve a champion device efficiency of 9.5% with VOC = 0.53 V. These device parameters are comparable to the reported PCE (10.3%) and VOC (0.61 V) for the highest efficiency hydrazine-processed CIGSe device at the time (without Sb-doping), and in fact the JSC and FF are higher for the thiol/amine processed device.24 The lower overall performance of the thiol/amine device may be attributed to charge recombination occurring at the fine-grained carbon-containing CIGSe layer below the coarsened larger grains remaining after selenization (which is not observed in the hydrazine based device). Subsequent work has been done to optimize the selenization process in order to avoid such fine-grained layers.53
 Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of CIGSe thin films prepared from a Cu/In/Ga/Se EDT/en ink, showing top-views of (a) an as-prepared CIGSe film, and (b) a selenized CIGSe film, and cross-sectional views of (c) an as-prepared CIGSe film and (d) a final CIGSe device. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In Agrawal and co-workers' second report using the thiol/amine dissolution chemistry, they demonstrated the dissolution of several bulk chalcogenides (including, for the first time CuS, CuSe, and SnSe), as well as elemental metal precursors (Cu, Zn, Sn, and In) in binary mixtures of EDT and primary amines (butylamine and hexylamine) at room temperature.38 The inks were stable for months with solubility limits ranging from 0.3–0.78 M. In this work, the authors present the first example of recovering a binary chalcogenide material from an alkahest ink where the only precursor is an elemental metal. ZnS (mixed phase zinc blende/wurtzite) films were recovered (300 °C) from an ink containing Zn as the only precursor, using EDT as a sulfur source. Additional thin films of phase-pure CuS and SnS (from their corresponding bulk powders) as well as CTSSe, CZTS, and CZTSSe were deposited by spin coating their respective precursor inks followed by thermal annealing to 300 °C. Two different precursor inks were used to deposit CZTSSe films for PV devices, the first consisting of dissolved Cu2Se, SnSe, Zn, S and Se, and the second consisting of purely elemental components of Cu, Sn, Zn, S, and Se. STEM-HAADF imaging was used to investigate an as-deposited film made from the first ink (annealed to 300 °C). The results clearly show layers formed by multiple coats of ink, comprised of in situ formed nanoparticles (<5 nm). A post-annealing selenization step was used to facilitate grain growth for both types of films, after which a large grain/fine grain bilayer was observed as in previous examples (vide supra).34,35 Both inks resulted in devices with similar PCEs (i.e., 6.84% for the first ink and 7.02% for the second, purely elemental precursor ink).
Next, the Agrawal group reported on the dissolution of non-chalcogenide precursors (i.e., Cu(OAc)2, In(OAc)3, Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, Ga(acac)3 CuCl, InCl3, GaCl3, and GaI3) in a mixture of EDT or propanethiol and hexylamine at room temperature.39 They also found that Cu2Se and In2Se3 were only soluble if the dithiol was used in the mixture and not when propanethiol was used. The authors set out to use these precursors to formulate an ink to solution process high quality, sulfur-depleted CIGSe films for PV devices. XRD and Raman spectroscopy confirmed the recovery of CIGSe, with no sign of a sulfide CIGS phase, after thermal annealing and selenization of an ink using Cu2Se, In(OAc)3, Ga(acac)3, and Se as precursors. They achieved a relatively high-efficiency ultra thin (520 nm) CIGSe device (PCE = 10.3%); however, several observations lead the authors to a final optimized preparation method for (thicker) absorber layer devices: (1) they observed that while increased annealing temperature and time facilitated more complete incorporation of Cu, these conditions also lead to higher crystallinity of the as-deposited CIGSSe films that, in general, tend not to coarsen into large grains during the selenization process. (2) The as-deposited film appeared to be fairly porous, so a soaking procedure prior to selenization was developed to address this. The as-deposited films were soaked in an EDT/hexylamine solution containing only the cation (i.e., Cu, In, Ga, and no Se) precursors for 10 min, followed by drying at 300 °C. This helped prevent a sandwiched fine-grained layer from forming within the CIGSSe films during selenization, however, they could not eliminate a thinner, fine-grained layer toward the bottom of the films. The authors postulated that the soaking step served to decrease the porosity of the as-deposited layer, such that during selenization less liquid Se was able to intercalate to the bottom of the CIGSSe layer to nucleate grain growth. (3) When chloride salts were used as precursors for the inks, the annealed films were always Ga-poor due to the formation and subsequent low-temperature volatilization of GaCl3. After optimization based on these observations, their most successful method was to use an ink formulation with a precursor ratio of Cu/In/Ga/Se = 0.95:0.7:0.3:2.6. Multiple coats (annealing to 325 °C between layers) of the ink followed by the cation solution soaking/drying step and selenization gave a 1.1 μm-thick film (<100 nm fine grain layer) with a composition of Cu0.91In0.70Ga0.30Se2.05 by SEM-EDX. Such films gave devices with an average PCE of 11.8% (champion 12.2%).
Soon after, Bowers and coworkers also studied as-deposited chalcopyrite absorber film morphology as a key factor in increasing device performance.40 By utilizing spray pyrolysis instead of spin coating to deposit CuIn(S,Se)2 (CIS) precursor inks, they showed that selenization of denser, as-deposited films is advantageous toward obtaining large grained absorber films. They spray coated mixtures of Cu2S and In2S3 dissolved in EDT/en onto Mo-coated glass at 310 °C in air to yield CIS precursor films. They compared two selenization techniques, the first in a tube furnace and the second in a rapid thermal processing (RTP) oven, and determined that the RTP oven facilitated faster temperature ramping leading to a thinner MoSe2 layer, and thus a lower series resistance and improved fill factor when compared to the tube furnace-selenized film. Upon selenization using an RTP oven, the majority of the sulfur in the films was displaced by selenium to give a single phase of CISe with a band gap of 1.03 eV. Device efficiencies up to 8% PCE were achieved.
The Bowers group followed this work with a report in which they utilize the straightforward compositional tunability of the alkahest method to study the effects of varying Ga content in CIGSSe-based devices.41 Individual solutions of In2S3, Cu2S, and Ga + Se in EDT/en were prepared, combined in the desired Cu-poor stoichiometric ratio, and diluted with ethyl acetate to form the precursor ink. The films were deposited by spray coating the ink onto a Mo–glass substrate held at 310 °C with 90 s allotted for drying in between layers. They varied the nominal precursor inks to aim for compositions of Cu0.9In1−xGaxSe2 with x = 0, 0.1 (0.08), 0.2 (0.19), 0.3 (0.28), and 0.4 (0.39), where the value in parenthesis is the measured composition in the selenized film by EDX. Interestingly, the selenized films retained nearly the same Cu content as was initially used in the precursor ink formulation, which is different than the loss of Cu observed by Agrawal and coworkers in their report where spin coating was used to deposit thiol/amine CIGSSe precursor inks.39 The authors attribute the retention of Cu to a lack of layer re-dissolution in the case of spray deposition as opposed to spin coating (in agreement with the Agrawal group's findings). Thus, the effect of layer re-dissolution by the solvent system is a key consideration when targeting specific compositions of spin-cast thin films. Characterization by XRD and Raman indicated that phase-pure alloys are achieved in all cases, except where x = 0, in which case there appeared to be phase segregation (CuInS2, CuIn5S8, and Cu2−xS). The selenized CIGSe films were incorporated into devices that gave EQE spectra with systematic blue-shifting onsets as the Ga content was increased, as expected for the higher band gap materials. A champion PCE of 9.8% was achieved for a device where the CIGSe absorber layer had a graded band gap prepared by decreasing the Ga content in the ink as subsequent layers were deposited.
Recently, the Agrawal group has expanded upon the use of alkahest solution processing of absorber layers to include CdTe.42 In this work, an ink containing Te and CdCl2 in a mixture of propanethiol/en was spin coated onto a CdS-coated FTO–glass substrate followed by thermal annealing on a hot plate at 500 °C. A total of 35–40 coats were required to achieve a 1.5 μm-thick film. While these as-prepared films are mainly CdTe, XRD verified that a final annealing step in an evacuated ampoule at 550 °C for 30 min is required to remove Te and other impurities. Notably, in contrast to sulfide and selenide films that require the presence of their respective chalcogen atmosphere for grain growth, the final CdTe films consist of micron-sized grains without a Te atmosphere in the final annealing step. In fact, when a Te atmosphere was used, the authors observed Te-rich films, whereas SEM-EDX analysis revealed a Te/Cd ratio of ca. 1:1 before and after the final annealing step without a Te atmosphere. The final films contained a small amount of S and Cl, with slight shifts of XRD peaks to higher 2θ values indicating that the sulfur incorporation was uniform throughout the film. It was concluded that the source of the sulfur was due to reaction with the thiol as well as partial dissolution of the CdS layer. Carbon was also present in the annealed films, though a bilayer morphology (as reported for the CZTS and CIGS/Se films, vide supra) was not observed.34–40 For device fabrication, the films were annealed in air after every five coats to incorporate oxygen in the growth process (this has been beneficial for CdTe devices made by other techniques),54 and the final films were finished with a nitric-phosphoric acid etch. Poor rectifying behavior and low device efficiencies (0.5% PCE) were observed and attributed to several factors including high recombination and shunting stemming from consumption of the CdS layer and the presence of C, Cl, and S impurities.
Electrocatalysts
While most examples using the alkahest chemistry toward fabrication of PV devices involve the deposition of absorber layers, in 2015 Liu et al. utilized the method to deposit efficient transition metal chalcogenide thin film counter electrodes (CEs) for sensitized solar cells.55 Tetragonal FeSe, monoclinic Cu1.9S, and monoclinic Cu2Se precursors were dissolved in EDT/en solutions at 60 °C for ca. 5 h to yield the precursor inks. Notably, after annealing the inks to 330 °C, new phases and/or stoichiometries (orthorhombic FeSe2, hexagonal Cu1.8S, and hexagonal CuSe) were recovered, as observed by XRD, which the authors suggest is either due to partial oxidation as the inks were prepared in air, or due to partial evaporation of the metal during the annealing step. Counter electrodes were made by drop casting the inks on FTO/glass substrates followed by annealing to yield ≥25 μm thick microstructured films (Fig. 7a–c) with high specific surface areas (22.5–29.3 m2 g−1). Cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and Tafel polarization studies were used to investigate the electrodes' ability to facilitate the reduction of either triiodide (for FeSe2) or polysulfide (for Cu1.8S and CuSe). CV (Fig. 7f) and EIS data showed that the FeSe2 electrode had higher activity than Pt toward reduction of triiodide with higher peak currents, lower charge transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and a larger diffusion coefficient. Accordingly, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) utilizing the FeSe2 CEs had higher efficiencies (avg. 9.0%) than those with Pt CEs (avg. 8.4%). To investigate the catalytic properties of the CuSe and Cu1.8S CEs compared to Pt, CdSe-quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) with polysulfide electrolyte were prepared using CuSe, Cu1.8S, and Pt CEs. EIS measurements on the devices indicated that those having CuSe and Cu1.8S CEs generate much lower charge transfer resistances for reduction of polysulfide compared to Pt. Additionally, as seen in the CV plot in Fig. 7g, current densities in the reduction zone were greatest for the CuSe CEs (i.e., 8 to 10 times greater than for Pt), indicating the impressive catalytic activity of the recovered CuSe for the reduction of polysulfide. Reproducibility and stability of the CEs were verified by observation of comparable results when comparing different batches (including recycled CE materials) and over multiple cycles.
 Fig. 7  (a–d) SEM images of recovered (a) FeSe2, (b) Cu1.8S, (c) CuSe, and (d) CoSe2 materials, showing nanostructured morphologies; (e) photographs of precursor inks; (f) CV curves for FeSe2 and Pt electrodes where Ox′ and Red′ correspond to the iodide/triiodide redox species; (g) CV curves for Cu1.8S, CuSe, and Pt electrodes in a polysulfide electrolyte; (h) polarization scans of CoSe2 thin films on HOPG substrates showing better surface utilization for thinner films. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Broadening the scope of solution processing using the alkahest method has not only lead to new solution-processable materials, but it has also inspired exploration into new applications. For instance, in 2016 we used Co(OH)2 and gray Se to prepare a precursor ink for the deposition of marcasite-type CoSe2 that could be used as a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) electrocatalyst.56Fig. 7d shows the nanostructured morphology of the recovered phase-pure CoSe2 material. We showed that multiple coats of the ink (annealed to 350 °C between coats) could be used to control the thickness of CoSe2 on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrates. Electrocatalytic HER activity studies were performed in 0.5 M aqueous H2SO4 solutions for films of differing thicknesses. The Faradaic efficiency for H2 production for all films was >99%, and an 8 h stability test showed that the films were indeed robust. Polarization curves (Fig. 7h, as-measured traces are dotted) revealed that although all of the films had the same onset potential as determined from Tafel plots (−117 mV vs. RHE), the overpotential required to reach 10 mA cm2 (η10mAcm−2; e.g., −272 mV vs. RHE for a 391 nm thick film) increased with film thickness as a result of mass transport-dominated HER at higher overpotentials. Electrochemically active surface areas for the films (determined by CV double-layer capacitance measurements) were used to normalize the polarization curves and η10mAcm−2 values (Fig. 7h, normalized traces are bolded), which revealed that thicker films had poor surface utilization due to diffusion-limited current, and thus, thinner films were most efficient. The practicality of the alkahest molecular ink method is demonstrated in this work as it facilitates the straightforward tuning of film properties (such as film thickness) that can be optimized to most effectively utilize a catalyst.
Flexible substrates for photodetectors
Flexible polyimide substrates were used in Hasan et al.'s recent work to construct flexible photodetectors based on alkahest-processed Sb2Se3 nanowire thin films.57 While previous reports on Sb2Se3 nanowire photodetectors required separate steps for the nanowire synthesis and deposition (separated by several work up steps), the morphology of spin-cast Sb2Se3 thin films could be tuned from nanowires to nano-grains by simply changing the ratio of elemental Sb and Se in a mercaptoethanol/en ink.58,59 A Sb/Se ratio of 1:3 yielded 0.1–1.2 μm long nanowires with 100–300 nm diameters, while a lower ratio (1:1.6) resulted in nano-grained morphology. The recovered nanowires were single-crystalline orthorhombic Sb2Se3 as observed by phase-contrast high-resolution TEM and by selected-area electron diffraction, with further corroboration by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction of the thin films. Elemental analysis and mapping indicated that Sb and Se were uniformly distributed throughout the nanowires and were present in the expected stoichiometric ratio for Sb2Se3. XPS and Raman spectroscopy data showed the presence of Sb2O3 in the films, which the authors attributed to storing the films in air. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy was used to generate a Tauc plot from which the direct band gap of the Sb2Se3 films was extrapolated as 1.12 eV. Flexible photodetectors were constructed by spin-coating the Sb2Se3 precursor ink onto polyimide substrates and annealing to 350 °C for 5 min. The flexible photodetectors showed response (24 ms) and recovery (9 ms) times that were two orders of magnitude smaller than previously reported Sb2Se3-nanowire photodetectors. Optical simulation results suggest that tuning the size of the nanowires (by adjusting the precursor ratio or annealing conditions), could result in optimization of broadband performance, or alternatively that spectrally selective detection may be achievable. The mechanical stability of the photodetectors was confirmed with no significant change in photoresponse observed after 40 bending cycles over a radius of 10 mm. This report showcases a strong example of how the alkahest method can be paired with versatile flexible substrates to fabricate highly functional thin films with morphology control for optoelectronic applications.
Thermoelectric materials
Many binary metal chalcogenides (e.g., Cu2−xE, Bi2E3, PbE, SnE, where E = S, Se, or Te), as well as alloys thereof, are excellent thermoelectric materials.60 Although several of these materials were prepared using the alkahest method in early reports (e.g., PbTe, Bi2Te3, SnS, etc., vide supra), it was not until recently that Ma et al. reported measuring the thermoelectric properties of an alkahest-prepared material.61 They investigated Cu2−xSeyS1−y and Ag-doped Cu2−xSeyS1−y thin films (ca. 60–90 nm thick) prepared by spin coating inks consisting of Cu2Se, Cu2S, and Ag2O as precursors in EDT/en mixtures, followed by annealing for at least 30 min to various temperatures above 300 °C. Thermal recovery of Cu2Se inks resulted in stoichiometries ranging from Cu1.78Se0.69S0.31 to Cu1.94Se0.65S0.35 with increasing annealing temperature from 310 to 390 °C. The change in composition was accompanied by an increase in Seebeck coefficient from 26 to 34 μV K−1 and decrease in electrical conductivity from 1380 to 890 Ω−1 cm−1, while the thermal conductivity remained constant at ca. 0.6 W m−1 K−1. These systematic changes with temperature were attributed a decrease in Cu vacancies (which leave holes), and thus a decrease in electrical conductivity and corresponding increase in Seebeck coefficient. Utilizing Cu2S or a mixture of Cu2Se + Cu2S as precursors allowed for the recovery of Cu2−xSeyS1−y alloys with a constant near-zero value of x and tunable value of y. XRD analysis of recovered bulk powder samples revealed that inks containing Cu2Se as the only precursor gave a mixture of monoclinic and cubic Cu2−xSeyS1−y, while Cu2S inks gave tetragonal Cu2−xS and inks utilizing mixtures of Cu2S + Cu2Se as precursors yielded a mixture of Cu2−xS and Cu2−xSe phases with signs of alloying. With decreasing Se/S ratio, the average Seebeck coefficient increased from 29 to 83 μV K−1 and the average electrical conductivity decreased from 1163 to 163 Ω−1 cm−1. Ag-doped Cu2−xSeyS1−y films prepared at 350 °C had an average Seebeck coefficient of 52 μV K−1 (80% increase over non-doped samples) despite the larger number of Cu vacancies and higher Se/S ratio, both shown to decrease the Seebeck coefficient in the case of the undoped samples. The Ag-doped films exhibited thermal conductivities 30% lower than the undoped films. This work nicely presents an example of how different approaches can be facilitated (utilizing different precursors or doping) within the alkahest solution processing method to engineer electronic and thermal conductivities as well as overall thermoelectric properties of a given material.
Ligands for colloidal nanocrystals
In addition to solution processing of functional chalcogenide thin films, the chemistry of the molecular inks themselves can be an interesting platform for materials chemistry. An example of this can be seen in Talapin's work using metal chalcogenide complexes (MCCs), prepared by dissolution of bulk chalcogenides with excess chalcogen in hydrazine, as strongly binding ligands for semiconductor nanocrystals. A simple phase-transfer ligand exchange can be used to facilitate the exchange of native long-chain organic ligands for MCCs on various colloidal nanocrystal platforms. Upon mild thermal annealing, the MCC ligands are converted into amorphous or crystalline chalcogenide intermingled with the nanocrystals. Since there is no source of nonvolatile carbon species, this method allows for clean deposition of all-inorganic nanocrystalline thin films within an electronic-grade chalcogenide network. Additionally, replacing the bulky organic native ligands allows for closer nanocrystal spatial coupling and enhanced electronic coupling between adjacent particles. For example, when dodecanethiol ligands were replaced with Sn2S64− MCC ligands, the conductivity of corresponding Au nanocrystal solids was increased by ca. 11 orders of magnitude.62 This method has been successfully used to cap many compositions and structures of nanocrystals with Sn2S64− ligands (e.g., CdSe, CdTe, CdS, Bi2S3, Au, Pd) and also works to cap CdSe nanocrystals with various MCC ligands (e.g., Sn2Se64−, In2Se42−, In2Te3, Ga2Se3, CuInSe3, ZnTe, HgSe22−, Sb2Se3). Unfortunately, as discussed previously, working with hydrazine presents a safety and practicality issue that may make this method prohibitive to scale.
Drawing on the similarities we found between the hydrazine dissolution method and the alkahest method regarding their wide ranging solvent power, we investigated the nature of dissolved Sb2S3 in mercaptoethanol/en as a model system for phase-transfer ligand exchange to install the dissolved Sb2S3 species onto CdSe nanocrystals.63 By combining several analytical techniques (inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES), TGA, electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy (ESI-MS), Raman and FT-IR spectroscopies), we were able to deduce the structure of the dissolved species as a mixture of molecular stibanates containing either one or two antimony atoms coordinated by deprotonated mercaptoethanol and counterbalanced in charge by protonated en ligands. Ligand exchange of native stearate-bound CdSe nanocrystals was complete within 5 min of stirring with a solution of molecular stibanates. Zeta potential measurements indicated that the negatively charged surface ligands provided electrostatic colloidal stability for extended periods (>1 month). Additionally, as shown in Fig. 8a and b, stibanate ligands could be installed on CdS/CdSe core/shell, and Pt nanocrystals to yield colloidally stable suspensions, and other chalcogenide semiconductors (As2S3, As2Se3, Sb2Se3, SnS, and ZnS) were shown to work in a similar fashion for facile ligand exchange of CdSe nanocrystals. As shown in Fig. 8c, there is no blue shift in exciton peak or scattering observable in the solution absorption spectra for the ligand-exchanged nanocrystals, indicating that the nanocrystals were not etched during the ligand exchange process and were indeed colloidally stable. Thin films of as-prepared and stibanate-capped CdSe nanocrystals were prepared by spin coating colloidal suspensions onto ITO/glass substrates. Fig. 8d shows that the stibanate-capped nanocrystal films gave much higher photocurrent densities (ca. −45 μA cm−2) than the as-prepared nanocrystal films (<2 μA cm−2) as a result of replacing the insulating native ligands. Additionally, the stibanate-capped nanocrystal films showed signs of enhanced interparticle coupling as observed by a broadened and red-shifted exciton peak in the absorption spectrum without peak sharpening in the XRD patterns.
 Fig. 8  (a) Ligand exchange of CdSe nanocrystals using various dissolved bulk inorganic materials; (b) ligand exchange of various types of nanocrystals using stibanate ligands from dissolved bulk Sb2S3; (c) solution absorption spectra of CdSe nanocrystals before and after ligand exchange with various dissolved bulk semiconductors; (d) chopped photocurrent response of as-prepared (heated to 150 °C) and ligand-exchanged (heated to 300 °C) CdSe films. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Elucidation of solvated species and dissolution mechanisms
The majority of research involving alkahest chemistry has been aimed at the design and recovery of useful chalcogenide materials in the form of thin films for relevant applications. Perhaps due the straightforward dissolution/recovery methodology, the specific chemistry of the dissolution process has not received as much attention. Granted, such studies are quite complex and require thoughtful consideration of several nuanced characteristics of the system; for example, the dissolution process is air-sensitive for some solutes, and as we showed in the case of Sb2S3 dissolution, there can be several different species present in solution, possibly in dynamic equilibrium. Additionally, ethylenediamine and most of the thiols used to formulate the solvent mixtures are classified as toxic and corrosive, therefore care needs to be taken when working with the solvent mixtures. Importantly though, in contrast to hydrazine ethylenediamine is not a carcinogen and is far less toxic. It should also be noted that the thiol/amine solvent mixtures are inherently malodorous as the short chain alkane thiol components produce strong sulfurous odors. Thus, investigation of the dissolution process for bulk precursors in this system by direct characterization of dissolved species is indeed a difficult task. However, several groups have put efforts toward understanding the mechanisms at play. In the following section we will summarize these studies (some of which are included in the application articles discussed above) to illustrate what is known about the system, and draw some connecting lines between the findings.
In our first report on the alkahest system, we studied the crystal structure of the binary EDT/en solvent mixture and found it to consist of the addition product of EDT and en with a stoichiometry of (enH+)2(EDT2−)(en), where the crystal lattice is stabilized by extensive N–H⋯S hydrogen bonding.28 The ability for the system to hydrogen bond is evidently an important factor in its solvent power toward chalcogenides, as replacing en with a bidentate tertiary amine of similar basicity (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine) results in negligible solvent power toward the V2VI3 chalcogenides. The ionic nature of the solvent system was confirmed by measuring an increase (ca. 15000×) in electrolytic conductivity upon the addition of EDT to en, while further evidence from 1H NMR and Raman spectroscopy indicate at least partial deprotonation of the thiol.29 Additionally, the strong solvent power of the EDT/en mixture seems to be associated with the 1,2-chelating ability of both the thiol and amine as binary mixtures containing a thiol/mono-amine or 1,3-chelating thiol had much poorer solvent power.
Regarding the dissolution of the V2VI3 materials, we observed that none were soluble in the absence of EDT (with the exception of As2S3 and As2Se3, which were previously known to dissolve in primary amines).64 The dissolved species appeared to be molecular rather than nanoparticulate, as the solutions were free of visible scattering and dynamic light scattering did not give evidence of any clusters greater than 1 nm. At this point, our working hypothesis for the dissolved chalcogenide species was an en-ligated thiolatochalcogenometallate anion counterbalanced by enH+. The ionic nature of this proposed species was supported by electrolytic conductivity data, where conductivity increased by a factor of ca. 1.4–1.6 upon V2VI3 dissolution relative to the solvent system on its own.
In our study of the dissolution of bulk Se and Te, we found that although the solubility limit of Se in the thiol/en mixture increases when moving from ethanethiol to mercaptoethanol to EDT, that of Te drops in the inconclusive order of ethanethiol to EDT to mercaptoethanol.291H NMR and Raman spectroscopy indicated that the Se ink was comprised of a heterogeneous mixture of Se rings/chains and species containing Se–S bonds created by a nucleophilic thiolate, whereupon addition of Se, the thiol S–H Raman band disappears. Additionally, we found that the presence of dissolved Se or Te greatly increases the solubility of elemental Sb and Sn, respectively, presumably due to increased nucleophile concentration facilitated by the dissolution of the chalcogen, similar to the mechanism functioning in the hydrazine method where excess chalcogen is reduced in situ to yield an effective nucleophile.
In our investigation of molecular stibanates as ligands for CdSe nanocrystals (vide supra), we first studied the nature of the dissolved chalcogenide species in the ink. Negative-ion ESI-MS data indicated that in a dilute Sb2S3 mercaptoethanol/en solution there are four primary stibanate species having mercaptoethanol ligands and either one or two Sb atoms. ICP-AES and combustion elemental analysis data indicated that en was also associated with the dissolved species, as excess N and C were observed in a dried sample of the ink. Further information about the dissolved stibanates gathered from FT-IR and Raman spectroscopies was compared with literature reports on relevant model species in order to support the following proposed stibanate structures: [SSb(SC2H4O)]−, [(SC2H4O)Sb(SC2H4O)]−, [(HOC2H4S)Sb(μ-S)2SbS]−, and [(HOC2H4S)Sb(μ-S)2Sb(SC2H4O)]− where each molecular stibanate is counterbalanced by enH+.
Further motivation to understand the complexities of the alkahest chemistry lead to our investigation into the dissolution of Sn, SnO, and SnS, which allowed us to utilize solution 119Sn NMR toward identifying the dissolved species.65 Added value for studying these systems was recognized in the recovery of phase-pure SnS after mild thermal annealing of all three precursor inks, which, as discussed above, is a narrow band gap semiconductor candidate for single junction PV devices. EDT/en solutions of each precursor were prepared by room temperature dissolution over 1–5 days. All three precursors gave light yellow, optically transparent solutions with identical 119Sn NMR signals at δ119Sn = 217 ppm and no JSn–Sn coupling (Fig. 9a), suggesting that all precursors give the same four-coordinate mononuclear species upon dissolution; this is supported by near identical TGA/DSC ink decomposition traces (Fig. 9b). Comparing literature reports and the observed δ119Sn, our initial hypothesis for the nature of the dissolved species was a complex akin to (EDTate)2Sn(IV). However, 119Sn NMR experiments indicated that the (EDTate)2Sn(IV) complex (as synthesized by literature methods) is easily chelated by EDT2− or en to yield six-coordinate species. Specifically, the 119Sn NMR spectrum we obtained of (EDTate)2Sn(IV) in the EDT/en solvent system gave a broad resonance at δ119Sn = −346 ppm indicative of a six-coordinate species. To resolve the oxidation state of Sn in the dissolved species we studied the 119Sn NMR spectra of EDT/en solutions containing Sn2+ and Sn4+ sources, SnCl2·2H2O (singlet at δ119Sn = 210 ppm) and SnCl4·5H2O (singlet at δ119Sn = −347 ppm), respectively. As the signal of the Sn2+ control sample had nearly the same chemical shift as the dissolved Sn, SnO, and SnS, we concluded that the solvated complex contains only Sn2+. This was further supported by the observation of a single resonance at δ119Sn = 216 ppm in the spectrum of a solution containing a 1:1 wt/wt mixture of SnCl2·2H2O and SnO in EDT/en. Lack of signals associated with ν(Sn–N) in the Raman spectra of the three tin precursor inks indicated that en does not chelate to the Sn species. Therefore, the resting hypothesis is that Sn, SnO, and SnS dissolved in EDT/en yield a four-coordinate Sn2+ species with en acting as a noncoordinating solvent and likely countercation. This was corroborated by DFT calculations modeling bis(1,2-ethanedithiolate)tin(II) in the gas phase that revealed a δ119Sn of 308 ppm, which is within the experimental range for four-coordinate Sn–thiolate complexes.
 Fig. 9  (a) 119Sn NMR spectra of dissolved SnO, SnS, and Sn, showing the same single peak at 217 ppm; (b) TGA/DSC data indicating nearly identical decomposition traces for each of the three tin-based inks. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
A noteworthy characteristic of the alkahest method is the redox chemistry that allows such a range of precursors to be utilized toward recovering a common chalcogenide material. For example, in the EDT/en solvent system, Sn0 is oxidized to the stable oxidation state of Sn2+ to yield the same solute as is given by dissolution of the SnO and SnS precursors, such that all three inks yield the same phase-pure SnS upon annealing. Other elemental precursors (e.g., Cu, Zn, In, Ga, Mg, Fe, Co, Ni, Mn and Sb, vide supra) must also go through a similar oxidation process involving the binary solvent system, in some cases requiring the presence of elemental chalcogen, to achieve appreciable dissolution.29,35,37 In the other direction, alkahest chemistry also facilitates the reduction of elemental Se and Te in the case where a countercation precursor is present so that chalcogenide materials may be recovered.29 Walker and Agrawal studied the dissolution of elemental Se in a mixture of ethanethiol and oleylamine, and using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) found diethyldisulfide and elemental Se1 and Se8 in solution, leading them to propose the mechanism shown in Scheme 2 for the dissolution of Se in a thiol/amine mixture.66
 Scheme 2  Mechanism proposed for dissolution of Se in a thiol/amine mixture. Adapted from ref. 66 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As the major motivation in the pursuit of the alkahest system was to find a system with similar wide-ranging applicability and low-temperature recovery properties as are offered by the hydrazine method, it is useful to take stock of how the two methods compare thus far. More than 65 bulk precursors have already been reported to be soluble in a thiol/amine mixture, including: Mg,35 Mn,35 MnO,33 Fe,35 FeSe,55 Fe(acac)2,33 Co,35 Co(OH)2,56 Ni,35 Ni(acac)2,33 Cu,35,37,38 CuO,33 Cu2O,31,33,34,36 CuS,38 Cu2S,32,38,40,41,53,67 Cu1.9S,55 CuSe,38 Cu2Se,38,39,55,67 CuCl2,33,36 CuCl,36,39,42 Cu(Ac)2,33 Cu(acac)2,33,36,39 Cu(OAc)2,36,39 Ag2O,31,33 Ag2S,38 Ag2Se,38 Zn,35,36,38 ZnO,31,33,34,36 ZnS,63 ZnCl2,36 Zn(OAc)2,36 CdO,31 Cd(OH)2,33 CdCl2,42 In,35,37,38 In2S3,38,40,41,67 In2Se3,38,40,41,53,67 InCl3,39 In(OH)3,33 In(acac)3,39 In(OAc)3,39 Ga,35,37,41,53 GaCl3,39 GaI3,39 Ga(acac)3,33,39 PbO,31 PbS, Sn,35,38,65 SnO,31,33,34,65 SnS,30,38,63,65 SnSe,38 SnCl2,36 Sn(acac)2Cl2,36 GeO2,31 As2O3,31 As2S3,28,63 As2Se3,28,63 As2Te3,28 Sb,29,57 Sb2O3,31,33 Sb2S3,28,32,63 Sb2Se3,28,63 Sb2Te3,28 Bi2O3,31,33 Bi2S3,28 Bi2Se3,28 Bi2Te3,28 S,38 Se,29,35,37,41,56,57 Te.29,42 This list clearly shows how numerous and wide-ranging the scope of viable precursors is for this method, though it is most definitely not all-inclusive as ongoing research continues to grow the pool of suitable soluble materials. Notably, several of the materials in this pool have been reported as insoluble in hydrazine, e.g. CdS, In2S3, and ZnS.23 The procedure for dissolution using the alkahest system (i.e., dissolution on the order of minutes to hours in most cases) is in general, less cumbersome than what is required for the hydrazine method (i.e., dissolution up to days or longer). The annealing conditions required to recover phase-pure thin film materials for devices are fairly similar for both methods with crystalline materials recoverable at 300–350 °C and higher temperatures used to obtain high quality films. For example, in the case of alkahest-processed CZTSSe devices (7–8% PCE) the absorber layers were annealed to 250–320 °C for 1–5 min between coats of ink, with final selenization steps at 500–550 °C for 10–50 min (Table 1) and the best devices using hydrazine-processed CZTSSe or CIGS absorber layers also used a 5 min low-temperature annealing step (280–340 °C) in between layers, and final annealing temperatures of 500–600 °C, though they do not require a chalcogen atmosphere (e.g., selenization).25,49
Conclusions
The necessary future work involving the alkahest chemistry will focus on studying the dissolution mechanism and resulting solvated species for various precursors aiming to gain a better understanding of the fundamental chemistry that is at play. We need to understand how this remarkable binary thiol/amine solvent mixture works to dissolve such an extensive library of bulk material precursors to yield phase-pure chalcogenides upon solution deposition and relatively mild thermal annealing. Once we have a handle on the chemistry of the system, better-focused work can be performed to solution process high quality, technologically relevant materials that may not yet by achievable by other solution processing methods over a range of applications. Additionally, with a strong understanding of how this method works, we can conceivably begin working on synthesizing new compositionally complex chalcogenides, as a practical alternative to the high-energy techniques that are most often used in investigating new materials.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation under DMR-1506189. C. L. McC. thanks the National Science Foundation for a graduate research fellowship. We also thank those co-workers that carried out the work described in this Feature Article: K. Abuyen, Dr P. Antunez, Dr J. Buckley, E. Schueller, and Dr D. Webber.
References

          D. B. Mitzi, Solution Processing of Inorganic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2008 Search PubMed .

Trends 2016 In Photovoltaic Applications, International Energy Agency, 2016.

‘Best Research-Cell Efficiencies’ Chart, National Renewable Energy Laboratory – National Center for Photovoltaics, 2016.
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 3–13 Search PubMed .
P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, W. Witte and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1897–1916 CrossRef CAS .

Global Flexible Electronics Market 2016–2020, Technavio, 2016.

Global Thin-film Semiconductor Deposition Market 2016–2020, Technavio, 2016.

          A. V. Powell and P. Vaqueiro, in Thermoelectric Materials and Devices, ed. I. Nandhakumar, N. M. White and S. Beeby, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2016, ch. 2, pp. 27–59 Search PubMed .
D. Kong, J. J. Cha, H. Wang, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3553–3558 CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, L. L. Kosbar, C. E. Murray, M. Copel and A. Afzali, Nature, 2004, 428, 299–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, M. Copel and S. J. Chey, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1285–1289 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7078–7086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 3755–3761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, M. Copel and C. E. Murray, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 926–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Milliron, D. B. Mitzi, M. Copel and C. E. Murray, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 587–590 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, S. Raoux, A. G. Schrott, M. Copel, A. Kellock and J. Jordan-Sweet, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. Raoux, R. M. Shelby and J. Jordan-Sweet, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 352–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, B. Spokoyny, J. Lee, M. Scheele, A. Weber, S. Perera, D. Landry and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6686–6695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Feser, E. M. Chan, A. Majumdar, R. A. Segalman and J. J. Urban, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2122–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Wang, J. P. Feser, X. Gu, K. M. Yu, R. A. Segalman, A. Majumdar, D. J. Milliron and J. J. Urban, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1943–1945 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3141–3158 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, M. Yuan, W. Liu, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey, V. Deline and A. G. Schrott, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. Yang, D. Liu, S. C. Tse, W. Cao, Z. Feng, S. Chen and L. Qian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3674–3681 CAS .
B. D. Vineyard, J. Org. Chem., 1967, 32, 3833–3836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Yao, L. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7207–7210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Webber and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15722–15725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Webber, J. J. Buckley, P. D. Antunez and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2498–2502 RSC .
P. D. Antunez, D. A. Torelli, F. Yang, F. A. Rabuffetti, N. S. Lewis and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5444–5446 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. McCarthy, D. H. Webber, E. C. Schueller and R. L. Brutchey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8378–8381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. McCarthy, P. Cottingham, K. Abuyen, E. C. Schueller, S. P. Culver and R. L. Brutchey, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6230–6233 RSC .
Q. Tian, G. Wang, W. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Huang and D. Pan, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3098–3103 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tian, Y. Cui, G. Wang and D. Pan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4184–4190 RSC .
Y. Yang, G. Wang, W. Zhao, Q. Tian, L. Huang and D. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 460–464 CAS .
R. Zhang, S. M. Szczepaniak, N. J. Carter, C. A. Handwerker and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2114–2120 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Q. Tian, Z. Zhou, G. Wang, Y. Meng, D. Kou, W. Zhou, D. Pan and S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19263–19267 CAS .
R. Zhang, S. Cho, D. G. Lim, X. Hu, E. A. Stach, C. A. Handwerker and R. Agrawal, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5007–5010 RSC .
X. Zhao, M. Lu, M. J. Koeper and R. Agrawal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7390–7397 CAS .
P. Arnou, M. F. A. M. van Hest, C. S. Cooper, A. V. Malkov, J. M. Walls and J. W. Bowers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11893–11897 CAS .
P. Arnou, C. S. Cooper, S. Uličná, A. Abbas, A. Eeles, L. D. Wright, A. V. Malkov, J. M. Walls and J. W. Bowers, Thin Solid Films, 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2016.10.011 .
C. K. Miskin, A. DuboisCamacho, M. O. Reese and R. Agrawal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9167–9171 RSC .
C. S. Cooper, P. Arnou, L. D. Wright, S. Uličná, J. M. Walls, A. V. Malkov and J. W. Bowers, Thin Solid Films, 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2016.12.026 .
Q. Tian, L. Huang, W. Zhao, Y. Yang, G. Wang and D. Pan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1269–1275 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Huang, S. Wei and D. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 313, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, D. Pan and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10160–10165 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Huang and D. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5308–5313 CAS .

          R. Scheer and H. Schock, Chalcogenide Photovoltaics: Physics, Technologies, and Thin Film Devices, Wiley-VHC, Weinheim, Germany,  2011 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 CrossRef .
C. K. Miskin, W. Yang, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, C. S. Joglekar, E. A. Stach and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 654–659 CAS .
Y. Qu, G. Zoppi and N. S. Beattie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 836–845 CAS .
S. Chen, A. Walsh, X. Gong and S. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1522–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Q. Fan, Q. Tian, Z. Zhou, Y. Meng, D. Kou, W. Zhou and S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13476–13481 CAS .
D. H. Rose, F. S. Hasoon, R. G. Dhere, D. S. Albin, R. M. Ribelin, X. S. Li, Y. Mahathongdy, T. A. Gessert and P. Sheldon, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1999, 7, 331–340 CAS .
F. Liu, J. Zhu, L. Hu, B. Zhang, J. Yao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6315–6323 CAS .
C. L. McCarthy, C. A. Downes, E. C. Schueller, K. Abuyen and R. L. Brutchey, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 607–611 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hasan, E. S. Arinze, A. K. Singh, V. P. Oleshko, S. Guo, A. Rani, Y. Cheng, I. Kalish, M. E. Zaghloul, M. V. Rao, N. V. Nguyen, A. Motayed, A. V. Davydov, S. M. Thon and R. Debnath, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600182 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhai, M. Ye, L. Li, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Li, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4530–4533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, W. Wang, C. Wang, T. Ding and Q. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500109 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ge, L. Zhao, D. Wu, X. Liu, B. Zhang, J. Li and J. He, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 227–239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, P. B. Vartak, P. Nagaraj and R. Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 99905–99913 RSC .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Buckley, M. J. Greaney and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6311–6317 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Chern and I. Lauks, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 6979–6982 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Buckley, C. L. McCarthy, J. Del Pilar-Albaladejo, G. Rasul and R. L. Brutchey, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 3175–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Walker and R. Agrawal, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8331–8334 RSC .
P. Arnou, C. S. Cooper, A. V. Malkov, J. W. Bowers and J. M. Walls, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 582, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Carrie L. McCarthy
	Carrie McCarthy received her BS in chemistry in 2012 from the University of Wyoming where she conducted research on organometallic catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction. She then did a research internship at BASF in Ludwigshafen, Germany. Since 2013, she has been a graduate student at the University of Southern California in Prof. Richard L. Brutchey's group. Her research is focused on developing sustainable alternatives for the processing of functional inorganic thin films including solution processing of crystalline films from bulk materials. In 2014 she was awarded an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship for her PhD work.

Richard L. Brutchey
	Richard L. Brutchey received his PhD degree in 2005 from the University of California, Berkeley under the direction of T. Don Tilley and was a postdoctoral fellow with Daniel Morse from 2005–2007 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He began his independent career in 2007 at the University of Southern California, where is a Professor of Chemistry. His research focuses on the synthesis of inorganic materials and their application to sustainable energy solutions. More information about the Brutchey group can be found at http://twitter.com/brutcheygroup.

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the base-catalyzed thiol–sulfur reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 1967 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 1  Nine V2VI3 semiconductor inks prepared from bulk precursors. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of the SnS/EDT/en ink (left) and a SnS thin film on a glass substrate recovered from the SnS ink (right); (b) diffuse reflectance UV-vis-NIR spectrum and corresponding Tauc plot measured for the recovered SnS; (c) transient photocurrent response of a spin coated SnS thin film. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Lattice parameter and unit cell volume vs. composition for a series of Sb2Se3−xSx alloys prepared by thermally annealing Sb2O3/Se thiol/amine inks; (b) Tauc plots for the same series of alloys showing band gap tunability. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 


1	CZTSSe	CuO, ZnO, SnO	0.6:1:2 TA/EA/MOEt	65 °C, 30 min, air	320/540	6.83	0.424	31.5	51.1	1.11	
33

2	CZTSSe	Cu2O, SnO, ZnO	1:1:2 EDT/EA/MOEt, diluted with MOEt to 0.66 M total metal	RT, NA, air	320/540	7.34	0.436	34.0	49.5	1.12	
34

3	CZTSe	Cu, Zn, Sn, Se	1:2 TA/EA, diluted with MOEt to 0.35 M total metal	55 °C, hours, air	320/540	8.02	0.408	33.4	58.8	1.00	
35

4	CZTSSe	CuCl, ZnCl2, SnCl2, Se, S	1:4 or 1:2 propanethiol/HA	RT, 2 h, nitrogen	250/500	7.86	0.382	34.4	60.1	1.08	
36

5	CIGSe	Cu, In, Ga, Se	1:10 EDT/en	60 °C, hours, argon	350/550	9.50	0.528	26.6	67.5	1.17	
37

6	CZTSSe	Cu2Se, SnSe, Zn, S	1:1 EDT/HA, dilution with HA to [Sn] = 0.1	RT, hours-days, nitrogen	300/500	6.84	0.360	35.5	53.5	1.08	
38

7	CZTSSe	Cu, Sn, Zn, S, Se	1:1 EDT/HA, dilution with HA to [Sn] = 0.1	RT, hours-days, nitrogen	300/500	7.02	0.390	33.0	56.1	NA	
38

8	CIGSe	Cu2Se, In(OAc)3, Ga(acac)3, Se	1:10 EDT/HA	RT, overnight, nitrogen	325/500	12.2	0.560	33.3	65.4	1.17	
39

9	CISe	Cu2S, In2S3	1:10 EDT/en, dilution with ethyl acetate	RT, overnight, nitrogen	310/550	8.0	0.452	31.4	56.2	1.03	
40

10	CIGSe	In2S3, Cu2S, Ga, Se	1:10 EDT/en, dilution with ethyl acetate	RT, overnight, nitrogen	310/NA	9.80	0.528	30.7	60.2	1.15–1.2	
41

11	CdTe	Te, CdCl2	1:3 propanethiol/en	RT, overnight, nitrogen	500/550	0.50	0.460	3.89	30	1.44	
42


 	Fig. 4  SEM micrographs of CZTS films prepared by the method in ref. 34. (a and c) Are top-down images before and after selenization, respectively. (b and d) Are cross-sectional images before and after selenization, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD diffractograms of as-prepared (red) and selenized (black) CZTSe thin films prepared using a Cu/Zn/Sn/Se-based ink on Mo substrates; (b) Raman spectrum of selenized CZTSe thin film showing an additional peak associated with a ZnSe impurity at 251 cm−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of CIGSe thin films prepared from a Cu/In/Ga/Se EDT/en ink, showing top-views of (a) an as-prepared CIGSe film, and (b) a selenized CIGSe film, and cross-sectional views of (c) an as-prepared CIGSe film and (d) a final CIGSe device. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–d) SEM images of recovered (a) FeSe2, (b) Cu1.8S, (c) CuSe, and (d) CoSe2 materials, showing nanostructured morphologies; (e) photographs of precursor inks; (f) CV curves for FeSe2 and Pt electrodes where Ox′ and Red′ correspond to the iodide/triiodide redox species; (g) CV curves for Cu1.8S, CuSe, and Pt electrodes in a polysulfide electrolyte; (h) polarization scans of CoSe2 thin films on HOPG substrates showing better surface utilization for thinner films. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Ligand exchange of CdSe nanocrystals using various dissolved bulk inorganic materials; (b) ligand exchange of various types of nanocrystals using stibanate ligands from dissolved bulk Sb2S3; (c) solution absorption spectra of CdSe nanocrystals before and after ligand exchange with various dissolved bulk semiconductors; (d) chopped photocurrent response of as-prepared (heated to 150 °C) and ligand-exchanged (heated to 300 °C) CdSe films. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) 119Sn NMR spectra of dissolved SnO, SnS, and Sn, showing the same single peak at 217 ppm; (b) TGA/DSC data indicating nearly identical decomposition traces for each of the three tin-based inks. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Mechanism proposed for dissolution of Se in a thiol/amine mixture. Adapted from ref. 66 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
