Carbon nanotube hybrid nanostructures: future generation conducting materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01717G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01717G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9347-9361Carbon nanotube hybrid nanostructures: future generation conducting materials

        
          
            Amutha 
            Chinnappan
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Chinnappan 
            Baskar
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hern 
            Kim
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Seeram 
            Ramakrishna
          
          
        
      *ab
aCenter for Nanofibers and Nanotechnology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119260. E-mail: seeram@nus.edu.sg;   Tel: +65 65162216
bGuangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration (GHMICR), Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
cTHDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India 249001
dDepartment of Energy Science and Technology, Smart Living Innovation Technology Center, Myongji University, Yongin, Gyeonggi-do 17058, Republic of Korea
Received 
      26th February 2016
    , Accepted 3rd May 2016First published on 13th May 2016AbstractThe present electronic age has seen rapid advancements in the performance and versatility of electronic devices along with a simultaneous decrease in their dimensions. Miniaturising electronic devices increases their portability and ease of handling, making them ubiquitous in the modern world. Likely developments awaiting the science and technology of next-generation conducting materials are based on CNT hybrid nanomaterials. In recent times, carbon nanotubes based hybrid nanomaterials have attracted significant attention due to their unique electronic, optical, thermal, mechanical, and chemical properties. CNT powders are incorporated in diverse commercial products ranging from rechargeable batteries, automotive parts, and sporting goods to boat hulls and many more. In this review we focus on CNT based nanocomposite materials and their applications.Dr Amutha Chinnappan is a Research Fellow at Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. She obtained her PhD in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She has completed her postdoctoral training and Research Professor in the Energy Science and Technology Department, Myongji University. She has authored more than 20 research papers in reputed international journals. Her current research interests include ionic liquids based functional nanomaterials for energy applications, biomass conversion, hydrogen generation, and green chemistry.Dr Chinnappan Baskar is an Associate Professor and Dean of the THDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Constituent Institute of Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, India. He was a former Director (Officiating) of THDC-IHET. He received his M. Sc. in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and PhD in Organic and Materials Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore. His research interests include synthetic organic chemistry, conducting polymers, green chemistry, ionic liquids, and biomass conversion. He has published several research papers in reputed international journals and conference proceedings. He has one Korean Patent to his credit. He was invited to attend and deliver lectures/seminars at international and national conferences & workshops, and faculty development programs. He has been the examiner for PhD & M. Phil theses at different universities and institutes in India. He has received the award for “Excellent Institute for Promoting Hydropower in Uttarakhand” by the CMAI Association of India. He is the Editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); author of the book Engineering Chemistry (Wiley India); co-author of Stereochemistry (Narosa Publishing House and Alpha Science International Ltd), and the co-author of the text book Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).Dr Hern Kim is a Professor in the Department of Energy Science and Technology and Director of Smart Living Innovation Technology Center, Myongji University, Republic of Korea. He has published more than 120 research papers in reputed international journals. His research interest includes synthesis of advanced materials (including nano/microcomposite particles, fibers, films, ionic liquids etc.) and their applications to a variety of fusion (energy/environment/chemical/bio/nano) technologies.Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng is the Director of the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He is a Highly Cited Researcher in Materials Science (http://www.highlycited.com). Thomson Reuters recognized him as among the World's Most Influential Scientific Minds. He is a recognized world authority in electrospun nanomaterials. He has authored 7 books and over 800 journal papers which attracted over 50000 citations and ∼105 H-index. He is an elected international fellow of academies and professional societies in Singapore, UK and USA.
Introduction
Nanomaterials are those particles that present at least one dimension in the nanometer range giving them novel and special properties. The main advantages of these materials are a high surface-to-volume ratio, easy derivatization procedures, and unique thermal, mechanical or electronic properties.1–3 Carbon-based nanomaterials, the important parts of these materials, have fascinated the scientific community since their discovery. In recent years, a large number of carbon-based nanoparticles have been investigated as sorbent materials in sample preparation, including nanodiamonds, fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphene, carbon nanofibers, carbon nanocones-disks and nanohorns, as well as their functionalized forms. The characteristic structures of carbon based nanomaterials allow them to interact with organic molecules via non-covalent forces, such as hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, electrostatic forces, van der Waals forces and hydrophobic interactions. These interactions and their hollow or layered, nanosized structures make them good candidates for use as adsorbents.4,5
In recent times, there has been much interest focusing on carbon nanotubes research due to the unique structures and physical properties of these nanomaterials, as well as their prospective applications in a wide variety of fields. Iijima6 discovered carbon nanotubes in 1991. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are big carbon molecules which have a very high length-to-diameter ratio.7 CNTs can be considered as a graphene sheet in the shape of a cylinder capped by fullerene-like structures. Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are formed by seamless roll up of single and multi-layers of graphene lamella respectively. Their reported surface areas range from 150 to 1500 m2 g−1, which is a basis for serving as good sorbents.6 Furthermore, CNTs can be easily covalently or non-covalently functionalized with different organic molecules to provide a more selective interaction with analytes.3,8,9
Carbon nanotubes possess a remarkable array of structural, mechanical and electronic properties, such as high aspect ratio, high strength and excellent current carrying capability.10 These properties have fuelled an exponential increase in the number of publications and patents on CNTs over the last decade and led to CNTs being considered as a hot topic in many areas.11 Much research has concentrated on the application of CNTs in areas such as composite materials, scanning probe microscopy, field emission, nanoelectronics and solar cell technology.12,13 Carbon nanotubes, composed entirely of sp2 bonded graphitic carbon, are found in all reduced dimensionalities including zero-dimensional fullerenes, one-dimensional CNTs, and two-dimensional graphene. With nanometer-scale dimensions, the properties of CNTs are strongly dependent on their atomic structures and interactions with other materials.14,15 Even a single nanotube is hundred times stronger and six times lighter than steel with excellent conductivity. This means a group of CNTs can make wonders, provided it should be uniformly distributed.16 Thus the future of CNTs' application lies mainly in the fabrication of technologically important materials ranging from reinforced composites to electrical sensors.17 But the large number of applications of CNT composites in electronics, optics and biomedical fields has been limited to a certain extent by a few factors. The low level of dispersion of CNTs in polar liquids arising from their tendency to aggregate because of the hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions existing in them is one important aspect to be considered in this scenario.18 There is always difficulty in dispersing CNTs using traditional methods of composite fabrication. Moreover, the volume fraction of CNTs in the composites is always very low, resulting in their low performance. One new approach in the fabrication of CNT composites is to synthesize 1D, 2D and 3D CNT structures such as CNT fibers (1D), CNT ribbons (1D), CNT films (2D) and CNT aerogel (3D) first before polymers are infiltrated into their structures. The CNT composites produced by this method give impressive performance with high CNT volume fraction.19–22 These extremely light weight materials are much stronger compared to steel and are better conductors compared to copper.23 Their high tensile strength (150–180 GPa) and tensile modulus (640 GPa to 1 TPa) make CNTs unique fillers in the nano-world. Their one dimensional structure allows metallic nanotubes to transport electrons through the entire tube without scattering. This transport behavior and CNTs' large phonon mean free path length are responsible for their high electrical and thermal conductivity.24 All these superior properties of CNTs offer great opportunities towards the synthesis of new composites. High performance light weight structural materials made of CNT–elastomer composites used in space exploration are an example among the tremendous possibilities of CNT composites.18,25 Likely developments awaiting the science and technology of next-generation conducting materials are based on CNT hybrid nanomaterials. This article focuses on efforts towards this goal and developments in related areas.
Applications
Composite materials
CNT based nanocomposites are very attractive and an emerging new class of materials with unique properties. They are a major part of nanotechnology and capable of developing several fields in materials science and engineering. In this paper, we review important applications of CNT nanocomposites such as Li-ion batteries, supercapacitors, H2 production, photocatalysts, and CNT-membranes. All closed cage carbon structures, including fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, are natural electron acceptors. Proof of this can be obtained mathematically even by qualitative molecular orbital theory,26,27 the same level that readily shows that carbon nanotubes are either semiconducting or metallic. The argument starts from isolated C2 fragments that are brought together from infinite distance. Each fragment has a π and a π* orbital. As they are brought together to form the nanotube, the two degenerate sets of σ and π* orbitals mix prevalently between themselves and spread in energy. The low-lying end of the π* orbitals is very stable and readily accepts electrons. The symmetry of these low-lying empty orbitals is the same as that of rotations and translations, a feature that increases the probability of transport along the tube axis. Although the original example was developed for C60, the authors showed that it also holds for tubular structures.28
Considering the wide variety of polymers that can now be introduced onto the surface of carbon nanotubes,29,30 it should be possible to use the vacuum filtration approach to produce polymer functionalized nanotube films containing multiple reactive groups that can subsequently be utilized for further derivatization, such as the introduction of metal nanoparticles. Hu and coworkers reported31 the fabrication of Au/CNTs composite materials in solution through in situ reduction of HAuCl4 by MWNTs. The composite was non-covalently functionalized with poly(ethylene imine) (PEI). Although this work demonstrated high Au nanoparticle densities on the surface of MWNTs, the resulting composites exhibited large-scale aggregation of particles, forming a nearly continuous shell around MWNTs after prolonged deposition times, which precludes any potential for nanoparticle addressability. In addition, thin films of these materials were not prepared. The same kind of materials was synthesized by Lawson et al. They have carried out covalent functionalization of SWNTs with PEI (Fig. 1). The resulting product possesses sufficient solubility to achieve and allow the formation of homogeneous thin films, which could subsequently be decorated with Au nanoparticles by in situ reduction of HAuCl4 in water.
 Fig. 1  TEM images of PEI functionalized SWNT films (scale bars, 500 nm ((A) and (C)), 100 nm ((B) and (D))).31 
Elastomers are characterized by low electrical (<10−11 S m−1) and thermal conductivities (−0.2 W m−1 K−1). But the incorporation of nanoscale conducting fillers like nanotubes, graphene, graphite nanoplatelets, etc. improves their electrical conductivity significantly up to 10 S m−1. Due to the very high aspect ratio and specific surface area of CNTs the modulus and the tensile strength of elastomers dramatically increase to a great extent even at low concentrations. The modified CNTs reinforced elastomer composites are reported to have a high tensile modulus (over the native elastomer) without much reduction in their strain-at-break values.18,32
Immobilization of carbon nanotubes into polymer matrices has been getting immense attention because of their excellent mechanical and physical properties, most notably high surface area, small pore size and high pore volume. Uniform dispersion and orientation of CNTs into polymer matrices is still a challenging process because CNTs tend to aggregate to form tight bundles due to strong van der Waals interactions and small size.33,34 Electrospinning is a more versatile and simple method to synthesize nanofibres. Fig. 3 shows the basic electrospinning set up. Several publications have reported on CNTs/polymer composites.35–43 The electrical conductivity of carbon nanotube fibers can be compared to that of individual carbon nanotubes due to nanotube–nanotube interaction and electron tunneling.44,45 Analytical modeling research describing the electrical tunneling behavior of straight46 and wavy47 carbon nanotubes embedded within a nonconductive polymer matrix provides a foundation for describing the electrical properties of polymer-infused carbon nanotube fibers (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrographs depicting an aerogel-spun carbon nanotube fiber.44 
 Fig. 3  Electrospinning setup.38 
Electrospinning of CNTs/polymer fibrils is motivated by the idea to align the CNTs in a polymer matrix and produce CNTs/polymer nanocomposites in a continuous manner. The alignment of CNTs enhances the axial mechanical and physical properties of the filaments.48
CNT powders mixed with polymers or precursor resins can increase the stiffness, strength, and toughness of a material.45,49,50 Adding ∼1 wt% MWCNTs to epoxy resin enhances stiffness and fracture toughness by 6 and 23%, respectively, without compromising other mechanical properties.51 These enhancements depend on the CNTs' diameter, aspect ratio, alignment, dispersion, and interfacial interaction with the matrix.49 Xing and co-workers52 reported high thermal and electrical conductivity of epoxy composite film by loading a high volume fraction of well-dispersed multiwalled carbon nanotubes and copper nanowires (Cu NWs) in an epoxy matrix. The composite matrix was prepared by a vacuum filtration method with an optimum Cu NW content of 50 wt%. The hybrid mats were then impregnated with epoxy solution to prepare epoxy composite films. The epoxy was modified using a toughening agent to make the composite films tough and flexible. The loading fraction of MWCNTs and Cu NWs was tuned by controlling the viscosity of the epoxy solution. The nanocomposites with 42.5 wt% epoxy shows electrical conductivity of 1500 S m−1, and the thermal conductivity was 2.83 W m−1 K−1, which was 10.1 times that of neat epoxy. Its thermal resistance was as low as 1% of the pure epoxy.
CNT resins are also used to improve fiber composites. For example, carbon fiber composites with CNT-enhanced resin are used to make strong, light weight wind turbine blades and hulls for maritime security boats. CNTs hold an important position as additives in the organic precursors used to synthesize carbon fibers. They can influence the arrangement of carbon in the pyrolyzed fiber, enabling fabrication of 1 μm diameter carbon fibers with over 35% increase in strength (4.5 GPa) and stiffness (463 GPa) compared with control samples without CNTs.48,53,54
Randeniya et al.55 reported the synthesis of metal–CNT composite yarns, which combine the unique properties of CNT yarns and nanocrystalline metals to obtain a new class of materials with enhanced electrical conductivity. They used a new technique, self-fuelled electrodeposition (SFED), which combines a metal reducing agent and an external circuit for transfer of electrons to the CNT surface, where the deposition of metal nanoparticles takes place. In particular, the Cu–CNT and Au–CNT composite yarns prepared by this method have metal-like electrical conductivities (2–3 × 105 S cm−1) and are mechanically robust against stringent tape tests. However, the tensile strengths of the composite yarns are 30–50% lower than that of the unmodified CNT yarn. The optical image of the CNT composite yarn is given in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Optical microscopy images of (a) pure CNT yarn, (b) Au–CNT composite yarn, (c) Pd–CNT-composite yarn, and (d) Ag–CNT-composite yarn.55 
CNT–copper composites
To date, there have been various approaches developed for creating carbon–copper nanostructure materials using different techniques. Zhao et al.56 prepared copper–carbon nanowires with diameters between 60 nm and 120 nm and lengths ranging from 5 μm to 20 μm using the hydrothermal method. Setlur et al.57 wrote the first report on the synthesis of larger quantities of CNTs filled with pure copper using the hydrogen arc method in 1996. Zhang and Wang58 developed a method based on a microwave plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD) system to grow Cu-filled CNTs. Deng et al.59 fabricated carbon–copper nanocables using the hydrothermal method. Haase et al.60 developed a facile one-step route for the synthesis of a carbon–copper nanostructure. Ding et al.61 synthesized a pure CNT–CuNW coaxial nanostructure by the arc discharge method. These studies have shown that various metals can successfully be inserted into CNTs and provided structural and chemical characterizations; however, a better understanding of their physical properties is needed.62 Toprak et al. studied molecular dynamics simulation to predict the thermal conductivity of (7,7) single wall carbon nanotubes filled with a copper nanowire for lengths ranging from 9.957 nm to 63.091 nm.63
Arai et al.64 fabricated Cu/multiwalled carbon nanotube composites containing two different sized MWCNTs using an electroless deposition technique in aqueous solution. In order to disperse the MWCNTs in the solution, an anionic dispersant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and a polymeric dispersant hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) were used. The dispersibility of the MWCNTs in solution was evaluated by measuring the particle size distribution. The zeta potential for the MWCNTs was also evaluated to examine the dispersibility. Uniform Cu/MWCNT composites containing the two different sized MWCNTs were fabricated through the electroless copper deposition process from a solution containing copper ions, a complexing agent, a reducing agent, and the two dispersants, SDS and HPC, in addition to the two different sized MWCNTs.
Lim and co-workers65 proposed a molecular-level mixing and controlled oxidation process as a novel fabrication technique for the production of CNTs/Cu nanocomposite powders. The fabricated CNTs/Cu2O nanocomposite powders showed microstructures with homogeneous dispersion of implanted CNTs in a Cu2O matrix. The CNTs/Cu2O nanocomposite powders were reduced to CNTs/Cu nanocomposite powders with H2 gas and then the as-prepared CNTs/Cu nanocomposite powders were spark plasma sintered to fabricate CNTs/Cu nanocomposites. The mechanical properties of the Cu and the CNTs/Cu nanocomposites were characterized by tensile testing before and after hot compression. Before hot compression, the CNTs/Cu nanocomposites were brittle, but after hot compression both yield strength and elongation increased, while the yield strength of the Cu decreased after hot compression. Hot compression enhanced the ductility and strength of the CNTs/Cu nanocomposites due to the alignment of Cu grains and CNTs. Electrical conductivity was also enhanced due to a reduced scattering of electrons because of the alignment of the CNTs and Cu grains as well as the annealing effects of the Cu matrix.
A nanocrystalline CNT-reinforced Cu composite (Fig. 8) (grain size ≤ 25 nm) with high strength and good ductility was developed by Li et al.66 Pillar testing revealed that its strength and plastic strain could be as large as 1700 MPa and 29%, respectively. Compared with its counterpart made under the same conditions, addition of 1 wt% CNTs led to a dramatic increase in strength, stiffness and toughness without sacrificing the ductility. Microstructural analysis discloses that in the Cu matrix, CNTs could be distributed either at grain boundaries or inside the grains and could inhibit dislocation nucleation and motion, resulting in an increase in the strength.
 Fig. 5  The scheme of electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs).100 
 Fig. 6  SEM images of a MWCNT–IL modified electrode.133 
 Fig. 7  High resolution scanning electron microscope image of germanium nanowires made by electrodeposition from ionic liquids.137 
 Fig. 8  High resolution TEM analysis of the Cu–CNT nanocomposite.66 
Subramaniam and co-workers67 reported that a carbon nanotube–copper composite showed one hundred fold increase in current carrying capacity. The authors reported that present-day devices operate close to the maximum current-carrying-capacity (that is, ampacity) of conductors (such as copper and gold), leading to decreased lifetime and performance, creating demand for new conductors with higher ampacity. Ampacity represents the maximum current-carrying capacity of the object that depends both on the structure and material. A carbon nanotube–copper composite exhibiting similar conductivity (2.3–4.7 × 105 S cm−1) to that of copper (5.8 × 105 S cm−1), but with a 100-times higher ampacity (6 × 108 A cm−2) was reported. Vacuum experiments demonstrated that the carbon nanotubes suppressed the primary failure pathways in copper as observed by the increased copper diffusion activation energy (∼2.0 eV) in the carbon nanotube copper composite, explaining its higher ampacity. This is the only material with both high conductivity and high ampacity, making it uniquely suited for applications in microscale electronics and inverters. The same group, Subramaniam et al.,68 have developed a carbon nanotubes–copper (CNTs–Cu) composite (Fig. 9) with high metallic thermal conductivity (395 W m−1 K−1) and a low, silicon-like CTE (5.0 ppm K−1). The thermal conductivity was identical to that of Cu (400 W m−1 K−1) and higher than those of most metals (Ti, Al, Au). Importantly, the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch between CNTs–Cu and silicon was only 10%, meaning an excellent compatibility. The seamless integration of CNTs and Cu was achieved through a unique two-stage electrode positioning approach to create an extensive and continuous interface between the Cu and CNTs. This allowed for thermal contributions from both Cu and CNTs, resulting in high thermal conductivity. Simultaneously, the high volume fraction of CNTs balanced the thermal expansion of Cu, accounting for the low CTE of the CNT–Cu composite. The experimental observations were in good quantitative concurrence with the theoretically described ‘matrix-bubble’ model.
 Fig. 9  Fabrication and ampacity of the CNT–Cu composite. (a) Picture of the CNT–Cu composite alongside a paperclip for size reference. (b) Schematic representation of various steps for CNTs–Cu composite fabrication. Cu seeds nucleate on the CNT surface during the organic electrode positioning and subsequently grow during the aqueous electrodeposition to yield the CNTs–Cu composite. (c) Ashby plot of ampacity versus conductivity for various relevant materials, including metals (such as Cu, Au, Ag, Al, etc.), alloys (such as Sn–Pb), nanocarbons (such as SWNTs, graphene) and composites (such as Pt–CNTs). The ITRS recommended level of current density is also shown for comparison, with the performance of CNTs–Cu exceeding it. (d) Variation of resistivity with current density for the CNTs–Cu composite. The electrical conductivity of the wire was 2 × 105 S cm−1. Similar traces for Cu and Au lines are shown in the inset for comparison. (e) SEM image of the CNTs–Cu test structure after failure. Scale bar, 4 μm. (f) SEM image of the same CNTs–Cu composite test line before failure. Scale bar, 4 μm. (g and h) EDX mapping (based on Cu) of the failure points of the CNTs–Cu composite line presented in Fig. 1e. Scale bar, 500 μm. (i) Variation of conductivity with temperature for CNTs–Cu (red) and Cu (black), showing the largely invariant conductivity of the CNTs–Cu composite with temperature. In comparison, Cu shows a decreasing conductivity with temperature, as expected for metals. (j) Comparison of conductivity per unit weight (specific conductivity) of CNTs–Cu with different metals.68 
H2 production
Hydrogen is a well known energy carrier and can serve as an ideal fuel. It is a promising alternative to conventional energy source. For the advancement of hydrogen economy, scientists are devoted to finding ways for developing methods for hydrogen production with increased efficiency and non-polluting byproducts. Numerous catalysts have been studied from transition metal to heterogeneous catalysts.69,70 However, the powder form of catalysts has several drawbacks, for example they are difficult to separate, easily aggregated and difficult to handle in a continuous flow system. Although heterogeneous catalysts overcome these issues, they still suffer from stability and performance issues when used repeatedly. The performance of the catalyst eventually decreases after four to five recycles because of catalyst support failure, which causes catalyst deactivation.71 In order to rectify the above said problems, many researchers have been utilizing CNT nanocomposites for the production of hydrogen.
Li et al.72 reported composite nanofiber sheets containing multiwalled carbon nanotubes and cobalt chloride dispersed in PAN (polyacrylonitrile). They were produced by an electrospinning technique. CNTs/polymer fibers were used for hydrogen generation from sodium borohydride. The same author reported CoB catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes with open tips (o-CNTs) for hydrogen production from NaBH4 hydrolysis. The properties and morphologies of o-CNT supports and CoB/o-CNT catalysts were characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR), X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which showed that o-CNTs possess different organic functional groups and many open tips and CoB can be effectively loaded. Compared with CoB catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes with closed tips (c-CNTs), CoB/o-CNTs exhibit a significantly higher hydrogen production rate of up to 3041 mL min−1 g−1 under the same conditions.73
Xiong and co-workers74 immobilized trimetallic RuCuNi nanoparticles (NPs) on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) using a simple liquid impregnation–reduction method, and the RuCuNi/CNTs catalyst was applied to the hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane (AB) at room temperature. Well dispersed RuCuNi nanoparticles were stabilized and immobilized by CNTs. The experimental results show that the RuCuNi/CNT nanomaterials exhibit higher catalytic activity than monometallic Ru, Cu, Ni and bimetallic RuCu, RuNi counterpart loadings as well as RuCuNi NPs, owing to the strong trimetallic synergistic effects, uniform distribution of nanoparticles on the surface of CNTs and bifunctional effects between the RuCuNi nanoparticles and the CNT support. The activation energy (Ea) and the turn over frequency (TOF) of this RuCuNi/CNT catalyst are 36.67 kJ mol−1 and 311.15 molH2 min−1 (molRu)−1, respectively. In addition, the catalytic stability during the recycling tests also shows outstanding performance in the hydrolysis of AB.
Chinnappan et al.75 reported and examined the catalytic activity of multiwalled carbon nanotubes/ionic liquid (IL)/Mn nanohybrids for hydrogen generation from the hydrolysis of sodium borohydride. Transmission electron microscopy reveals that Mn nanoparticles are well-distributed on the MWCNT surface. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirm the presence of Mn and Ni atoms in the nanohybrids. The nanohybrids exhibit excellent catalytic lifetime and give a total turnover number of 18496 molH2 molcatalyst−1 in the hydrolysis of NaBH4, which can be attributed to the presence of Mn atom and IL containing the nickel halide anion. It is worth noting that a very small amount of catalyst is used for this hydrolysis reaction. The activation energy is found to be 40.8 kJ mol−1 for the MWCNTs/IL/Mn nanohybrids from the kinetic study of hydrogen generation from the hydrolysis of NaBH4. The authors reported that improved hydrogen generation rate, lower activation energy, and low cost make the nanohybrids promising candidate as catalysts for hydrogen generation from NaBH4 solution. The nanohybrids are easy to prepare and store, and yet catalytically active. The recycling process is very simple and further purification is not tedious.
Wang et al.76 used a carbon nanomaterial with metal catalysts for NaBH4 dehydrogenation reaction. They fabricated core–shell-like CoPt-poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/MWCNTs. Conducting polymers were added to CNTs, basically to enhance their conductivity, solubility and chemical properties. For example, when poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is used as the conducting polymer, on the graphitic surface of CNTs, a π bond is present along the z-axis which is responsible for the interaction of PEDOT:PSS on their surface via π–π stacking interactions.77 Due to the π–π interaction effect and the channel effect the PEDOT:PSS modification of MWCNTs can improve the conductivity and solubility in aqueous solution and stability during long term cycling of the catalysts.
Photocatalysts
Composites prepared using different semiconducting metal oxides and carbon materials are currently the active photocatalytic materials for the degradation of dyes and industrial effluents. CNTs have been successfully used as catalyst supporting materials with properties superior to those of other regular catalyst-supports like activated carbon, soot or graphite.78 CNTs are excellent candidates that allow a deeper insight into the semiconductor junction of titania with metallic or semiconducting carbons. They allow for surface chemical modifications to control the type of bonds that can be formed with titania, be it chemical bonding or van der Waals bonding. The mixture of titania and CNTs also has a large area where pollutants (organic or inorganic reactants) can be adsorbed. Adsorption is a key process in the photocatalytic destruction of pollutants. Thus, CNT–TiO2 mixtures and composites are able to achieve photocatalytic activities well beyond those of anatase/rutile composites.79–81
Dai et al.82 prepared nanocomposite catalysts (MWNTs–TiO(2)) by a hydrothermal method from multi-walled carbon nanotubes and titanium sulfate as the titanium source, and then systematically analyzed them using electron microscopy, Raman, FT-IR, and UV-vis spectroscopy. Pt-loaded nanocomposites, pristine TiO(2) and MWNTs were examined for their photocatalytic activity in splitting water with triethanolamine as an electron donor. Under visible light irradiation (lambda > 420 nm), hydrogen was successfully produced over the Pt/MWNTs-TiO(2), while no water splitting was observed with the Pt-loaded pristine TiO(2) and MWNTs. Under full spectral irradiation of a Xe-lamp, a hydrogen generation rate of up to 8 mmol g−1 h−1 or more was achieved. The significant photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposites was attributed to the synergetic effect of the intrinsic properties of its components such as excellent light absorption and charge separation on the interfaces between the modified MWNTs and TiO(2), resulting from the direct growth of TiO(2) nanoparticles on the surface of the MWNTs during the hydrothermal process.
ZnxCd1−xS/CNT nanocomposites were synthesized to improve the dispersion, adjust the energy band gap, and enhance the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes. The photocatalyst was used for H2 production. Authors say that the high activity of photocatalytic H2 production is attributed to the following factors: (i) the optimum band gap and a moderate position of the conduction band (which needs to match the irradiation spectrum of the Xe lamp best), (ii) the efficient separation of photogenerated electrons and holes by hybridization, and (iii) the improvement of the dispersion of nanocomposites by assembling along the CNTs as well.83
Li-ion batteries
To achieve high energy, high power, and high cyclability for Li-ion batteries, one of the attractive strategies is to develop nanostructured electrode materials with high capacity and high rate capability. In this regard, carbon nanotubes have been studied for battery applications due to their excellent electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, high mesoporosity, and good electrolyte accessibility.18,84–88 In batteries, small amounts of CNT powder are blended with active materials and a polymer binder, such as 1 wt% CNT loading in LiCoO2 cathodes and graphite anodes. CNTs provide increased electrical connectivity and mechanical integrity, which enhances rate capability and cycle life.89–93 Lithium ion capacity in CNTs results from effective diffusion of lithium ions into stable sites located on the nanotube surface and/or inside individual nanotubes through endcap or sidewall openings. In addition, lithium ion intercalation can occur between the MWCNT layers (entering through lattice defects or open nanotube ends) or in the interstitial sites of close-packed SWCNT bundles (the 2-dimensional triangular lattice arising from van der Waals attractions between nanotube sidewalls.) The use of CNTs as an additive for either the anode or cathode has several advantages compared to other carbon additives like carbon black, acetylene black, or even carbon nanofibers. CNTs have a high theoretical electrical conductivity and room temperature measurements exceed 5 × 105 S m−1 for the purified materials. The high aspect ratio of CNTs (ratio of length to diameter which is >10000 for typical materials) compared to the other carbon additives allows for lower weight doping levels to achieve a comparable percolation threshold.94–98 The excellent thermal conductivity properties of CNTs can promote effective heat dissipation within a composite, which enhance the safety over composite electrodes with inferior carbon additives. Moreover, the strength and flexibility of CNTs can prevent cracking during operation or in vibration environments. They show excellent cycling ability. All these show that CNTs as an additive in conventional electrode composites show tremendous promise to enable higher reversible capacities and rate capability while improving battery cyclability.24,99
Supercapacitors
A typical supercapacitor consists of two electrodes (positive and negative) immersed in an electrolyte and a separator that electrically isolates them. Based on the different operation mechanisms, supercapacitors are classified into two major types: electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudo- or redox capacitors. The EDLC is charged and discharged by the creation and release of the electrical double layers through the accumulation of electrolyte ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface. In EDLCs, the capacitance is contributed by electrostatic interactions of electrons and dielectric materials on the interfaces of electrodes and electrolytes and the energy is stored in the double layers (Fig. 5).100
Nan et al.101 designed and fabricated a high performance asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device, wherein a novel nanocomposite consisting of manganese oxide (NiMn2O4) nanosheets with CNTs was used as the active material. High capacitance of 151 F g−1 and energy density of 60.69 W h kg−1 were achieved for the CNT@NiMn2O4 nanocomposite ASC at a current density of 1 A g−1, which could be attributed to the wide operation voltage window ranging from 0 to 1.7 V. Moreover, the CNT@NiMn2O4 nanocomposite ASC also showed remarkable cycling stability with 96.3% energy density retention after 5000 cycles.
Guo and co-workers102 developed a 3D porous CNT/MnO2 composite electrode based on manganese oxide and CNTs by a simple dipping and drying process followed by a potentiostatic deposition technology. The electrochemical performances were closely related to the synergistic effect of the two components and the unique 3D porous architecture of the electrode. The composite electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 160.5 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 which can rival with that of the asymmetrical supercapacitor. Such a symmetrical device delivered significant energy density of 22.3 W h kg−1 at the power density of 500 W kg−1.
Ni(OH)2/CNTs nanoflake composites were synthesized by Cheng et al. for supercapacitor applications. Chemical precipitation method was used to synthesize the material. Compared with the pure nickel hydroxides, the Ni(OH)2/CNT nanocomposite exhibits a much better electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance of 720 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The enhanced performance can be attributed to a synergetic effect of hydroxides and CNTs with better electrical conductivity and more porous structure to facilitate both ion and charge transport.103 Cheng and co-workers104 fabricated CNT thin films through a continuous floating catalytic chemical vapor deposition and Ni(OH)2/CNT nanocomposite films via a facile electrochemical deposition. The composite showed a very good electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance over 1200 (F g−1) (Table 1).
Table 1 Specific capacitance values of CNT based materials for supercapacitorsa




Types of materials
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
References





a CNTs – carbon nanotubes; NiO – nickel oxide, RuO2 – ruthenium oxide; MWCNTs – multi-walled CNTs; IrO2 – iridium dioxide; MnO2 – manganese dioxide; In2O3 – indium trioxide; ZnO – zinc oxide; PPy – polypyrrole; PANI – polyaniline; PEDOT – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene); Ni(OH)2 – nickel hydroxide.





NiO/CNT composite
1329

105



RuO2/a-MWCNT composite
184 ± 11

106



IrO2NTs/MWCNTs
66–74

107



Au–MnO2/CNT hybrid coaxial arrays
68

108



In2O3 nanowire/CNT film
64

109



MnO2/CNT-paper
540

110



CNT/RuO2 nanocomposite
70

111



PPy/functionalized CNT composite
304

112



PANI/SWCNT composite
485

113



MWCNT/PANI composite
434

114



PEDOT/F-SWCNT composite
210

115



PPy/functionalized SWCNTs
200

116



Buckled SWCNT macrofilms
54

117



Acid-modified MWCNTs
77

118



SWCNT films
34

119



NiMn2O4@CNTs
151

101



3D porous CNT/MnO2 composite
160.5

102



MnO2/C-CNTs
100.3

120



Ni(OH)2/CNT nanocomposite
720

103



Ni(OH)2/CNT composite film
1200

104



Graphene-patched CNT/MnO2 nanocomposite
280

121



RuO2/CMK-3/CNT composites
1102

122



PPy/MnO2/CNT composite
402.7

123





CNT–ionic liquids (CNT–ILs)
The use of electrodes prepared from carbon nanotubes and ionic liquids has been reported in a number of articles. ILs are a unique and important class of materials. Because of their high stability, high electrical conductivity, and very low vapor pressure, ILs hold great promise for green chemistry applications in general and for electrochemical applications in particular.124–127 Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) can be defined as liquid electrolytes made entirely of ions which have melting points below 100 °C. Ionic liquids are organic salts with low melting points. Commonly used cations are imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium, ammonium, phosphonium, and sulphonium, and anions are tetrafluoroborate (BF4−), hexafluorophosphate (PF6−), and bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (NTf2). They possess a wide range of liquidus temperatures, in some cases in excess of 400 °C, and have all of the intrinsically useful characteristics of negligible vapor pressure, wide liquidus range, thermal stability, high ionic conductivity and a large electrochemical window, making them attractive, novel, environmentally friendly solvents for electrochemical devices.128–131
Kachoosangi et al. prepared a composite electrode using multiwall carbon nanotubes and the ionic liquid n-octylpyridinum hexafluorophosphate (OPFP). One major advantage of this electrode compared to other electrodes using carbon nanotubes and other ionic liquids is its extremely low capacitance and background currents. A 10% (w/w) loading of MWCNTs was selected as the optimal composition based on voltammetric results, as well as the stability of the background response in solution.128
Xi et al. reported a DNA-modified carbon paste electrode (DNACPIE), which was designed by using a mixture of the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate and paraffin oil as the binder.132 The electrode exhibits higher sensitivity compared to DNA modified carbon paste electrodes without ionic liquids and better selectivity compared with electrodes without DNA. Adenine showed an irreversible adsorption-controlled oxidation reaction with enhanced electrochemical response, which was due to the presence of highly conductive MWCNTs on the carbon ionic liquid electrode surface. The electrode showed good stability and selectivity, and was further applied to milk powder samples with satisfactory results. Salimi et al.133 reported a new carbon nanotubes–ionic liquid and chlorpromazine modified electrode (Fig. 6) biosensor for the determination of dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and fabrication of ethanol. The nanocomposite modified electrode displayed excellent electrocatalytic activity toward the oxidation of NADH. The proposed electrode showed potential application in the third generation reagentless biosensors.129,134
Ionic liquids also serve as the basis of important approaches in nanoscience. They have been used to synthesize metal nanowires, for example using template-assisted techniques. Iron, cobalt and nickel nanowires are, owing to their ferromagnetic properties, interesting for fundamental research. These elements can be obtained in aqueous solution, but as a result of hydrogen coevolution the nanowires are usually of limited quality. This problem does not exist in ionic liquids, as there is no hydrogen evolution, and the template-assisted deposition of silver,135 cobalt,136 germanium and silicon137 has been reported to deliver compact nanowire mats of these metals; see Fig. 7 for a typical example. In the past two or three years, the tremendous potential offered by ionic liquids as solvents and electrolytes has been realized in a broad swath of materials preparation and device applications. Ionic liquids are thus no longer laboratory curiosities; they have become an important component in the materials science field.138
Kim et al.139 reported the fabrication of a multi-walled carbon nanotube ionic liquid electrode for the voltammetric detection of phenolic compounds in red wine. The MWCNT ionic liquid was prepared by the immobilisation of 1-butylimidazole bromide onto an epoxy group on poly(glycidylmethacrylate)-grafted MWCNTs. The working electrode was fabricated by drop-casting the MWCNT ionic liquid solution (with tyrosinase and chitosan) on an indium tin oxide (ITO) glass. A three-electrode system with a Ag/AgCl (satd KCl) reference electrode and a Pt wire counter electrode was employed. Three brands of red wine were tested in a background of phosphate buffer solution. The sensing range for phenolic compounds was 0.01 to 0.08 mM and the concentration of phenolics in commercial red wines was determined to be in the range of ca. 400–3000 (mg L−1).140
Mukai et al.141 reported a high performance plastic actuator based on an ionic liquid based bucky gel. They proposed a two-step process using a ball-mill method for preparing the casting solution for the bucky-gel electrode in order to improve the performance of the actuator by developing the bucky-gel electrode layer with a high content of SWNTs which are well dispersed in the electrode layer. They measured the displacement and the blocking force of the new bucky-gel actuator fabricated by hot-pressing the prepared electrode and electrolyte layers and analyzed the experimental results using the tri-layer polymer actuator model which was developed by Alici et al.,142,143 for conducting polymer actuators. The bimorph actuator composed of the ionic gel sandwiched by two new bucky-gel electrode layers has the maximum stress and strain of 4.7 MPa and 1.9%, respectively. By the FE-SEM observation, the presence of fine exfoliated bundles of SWNTs dispersed in the bucky-gel electrode layer was confirmed. The double-layer capacitance of the bucky-gel electrode layer was surprisingly large, which is considered to generate the large stress and strain. The advantage of a bucky-gel actuator is not only its good performance but also its easy process of fabrication. The present development provides an important step for electromechanical polymer actuator technologies.
Coatings and films
Shim et al.144 demonstrated that highly conductive coatings can be made by the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly of SWNTs. These films exhibit electrical conductivities of 102 to ∼103 S m−1 at room temperature without doping at low nanotube loadings, indicative of the efficient utilization of SWNTs in percolation pathways. Low SWNT loadings also make the coatings transparent with transmission as high as 97% for visible light. Thicker LBL films display conductivities of 4.15 × 104 S m−1. These free-standing films are flexible and possess 160 MPa of tensile strength. Boccaccini et al.145 have reviewed the preparation and characterisation of stable CNT suspensions, and the mechanism of the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) process.146
Pialago et al.147 reported the preparation of ternary copper–carbon nanotubes–silicon carbide (SiC) composite powders by mechanical alloying (MA). These MA composite powders were spray deposited as coatings on Cu plate substrates by cold gas dynamic spraying (CGDS). The results showed that the addition of SiC in the Cu–5CNTs powder mixture led to particle size reduction after MA. The deposition efficiency of the Cu–CNTs–SiC composite powders as CGDS feedstock increased when the SiC content was increased from 10 vol% to 20 vol%. The dispersion of SiC in the composite powder particles and coatings was not homogeneous as revealed by the EDX elemental mappings. As examined by XRD, the SiC as well as the CNTs and the Cu had undergone microstructural changes (e.g., microstraining, grain refinement, and partial amorphization) due to the deformation caused by MA and CGDS. The addition of SiC, combined with the strain hardening due to MA and CGDS, resulted in coatings with significantly higher hardness than the coatings without SiC. Using CGDS, the MA Cu–CNTs–SiC composite powders produced coatings with microporous surfaces and dense internal microstructures as evidenced by the SEM, profilometry, and porosimetry results. Lastly, the surface pores of the Cu–CNTs–SiC coatings were finer than those of the pure Cu and Cu–5CNT coatings.
CNT membranes
Nanotechnology is being used to enhance conventional ceramic and polymeric water treatment membrane materials through various avenues.148 Well-aligned CNTs can serve as robust pores in membranes for water desalination and decontamination applications.149 The hollow CNT structure provides frictionless transport of water molecules, and this makes them suitable for the development of high fluxing separation techniques. Appropriate pore diameters can constitute energy barriers at the channel entries, rejecting salt ions and permitting water through the nanotube hollows.150 The tip-functionalized nonpolar interior surface of carbon nanotubes provides strong attraction to polar water molecules and rejects salts and pollutants. Low energy consumption, antifouling and self-cleaning functions have made CNT membranes extraordinary over the conventional ones (Fig. 10).151,152
 Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscope image of a pristine CNT membrane; (b) movement of pure water molecules through the CNT-membrane in osmotically imbalanced compartments.153 
Ge et al.150 fabricated and characterized vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) membranes and the corresponding gas permeability and hydrogen separation were measured. The carbon nanotube diameter and areal density were adjusted by varying the catalyst vapour concentration (Fe/C ratio) in the mixed precursor. The permeances were one to two magnitudes higher than the Knudsen prediction, while the gas selectivities were still in the Knudsen range. The permeance of aligned carbon nanotube membranes can be improved by increasing the areal density and operating at an optimum temperature. Mi et al.154 also fabricated VACNT membranes on a porous a-alumina support by a multi-step method, and the measured diffusivity values were about four times larger than the predicted values from the Knudsen diffusion model. Later, Yu et al.155 prepared high-density, vertically aligned carbon nanotube membranes via chemical vapor deposition followed by solvent evaporation. The gas permeability was 4–7 orders of magnitude higher than previous reports and approximately 450 times those predicted by Knudsen diffusion. Meanwhile, the first data of the transport of a mixture of gases through a single-walled carbon nanotube membrane were reported by Kim et al.,156,157 confirming that non-Knudsen transport occurs in aligned CNT membranes. Hinds et al. fabricated CNT membranes by incorporating CNTs into a polymer film (mixed cellulose ester-MCE) to form a well-ordered nanoporous membrane structure. The lengths of the nanotubes within the polymer film were reduced by selective electrochemical oxidation, allowing for tunable pore lengths.158 Yang and co-workers reported plasma-modified ultralong carbon nanotube (UCNT) membranes. They exhibit ultrahigh specific adsorption capacity for salts (exceeding 400% by weight) that is two orders of magnitude higher than that found in the current state of-the-art activated carbon-based water treatment systems. They exploited this adsorption capacity in ultralong carbon nanotube-based membranes that can remove salts, as well as organic and metal contaminants. These UCNT based membranes may lead to next-generation rechargeable, point-of-use potable water purification appliances with superior desalination, disinfection and filtration properties (Fig. 11).159
 Fig. 11  UCNT-based membranes in a micro-channel device. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine UCNTs. Scale bar, 20 mm. (b) Top view: SEM image of the porous MCE support with an average pore size of 220 nm. Scale bar, 1 mm. (c) Photo of a UCNTs–MCE membrane fabricated by vacuum filtration. The excellent flexibility of the membrane is demonstrated by the large-angle bending with no surface damage or structural degradation. Scale bar, 1 cm. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine UCNTs–MCE membrane. The thickness B of the UCNT layer is 0.5 mm. Scale bar, 1 mm. (e) Schematic diagram of the UCNTs–MCE membrane integrated into a micro-cross channel device. Salt water flows through the channel with two identical membranes pressed face-to-face. (f) Photo of the actual micro-channel device. Scale bar, 1 cm.159 
Wu and co-workers have developed a facile microtome-cutting method to fabricate MWCNT and SWCNT membranes that show enhanced electroosmotic flow rates and efficiency. Direct observation of neutral molecular transport under bias demonstrated the phenomena of electroosmotic pumping with velocities as high as 0.16 cm s−1V1, 82 fold higher than related nanoporous AAO/a-CNT materials. Changes in electroosmotic flow as a function of ionic strength and surface charge functionality were also consistent with the electroosmotic flow phenomenon. Appreciable electroosmotic pumping was observed at voltages (0.3–0.6 V) that are far below voltages of water splitting. Importantly power efficiencies were 25–110 fold improved compared to nanoporous materials which have important applications in separations and portable medical devices.160 Gu et al. proposed a robust strategy for fabricating superhydrophobic carbon nanotubes based hybrid materials as a separation membrane through the covalent attachment of the fluorine-bearing organosilane 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane (PFDTS) onto –OH functionalized CNTs. This method resulted in a PFDTS/CNT superhydrophobic material with controlled functionalization that could be used to effectively separate various surfactant-stabilized water-in-oil emulsions with high separation efficiency and high flux. It maintains stable superhydrophobicity and high separation efficiency under extreme conditions, including high or low temperature and strongly acidic or alkaline solutions, and shows fire-retardant properties.161
Conclusion
Carbon nanotubes are known to be rigid materials to date and exhibit novel electronic properties that bridge those of the bulk and molecules. They also represent a valuable starting point for preparing new nanocomposites. It is evident from the broad literature coverage in this review that CNTs have significant promise for electronic, photovoltaic, membrane applications and many more fields. Numerous products that use CNTs today incorporate CNT powders immobilized in polymer matrices or deposited as thin films; for commercialization of these products, it is essential to integrate processing of CNTs with existing manufacturing methods. Significant progress has been achieved using organized CNT materials, for example forests and yarns are beginning to bridge the gap between the nanoscale properties of CNTs and the length scales of bulk engineering materials. However, additional challenges must be addressed before the full commercial potential of carbon nanomaterials is realized. For example, the thermal conductivity and mechanical strength of CNT composite materials like yarns and sheets remain far inferior to the properties of individual CNTs. Recently, ionic liquids combined with carbon nanotube materials have attracted much attention as the most promising materials for energy related studies. Ionic liquids have gained overwhelming interest over the past years, and have been revealed as green reaction media owing to their negligible volatility, excellent thermal stability, and the variety of structures available. The tunability of ILs and their ability to be easily combined with other materials make them ideal candidates in a range of electrochemical devices. ILs can not only be used as supporting electrolytes for electrochemical processes but also as modifiers for chemically modified electrodes.162 CNTs can form gels with ILs and give excellent electrocatalytic properties.163 This is based on the high viscosity of the ILs and the cation π interactions of ILs and CNTs. A nanocomposite of CNTs and ILs would be expected to display excellent and useful properties. Although this field is still in the developmental stage, it is envisioned that in the next decade we will see some significant advances towards commercialization of CNTs–IL based novel materials.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Lloyd's Register Foundation, UK for research support.
Notes and references
Y. D. Tretyakov and E. A. Goodilin, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2009, 78, 801–820 CrossRef CAS .
L. He and C.-S. Toh, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 556, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-T. Zhang, X. Zheng, H.-F. Li and J.-M. Lin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 784, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Scida, P. W. Stege, G. Haby, G. A. Messina and C. D. García, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 691, 6–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Valcarcel, S. Cardenas, B. M. Simonet, Y. Moliner-Martinez and R. Lucena, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2008, 27, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Xie, W. Qian and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6156–6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hussain and S. Mitra, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 399, 75–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lawson, F. Gonzaga, J. Huang, G. de Silveira, M. A. Brook and A. Adronov, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1694–1702 RSC .

          R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes, Imperial College Press, London,  1998 Search PubMed .
J. Giles, Nature, 2006, 441, 265 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dekker, Phys. Today, 1999, 52, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Dumitrescu, P. R. Unwin and J. V. Macpherson, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6886–6901 RSC .

          T. Gay, J. Kaufman and M. McGuigan, Stronger than Steel: Carbon Nanotubes, Power Point Slides given at Boston University, December 15, 2005. Available at http://www.bu.edu/gk12/marc/Lessons/cnt/cnt_talk.pdf Search PubMed .
P. Costa, C. Silvia, J. C. Viana and S. L. Mendez, Composites, Part B, 2014, 57, 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ponnamma, K. K. Sadasivuni, Y. Grohens, Q. Guo and S. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8446–8485 RSC .
T. Q. Tran, Z. Fan, P. Liu, S. M. Myint and H. M. Duong, Carbon, 2016, 99, 407–415 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, A. Lam, Z. Fan, T. Q. Tran and H. M. Duong, Mater. Des., 2015, 87, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, T. Q. Tran, Z. Fan and H. M. Duong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 117, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mikhalchan, Z. Fan, T. Q. Tran, P. Liu, V. B. C. Tan, T.-E. Tay and H. M. Duong, Carbon, 2016, 102, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Ford, Carbon Nanotube-based Cables Carry Four Times the Current of Copper,  2014. Available at https://www.theengineer.co.uk/carbon-nanotube-based-cables-carry-four-times-the-current-of-copper/ Search PubMed .
S. Berber, Y. K. Kwon and D. Tomanek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Smith, J. W. Connell, D. M. Delozier, P. T. Lillehei, K. A. Watson, Y. Lin, B. Zhou and Y. P. Sun, Polymer, 2004, 45, 825–836 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Fowler and A. Ceulemans, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 508–510 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Fowler, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1990, 86, 2073–2077 RSC .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Zerbetto and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 871–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. J. Bahun, F. Cheng, C. M. Homenick, G. Lawson, J. Zhu and A. Adronov, in Chemistry of Carbon Nanotubes, ed. V. A. Basiuk and E. V. Basiuk, American Scientific Publishers, Stevenson Ranch, CA,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. M. L. Homenick, G. Lawson and A. Adronov, Polym. Rev., 2007, 47, 265–290 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Hu, T. Wang, X. H. Qu and S. J. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 853–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. Tour, J. L. Hudson, R. Kirshnamoorti, K. Yurekli and C. A. Mitchell, US Pat., 2007/0259994,  2007 .
R. Tucknott and S. N. Yaliraki, Chem. Phys., 2002, 281, 455 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dror, W. Salalha, R. L. Khalfin, Y. Cohen, A. L. Yarin and E. Zussman, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7012–7020 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Naebe, T. Lin and X. Wang, Carbon nanotubes reinforced electrospun polymer nanofibres, in Nanofiber, ed. A. Kumar, IN-TECH, Vienna, Austria,  2010, pp. 209–28 Search PubMed .
A. Chinnappan, H. C. Kang and H. Kim, Energy, 2011, 36, 755–759 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chinnappan, H. Kim and I. T. Hwang, Chem. Eng. J, 2012, 191, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chinnappan, A. H. Jadhav, J. M. C. Puguan, R. Appiah-Ntiamoah and H. Kim, Energy, 2015, 79, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balavoine, P. Schultz, C. Richard, V. Mallouh, T. W. Ebbesen and C. Mioskowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1912–1915 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ding, A. Eitan, F. T. Fisher, X. Chen, D. A. Dikin, R. Andrews, L. C. Brinson, L. S. Schadler and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS .
K. Keren, R. S. Berman, E. Buchstab, U. Sivan and E. Braun, Science, 2003, 302, 1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Wu, F. Wei, G. Luo and W. Qian, Polymer, 2005, 46, 12689–12695 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Yeo and J. R. Friend, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2006, 1, 177–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Wu and T.-W. Chou, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aryal, C. K. Kim, K.-W. Kim, M. S. Khil and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2008, 28, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, E. T. Thostenson and T. W. Chou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 223114 CrossRef .
C. Li, E. T. Thostenson and T. W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 1445–1452 CrossRef CAS .
T.-W. Chou, L. Gao, E. T. Thostenson, Z. Zhang and J.-H. Byun, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bauhofer and J. Z. Kovacs, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 1486–1498 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Gojny, M. H. G. Wichmann, U. Kopke, B. Fiedler and K. Schulte, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2004, 64, 2363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, W. Cao, W. Li, H. Chen, M. Wang, H. Wei, D. Hu, M. Chen and Q. Li, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, U. Khan, W. J. Blau and Y. K. Gun'ko, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1624 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Chae, Y. H. Choi, M. L. Minus and S. Kumar, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 406 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Randeniya, A. Bendavid, P. J. Martin and C.-D. Tran, Small, 2010, 6, 1806–1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and Z. Yan, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1255 RSC .
A. A. Setlur, J. M. Lauerhaas, J. Y. Dai and R. P. H. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 345 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Zhang and E. G. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deng, A.-W. Xu, G.-Y. Chen, R.-Q. Song and L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11711–11716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Haase, S. Hampel, A. Leonhardt, J. Thomas, N. Mattern and B. Büchner, Surf. Coat. Tech., 2007, 201, 9184–9188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, X. Yan, B. K. Tay and Q. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2011, 72, 1519–1523 CrossRef CAS .
D. Golberg, P. M. F. J. Costa, M. Mitome, S. Hampel, D. Haase and C. Mueller, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1937–1942 CrossRef CAS .
K. Toprak and Y. Bayazitoglu, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 61, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arai and T. Osaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, D68–D73 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Lim, C. B. Mo, D. H. Nam and S. H. Hong, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 78–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. Misra, Z. Horita, C. C. Koch, N. A. Mara, P. O. Dickerson and Y. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 071907 CrossRef .
C. Subramaniam, T. Yamada, K. Kobashi, A. Sekiguchi, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2202 Search PubMed .
C. Subramaniam, Y. Yasuda, S. Takeya, S. Ata, A. Nishizawa, D. Futaba, T. Yamada and K. Hata, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2669–2674 RSC .
B. H. Liu, Z. P. Li and S. Suda, J. Alloys Compd., 2006, 415, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Q. Feng, Z. Dong and J. Ma, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 378, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Cai, P. Lu, Q. Xu, Y. Zhongfu and J. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9206–9216 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, E. E. Arthur, D. La, Q. Li and H. Kim, Energy, 2014, 71, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Q. Li and H. Kim, Chem. Eng. J, 2012, 210, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, L. Zhou, G. Yu, K. Yang, M. Ye and Q. Xia, Introd. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 15521–15528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chinnappan, J. M. C. Puguan, W.-J. Chung and H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 429–436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Peng, J. Wang, C. Jing and J. Tian, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2015, 200, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kaur, M. S. Shin, A. Joshi, N. Kaur, N. Sharma, J. S. Park and S. S. Sekhon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 3161–3166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Coq, J. M. Planeix and V. Brotons, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 173, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
K. Byrappa, A. S. Dayananda, C. P. Sajan, B. Basavalingu, M. B. Shayan, K. Soga and M. Yoshimura, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 2348–2355 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Chen, F.-J. Zhang and W.-C. Oh, New Carbon Mater., 2009, 24(2), 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dai, T. Peng, D. Ke and B. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125603 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Yao, F. Jia, B. Chen and Z. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9976–9981 RSC .
E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1775 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laurelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupunt and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Welna, B. Taylor, L. Dai, L. Qu and M. Durstock, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1455–1460 CrossRef CAS .
G. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, E. R. Fisher and C. R. Martin, Nature, 1998, 393, 346 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, A. Goering, L. Quy and L. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12099–12104 RSC .
L. Dai, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Köhler, C. Som, A. Helland and F. Gottschalk, J. Cleaner Prod., 2008, 16, 927 CrossRef .
K. Evanoff, J. Khan, A. A. balandin, A. Magasinski, W. J. Ready, T. F. Fuller and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sotowa, G. Origi, M. Takeuchi, Y. Nishimura, K. Takeuchi, I. Y. Jang, Y. J. Kim, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo and M. S. Dresselhaus, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dubot and P. Cenedese, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 241402 CrossRef .
T. Kar, J. Pattanayak and S. Scheiner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 10397–10403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nishidate and M. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 245418 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, Y. Xia and L. Mei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 165413 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, J. Peng and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3515–3517 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. V. Sreekumar, T. Liu and S. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16435–16440 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao and B. Q. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3183–3201 CAS .
H. Nan, W. Ma, Z. Gu, B. Geng and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24607–24614 RSC .
C. Guo, H. Li, X. Zhang, H. Huo and C. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 206, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, A. D. Su, S. Li, S. T. Nguyen, L. Lu, C. Y. H. Lim and H. M. Duong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 601, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, K. L. P. Koh, P. Liu, T. Q. Tran and H. M. Duong, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 481, 626–632 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, Q. She, B. Hong, X. Liu, Y. Shi, Z. Shi, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A818–A823 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. A. Huber, M. C. Kopac and P. G. Pickup, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 7141–7147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Chen, J. H. Cai, Y. S. Huang, K. Y. Lee and D. S. Tsai, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 115706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 658–663 CAS .
P. C. Chen, G. Shen, S. Sukcharoenchoke and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043113 CrossRef .
Y. J. Kang, B. Kim, H. Chung and W. Kim, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2510–2514 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, J. M. Ko and O. O. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A864–A867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mi, X. Zhang, Y. Xu and F. Xiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2284–2288 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta and N. Miura, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1721–1726 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. B. Kong, B. Wang, Y. C. Luo and L. Kang, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Sun, X. Li and X. Du, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Chen and X. Sun, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2007, 67, 2981–2985 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793–4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, B. T. T. Chu, B. Ballesteros, W. Wang, C. Johnston, J. M. Sykes and P. S. Grant, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065605 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Niu, W. Zhou, J. Chen, G. Feng, H. Li, W. Ma, J. Li, H. Dong, Y. Ren, D. Zhao and S. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1440–1446 CAS .
H.-W. Chang, Y.-R. Lu, J.-L. Chen, C.-L. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-M. Chen, Y.-C. Tsai, C.-M. Chang, P.-H. Yeh, W.-C. Chou, Y.-H. Liou and C.-L. Dong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1725–1735 RSC .
Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3408–3416 CAS .
A.-Y. Lo, Y. Jheng, T.-C. Huang and C.-M. Tseng, Appl. Energy, 2015, 153, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Que and J. Huang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 747–751 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Huddleston, A. E. Visser, W. M. Reichert, H. D. Willauer, G. A. Broker and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2001, 3, 156–164 RSC .
K. R. Seddon, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1997, 68, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .

          V. R. Koch, C. Nanjundiah and R. T. Carlin, US Pat., 5827602, Covalent Associates Incorporated,  1998 .
M. R. Majidi, R. F. B. Baj and A. Naseri, Food Anal. Methods, 2013, 6, 1388–1397 CrossRef .
R. T. Kachoosangi, M. M. Musameh, I. Abu-Yousef, J. M. Yousef, S. M. Kanan, L. Xiao, S. G. Davies, A. Russell and R. G. Compton, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 435–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Kokorin, Ionic Liquids: Applications and Perspectives, InTech,  2011 Search PubMed .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chinnappan, H. Kim and I. T. Hwang, Chem. Eng. J, 2012, 191, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xi, Y. Duan, X. Li, L. Qu, W. Sun and K. Jiao, Microchim. Acta, 2010, 170, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salimi, S. Lasghari and A. Noorbakhash, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1707–1716 CrossRef CAS .

          Y.-S. Liu and G.-B. Pan, Ionic Liquids for the Future Electrochemical Applications, in Ionic Liquids: Applications and Perspectives, ed. A. Kokorin, InTech,  2011, pp. 627–639 Search PubMed .
I. Kazeminezhad, A. C. Barnes, J. D. Holbrey, K. R. Seddon and W. Schwarzacher, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 86, 373–375 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Yang, M. Z. An, C. N. Su and F. P. Wang, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 23, 1501–1504 CAS .
R. Al-Salman, J. Mallet, M. Molinari, P. Fricoteaux, F. Martineau, M. Troyon, S. Zein, E. Abedinw and F. Endres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6233–6237 RSC .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Kim, H.-Y. Kang, J.-C. Lee and S.-H. Choi, Sensors, 2009, 9, 6701–6714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Silvester, Analyst, 2011, 136, 4871–4882 RSC .
K. Mukai, K. Asaka, K. Kiyohara, T. Sugino, I. Takeuchi, T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5555–5562 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alici, B. Mui and C. Cook, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 126, 396 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alici and N. N. Huynh, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 126, 616–625 CrossRef .
B. S. Shim, Z. Tang, M. P. Morabito, A. Agarwal, H. Hong and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5467 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Boccaccini, J. Cho, J. A. Roether, B. J. C. Thomas, E. J. Minay and M. S. P. Shaffer, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3149 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. R. Rao and A. Govindaraj, Nanotubes and Nanowires, RSC, 2nd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
E. J. T. Pialago, O. K. Kwon and C. W. Park, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 6764–6775 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Pendergast and E. M. V. Hoek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1946–1971 CAS .
R. Das, M. E. Ali, S. B. A. Hamid, S. Ramakrishna and Z. Z. Chowdhury, Desalination, 2014, 336, 97–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, L. Wang, A. Du, M. Hou, V. Rudolph and Z. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5329–5336 RSC .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333(6043), 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Corry, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112(5), 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          O. Bakajin, A. Noy, F. Fornasiero, C. P. Grigoropoulus, J. K. Holt, J. B. In, S. Kim and H. G. Park, in Nanofluidic Carbon Nanotube Membranes: Applications for Water Purification and Desalination, ed. Savage, Willian Andrew Inc./Elsevier, New York,  2009, pp. 77–93 Search PubMed .
W. Mi, Y. S. Lin and Y. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 304, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, H. H. Funke, J. L. Falconer and R. D. Noble, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. R. Jinschek, H. Chen, D. S. Sholl and E. Marand, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kalra, S. Garde and G. Hummer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100(18), 10175–10180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Hinds, N. Chopra, T. Rantell, R. Andrews, V. Gavalas and L. G. Bachas, Science, 2004, 303, 62–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Yang, Z. J. Han, S. F. Yu, K. L. Pey, K. Ostrikov and R. Karni, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2220 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, K. Gerstandt, M. Majumder, X. Zhan and B. J. Hinds, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3321–3328 RSC .
J. Gu, P. Xiao, Y. Huang, J. Zhang and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4124–4128 CAS .
Z. Zhu, L. Qu, X. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Sun and X. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5959 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Lshimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Science, 2003, 300, 2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
	Dr Amutha Chinnappan is a Research Fellow at Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. She obtained her PhD in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She has completed her postdoctoral training and Research Professor in the Energy Science and Technology Department, Myongji University. She has authored more than 20 research papers in reputed international journals. Her current research interests include ionic liquids based functional nanomaterials for energy applications, biomass conversion, hydrogen generation, and green chemistry.
	Dr Chinnappan Baskar is an Associate Professor and Dean of the THDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Constituent Institute of Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, India. He was a former Director (Officiating) of THDC-IHET. He received his M. Sc. in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and PhD in Organic and Materials Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore. His research interests include synthetic organic chemistry, conducting polymers, green chemistry, ionic liquids, and biomass conversion. He has published several research papers in reputed international journals and conference proceedings. He has one Korean Patent to his credit. He was invited to attend and deliver lectures/seminars at international and national conferences & workshops, and faculty development programs. He has been the examiner for PhD & M. Phil theses at different universities and institutes in India. He has received the award for “Excellent Institute for Promoting Hydropower in Uttarakhand” by the CMAI Association of India. He is the Editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); author of the book Engineering Chemistry (Wiley India); co-author of Stereochemistry (Narosa Publishing House and Alpha Science International Ltd), and the co-author of the text book Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).
	Dr Hern Kim is a Professor in the Department of Energy Science and Technology and Director of Smart Living Innovation Technology Center, Myongji University, Republic of Korea. He has published more than 120 research papers in reputed international journals. His research interest includes synthesis of advanced materials (including nano/microcomposite particles, fibers, films, ionic liquids etc.) and their applications to a variety of fusion (energy/environment/chemical/bio/nano) technologies.
	Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng is the Director of the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He is a Highly Cited Researcher in Materials Science (http://www.highlycited.com). Thomson Reuters recognized him as among the World's Most Influential Scientific Minds. He is a recognized world authority in electrospun nanomaterials. He has authored 7 books and over 800 journal papers which attracted over 50000 citations and ∼105 H-index. He is an elected international fellow of academies and professional societies in Singapore, UK and USA.

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of PEI functionalized SWNT films (scale bars, 500 nm ((A) and (C)), 100 nm ((B) and (D))).31	 

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrographs depicting an aerogel-spun carbon nanotube fiber.44	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrospinning setup.38	 

 	Fig. 4  Optical microscopy images of (a) pure CNT yarn, (b) Au–CNT composite yarn, (c) Pd–CNT-composite yarn, and (d) Ag–CNT-composite yarn.55	 

 	Fig. 5  The scheme of electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs).100	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of a MWCNT–IL modified electrode.133	 

 	Fig. 7  High resolution scanning electron microscope image of germanium nanowires made by electrodeposition from ionic liquids.137	 

 	Fig. 8  High resolution TEM analysis of the Cu–CNT nanocomposite.66	 

 	Fig. 9  Fabrication and ampacity of the CNT–Cu composite. (a) Picture of the CNT–Cu composite alongside a paperclip for size reference. (b) Schematic representation of various steps for CNTs–Cu composite fabrication. Cu seeds nucleate on the CNT surface during the organic electrode positioning and subsequently grow during the aqueous electrodeposition to yield the CNTs–Cu composite. (c) Ashby plot of ampacity versus conductivity for various relevant materials, including metals (such as Cu, Au, Ag, Al, etc.), alloys (such as Sn–Pb), nanocarbons (such as SWNTs, graphene) and composites (such as Pt–CNTs). The ITRS recommended level of current density is also shown for comparison, with the performance of CNTs–Cu exceeding it. (d) Variation of resistivity with current density for the CNTs–Cu composite. The electrical conductivity of the wire was 2 × 105 S cm−1. Similar traces for Cu and Au lines are shown in the inset for comparison. (e) SEM image of the CNTs–Cu test structure after failure. Scale bar, 4 μm. (f) SEM image of the same CNTs–Cu composite test line before failure. Scale bar, 4 μm. (g and h) EDX mapping (based on Cu) of the failure points of the CNTs–Cu composite line presented in Fig. 1e. Scale bar, 500 μm. (i) Variation of conductivity with temperature for CNTs–Cu (red) and Cu (black), showing the largely invariant conductivity of the CNTs–Cu composite with temperature. In comparison, Cu shows a decreasing conductivity with temperature, as expected for metals. (j) Comparison of conductivity per unit weight (specific conductivity) of CNTs–Cu with different metals.68	 


NiO/CNT composite	1329	
105

RuO2/a-MWCNT composite	184 ± 11	
106

IrO2NTs/MWCNTs	66–74	
107

Au–MnO2/CNT hybrid coaxial arrays	68	
108

In2O3 nanowire/CNT film	64	
109

MnO2/CNT-paper	540	
110

CNT/RuO2 nanocomposite	70	
111

PPy/functionalized CNT composite	304	
112

PANI/SWCNT composite	485	
113

MWCNT/PANI composite	434	
114

PEDOT/F-SWCNT composite	210	
115

PPy/functionalized SWCNTs	200	
116

Buckled SWCNT macrofilms	54	
117

Acid-modified MWCNTs	77	
118

SWCNT films	34	
119

NiMn2O4@CNTs	151	
101

3D porous CNT/MnO2 composite	160.5	
102

MnO2/C-CNTs	100.3	
120

Ni(OH)2/CNT nanocomposite	720	
103

Ni(OH)2/CNT composite film	1200	
104

Graphene-patched CNT/MnO2 nanocomposite	280	
121

RuO2/CMK-3/CNT composites	1102	
122

PPy/MnO2/CNT composite	402.7	
123


 	Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscope image of a pristine CNT membrane; (b) movement of pure water molecules through the CNT-membrane in osmotically imbalanced compartments.153	 

 	Fig. 11  UCNT-based membranes in a micro-channel device. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine UCNTs. Scale bar, 20 mm. (b) Top view: SEM image of the porous MCE support with an average pore size of 220 nm. Scale bar, 1 mm. (c) Photo of a UCNTs–MCE membrane fabricated by vacuum filtration. The excellent flexibility of the membrane is demonstrated by the large-angle bending with no surface damage or structural degradation. Scale bar, 1 cm. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine UCNTs–MCE membrane. The thickness B of the UCNT layer is 0.5 mm. Scale bar, 1 mm. (e) Schematic diagram of the UCNTs–MCE membrane integrated into a micro-cross channel device. Salt water flows through the channel with two identical membranes pressed face-to-face. (f) Photo of the actual micro-channel device. Scale bar, 1 cm.159	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
