Type-inversion as a working mechanism of high voltage MAPbBr 3 (Cl)-based halide perovskite solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP08392G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP08392G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5753-5762Type-inversion as a working mechanism of high voltage MAPbBr3(Cl)-based halide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Nir 
            Kedem‡
, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Kulbak‡
, 
      
        
          
            Thomas M. 
            Brenner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gary 
            Hodes
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            David 
            Cahen
          
        
      *
      Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel. E-mail: david.cahen@weizmann.ac.il; gary.hodes@weizmann.ac.il
Received 
      8th December 2016
    , Accepted 23rd January 2017First published on 26th January 2017AbstractUsing several metals with different work functions as solar cell back contact we identify majority carrier type inversion in methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3, without intentional doping) as the basis for the formation of a p–n junction. MAPbBr3 films deposited on TiO2 are slightly n-type, whereas in a full device they are strongly p-type. The charge transfer between the metal electrode and the halide perovskite (HaP) film is shown to determine the dominant charge carrier type of the HaP and, thus, also of the final cells. Usage of Pt, Au and Pb as metal electrodes shows the effects of metal work function on minority carrier diffusion length and majority carrier concentration in the HaP, as well as on built-in voltage, band bending, and open circuit voltage (VOC) within a solar cell. VOC > 1.5 V is demonstrated. The higher the metal WF, the higher the carrier concentration induced in the HaP, as indicated by a narrower space charge region and a smaller minority carrier diffusion length. From the analysis of bias-dependent electron beam-induced currents, the HaP carrier concentrations are estimated to be ∼ 1 × 1017 cm−3 with Au and 2–3 × 1018 cm−3 with Pt. A model in which type-inversion stretches across the entire film width implies formation of the p–n junction away from the interface, near the back-contact metal electrode. This work highlights the importance of the contact metal on device performance in that contact engineering can also serve to control the carrier concentration in HaP.
1. Introduction
Trading high efficiency for high VOC (>1.3 V) in a single-junction photovoltaic device requires the use of high band gap (>1.8 eV) materials. Within the halide perovskite (HaP) materials family, methylammonium- and/or cesium- and/or formamidinium lead tribromide ((MA/Cs/FA)PbBr3)-based devices have been shown to fulfill this requirement.1–8 Such devices are suitable for applications such as production of solar fuels and as cells to use the high energy part of the solar spectrum in multi-junction devices (via spectrum splitting or in tandem configurations).9–12 A full thin-film HaP device normally consists of an electron-selective transport layer (ETL), optional hole-selective transport layer (HTL) and metal (or high conductivity metal-like oxide or polymer) electrodes. For the most widely studied MA-lead triiodide (MAPbI3) HaP, such a structure is theorized to aid in having a high built-in field and an excited carrier selectivity throughout the HaP film. In terms of charge separation, the working mechanism of MAPbI3 is as that of a p–i–n junction.13 In previous work we found that MAPbBr3, deposited from a Cl-containing solution (MAPbBr3(Cl)), is a p-type material in a p–n junction type device, in contrast to the iodide analog.14,15 In that work, a common VOC of 1.3–1.4 V for the MAPbBr3(Cl) devices was demonstrated using a transparent electrode/ETL/HaP/HTL structure. Recently, Wu et al. reported that a VOC of 1.61 V can be achieved using MAPbBr3 when a cell with an ‘inverted structure’, i.e. inverted in as far that the light impinges on the HaP via the HTL, rather than the ETL side, giving a transparent electrode/HTL/HaP/ETL/metal electrode cell architecture.16 Theirs is the first report using ICBA or PCBM, two low electron affinity materials, as the ETLs for bromide-based devices, implying that the loss in translating the device's built-in voltage into VOC can be reduced by decreasing the energy difference between the perovskite's conduction band and the ETL's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).
We previously estimated the hole concentration of MAPbBr3(Cl) in a full, working device, using Electron Beam-Induced Current (EBIC) under bias, to be 1017 cm−3, suggesting moderate p-type doping.14 Other work, showing long minority carrier life time in the HaP with time-resolved photoluminescence, suggests low doping when deposited on glass without any conductive contact or substrate.3 Here we aim, using additional new experimental results, to provide a single explanation of the (sometimes contradicting) experimental evidence by suggesting a model in which either the selective layers or the metal contacts determine the nature of the majority carrier type of this HaP by charge transfer upon contact. We suggest that such charge transfer may be used to control free, dark, carrier concentration in the HaP, a challenge not yet resolved in this field.
Charge transfer occurs between a metal and a semiconductor when they are brought into direct electronic contact, if the two have different work functions. When the concentration of interface states is sufficiently low, this will result in a (change in) band bending in the semiconductor. As a result, the semiconductor may become more or less depleted of majority carriers close to the interface (Fig. 1 top). If the work function difference is large enough and the density of interface states is sufficiently low, the type of the majority carrier near the interface with the metal may invert, i.e., we have ‘type inversion’ of the semiconductor from n- to p-type or vice versa.17,18 This means that in the semiconductors, next to the interface, a p–n junction is formed (Fig. 1 bottom).
 Fig. 1  Built-in potential formation in an n-type semi-infinite semiconductor/metal inversion junction. Note that in the first (top) case the metal Fermi level is close to the mid-gap of the semiconductor, resulting in depletion at the interface. In the second (bottom) case the deeper (closer to the semiconductor valence band edge) metal Fermi level results in type inversion near the interface, and the point where the semiconductor Fermi level crosses the mid-gap is inside the semiconductor away from the interface. 
The J–V characteristic of a (metal contact)–(depleted semiconductor) junction will be rectifying at reverse bias; such a junction is known as a Schottky diode. Schottky diodes were identified in the past as candidates for photovoltaic (PV) devices,19,20 but it was quickly realized that only if depletion is strong enough to lead to type inversion do they allow preparation of efficient solar cells.21
An inversion junction has three main advantages over a non-inverted depletion junction:
(1) Charge carrier transport from the junction towards the contacts is more selective than in a non-inverted junction, for both electrons and holes, due to the presence of both p- and n-type semiconductor regions, which act as hole- and electron-selective materials.
(2) The built-in voltage will be higher, due to larger band bending; this results in a higher VOC than with a non-inverted junction.
(3) Charge separation will occur away from the physical interface, suppressing the effect of any remaining interface states on device performance.
Note that type-inversion, necessary for an inversion cell, is a property of a semiconducting material; it is different from so-called ‘inverted cells’, which refer to an architecture, inverted with respect to the direction of the incoming light. We will use the term type-inversion or type-inverted for a cell wherein its photovoltaically active semiconducting material underwent type-inversion. Type-inverted solar cells and inverted/inversion junctions are what we are concerned with here, and inverted structure cells will be referred to as such, so as to remain reasonably consistent with current, accepted nomenclatures, and attempt to minimize confusion.
The carrier concentration and type in a low-doped semiconductor thin film may be determined by a two-step process, depending on the nature of the contacts from both sides (e.g. ETL, HTL and/or metal film in HaP devices). For example, if the semiconductor is first deposited on a low WF material, electronic charge transfer that occurs to establish electronic equilibrium would result in n-type behavior of the semiconductor. If now a high WF metal (e.g., Pt or Au) is deposited on this semiconductor, then establishing a new electronic equilibrium can type-convert the part of the semiconductor closest to the high WF metal to p-type. Inversion of the majority carrier type will lead to the formation of a p–n junction within the semiconductor. Such a process depends on the initial doping of the semiconductor and the relative position of its Fermi level with respect to those of contact materials. For example, assume that a low n-doped semiconductor with a free carrier concentration of ∼1015 cm−3 is allowed to come in contact with a high WF metal. A few micrometer-thick film of this semiconductor will have 1011 carriers in a region with an area of 1 cm2. A metal will typically have a carrier density of ∼1022 cm−3 or, for a 1 nm thin film, ∼1015 cm2. Transfer of only a fraction of the 104 times more carriers in the 1 nm metal to the semiconductor will dominate the carrier concentration in the micrometer-thick semiconductor.17,22,23 A moderately n-doped semiconductor with a carrier concentration of 1017 cm−3 and a WF of 4.2 eV would be type-inverted to highly p-type upon contact with a 5.2 eV WF, 70 nm thick (semi-)metal PEDOT:PSS.20,24 The same n-type semiconductor, but surface-treated to have a low WF, in the range of ∼3.5 eV, can be type-inverted to p-type by a 4.5 eV metal such as Hg.25,26
For MAPbBr3(Cl) we deduce this mechanism by first showing that the MAPbBr3(Cl) WF is determined by the substrate on which it is deposited. We further show that only upon depositing a highly-doped semiconductor or a metal on top of the HaP, does a built-in field develop in the HaP. The magnitude of the built-in voltage can be controlled by the WF of the deposited metal, and deposition of Pb, Au and Pt with WFs of 4.25, 5.1 and 5.6 eV for clean surfaces, respectively, results in an average VOC of 0.22, 1.3 and 1.46 V, respectively. Thus, this study also presents a systematic investigation of the effect of the contact metal electrode on the physical properties and performance for this PV system. Doping of the HaP upon its contact with various metals is confirmed by EBIC analysis of the formed junctions. Our results suggest that a d-TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/HTL/Au or Pt device is an inversion type device and that by promoting charge transfer between the metal electrode and the HaP film, a higher VOC may be achieved.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Device fabrication
F-Doped tin oxide (FTO) transparent conducting substrates (Xinyan Technology TCO-XY15) were cut and cleaned by sequential sonication for 15 min in warm aqueous Alconox solution, deionized water, acetone, and ethanol, followed by drying in a N2 stream. A compact ∼60 nm thin TiO2 layer was then applied onto the clean substrate by spray pyrolysis of a 30 mM titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution in isopropanol using air as the carrier gas on a hot plate set to 450 °C, followed by two-step annealing at 160 °C and 500 °C, each for 1 hour in air.
A MAPbBr3(Cl) solution was prepared as described elsewhere.14,27 In short, MABr was prepared by mixing methylamine (40% in methanol) with hydrobromic acid (47% in water) in a 1:1 molar ratio in a 250 mL flask under continuous stirring at 0 °C for 30 minutes. MABr was then crystallized by removing the solvent in a rotary evaporator, washed three times with diethyl ether and filtered. The material, in the form of white crystals, was dried overnight in a vacuum oven at 65 °C. It was then kept in a dark, dry environment until further use. A 40 wt% solution of MAPbBr3(Cl) was prepared by mixing PbCl2 and MABr in a 3:1 molar ratio in DMF. To coat the substrate, the solution was spin-coated on a substrate at 80 °C in two stages, 3 seconds at 500 rpm and then at 5000 rpm for 30 seconds. The substrate was then heated on a hot plate set at 155 °C for 45 minutes. All procedures were carried out in an ambient atmosphere. Next, 125 μL of a hot (ca. 80 °C) hole conductor solution (40 mg of CBP in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, mixed with 4.5 μL of tert-butylpyridine and 14 μL of 170 mg mL−1 Li-TFSi, bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide (in acetonitrile)) was applied by spin-coating at 500 rpm for 30 seconds and then at 2000 rpm for 40 seconds. The samples were left overnight in the dark in dry air before 100 nm gold contacts were thermally evaporated on the back through a shadow mask with 0.24 cm2 rectangular holes. When PTAA was used, 125 μL of 15 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, mixed with 7.5 μL 1:1 acetonitrile:tert-butylpyridine solution and 7.5 μL of 170 mg mL−1 Li-TFSi in acetonitrile, was spin-coated on the sample. When PMMA was used, 125 μL of an 8 mg mL−1 solution in toluene was spin-coated on the sample.
2.2 Sample preparation for CPD, SPV and UPS measurements
Samples based on FTO/TiO2 were fabricated as detailed above and stopping the process at the necessary layer. PEDOT:PSS solutions were made by mixing 50% v/v water with Clevios™ PH 1000 and adding 40 μL mL−1 Zonyl™. The solution was spun onto a clean FTO substrate at 1500 rpm for 30 seconds and annealed at 150 °C for 30 minutes. MAPbBr3(Cl) was deposited as described above.
2.3 Characterization
UPS measurements were carried out using a Kratos AXIS ULTRA system, using a concentric hemispherical analyzer for photo-excited electron detection. A helium discharge lamp, with He I (21.22 eV) and He II (40.8 eV) radiation lines, was used as the excitation source. The total energy resolution was less than 100 meV, as determined from the Fermi edge of a Au reference sample. The spectra were measured by applying a bias of −5 V to the sample to observe the photoemission onset at low kinetic energies.
CPD and surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements were performed in a custom-built Kelvin probe system with a Besocke Delta-Phi controller and a gold mesh probe. Sample illumination was performed using a controllable intensity 360 W halogen lamp. All measurements were performed in a nitrogen-filled glovebox with nominal O2 and H2O levels below 5 ppm and at a pressure of 1.0035 bar. More information regarding CPD/SPV measurements can be found in the ESI.†
The current–voltage curves of the devices were measured using a Keithley 2400-LV SourceMeter and controlled with a LabVIEW-based, in-house written program. A home-built solar simulator equipped with a xenon arc lamp and an AM 1.5 filter was used for illumination. The power output of the solar simulator was adjusted to match AM1.5 global sunlight (100 mW cm−2) by using a reference Si photodiode (IXOLAR™ High Efficiency SolarBIT, IXYS KXOB22-12X1L) as well as by calibrating against natural sunlight by an Eppley pyranometer. 4 × 4 mm2 device dimensions were determined from the size of the metal electrode and a shadow mask of that size.
EBIC analysis was done using a Zeiss Supra scanning electron microscope (SEM), together with a Stanford Instruments pre-amplifier model SR570. The EBIC signal was directed into an input channel of the SEM computer and recorded using the standard Zeiss SEM software. In order to separate the background dark current from the EBIC signal when bias is applied to the device, the pre-amplifier was further connected with a lock-in amplifier while the primary e-beam intensity was modulated using a fast beam blanker. The SEM beam blanker was operated within a frequency range of 60–65 kHz depending on the sample. An accelerating voltage of 3 kV, a diameter aperture of 7.5 μm, and a working distance of 7–8 mm were used, which resulted in a 3–4 pA beam current. The interaction volume limits the resolution under these conditions to ∼20 nm. Care must be taken to avoid beam damage, which can affect the measured properties. The effect of beam-induced changes in the EBIC signal for the Br HaP in particular was studied extensively and the mentioned conditions minimize beam damage-related artifacts.28 More information regarding EBIC measurements and data analysis can be found in the ESI.†
3. Results and discussion
The first support for possible type-inversion is the ability to shift the WF (i.e., the position of the Fermi level, EF, in the gap w.r.t. the reference (“local vacuum”) level)29 of MAPbBr3(Cl) using different substrates. WF was measured both by using a Kelvin Probe (KP) in an inert dry N2 atmosphere and by UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) performed in UHV. In short, in a Kelvin probe measurement, the vacuum levels of the probe and the sample surfaces are aligned by biasing the probe with respect to the sample. The applied bias [known as contact potential difference (CPD)] is used to infer the WF difference.
The WF values of bare dense-TiO2 and PEDOT:PSS were measured (∼4.5 eV and ∼5.2 eV respectively) and compared with that of the HaP film, deposited on top of either of these substrates. The results for the HaP WF are presented in Table 1 using KP and in Fig. S1 (ESI†) using UPS.
Table 1 WF of MAPbBr3(Cl) films on different substrates, measured by a Kelvin probe




Substrate
WF [eV]




FTO/TiO2
4.5 ± 0.15


FTO/PEDOT:PSS
5.1 ± 0.1




The results of both methods show that the HaP WF follows closely that of the substrate, spanning a 0.6–0.7 eV range depending on the substrate WF. This suggests that the HaP film has a very low free carrier concentration. Then, depending on the WF difference, charge transfer across the interface with the substrate can result in a large change in the Fermi level position within the gap. For a semi-infinite semiconductor, a depletion region of width ωd should develop according to eqn (1): (1)where εs is the dielectric constant, Vbi is the built-in voltage and N is the doping concentration. For low doping density (≤1015 cm−3) and high εs (∼75), a space charge region width can be estimated, showing that it can extend over what may be the entire film thickness of ∼1 μm.30,31 A low Vbi, e.g. 100 mV, formed due to the HaP/metal contact, would result in ωd ≥ ∼0.8 μm, all of the width of HaP films normally used in solar cells. For Vbi = 0.5 V or more, ωd would become >1 μm. Note that the textbook analysis used here is for a model semi-infinite semiconductor; for a real HaP film with a thickness varying between 0.5 and 1 μm, in which carrier (re-)distribution is limited, a stronger effect is expected. The carrier concentration in the film will therefore depend entirely on charge redistribution upon formation of an interface with a high carrier density material. Furthermore, in the case of a full device, where the HaP is sandwiched between two conductive layers, imbalanced charge transfer would result in the built-in field being close to one of the interfaces. The magnitude of the built-in field in the HaP can be estimated by the light response of the Kelvin probe measurement (the surface photovoltage, SPV; see further explanation in the experimental section). As illumination is done from the glass side (as is the case for full devices), SPV can also be measured if a thick metal electrode covers the device.32
For a partial device structure with an exposed HaP surface, before deposition of an HTL, a small SPV of ∼300 mV is detected. This illustrates the relatively small quasi-Fermi level splitting at the TiO2–HaP interface (assuming no significant band bending at the HaP surface).33 Deposition of even an ultra-thin (∼1 nm) non-continuous Au film on the HaP increases the light response to ∼1 V (Table 2). To prevent shorting with the TiO2 upon Au deposition onto the HaP, first a PMMA [poly(methyl methacrylate)] filler was deposited on the HaP.32 The amount of PMMA was adjusted so as to only fill the gaps between the HaP crystals, but not cover the top of the HaP (which would block charge transfer between the Au and HaP). PMMA by itself was found not to contribute to the SPV (Table 2). This result suggests that the Au electrode is essential to the formation of most of the built-in field. This is in contrast to what was found for MAPbI3(Cl) thin film devices, where the larger contribution to charge separation and VOC is derived from the interface with the electron-selective layer.33,34
Table 2 Surface photovoltage (SPV) values of bare MAPbBr3(Cl) on TiO2 and after deposition of an Au electrode




Substrates
SPV [mV]




FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)
300 ± 100


FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/(PMMA)
300 ± 100


FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/(PMMA)/Au
1000 ± 100




Several hole transport materials (HTM) have been suggested as candidates for high VOC Br–HaP devices including spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA and CBP, as well as no HTL.2–4,8,35 Here we used CBP [4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl] and PTAA [polytriarylamine] as examples that allow devices with VOC > 1.4 V. The CBP's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is ∼6.25 eV and the PTAA's HOMO is ∼5.15 eV below the reference level.4,36 According to recent work,37 the band offset between the HaP valence band maximum (VBM) and HTM HOMO positions does not necessarily support high VOC. Ideally, the offset facilitates a driving force for hole extraction, although a too large offset would impose a voltage loss. In the case of CBP, the offset may result in a barrier for hole extraction and an S-shaped I–V curve (see Fig. S2, ESI†).21,38 Remarkably, though, occurrence of such a curve has a small effect on the VOC of the device (Fig. S3, ESI†). In either case, a few nanometer-thick organic layer of CBP on top of the HaP film may allow charge transfer via trap states, even if the relative position of the bands is non-optimal, based on the widely accepted model for transport in organic semiconductors. The actual energy-level alignment is not well-controlled and probably depends on the specific deposition method and chemical interactions (if any) between the HTL and perovskite as well as on the materials used.
As is done for many organic semiconductors, both Li-TFSi [bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide] lithium salt and TBP [4-tert-butylpyridine] can be added to CBP and PTAA to improve conductivity and morphology.39 An enhanced conductivity using Li-TFSi depends on the efficiency of charge transfer between the organic semiconductor backbone and the additive. Here we used the HTL both with and without Li-TFSi (denoted “doped” and “undoped”, respectively). As shown in Fig. 2, a high built-in voltage is observed in the device upon its contact with the HaP with doped PTAA, and in this case the deposition of an Au film does not contribute further. For undoped PTAA, a significantly lower built-in voltage is indicated, which increases upon deposition of an Au electrode. Formation of a built-in voltage in the device requires charge transfer from the HTL or metal electrode to the HaP. When PTAA is undoped, further deposition of the Au electrode is required to allow complete development of the built-in voltage (which requires sufficient charge carriers to be available for transfer) and, thus, to induce a strong light response. As the free carrier concentration of doped PTAA is high enough, a high built-in voltage is formed upon contact between the materials.
 Fig. 2  SPV (Y-axis) of FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/PTAA stack before and after Au deposition on the PTAA. The notation (−Li) and (+Li) indicates whether Li-TFSi was added (to dope the PTAA) or not. 
In the case of CBP, before Au electrode deposition, an SPV of ∼400 mV was found, regardless of the addition of Li-TFSi (Table 3). This may be due to a lower doping efficiency (lower free carrier concentration) compared with PTAA and/or an energy level (mis)alignment with the HaP. As Au is evaporated, the SPV increases to >1000 mV.
Table 3 SPV values with doped CBP (doped with Li-TFSi and TBP) as the HTL top surface and with a ∼1 nm (nominal) Au film deposited on top of the CBP




Substrate
SPV [mV]




FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP
400 ± 100


FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP/Au (∼1 nm)
1100 ± 100




A high SPV response is observed with as little as 1 nm of Au film over the device with either CBP or undoped-PTAA. Such thickness is nominal as the Au film is most likely non-continuous, but sufficient to facilitate the formation of a high built-in voltage. This means that charge separation is not facilitated by the HTL itself, but that the Au film is required. A similar observation was seen with an ∼6 nm thick, transparent carbon electrode (see ESI†). To rule out any effect, which may arise from exposing the samples to the evaporation chamber environment during gold evaporation, the samples denoted CBP in Table 3 were kept in the chamber but were shaded by a sample shutter. These samples yielded an SPV response similar to the case where no such exposure was performed, i.e., after deposition of CBP only. From the PTAA and CBP cases, we learn that the HTL itself is not sufficient to facilitate charge separation and a high built-in field in the device and that charge transfer, either from doped PTAA or from a metal film, plays a crucial role in the photovoltaic process.
As a ca. 350–400 mV higher VOC can be achieved using CBP than PTAA, in the remainder of this report we will focus on devices with CBP as the HTL. The WF of various metals should correlate, assuming low interface state concentration, with the built-in voltage and hence with the VOC of a full device.
Full devices were made using doped CBP with Pb, Au or Pt as electrodes to investigate this correlation and provide experimental information about the effect of the metal WF on VOC.
Pb is a low work function metal, selected because of its low diffusion rate into organic materials, when evaporated onto them.40,41 Pt was selected as its WF is higher than that of Au, which is a standard metal of choice for HaP research. The metal WF values are 4.2–4.3 eV for Pb, 4.9–5.1 and 5.4–5.6 for Au and Pt, respectively, depending on their purity and adsorbed contaminants.42–45I–V characteristics of the best-performing devices are presented in Fig. 3. Little hysteresis is seen with Au and Pt electrodes; more significant hysteresis is evident with the Pb electrode. Using Pb as a metal electrode results in a lower VOC than what can be expected based on the SPV values of the device without metal, i.e., with CBP as the exposed top layer. This finding suggests that in this case the metal contact actually impedes efficient charge separation. The average device performances are presented in Table 4.
 Fig. 3  Light-induced I–V characteristics of the FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP/metal device, where the metal is Pb, Au or Pt. 
Table 4 Average PV characteristics of the devices




Metal
Metal WF [eV]

V
OC [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]

η [%]





a Data were taken from forward scans only.





Pba
4.2–4.3
0.22 ± 0.05
2.0 ± 0.1
14 ± 1
0.07 ± 0.005


Au
4.9–5.1
1.30 ± 0.05
4.7 ± 0.2
53 ± 8
3.3 ± 0.5


Pt
5.4–5.6
1.46 ± 0.02
5.2 ± 0.2
55 ± 7
4.2 ± 0.6




On average, with Pt as an electrode the VOC is 150 mV higher than that of Au, with a highest VOC of 1.5 V. As the built-in voltage should translate to some extent into VOC in a device configuration, the correlation between the built-in voltage as measured with SPV and the device VOC further suggests an inversion mechanism. The slightly n-type HaP transforms into p-type throughout most of the film thickness, as shown below. With the Pb electrode, the low VOC and the shape of the I–V curve suggest a different profile of the built-in voltage compared to that expected from a p–n junction. The small charge transfer that is expected in this case should result in a close to flat energy band profile and, thus, low selectivity of the contact. Majority carrier concentration is expected to affect the minority carrier diffusion length and the space charge region width. Both parameters can be extracted using an actual device structure (rather than a partial device or a pure HaP sample) from the Electron Beam-Induced Current (EBIC) profile of the device’s cross section. EBIC has been used previously to investigate the working mechanism of HaP-based solar cells.13–14,46 By modeling the shape of the signal, a quantitative analysis of the excited minority carrier diffusion length and the space charge region width can be made. Across a p–n junction, a high and flat signal is expected from the space charge region (SCR) and a mono-exponential decay is expected where charge collection is diffusion-limited. Two important drawbacks of EBIC measurements and analysis are the effects of morphology on the signal strength and beam damage-related changes in signal strength and profile.44 The first can be mitigated by selecting morphologically (topographically) featureless areas for analysis. Beam damage-related uncertainty requires careful analysis of the phenomena to estimate their effects on the EBIC signal. The EBIC image and line scan resolution are inversely correlated with the primary beam energy; for HaP we find that for a beam energy of 3 keV, the resolution is ∼20 nm.13,14
SEM and EBIC images of the cross-sections are presented in Fig. 4; the images are contrast-enhanced and the brightness of the image is therefore arbitrary and cannot be used to compare the collection efficiency between the samples. An overlay of the signal was used to determine the physical location of the EBIC signal. In all cases, the profile shape shows a high and flat EBIC signal close to the TiO2/HaP interface, which changes into a mono-exponential decay deeper into the film. This signature shape fits the one expected from a p–n junction, with a space charge region close to the TiO2/HaP interface and a quasi-neutral region (QNR) further into the film, which means that MAPbBr3 is a p-type material and that the minority carriers are electrons.14
 Fig. 4  Secondary electron images (left) and EBIC images (right) of devices with different metal electrodes. The EBIC signal peaks at the TiO2/HaP interface and decays into the HaP, indicating an SCR at that interface and a QNR close to the HaP/HTL interface. 
This result strengthens our above-mentioned observation that the charge transfer between the metal electrode and the HaP film strongly affects the carrier concentration throughout the film thickness. In the classical metal/semi-infinite semiconductor Schottky diode case, the potential difference that is the origin of the built-in voltage occurs between the metal/semiconductor interface and the bulk (Fig. 5 top). In the present case, in contrast, accumulation of charge in a thin film results in most of the film being type-inverted (Fig. 5 bottom). The built-in voltage therefore starts at the interface away from the metal next to the TiO2 and extends towards the back-contact metal.
 Fig. 5  Type inversion of semi-infinite semiconductor/metal junction compared to HaP film/metal junction. Note the flat band in the top illustration in the semi-infinite semiconductor vs. the built-in voltage formation at the back contact in the real HaP film. 
To extract the space charge region width and the excited minority carrier diffusion length, we used a simple model for the EBIC signal as we did previously.14,47 In short, a mono-exponential growth and decay were used to model the increase and decrease of signal around the SCR. Assuming constant generation and forcing a continuity of the signal, the SCR width was determined by deviation from the exponential decay/growth.
The averaged and normalized EBIC profiles are presented in Fig. 6a for all metal electrodes. As mentioned, the peak of the signal is situated at the TiO2/HaP interface, where the decay on the left is into the TiO2. In comparison to the Au or Pt electrodes, a wider peak and a lower decay rate of the EBIC signal is clearly seen with the Pb electrode. The difference in the SCR width and the electron diffusion length (Fig. 6b) is consistent with the hypothesis of inversion of the HaP from n- to p-type when the metal electrode is added. A higher WF metal results in a more p-type material, which in turn results in a narrower SCR width and a smaller electron diffusion length, Ln, since Ln is inversely proportional to the majority carrier concentration. Further indication that the CBP does not play a role in determining either Wd or Ln comes from a PMMA/Au device instead of CBP/Au. In the PMMA sample, a 95 ± 25 nm SCR width and an electron diffusion length of 260 ± 50 nm were measured (Fig. S5, ESI†), values that are, within the measurement error, the same as those obtained for the junction with CBP/Au. In light of this it is important to note that the important function of the HTM for device performance is to block electrons from reaching the metal contact. The device performance with PMMA was poor in terms of current (and energy conversion efficiency).
 Fig. 6  (a) Averaged, normalized representative EBIC profiles of the junctions with different metals, with the physical junction indicated as a vertical line; (b) differences in the space charge region (SCR) and electron diffusion length (Ln) between junctions with three different metals. The numbers are averaged from two (Pt) or three (Pb, Au) sets of samples each. 25 EBIC profiles were taken at five locations per sample. 
Further analysis of the doping density when Au and Pt electrodes are applied can be done using voltage-dependent EBIC analysis of the SCR width (Wd). Using the slope of a linear regression under different bias conditions, the carrier concentration can be calculated according to eqn (2): (2)where ε0 and εr are the vacuum and relative dielectric permittivity, e is the elementary charge, NA is the carrier concentration and Va and Vbi are the applied and built-in voltage respectively. The result of this analysis for the device with a Pt electrode can be found in Fig. S6 in the ESI.† With a Pt electrode a carrier concentration of 2–3 × 1018 cm−3 is calculated, whereas with Au a carrier concentration of 0.9–1 × 1017 cm−3 was previously found (adjusting εr to present the best estimate).14 The calculated carrier concentration with the Pt electrode is consistent with that of highly doped (p-type) HaP, as expected from the suggested model.
To summarize the above results, semi-quantitative schematic band diagrams (not to scale on the x-axis) depicting the suggested model for the structure of the cells with the three different contacts are presented in Fig. 7. In this figure, the work functions of the metals were taken as 4.25, 5.1, and 5.6 eV for the Pb, Au, and Pt, respectively; a built-in potential of 300 meV larger than the respective device VOC was used for the p–n junction. As the WF of the HaP follows that of the substrate, a slight band bending is seen without the metal electrode. The low SPV signal in that case may arise from charge injection from the HaP into the TiO2. Formation of the p–n junction requires forcing of a potential drop over the CBP, to maintain the continuity of the electronic potential. The strong band slanting, indicated as an inclination of the CBP reference level, may explain the double diode seen in cases where the CBP layer is too thick to allow efficient trap state-mediated transport through the layer (see ESI,† Fig. S3).
 Fig. 7  Illustrative band diagrams of the junctions obtained with CBP as HTL with different metals. The band positions of the FTO, TiO2 and HaP films in the diagram are based on measurements presented here. The HOMO–LUMO positions of the CBP, as well as the metal work functions, are estimates taken from the literature. 
The width of the SCR, the low doping of the HaP and the long excited carrier diffusion length when using Pb do not result in a high performance device as could be thought, naively, due to the low selectivity of the junction. Charge separation in this case is limited to the HaP/CBP interface, and thus occurs at low efficiency as both carriers must diffuse a distance larger than the characteristic diffusion length. Better selectivity when Au and Pt electrodes are used results in an overall higher performance, not only in terms of VOC.
4. Conclusions
We demonstrate the importance of the metal electrode in determining the type and selectivity of the p–n junction formed at the contact between TiO2 and MAPbBr3(Cl) when CBP is used as a hole transport material. Charge transfer between the metal electrode and the HaP, upon establishing an electronic equilibrium after contact formation, results in inversion of most of the HaP from slightly n-type to highly-doped p-type. A VOC as high as 1.5 V is demonstrated using TiO2 and a (high-WF) Pt electrode, illustrating the importance of charge transfer between the selective layers and/or metal contacts and the HaP absorber. The small width of the HaP film results in a strong impact of this effect on carrier concentration. The position of the SCR is therefore next to the HaP/TiO2 interface and not, as common in other known inversion layer devices, next to the HTL (i.e., metal interface). It is therefore of great importance to take into consideration the work function and carrier concentration of the contacts that are used in electronic or opto-electronic measurements as they may determine the behavior of the HaP. Finally, a high conductivity, deep HOMO hole transport material as well as a shallow-LUMO ETL, is required for the MAPbBr3(Cl) based devices to allow them to fulfill their full potential in high photovoltage generation and to reduce the effect of the metal electrodes. It will be important to extend these studies to other perovskites, and in particular, p–i–n (or n–i–p) cells, which are normally formed using MAPbI3.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Drs Alex Yoffe and Tatyana Bendikov of the Chemical Research Support (CRS) department for the development of the soft Pt evaporation procedure and for UPS measurements, respectively. We also thank Dr Ifat Kaplan-Ashiri and Mr Ofer Dudovitch of the CRS' Electron Microscopy Unit for their help in constructing and installing the EBIC apparatus on the SEM system. This work was supported by the Israel Ministry of Science via its Tashtyoth and Israel-China programs and by the Israel National Nano-Initiative. This research is made possible in part by the historic generosity of the Harold Perlman Family. T. M. B. thanks the WIS for an Alternative Sustainable Energy Research Initiative (AERI) postdoctoral fellowship. D. C. holds the Sylvia and Rowland Schaefer Chair in Energy Research.
References
M. Kulbak, S. Gupta, N. Kedem, I. Levine, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 167–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, M. Kulbak, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sheng, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. Chen, X. Wen, X. Hao and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3545–3549 CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
B. Suarez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. S. Ripolles, R. S. Sanchez, L. Otero and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Hanusch, E. Wiesenmayer, E. Mankel, A. Binek, P. Angloher, C. Fraunhofer, N. Giesbrecht, J. M. Feckl, W. Jaegermann, D. Johrendt, T. Bein and P. Docampo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dymshits, A. Rotem and L. Etgar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20776–20781 CAS .
Y.-S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kinoshita, K. Nonomura, N. Joong Jeon, F. Giordano, A. Abate, S. Uchida, T. Kubo, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and H. Segawa, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. McCambridge, M. A. Steiner, B. L. Unger, K. A. Emery, E. L. Christensen, M. W. Wanlass, A. L. Gray, L. Takacs, R. Buelow, T. A. McCollum, J. W. Ashmead, G. R. Schmidt, A. W. Haas, J. R. Wilcox, J. Van Meter, J. L. Gray, D. T. Moore, A. M. Barnett and R. J. Schwartz, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 352–360 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
N. Kedem, T. M. Brenner, M. Kulbak, N. Schaefer, S. Levcenko, I. Levine, D. Abou-Ras, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 2469–2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
MAPbBr3(Cl) refers to MAPbBr3−xClx. Since we assume all the cloride Is out, we abbreviated this material as MAPbBr3(Cl) due to its origins.
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang and S. H. Chang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4077–4085 RSC .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, Murray Hill, NJ, USA, 2nd edn,  1998 Search PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, Imperical College, London, UK,  2003 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, N. Kedem, H. Cohen, P. Barnes and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16884–16891 CAS .
A. S. Erickson, A. Zohar and D. Cahen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301724 CrossRef .
R. Har-Lavan and D. Cahen, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 1443–1459 CrossRef .

          C. G. B. Garrett and W. H. Brattain, Physical Theory of Semiconductor Surfaces, Physical Review,  1955, vol. 99, pp. 376–387 Search PubMed .
In ref. 17, page 369 Fig. 5.
A. S. Erickson, N. K. Kedem, A. E. Haj-Yahia and D. Cahen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 233901 CrossRef .
R. Har-Lavan, O. Yaffe, P. Joshi, R. Kazaz, H. Cohen and D. Cahen, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 12164 CrossRef .
A.-E. Haj-Yahia, O. Yaffe, T. Bendikov, H. Cohen, Y. Feldman, A. Vilan and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 702–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tidhar, E. Edri, H. Weissman, D. Zohar, G. Hodes, D. Cahen, B. Rybtchinski and S. Kirmayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13249–13256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Klein-Kedem, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 347–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 17, 112–116 RSC .
Y. Rakita, E. Meirzadeh, T. Bendikov, V. Kalchenko, I. Lubomirsky, G. Hodes, D. Ehre and D. Cahen, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 51101 CrossRef .
R. B. K. Siram, J. Das, S. Mukhopadhyay, T. M. Brenner, N. Kedem, M. Kulbak, T. Bendikov, D. Cahen, G. Hodes and B. Rybtchinski, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600506 CrossRef .
L. Barnea-Nehoshtan, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2408–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Das, R. B. K. Siram, D. Cahen, B. Rybtchinski and G. Hodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20305 CAS .
M. Kröger, S. Hamwi, J. Meyer, T. Riedl, W. Kowalsky and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 932–938 CrossRef .
J. Endres, D. A. Egger, M. Kulbak, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, S. H. Silver, G. Hodes, B. P. Rand, D. Cahen, L. Kronik and A. Kahn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2722–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, P. V. V. Jayaweera, S. Kaneko, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1750–1752 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio, M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo, I. McPherson and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2572–2579 RSC .
X. Yu, R. Lovrinčić, O. Kraynis, G. Man, T. Ely, A. Zohar, T. Toledano, D. Cahen and A. Vilan, Small, 2014, 10, 5151–5160 CAS .

          R. Lovrinčić, O. Kraynis, R. Har-Lavan, A.-E. Haj-Yahya, W. Li, A. Vilan and D. Cahen, 2012, arXiv: cond-mat/12112174.
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4729–4733 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumatani, Y. Li, P. Darmawan, T. Minari and K. Tsukagoshi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–6 Search PubMed .
CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 2008.
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1950, 21, 536–540 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Donolato, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 66, 4524–4525 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UPS spectra, additional I–V curves, EBIC of cells with PMMA, change in the space charge region width with applied bias, CPD and SPV detailed working mechanism and working procedure and data analysis for EBIC. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08392g‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Built-in potential formation in an n-type semi-infinite semiconductor/metal inversion junction. Note that in the first (top) case the metal Fermi level is close to the mid-gap of the semiconductor, resulting in depletion at the interface. In the second (bottom) case the deeper (closer to the semiconductor valence band edge) metal Fermi level results in type inversion near the interface, and the point where the semiconductor Fermi level crosses the mid-gap is inside the semiconductor away from the interface.	 

FTO/TiO2	4.5 ± 0.15
FTO/PEDOT:PSS	5.1 ± 0.1
	(1)

FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)	300 ± 100
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/(PMMA)	300 ± 100
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/(PMMA)/Au	1000 ± 100

 	Fig. 2  SPV (Y-axis) of FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/PTAA stack before and after Au deposition on the PTAA. The notation (−Li) and (+Li) indicates whether Li-TFSi was added (to dope the PTAA) or not.	 

FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP	400 ± 100
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP/Au (∼1 nm)	1100 ± 100

 	Fig. 3  Light-induced I–V characteristics of the FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3(Cl)/CBP/metal device, where the metal is Pb, Au or Pt.	 


Pba	4.2–4.3	0.22 ± 0.05	2.0 ± 0.1	14 ± 1	0.07 ± 0.005
Au	4.9–5.1	1.30 ± 0.05	4.7 ± 0.2	53 ± 8	3.3 ± 0.5
Pt	5.4–5.6	1.46 ± 0.02	5.2 ± 0.2	55 ± 7	4.2 ± 0.6

 	Fig. 4  Secondary electron images (left) and EBIC images (right) of devices with different metal electrodes. The EBIC signal peaks at the TiO2/HaP interface and decays into the HaP, indicating an SCR at that interface and a QNR close to the HaP/HTL interface.	 

 	Fig. 5  Type inversion of semi-infinite semiconductor/metal junction compared to HaP film/metal junction. Note the flat band in the top illustration in the semi-infinite semiconductor vs. the built-in voltage formation at the back contact in the real HaP film.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Averaged, normalized representative EBIC profiles of the junctions with different metals, with the physical junction indicated as a vertical line; (b) differences in the space charge region (SCR) and electron diffusion length (Ln) between junctions with three different metals. The numbers are averaged from two (Pt) or three (Pb, Au) sets of samples each. 25 EBIC profiles were taken at five locations per sample.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Illustrative band diagrams of the junctions obtained with CBP as HTL with different metals. The band positions of the FTO, TiO2 and HaP films in the diagram are based on measurements presented here. The HOMO–LUMO positions of the CBP, as well as the metal work functions, are estimates taken from the literature.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UPS spectra, additional I–V curves, EBIC of cells with PMMA, change in the space charge region width with applied bias, CPD and SPV detailed working mechanism and working procedure and data analysis for EBIC. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08392g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
