Assessing the outdoor photochemical stability of conjugated polymers by EPR spectroscopy   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA04605C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04605C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13166-13170Assessing the outdoor photochemical stability of conjugated polymers by EPR spectroscopy†

        
          
            Alexander I. 
            Shames
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Liana N. 
            Inasaridze
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alexander V. 
            Akkuratov
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Andrei E. 
            Goryachev
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Eugene A. 
            Katz
          
        
      cd and 

        
          
            Pavel A. 
            Troshin
          
        
      be
aDepartment of Physics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, 8410501, Be'er-Sheva, Israel. E-mail: sham@bgu.ac.il
bIPCP RAS, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka, 141432, Russia
cDepartment of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, Swiss Institute for Dryland Environmental and Energy Research, J. Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boker Campus, 8499000, Israel
dIlse Katz Institute of Nano-Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva 8410501, Israel
eSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel st. 3, Moscow, 143026, Russia
Received 
      2nd June 2016
    , Accepted 25th July 2016First published on 25th July 2016AbstractWe report the first outdoor study of the intrinsic photochemical stability of a series of conjugated polymers encapsulated in an inert atmosphere and exposed to natural sunlight illumination conditions in the Negev Desert. The photoinduced aging effects resulting in the modification of the chemical structures of the materials and the appearance of persistent radical species in the samples were revealed by EPR spectroscopy. Comparing the degradation profiles normalized to the total number of absorbed photons allowed us to establish some correlations between the chemical structures of polymers (and even particular building blocks) and their photostability. Our approach may be widely used for the facile screening of many existing conjugated polymers with respect to their intrinsic photostability under outdoor solar conditions as well as for the elaboration of guidelines for designing novel promising materials for stable and efficient organic photovoltaics.
Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have been progressing very rapidly since the last decade. Major efforts of researchers were focused on the enhancement of the power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells,1–3 while the stability of the used materials and the devices received just a little attention. Unresolved long-term stability issues might be one of the main reasons why OPV devices still have not entered the real photovoltaic market by now in spite of the impressive progress in their power conversion efficiencies (above 10% for single junction OPV solar cells).2–4 While considering the stability of organic photoactive materials (mainly conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives), a special focus was placed on studying their photooxidation (e.g. stability in air or under aerobic conditions).4–6 However, it is known that even simple and robust non-conjugated polymers such as polypropylene, polystyrene or PMMA require special stabilizing additives to sustain simultaneous action of light, oxygen and moisture.7,8
Therefore, most probably, organic solar cells based on fragile conjugated organic molecules can be applied practically only in combination with appropriate barrier coatings which can prevent (or at least diminish substantially) penetration of oxygen and moisture into the active layer of the devices. This is not surprising since all existing types of photovoltaic cells require appropriate encapsulation to achieve reasonable operation lifetimes. It should be emphasized that organic semiconductors, in contrast to their inorganic analogues, can undergo degradation even in the absence of reactive species just under exposure to light and elevated temperatures, which cannot be avoided under real operation conditions of solar cells, even if they are ideally encapsulated. Mechanisms of such degradation might involve different photocyclization and cycloreversion reactions, formation of triplet excitons and their non-radiative quenching resulting in the cleavage of some bonds and formation of radical species.9 This is the reason why the investigation of the photostability of conjugated polymers and fullerene/polymer blends under anaerobic conditions (in the absence of oxygen or with a negligibly low O2 concentration) attracts more and more attention.10,11 Recently we have applied EPR spectroscopy for the assessment of the electronic quality of conjugated polymers designed for photovoltaic applications11 and investigation of their photostability.12 In particular, we performed a comparative study of seven different conjugated polymers and revealed the inferior stability of PTB7 and PBDTTT-CF polymers, while P3HT and PCDTBT were found to be the most stable ones. It should be emphasized that a high-power halogen lamp was used as a source of light in that work. Noteworthy is the fact that spectral difference between the halogen lamp and the solar light irradiation might have a considerable impact on the behaviour of the materials. Therefore, there is some uncertainty in the interpretation of the results with respect to real photovoltaic applications. In the present paper we report the first study of the photochemical stability of several structurally different conjugated polymers performed under real outdoor conditions in the Negev Desert (Israel). We show that electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy is a reliable tool for the assessment of intrinsic photodegradation of organic materials and revealing molecular structure/stability relationships.
Results and discussion
The molecular structures of polymers used in this work are shown in Fig. 1. The main set of the materials consists of four polymers which differ from each other only by the central electron donor building block D representing thiophene (P1), phenylene (P2), triphenylamine (P3) and cyclopentadithiophene (P4) residues. Polymer PCDTBT was chosen as a reference material since it demonstrated outstanding photochemical stability in thin films (examined by EPR, ref. 13) and operational stability in devices enabling estimated device lifetimes as long as 10–15 years.14 Following our previous report,12 the intrinsic photodegradation of the materials was monitored by EPR spectroscopy. The main idea of the experiment is based on the assumption that continuous pumping of the sample by sunlight results in a massive generation of excitons. Some of these excitons are quenched radiatively giving rise to photoluminescence. However, a minor fraction of excitons might undergo non-radiative quenching (especially when the initially formed singlet excited states are converted to triplets) resulting in the cleavage of some bonds and formation of biradicals. Most of these biradicals recombine and such a process does not lead to any changes in the structure of the material. However, some of these radicals can migrate along the chain of conjugated double bonds and interact with the double bonds of the same or neighboring molecules (radical addition) thus leading to cross-linking. It should be emphasized that all electron donor polymers, small molecules and even fullerene derivatives comprise multiple aromatic (or quasi-aromatic) units which can be arranged in a way providing the appropriate environment required for the stabilization of the radical species. The stability of triphenylmethane radicals and many other tri(het)arylmethane radicals is well known.15 Most probably, some similar species are generated in our samples under aging.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the polymers investigated in this work. 
Summarizing the aforementioned, we hypothesize that some minor fraction of the photogenerated radicals can be stabilized in the polymer films thus resulting in the formation of long-living species which can be easily detected by EPR spectroscopy at room temperature (RT) without using any additional illumination during the measurements (so-called “dark” EPR). It has been shown previously that such “persistent” radical species behave as traps for mobile charge carriers facilitating their recombination and limiting the photovoltaic characteristics of fullerene/polymer OPV cells.11
Exposing the thin films of conjugated polymers to sunlight should result in accumulation of radical species. Indeed, this expectation was completely fulfilled by the experimental data which showed a considerable rise of the “dark” signals with g = 2.0026 ± 0.0002 and line width ΔHpp ∼ 0.5 mT in the EPR spectra of all investigated samples on increasing the sunlight exposure time (Fig. 2). Analysis of the multiple EPR spectra recorded after sunlight exposure at different times allowed us to reconstruct the degradation profiles of the materials. Thus, Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the concentration of persistent radical species (e.g. not short-living ones induced by sunlight) in the investigated polymer samples as a function of the aging time.
 Fig. 2  RT EPR spectra of the pristine polymer films (so-called “dark” EPR spectra, black lines) and after their exposure to sunlight for 5 days (red lines), ν = 9.407 GHz. For getting a better signal-to-noise ratio, spectra were recorded under slightly saturated and overmodulated conditions (PMW = 20 mW and Amod = 1 mT). Background EPR signals are subtracted. 
 Fig. 3  The outdoor photodegradation profiles of conjugated polymers P1–P4 and PCDTBT as revealed from the EPR measurements. 
One might notice that the concentration of the radical species in the films of polymer P1 increased by a factor of ∼3 within the first few days after starting the outdoor aging experiment. However, it decreased again by a factor of ∼2 within the next month. Such particularly unusual behaviour can be explained by the assumption that thin films of polymer P1 adsorb oxygen from air so effectively that it cannot be removed completely during the continuous drying at elevated temperatures under vacuum and multiple evacuation-filling with pure helium. The traces of oxygen induce initially the photoinduced doping of the polymer resulting in the appearance of a strong polaron signal in the EPR spectrum. A similar behaviour has been previously observed for the poly(3-hexylthiophene)-oxygen system.13
Negatively charged counterions represented by reactive oxygen species tend to react further with the polymer chains producing finally diamagnetic products (e.g. H2O, ROH, ROOH, etc.). This explains the decrease in the intensity of the radical signal in P1 films at longer exposure times. The effect of oxygen is out of the scope of this report and should be addressed in future research.
Some important conclusions on the relative photostability of conjugated polymers P1–P4 and PCDTBT can be drawn by comparing their degradation profiles and, especially, the concentrations of radical species observed at the longest exposure time (104 days). In particular, the concentration of the radical species in polymer P4 was found to increase continuously with the aging time. This trend suggests that this material undergoes significant degradation under the exposure to sunlight. Most probably, such a behavior is induced by the presence of cyclopentadithiophene units in the molecular framework of this polymer. The final concentration of the radical species in the films of P1 is comparable to that observed for the reference polymer PCDTBT. Moreover, polymers P2 and P3 showed even lower concentrations of the radical species as compared to PCDTBT pointing out their excellent intrinsic photostability under natural outdoor illumination conditions.
Considering the experimental results presented in Fig. 3, we conclude that the relative photostability of polymers increases in the raw P4 ≪ P1 < P2 ∼ P3.
This conclusion is very important with respect to the photovoltaic applications of these materials where they are supposed to be exposed to sunlight for a long period of time. However, revealing the correlations between the molecular structures of the polymers and their intrinsic photochemical stability requires a deeper insight accounting for the differences in the optical properties of the materials. Indeed, polymers P1–P4 absorb different numbers of photons under illumination with solar light as can be concluded from their UV-vis light absorption spectra given in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† The optical bandgaps, Eg, of P1, P2, P3 and P4 were estimated from the fundamental edges of the spectra of thin polymer films to be 1.91 eV, 2.24 eV, 2.16 eV and 1.85 eV, respectively. Considering the fact that the sunlight in Sede Boker is very close to the AM1.5G standard (see the Experimental section) and assuming that thick polymer films harvest all photons with energy hν ≥ Eg, the following ratios between the total numbers of photons absorbed by the materials can be derived: 1.0 (P2): 1.1 (P3): 1.7 (P1 and PCDTBT): 1.9 (P4). Normalizing the relative concentrations of the radical species to the total numbers of the harvested photons one can realize that polymers P1–P3 and PCDTBT possess very similar “absolute” intrinsic photochemical stability – see Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  The EPR photodegradation profiles of conjugated polymers P1–P4 and PCDTBT normalized with respect to the total number of photons absorbed by the samples. 
This is an important conclusion suggesting that polymers P1–P3 and PCDTBT are composed of photochemically stable units such as thiophene, benzothiadiazole, p-phenylene, N-alkyl carbazole, and triphenylamine residues. These building blocks can be used for designing many other promising materials for highly efficient and stable photovoltaics. In contrast, polymer P4 demonstrated much inferior photochemical stability as compared to P1–P3 and PCDTBT presumably due to the presence of cyclopentadithiophene units in its molecular framework. Therefore, one should, most probably, avoid using cyclopentadithiophene as a building block in the design of novel materials for OPVs.
Experimental
All polymers were synthesized in our labs, end-capped with phenyl units and extensively purified using chelating reagents and sequential Soxhlet extractions to reduce the content of palladium catalyst residues and other impurities. The details of the synthesis and purification of the materials are presented in the ESI.†
The samples for the investigation of the photochemical stability of conjugated polymers were prepared as follows. A weighed portion of the conjugated polymer (5–10 mg), chlorobenzene purified by distillation (1.0 mL) and a small PTFE-coated magnetic stirrer were placed inside a dark 2 mL glass vial in an argon glovebox. The solutions were stirred at ca. 50 °C for 4–5 days until the polymer was completely dissolved. Afterwards, a small portion of the solution (100–200 μL) was introduced into standard 5 mm o.d. NMR tube (which is EPR silent within the g = 2.00 region). These sample tubes were immediately connected to a vacuum line to remove the solvent under reduced pressure (10−1 mbar). Gentle shaking was applied during the solvent evaporation to achieve the most homogeneous coating of the internal walls with a relatively thick (>1 μm) polymer film. The resulting films were transferred immediately to an argon glovebox and dried in a high vacuum (10−6 mbar) to ensure the removal of trace amounts of solvent and absorbed reactive species (oxygen and moisture). The weight of the test tubes with the polymer films was determined with a high accuracy. Then the tubes were closed with plastic stoppers, taken outside and connected to a vacuum/helium line. Multiple successive evacuations (10−3 mbar) and filling of the tubes with helium provided a clean anaerobic atmosphere. The tubes were sealed while being connected to a helium line.
Outdoor aging of the prepared samples was performed for a period of 104 days in Sede Boker (the Negev desert, Israel). The global intensity of incident sunlight was measured with a calibrated thermopile pyranometer (Eppley PSP). For this purpose the samples and the pyranometer were mounted on a fixed angle (30° to horizontal) stand (see Fig. S1†). This stand is designed for the outdoor photovoltaic characterization of OPV cells and modules.16 The stand was placed outdoor during the entire aging period (at days and nights). It should be noted that the spectrum measured at noon time ± 2–3 hours at Sede Boker (Lat. 30.8oN, Lon. 34.8oE, Alt. 475 m) is very close to the AM 1.5G spectrum (Fig. S2†).
Room temperature (RT, T = 295 K) EPR measurements were carried out using an EMX-220 X-band (ν = 9.4 GHz) spectrometer (Bruker Biospin, Rheinstetten, Germany) equipped with a Bruker ER 4102ST rectangular TE102 resonator and an Agilent 53150A frequency counter. Processing of EPR spectra was done using Bruker's WIN-EPR and Origin (OriginLab Corp., Northampton, USA) software. The effective weight of that part of each sample used for the EPR study varies within 10% from sample to sample. This fact was taken into account while plotting error bars for integral intensities in Fig. 3.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated that EPR spectroscopy can be applied successfully for the investigation of the intrinsic (anaerobic) photochemical degradation of conjugated polymers, e.g.P2–P4 and PCDTBT, under natural sunlight illumination conditions. The photoinduced aging effects can be quantitatively assessed by monitoring the changes in the concentration of persistent radical species in the polymer films as a function of the exposure time. This approach opens wide opportunities for performing direct and facile screening of various organic materials in order to reveal whether they can sustain the action of light and elevated temperatures under real outdoor solar cell operation conditions.
Normalization of the integral intensity of the recorded EPR signal to the total number of the absorbed photons allows one to compare the intrinsic photochemical stability of a series of structurally different conjugated polymers. Revealing the correlations between the peculiarities of the molecular structures of the materials and their degradation behaviour can help a lot in identifying fairly stable and, on the contrary, photochemically reactive building blocks incorporated into the polymers. Further development of this research direction should result in establishing important guidelines for designing novel promising materials for highly stable and efficient organic photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 15-33-20566_mol_ved) and European Commission's StableNextSol COST Action MP1307. We gratefully thank Dr L. A. Frolova for assistance in preparing some of the samples used in this work.
Notes and references
H. Zhou, L. Yang and W. You, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 607–632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
J. U. Lee, J. W. Jung, J. W. Jo and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24265–24283 RSC .
R. Po, A. Bernardi, A. Calabrese, C. Carbonera, G. Corso and A. Pellegrino, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 925–943 CAS .
M. Manceau, E. Bundgaard, J. E. Carlé, O. Hagemann, M. Helgesen, R. Søndergaard, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4132–4141 RSC .
T. Tromholt, M. V. Madsen, J. E. Carlé, M. Helgesen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7592–7601 RSC .

          C. Krohnke, Polymer stabilization, in Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, Pergamon,  2001, pp. 7508–7516 Search PubMed .
S.-S. Choi and J.-H. Jang, Polym. Test., 2011, 30, 673–677 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Klán and J. Wirz, Photochemistry of organic compounds: from concepts to practice, Wiley, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Tournebize, P.-O. Bussière, P. Wong-Wah-Chung, S. Thérias, A. Rivaton, J.-L. Gardette, S. Beaupré and M. Leclerc, Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 478–487 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Susarova, N. P. Piven, A. V. Akkuratov, L. F. Frolova, M. S. Polinskaya, S. A. Ponomarenko, S. D. Babenko and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2239–2241 RSC .
L. A. Frolova, N. P. Piven, D. K. Susarova, A. V. Akkuratov, S. D. Babenko and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2242–2244 RSC .
A. Aguirre, S. C. J. Meskers, R. A. J. Janssen and H.-J. Egelhaaf, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1657–1662 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, G. F. Burkhard, R. Cheacharoen and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 404–407 CrossRef CAS .

Free radicals in chemistry and biology, ed. M. Lazár, CRC Pr, Boca Raton, Fla,  1989 Search PubMed .
J. Kettle, N. Bristow, D. T. Gethin, Z. Tehrani, B. Li, E. A. Katz, G. dos R. Benatto and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 481–487 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of polymers, light exposure experimental setup, absorption spectra, and global spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04605cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the polymers investigated in this work.	 

 	Fig. 2  RT EPR spectra of the pristine polymer films (so-called “dark” EPR spectra, black lines) and after their exposure to sunlight for 5 days (red lines), ν = 9.407 GHz. For getting a better signal-to-noise ratio, spectra were recorded under slightly saturated and overmodulated conditions (PMW = 20 mW and Amod = 1 mT). Background EPR signals are subtracted.	 

 	Fig. 3  The outdoor photodegradation profiles of conjugated polymers P1–P4 and PCDTBT as revealed from the EPR measurements.	 

 	Fig. 4  The EPR photodegradation profiles of conjugated polymers P1–P4 and PCDTBT normalized with respect to the total number of photons absorbed by the samples.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of polymers, light exposure experimental setup, absorption spectra, and global spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04605c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
