Thermally activated delayed fluorescence materials as organic photosensitizers  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC04593H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC04593H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 10675-10688Thermally activated delayed fluorescence materials as organic photosensitizers

        
          
            Alexander M. 
            Polgar
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zachary M. 
            Hudson
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z1, Canada. E-mail: zhudson@chem.ubc.ca
Received 
      19th August 2021
    , Accepted 16th September 2021First published on 27th September 2021AbstractPhotosensitizer molecules play a crucial role in materials and life sciences. Efforts to improve their performance and reduce the associated costs are therefore vital for advancing environmentally friendly light-driven technologies. In this Feature Article, we describe the use of photosensitizers that make use of thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF), their benefits compared to conventional fluorescent and phosphorescent sensitizers, and the efforts of our group and others to develop emitters with application-tailored properties. The key feature is the diversity of accessible excited state pathways, which may be tuned by molecular and supramolecular approaches to suit a particular problem. This unique property has allowed TADF emitters to become competitive for applications including TADF-sensitized fluorescence in light emitting diodes and chemical sensing, organic long persistent luminescence, photodynamic therapy, and non-coherent photon upconversion.
Alexander M. Polgar
Alexander M. Polgar studied chemistry at Western University, Canada and received an MSc in inorganic chemistry in 2018 under the guidance of Prof. J. F. Corrigan. He joined the group of Prof. Z. M. Hudson at the University of British Columbia for his PhD thesis. His current research focuses on the synthesis of polymeric TADF materials for photonic and energy applications.
Zachary M. Hudson
Prof. Zachary M. Hudson is an Associate Professor and Canada Research Chair in Sustainable Chemistry at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada. Zac completed his BSc and PhD in chemistry at Queen's University, developing luminescent materials for organic electronics. During his PhD he also held graduate fellowships at Jilin University in China, as well as Nagoya University in Japan. He then completed postdoctoral fellowships in polymer science at the University of Bristol (UK) and the University of California, Santa Barbara (USA). He currently leads a research program at UBC developing luminescent materials for optoelectronics, bioimaging, and photocatalysis.
Introduction
Photosensitizers are a class of molecules capable of harvesting energy from light, storing that energy in excited states and efficiently transferring it to an acceptor. This excitation energy can be used to power chemical reactions along unique mechanistic pathways or to drive energy/charge migration in everything from photosynthesis in plants to modern electronic devices.1 Photosensitizers that can harness the clean and abundant energy from sunlight have garnered significant interest for environmentally friendly technologies, such as organic photovoltaics and photoelectrochemical cells.2,3 Their sustained development therefore presents a “green” alternative for the harvesting and storage of energy.
The capacity to store excitation energy in organic molecules was somewhat rare until recently, with only a small group of specialty dyes being suitable.4 Simple organic molecules (without extended π-conjugation) typically have poor light absorption characteristics, often requiring high-energy UV light for excitation, and can readily lose their excitation energy by thermal deactivation pathways or the emission of a photon. The emergence of organometallic chemistry throughout the latter half of the 20th century revealed that complexes of the noble metals (particularly RuII, IrIII, and PtII) were potent photosensitizers due to their long-lived triplet excited states and large ligand field splitting.5,6 This increased the performance of photosensitizers significantly, at the cost of introducing new issues with their price, toxicity, and environmental impact.
In the past decade, a new class of efficient, inexpensive and environmentally benign photosensitizing molecules has emerged, making use of thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF).7–9 TADF emitters are typically either purely organic molecules,10 or derived from earth-abundant metals such as Sn, Cu, or Zr,11–13 which are designed to have a small energetic gap between the first singlet and triplet excited states. This attracted interest for energy-efficient organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), as a means to harvest 100% of electrically generated excitons through rapid interconversion of singlet and triplet excited states.14 However, this same feature makes TADF emitters ideal photosensitizers, with long-lived, high-energy excited triplet states, without the drawbacks associated with the use of noble metal elements.
This Feature Article will highlight the emerging applications of TADF sensitizers and our ongoing efforts in engineering the properties of TADF sensitizers by managing their excited state pathways through molecular and supramolecular design. The application of TADF emitters to photocatalysis will be omitted here, as this most commonly involves photoredox, rather than photosensitization pathways,15 and a comprehensive review on this topic has been recently published.7 To date, only a small subset of TADF emitters have been applied as photosensitizers, and we hope this Feature Article will stimulate interest in the development of new TADF sensitizers with application-tailored properties.
Excited state pathways in sensitizers
There are two main mechanisms by which molecules exchange energy from their electronically excited states: electron transfer (ET) and energy transfer (EnT). Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between the two processes. Traditionally, the term photosensitizer, or just sensitizer, refers to a molecule that donates its excitation energy by an EnT process. Consequently, this Article will principally cover EnT from TADF emitters. Basic elements of ET will be addressed as it can be a competing excited state pathway that should be accounted for when designing new sensitizer molecules.
 Fig. 1  Excited state pathways accessible to photosensitizer molecules involving either electron transfer or energy transfer. Solid grey lines indicate the movement of an electron. 
The feasibility of electron transfer for an electronically excited donor and acceptor pair can be evaluated from the Gibbs free energy of photoinduced electron transfer (ΔGPET): ΔGPET = −F(E1/2(A/A˙−) − E1/2(D+˙/D)) − w − E0,0(1)where E1/2(A/A˙−) and E1/2(D+˙/D) are the reduction and oxidation potentials of the electron acceptor and donor moieties respectively (in units of Volts), E0,0 is the energy of the excited state in its lowest vibrational state (in electronvolts), F is the Faraday constant, and w is a normally small correction factor due to the attraction of the radical ion pair created. The term E0,0 can correspond to either the singlet or triplet excited state of the donor or acceptor, depending on the nature of the excited state and whether it is acting as a reductant, or oxidant, respectively.
It is often convenient to recast eqn (1) in terms of the redox potentials of the excited state. For example, if the excited state is acting as an oxidant, GPET can be rewritten as  where  is the excited state reduction potential. A thermodynamically feasible PET must fulfill the requirement that the excited state reduction potential exceeds the oxidation potential of the ground state donor. Similarly, if the excited state reduces an acceptor molecule, then  
Here the excited state oxidation potential  should be more negative than the reduction potential of the ground state acceptor.
PET is mediated through electronic exchange interactions which require direct orbital overlap between the donor and acceptor moieties. Consequently, the excited state needs to be sufficiently long-lived for molecular diffusion to bring the two into proximity. Since transitions from the first excited triplet state to either the ground state or excited singlet state are quantum mechanically forbidden by the necessity for a spin–flip to occur, PET most commonly originates from long-lived triplet states.
Energy transfer occurs either via dipolar coupling through the electromagnetic field (Förster resonance energy transfer–FRET) or through electronic exchange interactions (Dexter energy transfer–DET). One distinguishing feature of the two is the distance over which the two interactions are effective. Because it relies on orbital overlap, the rate of DET decays exponentially with the donor–acceptor separation (rDA)  K is dependent on the spatial overlap between the frontier orbitals of the excited donor and acceptor molecules and L is the interaction radius of the donor–acceptor pair. J is the spectral overlap integral between the donor emission spectrum (fD) and acceptor absorption spectrum (εA). Depending on whether the donor is in the excited singlet or triplet state, this integral can take two forms:    Since the triplet absorption spectrum  is not accessible for most compounds, this is in practice replaced by the triplet energy of the donor and acceptor, ET(D) and ET(A). If ET(D) is greater than ET(A), then it is assumed that JT is large and there is the possibility of rapid DET. As with PET, DET is most efficient from long-lived triplet states, which have a higher likelihood of bimolecular interactions during the timescale of molecular diffusion.
The rate of FRET has a characteristic rDA−6 dependence due to it relying on coupling between two oscillating electric dipoles. In general, this means that FRET is more efficient than DET at distances exceeding the van der Waals radii of the donor–acceptor pair (on the order of nanometers).  where τD is the excited state lifetime of the donor in absence of the acceptor. R0 is the distance at which energy transfer is 50% efficient. It is a parameter unique to each donor–acceptor pair in a specified or assumed geometry and is calculated from the quantum yield of the donor φD, and the spectral overlap integral between donor emission spectrum and acceptor absorption.  κ2 is the dipole orientation factor, n is the refractive index of the medium, and NA is Avogadro's number. Thus, the rate of FRET can be increased by (i) increasing the donor quantum yield, (ii) increasing the molar absorptivity of the acceptor, (iii) increasing the spectral overlap integral, or (iv) organizing donor and acceptor into a proximal orientation. Because the oscillator strength of the S0 → T1 transition (and hence the magnitude of εA) is generally very low, it is uncommon for excited triplet states to be generated on the acceptor by FRET.
Properties of TADF sensitizers
Conventional fluorescent organic dye molecules are generally limited to FRET-type EnT sensitization on account of their low triplet yields, which make ET unfavourable compared to rapid fluorescence or non-radiative relaxation (Fig. 2). Triplet EnT by a Dexter-type mechanism is facilitated by intersystem crossing (ISC) from S1 to T1. This can be accomplished by the incorporation of heteroatoms such as oxygen and nitrogen, which can impart n → π* excited states. Spin–orbit coupling between states of different orbital symmetry may then mediate an electronic spin flip via a change in electronic orbital angular momentum. This is responsible for the high triplet yield of benzophenone derivatives, and their widespread use as triplet sensitizers.16 Alternatively, spin–orbit coupling can be improved using heavy main group elements, such as Br, I, S and Se. Derivatization with these elements can turn fluorescent molecules with high rates of radiative decay from their singlet state, such as xanthenes and boron dipyrromethanes, into potent triplet sensitizers.
 Fig. 2  Structures of some of the most common fluorescent and phosphorescent sensitizers and the typical excited state pathways accessible to each class sensitizers. The solid purple arrow indicates light absorption, the blue arrow is emission of a photon, and the dashed grey arrow is non-radiative return to the ground state. Solid grey arrows are radiationless transitions between electronic states. 
Phosphorescent molecules with heavy transition metals commonly exhibit quantitative ISC, making them effective agents for triplet ET or EnT.17 They are somewhat hampered by the intrinsically low extinction coefficients of metal–ligand charge transfer absorption bands, which can make accessing the triplet state inefficient under low irradiance. Concentration- and aggregation-caused quenching can also be problematic for these emitters in the solid state and in the aqueous environments of biomedical applications.6
TADF emitters achieve efficient ISC due to the inverse dependence of the rate of ISC on the singlet–triplet gap ΔEST (Fig. 3). Spatially separating the HOMO and LUMO using discrete donor and acceptor units reduces the electronic exchange interaction, yielding low ΔEST. This small energy barrier also facilitates reverse intersystem crossing (RISC; T1 → S1) by thermal upconversion, enabling the rapid interconversion of singlet and triplet excited states. As such, TADF emitters are perhaps the most versatile sensitizers, having access to EnT and ET pathways from both singlet and triplet excited states. Additionally, TADF emitters possess higher energy triplet states compared to fluorescent and phosphorescent counterparts (which tend to have deeper triplet levels due to their larger ΔEST), so they can activate a broader range of substrates. Aggregation-induced emission is a common feature in TADF molecules based around the twisted intramolecular charge transfer design, allowing them to act as sensitizers in both solution and the solid state.
 Fig. 3  Excited state pathways available to TADF sensitizers. 
The following sections will examine how these unique features of TADF emitters transfer to specific applications where one excited state pathway must be selected and optimized for by molecular or supramolecular design.
TADF-sensitized fluorescence
TADF-sensitized fluorescence (TSF) involves EnT from the singlet excited state of a TADF sensitizer to a fluorescent acceptor (Fig. 4). TSF is most commonly applied in the context of OLEDs, however we have also explored this process for chemical sensing applications.18 In OLEDs, the addition of a fluorescent emitter can reduce the density of triplet excitons in the emissive layer, which is beneficial for improving device lifetime and efficiency roll-off,19,20 as well as improving the colour purity by having emission dominantly from the π → π* state of the acceptor, rather than the charge transfer emission of the sensitizer. This factor additionally resolves the contradiction between fast RISC and a high rate of radiative relaxation from S1 imposed by Fermi's golden rule. It does this by separating the types of electronic transitions responsible for exciton harvesting and emission. Several recent reviews have highlighted the impressive performance of OLEDs based on TSF.21,22 Here, we will focus on the underlying excited state pathways and how they can be tuned.
 Fig. 4  Excited state pathways for TADF-sensitized fluorescence. EnT from the singlet state of the sensitizer produces TSF emission from the fluorescent emitter, whereas sensitizer emission or non-radiative decay and EnT to the triplet state of the fluorescent emitter are unproductive pathways. The bolded arrows indicate productive pathways and unproductive pathways are denoted by thin arrows. 
Designing a TSF system starts with the selection of a TADF sensitizer and fluorescent emitter. Because the efficiency of TSF depends on the singlet EnT, the spectral overlap integral is a key parameter in assessing suitable sensitizers. In the initial report of TSF, Adachi and coworkers prepared four TSF OLEDs based on fluorescent compounds with sky blue to red emission.23 Each fluorescent molecule has distinct absorption characteristics and therefore four different TADF sensitizers were employed to grant efficient FRET (Fig. 5). In general, the emission of the sensitizer should be at a higher energy compared to that of the emitter to allow for spectral overlap. However, for TADF sensitizers with large Stokes shifts and broad charge transfer emissions, this is not strictly necessary if the Stokes shift and spectral width of the fluorescent dopant are small.24–26 This allows minimal energy to be lost during FRET, or even an apparent increase in emission energy to be realized using ultra-colour-pure multi-resonant TADF emitters.25
 Fig. 5  Structure of TADF sensitizers and fluorescent emitters used in TSF OLEDs by Nakanotani et al.22 
Due to the plethora of excited state pathways available to TADF emitters, simply increasing the magnitude of J is not sufficient to generate more efficient TSF. For example, Wang et al. examined two green TADF sensitizers 4CzIPN and OSTFB having similar emission spectra and quantum yield (and therefore J values) for red TSF (Fig. 6).27 Despite this, OLEDs based on OSTFB had efficiencies nearly twice as high as those using 4CzIPN. Moreover, the electroluminescence of the 4CzIPN device showed signs of incomplete energy transfer, as residual emission from the sensitizer was observed. The authors concluded that a higher radiative rate (S1 → S0) for OSTFB compared to 4CZIPN was responsible for the enhanced performance, consistent with the expectations of Förster theory that high oscillator strength sensitizers will more efficiently couple to generate excited states on the emitter.28
 Fig. 6  Chemical structure of TADF sensitizers used by Wang et al. for red TSF. 
We have prepared polymeric TSF systems based on a side-chain approach with pendant TADF sensitizer and fluorescent emitter monomers (Fig. 7).29 Acrylic monomers of a phenylcarbazole host, pyrimidine or oxadiazole-based TADF sensitizer and fluorescent acceptors from polycyclic aromatic amines were randomly copolymerized to generate TSF emission from sky-blue to orange. The polymeric matrix allows for efficient energy transfer while minimizing losses due to aggregation or phase separation.
 Fig. 7  TSF polymers prepared by our group with wide spectral coverage.29 
TADF sensitizers with longer delayed fluorescence lifetimes were found to result in lower quantum yield from the polymers, likely owing to bimolecular quenching between sensitizer and emitter. This was avoided by decreasing the doping concentration of the emitter to lower the probability of quenching. By carefully adjusting the doping ratio between blue TADF sensitizer and orange fluorescent emitter, white TSF emission with a high quantum yield of 91% was realized from a single polymer by enforcing incomplete EnT. Time-resolved emission spectroscopy revealed that the orange emission is almost entirely generated from FRET in the white-light emitting polymer, which is completed in under 10 ns, such that non-radiative processes are not competitive pathways in the excited state of the sensitizer.
A commonly cited exciton loss process in TSF is Dexter-type triplet EnT to the fluorescent acceptor (Fig. 4). Since the triplet states generated by this process are non-emissive, this leads to efficiency loss. One strategy to reduce losses by this mechanism is to append sterically blocking groups on the acceptor.30 This protects the chromophore core from orbital overlap with the sensitizer needed for DET. Aizawa et al. created a dendritic acceptor based on the TTPA core with trityl blocking groups (Fig. 8).31 A detailed photophysical analysis demonstrated how improved device efficiency from the dendritic emitter (G1) was obtained by diminishing triplet energy transfer as well as inhibiting direct carrier recombination compared to TTPA. Liu et al. used steric blocking on both the sensitizer 3CzBN–Cz and emitter PY–Cz to suppress DET.32 This strategy afforded sky-blue TSF OLEDs with efficiencies an order-of-magnitude greater than the core-unmodified analogues.
 Fig. 8  Sensitizer and emitter molecules derivatized with blocking groups to suppress DET in TSF OLEDs.31,32 
Han et al. used emissive layer design rather than molecular design to spatially separate sensitizer and emitter.33 By stacking alternating emissive layers doped with either the sensitizer or the fluorescent emitter, they could restrict DET to only rare interfacial interactions, while allowing for efficient interlayer FRET, due to the different length dependences of the two Förster and Dexter EnT processes. This resulted in a significant increase in efficiency despite carrier trapping at the fluorescent emitter. Zhao and co-workers took this idea a step further and generated white OLEDs by a cascade interlayer energy transfer from blue TADF sensitizer through multiple sensitizing layers of either green TADF emitters or orange TSF emissive layers, ultimately achieving high efficiencies and color-rendering indices.34
Under optical excitation, DET is thought to be mostly ineffective in the solid state,35,36 yet emission quenching of both sensitizer and emitter is nevertheless routinely characterized by steady-state and time-resolved optical spectroscopy.37,38 This implies that the singlet states of sensitizer and emitter are also involved in quenching interactions. We examined this phenomenon in polymers of the TADF sensitizer PymPTZ and fluorescent emitter PBI (Fig. 9).39 By changing the architecture of the polymer from linear to bottlebrush and random to block, we were able to precisely control the interface between sensitizer and emitter to study this effect. In all cases, quenching of the fluorescent emitter was observed due to a combination of aggregation and bimolecular quenching interactions. However, in the bottlebrush block morphology, nanoscale separation between the sensitizer and emitter limits the extent to which the sensitizer is quenched. This supramolecular design strategy allowed for an order-of-magnitude enhancement in red TSF efficiency from bottlebrush block copolymers compared to linear random by precisely controlling the positions of sensitizer and emitter residues.
 Fig. 9  Chemical structure of PymPTZ and PBI and representations of the four polymer architectures used by our group to optimize TSF by limiting sensitizer-emitter quenching interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
We have also explored the application of TSF to ratiometric temperature sensing. Thermoresponsive polymers consisting of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM), a TADF sensitizer NAI-DMAC and fluorescent emitter tBuODA (Fig. 10) show a linear increase in the relative emission of the fluorescent emitter with increasing temperature above the lower critical solution temperature of poly(NIPAM) (32 °C). At temperatures below this, a mixture of the TADF charge transfer emission and tBuODA fluorescence is observed. Increasing the temperature changes the local viscosity surrounding NAI-DMAC due to the collapse of poly(NIPAM). This prevents the charge transfer state from forming efficiently and the excitation energy remains instead at the locally excited state of the naphthalene imide acceptor unit. EnT from NAI to tBuODA results in the strong enhancement in blue fluorescence and a high ratiometric fluorescent thermal response of 32 ± 4% K−1.
 Fig. 10  Thermoresponsive TSF polymers for ratiometric temperature sensing designed by our group.18 Adapted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The high thermal response of the polymers relies on environmental factors to shape the excited state pathways accessible to the TADF sensitizer. At low temperature, energy transfer to the fluorescent acceptor is endothermic. By triggering the collapse of the polymer above 32 °C, the excitation energy can be trapped in the higher lying locally excited state and then transferred exothermically to the fluorescent emitter. Such non-equilibrium strategies in TSF are almost entirely unexplored but are fertile ground for future innovations and unexpected applications of TADF sensitization.
Organic long persistent luminescence
Long persistent luminescence (LPL), also called luminescence afterglow, is a phenomenon in which a material remains emissive after excitation ceases for durations ranging from minutes to days.40 This has a variety of applications in safety lighting, optical storage and sensors, and biomedical research.41,42 Until recently, practical materials for LPL were limited to inorganic phosphors capable of dissociating electron–hole pairs created upon optical excitation and storing them in trap sites for extended periods of time. Thermal fluctuations then allow for diffusion of the electron and hole from the trap and ultimately recombination to produce long-delayed emission. Most commercial LPL materials are based on metal oxides doped with rare earth metals such as Eu2+, Nd3+ or Dy3+, which require high fabrication temperatures and exhibit poor transparency and dispersibility for applications in paints and coatings.43,44
In 2017, Kabe and Adachi demonstrated purely organic long persistent luminescence (OLPL) based on TADF as a means to improve the processability and environmental impact of LPL materials.45 Organic donor and acceptor molecules capable of forming a low ΔEST exciplex upon optical (and later electrical; ref. 46) excitation were used as a means of trapping electrons and holes on individual molecules as a stable radical anion or cation, respectively, through dissociation of the exciplex. In a thick film of the donor:acceptor blend (the so-called charge separation matrix), these radical ions may be stable for more than an hour before recombining to form the exciplex, which can subsequently emit light or sensitize emission from other luminophores (Fig. 11). This mechanism is distinct from organic afterglow materials based on room temperature phosphorescence (RTP), which do not typically employ TADF sensitizers.47 In the past four years, this concept has been expanded upon to realize OLPL from single molecules,48 doped crystals,49 polymers,50 and thin films prepared by a variety of fabrication methods,51 and its mechanism has been studied in great depth.46,52–55
 Fig. 11  Excited state processes occurring in TADF-sensitized OLPL. In the first step, either the donor (D) or acceptor (A) is excited and an excited state charge transfer forms the exciplex [DA]* (TADF sensitizer). Unproductive pathways in the exciplex are emission of a photon (fluorescence or TADF), non-radiative relaxation, or EnT to a lower locally excited triplet on the donor, resulting in room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP). The productive pathway is ET – resulting in separation of charge on diffusible donor/acceptor radical ions. In the second step, donor and acceptor ions recombine, forming singlet and triplet states on the exciplex. All remaining excited state pathways are productive for OLPL, except for triplet EnT to the fluorophore (F) resulting in non-radiative decay. 
To our knowledge, only one OLPL system using the TADF exciplex as a sensitizer has been reported by Jinnai, Kabe, and Adachi in 2018.56 The electron acceptor PPT was used as charge separation matrix because of its stable radical anion. Dispersed into this was 1 mol% of electron donor TMB (Fig. 12) and 1 mol% of a fluorescent emitter, which is sensitized by the exciplex upon recombination. In this communication, they showed that TADF-sensitization provides fertile ground for improvements to OLPL systems by improving the colour purity of emission (similar to TSF), providing additional trap sites for electrons on the low LUMO levels of the fluorescent dopants, and more efficiently converting excitons to light (compared to the exciplex) from their high oscillator strength electronic transitions. Moreover, it enables facile access to emission colours across the visible spectrum, including white, without having to optimize a new donor–acceptor exciplex pair for each colour.57
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of the electron donor (TMB) and acceptor (PPT) used for TADF exciplex sensitization of OLPL by Jinnai et al.56 
Being a multi-step, multi-chromophore process (Fig. 11), there are many excited state pathways in OLPL, both productive and deleterious, and this may be responsible for the limited development of sensitized OLPL to date. In the first step, incomplete exciplex formation, TADF and non-radiative relaxation from the exciplex all contribute to lower the efficiency, duration, and colour purity of OLPL. Our group and others have shown that exciplex formation can be controlled by regulating the interface between donor and acceptor moieties.58–60 We have shown that bottlebrush polymer structures allow for precise mixing or de-mixing of the exciplex constituents which can be used to tune the emission colour by extent of exciplex formation (Fig. 13). Conventional melt-cast processing of OLPL materials does not allow for the same degree of control, where emitter aggregation is unavoidable and leads to losses in efficiency and colour purity.56 Such a supramolecular design strategy for exciplex formation could benefit the efficiency of OLPL by reducing the fraction of excitons lost prior to charge separation.
 Fig. 13  Architecture of donor–acceptor TADF polymers prepared by our group to precisely control the interface between donor (blue) and acceptor (purple) moieties of the exciplex.58 Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
The longevity of OLPL systems can be increased by ensuring that charge separation is a more efficient and rapid process than charge recombination. Crucially, the ratio of recombination events that occur due to geminate ion recombination (i.e., the exciplex reforms directly after charge separation) limit the maximum duration of OLPL versus recombination following prolonged charge separation. Rapid charge extraction is therefore required to bias recombination away from geminate ions. High electron/hole mobility materials are often used for this purpose, for example in organic photovoltaics and OLEDs, and may be leveraged to design more long-lived OLPL systems in the future. The types of molecular wire morphologies shown in Fig. 13 have proven particularly valuable for long range transport and storage of electrons and holes.61,62
In the second step of OLPL, the problem of optimizing emission is the same as for TSF: improve FRET to the fluorescent emitter while managing the quenching due to DET. As such, similar strategies can be employed to minimize exciton losses due to triplet quenching, such as spatially separating the exciton harvesting and emissive components of the system. An additional loss mechanism is quenching due to charge transfer to a locally excited triplet on the donor molecule of the exciplex,54 which may release its energy as room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) or be transferred to the triplet state of the fluorescent emitter (Fig. 11). This requires careful consideration of the energy levels of all the components in the system, and their potential interactions.
OLPL is a new addition to the applications of TADF emitters, and therefore much basic research remains before this technology can realize its full potential. However, we emphasize that TADF sensitization for OLPL has already been demonstrated as one of the most effective approaches for high performance, and its sustained development should be made a priority alongside the ensuing fundamental mechanistic studies.
Singlet oxygen generation for photodynamic therapy
Atmospheric oxygen exists in a stable triplet ground state configuration (3O2). Its excited singlet state 1O2 lies nearly 1 eV higher in energy and is commonly accessed by a photosensitization pathway. This requires sensitizers capable of Dexter-type triplet EnT to account for the change in multiplicity of O2 (Fig. 14). This process to generate 1O2 is useful for a variety of oxidation and cycloaddition reactions in organic chemistry,63,64 and occurs naturally in organisms to build up complex biomolecules and regulate metabolic activity.65 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a non-invasive, selective, and side-effect-free protocol that uses 1O2 generated by a photosensitizer to destroy cancerous tissue.5,66
 Fig. 14  Excited state pathways of TADF sensitizers for singlet oxygen generation. Emission of a photon from the singlet state the sensitizer, either directly after excitation or following RISC, is the main unproductive pathway for the generation of 1O2. 
Photosensitizers for PDT normally access the triplet state by exploiting the heavy atom effect of noble metals, or heavy main group elements such as Br or I.67 Sensitizers that directly transfer energy to 3O2 are classified as Type II, whereas Type I sensitizers involve an electron transfer to an intermediary molecule, to produce radical species such as superoxide (Fig. 14). In 2016, Zhang et al. demonstrated that TADF emitters based on carbazole–phthalonitrile could be formulated into nanostructures that were effective Type II sensitizers for PDT.68 Typically, TADF emitters are hydrophobic molecules with poor dispersibility in aqueous media. However, aggregates of these emitters prepared by the nanoprecipitation method were colloidally stable in water and taken up by cells with minimal cytotoxicity in the dark. Irradiation with visible light resulted in a dramatic reduction of the cancer cell viability as 1O2 is generated, demonstrating, for the first time, the photodynamic effect of TADF sensitizers.
In 2019, Chun-Sing Lee and co-workers introduced two new TADF emitters An-TPA and An–Cz–Ph (Fig. 15), which self-assemble into nanoparticles capable of organelle-targeted PDT.69 High singlet oxygen quantum yields (φΔ) up to 52% were achieved, enabling extremely high cancer-killing ability at low concentrations of the photosensitizers. Two-photon excitation at 800 and 880 nm was found to activate the photodynamic effect in vitro and allowed for simultaneous fluorescence imaging for integrated theranostic applications.70 Hu et al. developed a new green TADF emitter TPE-AQ which self-assembles under nanoprecipitation to give water-dispersible nanoparticles.71 Using visible light excitation, they were able to generate 1O2 with a quantum yield of 32%. The nanostructures were found to be effective inhibitors of tumor growth in vivo, with minimal damage to surrounding tissue. The highest φΔ reported for TADF sensitizers to date is 0.91 by Xiao et al. using the heavy atom effect of bromine to enhance ISC in the carbazole–anthroquinone dyad AQCzBr2 (Fig. 15).72
 Fig. 15  Chemical structures of TADF sensitizers employed as nanoparticles for PDT through nanoprecipitation.69,71,72 
PDT agents produced by nanoprecipitation of small molecule TADF emitters show excellent water dispersibility but introduce concerns with dye leakage and particle agglomeration, and the mechanisms by which cancer cells are selectively targeted by these nanostructures are unclear. Fluorescein derivatives capable of TADF introduced by Xiong et al. in 2014 fulfill many of the requirements for effective PDT agents, as they are water-soluble without the need for nanoprecipitation or encapsulation.73 In 2019, the same group developed a fluorescein derivative FL-RGD with covalently conjugated cyclic arginine–glycine–aspartic acid tripeptide for tumor cell targeted PDT (Fig. 16).74 Owing to long delayed fluorescence lifetimes (15–33 μs), φΔ values as high as 0.58 were obtained. The fluorescein derivative has a high molar absorptivity in the red region of the visible spectrum and a large two photon cross-section that allows for deep tissue penetration of incident light for therapeutic and diagnostic applications of this sensitizer.
 Fig. 16  Structure of water-soluble TADF sensitizer for tumor cell-targeted PDT.74 
We have recently developed multifunctional compartmentalized nanoparticles based on block copolymers with a hydrophilic cell-penetrating corona surrounding TADF emitters (Fig. 17).75 This system was the first of its kind to use a single polymer as both the emitter and the cell-penetrating moiety, and notably addressed many issues previously seen with small molecule encapsulation. Firstly, the photophysical properties of the native red emitter were better retained than with previous structures, as the polymer nanoparticles exhibited quantum yields up to 17% in water and significant delayed fluorescence under both air and inert atmospheres. This method also effectively eliminated the concern of dye leakage, as the emitters were covalently bonded to the nanoparticles. Lastly, this polymeric approach could allow for facile corona modification such as incorporation of organelle-targeting groups or cancer cell receptor targeting moieties (i.e., folic acid, HER2). This strategy could also be amenable to PDT, by modification of the nanoparticle shell to allow for efficient gas permeation. This would allow for effective oxygen permeation and subsequent singlet oxygen generation (given the correct excitation wavelength) by the TADF nanoparticle, while mitigating the risk of dye leakage and allowing for specific cancer cell-targeting capabilities.
 Fig. 17  Polymer dots formed by self-assembly of an amphiphilic block copolymer containing a water soluble, cell-penetrating guanidine unit, and a hydrophobic host material and TADF emitter used by our group to deliver TADF emitters to biological targets.75 Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
The selection criteria for TADF sensitizers in PDT are only starting to become established. High singlet oxygen generation quantum yield, strong light absorption, particularly in the biological transparency window (>650 nm), and good biocompatibility – for example, water solubility, organelle targeting, and minimal dark cytotoxicity, are all desirable features for any effective PDT agent. However, for TADF sensitizers RISC is an additional consideration, as it converts triplet excited states back to the singlet, where they may deactivate non-radiatively or by emission of a photon. Fast RISC thus limits the efficiency of triplet-state sensitization. Therefore, TADF emitters with long delayed fluorescence lifetimes (indicative of slow ISC) and relatively lower quantum yields are desirable for applications such as PDT which rely on the triplet state. This contrasts with the main application of TADF emitters in OLEDs where a long lifetime is seen as a liability, as it increases the likelihood of exciton annihilation processes under electrical excitation.37 Consequently, many TADF emitters with properties seen as undesirable for OLEDs should be re-evaluated for other applications, such as PDT.
Triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion
Triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion (TTA-UC) converts two low-energy triplet excited states into one high-energy singlet excited state. This is useful in a variety of applications where harvesting of sub-bandgap photons can be beneficial, such as in sunlight-driven photovoltaics or photocatalysis,76–78 biological imaging or photodynamic therapy using the greater penetration depth of low energy photons,79 and can also be used in organic electronics as a method to harvest triplet excitons.80 TTA-UC is driven by a triplet EnT sensitizer which transfers its energy to the triplet state of a fluorescent emitter. If the singlet level of the emitter is less than twice that of its triplet level, then two emitter triplet states can potentially annihilate to form one excited singlet state (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Excited state pathways of TADF sensitizers for triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion. Excitation of the sensitizer either leads to productive triplet EnT to the emitter or can follow unproductive pathways through deactivation of the singlet state. Two emitter triplets can combine to form one excited singlet state by TTA, which emits at shorter wavelengths than the excitation light. Back EnT to the singlet state of the sensitizer is the main unproductive pathway at the emitter. 
Ideal sensitizers for TTA-UC should have a small singlet–triplet gap to increase the anti-Stokes shift (the energy difference between the incident and upconverted photon energy) as less energy is lost during intersystem crossing. This factor led Baldo and co-workers to apply TADF sensitizers to TTA-UC using a bilayer geometry of TADF sensitizer and fluorescent emitter thin films.81 Using the green TADF emitter 4CzTPN-Ph as their sensitizer and diphenylanthracene (DPA) as fluorescent emitter, they successfully converted green light to blue (Fig. 19). The low probability of encounter between sensitizer and emitter in this geometry resulted in a relatively low upconversion efficiency of 1.1% in the solid-state. Visible to ultraviolet upconversion was achieved in the following year by Yanai et al. employing 4CzIPN as sensitizer to the UV-emissive terphenyl with an anti-Stokes shift of 0.83 eV.82 Previously, the triplet state of terphenyl was too high for upconversion with conventional phosphorescent sensitizers, but the small singlet–triplet gap of TADF emitters made this challenging energy transfer possible.
 Fig. 19  TADF sensitized TTA-UC systems for conversion of green-to-blue light and blue-to-UV light.81,82 
For practical applications, sensitizers capable of upconverting low energy red or near-infrared light are desirable. Song and co-workers used a red emissive TADF sensitizer based on fluorescein to achieve red-to-blue photon upconversion with the largest anti-Stokes shift to date in purely organic systems (0.94 eV).83 The high upconversion efficiency of 11.2% in solution was enabled by the long triplet lifetime of fluorescein derivatives. Extending the absorption of TADF emitters into the red and NIR region of the visible spectrum is beneficial for realizing practical TADF upconversion systems, for example in harvesting sub-bandgap solar radiation, but very few examples of NIR TADF emitters are known.84 In 2018, Adachi developed TADF emitters with emission exceeding 700 nm based on a triphenylamine derivatized boron difluoride curcuminoid.85 We have elaborated on this concept by exchanging triphenylamine for other aromatic amine donors, allowing the absorption to be extended beyond 700 nm.86 Using a planarized triphenylamine donor, intense absorption of red light was achieved (Fig. 20). This coupled with the large two-photon cross-section and long excited state lifetimes made these derivatives attractive for bio-imaging, however these same properties have great potential in future TTA-UC applications.
 Fig. 20  Example of a boron difluoride curcuminoid TADF emitter with strong red absorption developed by our group for near-infrared imaging applications.86 Adapted from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley. 
Back energy transfer, where the emitter transfers energy from its singlet state back to the sensitizer is a significant loss mechanism in TTA-UC (Fig. 18). Exciplex TADF can alleviate this by having a relatively low concentration of the transiently generated sensitizer at any point in time. Lee, Bardeen, and co-workers used exciplex formation at the interface between layers of m-MTDATA and ADN to sensitize TTA on the ADN molecules for blue OLEDs.80 Singlet EnT to the exciplex is thermodynamically favourable in this system but is prevented by its limited interfacial existence and eliminated entirely by introducing a singlet blocking layer between the sensitizer and TTA material. One attractive feature of this approach is the ultralow turn-on voltages, even below the singlet level of the emitter.
A challenge of designing TADF sensitizers for TTA-UC is the presence of RISC, which deactivates the triplet state and can lead to exciton loss by fluorescence. Using sensitizers with low rates of RISC can minimize this but will inevitably give lower upconversion efficiencies than systems without the RISC pathway. To address this problem, Peng et al. synthesized bichromophoric derivatives of the classical TADF emitters 4CzIPN and 4CzPN covalently linked to the triplet acceptor pyrene (Fig. 21).87 In this system, the close proximity of the sensitizer and emitter allows for triplet EnT to occur at rates several orders of magnitude faster than RISC, up to 109 s−1.88 The covalently linked emitter is sensitized preferentially over RISC, and is then unable to dissipate energy from the triplet excited state. Free pyrene molecules dispersed in the host alongside the bichromophoric sensitizer can then be sensitized by the bound pyrene triplet and then undergo TTA. This system enabled blue-to-UV upconversion in polymer films, with efficiencies exceeding those obtained using 4CzPN as a sensitizer by as much as 80 times.
 Fig. 21  Bichromophoric TADF sensitizer developed by Peng et al. for ultra-fast triplet EnT to the sensitizer.87,88 
Record-setting upconversion efficiencies were reported from the TADF active zirconium(IV) complex Zr(MesPDPPh)2, with DPA as the emitter (Fig. 22).89 Efficiencies between 31.7 and 42.7% were achieved in solution, even higher than state-of-the art photosensitizers based on noble metal elements.77 The high upconversion efficiency in this system is attributed to the fast rate of triplet EnT even at low emitter concentrations and a lack of self-quenching mechanism such as ACQ or homo-TTA. Energy alignment of the sensitizer and emitter triplet level and the slow native rate of delayed fluorescence from the sensitizer reduce losses to RISC. Losses due to energy back transfer are prevented by the insignificant spectral overlap between emitter and sensitizer absorption. On the other hand, strong absorption at energies below the singlet level of the emitter enables high efficiency upconversion at low irradiance. The major limiting factor for efficiency in this system is thought to be the quantum yield of the emitter, which highlights the great potential of TADF sensitizers for TTA-UC.
 Fig. 22  Chemical structure of Zr(MesPDPPh)2 used by Castellano et al. for efficient TADF sensitized TTA-UC. 
Challenges and prospects
The myriad of excited state pathways accessible to TADF emitters bestows them with great versatility for sensitizer applications, but also introduces loss mechanisms that need to be managed for high performance in these settings. Here we examined four different applications of TADF sensitizers, each with unique opportunities for manipulating the excited state pathways, and have elucidated some molecular and supramolecular design criteria for making better sensitizers.
In common to all applications of TADF sensitizers is the need for a narrow singlet–triplet gap to facilitate ISC and minimize energy wasted upon accessing the triplet state. For TADF-sensitized fluorescence and OLPL, this translates to fast rates of RISC which are beneficial for minimizing triplet exciton losses. However, for photodynamic therapy and TTA-UC, this detracts from the efficacy of triplet EnT. Design principles that provide better control over the triplet state residence times are needed, for example by modulating the energetic gap between the lowest triplet locally excited and charge transfer states.90 The other alternative is to enforce fast intramolecular EnT to suppress RISC, for example by supramolecular pre-assembly or covalent tethering of donor and acceptor molecules.88
There are some inherent challenges to using TADF sensitizers. For example, the weak absorptivity of TADF charge transfer states may compromise their utility in applications such as TTA-UC and PDT, where strong light absorption is highly beneficial. Strategies to improve this include sensitizing TADF absorption with covalently attached “antennae” groups,91 or using multi-resonant TADF emitters with intrinsically low reorganization in the excited state.92 Our group has been developing TADF emitters with planarized donors and acceptors that have enhanced photostability and light absorption, which show promise in sensitizing applications.93,94
Extending the applications of TADF further beyond OLEDs will demand tailoring of the photophysical properties, as well as integrating non-standard application-oriented features. Our group and others have leveraged both molecular and supramolecular design of TADF emitters to shape their photophysical and physicochemical properties. It is our hope that revisiting existing molecules with these tools, and the rational development of new emitters will bring TADF sensitizers to the same level of utility as their fluorescent and phosphorescent analogues.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada for financial support of their work. AMP is grateful for an NSERC Canada Graduate Scholarship, and ZMH is grateful for support from the Canada Research Chairs program.
Notes and references
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Romero and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10075–10166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Monro, K. L. Colón, H. Yin, J. Roque, P. Konda, S. Gujar, R. P. Thummel, L. Lilge, C. G. Cameron and S. A. McFarland, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 797–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, R. Chen, Q. Sun, W. Lai, Q. Su, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3259–3302 RSC .
M. A. Bryden and E. Zysman-Colman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7587–7680 RSC .
W. Chen and F. Song, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 1717–1730 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2487–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Wong and E. Zysman-Colman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605444 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-P. To, G. Cheng, G. S. M. Tong, D. Zhou and C.-M. Che, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Endo, M. Ogasawara, A. Takahashi, D. Yokoyama, Y. Kato and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4802–4806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. S. Lee, J. M. Favale, D. C. Leary, J. L. Petersen, G. D. Scholes, F. N. Castellano and C. Milsmann, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, B. Pattengale, Q. Liu, S. Yang, W. Shi, S. Li, J. Huang and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13719–13725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Montalti, A. Credi, L. Prodi and M. T. Gandolfi, Handbook of Photochemistry, CRC Press,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. Yersin, A. F. Rausch, R. Czerwieniec, T. Hofbeck and T. Fischer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2622–2652 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Christopherson, D. M. Mayder, J. Poisson, N. R. Paisley, C. M. Tonge and Z. M. Hudson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20000–20011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Furukawa, H. Nakanotani, M. Inoue and C. Adachi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Li, Y. Li, Y. Qiu and L. Duan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 50, 1181–1191 RSC .
M. Cai, D. Zhang and L. Duan, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 1611–1623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Byeon, D. R. Lee, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803714 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nakanotani, T. Higuchi, T. Furukawa, K. Masui, K. Morimoto, M. Numata, H. Tanaka, Y. Sagara, T. Yasuda and C. Adachi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu and L. Duan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2000483 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chan, M. Tanaka, Y.-T. Lee, Y.-W. Wong, H. Nakanotani, T. Hatakeyama and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heimel, A. Mondal, F. May, W. Kowalsky, C. Lennartz, D. Andrienko and R. Lovrincic, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4990 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Wang, C. C. Huang, S. Kumar, S. F. Wu, Y. Yuan, A. Khan, Z. Q. Jiang, M. K. Fung and L. S. Liao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 161–167 RSC .

          B. W. van der Meer, in FRET – Förster Resonance Energy Transfer, ed. I. L. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Wiley,  2013, pp. 23–62 Search PubMed .
A. M. Polgar, C. M. Tonge, C. J. Christopherson, N. R. Paisley, A. C. Reyes and Z. M. Hudson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38602–38613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, X. Song, M. Cai and L. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705250 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aizawa, S. Shikita and T. Yasuda, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7014–7022 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, K. Sun, G. Zhao, J. Wei, J. Duan, M. Xia, W. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11005–11013 RSC .
S. H. Han and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1504–1508 RSC .
H. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Fu, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakoby, S. Heidrich, L. Graf von Reventlow, C. Degitz, S. M. Suresh, E. Zysman-Colman, W. Wenzel, B. S. Richards and I. A. Howard, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 1121–1125 RSC .
N. Haase, A. Danos, C. Pflumm, P. Stachelek, W. Brütting and A. P. Monkman, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1805–1815 RSC .
M. Hasan, A. Shukla, V. Ahmad, J. Sobus, F. Bencheikh, S. K. M. McGregor, M. Mamada, C. Adachi, S. Lo and E. B. Namdas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000580 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shukla, S. K. M. McGregor, R. Wawrzinek, S. Saggar, E. G. Moore, S. C. Lo and E. B. Namdas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009817 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Polgar, J. Poisson, C. J. Christopherson and Z. M. Hudson, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 7880–7889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Gecevicius and J. Qiu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2090–2136 RSC .
C. Chiatti, C. Fabiani and A. L. Pisello, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2021, 51, 409–433 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, T. Wang, Y. Shao, C. Yu and L. Hu, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Anesh, S. K. H. Gulrez, A. Anis, H. Shaikh, M. E. Ali Mohsin and S. M. AL-Zahrani, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2014, 33, 21436 CrossRef .
R. E. Rojas-Hernandez, F. Rubio-Marcos, M. Á. Rodriguez and J. F. Fernandez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 2759–2770 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Nature, 2017, 550, 384–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, K. Jinnai, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Nidhankar, Goudappagouda, V. C. Wakchaure and S. S. Babu, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4216–4236 RSC .
W. Li, Z. Li, C. Si, M. Y. Wong, K. Jinnai, A. K. Gupta, R. Kabe, C. Adachi, W. Huang, E. Zysman-Colman and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Alam, N. L. C. Leung, J. Liu, T. S. Cheung, X. Zhang, Z. He, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, C. C. S. Chan, K. S. Wong, Q. Peng and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, R. Kabe, N. Nishimura, K. Jinnai and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803713 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jinnai, N. Nishimura, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Chem. Lett., 2019, 48, 270–273 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nishimura, Z. Lin, K. Jinnai, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000795 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jinnai, N. Nishimura, C. Adachi and R. Kabe, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 8412–8417 RSC .
Z. Lin, R. Kabe, K. Wang and C. Adachi, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, Y. Zheng and J. Zuo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 17121–17125 CrossRef .
K. Jinnai, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800365 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Chem. Lett., 2020, 49, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Tonge and Z. M. Hudson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13970–13976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao, J. Hu, X. Wang, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17739–17742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsujimoto, D. G. Ha, G. Markopoulos, H. S. Chae, M. A. Baldo and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4894–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Davis, W. A. Svec, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, Nature, 1998, 396, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sedghi, V. M. García-Suárez, L. J. Esdaile, H. L. Anderson, C. J. Lambert, S. Martín, D. Bethell, S. J. Higgins, M. Elliott, N. Bennett, J. E. Macdonald and R. J. Nichols, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 517–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ghogare and A. Greer, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9994–10034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, Y. Zhan, P. Liu and P. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 314–319 RSC .
W. Dröge, Physiol. Rev., 2002, 82, 47–95 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Song, L. Nie and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6597–6626 RSC .
A. Gorman, J. Killoran, C. O’Shea, T. Kenna, W. M. Gallagher and D. F. O’Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10619–10631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Chen, R. Chen, X.-K. Liu, Y. Xiong, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach, C. Adachi, X. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11744–11747 RSC .
J. Zhang, F. Fang, B. Liu, J. H. Tan, W. C. Chen, Z. Zhu, Y. Yuan, Y. Wan, X. Cui, S. Li, Q. X. Tong, J. Zhao, X. M. Meng and C. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41051–41061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Xiao, J.-X. Chen, S. Li, W.-W. Tao, S. Tian, K. Wang, X. Cui, Z. Huang, X.-H. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 888–895 RSC .
S. Hu, B. Huang, Y. Pu, C. Xia, Q. Zhang, S. Guo, Y. Wang and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 5645–5655 RSC .
Y.-F. Xiao, J.-X. Chen, W.-C. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Cao, J. Tan, X. Cui, Z. Yuan, S. Ji, G. Lu, W. Liu, P. Wang, S. Li and C.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4902–4905 RSC .
X. Xiong, F. Song, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xue, L. Sun, N. Jiang, P. Gao, L. Tian and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9590–9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Shi, G. Hong, W. Chen, B. Song, X. Peng, X. Xiong and F. Song, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 310, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Christopherson, N. R. Paisley, Z. Xiao, W. R. Algar and Z. M. Hudson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 13342–13349 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Richards, D. Hudry, D. Busko, A. Turshatov and I. A. Howard, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 9165–9195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Khnayzer, J. Blumhoff, J. A. Harrington, A. Haefele, F. Deng and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 209–211 RSC .
F. Glaser, C. Kerzig and O. S. Wenger, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9922–9933 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Meng and W. Bu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 379, 82–98 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Lin, C. J. Easley, C. H. Chen, P. C. Tseng, M. Z. Lee, P. H. Sher, J. K. Wang, T. L. Chiu, C. F. Lin, C. J. Bardeen and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10963–10970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wu, D. N. Congreve and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 031103 CrossRef .
N. Yanai, M. Kozue, S. Amemori, R. Kabe, C. Adachi and N. Kimizuka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6447–6451 RSC .
W. Chen, F. Song, S. Tang, G. Hong, Y. Wu and X. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4375–4378 RSC .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Yun and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800255 CrossRef .
D.-H. Kim, A. D’Aléo, X.-K. Chen, A. D. S. Sandanayaka, D. Yao, L. Zhao, T. Komino, E. Zaborova, G. Canard, Y. Tsuchiya, E. Choi, J. W. Wu, F. Fages, J.-L. Brédas, J.-C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Paisley, S. V. Halldorson, M. V. Tran, R. Gupta, S. Kamal, W. R. Algar and Z. M. Hudson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18630–18638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, X. Guo, X. Jiang, D. Zhao and Y. Ma, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1233–1237 RSC .
Q. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Guo, J. Peng, S. Garakyaraghi, C. M. Papa, F. N. Castellano, D. Zhao and Y. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 6673–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, S. Sheykhi, Y. Zhang, C. Milsmann and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9069–9077 RSC .
F. B. Dias, J. Santos, D. R. Graves, P. Data, R. S. Nobuyasu, M. A. Fox, A. S. Batsanov, T. Palmeira, M. N. Berberan-Santos, M. R. Bryce and A. P. Monkman, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600080 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Franco, M. Jakoby, R. V. Schneider, F. Hundemer, D. Hahn, B. S. Richards, S. Bräse, M. A. R. Meier, U. Lemmer and I. A. Howard, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hatakeyama, K. Shiren, K. Nakajima, S. Nomura, S. Nakatsuka, K. Kinoshita, J. Ni, Y. Ono and T. Ikuta, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Sauvé, J. Paeng, S. Yamaguchi and Z. M. Hudson, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 108–117 CrossRef PubMed .
E. R. Sauvé, C. M. Tonge and Z. M. Hudson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4164–4172 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Alexander M. Polgar
	Alexander M. Polgar studied chemistry at Western University, Canada and received an MSc in inorganic chemistry in 2018 under the guidance of Prof. J. F. Corrigan. He joined the group of Prof. Z. M. Hudson at the University of British Columbia for his PhD thesis. His current research focuses on the synthesis of polymeric TADF materials for photonic and energy applications.

Zachary M. Hudson
	Prof. Zachary M. Hudson is an Associate Professor and Canada Research Chair in Sustainable Chemistry at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada. Zac completed his BSc and PhD in chemistry at Queen's University, developing luminescent materials for organic electronics. During his PhD he also held graduate fellowships at Jilin University in China, as well as Nagoya University in Japan. He then completed postdoctoral fellowships in polymer science at the University of Bristol (UK) and the University of California, Santa Barbara (USA). He currently leads a research program at UBC developing luminescent materials for optoelectronics, bioimaging, and photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Excited state pathways accessible to photosensitizer molecules involving either electron transfer or energy transfer. Solid grey lines indicate the movement of an electron.	 
ΔGPET = −F(E1/2(A/A˙−) − E1/2(D+˙/D)) − w − E0,0	(1)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of some of the most common fluorescent and phosphorescent sensitizers and the typical excited state pathways accessible to each class sensitizers. The solid purple arrow indicates light absorption, the blue arrow is emission of a photon, and the dashed grey arrow is non-radiative return to the ground state. Solid grey arrows are radiationless transitions between electronic states.	 

 	Fig. 3  Excited state pathways available to TADF sensitizers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Excited state pathways for TADF-sensitized fluorescence. EnT from the singlet state of the sensitizer produces TSF emission from the fluorescent emitter, whereas sensitizer emission or non-radiative decay and EnT to the triplet state of the fluorescent emitter are unproductive pathways. The bolded arrows indicate productive pathways and unproductive pathways are denoted by thin arrows.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of TADF sensitizers and fluorescent emitters used in TSF OLEDs by Nakanotani et al.22	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structure of TADF sensitizers used by Wang et al. for red TSF.	 

 	Fig. 7  TSF polymers prepared by our group with wide spectral coverage.29	 

 	Fig. 8  Sensitizer and emitter molecules derivatized with blocking groups to suppress DET in TSF OLEDs.31,32	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structure of PymPTZ and PBI and representations of the four polymer architectures used by our group to optimize TSF by limiting sensitizer-emitter quenching interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Thermoresponsive TSF polymers for ratiometric temperature sensing designed by our group.18 Adapted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Excited state processes occurring in TADF-sensitized OLPL. In the first step, either the donor (D) or acceptor (A) is excited and an excited state charge transfer forms the exciplex [DA]* (TADF sensitizer). Unproductive pathways in the exciplex are emission of a photon (fluorescence or TADF), non-radiative relaxation, or EnT to a lower locally excited triplet on the donor, resulting in room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP). The productive pathway is ET – resulting in separation of charge on diffusible donor/acceptor radical ions. In the second step, donor and acceptor ions recombine, forming singlet and triplet states on the exciplex. All remaining excited state pathways are productive for OLPL, except for triplet EnT to the fluorophore (F) resulting in non-radiative decay.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of the electron donor (TMB) and acceptor (PPT) used for TADF exciplex sensitization of OLPL by Jinnai et al.56	 

 	Fig. 13  Architecture of donor–acceptor TADF polymers prepared by our group to precisely control the interface between donor (blue) and acceptor (purple) moieties of the exciplex.58 Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Excited state pathways of TADF sensitizers for singlet oxygen generation. Emission of a photon from the singlet state the sensitizer, either directly after excitation or following RISC, is the main unproductive pathway for the generation of 1O2.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chemical structures of TADF sensitizers employed as nanoparticles for PDT through nanoprecipitation.69,71,72	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure of water-soluble TADF sensitizer for tumor cell-targeted PDT.74	 

 	Fig. 17  Polymer dots formed by self-assembly of an amphiphilic block copolymer containing a water soluble, cell-penetrating guanidine unit, and a hydrophobic host material and TADF emitter used by our group to deliver TADF emitters to biological targets.75 Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Excited state pathways of TADF sensitizers for triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion. Excitation of the sensitizer either leads to productive triplet EnT to the emitter or can follow unproductive pathways through deactivation of the singlet state. Two emitter triplets can combine to form one excited singlet state by TTA, which emits at shorter wavelengths than the excitation light. Back EnT to the singlet state of the sensitizer is the main unproductive pathway at the emitter.	 

 	Fig. 19  TADF sensitized TTA-UC systems for conversion of green-to-blue light and blue-to-UV light.81,82	 

 	Fig. 20  Example of a boron difluoride curcuminoid TADF emitter with strong red absorption developed by our group for near-infrared imaging applications.86 Adapted from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  Bichromophoric TADF sensitizer developed by Peng et al. for ultra-fast triplet EnT to the sensitizer.87,88	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structure of Zr(MesPDPPh)2 used by Castellano et al. for efficient TADF sensitized TTA-UC.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
