Manipulating a vertical temperature-gradient of Fe@ Enteromorpha /graphene aerogel to enhanced solar evaporation and sterilization   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09807A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09807A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3750-3759Manipulating a vertical temperature-gradient of Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene aerogel to enhanced solar evaporation and sterilization†

        
          
            Yan 
            Kong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Gao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yunkai 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuanfeng 
            Qi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Weiyan 
            Yin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shouquan 
            Wang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Fengjiao 
            Yin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhenguo 
            Dai
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Baoyu 
            Gao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Qinyan 
            Yue
          
        
      *a
aShandong Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266000, PR China. E-mail: gaoyue0322@aliyun.com; qyyue58@aliyun.com
bSchool of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Qingdao University of Technology, Qingdao 266033, PR China
cHubei Key Laboratory of Biomass Fibers and Eco-dyeing & Finishing, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Wuhan Textile University, China
dShandong Tianli Energy Co., Ltd., China
eShandong Shanda WIT Science and Technology Co., Ltd., Jinan 250061, Shandong, PR China
Received 
      15th November 2021
    , Accepted 29th December 2021First published on 5th January 2022AbstractWater purification via solar interface evaporation technique is an attractive method to solve water resources shortage. Many efforts have been devoted to developing materials with high absorbance and various heat insulation devices to reduce heat loss while ignoring the heat loss caused by high temperature. To address this issue, a strategy is reported to breaking the evaporation limit by introducing a cold evaporation surface for additional environmental energy input. The evaporation system both eliminates thermal losses and maximizes utilizing the energy of the environmental energy and top evaporation interface vertically downward. The vertical hollow structure inner the lotus root-like three-dimensional (3D) aerogel based on iron-doped Enteromorpha/graphene and the nanopore structure formed by the stacked nanoparticles facilitate the water transport. The air barrier formed on the inner skeleton helps to reduce thermal conductivity and heat loss. By gradually increasing the side surface area of the cold evaporation to increase the temperature gradient difference in the vertical direction, the aerogel can realize the co-operation of the top surface interface evaporation and the side cooling evaporation. When the exposure height is 55 mm, the evaporation rate can be as high as 3.85 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun. In addition, aerogels show effective water purification capabilities, including effective isolation of inorganic ions, organic matter, oil in seawater, and sewage. More importantly, aerogels show excellent ability to extinguish bacteria under light, which provides a new idea for increasing water evaporation rate and realizing water purification.
1. Introduction
The recently developed various advanced water treatment technologies for obtaining high-quality freshwater from seawater and wastewater have become one of the leading research hotspots to solve freshwater shortage.1–4 Inspired by natural evaporation in the water cycle, solar-driven evaporation technology is considered as a low-cost, low-energy, and large-area development system for seawater desalination, wastewater purification, phase separation, and sterilization.5–8 The solar-driven evaporation system based on photothermal materials utilizes the absorbed sunlight to convert it into heat simultaneously, which promotes the phase change of water in the system to generate water vapor to achieve saltwater desalination and water purification.9–11 At present, one of the challenges limiting the development of solar evaporation technology is achieving efficient evaporation and breaking the limited evaporation rate.
In the past, it has always been the subject of scientific research to find photothermal materials to achieve maximum local heating in the light absorption layer to break the evaporation limiting rate.12–14 Compared with traditional solar evaporation technology, interfacial heating significantly increases the evaporation rate.15–18 Many efforts have been made to construct photothermal interfaces with excellent photothermal effects.19–23 Hu et al. produced a graphene–CuFeSe2 aerogel interface temperature higher than 130 °C for oil removal.24 However, CuFeSe2 aerogel cannot transport water for solar-driven water evaporation due to its hydrophobicity. Therefore, water transportation channels are necessary for an efficient solar evaporation system based on good light absorption. Light absorption can be enhanced by increasing carbon with sp2 hybridization, modifying the graphite structure, and creating nanopores for carbon materials. It is beneficial for reducing the bandgap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and change the surface morphology and hydrophilicity of the carbon material.25,26 In addition, the optical microcavity formed in the carbon material is beneficial for the multiple utilization of light.27,28
Excellent thermal management is essential in the process of solar-driven interfacial evaporation. Current strategies for reducing heat loss (to the environment and large amounts of water) in the evaporation system include establishing a thermal barrier between the evaporation system and the bottom water. Thermal barriers such as foam, cane stalks, nanofibers, and de-lignin wood have good water channels and improve the device's mechanical properties.29–32 Then, gradually evolved two-dimensional water channels and one-dimensional water channels are ideal thermal barriers. Another strategy is to increase the surface area of photothermal materials, realize the transformation from two-dimensional materials (2D) to three-dimensional (3D) materials, effectively capture reflected light, and use light multiple times to reduce light reflection loss.33–35 More importantly, increasing the surface area can absorb the excess energy of the photothermal surface, which is conducive for lowering the temperature between the evaporation interface and the environment and restrains the loss of thermal radiation and convection.36,37 Xu et al. carefully controlled the cold evaporating surface to extract energy from the water, proving that the evaporation rate could significantly increase.38–41 The 3D material sidewall without light irradiation that undergoes cold evaporation is called a cold evaporation surface. The research on obtaining energy from the environment and water to increase the evaporation efficiency needs further research to improve the defect that cotton swabs still need to consume a large amount of energy due to their strong water absorption and retention. As a 3D photothermal material, aerogels have extremely low thermal conductivity and a rich porous structure for effective heat insulation and is expected to achieve high evaporation rates.42
Herein, we report a lotus root-like Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene (MFeG) aerogel for solar steam generation to demonstrate the combination of excellent light absorption, heat loss suppression, and cold evaporation effect to obtain an ultra-high evaporation rate. Compared with MFeG hydrogels, only a thin layer of water between the MFeG aerogels skeleton is conducive for the photothermal conversion of the interface and the rapid escape of water molecules at the water–vapor interface. In addition, MFeG aerogels improve the evaporation interface's thermal localization and water transport capacity by introducing nanoparticles to enhance light absorption and water wettability. By manipulating the vertical height of the aerogel, the low-temperature gradient formed in the vertical direction of the aerogel side surface can effectively extract energy from the environment to achieve a large amount of water vapor escaping in the absence of light. At the same time, the excess heat from the light-to-heat conversion on the top surface is transferred vertically downward to the inside of the aerogel, realizing the effective use of energy instead of being lost in bulk water. As a result, aerogel has a high light absorption rate, super-hydrophilicity, strong mechanical properties, and a high-efficiency cold evaporation rate. It can achieve an evaporation rate of 3.85 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun. In addition, aerogels have excellent performance in seawater desalination, organic matter removal, and demulsification. Thus, aerogels are promising materials to regenerate clean water from seawater and wastewater and have great potential in practical application.
2. Experimental
Materials
Potassium ferrate(VI) (K2FeO4), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulfuric acid (H2SO4), phosphoric acid (H3PO4), potassium permanganate (KMnO4), and urea were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Flake graphite was obtained from Jinrilai Carbon Reagents Co., Ltd. (Qingdao, China). Enteromorpha was taken from the sea area of Qingdao Port, Shandong Province (36°05′N, 120°18′E), and were crushed to 200 mesh size after washing and drying. Experimental seawater was obtained from Qingdao Port in Shandong Province (36°05′N, 120°18′E). All chemicals and solvents in the experiments were of analytical grade and used without any further purification.
Preparation of Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel
The Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel was synthesized by the hydrothermal method. The Enteromorpha powders (40 ± 0.4 mg) and graphene oxide (80 ± 0.8 mg) were dispersed in 50 mL of deionized water, and then ultrasonic disintegration for 3 min to obtain a uniform solution. Subsequently, 0.25 g of urea was added and magnetically stirred for 5 min, and then placed in a reaction kettle at 180 °C for 7 h. After the reaction, the hydrogel was washed with 20% ethanol–water mixture for 24 h, and a 3D hydrogel with a molded structure was observed, which was named as the 0MFeG hydrogel.
Preparation of Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel and aerogel
Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel was prepared by the precipitation method reported in the literature.43 K2FeO4 was dissolved in NaOH aqueous solution by ultrasonic treatment and then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min to prepare a K2FeO4 solution containing 6 M NaOH. The prepared hydrogel was directly immersed in a 30 mL solution containing K2FeO4 and 6 M NaOH, and allowed to stand for 24 h. After soaking and cleaning in ethanol and deionized water, the Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel can be obtained. The potassium ferrate concentrations were 6, 8, 10, and 12 mM, and the samples were named as 6MFeG, 8MFeG, 10MFeG, and 12MFeG hydrogel, respectively. The above hydrogels were stored in an ultra-low temperature freezer for 4 h. The MFeG hydrogel was freeze-dried in a freeze-dryer for 48 h to obtain the MfeG aerogel.
Characterization
The mechanical properties were measured using a universal testing machine (CMT4304, MTS) equipped with a 200 N load cell at room temperature. The surface morphology images of the MFeG aerogels were obtained using a Hitachi, SU8010 scanning electron microscopy. The absorption spectrum was recorded using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere (PerkinElmer, USA). A HARKE-SPCA contact angle system was measured to characterize the hydrophilicity at room temperature using 10 μL water droplets on the MFeG aerogels' surface. The Raman spectra were recorded using a Micro-Raman Spectrometer (DXR2, Thermo). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out on a ThermoFisher, ESCALAB 250XI. The thermal conductivity of the MFeG aerogels at room temperature and ambient pressure was determined via a thermal analyzer (TC3000, XIATECH).
Solar steam generation and water purification
Steam generation experiments were carried out using a solar simulator (SS-50A, Sanyou, Beijing, China) with a light spot size of 5 cm × 5 cm at a solar density of 100 mW cm−2. The beaker (50 mL) containing the evaporator and the solution was placed in a computer-connected electronic balance (accuracy 0.1 mg) at 27 ± 2 °C with a relative humidity of 50 ± 5%, real-time record weight loss. MFeG aerogel with a diameter of 20 mm at the same exposure height (15 mm) and a layer of polystyrene foam was wrapped around the aerogel to fit the beaker to reduce heat loss. To study the effect of the aerogel height on the evaporation rate, the height of the MFeG aerogel exposed above the water surface was set to vary from 0 to 55 mm (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, 35, 45, 55 mm). Thermocouple thermometers (DT-847N, ATEST) collected the temperature at different positions of the device. The infrared images were captured using an infrared camera (FLIRE6). The concentrations of anions and cations in seawater were measured by ion chromatography (CIC-D100, ShengHan, China). The optical images of emulsified oil and recovered water were taken with a polarizing microscope (Nikon, ECLIPSE LV100POL).
3. Results and discussion
Microscopic morphology analysis
The Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene hydrogel (MFeG hydrogel) was simply synthesized by hydrothermal self-assembly and precipitation, and then the Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene aerogel (MFeG aerogel) was synthesized by a simple freeze-drying method. As shown in Fig. S1,† the side surface and top of the synthesized MFeG hydrogel are rough and uneven, while the bottom is smooth due to gravity squeezing. This macroscopic rough and uneven structure is conducive for multiple reflections of sunlight on the top surface and the reuse of light numerous times to increase light absorption; simultaneously, the protrusions structure significantly increases the surface area of the top and the sides. When the cylindrical MFeG hydrogel was cut along the radial direction, its interior is not uniform and complete but presents a vertical channel structure, similar to an entire lotus root-like structure. The lotus root-shaped vertical-cavity can be used as a water conveying channel and water storage reservoir, providing continuous water transportation for the water evaporation process. For the lightweight lotus root-like MFeG aerogel, its outer surface is entirely closed, and the interior has a vertical cavity structure, which is conducive for floating on the water surface and reducing heat transfer.
Given the unique structure of the MFeG aerogel, its microstructure was further studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). By comparing the structure and morphology of the aerogel before and after modification, it is concluded that the modified aerogels are successfully loaded with the nanospherical particles, while the surface of the Enteromorpha/graphene aerogels (0MFeG) is relatively smooth (Fig. 1a). That is to say, the modified aerogel not only has a macroscopic 3D network pore structure but also forms a nanolevel pore structure due to the aggregation of nanoparticles, which is beneficial for increasing the roughness. It is speculated that this rough structure and the stacked nanoparticles can significantly improve the pore structure, which enhances the light absorption performance and improves the water delivery channel through capillary action during the water evaporation process. In addition, this structure is conducive for enhancing the capillary effect in the process of water evaporation. Further, through EDS analysis, it is observed that the aerogel contains many elements such as N, Mg, Na, K, Fe, and Al, which is mainly due to the abundant elements in the Enteromorpha of the aerogel (Fig. 1d). In addition, the content of Fe accounted for 19.06% after soaking in 8 mM potassium ferrate, indicating that iron had been successfully loaded on the MFeG aerogel. Further, through XRD testing, it was found that the resulting nanoiron particles had an amorphous structure (Fig. S2†). The small peak at about 25° indicates the (002) reflection of graphene. The Fe, O, N, Na, and C elements in the 8MFeG aerogel were identified by XPS full-survey-scan spectrum (Fig. S3†). In the XPS Fe 2p spectrum, two major peaks at 711.6 eV and 725.2 eV were detected, which are assigned to Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2 binding energies, respectively, and two shake-up satellite peaks were detected at 719.5 eV and 733.2 eV. The deconvoluted O 1s XPS spectrum shows three peaks at 533.0 eV, 531.8 eV, and 530.1 eV, indicating the presence of the H–O–H band, Fe–O–H band, and Fe–O–Fe band, respectively. This result is consistent with that reported in the literature for FeOOH. All the above results demonstrate that the iron nanoparticles on the aerogel are amorphous FeOOH.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of the (a) 0MFeG aerogel, (b) 8MFeG aerogel, (c) SEM element mapping of the 8MFeG aerogel, (d) the EDS energy spectrum of the 8MFeG aerogel (inset table: element distribution), (e) optical images of top, bottom, and cross-sections of the 8MFeG hydrogel, (f) the synthetic route of the MFeG aerogel. 
Light-to-heat conversion mechanism
The continuous water transport capacity is essential for ensuring the continuous and efficient interface evaporation of the MFeG aerogel. As shown in Fig. 2a, the 0MFeG aerogels show poor wettability and permeability. Water drops to the surface within 1600 ms without complete penetration, and the water contact angle remains at 65°. However, the MFeG aerogels modified by iron nanoparticles all show hydrophilicity, and the droplets can thoroughly penetrate into the aerogels within 2 s, making the surface water contact angle 0°. The aerogels 6MFeG, 8MFeG, 10MFeG, and 12MFeG are fully permeated at 160 ms, 440 ms, 400 ms, and 1720 ms, respectively, which means that the difference in the capillary penetration of the aerogel will lead to the difference in the water supply during solar evaporation. Fig. 2b illustrates the difference in the water supply between the 0MFeG and 8MFeG aerogels. The 8MFeG aerogel modified with iron nanoparticles is beneficial for enhancing capillary action due to the accumulation of nanostructures. The 0MFeG aerogel has a certain water contact angle, which causes the pores in the aerogel network to form air barriers, while the 8MFeG aerogel has enhanced hydrophilicity but still maintains air barriers due to the closed holes formed in the aerogel network. Such an air barrier is an effective insulation layer during the solar evaporation process. The poor permeability of the 12MFeG aerogel is due to the excessive aggregation of iron nanoparticles, which leads to the blockage of nanowater channels and weakens the capillary action. The DSC curves of the 0MFeG aerogel, 8MFeG hydrogel, and wettable 8MFeG aerogel were further tested to identify the difference in the evaporation performance of water molecules under different environments (Fig. S5†). The temperature-induced phase transitions of water molecules in the 0MFeG aerogel, 8MFeG hydrogel, and 8MFeG aerogel after wetting are similar. The corresponding enthalpy of evaporation for the 0MFeG aerogel (2295 J g−1), 8MFeG hydrogel (2231 J g−1), and wettable 8MFeG aerogel (2227 J g−1) were calculated, which are slightly lower than the enthalpy of evaporation for pure water (2450 J g−1). Therefore, it can be concluded that the high evaporation rate of the 8MFeG aerogel does not depend on the reduction of the evaporation enthalpy of water molecules.
 Fig. 2  (a) The contact angle image of the MFeG aerogel, (b) schematic diagram of fast water transportation of the 0MFeG aerogel and the 8MFeG aerogel, (c) the surface temperature of the MFeG aerogel (dry and wet state) and the MFeG hydrogel, (d) infrared photographs of the MFeG aerogel and the MFeG hydrogel surface temperature under 1 sun, (e) schematic illustration of the light absorption capacity of the 8MFeG hydrogel and the 8MFeG aerogel, (f) Raman spectra of the MFeG aerogels, (g) ultraviolet-visible near-infrared spectra of the MFeG aerogels surface, standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum is set as the background. 
An infrared imager was used to characterize the temperature profile of the synthesized MFeG hydrogels and aerogels. As shown in Fig. 2d, the temperature at the top of the hydrogel and the surrounding environment is significantly different under 1 sun intensity after 5 min irradiation. For the MFeG hydrogels, the surface temperature response of the synthesized hydrogel with different iron content does not show an obvious difference because it contains a large amount of water. The surface temperature of the hydrogel sample 8MFeG can reach 37.2 °C, while the surface temperature of the unmodified hydrogel (0MFeG) can also reach 33.5 °C. In contrast, the synthesized aerogels with different iron content strongly respond to light and show apparent differences. As the iron content increases, the surface temperature of the aerogel increases, and the surface temperature of the 12MFeG aerogel is as high as 78.9 °C. In general, the synthesized MFeG aerogel has good light-to-heat conversion performance.
As a carbon material, the photothermal conversion mechanism of the aerogel is mainly due to the sizeable conjugated π-bonds in the graphene oxide material. The more conjugated π-bonds in the material, the electrons in the entire solar spectrum can be excited, resulting in transitions and causing the crystal lattice vibration to produce a macroscopic temperature increase. Therefore, Raman spectroscopy was used to analyze the degree of graphitization and disorder of the MFeG aerogel, as shown in Fig. 2f. The results show that the greater the increase in the iron content, the greater the ratio of ID/IG, where the strength of the G-band reflects the stretching motion of all sp2 atom pairs in the carbon ring or long chain, and the strength of the D-band reflects the defects and disorder of the carbon material. The introduction of iron leads to more defects and disordered structures in the aerogels, which is conducive for enhancing the light absorption performance of the materials. The iron nanoparticles formed in the hollow lotus root-like aerogel porous network are beneficial for developing a stacked nanoporous structure conducive to the multi-level reflection of sunlight inside the aerogel to improve the utilization of light (Fig. 2e). The further analysis of the light absorption of the aerogels by ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy also supports this view (Fig. 2g). The results show that the MFeG aerogel has good light absorption in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared regions. Compared with the 0MFeG aerogel, the light absorption of the 8 MFeG aerogel is increased by nearly 5%.
Mechanical properties analysis
The MFeG aerogels have excellent elasticity, benefiting from the closed vertical channel formed in the hydrothermal preparation process and the 3D microscopic interconnected network structure formed after freeze-drying. The maximum compressive stress and Young's modulus were further studied through the universal testing machine test. The results show that the MFeG aerogels with different iron contents show good resilience and can still maintain good morphology without cracking after 10 compression cycles under 70% strain (Fig. 3a–e). Moreover, the aerogels can rebound to more than 90% of their initial height, showing small plastic deformation and excellent mechanical stability. Three deformation forms are observed through the stress–strain curve of the MFeG aerogel: linear elastic zone, yield zone, and compaction zone. The strain corresponding to the bending of the inner pore wall of the aerogel is less than 10% when elastic deformation occurs under low stress. Then, the internal pores of the aerogel are gradually compressed and elastic yielding shows a relatively flat stress platform. Finally, the stress increases sharply, and the wall surfaces between adjacent holes are in contact with each other, resulting in an obvious deformation of the inner pore structure. It consumes energy by stagnating and compressing a large amount of gas in the aerogel pores, thereby exhibiting good mechanical properties. In addition, the hysteresis loop is due to the dissipation of mechanical energy generated by friction between the internal framework and the air. As shown in Fig. 3f, the maximum compressive stress increases with the increase in the iron content, while Young's modulus shows a trend of first decrease and then increase. It is understood that the filling of iron particles helps to improve the strength and compression performance of the aerogel. Still, the high iron content leads to unevenly high accumulation and aggregation on the 3D network structure, resulting in irregular force and internal collapse phenomenon.
 Fig. 3  (a–e) 10 cyclic compressive tests of the MFeG aerogels with 70% strain, (f) the maximum compressive stress and Young's modulus of the MFeG aerogels with 70% strain, (g) resilient photograph of the 8MFeG aerogels, (h) photographs of the 8MFeG aerogels supporting a 400 g weight. 
Evaporation properties of the hydrogels and aerogels
The aerogel and hydrogel with a height of 18 mm were respectively fixed in the evaporating water body through polystyrene foam to ensure that the sample was 15 mm above the water surface. A solar simulator was set above the photothermal material, and the mass changes of water were recorded in real-time through an electronic balance to study and compare the difference in the evaporation performance between the lotus root-like hydrogel and aerogel. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, compared with 0MFeG, the evaporation rate of the hydrogel is significantly higher after immersing in potassium ferrate, and the 8MFeG hydrogel can reach 2.19 kg m−2 h−1. After modifying the iron nanoparticles, the evaporation rate of the MFeG hydrogel initially increased with the iron content. When the addition amount exceeds 8 mM, the evaporation rate gradually decreased with the increase in the iron content. After freeze-drying, the evaporation rate of the obtained aerogels increased obviously. With the rise in the iron content, the evaporation rate showed the same change pattern as that of the hydrogels. It is concluded that the evaporation rate of the decorated MFeG aerogels with different iron content is 0.1–0.2 kg m−2 h−1 higher than the corresponding hydrogels. Aiming at the phenomenon that the evaporation performance is reduced when the iron content is too high, it is speculated that the aggregation of iron nanoparticles affects the light absorption and excessive iron nanoparticles block the nanowater channel and affect the capillary action. In particular, the evaporation rate of the aerogel 8MFeG aerogel is as high as 2.39 kg m−2 h−1, which is much higher than most photothermal materials currently studied. This phenomenon is considerably related to the difference in the structure of the aerogels and hydrogels. Compared with hydrogels containing a lot of water, freeze-drying leads to vertical cavities and many 3D interconnected microstructures in the aerogels. There is only a thin layer of water film on the surface and inside the MFeG aerogels during the evaporation process, which facilitates rapid evaporation and minor heat conduction loss. The aerogel has a lotus root-like 3D network structure with well-developed pores. Therefore, the porosity of the MFeG aerogel was further tested (Fig. 4d). The results verify that the porosity of the MFeG aerogel is up to 99%. In addition, compared with the MFeG hydrogels, MFeG aerogels have a low saturated moisture content when saturated with water, up to only 60 g g−1 (Fig. 4e). It is further confirmed that the high porosity and low saturated moisture content are beneficial for the formation of air barriers with a thin layer of water inside the aerogel, which is presumed to be beneficial for the thermal insulation effect. The thermal conductivity of the hydrogel and the saturated water-absorbing aerogel was further evaluated (Fig. 4f). The results reveal that the thermal conductivity of the hydrogel (0.55 W m−1 K−1) is close to that of water (0.60 W m−1 K−1), while the saturated water-absorbing aerogel (0.32 W m−1 K−1) has a smaller thermal conductivity due to the presence of air barriers. In other words, the aerogel has good thermal management and is more conducive for interfacial water evaporation.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Mass change of water with the MFeG hydrogels and MFeG aerogels over time under 1 sun illumination, (c) evaporation rate of the MFeG hydrogels and MFeG aerogels, (d) porosity of the MFeG aerogel, (e) moisture content of the MFeG aerogels saturated with adsorbed water and the MFeG hydrogels, (f) thermal conductivity of water, 8MFeG hydrogel, 8MFeG aerogel in dry and wet states. 
Evaporation performance of the Fe@Enteromorpha/graphene aerogel
The photothermal properties of the MFeG aerogels under different light intensities were further studied by controlling the light power of the solar simulator. The water evaporation properties and temperature changes of the MFeG aerogels with a diameter of 20 mm under the same exposure height (15 mm) were investigated with the experimental intensity gradients of 0, 0.7, 1, 2, and 3 solar illuminations (Fig. 5a–c, S6 and S7†). It can be observed that the evaporation rate of the different samples in the absence of sunlight is much higher than that of blank water (Fig. 5e). The evaporation rates of 0MFeG, 6MFeG, 8MFeG, 10MFeG, and 12MFeG aerogels under dark conditions are 0.31, 0.43, 0.50, 0.37, and 0.31 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The infrared image shows that the top surface temperatures of the MFeG aerogels with different iron content are 22.6, 20.4, 19.3, 22.3, and 22.8 °C, which is lower than the room temperature (Fig. 5d and g). Since water evaporation is a natural process, water molecules near the air–water interface need to use enough kinetic energy to overcome the force of molecules between the liquid phases to move out and diffuse to the interface.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Mass change of water with the MFeG aerogels over time under different sunlight intensity illumination, (d) infrared image of the top and side of the MFeG aerogels under dark (0 sun), (e) evaporation rate of the MFeG aerogels under different sunlight intensity illumination, (f) temperature variation of the MFeG aerogels surface over time under 1 sun, (g) temperature distribution diagram of the diameter direction of the top of the MFeG aerogels (the aerogel is at about 20–40 mm). 
For solar-driven interface evaporation, most researchers currently study the energy balance of this process simply using solar energy as the only energy input to drive the movement of water molecules. The energy output includes the energy for water evaporation, heat radiation for energy transfer to the environment, heat convection, and heat conduction. In a dark environment without sunlight, the photothermal material can still achieve greater water evaporation due to its lower surface temperature driving the surface to absorb energy from the environment. This phenomenon can be explained as follows: the phase change of water on the air–water interface causes the surface temperature of the aerogels to decrease gradually; heat radiation is a dynamic state, and the surrounding air (27 °C) radiates electromagnetic waves to the aerogel and at the same time, it absorbs the electromagnetic waves radiated by the aerogel but the electromagnetic waves radiated by the air are more energetic. Thus, the overall effect is always that the warmer air transfers energy to the cooler aerogel; the 3D network structure of the aerogel suspended above the water surface has a thin film of water on the skeleton, and the holes between the skeleton are filled with air to form an air interlayer barrier that blocks the loss of heat conduction. In general, the energy transfer is transformed into the transfer of energy from the environment to the aerogel. Therefore, the lower the thermal conductivity and the greater the porosity of the aerogels, the higher the dark evaporation rate. In the presence of sunlight, the evaporation rate of water increases with the increase in the light intensity, indicating that the higher the absorbed light energy, the stronger the photothermal conversion ability. It is worth mentioning that the sample 8MFeG exhibits a light-to-heat conversion ability far superior to that of other samples under different light intensities. At the same time, it was observed that the surface temperature gradually increased; in particular, the temperature and evaporation rates of the 8MFeG aerogel are as high as 58.8 °C and 6.87 kg m−2 h−1 under 3 sun irradiations, respectively. When exposed to high-intensity sunlight, the surface temperature of the aerogels is significantly higher than the ambient temperature. Although the evaporation rate is high under sun illumination, the loss of heat conduction, heat radiation, and heat convection transmitted to the environment is larger than that of dark evaporation.
Energy conversion of the 3D aerogels with different heights
The strategy of increasing the energy input based on the reverse transfer of heat into the aerogel via the evaporative cooling effect is feasible. The energy transfer of the evaporation system due to the formation of temperature gradients was further studied by increasing the superimposed height of the aerogel to increase the side cooling evaporation surface. As shown in Fig. 6a, the vertical height of the MFeG aerogels exposed above the water surface was set to vary from 0 to 55 mm (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, 35, 45, 55 mm). Since the height of the 0 mm aerogel is 20 mm, it is necessary to ensure that the MFeG aerogels with different exposure heights are immersed at the same height (20 mm) under the water surface. As shown in Fig. 6b, the evaporation rate of the aerogel at different heights is significantly different. The evaporation rate is only 1.11 kg m−2 h−1 when the top of the aerogel remains at the same level as the horizontal plane, and then it is significantly increased to 1.87 kg m−2 h−1 for aerogels exposed to the air 6 mm high. Gradually increasing the stack height (8–55 mm), the evaporation rate increased to 1.96, 2.01, 2.33, 2.58, 2.90, 3.61, 3.73, and 3.85 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, far exceeding the theoretical evaporation limit value.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the 8MFeG aerogel with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights, (b) mass change of water with the MFeG aerogels with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights over time under 1 sun illumination, (c) infrared image of the 8MFeG aerogel with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights, (d) temperature at different positions of the 8MFeG aerogels with 0–55 mm exposure heights, (e) schematic illustration of the energy exchange between the top and side of the evaporator and environment with different exposure heights, (f) energy exchange between the aerogel and the environment at different exposure heights. 
Infrared imagers and a thermocouple thermometer further tested the temperature at different locations of the evaporation system. It includes four sites: the top surface, the middle side surface, the bottom side surface of the aerogel exposed to the air, and bulk water at the bottom of the aerogel (Fig. S9†). It is concluded that the temperature at the top of the aerogel is first increased and then decreased as the exposure height increases. The temperature of the top surface of the aerogel is as high as 42.1 °C at the exposure height of 6 mm, then decreased to 35.3 °C at the exposure height of 55 mm (Fig. 6d). The calculated heat loss (heat radiation and heat convection loss) at the top of the aerogel is 0.047, 0.051, 0.052, 0.053, 0.049, 0.046, 0.042, 0.038, 0.036, 0.033, 0.029, and 0.029 W, respectively. For high-exposure aerogels, the lower temperature of the evaporation surface is beneficial for reducing heat radiation and heat convection losses, which is a reason for the high evaporation rate. After solar radiation, the temperature of the side surface is much lower than that of the top surface. For aerogels with exposure heights of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15 mm under 1 sun, the temperature difference between the top surface and the side surface was about 4.4 °C, 5.3 °C, 4.4 °C, 5.8 °C, 5.8 °C, and 5.2 °C. In particular, the temperature difference can be as high as ∼12 °C when the exposure height is higher than 45 mm. It is concluded that the heat generated by the photothermal conversion on the surface of the aerogel is transferred downward along with the vertical height of the aerogel, thereby forming a temperature gradient (Fig. 6c), which explains the decrease in the surface temperature of the aerogel as the exposure height gradually increases. It was observed that when the exposure height of the aerogel was low (2–10 mm), the heat was transferred to the bottom of the aerogel and it still maintained a high temperature, indicating that the net energy was still transferred to the environment. After the exposure height of the aerogel is increased to more than 25 mm, the bottom of the aerogel can maintain a low temperature similar to that of the side, indicating that there is basically no net energy transfer to bulk water and the environment during this process.
Excitingly, the water temperature of the evaporation system was slightly reduced when the exposure height was 55 mm, indicating that there might still be an aerogel obtaining energy from water at this time. For the aerogel with a height of 2 mm, the energy loss on its side surface was calculated to be 0.0074 W. As the height increased to 55 mm, the energy loss was converted into the energy input, reaching 0.093 W (Fig. 6f). The heat conduction loss was further calculated, and it is found that the loss of aerogel is as high as 0.052 W when it is completely immersed in water (0 mm). As the height of the aerogel increases, its heat conduction loss can be reduced to 0 W (20 mm), especially when the height reaches 55 mm, the water body reversely transfers heat to the aerogel, up to 0.035 W energy. This is attributed to the extended heat conduction path and the microstructure with a lotus root-like and 3D network, which effectively prevents the heat conduction loss to water and has excellent heat preservation effect. In general, the entire aerogel has supercapillary action due to superhydrophilicity, which can ensure that the side of the aerogel continuously absorbs water and maintains a moist state. In addition, the side of the aerogel absorbs and takes away a large amount of heat due to the evaporative cooling effect, which causes the temperature of the side to decrease. Therefore, the side of the aerogel can obtain energy from the environment through convection and radiation heat transfer processes instead of losing energy. In other words, the larger the lateral area, the more the water molecules near the evaporative cooling interface, the more the energy absorbed and carried away at the interface, and the more the water molecules that escape from the interface in the same evaporation time. That is, the larger the evaporative cooling surface (the higher the height of the aerogel), the higher the evaporation rate.
Water purification
The warm environment created by photothermal materials in the treatment of actual wastewater is conducive for the growth of microorganisms and causes bacterial pollution problems. The study reports that reduced graphene has a strong ability to inhibit or kill pathogenic microorganisms, mainly to kill bacteria by destroying the cell membrane's integrity and inhibiting bacteria. Escherichia coli was used as the representative bacteria to evaluate the growth of the MFeG aerogel surface adhesion. The light intensity was changed (0, 1, 2, 5 sun), 20 mg of the MFeG aerogel was floated in 20 mL of E. coli solution and placed on a magnetic stirrer. 500 μL of E. coli solution from the top of the aerogel were collected at different intervals of time (0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 min). As shown in Fig. 7a–c, the aerogel has a poor sterilization effect, only killing 70% of Escherichia coli without light. It is speculated that this process is mainly due to the inhibition effect of reduced graphene. The sterilization rate of the MFeG aerogel can reach 80% under 1 sun irradiation. Meanwhile, the temperature distribution of the aerogel sterilization process is shown in Fig. 7a1. Local maximum temperatures at the top of the MFeG aerogel were observed to reach ∼21.2 °C, 38.5 °C, 48.6 °C, and 71.6 °C, respectively, during sterilization under different sunlight intensities (0, 1, 2, and 5 sun). Gradually increasing the light intensity to 5 sun can ultimately kill E. coli. Intense light is beneficial for making the temperature of the system exceed 50 °C.
 Fig. 7  (a1) The temperature distribution at the top of the aerogel under different sunlight intensities during the sterilization process, (a2) photographs of agar plates used for the growth of Escherichia coli in the presence of the MFeG aerogel after different intensity sunlight irradiation, (b) schematic diagram of sterilization of the aerogel during seawater desalination, (c) bactericidal efficiency against Escherichia coli with the 8MFeG aerogel under different sunlight intensity, (d) water evaporation rate during continuous evaporation in the brine of different salinity, (e) long-term evaporation of the 8MFeG aerogel, (f) concentrations of major ions in the seawater before and after desalination. 
It is speculated that local heating significantly reduces the activity of bacteria, i.e., it has a strong inhibitory effect on gyrase and topoisomerase IV and induces cell death. The results further indicate the importance of photothermal effects in bacterial inactivation. It provides a strategy for the rapid inactivation of bacteria to achieve water quality purification and prevent light heat materials from bacterial pollution.
To further investigate the ability of the 8MFeG aerogel to achieve water purification via solar-assisted interface water evaporation, including seawater, simulated dye wastewater, and emulsified oil, clean water is condensed and recovered in a closed device. The seawater of Qingdao Port (36°05′N, 120°18′E) in Shandong Province was used to evaluate its ability to remove inorganic ions (Fig. 7f and S13†). The results show that the concentration of Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Cl−, Br−, and NO3− ions in the condensate water after the interface evaporation is significantly reduced, which reached the standard of healthy drinking water as defined by the World Health Organization (WHO). In addition, the MFeG aerogel with a height of 15 mm can maintain a steady evaporation rate of 2.0–2.4 kg m−1 h−1 when evaporating continuously in the brine of different salinity under 1 solar irradiation. Simultaneously, no obvious salt particles were observed on the aerogel surface after 1 h of sunlight irradiation, which is attributed to the lotus-shaped vertical water transport channel that could achieve brine reflux well. Stable water evaporation rates were observed for aerogels with 15 mm height to 35 g L−1 of brine under one sun for 9 h, up to 2.4 kg m−2 h−1. For oil-in-water emulsified oil, no apparent oil droplets were observed in the condensed water of the oil-in-water emulsion after solar evaporation (Fig. S14†). The absorption wavelength of methylene blue and methyl orange dyes before and after evaporation was further detected by the ultraviolet spectrum absorption method (Fig. S15 and S16†). The results revealed that the light absorption rate after evaporation was close to zero and the visual observation had a good decolorization effect.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we constructed aerogels with lotus root-like vertical porous channels and integrated iron nanoparticles through hydrothermal self-assembly and precipitation methods, which demonstrated excellent light-to-heat conversion and were used for solar-driven water evaporation. The decoration of the stacked nanoparticles in the aerogel network and the formation of nanopores are conducive for limiting the re-use of light in the 3D porous structure and further heat generation at the nanometer scale. The resulting aerogel has good water transport capacity and local thermal localization, which effectively promotes the escape of surface water molecules from the air-liquid interface. The experimental results revealed that the evaporation efficiency of the aerogel is slightly higher than that of the hydrogel because it contains a thin layer of water and low thermal conductivity. The excessive modification of nanoparticles is not conducive for the evaporation of aerogels because it blocks the water channels. With the increase in the light intensity, the gradual increase in the evaporation rate is mainly due to the enhancement of the light-to-heat conversion ability. In addition, the aerogel surface has an obvious cold evaporation effect due to the formation of a temperature gradient under low-concentration light intensity, which intensifies the escape of water molecules. The obtained aerogel exhibited an excellent evaporation rate of 3.85 kg m−2 h−1 at 1 sun at a height of 55 mm. Furthermore, the ion concentration of the purified water obtained after evaporation reaches the drinking water standard, which significantly reduces the organic matter and has excellent sterilization performance. Therefore, the Enteromorpha/graphene aerogel decorated with iron nanoparticles is a promising material for obtaining a high evaporation rate and providing a considerable prospect for efficient water evaporation to alleviate the water crisis.
Author contributions
Yan Kong: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, investigation, writing – original draft, visualization. Yue Gao: methodology, writing – review & editing, project administration. Yunkai Sun: validation, software, formal analysis. Yuanfeng Qi: investigation. Weiyan Yin: investigation. Shouquan Wang: investigation, resources. Fengjiao Yin: investigation, resources. Zhenguo Dai: investigation, resources. Baoyu Gao: supervision, resources, project administration. Qinyan Yue: conceptualization, supervision, writing – review & editing, project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2021QE041), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51978384), Major Technological Innovation Engineering Project of Shandong Province (No. 2020CXGC011204) and Shandong Province Postdoctoral Innovative Talents Support Program (Grant No. SDBX2020002). In addition, the authors would like to thank Shiyanjia Lab (http://www.shiyanjia.com) for the DSC and XPS measurements.
Notes and references
J. Mustafa, A. A. H. I. Mourad, A. H. Al-Marzouqi and M. H. El-Naas, Desalination, 2020, 483, 114386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Le Dirach, S. Nisan and C. Poletiko, Desalination, 2005, 182, 449–460 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. Q. Liang, Z. K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Connor, in Water for a Sustainable World, UNESCO Publishing,  2015, p. 122 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, G. Xu, M. Zhu, W. C. Law, K. T. Yong, Y. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong and F. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25571–25600 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li and W. Hong, Water Res., 2020, 177, 115770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Sharshir, A. M. Algazzar, K. A. Elmaadawy, A. W. Kandeal, M. R. Elkadeem, T. Arunkumar, J. Zang and N. Yang, Desalination, 2020, 491, 114564 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Dao, N. H. Vu and S. Yun, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Ding, M. Gao, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, J. He and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuang, L. Zhou, W. Xu, N. Xu, X. Hu, X. Li, G. Lv, Q. Zheng, S. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700497 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, M. Du, G. Lv, L. Zhou, X. Li, L. Bertoluzzi, C. Liu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mu, Y. Gu, P. Wang, A. Wei, Y. Tian, J. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Sun, J. Liu, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 220, 110842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, L. Li, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14736–14745 RSC .
L. Li, T. Hu, A. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32143–32153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Zhao, L. Li, T. Hu, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 602–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, C. Song, X. Zhu, J. Gong and Q. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27450–27457 RSC .
J. Wang, X. Guo, J. Chen, S. Hou, H. Li, A. Haleem, S. Chen and W. He, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 3088–3098 RSC .
P. Wang, X. Wang, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Mu, Y. Chen, Z. Sun, A. Wei, Y. Tian, J. Zhou, X. Liang, L. Miao and N. Saito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 30556–30564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Q. Li and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, Z. Tian, F. Wang, J. He, X. Ye, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, W. Liang and A. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 2932–2943 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiao, N. Li, L. Luo, J. He, Y. Lin, J. Li, L. Yu, C. Guo, P. Murto and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9692–9705 RSC .
A. Sun, X. Hou and X. Hu, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104511 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, J. Sun, Q. Peng, Q. Sun, G. Wang, Y. Cai, X. Gu, Z. Shuai and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, H. Dan, W. Kong, Y. Gao, Y. Shang, K. Ji, Q. Yue and B. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24734–24742 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Zhao, Y. Xu, L. Chen, T. Jiang, W. Jiang, S. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26769–26775 RSC .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Mater. Today, 2021, 42, 178–191 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Liu, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Geng, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16343–16347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aftabuzzaman, C. Lu and H. K. Kim, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17590–17648 RSC .
C. Zhang, J. Mo, Q. Fu, Y. Liu, S. Wang and S. Nie, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, W. Li, W. Song, L. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 349–357 RSC .
Y. Xia, Y. Kang, Z. Wang, S. Yuan, Y. Li, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6612–6633 RSC .
N. Li, L. Qiao, J. He, S. Wang, L. Yu, P. Murto, X. Li and X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008681 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, N. Li, S. Wang, S. Li, F. Li, L. Yu, P. Murto and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21197–21208 RSC .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, M. H. Singer, C. Li, A. R. Cheney, D. Ji, L. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Bei, Z. Yu, S. Jiang and Q. Gan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800222 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11665–11673 RSC .
X. Wu, T. Gao, C. Han, J. Xu, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1625–1633 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Storer, J. L. Phelps, X. Wu, G. Owens, N. I. Khan and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15279–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Du, S. He, L. Liu, K. Yang, J. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Du, L. Xie, W. Ai and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09807aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of the (a) 0MFeG aerogel, (b) 8MFeG aerogel, (c) SEM element mapping of the 8MFeG aerogel, (d) the EDS energy spectrum of the 8MFeG aerogel (inset table: element distribution), (e) optical images of top, bottom, and cross-sections of the 8MFeG hydrogel, (f) the synthetic route of the MFeG aerogel.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The contact angle image of the MFeG aerogel, (b) schematic diagram of fast water transportation of the 0MFeG aerogel and the 8MFeG aerogel, (c) the surface temperature of the MFeG aerogel (dry and wet state) and the MFeG hydrogel, (d) infrared photographs of the MFeG aerogel and the MFeG hydrogel surface temperature under 1 sun, (e) schematic illustration of the light absorption capacity of the 8MFeG hydrogel and the 8MFeG aerogel, (f) Raman spectra of the MFeG aerogels, (g) ultraviolet-visible near-infrared spectra of the MFeG aerogels surface, standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum is set as the background.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–e) 10 cyclic compressive tests of the MFeG aerogels with 70% strain, (f) the maximum compressive stress and Young's modulus of the MFeG aerogels with 70% strain, (g) resilient photograph of the 8MFeG aerogels, (h) photographs of the 8MFeG aerogels supporting a 400 g weight.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Mass change of water with the MFeG hydrogels and MFeG aerogels over time under 1 sun illumination, (c) evaporation rate of the MFeG hydrogels and MFeG aerogels, (d) porosity of the MFeG aerogel, (e) moisture content of the MFeG aerogels saturated with adsorbed water and the MFeG hydrogels, (f) thermal conductivity of water, 8MFeG hydrogel, 8MFeG aerogel in dry and wet states.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Mass change of water with the MFeG aerogels over time under different sunlight intensity illumination, (d) infrared image of the top and side of the MFeG aerogels under dark (0 sun), (e) evaporation rate of the MFeG aerogels under different sunlight intensity illumination, (f) temperature variation of the MFeG aerogels surface over time under 1 sun, (g) temperature distribution diagram of the diameter direction of the top of the MFeG aerogels (the aerogel is at about 20–40 mm).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the 8MFeG aerogel with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights, (b) mass change of water with the MFeG aerogels with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights over time under 1 sun illumination, (c) infrared image of the 8MFeG aerogel with 0–55 mm variable exposure heights, (d) temperature at different positions of the 8MFeG aerogels with 0–55 mm exposure heights, (e) schematic illustration of the energy exchange between the top and side of the evaporator and environment with different exposure heights, (f) energy exchange between the aerogel and the environment at different exposure heights.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a1) The temperature distribution at the top of the aerogel under different sunlight intensities during the sterilization process, (a2) photographs of agar plates used for the growth of Escherichia coli in the presence of the MFeG aerogel after different intensity sunlight irradiation, (b) schematic diagram of sterilization of the aerogel during seawater desalination, (c) bactericidal efficiency against Escherichia coli with the 8MFeG aerogel under different sunlight intensity, (d) water evaporation rate during continuous evaporation in the brine of different salinity, (e) long-term evaporation of the 8MFeG aerogel, (f) concentrations of major ions in the seawater before and after desalination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09807a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
