High temperature sodium batteries: status, challenges and future trends   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24086J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24086J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 734-749Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHigh temperature sodium batteries: status, challenges and future trends†

        
          
            Karina B. 
            Hueso
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michel 
            Armand
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Teófilo 
            Rojo
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartamento de Quíımica Inorgánica, Universidad del País Vasco UPV/EHU, P.O. Box. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. E-mail: trojo@cicenergigune.com;  Fax: +34 946013500;   Tel: +34 946012458  Tel: +34 945297108
bCIC ENERGIGUNE, Parque Tecnológico de Álava, Albert Einstein 48, ED.CIC, 01510 Miñano, Spain
Received 
      15th November 2012
    , Accepted 11th January 2013First published on 14th January 2013AbstractThe progress in the research and development of high temperature sodium batteries suggests that all-solid-state batteries with inorganic or polymer solid electrolytes are promising power sources for a wide range of applications due to their high thermal stability, reliability, long-cycle life and versatile geometries. The electrolytes play a fundamental role in terms of current (power) density, the time stability, and the safety of batteries and, as a result, their continuous improvement and innovation are indeed critical to success. In fact, inorganic solid electrolytes pave the way for improving the cost-effective development of rechargeable sodium batteries. This review describes a state-of-the-art overview of most of the Na+ conductors for use as electrolytes in sodium/sulphur and ZEBRA batteries. The emphasis of this article is on inorganic solid electrolytes, especially, ceramic and glass-ceramic electrolytes as promising alternatives applicable to all solid-state batteries. As part of a continuous effort to find new materials that operate at room temperature and moderate temperatures, NASICON electrolytes will also be considered. Polymer electrolytes based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) are also very suitable for all solid-state batteries. Hence, the review focuses on ion transport based on the observed conductivity, electrolyte preparation, safety and environmental impact.Karina B. HuesoKarina Beatriz Hueso received her PhD in Analytical Chemistry from the University of Salamanca (USAL, Spain) in 2010. During her PhD she spent two months at the Faculty of Science and the Environment at the University of Hull, UK. She has a multidisciplinary background in the fields of fluorimetry, biochemical, biopolymers and flow-injection analysis. After she obtained a Master's degree in new materials from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU, Spain) in 2011, she joined the Inorganic Chemistry department at UPV/EHU. Currently, her research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of novel materials for sodium batteries.Michel ArmandProf. Michel Armand has been Directeur de Recherche at CNRS since 1989. Invited professor at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (1982–83). Professor at the University of Montreal (Canada) (1995–2004). Director of the Joint CNRS-UdM International Laboratory on Electroactive Materials (2000–2004). Resumed as Directeur de Recherche at CNRS in Amiens (France). He has authored/co-authored over 230 publications, 225 presentations at conferences of which 185 were invited and 157 patents delivered or pending. He is acting or has acted as Editorial Board for several journals (Solid-State Ionics, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, Synthetic Metals, J. Power Sources) and Conferences advisory committee and organisation for 38 international conferences.Teófilo RojoTeófilo Rojo received his PhD from the University of the Basque Country in 1981. He has spent various research periods at several European and American universities. Since 1992 he has been a Full Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the UPV/EHU. His research has been focused on Solid State Chemistry and Materials Science. Since 2010 he has been the Scientific Director of the CIC-Energigune and his research is focused on the study of materials for both lithium and non-lithium based batteries. He holds different positions in various scientific bodies in Spain being the chairman of the Solid State Chemistry Group within the Spanish Royal Society for the last ten years.

Broader context
On a broader scale, energy innovation plays an important role in the reduction of carbon emission in the atmosphere and global warming. In consequence, advances are needed in energy storage technology for the integration of intermittent renewable energy resources on electricity markets and grids. The low-cost and high abundance of sodium versus lithium make sodium batteries a promising technology in the long term. Na battery technology is regarded as promising in the future of stationary energy storage and battery electric vehicles (BEVs). For this purpose, the development of novel electrode and electrolyte materials is needed. Although inorganic or polymer solid electrolytes play a fundamental role in the successful progress of all solid-state rechargeable sodium batteries, they have received less attention until very recently. For this reason, this article focuses on solid electrolytes for next generation batteries.

1 Introduction
Energy storage technology will be of vital importance in the near future as a result of energy demand and the gradual increase in the price of fossil fuels and their environmental impact. Energy storage systems are required not only for load leveling because of the intermittent nature of energy sources (solar, wind and tide), but also for energy usage (peak vs. off-peak hours). Such cells would smooth fluctuations in the electrical grid, thereby optimizing energy collection, storage, and usage. Fig. 1 shows several electrical energy storage (EES) systems in terms of power rating, which identifies potential applications and duration of discharge.1
 Fig. 1  Comparison of discharge time and power rating for various electrical energy storage systems. Reprinted from ref. 1. Courtesy of Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 
Batteries represent an excellent energy storage technology for the integration of renewable resources. Due to the fact that many global lithium reserves are located in remote or in politically sensitive areas and the high cost of lithium-ion batteries, Na and Na-ion batteries have re-emerged as candidates for medium and large-scale stationary energy storage. The use of a naturally abundant element, low cost and very suitable redox potential (E°(Na+/Na) = −2.71 V versus standard hydrogen electrode; only 0.3 V positive of lithium), means that rechargeable electrochemical cells based on sodium also hold much promise for energy storage applications.2,3 All-solid-state batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes are promising power sources for a wide range of applications because of their safety, long-cycle life and versatile geometries.4 However, not only cathodic and anodic materials must be optimized, but also new electrolytes should be synthesized as they are the key points for the success of Na batteries.5
Among the possible solid electrolytes, ceramic or polymer electrolytes each provide specific advantages such as easy handling, high thermal stability, low self-discharge rates, operable over a wide range of environmental conditions, durability, reliability, no flammable components and without the need for containment as for liquid electrolytes. The high elastic moduli of ceramics make them more suitable for rigid battery designs whereas the low elastic moduli of polymers are useful for flexible battery designs. The main advantages of the solid ceramic electrolytes are their simple manipulation, versatility, high stability, long life, high performance, safe operation and no leakage.
Ionic conduction in ceramic compounds occurs by the movement of ionic point defects, the creation and/or movement of which requires energy, so the conductivity follows the Arrhenius law with activation energy in the range of 0.25 to 1 eV. Therefore, ceramic solid electrolytes are suitable for high-temperature applications.6 Sodium–sulphur (Na–S) and ZEBRA batteries have been the high temperature systems commercially available up to this point of time.

Fig. 2 summarizes a general vision of the two high temperature sodium batteries with reference to their characteristics, applications, advantages, shortcomings and recycling that will be more deeply described and studied in detail throughout this review.
 Fig. 2  Schematic summary of the main features of the high temperature sodium batteries. (Data from ref. 6–9, 27, 28 and 30, that will appear below.) 
The evolution of interest in researching sodium batteries operating at high temperature has been depicted in Fig. 3A. This search shows the number of articles appeared in scientific journals per year, based on the keywords “Na battery high temperature”. During the 90s, a continuous trend can be seen in the number of articles published about this research topic. A decrease is observed in the early years of the 21st century. However, in the last few years, a growing attention to high temperature batteries for energy storage market reappears. The increasing interest in developing innovative materials and new designs for sodium batteries can also be measured by the number of patents. In terms of number of patents relative to sodium batteries operating at high temperature, a remarkable growth during the last few years has been observed (see Fig. 3B).
 Fig. 3  Number of scientific publications per year related to Na batteries operating at high temperature. (A) All publications, including patents, from 1970 to 2012. (B) Number of patents from 2000 to 2012. Source: Scifinder Scholar™ 2012. 
On the other hand, considering the publications related to the electrolytes, beta-alumina has been the object of worldwide interest during the 1970s and 1980s. However, nowadays other electrolytes such as NASICON-type, glass and glass ceramic are being studied. The number of articles appeared in scientific journals per year, based on these electrolytes can be observed in the ESI (Fig. S1†). In comparison with the beta-alumina publications, the NASICON-type, glass and glass ceramic electrolytes are in their early stage of development for sodium battery applications.
Sodium–sulphur batteries were primarily manufactured by NGK Insulators Ltd. in 2003, Japan, and since 2008 they have been only manufactured by one group, the NGK/TEPCO (Tokyo Electric Power Co.) Consortium. Whereas ZEBRA (Zero-Emission Battery Research Activities) cells which are based on Na/NiCl2 were invented by Coetzer in 1978 and further developed by Beta Research and Development Ltd. in England7 until the technology was acquired by MES S.A. with its alternative energy division (Divisione Energie Alternative, DEA). In 2010, Switzerland’s MES-DEA has been acquired by the Italian company FIAMM Energy LLC8 and they have formed a new company, FZ Sonick SA.9 Both cells operate at temperatures near 300 °C and are based on using β-β′′-alumina as a Na+-conducting membrane between two liquid electrodes10 (see ref. 2).
1.1 Sodium–sulphur batteries, Na–S
Li–S cells are receiving intense interest for applications such as transportation due to a high theoretical specific energy (2567 W h kg−1).11,12 In the same way, sodium–sulphur (Na–S) batteries (760 W h kg−1, with a low rate of self-discharge) can meet the future requirements economically, efficiently and also in terms of reliability, but in this case for advanced large-scale energy storage systems. These batteries exhibit reasonable power and energy densities, temperature stability, and, moreover, low cost because of its abundant raw materials and suitability for high volume mass production. Other advantages of Na–S technology are cycling flexibility and low maintenance requirements.13 In addition, Na–S batteries are environmentally benign, since these batteries are sealed and allow no emissions during operation. More than 99% of the overall weight of the battery materials can be recycled (the steel, copper and aluminium). Only sodium must be handled as a hazardous material.14 However, processes for recycling sodium and sulphur from these batteries are apparently still not developed.15
Since the development of Na–S batteries in the 1970s, sodium and sulphur have been utilized as the anode and cathode active materials, and sodium-conducting β-alumina ceramic as the electrolyte separating both electrodes. The sulphur impregnates a graphite felt for electron exchange. The use of the light elements, Na and S, endows the Na–S system with large capacity and, high energy density (not only in mass, but also in volume 2584 W h l−1), making them suitable storage batteries.16 Actually, elemental sulphur for positive active materials has a very high theoretical specific capacity of 1675 mA h g−1 based on two electron change reaction. In addition, elemental sulphur is a low-cost, safe and environmental friendly material. The electrode and overall Na–S cell reactions can be described as in eqn (1)–(3). (Anode) 2Na ⇔ 2Na+ + 2e−(1) (Cathode) xS + 2e− ⇔ Sx2−(2) (Overall cell) 2Na + xS ⇔ Na2Sx, E = 2.08–1.78 V(3)
The reaction products, sodium polysulphides (Na2Sx), coexist in the liquid state, yielding high electrode reactivity. Initially, at 2.075 V (see Fig. 4) a two-phase region of sulphur and sodium polysulphide (Na2S5) is present, as these two liquids are immiscible at the operating temperature.
 Fig. 4  Na–S cell voltage profile with the different phases that exist at each stage-of-charge. (Derived from ref. 17.) 
As the cell is discharged, all S combines with Na to form a single phase region (Na2S4). At 1.74 V reduction to Na2S3 occurs and at deeper discharge solid Na2S2 is formed. At this point, increased resistance at the positive electrode prohibits further discharge.17 The round-trip ac-to-ac efficiency of the Na–S system is approximately 80%. The estimated life of a Na–S battery is practically 15 years after 4500 cycles at 90% depth of discharge. However, despite the high specific capacity of sulphur cathodes, low cost and availability, wide operation temperature range and the possibility of long cycling, Na–S represents only the third ranking in installed capacity (≈3600 MW h) worldwide (see ref. 1).
It is known that the beta-alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) avoids self-discharge, because it is a good conductor of sodium ions but an insulator for electrons. When sodium gives off an electron, the Na+ migrates to the sulphur container. The electron drives an electric current through the molten sodium to the contact, through the electrical load and back to the sulphur container. Here, another electron reacts with sulphur to form S42−, sodium polysulphide. The discharge process can be represented in eqn (3) and graphically in Fig. 5, whereas a schematic diagram of a Na–S battery is shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 5  Na–S cell principle operation during the discharge process. (Derived from ref. 17.) 
 Fig. 6  A typical Na–S cell containing molten Na (anode) within a sodium β′′-alumina tube as the solid electrolyte which is surrounded by molten S (cathode). The cross-section of the cell shows the direction of Na+ transport through the β′′-alumina electrolyte. On discharge, Na combines with S to form Na polysulphides. These reactions are reversed during charging, and Na returns to the interior of the tube. (Derived from ref. 20.) 
Although the theoretical gravimetric capacity of the sulphur electrode is 1675 mA h g−1 based on full reduction to Na2S, most reports fail to achieve one-third of this capacity (see ref. 2). Therefore, the highest disadvantage of this cell is the limited gravimetric capacity of the positive electrode (836 mA h g−1) caused by the polysulphide formed as by-products during the process of discharge (see Fig. 4). Another drawback of Na–S batteries is the necessity to be operated at temperatures ≈300 °C to use liquid-state sulphur and sulphide positive electrodes and sodium negative electrodes, and to enhance the conductivity of the β′′-alumina solid electrolyte (see ref. 4). The high operating temperature forces a fraction of energy to be used to maintain this operating temperature, resulting in a lower overall efficiency (87%).18 Besides, at the operating temperatures (270–350 °C), molten sulphur, sodium and the polysulphide compounds are highly corrosive, therefore resistant containers such as high chromium steel and molybdenum-lined steels have to be used in these cells (see ref. 2).
Another concern is the possibility of a violent uncontained reaction between molten sodium and molten sulphur in case of a rupture of the thin and fragile β′′-alumina ceramic membrane. In fact, a recent fire incident related to Na–S batteries made by NGK Insulators temporarily stopped their use as a precautionary measure. For safety reasons, Na–S batteries are considered unfavourable for transportation and they are being exploited predominantly for stationary storage.19 The Na–S batteries are available for grid applications, with 200 installations worldwide, accounting for 315 MW of discharge power capacity.20
NGK Insulators, Ltd. has implemented countermeasures since the incident occurred on September 21, 2011 involving the Na–S batteries for electricity storage. The main causes of the fire were: one cell out of 384 battery cells which form the modular battery was faulty and leaked hot molten material, making a short circuit between battery cells in an adjoining block. There was no fuse installed between the battery cells so the short circuit current flowed continuously and emitted heat, which destroyed other battery cells and they caught fire.21 The safety enhancement measures to prevent the spread of fire in modular batteries were installing fuses between battery cells in modular batteries, insulation boards between blocks and anti-fire boards between battery modules.
Other critical components of these batteries are seals, which must not only be hermetic in the 300 to 350 °C range but also withstand the Na and S vapours and/or contact with the highly reactive molten electrode materials. Recent studies show that the glass-ceramic sealants can be highly resistant to sodium and that the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) of these materials can be modulated to match with those of α-alumina and β-alumina. Song et al.22 studied the borosilicate glass with TiO2 as the nucleating agent. Moreover, in their work, Y2O3 was doped to modulate the TECs, and CaF2 was added to decrease the viscosity of the borosilicate glass. The TEC of the sealants was 6–7 × 10−6 °C after heat treatment. In addition, the thermal shock resistance of the seal was high, and no microcracking appeared after 100 thermal cycles.
Also Na/Ni3S2 cells with liquid electrolytes have successfully been developed.23 However, today's tendency is the development of solid-state batteries because cells with liquid electrolytes may form dendritic growths that may cause short circuits, similar to lithium batteries cycled at room temperature.24 Therefore, a safer alternative is to use a solid electrolyte that acts as a barrier to prevent dendritic growths and replace flammable solvents (see ref. 18).
From a safety viewpoint, developing low-cost Na–S batteries with high-capacity energy storage systems that operate at lower temperature is strongly desirable in order to overcome the hurdles described above. All-solid-state batteries are the promising power sources for a wide range of applications because of their long-cycle life, versatile geometries, low cost and safety. Moreover, these batteries do not suffer from leakage, volatilization, or flammability.
Although ambient temperature sodium batteries are in their early stage of development, they are highly promising for large-scale grid storage applications due to the abundance and very low cost of sodium-containing precursors used to make the components.25 In order to meet the challenge of developing solid-state batteries that operate at ambient and moderate temperatures, solid electrolytes that have high Na+ ion conductivities at room temperature and close contact with electrode active materials are indispensable (see ref. 4). Therefore, the low temperature Na–S cell entails new approaches to devise protective layers for both the positive and negative electrode, and the development of improved electrolytes holds promise for the future of these batteries (see ref. 2). One strategy to develop a design that works at low temperature is to use NASICON membranes to allow operation at 90 °C with all components remaining solid. On the other hand, since the design of these batteries is based on many fragile parts involving ceramic electrolyte membrane, glass (ceramic) sealants, and ceramic insulators, more contributions to improve all the ceramic materials should be made.
1.2 ZEBRA batteries
The ZEBRA batteries also have gained high attention due to the number of useful characteristics such as high energy density (120 W h kg−1), high voltage, maintenance free operation, no gassing, and zero self-discharge.26 The safety features of this storage technology make ZEBRA batteries particularly suitable for electric and hybrid vehicles. They can also be used for stationary applications in support to renewable energy for load-leveling.
These cells contain a liquid sodium negative electrode, a metal chloride positive electrode, usually NiCl2, and β′′-Al2O3 as an electrolyte and a separator. Addition of iron to the cell increases the power response. The charge–discharge reactions and potentials versus sodium at 300 °C are shown: (Anode) 2Na ⇔ 2Na+ + 2e−(4) (Cathode) NiCl2 + 2Na+ + 2e− ⇔ Ni + 2NaCl(5) (Overall cell) NiCl2 + 2Na ⇔ Ni + 2NaCl, E = 2.58 V(6)
In the case of iron chloride the homologous overall cell reaction is as follows: FeCl2 + 2Na ⇔ Fe + 2NaCl, E = 2.35 V(7)
The cathode has a porous structure of nickel and salt NaCl which is impregnated with NaAlCl4, a 50/50 mixture of NaCl and AlCl3. The sodium ion transport during the discharge process is depicted in Fig. 7. Sodium ions resulting from the oxidation of sodium at the negative electrode are transported through the β′′-Al2O3 electrolyte to NiCl2 by the secondary electrolyte (NaCl and AlCl3). The ZEBRA battery typically operates at 300 °C or above due to the high ohmic resistance of a thick beta-alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) and the necessity of the molten secondary electrolyte NaAlCl4 (melting point = 157 °C) in the cathode so as to ensure facile sodium ion transport between the BASE and solid cathode materials. The nucleation of Ni° and NaCl is also facilitated.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA) cell on discharge. (Derived from ref. 2.) 
The schematic diagram of a ZEBRA battery describing the main components and principle operation of the cell during the discharging process is shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  ZEBRA cell chemical reactions during discharging. (Derived from ref. 26.) 
Another function of the NaAlCl4 salt is to overcome the problems of overcharge reactions. The charge capacity of the ZEBRA cell is determined by the quantity of salt (NaCl) available in the cathode. When the charge voltage is continuously applied in a fully charged cell, the liquid salt NaAlCl4 supplies a sodium reservoir following the reversible reaction:272NaAlCl4 + Ni ↔ 2Na° + Ni(AlCl4)2
This overcharge reaction requires a higher voltage than the normal charge as illustrated in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA) cell reactions at 300 °C. Theoretical specific energy: 790 W h kg−1, under normal operation. (Derived from ref. 27.) 
The overcharge reaction has three favorable consequences: (a) any further charge current is stopped automatically as soon as the increased open circuit voltage equalises the charger voltage. (b) If cells fail in parallel strings in a battery, the remaining cells in the string with the failed cells can be overcharged in order to balance the voltage of the failed cells. (c) For a vehicle with a fully charged battery which goes downhill there is an overcharge capacity of up to 5% for regenerative breaking so that the braking behaviour of the vehicle is fundamentally unchanged.
Moreover, as from the very first charge the cell has a surplus of sodium in the anode compartment so that for an over-discharge tolerance sodium is available to maintain the current flow at a lower voltage. In a recent work, Gerssen-Gondelach and Faaij (see ref. 28) examined the prospects of available and new technologies for battery electric vehicles (BEVs). As it can be seen in Table 1, Li-ion and ZEBRA batteries are considered to play the most important role in the short term, while other commercial available battery technologies (lead-acid, NiMH and Na–S) are considered to be less attractive for BEVs.28
Table 1 Battery performance projections for the short, medium and long term (2015–2025–beyond 2025)






Li-ion
Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA)
Li–S
Zn–air
Li–air





a RT: room temperature. Derived from: ref. 1 and 28.





Specific energy (W h kg−1)
60–250
130–200
400–500
250–350
500–1000


Specific power (W kg−1)
400–500
230–320
300–400
Unknown
Unknown


Efficiency (%)
90–95
90–95
Unknown
70–80
70–85


Cycle life (cycles)
1000–4500
1000–4500
1000–1000
2000–4500
Unknown


Depth of discharge, DoD (%)
80
80
100
Unknown
Unknown


Lifetime (years)
7–12
15
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown


Operating temperaturea
Improving, but uncertain
From 300 to 350 °C to RT
RT
RT
RT


Cost ($2010 per kW h−1)
250–350
100–350
250–500
100–350
300–700


Safety
Good
Good
Uncertain
Good
Uncertain; key issue




The ZEBRA battery exhibits a number of advantages over the Na–S battery, which include higher voltage, better tolerance against overcharging and easiness of assembly in the discharged state with NaCl, AlCl3, nickel and iron powder. ZEBRA cells are produced in the discharged state so that no metallic sodium is to be handled and all the required sodium is inserted as salt. In addition, the positive electrode is comprised mostly of solid materials which reduces corrosiveness and makes the cell intrinsically safer than the Na–S battery. On the other hand, ZEBRA battery performance has been optimized to solve several technical issues such as the formation of low-conducting nickel chloride, the solubility of nickel chloride in NaAlCl4 melt and cell capacity fade with time. These problems have been mitigated by using additives such as sodium bromide, sodium iodide, sulphur, aluminium, iron, and sulphide.29
The addition of NaF and other sodium halides (NaI and NaBr) is beneficial in suppressing the FeCl2 dissolution and provides a degree of overcharge protection. However, the formation of AlF3 on the surface of β′′-Al2O3 is the cause of the resistance increase and subsequent failure of the cells cycled at 260 °C. Therefore, as NaI and NBr provide the same benefits associated with NaF, then the formation of AlF3 whose melting point is 1291 °C can be avoided. Nevertheless, capacity loss in the cells cycled at 350 °C can be attributed to the growth of Ni particle size. A combination of high temperature, increased NiCl2 dissolution in the molten electrolyte and the formation of Ni3S2 phase are responsible for Ni grain growth in high temperature cells as reported by Petric and Hosseinifar.30
ZEBRA cells can be connected in parallel and in series. Different battery types have been made with one to five parallel strings, up to 220 cells in series and 100–500 cells in one battery pack. Between every second cell there is a cooling plate through which ambient air is circulated. For thermal insulation and mechanical support the cells are surrounded by a double walled vacuum insulation typically 25 mm thick. Fig. 10 illustrates all components of the complete system ready assembly. The resistive heater and the fan for cooling are controlled by the battery management interface (BMI) for thermal management.
 Fig. 10  ZEBRA battery system. (Derived from ref. 27.) 
ZEBRA cells may be of practical use in electric vehicles especially buses if the synthesis and processing of the β′′-alumina components are optimized (see ref. 2). Another interesting strategy is lowering the temperature (≤200 °C) to improve cycle life. These may decrease the degradation mechanisms due to particle ripening and side reactions that occur in the cathode at high operating temperatures. The reduced temperature technology may also enable the use of low cost materials of sealing and construction providing an easier path towards broad market penetration for grid storage. A new low-temperature design has been proposed by Lemmon et al.31 They cycled a ZEBRA battery with a planar composite BASE (α-Al2O3/yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) discs sintered in loose β′′-Al2O3 powder) under the C/3 rate at 175 °C. This study concludes that the operating temperature gave significant influences on the stability of cell performance during cycling. Overall, the higher operating temperature resulted in the more rapid increase in cell polarization with cycling, 55%. Increase in end-of-charge polarization was observed at 280 °C after 60 cycles, while little changes were found in the cell tested at 175 °C (see Fig. 11). Moreover, the performance degradation at higher temperatures was due to the particle growth of both nickel and sodium chloride (∼50 μm in size) in the cathode. Therefore, these results indicate the feasibility of cell operation below 200 °C resulting in a better stability.
 Fig. 11  Cell polarization tested at various temperatures: (a) cell polarization at the end of charge and (b) cell polarization at the end of discharge. Reprinted from: X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle, and Z. Yang, The effects of temperature on the electrochemical performance of sodium–nickel chloride batteries, J. Power Sources, 215, 288–295, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier. 
Gerssen-Gondelach and Faaij predict that ZEBRA battery performance projections will focus on radical changes in chemistry to achieve specific energy and peak power values of more than 200 W h kg−1 and 400 W kg−1 and enhancement of the power rate to improve the power/energy ratio (see ref. 28).
Moreover, to improve the performance at low operating temperatures, further efforts need to be made in terms of improving the ionic conductivity of BASE and the electrolyte adjacent to the cathode, or if other better Na-ion solid state electrolytes are developed, as well as overcoming the wetting problem by liquid sodium.
2 Electrolyte materials
The electrolytes play a fundamental role in terms of current (power) density, the time stability, and the safety of the battery. Besides the ionic conductivity, a good electrochemical stability and compatibility with the electrodes are also desirable in electrolyte optimization. The electrochemical stability is evaluated by considering the anode/electrolyte interfacial resistance, the electrochemical window and the electrolyte behaviour during the battery cycling test. The solid electrolyte is the critical part of the cell configuration; therefore, to deliver the expected performance the following important requirements should be met:32 (i) high ionic conductivity to reduce the resistance polarization effects in a solid state battery. (ii) Need to be thermodynamically stable and to perform well in a wide temperature range. (iii) Should be physically and chemically compatible with the anode and cathode.
In order to give a global view of the sodium electrolytes for the described batteries, different types of inorganic solid electrolytes such as beta-alumina, glass, glass-ceramic and NASICON-type are described along this section, among others. In some cases, lithium electrolytes will be included to compare their ionic conductivity with the sodium ones.
2.1 Beta-alumina
β-Alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) is historically the first fast ion conductor material used in both Na–S and Na-metal chloride batteries so as to take advantage of the increased conductivity of this solid electrolyte at elevated temperatures. There are two distinct crystal structures: β-Al2O3 (hexagonal: P63/mmc; a0 = 0.559, c0 = 2.261 mm) and β′′-Al2O3 (rhombohedral: R3m; a0 = 0.560, c0 = 3.395 mm). The β-Al2O3 has a stoichiometry of Na2O·(8–11)Al2O3, while the β′′-Al2O3, which exhibits higher ionic conductivity, has a lower alumina content with an ideal formula of Na2O·(5–7)Al2O3. Therefore, they differ in chemical stoichiometry and the stacking sequence of oxygen ion across the conduction layer. The basic unit consists of spinel blocks and conduction planes. The spinel block is a four layer ABCA stack of oxygen ions with aluminium ions and the conduction planes or slabs contain fewer O atoms and more room for sodium cations. One full unit cell requires three sets of this pairing. Fig. 12 shows the ABCA oxygen layer of the spinel blocks and conduction planes of the structure.33
 Fig. 12  Crystal structure of β′′-Al2O3 showing the spinel blocks identified with D and conduction slabs by H. Large circles are O2−. Medium-sized shaded circles are Na+ and the small solid ones are Al sites while checkerboard circles are Al2 sites where stabilizer ions substitute (Mg2+, Li+, etc.). (Derived from ref. 33.) 
There are a variety of methods to synthesise β′′-Al2O3 powders such as via a conventional solid-state reaction,34–37 the sol–gel process,38–46 the co-precipitation technique,47,48 the spray-freeze/freeze-drying method (see ref. 44 and 45), flame spray pyrolysis,49 microwave heating50 and mechanochemical methods.51 The β′′-Al2O3 phase was found to give a better ionic conductivity than the β-Al2O3 phase. Nevertheless, in the solid-state reaction route and the solution-based chemical methods it is difficult to obtain a uniform product because the synthesized β′′-Al2O3 is often epitaxially mixed with β-Al2O3 and with remnant NaAlO2 distributed along grain boundaries in the first route. Boehmite and bayerite have been used to prepare pure β′′-Al2O3 (see ref. 31). Besides its composition, the ionic conductivity of polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 depends on the ratio of β′′/β and the microstructure (grain size, porosity, impurities, etc.).
It is also important to take into account the reactivity of the conventional β/β′′-Al2O3 with water. The conventional solid-state reaction process leaves remnant NaAlO2 along the β/β′′-Al2O3 grain boundaries, making the product susceptible to H2O and CO2 attack from the atmosphere. A vapour-assisted method has been proposed by Virkar et al.52 to obtain Na-β′′-Al2O3 with superior chemical stability and mechanical strength compared to Na-β′′-Al2O3 synthesized by the conventional solid-state reaction route. Fig. 13 illustrates a schematic description of the vapour-assisted conversion process in the case of Na-β′′-Al2O3 formation. In this process, the starting materials of α-Al2O3 and YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia) are sintered at 1500–1600 °C and then buried in a loose powder of sodium source (e.g. Na2CO3 or NaAlO2). The alkali compounds decompose and allow a vapour-assisted reaction of alkali oxides with α-Al2O3.
 Fig. 13  A schematic explanation for the mechanism of the vapour-assisted conversion process for the synthesis of beta-alumina ion conductors. (Derived from ref. 55.) 
In terms of conductivity at room temperature, single crystals in the plane direction can reach 0.1 S cm−1, while commercial β′′-Al2O3 manufactured by Ionotec53 provides 0.002 S cm−1. The ionic conductivity at 300 °C of a single crystal β′′-Al2O3 is about 1 S cm−1, which is almost 5 times that of polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 (0.2–0.4 S cm−1) (0.24 S cm−1 at 300 °C and 0.38 S cm−1 at 400 °C as an Ionotec commercial product. The typical ionic conductivity of polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 at 300 °C is 0.22–0.35 S cm−1 as reported in ref. 6).
The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique is used to study the electrochemical properties of the electrolytes. In Fig. 14 the AC impedance spectra of sodium beta-alumina ceramic pellets at 300 °C are described. The sodium beta-alumina nano-powders were synthesized using the citrate sol–gel process with the addition of the cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB). The intercept of the semicircle with the real axis represents the ohmic resistance of the sodium beta-alumina ceramic pellets. The results showed that CTAB could enhance the conductivity of this phase (see ref. 46).
 Fig. 14  AC impedance spectra of sodium beta-alumina pellets calcined at 300 °C with different amounts of CTAB: molar ratio of CTAB/total metallic ions is (a) 0; (b) 0.1; (c) 0.2; (d) 0.4. Reprinted from: Z. Wang, X. Li, and Z. Feng, The effect of CTAB on the citrate sol–gel process for the synthesis of sodium beta-alumina nano-powders, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 32, 1310–1314, Copyright 2011, with permission from Korean Chemical Society. 
The strength and fracture toughness can be enhanced by incorporating ZrO2 into the β′′/β-Al2O3 matrix. It must be noted, however, the addition of ZrO2 into the β′′-Al2O3 might decrease the electrical performance because ZrO2 is not a sodium-ionic conductor at battery operating temperatures (<450 °C). However, the resistivity remains less than 10 Ω cm at 300 °C with up to 15 vol% of ZrO2 addition. The enrichment in sodium or substitution of aluminium ions with mono- or divalent ions (e.g., Li+, Mg2+) leads to higher Na+ conductivity. Two ideal β′′-Al2O3 stoichiometries, Na1.67Al10.33Mg0.67O17 (Mg2+ doped) and Na1.67Al10.33Li0.33O17 (Li+ doped), have been obtained but no conductivity values have been published (see ref. 31).
The electrochemistry of a sodium-beta battery with planar design has been evaluated. The planar design allows for a thinner electrolyte that reduces the area of specific resistance and may be operated at reduced temperatures.54Fig. 15A shows cycle behaviour of a button cell during first five cycles. The charge and discharge voltage profiles were symmetrical in each cycle, indicating that sodium ion transport across the β′′-Al2O3 solid electrolyte was essentially reversible. The discharge capacity of the cell is plotted in Fig. 15B. The capacity for the first cycle was 292 mA h (close to the theoretical: 300 mA h for 2 g cathode). However, the cell capacity decreased significantly in first three cycles and was stabilized at 203 mA h after five cycles. Once the performance was stable, the cell was continuously cycled at around C/3 rate, as shown in Fig. 15C. The corresponding cell capacity was also plotted in Fig. 15D. It can be seen that the capacity gradually decreased from 146 to 87 mA h after 20 cycles even with the low current rejuvenation cycles. The capacity loss during cycling is generally related to growth of either nickel or sodium chloride grains within the cathode.
 Fig. 15  (A) Initial five charge–discharge cycles of a sodium-beta battery with planar design. (B) Corresponding discharge cell capacity. (C) Cycling behaviour at around C/3 rate with low current rejuvenation cycles. (D) Corresponding discharge cell capacity. Reprinted from: X. Lu, G. Coffey, K. Meinhardt, V. Sprenkle, Z. Yang, and J. P. Lemmon, High power planar sodium–nickel chloride battery, ECS Trans., 28, 7–13, Copyright 2010. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society. 
The effect of Li+ and Mg2+ stabilizers on the β′′-Al2O3 phase content has been investigated recently by Zhu and Xue.55 Stabilization of the β′′-Al2O3 phase is basically the substitution of Al3+ ions by cations of stabilizers to compensate extra Na+ ions. The compensating Li+ ions generally substituted the octahedral Al3+ ions, and Mg2+ ions substituted tetrahedral Al3+ ions in the spinel blocks. They studied the relationship between the β′′-Al2O3 phase content and the amount ratio of octahedra and tetrahedra (AAl(VI)/AAl(IV)) in Li+ and Mg2+ stabilized systems, respectively. The β′′-Al2O3 phase content increased by the addition of the stabilizers while the amount ratio of octahedra and tetrahedra (AAl(VI)/AAl(IV)) of β-Al2O3 decreased with the increasing β′′-Al2O3 phase content.
Fracture of the β′′-alumina ceramic is a vital concern because it leads to cell failure, whereas poor control of the ceramic microstructure results in interfacial reactions with the reactants. Although large-scale production of this ceramic has been achieved, production yields and cost are still major concerns.
2.2 NASICON
One of the optimum candidate structures for ion migration was Na Superionic Conductor (NASICON) and was developed by Goodenough et al. in 1976, in order to achieve a high ionic conduction.56 The original NASICONs were solid solutions derived from NaZr2P3O12 by partial replacement of P by Si with Na excess to balance the negatively charged framework to yield the general formula Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3).57 The NASICON compound is produced by Ceramatec, Inc of Salt Lake City, Utah and has been proposed for using as a solid electrolyte in solid-state electrochemical devices such as Na–S batteries,58 gas sensor devices,59–61 and ion sensors.62
NASICON as the β-aluminas is a superionic solid with a covalent framework. They have high Debye temperature and, therefore, high lattice thermal conductivity. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 shows a weak-second order-like transition that involves structural changes of smaller magnitude. These superionic solids with covalent framework are also of great technological importance because they have high thermal and chemical stabilities. Moreover, it is important that the system does not undergo considerable structural changes near the operating temperature.63
The 3-D network of NASICON compounds is a phosphosilicate characterized by structural building units (SBUs); thus, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has corner sharing tetrahedra of phosphate and silicate, (Si,P)O4, with zirconia, ZrO6, centred octahedral sites, where for every two octahedral sites there are three tetrahedral sites comprising two silicate and one phosphate centre. This way the SBUs are connected by (Si,P)O4 tetrahedra to form infinite ribbons parallel to the c-axis. The Na+ interstitial sites, located in the inter-SBU positions, are connected by a wide channel where Na+ ions can diffuse through bottlenecks that exceed 4.8 Å.64 The conduction pathways of sodium ions (Na(1) and Na(2) sites) are of a zigzag shape in three dimensions (see Fig. 16). NASICON-type compounds exhibit monoclinic to rhombohedral reversible structural transition, at the transition temperature depending on the composition (x), in the interval 1.8 < x < 2.2 a small distortion of monoclinic symmetry takes place.
 Fig. 16  NASICON structure in rhombohedral symmetry, showing ZrO6 and (Si,P)O4 polyhedra. Dark-shaded circles represent Na(1) positions, light-shaded circles represent Na(2) positions, and curved arrow represents the conduction path of Na+ ions. (Derived from ref. 60, 64 and 71.) 
This NASICON framework allows a wide range of chemical substitutions65 and its flexibility is responsible for its low thermal expansion, and makes it one of the most attractive families of materials for solid electrolytes.66 Most of the studies on this family of materials have been concentrated in the composition range 1.8 < x < 2.4, presenting the highest ionic conductivity for x = 2, higher than that of β-alumina which has two-dimensional mobility. In addition to its high ionic conductivity, it has claimed stability in humid air and aqueous solutions. However, NASICON-type ceramics have a low stability when in contact with molten sodium or molten sodium salts (see ref. 64).
In the synthesis of NASICON, ZrO2 impurities appear to be (see Fig. 17) decreasing the ionic conductivity. To avoid remaining ZrO2 in the final NASICON phase not only the synthesis method but also controlling the sintering temperature is the key factor.67 Porkodi et al.68 have proposed a new synthesis method to yield phase-pure NASICON based on a molecular precursor. Pellets with a pure Na3Zr2Si2PO12 phase prepared by this route and annealed at 900 °C for 4 h exhibited ionic conductivities at room temperature of about 5.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 and 2.5 × 10−3 S cm−1, for the sample sintered at 1220 °C for a period of 40 h.
 Fig. 17  XRD of the solid electrolyte NASICON sintered at different temperatures. Reprinted from: F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan, and L. Sun, Investigation of CO2 sensor based on NASICON synthesized by a new sol–gel process, Sens. Actuators, B, 93, 237–242, Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier. 
The relationship between the microstructure and electrical properties of the Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 materials has been studied by Fuentes et al.69 This work proved that the grain size of NASICON yttria-doped tetragonal polycrystalline zirconia (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 ceramics depends on sintering conditions, temperature and time. They showed the existence of an increase of the grain size when ceramics are sintered at higher temperatures or for longer periods of time. A maximum conductivity value of about 2.7 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature was obtained with the yttria doped tetragonal phase.
Mixtures of Na4Zr2Si3O12 and TiO2 have been patented by Takeuchi et al. as possible solid electrolytes for sodium–sulphur batteries70 due to their conductivity value (4.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature). However, other NASICON materials such as Na1.8Ti1.2Al0.8(PO4)3 samples exhibit an ionic conductivity close to 10−5 S cm−1 at 200 °C.71 NASICON may be fabricated in thin films of no more than a few microns in thickness to provide strong membranes and a mechanical barrier to sodium dendrites. NASICON ceramic membranes have been developed to improve the performance of sodium–sulphur batteries to operate at temperatures below 200 °C. Various dopants may be added to the NASICON to improve strength, conductivity, and/or sintering.72
The impedance spectrum of the Nasicon material synthesized by a sol–gel process starting from tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and sintered at different temperatures is shown in Fig. 18. A sharp decrease in resistance with increasing sintering temperature is observed. This behaviour can be mostly due to the grain boundary contribution because all high frequency intercepts of the grain boundary arcs are highly close to each other. The sintered pellets at 800, 900 and 1000 °C reached density values of 89, 91 and 94% respectively, almost the theoretical density of 3.27 g cm−3. The decrease of grain boundary resistance was related to the densification of the pressed bulk.
 Fig. 18  Complex impedance plots for NASICON bulk sintered at different temperatures. Reprinted from: F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan, and L. Sun, Investigation of CO2 sensor based on NASICON synthesized by a new sol–gel process, Sens. Actuators, B, 93, 237–242, Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier. 
The charge–discharge curves of a sodium–sulphur cell using tetraglyme as the cathode solvent and the non-porous NASICON membrane as the electrolyte are shown in Fig. 19. It represents the charge and discharge characteristics for 50 cycles at a discharge current of 0.03 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 19  Charge and discharge of a sodium–sulphur cell using tetraglyme as the cathode solvent and NASICON ceramic disc as the separator between electrodes. (Derived from ref. 72.) 
It can be observed that the capacity of the sodium–sulphur cell decreased for the first ten cycles but then was substantially stable over the next forty cycles. The non-porous solid electrolyte stops the migration of sodium polysulphides to the anode in each cycle, avoiding irreversible capacity loss (see ref. 72).
The specific energy versus cycle for the first 150 cycles at different current densities of the last cell is represented in Fig. 20. The plot shows a drop in the specific energy at higher current densities, but at lower current density, the specific energy rebounds back, with very little cycle fading.
 Fig. 20  Specific energy versus cycle number with the current density variation of a Na–S cell with a 1 mm thick NASICON membrane. (Derived from ref. 72.) 
Rapid capacity fade on cycling and high self-discharge are the two main reasons for shortening of sodium–sulphur battery life. However, NASICON-type membranes have minimal capacity fade and a relatively stable shelf life, as they selectively transport sodium ions but not the electrode solutions. Therefore, NASICON-type materials are promising candidates as electrolytes if the conductivity at room temperature is enhanced.
2.3 Glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes
Another choice for using a solid electrolyte is a Na+ ion-conducting glass. Different glass-ceramic electrolytes have been synthesized toward realizing all-solid-state Na–S batteries. Conventionally, glasses are made by heating raw materials above the melting point and quickly cooling to below the glass transition temperature (Tg). In a different route to the amorphous (glassy) state below the liquidus or melting point for a given phase, crystalline materials that are excessively mechanically deformed may react to create amorphous products that are chemically distinct from the starting materials (see ref. 18).
Alkali sulphide glasses, such as xLi2S–(1 − x)P2S5 glassy electrolytes, have attracted significant interest because of their high ionic conductivity (3.2 × 10−3 S cm−1) at room temperature and negligible electronic conductivity. Moreover, these glasses have a wide electrochemical window and also excellent cycling and rate performances.73–76 The crystalline material Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4 exhibits the highest ambient temperature conductivity of 2.2 × 10−3 S cm−1 and the lowest conduction activation energy of 20 kJ mol−1 in the series of thio-LISICON (see ref. 74), together with negligible electronic conductivity, high electrochemical stability, no reaction with lithium metal, and no phase transition up to 500 °C.77,78 Also the 3-D framework solid electrolyte Li10GeP2S12 or superionic conductor presents an extremely high ionic conductivity (about 1.2 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature). Moreover, the electrochemical stability from the cyclic voltammogram of a Li/Li10GeP2S12/Au cell with a lithium reference electrode has been tested. No significant currents due to electrolyte decomposition were detected in the scanned voltage range of −0.5 to 5 V. Other advantages of this superionic conductor are its stability, safety and a wide potential window.79
As far as we are aware, there is no equivalent sodium phase such as Na10GeP2S12. However, xNa2S + (1 − x)P2S5 amorphous materials (see ref. 18) and Na2S–GeS2 glasses80 have been recently prepared by melt-quenching and mechanical milling, and by mechanical alloying, respectively. In a thorough study, Martin et al. characterized these materials with Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) to examine the extent of chemical reaction between Na2S and P2S5 (see Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  FT-IR spectra of the starting materials and mechanically milled xNa2S + (1 − x)P2S5 products. Reprinted from: S. S. Berbano, I. Seo, C. M. Bischoff, K. E. Schuller, and S. W. Martin, Formation and structure of Na2S + P2S5 amorphous materials prepared by melt-quenching and mechanical milling, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 358, 93–98, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier. 
Na2S–GeS2 glasses have been studied by Itoh and Fukunaga (see ref. 80). They obtained information about the basic framework structure of Na2S–GeS2 glasses and the environment of Na ions with reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) simulation of the (Na2S)50(GeS2)50 glass by using both the neutron and X-ray diffraction data. They determined the minimum allowable distances between atoms by reference to the experimental total correlation functions and typical atomic sizes (see Table 2).
Table 2 Minimum allowance distances between atoms in the reverse Monte Carlo simulation for the (Na2S)50(GeS2)50 glass, NBS and BS being the non-bridging S atom and the bridging S atom, respectively






Minimum distance (nm)




Na Na
0.26


Na Ge
0.33


Na NBS
0.25


Na BS
0.32


Ge Ge
0.34


Ge NBS
0.20


Ge BS
0.20


NBS NBS
0.32


NBS BS
0.31


BS BS
0.29




The RMC model indicated that the Ge–S framework was formed through the connection of corner-sharing GeS4 tetrahedra and about 40% of the Na ions are coordinated by four sulphur atoms (non-bridging S atom, NBS, and/or bridging S atom, BS).
The conductivity of typical inorganic solid electrolytes that exhibit Na+ ion conductivities such as NASICON, beta-alumina, glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes is shown in Fig. 22. As can be seen in this figure, sulphide glasses in systems such as Na2S–SiS2, Na2S–GeS2 and Na2S–P2S5 are less conductive than the NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) phase, while the glass-ceramic with cubic Na3PS4 (closed circles) has a conductivity of 2 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature, one order of magnitude lower than that of sintered β-alumina and the NASICON-type crystal (10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature).
 Fig. 22  Conductivity of typical inorganic solid electrolytes. Temperature variation of the conductivities of several Na+ ion conductors such as β-alumina, NASICON, Na3PS4 glass (open circles) and the glass-ceramic prepared at 270 °C (solid circles) and sulphide glasses. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
The electrochemical window of this sulphide glass-ceramic electrolyte with cubic Na3PS4 has been examined by performing cyclic voltammetry measurements (see Fig. 23). Reversible sodium deposition and dissolution currents were observed at about 0 V versus Na+/Na, and no remarkable oxidation currents were observed up to 5 V. Therefore, this sulphide electrolyte has a wide electrochemical window of 5 V and is electrochemically stable against Na metal (see ref. 4).
 Fig. 23  Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte. The potential sweep was performed with a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Charge–discharge curves of the all-solid-state cell (Na–Sn/Na3PS4/TiS2) at room temperature are shown in Fig. 24. The average cell voltage from the second tenth cycle was 1.6 V, which approximately corresponds to the potential difference between the Na–Sn counter electrode (ca. 0.3 V versus Na+/Na) and the TiS2 working electrode (ca. 2.0 V versus Na+/Na). The reversible capacity of the cell was about 90 mA h per gram of TiS2 and the cell retained the capacity for 10 cycles.
 Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte. The potential sweep was performed with a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Nevertheless, in order to use these materials as solid electrolytes, further studies are needed to determine their thermal stability and ionic conductivity. In a similar way to this ternary phase, Na3PS4, it would be interesting to synthesize a sodium quaternary phase equivalent to Li10GeP2S12 in order to find out a new material exhibiting high conductivity in sodium at room temperature and also providing a good electrode–electrolyte contact.
2.4 Other sodium ion conductors
In solid electrolytes, the more stable structure and higher sodium ion-conductivity have been much expected. In order to fulfill these essential requirements Onishi et al. have predicted that the NaAlO(CN)2 perovskite can be utilized as a sodium ion-conductor. This phase has two sodium ion-conduction paths along x- and z-axes. However, the activation energy for sodium ion-conduction along the x-axis (5.55 eV) is too high, while the activation energy along the z-axis (0.06 eV) is very small for sodium ion-conduction at room temperature.81
2.5 Polymer electrolytes
Polyethers like poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) have been mostly used with lithium metal anodes and commercial batteries now use LiFePO4 cathodes. Polymer electrolytes are less conductive than superionic inorganic materials, and need to work at 60–80 °C to reach 10−4 S cm−1 but they are easily made into large surface films, leading to batteries with a total thickness of 100–200 μm. While sodium metal is extremely reactive with classical liquid electrolytes, PEO is much more resistant. All solid-state Na°/PEO-NaClO4/V2O5 batteries have been studied by West et al.82,83 Several tens of cycles could be obtained with limited capacity fading. Keeping a battery at this operating temperature consumes 10% of its own energy over one week, to be compared with 14% per day for high temperature systems.
Ahn et al.84 have reported the electrochemical properties of a Na–S battery using a PEO polymer electrolyte that is operated at 90 °C. The first discharge capacity is about 505 mA h g−1 sulphur, which is similar to that expected for the formation of Na2Sn (n ≤ 3), especially Na2S3. The upper plateau region may be related to the reduction of sulphur to Na2S4 or Na2S5, and the lower plateau to the reduction of sulphur to Na2Sn (n ≤ 3) (see Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  First discharge curve of a Na/PEO/S battery at 90 °C. Reprinted from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J. Ahn, Discharge properties of all-solid sodium-sulfur battery using poly(ethylene oxide) electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 165, 450–454, Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. 
The discharge capacity of the Na–S battery as a function of cycling number is given in Fig. 26. The discharge capacity remains at 166 mA h g−1 sulphur after 10 cycles, which is higher than that given by a Na/PVdF/S battery at room temperature (see ref. 84). The discharge capacity for Na/PVdF/S cells decreases continuously during cycling and becomes 117 mA h g−1 after ten cycles.85
 Fig. 26  First discharge curve of a Na/PEO/S battery at 90 °C. Reprinted from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J. Ahn, Discharge properties of all-solid sodium–sulfur battery using poly(ethylene oxide) electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 165, 450–454, Copyright 2017, with permission from Elsevier. 
Finally, an overview indicating future main trends with respect to the development of the high temperature batteries and electrolytes described in this review is shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Trends of the electrolyte for sodium batteries at different temperatures. 
3 Conclusions
Sodium batteries are considered promising candidates as a substitute for lithium batteries due to the lower price and abundance of sodium, and to its similar intercalation chemistry to lithium. As the U.S. Department of Energy (DEO) Pacific Northwest National Laboratory compiles on the website,86 the sodium batteries based on Na–S and Na–NiCl2 (ZEBRA) are two of the most promising candidates for stationary energy storage and battery electric vehicle (BEV) applications, respectively. Although these batteries need high temperature (250–300 °C), the tendency, nowadays, is shifting towards designs that work at intermediate temperatures (between 100 °C and 170 °C) and ambient-temperature in order to avoid significant thermal management problems and thermal sealing issues.87 A new work about an advanced intermediate-temperature (∼150 °C) Na–S battery has been recently reported by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL).88 Lu et al. tested Na–S cells with the mixture of S and Na2S4 as the cathode and tegraglyme plus 1 M NaI as the catholyte at 150 °C. This battery showed a dramatic improvement in the rate capacity and cycling stability over room-temperature Na–S batteries.
Furthermore, an optimization of the ceramic electrolyte/electrode interfaces is needed. ZEBRA battery performance projections will focus on achieving specific energy and peak power values of more than 200 W h kg−1 and 400 W kg−1 and enhancement of the power rate to improve the power/energy ratio. All-solid-state Na–S batteries, which operate at >100 °C, will be developed in near future using glass-ceramic electrolytes. Moreover, NASICON-type electrolytes such as Na3Zr2Si2PO12 or Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (1.6 < x < 2.4), that are substantially impermeable to water, are proposed to avoid the drawbacks of using the hygroscopic, fragile and requiring high temperature β′′-alumina solid electrolytes (BASE). The Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte can also be used to develop all-solid-state rechargeable sodium cells that are safe and possibly inexpensive. Polymer electrolytes offer another route that is inexpensive with high productivity technology. All these next-generation batteries with new electrolytes operating at room temperature may contribute to promote sustainable energy.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Gobierno Vasco/Eusko Jaurlaritza (IT-312-07). K.B.H. thanks the Basque Government for a postdoctoral PIC contract.
References

Electrical energy storage technology options, Report 1020676, Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA,  December 2010 Search PubMed .
B. L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef .
J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2019–2029 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856–861 CrossRef .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sudworth, J. Power Sources, 2001, 100, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.fiamm.com/, accessed November 2012.

          http://www.fzsonick.com/, accessed November 2012.
X. Lu, G. Xia, J. P. Lemmon and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef .
H. Tao, Z. Feng, H. Liu, X. Kan and P. Chen, Open Mater. Sci. J., 2011, 5, 204–214 CrossRef .

          A. Bito, in Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 2005. IEEE,  2005, pp. 1232–1235 Search PubMed .
Z. Wen, Y. Hu, X. Wu, J. Han and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201200473 .
J. L. Sullivan and L. Gaines, Energy Convers. Manage., 2012, 58, 134–148 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1695–1715 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshima, M. Kajita and A. Okuno, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2004, 1, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Berbano, I. Seo, C. M. Bischoff, K. E. Schuller and S. W. Martin, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854–7863 CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.ngk.co.jp/english/news/2012/0607.html, accessed November 2012.
S. Song, Z. Wen, Y. Liu, J. Lin, X. Xu and Q. Zhang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1735–1740 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, H.-J. Ahn, H.-S. Ryu, D.-J. Kim, G.-B. Cho, K.-W. Kim, T.-H. Nam and J. H. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 852–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dollé, L. Sannier, B. Beaudoin, M. Trentin and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A286–A289 CrossRef .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201200691 .

          T. M. O'Sullivan, C. M. Bingham and R. E. Clark, Zebra Battery Technologies for
the All Electric Smart Car, International Symposium on Power Electronics Electric Drives Automation and Motion (SPEEDAM), Institution of Electronic and Electrical Engineers,  2006 Search PubMed.
C.-H. Dustmann, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Gerssen-Gondelach and A. P. C. Faaij, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 111–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prakash, L. Redey and D. R. Vissers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 502–507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hosseinifar and A. Petric, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Z. A. Munshi, Handbook solid state batteries capacitors, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Singapore, 1st edn,  1995, vol. 1, ch. 5, pp. 112–113 Search PubMed .
D. P. Birnie, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2012, 68, 118–122 CrossRef .
A. V. Virkar, G. R. Miller and R. S. Gordon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1978, 61, 250–252 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Ray and E. C. Subbarao, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, Y. Cao, L. Lu, H. Yang and X. Shen, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 6222–6226 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Schäfer and W. Weppner, Key Eng. Mater., 1991, 59, 145–154 CrossRef .
P. E. D. Morgan, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 233–241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sartori, A. Martucci, A. Muffato and M. Guglielmi, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 24, 911–914 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaharescu, C. Parlog, V. Stancovschi, D. Crisan, A. Braileanu and T. Surdeanu, Solid State Ionics, 1985, 15, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamaguchi, K. Terabe, Y. Iguchi and A. Imai, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 25, 171 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jayaraman, T. Gnanasekaran and G. Periaswami, Mater. Lett., 1997, 30, 157–162 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Yoldas and D. P. Partlow, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1980, 59, 640–642 CAS .
A. Pekarsky and P. S. Nicholson, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1517–1524 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Green and S. Hutchison, Mater. Sci. Monogr., 1980, 6, 964 CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Li and Z. Feng, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 1310–1314 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hodge, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1983, 62, 244–248 Search PubMed .
T. Takahashi and K. Kuwabara, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1980, 10, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Sutorik, S. S. Neo, D. R. Treadwell and R. M. Laine, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 81, 1477–1486 CrossRef .
H. C. Park, Y. B. Lee, S. G. Lee, C. H. Lee, J. K. Kim, S. S. Hong and S. S. Park, Ceram. Int., 2005, 31, 293–296 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Song and Y. Liu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1821–1827 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Koh, N. Weber and A. V. Virkar, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 220, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.ionotec.com, accessed November 2012.
X. Lu, G. Coffey, K. Meinhardt, V. Sprenkle, Z. Yang and J. P. Lemmon, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu and J. Xue, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 517, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, H.-P. Hong and J. A. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Losilla, M. A. G. Aranda, S. Bruque, J. Sanz, M. A. París, J. Campo and A. R. West, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2134–2142 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ignaszak, P. Pasierb, R. Gajerski and S. Komornicki, Thermochim. Acta, 2005, 426, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 2–14 CrossRef .
S. Baliteau, A.-L. Sauvet, C. Lopez and P. Fabry, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2965–2968 CrossRef CAS .
K. Obata and S. Matsushima, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139, 435–439 CrossRef .
M. Cretin, H. Khireddine and P. Fabry, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 43, 224–229 CrossRef .
P. Padmakumar and S. Yashonath, J. Chem. Sci., 2006, 118, 135–154 CrossRef .
O. Bohnke, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 122, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
N. Anantharamulu, K. Koteswara Rao, G. Rambabu, B. Vijaya Kumar, V. Radha and M. Vithal, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2821–2837 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy and P. Padma Kumar, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 4946–4954 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan and L. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 237–242 CrossRef .
P. Porkodi, V. Yegnaraman, P. Kamaraj, V. Kalyanavalli and D. Jeyakumar, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6410–6419 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Fuentes, F. Figueiredo, F. M. B. Marques and J. I. Franco, Ionics, 2002, 8, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Takeuchi, E. Bétourne, M. Tabuchi, O. Nakamura and H. Kageyama, US Pat., 006117595A,  2000 .
F. E. Mouahid, M. Bettach, M. Zahir, P. Maldonado-Manso, S. Bruque, E. R. Losilla and M. A. G. Aranda, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2748–2757 RSC .

          J. Gordon and J. Watkins, US Pat., WO107833,  2010 .
K. Takada, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 158, 269–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Murayama, N. Sonoyama, A. Yamada and R. Kanno, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 170, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mercier, J. Malugani, B. Fahys and G. Robert, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 663–666 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, S. Hama, H. Morimoto, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 84, 477–479 CrossRef .
M. Yang and J. Hou, Membranes, 2012, 2, 367–383 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kanno and M. Murayama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A742–A746 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itoh and T. Fukunaga, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
T. Onishi, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2012, 112, 3777–3781 CrossRef CAS .
K. West, B. Zachau-Christiansen, T. Jacobsen and S. Atlung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 3061–3062 CrossRef CAS .
K. West, B. Zachau-Christiansen, T. Jacobsen, E. Hiort-Lorenzen and S. Skaarup, Br. Polym. J., 1988, 20, 243–246 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 450–454 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, H.-J. Ahn, I.-P. Kim, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, C.-W. Park and H.-S. Ryu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 861–865 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.pnl.gov/science/highlights/highlight.asp?id=617, accessed November 2012.

          W. Coors, C. Boxley, M. Robins and A. Eccleston, US Pat., 061823A2,  2012 .
X. Lu, B. W. Kirby, W. Xu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle and Z. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 299 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24086jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Karina B. Hueso	Karina Beatriz Hueso received her PhD in Analytical Chemistry from the University of Salamanca (USAL, Spain) in 2010. During her PhD she spent two months at the Faculty of Science and the Environment at the University of Hull, UK. She has a multidisciplinary background in the fields of fluorimetry, biochemical, biopolymers and flow-injection analysis. After she obtained a Master's degree in new materials from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU, Spain) in 2011, she joined the Inorganic Chemistry department at UPV/EHU. Currently, her research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of novel materials for sodium batteries.
Michel Armand	Prof. Michel Armand has been Directeur de Recherche at CNRS since 1989. Invited professor at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (1982–83). Professor at the University of Montreal (Canada) (1995–2004). Director of the Joint CNRS-UdM International Laboratory on Electroactive Materials (2000–2004). Resumed as Directeur de Recherche at CNRS in Amiens (France). He has authored/co-authored over 230 publications, 225 presentations at conferences of which 185 were invited and 157 patents delivered or pending. He is acting or has acted as Editorial Board for several journals (Solid-State Ionics, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, Synthetic Metals, J. Power Sources) and Conferences advisory committee and organisation for 38 international conferences.
Teófilo Rojo	Teófilo Rojo received his PhD from the University of the Basque Country in 1981. He has spent various research periods at several European and American universities. Since 1992 he has been a Full Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the UPV/EHU. His research has been focused on Solid State Chemistry and Materials Science. Since 2010 he has been the Scientific Director of the CIC-Energigune and his research is focused on the study of materials for both lithium and non-lithium based batteries. He holds different positions in various scientific bodies in Spain being the chairman of the Solid State Chemistry Group within the Spanish Royal Society for the last ten years.

Broader context
On a broader scale, energy innovation plays an important role in the reduction of carbon emission in the atmosphere and global warming. In consequence, advances are needed in energy storage technology for the integration of intermittent renewable energy resources on electricity markets and grids. The low-cost and high abundance of sodium versus lithium make sodium batteries a promising technology in the long term. Na battery technology is regarded as promising in the future of stationary energy storage and battery electric vehicles (BEVs). For this purpose, the development of novel electrode and electrolyte materials is needed. Although inorganic or polymer solid electrolytes play a fundamental role in the successful progress of all solid-state rechargeable sodium batteries, they have received less attention until very recently. For this reason, this article focuses on solid electrolytes for next generation batteries.


 	Fig. 1  Comparison of discharge time and power rating for various electrical energy storage systems. Reprinted from ref. 1. Courtesy of Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic summary of the main features of the high temperature sodium batteries. (Data from ref. 6–9, 27, 28 and 30, that will appear below.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Number of scientific publications per year related to Na batteries operating at high temperature. (A) All publications, including patents, from 1970 to 2012. (B) Number of patents from 2000 to 2012. Source: Scifinder Scholar™ 2012.	 
(Anode) 2Na ⇔ 2Na+ + 2e−	(1)
(Cathode) xS + 2e− ⇔ Sx2−	(2)
(Overall cell) 2Na + xS ⇔ Na2Sx, E = 2.08–1.78 V	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Na–S cell voltage profile with the different phases that exist at each stage-of-charge. (Derived from ref. 17.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Na–S cell principle operation during the discharge process. (Derived from ref. 17.)	 

 	Fig. 6  A typical Na–S cell containing molten Na (anode) within a sodium β′′-alumina tube as the solid electrolyte which is surrounded by molten S (cathode). The cross-section of the cell shows the direction of Na+ transport through the β′′-alumina electrolyte. On discharge, Na combines with S to form Na polysulphides. These reactions are reversed during charging, and Na returns to the interior of the tube. (Derived from ref. 20.)	 
(Anode) 2Na ⇔ 2Na+ + 2e−	(4)
(Cathode) NiCl2 + 2Na+ + 2e− ⇔ Ni + 2NaCl	(5)
(Overall cell) NiCl2 + 2Na ⇔ Ni + 2NaCl, E = 2.58 V	(6)
FeCl2 + 2Na ⇔ Fe + 2NaCl, E = 2.35 V	(7)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA) cell on discharge. (Derived from ref. 2.)	 

 	Fig. 8  ZEBRA cell chemical reactions during discharging. (Derived from ref. 26.)	 
2NaAlCl4 + Ni ↔ 2Na° + Ni(AlCl4)2

 	Fig. 9  Na/NiCl2 (ZEBRA) cell reactions at 300 °C. Theoretical specific energy: 790 W h kg−1, under normal operation. (Derived from ref. 27.)	 


Specific energy (W h kg−1)	60–250	130–200	400–500	250–350	500–1000
Specific power (W kg−1)	400–500	230–320	300–400	Unknown	Unknown
Efficiency (%)	90–95	90–95	Unknown	70–80	70–85
Cycle life (cycles)	1000–4500	1000–4500	1000–1000	2000–4500	Unknown
Depth of discharge, DoD (%)	80	80	100	Unknown	Unknown
Lifetime (years)	7–12	15	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown
Operating temperaturea	Improving, but uncertain	From 300 to 350 °C to RT	RT	RT	RT
Cost ($2010 per kW h−1)	250–350	100–350	250–500	100–350	300–700
Safety	Good	Good	Uncertain	Good	Uncertain; key issue

 	Fig. 10  ZEBRA battery system. (Derived from ref. 27.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Cell polarization tested at various temperatures: (a) cell polarization at the end of charge and (b) cell polarization at the end of discharge. Reprinted from: X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle, and Z. Yang, The effects of temperature on the electrochemical performance of sodium–nickel chloride batteries, J. Power Sources, 215, 288–295, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Crystal structure of β′′-Al2O3 showing the spinel blocks identified with D and conduction slabs by H. Large circles are O2−. Medium-sized shaded circles are Na+ and the small solid ones are Al sites while checkerboard circles are Al2 sites where stabilizer ions substitute (Mg2+, Li+, etc.). (Derived from ref. 33.)	 

 	Fig. 13  A schematic explanation for the mechanism of the vapour-assisted conversion process for the synthesis of beta-alumina ion conductors. (Derived from ref. 55.)	 

 	Fig. 14  AC impedance spectra of sodium beta-alumina pellets calcined at 300 °C with different amounts of CTAB: molar ratio of CTAB/total metallic ions is (a) 0; (b) 0.1; (c) 0.2; (d) 0.4. Reprinted from: Z. Wang, X. Li, and Z. Feng, The effect of CTAB on the citrate sol–gel process for the synthesis of sodium beta-alumina nano-powders, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 32, 1310–1314, Copyright 2011, with permission from Korean Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Initial five charge–discharge cycles of a sodium-beta battery with planar design. (B) Corresponding discharge cell capacity. (C) Cycling behaviour at around C/3 rate with low current rejuvenation cycles. (D) Corresponding discharge cell capacity. Reprinted from: X. Lu, G. Coffey, K. Meinhardt, V. Sprenkle, Z. Yang, and J. P. Lemmon, High power planar sodium–nickel chloride battery, ECS Trans., 28, 7–13, Copyright 2010. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  NASICON structure in rhombohedral symmetry, showing ZrO6 and (Si,P)O4 polyhedra. Dark-shaded circles represent Na(1) positions, light-shaded circles represent Na(2) positions, and curved arrow represents the conduction path of Na+ ions. (Derived from ref. 60, 64 and 71.)	 

 	Fig. 17  XRD of the solid electrolyte NASICON sintered at different temperatures. Reprinted from: F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan, and L. Sun, Investigation of CO2 sensor based on NASICON synthesized by a new sol–gel process, Sens. Actuators, B, 93, 237–242, Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Complex impedance plots for NASICON bulk sintered at different temperatures. Reprinted from: F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan, and L. Sun, Investigation of CO2 sensor based on NASICON synthesized by a new sol–gel process, Sens. Actuators, B, 93, 237–242, Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Charge and discharge of a sodium–sulphur cell using tetraglyme as the cathode solvent and NASICON ceramic disc as the separator between electrodes. (Derived from ref. 72.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Specific energy versus cycle number with the current density variation of a Na–S cell with a 1 mm thick NASICON membrane. (Derived from ref. 72.)	 

 	Fig. 21  FT-IR spectra of the starting materials and mechanically milled xNa2S + (1 − x)P2S5 products. Reprinted from: S. S. Berbano, I. Seo, C. M. Bischoff, K. E. Schuller, and S. W. Martin, Formation and structure of Na2S + P2S5 amorphous materials prepared by melt-quenching and mechanical milling, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 358, 93–98, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier.	 

Na Na	0.26
Na Ge	0.33
Na NBS	0.25
Na BS	0.32
Ge Ge	0.34
Ge NBS	0.20
Ge BS	0.20
NBS NBS	0.32
NBS BS	0.31
BS BS	0.29

 	Fig. 22  Conductivity of typical inorganic solid electrolytes. Temperature variation of the conductivities of several Na+ ion conductors such as β-alumina, NASICON, Na3PS4 glass (open circles) and the glass-ceramic prepared at 270 °C (solid circles) and sulphide glasses. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 23  Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte. The potential sweep was performed with a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte. The potential sweep was performed with a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reprinted from: A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda, and M. Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature rechargeable sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 3, 856–861, Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  First discharge curve of a Na/PEO/S battery at 90 °C. Reprinted from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J. Ahn, Discharge properties of all-solid sodium-sulfur battery using poly(ethylene oxide) electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 165, 450–454, Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  First discharge curve of a Na/PEO/S battery at 90 °C. Reprinted from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J. Ahn, Discharge properties of all-solid sodium–sulfur battery using poly(ethylene oxide) electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 165, 450–454, Copyright 2017, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 1  Trends of the electrolyte for sodium batteries at different temperatures.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24086j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
