Optical materials based on molecular nanoparticles  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1NR11313E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1NR11313E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 343-359Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsOptical materials based on molecular nanoparticles

        
          
            A. 
            Patra†
*, 
      
        
          
            Ch. G. 
            Chandaluri
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            T. P. 
            Radhakrishnan
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500 046, India. E-mail: tprsc@uohyd.ernet.in;  Fax: +91-40-2301-2460;   Tel: +91-40-2313-4827
Received 
      15th September 2011
    , Accepted 27th October 2011First published on 7th December 2011AbstractA major part of contemporary nanomaterials research is focused on metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, constituted of extended lattices of atoms or ions. Molecular nanoparticles assembled from small molecules through non-covalent interactions are relatively less explored but equally fascinating materials. Their unique and versatile characteristics have attracted considerable attention in recent years, establishing their identity and status as a novel class of nanomaterials. Optical characteristics of molecular nanoparticles capture the essence of their nanoscale features and form the basis of a variety of applications. This review describes the advances made in the field of fabrication of molecular nanoparticles, the wide spectrum of their optical and nonlinear optical characteristics and explorations of the potential applications that exploit their unique optical attributes.A. PatraA. Patra was born in West Bengal, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Burdwan, Bardhaman in 2003 and working under the supervision of Prof. T. P. Radhakrishnan, his PhD degree from University of Hyderabad in 2009. Following a post-doctoral stint with Prof. Keitaro Nakatani in PPSM, ENS Cachan, France, currently he is working as an Alexander von Humboldt researcher in the group of Prof. Ullrich Scherf at the University of Wuppertal, Germany. His research interests are in the area of fabrication and optical properties of molecular and macromolecular nanomaterials.Ch. G. ChandaluriCh. G. Chandaluri was born in Andhra Pradesh, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc. degree in Chemistry from the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad in 2007. He is currently pursuing his PhD. degree at the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad under the guidance of Prof. T. P. Radhakrishnan. His research interests are in the area of synthesis, fabrication and applications of molecular crystals, nanocrystals and thin film based optical materials.T. P. RadhakrishnanT. P. Radhakrishnan was born in Kerala, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc. degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai in 1982 and working under the supervision of Prof. Zoltan Soos, his PhD. degree from Princeton University, Princeton in 1987. Following a post-doctoral tenure with Prof. William Herndon at the University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, he joined the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad in 1989. He is currently a Professor in the School of Chemistry. His research interests span various domains and facets of molecular and nanomaterials.
A. Introduction
Materials in the nanometre domain manifest characteristics and functions that are significant departures from those observed in their building blocks (atoms, ions or molecules) as well as their bulk state. Most significantly, many physico-chemical properties become size-dependent; even the shape of the particles can exert critical influence on their attributes. The increased surface-to-volume ratio, and in some cases surface structures that are different from that in the bulk, are important features of nanoscale materials. Metal nanoparticles have been the subject of scientific explorations and technological innovations for centuries.1–3 While they continue to attract prime attention in the field of contemporary nanoscience and nanotechnology, semiconductor nanostructures have also emerged as the focus of extensive research.4,5 Phenomena such as quantum confinement and localized surface plasmon resonance form the basis of a plethora of applications in the field of opto-electronics, imaging technology, analytical sciences, biology and medicine.
Nanostructures built from molecular building blocks are relatively less explored compared to their metal and semiconductor counterparts built up of atoms or ions that form extended lattices. Focused attention on and interest in molecular nanomaterials are of more recent origin. A systematic and general understanding of size effects in these systems is only emerging and potential applications are beginning to be explored. On the other hand, the richness and versatility of molecular materials in general has been unravelled by research over the last 50 years. Electrical, superconducting, magnetic, optical and ferroelectric properties have been realized in this class of materials.6–10 The hallmark of molecular materials is the ability to tailor their assembly, structure and function, realized through the fine-tuning of the relatively weak intermolecular interactions. Effective utilization of this unique attribute of molecular materials is bound to be reflected in the emerging field of molecular nanomaterials.
Techniques such as reprecipitation, Langmuir–Blodgett deposition and layer-by-layer assembly have contributed significantly to the development of molecular nanostructures which has also rekindled interest in colloids and interface chemistry of molecular systems. Molecular nanomaterials are developed from a wide range of molecular and macromolecular systems including small organic molecules, coordination compounds, coordination polymers and conjugated polymers. The broad spectrum of intermolecular interactions and the subtle interplay of energetics that can be exploited in these systems form the basis of the rich variety of nanostructures that can be constructed. In addition to the increasing number of research reports, several reviews on various types of molecular nanomaterials have appeared over the last decade.11–18 The present review will focus on optical nanomaterials, specifically nanoparticles built from small molecules; related structures such as nanorods, nanotubes and nanowires will also be covered, as there are significant overlaps in many of the fabrication techniques and commonality of characteristics and functions. These systems have superior synthetic flexibility and generally possess appreciable solubility, aspects of crucial interest in the fabrication methodologies. They are also amenable to efficient fine-tuning of intermolecular interactions, without compromising their functional attributes. The great variety of innovative fabrication methods that have been developed will be discussed briefly, followed by an overview of the optical properties with special reference to the impact of aggregation, size/shape effects and nonlinear optical characteristics. Emerging areas of novel applications and device fabrication based on molecular optical nanomaterials will be discussed at the end.
B. Fabrication methodologies
The wide range of approaches that have been developed for the fabrication of molecular nanoparticles can broadly be grouped into those that exploit self-assembly in specific environments and those that may be steered by additional external forces. Many of the methods reported rely on the self-assembly of the constituent molecular building blocks. Such self-assembly can be induced through a variety of protocols such as reprecipitation, vapor deposition and crystallization in confined environments. The steered assembly approaches involve the role of an applied electric field or electrochemical potential; in some cases the growth of the nanoparticle is guided by template effects. After a brief discussion of the general aspects of self-assembly including aspects of nucleation and growth, we provide an overview of the various specific methods that have been reported.
1. Self assembly
Molecular self-assembly is a process that involves the spontaneous organization of molecules, generally under thermodynamic equilibrium conditions, into well-defined and stable structures through primarily weak, noncovalent interactions. It forms the basis of most of the popular strategies for the fabrication of molecular nanostructures. It may be noted that irreversible self-assembly of ordered structures realized under non-equilibrium conditions in some situations can be equally interesting.19 Design of the molecular building blocks and the supramolecular entities with specific structure, shape and interactions that will lead to the desired aggregate ensembles is the key step. Several nanostructures have been fabricated through the self-assembly of molecules in solution. Various amphiphilic molecules with tailored structures have been self-assembled into organic nanotubes, nanofibers and nanoplanks.20–23 1-D nanostructures of different derivatives of perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxydiimide (Fig. 1, PTCDI) and hexabenzocoronene (Fig. 1, HBC) prepared through self-assembly in solution have been investigated extensively.24,25 Self-assembly of oppositely charged porphyrins in aqueous solution exploiting electrostatic interactions leads to stable nanotube structures.26 Organogelation is another convenient route to the self-assembly of molecular nanostructures.27–29 These viscoelastic materials are often constituted of micrometre long gel fibers with nanometric diameters, the architecture strongly influenced by the shape of the molecular building blocks.27 Low molecular weight gelators with π-conjugated molecular structure are of special interest because of the gel networks that give rise to a semiconducting character and optoelectronic properties like enhanced fluorescence and switching. A class of molecules based on 1-cyano-trans-1,2-bis-(3′,5′-bis(trifluoromethyl)biphenyl)ethylene has been shown to exhibit enhanced fluorescence emission triggered by the gelation process.28
 Fig. 1  Structure of some of the molecules discussed in this review. 
Control of solvent evaporation provides one of the simplest and most efficient approaches to tune molecular nanostructure fabrication by self-assembly from solution.30 Commonly used techniques are drop casting, spin coating and zone casting. The critical factors involved in the formation of nanostructures through the drop casting technique are the polarity and volatility of the solvent, concentration of the solution, chain-length of any amphiphilic molecules present and nature of the surface on to which solutions are cast.31 The interplay of interactions between the molecule, solvent and substrate determine the dewetting and evolution of the self-assembled structures.32 Spin coating technique has been used extensively for the deposition of thin polymer layers; it can be adapted to fabricate nanostructures of small molecules as well.32,33 Careful optimization of the spinning speed, time of application, concentration of the solution and nature of the substrate can lead to very high quality thin films. Fluorescent organic nanoparticle-embedded polymer thin films have been fabricated through spin coating of the solutions of the compound of interest and a polymer, followed by exposure to solvent vapor that induces controlled aggregation of the molecules inside the polymer film.33 This technique is suitable for transferring and aligning nanoparticles over large surface areas on solid substrates, an aspect of great interest in device fabrication. The zone casting technique involves supplying a solution of an organic material through a stationary flat nozzle onto a moving substrate, providing access to anisotropic films of solution-processible material over large areas. This method has been used successfully to produce oriented layers of HBC for field-effect transistor devices.34 A simple approach involving controlled evaporation of a microfluid confined between a glass plate and a spherical fused silica lens has been used to fabricate concentric rings of self-assembled, ordered and aligned organic semiconductor nanowires.35
Self-assembly of molecules into specific target nanostructures remains a challenging problem in most cases. The course of self-assembly can be modulated by tuning the molecular building blocks so as to engage them in predefined interactions like hydrogen bonding, van der Waals, π–π stacking and electrostatic.36–38 Application of external forces to steer the assembly is exemplified by the case of self-assembled nanofibers of a phthalocyanine derivative oriented by an electric field.39 The orientation is enabled by the dipole moment induced in the nanofibers by the spatial separation of photoexcited charge carriers in the external field.
The fundamental events in the fabrication of nanocrystals are the nucleation and growth processes. A number of parameters involved in the fabrication protocol can influence these events, often in complex ways that are difficult to control. However, some studies have demonstrated that these stages can be steered through logical design. Nanocrystals of zinc tetraphenylporphyrin were fabricated by colloid chemical reduction of the cation leading to controlled release of the neutral molecule; the high and tunable supersaturation thus obtained cannot be realized in conventional crystallization.40 Morphology of the nanocrystals could be smoothly varied through polyhedral shapes such as cubes, cubooctahedron and octahedron by manipulating the growth kinetics, effectively separated from the nucleation stage. Efficient size-tuning was realized in a similar synthesis of perylene nanocrystals by adjusting the monomer concentration and injection method; once again a facile separation of the nucleation and growth stages was realized.41 Nucleation and growth processes have been explored in detail with rubrene,42 magnesium phthalocyanine43 and 2,5,8,11-tetra-tert-butylperylene44 nanocrystals as well.
2. Reprecipitation
The reprecipitation method developed primarily by Nakanishi and coworkers45,46 and applied extensively over the past decade, offers a simple and convenient route for the fabrication of molecular nanoparticles. It is essentially a process based on quick exchange of the solvent environment that leads to limited crystal growth. Microlitre quantities of a solution of the compound of interest in a good solvent are injected rapidly into excess of a second liquid which while being miscible with the first liquid, acts as a nonsolvent or poor solvent for the compound of interest. This addition is commonly carried out under vigorous stirring or ultrasonication. Replacement of the good solvent environment of the molecules by that of the poor solvent causes prompt aggregation and formation of nano/microparticles dispersed homogeneously in the bulk medium. The reprecipitation experiment is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. Water is commonly used as the poor solvent for organic compounds. Due to the ease of its implementation, the reprecipitation method has become very popular and is used extensively in the fabrication of molecular nanoparticles.11,45–54
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the reprecipitation method. 
The fragile nature of molecular nanoparticles necessitates the use of mild conditions for their fabrication and the reprecipitation method is ideally suited in this respect. Several parameters in the basic protocol mentioned above can be tuned to control the morphology and size of the particles produced. Some of these parameters are the volume and concentration of the injected solution, temperature of the bulk nonsolvent, use of microwaves or ultrasonication, and aging time and temperature of the colloid obtained by the reprecipitation process.11,42,47 Special additives introduced in the bulk nonsolvent before the injection of the solution of the compound of interest can be used to control the reprecipitation process. Molecules such as surfactants that can interfere with the normal molecular assembly and crystal growth process have been empolyed.48,49 Introduction of macromolecules has been shown to be a very effective method to influence the size and shape evolution of the particles.50,51 In the case of molecules such as titanylphthalocyanines which do not have sufficient solubility in any organic solvent that is miscible with water, supercritical fluid was used as the good solvent and following injection into water, the solution was cooled to initiate the crystallization.52 This technique has been described as supercritical fluid crystallization, and can be considered to be a useful variant of the reprecipitation method. The basic reprecipitation process can also be induced through the association of ions leading to a product insoluble in the solvent being used. Association of a cationic styryl dye with various borate ions in the aqueous phase in presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) produced ion-based dye nanoparticles with enhanced fluorescence response.53
The molecular level process of nanocrystal growth occurring in the reprecipitation method is still not understood completely, and is an area of active investigation. The process has been visualized to occur in four stages:54 (i) injection of the solution into the stirred nonsolvent leads to the formation of short-lived droplets, (ii) the good solvent elutes away from the liquid droplets and the sudden change in the micro-environment of the molecules induces the formation of molecular clusters, (iii) thermal collision between these clusters causes nucleation, eventually leading to (iv) crystal growth. In an interesting study, Nakanishi and coworkers have reported the growth dynamics of a single perylene nanocrystal prepared through the reprecipitation technique in water, by in situ and ex situ single particle fluorescence measurements.55 Recent investigations suggest the importance of unstable clusters that form during the growth process.43
Choice of the good and bad solvents is the key step in the reprecipitation strategy. With molecules that show appreciable solubility in most common organic solvents as well as water, this poses a serious problem and the utility of the simple reprecipitation approach is questionable. A methodology developed in our laboratory involving a polyelectrolyte-assisted reprecipitation approach provides a potential solution.56 The molecule of interest is complexed with the polyelectrolyte and solvents are chosen to be miscible as usual, but good or bad with respect to the polyelectrolyte rather than the molecule of interest. Utility of this approach was demonstrated using a zwitterionic diaminodicyanoquinodimethane molecule bearing remote ammonium functionalities (Fig. 1, BT2) with high solubility in water as well as organic solvents, complexing it with sodium poly(styrenesulfonate) (NaPSS) and injecting their aqueous solution into methanol (Fig. 3). The fluorescence enhancement known to occur on aggregation of molecules like BT257 was observed in its complex with NaPSS as well as the nanocrystals obtained by the polyelectrolyte-assisted reprecipitation in methanol. Spectroscopic and calorimetric experiments provided a model for the molecular level interactions and aggregation effects in this system.
 Fig. 3  Formation of BT2-NaPSS (Fig. 1) colloid by polyelectrolyte-assisted reprecipitation, TEM image of the nanoparticles and fluorescence enhancement (adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.). 
3. Laser ablation
Masuhara and coworkers58 have introduced an efficient and tunable method for the synthesis of molecular nanocrystals using the laser ablation technique. In a typical experiment, an aqueous suspension of the powdered organic material is irradiated with a laser under stirring leading to the formation of a colloidal solution of the nanoparticles. Unlike reprecipitation, which could be described as a ‘bottom-up’ approach, laser ablation is effectively a ‘top-down’ technique, as bulk crystals are broken down to smaller particles by an intense laser beam (Fig. 4).59 The laser wavelength, fluence, pulse width and number of shots influence the size and phase of nanoparticles formed. Aqueous dispersions of nanoparticles of a series of dye molecules have been prepared by the laser ablation method and the mechanism of their formation investigated. The mechanism was shown to depend on the pulse width of the laser shots used, essentially photothermal for nanosecond pulses and photomechanical for femtosecond pulses.58,60,61 The technique has been fruitfully employed in the fabrication of photochromic organic nanoparticles.62 Another interesting case is that of nanorods of N-(3,5-di-tertbutylsalicylidene)-4-aminopyridine obtained by laser ablation in presence of a surfactant like Triton X-100.59
 Fig. 4  The laser ablation process for the fabrication of molecular nanocrystals. 
4. Crystallization in confined environment
Crystallization in the spatially restricted environments of microemulsions,63,64 sol–gel matrices,65 nanoporous glasses,66 and porous alumina templates67–69 provides direct control on the growth of crystals and access to tailored nanostructures. Crystallization in a porous alumina template wherein the desired material is grown within the nanopores of an alumina membrane is perhaps one of the most popular techniques in this area. The general procedure is illustrated schematically in Fig. 5.68 The first step involves the infiltration of a solution of the molecule of interest into commercially available or custom made alumina membranes with uniform pore distribution by direct capillary forces or by pressure filtration. After the membrane is air dried, excess organic materials may be removed by grinding and polishing the membrane and the process repeated till the pores are fully packed with the solution. Finally the polished membrane is heated under optimal conditions of temperature and time, either in an inert atmosphere or in the environment of the solvent vapor. Dissolution of the alumina template in concentrated alkali solution frees the organic nanorods or nanotubes formed within the pores.67,68 Monodispersed perylene nanotubes have been fabricated by a simple dip-and-dry procedure, in which the porous alumina membrane is repeatedly immersed into a saturated solution of perylene and the solvent evaporated during the intervals between dipping.69 The diameter, length, and wall thickness of the nanotubes can be controlled by the choice of the template and the solution concentration. Chiral quinidine nanotubes70 and dibenzoylmethane nanotubes of various diameters71 are other examples of molecular nanostructures that have been fabricated using porous alumina templating.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the template method for the fabrication of molecular nanotubes/nanorods. 
Porous glasses, gels and polymers offer a convenient form of confined space for growing molecular nanoparticles of varying shapes. The latter can be obtained by preferential etching of shear aligned diblock copolymers. Crystals of 2,2,3,3,4,4-hexafluoro-1,5-pentanediol and (R)-(+)-3-methyladipic acid grown in such matrices showed size and environment dependent melting temperatures.66 Microemulsions allow restricted growth of molecular crystals, which in some cases follow a miniature version of the reprecipitation protocol. Cholesterol and retinol nanoparticles have been fabricated in various heptane–water microemulsions by precipitation of the organic material in the aqueous cores.63 In a stabilizer-free approach, nanocrystals of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and fullerene were fabricated in an oil-in-water emulsion made from low-molecular-weight hydrocarbons.64 Dispersion of a hot solution of the target molecule in an organic solvent, into aqueous medium at the same temperature produced the emulsion, which on cooling led to the confined crystal growth of the target molecule.
5. Vapor deposition
Deposition of small molecules from the vapor phase provides a direct route to the preparation of molecular nanostructures. The procedure involves the sublimation of a material onto a substrate, under vacuum conditions or using a carrier gas flow (Fig. 6).72,73 This technique is particularly useful for device fabrications as the nanostructures can be generated on a substrate of choice. Generally, the technique is applicable only to molecules that can be sublimed and remain stable at the process temperature. Besides the properties of the molecule itself, the principal factors that affect the size and morphology of the nanoparticles produced by this technique are the rate of evaporation, nature of the substrate and the temperature at which the substrate is held during deposition.74,75 Formation of molecular nanostructures by the physical vapor deposition (PVD) technique is sometimes described as molecular self-assembly from the gas phase.76,77
 Fig. 6  The two-zone vapor deposition system for the fabrication of molecular nanocrystals. 
Nanoribbons of tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium78 and copper hexadecafluorophthalocyanine79 prepared through the PVD technique have been successfully exploited in field emission studies and field-effect transistor devices respectively. It has been shown that the dimensional uniformity of organic nanowires can be improved through an adsorbent-assisted PVD process.72,80,81 The compound of interest and adsorbents such as neutral alumina or silica gel in desired proportions are ground into uniform mixtures and subsequently heated to the sublimation temperature under a nitrogen atmosphere. Control of the adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the adsorbents and the organic compound allow fine tuning of the compound vapor pressure, which in turn facilitates the formation of monodispersed nanocrystals. A variant of the simple vapor deposition technique is to condense the vapors in a liquid dispersion medium. This technique was employed to fabricate large volumes of concentrated dispersions of various polycondensed aromatic hydrocarbons in a single step.82 Single crystalline nanoribbons of copper – 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (Cu-TCNQ) have been fabricated on large area substrates by a combination of physical and chemical vapor deposition processes.73,83 TCNQ powder was placed in the high temperature zone and Cu (or copper-coated glass) plates in the low temperature zone (Fig. 6); the flowing carrier gas carries the TCNQ vapors to the Cu plate and the reaction between the metal and the strong organic acceptor molecule leads to the deposition of Cu-TCNQ nanoribbons. Solid-phase reactions combined with vapor deposition has also been used to produce anthracene nanowires and perylene nanorods.84
An interesting extension of the simple vapor deposition technique involves the growth of the nanostructure under an externally imposed field. An example is the fabrication of parallel arrays of oriented single-crystalline needles of light emitting p-hexaphenyl on a mica substrate, within the focus of an argon ion laser.85 It was shown that the size of the laser spot can be used to control the length and spatial distribution of the needle-like structures. Co-evaporation of tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) and TCNQ under an AC electric field has been used to fabricate electrically conducting organic wires and nanotransistors.86
6. Electrochemical deposition
The electrochemical route is especially useful for the fabrication of nano/microcrystals of conducting molecular charge-transfer salts. The typical experimental setup consists of a three-electrode cell with the working electrode on which the deposition occurs, a reference electrode and a counter electrode (Fig. 7).30 Scanning probe microscopes such as AFM or STM can be integrated with the cell in order to monitor the growth of the nanostructures. High quality microcrystals of metallic charge-transfer salts such as (TTF)Brx have been fabricated by electrochemical crystallization.87 Electron beam patterned microelectrodes or electrodes based on thin layers of silica which are good electronic insulators but allow an ion current to pass through, have been employed in these studies. It has also been shown that electrodeposited salts of TTF on silicon can exhibit signatures of superconductivity.88 In electrophoretic deposition, colloidal particles are charged in a polar medium and propelled towards electrodes by application of an appropriate electric field. Their gradual deposition enables fine control of the nano/microstructures in the organic film that grows on the electrode surface. Molecular photoelectrochemical devices based on donor–acceptor systems such as porphyrin–fullerene have been fabricated using electrophoretic deposition.89
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a cell for electrochemical deposition of molecular nanocrystals. 
7. Organized structures through template control
A general mechanical approach to the formation of molecular nanostructures involves the use of functional molecules as ‘ink’ on a rubber stamp which can be deposited on appropriate surfaces. Such an approach forms the basis of various techniques such as soft lithography and microcontact printing, with special relevance to the formation of large area structures and automation. Nanofabrication can be achieved through a variety of processes including molding, embossing, printing and template-controlled molecular assembly.90 Particle replication in non-wetting templates (PRINT) is an efficient ‘top-down’ protocol for the fabrication of organic nanoparticles.91 It follows the general principle of soft imprint lithography, but the deployment of nonwetting molds and substrate surfaces enables the fabrication of isolated particles with superior size, shape and composition control. The basic process involving the formation of the mold and printing is shown in Fig. 8. Photocurable perfluoropolyether molds and highly fluorinated surfaces provide the nonwetting environment for the nanofabrication. The technique is compatible with a wide range of polymeric materials and sophisticated biomaterials enabling encapsulation of bioactive agents for delivery applications.92 Another important approach to molecular printing involves dip pen nanolithography.93
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the PRINT process.91,92 
C. Optical properties
Electronic structure of molecules is perturbed by the interaction with neighboring molecules leading to significant changes in many cases, in optical responses such as absorption and emission. The exciton coupling model94 provides a framework to understand such effects which have important consequences for photo and electroluminescence applications. A novel feature of interest with molecular nanocrystals is the size-dependence of the optical properties observed in many systems; in some materials, shape-dependent responses are observed as well. Unlike the case of metals and semiconductors, a general and rigorous understanding of the impact of size on the optical properties of molecular nanocrystals is yet to emerge. While surface effects are likely to be important, the role of intermolecular and excitonic interactions also should be taken into account. It is relevant to note in this context, the high sensitivity of the optical responses of molecular nano and microcrystals to the fabrication conditions and the presence of additives and stabilizers95 that needs to be recognized while analyzing and interpreting experimental observations. An aspect of great practical interest is the enhanced fluorescence emission observed in several molecular nanocrystals.
1. Impact of molecular aggregation
Interactions between the molecular building blocks of molecular materials are considerably weaker than those between the atomic or ionic units that form materials such as metals, metal oxides and semiconductors. The subtle impact of these interactions on the electronic states of the molecules however, can lead to profound differences in the optical responses between the isolated molecule and the aggregate. Manifestation of aggregation effects in molecular nanoparticles could be similar to or quite distinct from that in bulk molecular materials. The traditional approach to describing the impact of aggregation on electronic absorption and emission spectral features in terms of the relative orientation of the interacting molecules and hence their transition dipoles, is commonly used to understand the spectral signatures of molecular nanoparticles as well. The exciton coupling model94 shows that a side-by-side alignment of the transition dipoles (H-aggregate) induces a blue shift of the absorption and diminished emission intensity, whereas a head-to-tail alignment (J-aggregate) induces a red shift of the absorption and enhanced emission intensity. Strongly coupled excitonic states due to H-aggregate structures have been observed in crystalline nanosheets of 2,5-bis(4-methoxybenzylidene) cyclopentanone (BMBCP).96 Aggregation of a porphyrin tetracarboxylic acid controlled by pH led to nanocrystals exhibiting H-aggregation characteristics.97 Interestingly, H-aggregates formed in nanocrystals of 1,4-di[(E)-2-phenyl-1-propenyl]-benzene (Fig. 1, PPB) have been shown to exhibit enhanced emission compared to the molecules in solution,98 an aspect discussed in detail later. 1,4-distyrylbenzene on the other hand, shows a distinctly different behavior with the strong solution fluorescence quenched in the nanoparticles. These observations have been rationalized in terms of the geometrical rigidity and loose packing in the nanoparticles of the former and the lack of torsional deactivation in the solution of the latter.
The enhanced emission of 1-cyano-trans-1,2-bis-(4′-methylbiphenyl)ethylene (Fig. 1, CN-MBE) nanoparticles has been attributed to J-aggregates of the molecule;99 solvent vapor induced changes in the fluorescence emission of the nanoparticles was also reported. Nanofibers of 1,3-diphenyl-2-pyrazoline grown in presence of the surfactant CTAB in water showed morphology controlled by the concentration of CTAB and characteristic spectral signatures of J-aggregates.48 Zinc meso-tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin self-assembles into hollow hexagonal nanoprisms; spectroscopy revealed J-aggregate formation.49 The length and aspect ratio of the nanoprisms could be controlled by the ratio of CTAB to the porphyrin, and solvent evaporation led to their organization into smectic 3-D architectures (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (a) Hexagonal nanoprisms of J-aggregated zinc mesotetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin and (b) their organization into a smectic 3-D architecture (adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright © 2005, American Chemical Society). 
There are several cases of molecular nanoparticles reported with H and J aggregates formed from the same or closely related molecules. Spin-coating a blend of a cyanine dye and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester led to phase-segregated structures.100 It was shown that the H-aggregates of the cyanine dye self-assembled on the nanoscale can be transformed to J-aggregates by dissolution of the fullerene component. H and J type aggregation effects have been invoked to explain the spectroscopic features of the strongly blue-fluorescent nanoparticles and bulk crystals of tris(4-cyanophenyl)amine.101 The strongly fluorescent and photochromic nanoparticles of a multifunctional 1,2-bisthienylethene (BTE) derivative showed the presence of J-aggregates whereas the molecule derived from it by removing a cyano group showed H-aggregation and weak fluorescence resulting from cofacial π–stacking interactions.102 An interesting case of tuning the mode of aggregation and the ratio of H and J aggregates has been reported in fluorescent nanoparticles of 1,1′,3,3,3′,3′-hexamethylindotricarbocyanine.103 While bis(2-ethyl-1-hexyl)sulfosuccinate as the counterion led predominantly to J-aggregates with strong fluorescence, tetrakis[3,5-bis-(1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-methoxy-2-propyl)phenyl] borate counterion produced mainly H-aggregates with weak fluorescence.
2. Enhanced fluorescence emission in aggregates
The strong fluorescence exhibited by many dye molecules in solution is quenched in their aggregated state. The self-quenching effect is attributed to the non-radiative pathways that open up due to the intermolecular interactions in the aggregates. As noted in the previous section, formation of H-aggregates generally induces cofacial π-stacking and effective non-radiative energy transfer routes. In view of this, there is considerable interest in developing molecules that show strong and enhanced fluorescence emission in the solid state as candidates for luminescent materials applications.57,104–106 Either prevention of π-stacking and intermolecular energy transfer through physical/steric separation of the molecules, or reduction of non-radiative excited state relaxation channels through rigidification of the molecules, can lead to strong fluorescence in the aggregated state of these systems. Nanoparticles form the ideal platform to demonstrate the enhanced emission in aggregated systems.107 PPB,98 CN-MBE99 and the BTE derivative102 mentioned in the previous section are typical cases of molecular nanoparticles exhibiting enhanced emission. For example, it has been reported that nanoparticles of CN-MBE with a mean diameter of 30–40 nm exhibit a fluorescence enhancement of ∼700 times over that of the solution (Fig. 10).99 The synergetic effect of intramolecular planarization and J-aggregate formation in nanoparticles is found to be responsible for the enhanced emission. Other examples include cruciform molecules,108 an amphiphilic derivative of 1-cyano-1,2-bis(biphenyl)ethene109 and a hydroxy derivative of 10H-phenothiazine.110 Highly fluorescent J-aggregates with a quantum yield near unity based on the H-bond mediated self-assembly of a PTCDI (Fig. 1) derivative have been reported.111 Organic ion pair formation has been exploited to develop molecular aggregates exhibiting enhanced fluorescence in nanostructures and solids.112 The counterions effectively preclude fluorescence quenching by the solvent and the stacking of the fluorophores.
 Fig. 10  (a) Enhancement of fluorescence upon aggregation of CN-MBE (Fig. 1) induced by the addition of water to a THF solution. (b) SEM image of the nanoparticles formed in 80% volume fraction of water in THF (adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright © 2002, American Chemical Society). 
3. Size dependent optical responses
A unique feature that makes nanomaterials interesting from fundamental as well as application perspectives is their size-dependent photophysical properties. While confinement effects make the optical responses of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles especially sensitive to size variation, factors that lead to size-dependent optical responses in molecular nanoparticles are likely to be complex. It has been suggested that the so-called “quantum size effect” may not dominate in small molecule crystals, with their relatively more localized excitons normally spanning just a few molecules.113–116 The increasing proportion of surface molecules to bulk ones in the nano regime could make the lattice of nanoparticles relatively softer. As the particle size increases this ratio decreases resulting in an increase in the average crystal cohesive energy, concomitantly strengthening the intermolecular interactions.117–122 These effects could have an impact on the optical responses of molecular nanoparticles.
Size-dependent optical properties were first observed in perylene nanocrystals.117 Another early investigation relates to the effect of supramolecular structure and particle size on the absorption spectra of β-carotene nanoparticles.123 A large number of studies demonstrating size-dependent optical absorption and emission in a wide variety of molecular nanostructures including spherical particles,98,121–127 wires,72,128,129 tubes71,130 and plates131,132 have appeared over the last decade. A series of substituted pyrazoline compounds have been investigated for the size-tunable optical properties of their nanoparticles.121,124,125 With increasing size, nanoparticles of 1,3-diphenyl-5-(2-anthryl)-2-pyrazoline (Fig. 1, DAP) show a red shift in the absorption band in the 330–410 nm range and splitting of a higher energy band.121 In the emission spectrum however, the main peak shifts to the blue and a lower energy band emerges and grows in intensity. These size-dependent changes are attributed to the increase in intermolecular interactions with increasing particle size and the consequent inhibition of vibronic relaxation and configurational reorganization. Increase in the size of nanoparticles of (R)-(+)-1,1′-bi-2-naphthol dimethyl ether (Fig. 1, BNDE) is accompanied by reduction in the emission intensity as well as red shift in the circular dichroism spectrum.122 The size-dependence of exciton chirality has also been attributed to the emergence and growth of intermolecular interactions. Nanowires of 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole fabricated by the adsorbent assisted PVD method show not only a blue shift of the absorption, but also a gradual emergence of vibrational fine structure in the emission spectrum with decrease in the wire diameter from 500 nm to 40 nm.72 The fine structure appears to be a consequence of the increase in the long range and configurational order, and enhancement in the degree of orientation of the nanowires with decreasing diameter. Nanotubes of dibenzoylmethane display an increase in fluorescence intensity with a decrease in diameter.71 Raman spectroscopic investigations revealed increasing fractions of the enol isomer as the nanotubes became thinner. The improved π-stacking of the enol structures leads to aggregation induced emission enhancement. Size tunable nano/microcrystals of a zwitterionic diaminodicyanoquinodimethane molecule (Fig. 1, BCADQ) with a plate-like morphology, fabricated in our laboratory through a reprecipitation–digestion protocol, showed optical responses dependent on the particle size (Fig. 11).131 Absorption is gradually red shifted with sequential emergence of additional peaks in the longer wavelength region and fluorescence intensity is enhanced with increase of particle size. A model that explains these observations has been developed based on quantum chemical computations as discussed later.
 Fig. 11  (a) AFM image of BCADQ (Fig. 1) nanocrystals fabricated by reprecipitation and digestion at 30 °C. (b) Absorption and emission (λexc = 365 nm) spectra of BCADQ colloids digested at 0, 30, 45, 60, 75 and 90 °C resulting in increasing size of nanoparticles. (c) Schematic drawing of the computed ground and excited electronic states of BCADQ monomers and dimers (1: H-bonded, 2: antiparallel, 3: parallel) used to model the absorption (black arrow) and emission (red arrow) of solution, colloids and solid (adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright © 2006, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.). 
Several of the studies cited above and others have demonstrated the particle size dependence of not only the absorption and emission spectra, but also of the excited state dynamics.98,121,124,127,129,131,133–136 Detailed investigations on relaxation dynamics of highly emissive organic nanoparticles of PPB (Fig. 1) have been carried out by picosecond and femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopy.98 A recent study of the excited state decay of 4-di(4′-tert-butylbiphenyl-4-yl)amino-4′-dicyanovinylbenzene) nanoparticles deposited on glass substrates showed clear particle size dependence of the pre-exponential factors of the different life time components assigned to the core and surface contributions.127 A time-resolved fluorescence study has shown that the increased fluorescence quenching at smaller particle sizes in surfactant stabilized nanoassemblies of meso-substituted tetracarboxyphenyl porphyrin can be attributed to the enhancement of singlet–singlet annihilation processes.133 Nanosecond transient absorption measurements showed that the decrease of the excited triplet state lifetime with a decrease in particle size could arise due to the triplet–triplet annihilation processes within these nanoassemblies. Exciton dynamics of nanoaggregates of a pyrene-ammonium bromide fabricated in a poly(vinyl alcohol) matrix has been studied by fluorescence anisotropy decay measurements.134 The decay profiles fitted to a double exponential function with a constant term, showed rate constants increasing and the constant term decreasing as the domains grew in size, reflecting the increasing efficiency of exciton diffusion and energy migration in the aggregates. Exciton dynamics of size-tunable nanobelts of PTCDI (Fig. 1) fabricated through controlled oxidation of its dianion has been reported recently.136
Electronic structure calculations provide useful insight into various aspects related to the size dependent optical responses in molecular nanoparticles.98,121–124,131,132 The optical properties of nanoparticles of DAP and BNDE have been analyzed through quantum mechanical studies of model systems based on molecular dimers.121,122 Optimization of molecular geometry using density functional theory based methods and computation of spectroscopic features of aggregates by semiempirical calculations have been carried out to explore the aggregation of β-carotene molecules in their nanoparticles.123 Molecular geometries from single crystal structure analysis and computations have been used to draw useful conclusions from the spectroscopic studies of size-tuned nanoparticles of PPB and a related molecule.98 A comprehensive model that explains the size-dependent photophysics of BCADQ nano/microcrystals has been developed using a combination of spectroscopic studies, crystallographic investigations and computation.131 Geometries of molecules and molecular dimers from crystal structure analysis as well as optimization calculations were used to compute spectroscopic features by semiempirical quantum chemical methods. Analysis of the absorption spectra of nanoparticles with varying size distributions and computational study of the different kinds of intermolecular interactions observed in the crystal lattice (Fig. 11) led to the concept of a progressive manifestation of the hierarchical intermolecular interactions with increasing crystal size. The smaller and hence softer crystals exhibit signatures of only the stronger interactions; as the particle size increases, the rigidity of the lattice improves leading to the manifestation of the strong as well as the weaker interactions. This model has been used to explain the optical properties of nanoparticles of related molecules as well.132
Far-field microspectroscopy combined with atomic force microscopy has been developed as a powerful tool to examine the optical properties of single nanoparticles. Such an approach allows the evaluation of the precise relationship between optical response and particle size, as individual particles are examined rather than ensembles.58,120 A typical example is the critical analysis of the size dependent excimer emission of perylene nanocrystals which led to the development of a model based on the inhibition of lattice vibration and consequent raising of the excimer energy level, with decrease in the crystal size. Single particle spectroscopy combined with microscopy has also been used to investigate the sensitive dependence of emission color on the morphology of organic nanoparticles discussed below.135
4. Shape dependent optical responses
The shape of molecular nanocrystals and their surface structure can be modified by a number of factors including the method of fabrication, solvent composition, presence of stabilizers and annealing or aging. The shape is influenced by the extent of crystallinity, molecular packing and growth kinetics. Several reports exist on the impact of the shape and surface features of molecular nanoparticles on their optical responses. The surface structure of 9,10-bis(4-(N-carbazolyl)phenyl)anthracene nanocrystals was shown to depend on whether they were formed through an emulsion or reprecipitation route.137 While the photoluminescence spectrum of the former with a rough surface morphology showed clear fine structure, the spectrum of the latter with a smooth surface was very different with no fine structure; interestingly, the absorption spectra were insensitive to the surface morphology. Single molecule spectroscopy of nanoparticles of the bis(2,5-di-tert-butylphenyl) derivative of PTCDI (Fig. 1) showed that small amorphous particles produced a blue emission characteristic of the monomer and larger crystalline particles produced red emission reminiscent of excimers.135 Nanotubes and nanorods of 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole fabricated by varying the type of solvent (ethanol and acetone) and solution concentrations, were found to show different extents of J-aggregation leading to a shift of the absorption peak and a change in emission intensity.138 The size and shape of perylene nanoparticles fabricated through a hydrothermal process were shown to be controlled by the temperature of the process; the optical absorption and photoluminescence could be tuned through the control of size and shape.139
As in the case of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, surfactants can be used to conveniently control the shape of molecular nanoparticles as well.41,44,140,141 Self-assembly of a simple molecule like pyrene could be tuned to generate nanoparticles, short nanorods and nanowires by optimizing the relative amount of sodium dodecyl sulfate template molecules.140 An increase in the aspect ratio led to the gradual transition of emission characteristics such as peak position, life time and anisotropy, from those of isolated molecules to those of aggregates. Cubic to rhombic dodecahedral nano/microcrystals and nanowires of 2,5,8,11-tetra-tert-butylperylene fabricated by tuning the solvent composition in the reprecipitation process showed different photoluminescence spectra.44,141 1-D ribbons and 2-D plates of rubrene microcrystals fabricated by tuning the nucleation and growth processes show distinct optical responses owing to the polymorphic structures formed.42 Annealing of rubrene nanocrystals produced by the reprecipitation process in a solvent vapor environment led to significant changes in the morphology; the changes are sensitive to the nature of the substrate on which the nanocrystals are deposited.142 Rectangular and hexagonal nanocrystals formed by the annealing process were shown to produce considerably enhanced photoluminescence over the pristine ones. A simple aging process can also induce morphological changes in molecular nanocrystals. An interesting case is that of N,N′-bis(salicylidene)-p-phenylenediamine which changes from spherical particles to rods and belt-like aggregates with aging; the fluorescence emission of the nanoparticles enhanced in intensity over that in solution, however diminishes with the aging time, possibly due to increasing intermolecular interactions.143 Reversible photoinduced shape changes have been observed in organic nanorods of 9-anthracene carboxylic acid which undergo dimerization on irradiation with 365 nm light with concomitant switching off of the fluorescence emission.144 The study shows that strain-induced mechanical damage familiar in macroscopic crystals does not occur in the nanoscopic crystals; this would be of considerable interest in photomechanically driven actuators.
5. Polarized emission
Highly ordered assembly of chromophores and fluorophores in nanoscale molecular aggregates, and further organization of the aggregates into ordered bulk structures in some cases, can give rise to strongly anisotropic optical responses. Polarized light emission from molecular nanoparticles can be exploited in various applications including optoelectronic devices, nanolasers, polarizing light emitting diodes and flat panel displays. Different derivatives of PTCDI (Fig. 1) have been shown to form nanobelts and fibres24,145–147 exhibiting polarized emission. The planar aromatic cores form ordered stacks with different degrees of tilt with respect to the nanobelt/fiber axis. These tilts determine the direction of emission polarization in these 1-D structures, as the transition dipole is largely confined to the molecular plane. Efficient wave-guiding effects have also been demonstrated in some nanobelt structures (Fig. 12).146 Examination of fibers of tetra(p-phenylenevinylene) typically a few nanometres in diameter and a few micrometres in length deposited on a graphite surface revealed polarized emission relative to the orientation of the fiber on the surface.148 As the transition dipole is along the long axis of the molecule and the emission polarization is perpendicular to the fiber axis, it was concluded that the molecules are organized with their long axis perpendicular to the fiber axis. Self-assembly and heteroepitaxial growth were used to fabricate highly crystalline and oriented nanofibers of α-sexithiophene on p-sexiphenyl on a mica substrate.149 Ordered assembly and epitaxial growth led to organized structures exhibiting polarized emission; the different emissions of the components were exploited to elicit multi-color emission in the hetero nanostructures. An interesting case of polarized absorption and emission has been reported in self-assembled nanorings of porphyrin dodecamer molecules.150 It was shown that the columnar stacks of the molecules are radially oriented within the rings with tangentially directed transition dipoles. Nanotubular J-aggregates of an amphiphilic cyanine dye studied using polarization-resolved near field scanning optical microscopy revealed strong polarized emission arising from highly uniform supramolecular organization within individual nanotubes and organized assembly of the nanotubes within ensembles.151
 Fig. 12  (a) Fluorescence microscopy image of nanobelts of a PTCDI (Fig. 1) derivative; inset shows the image of a horizontally aligned nanobelt with horizontal and vertical orientation of the emission polarizer. (b) Fluorescence intensity as a function of the angle between the polarizer and the long axis of the nanobelt (reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society). 
6. Optical activity
Redox processes and irradiation can act as chiroptical switches inverting the chirality of molecules, and factors such as disruption of intramolecular H-bonds and change of temperature or solvent can invert the circular dichroism responses. Formation of nanoparticles has been shown to be an effective strategy to invert the exciton coupling circular dichroism of (R)-di-2-naphthylprolinol.152 Dissolution and reformation of the nanoparticles leads to reversible changes in the circular dichroism. Chirality inversion due to intermolecular exciton coupling and size-dependent exciton chirality have been reported in nanoparticles of BNDE (Fig. 1).122 Optically active nanoparticles of the achiral meso-tetrakis(1-methylpyridinium-4-yl)porphine cation have been fabricated by combining with chiral C2 and D3 symmetric hexacoordinated phosphate anions.153 The induced optical activity has been attributed to the interaction of the magnetic/electric transition moments of the anions with the electric transition moment of the cation Soret band, as well as chiral distortion of the cation structure in the nanoparticle.
7. Special luminescence effects
Nanoparticles based on molecules with a fluorophore covalently bound to a photochromic moiety exhibit switchable fluorescence when irradiated at different wavelengths.102,154,155 Multicolored emissions from crystalline 1-D nanomaterials and their hierarchical assemblies based on 1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene (Fig. 1, PPCP),80 prepared by the adsorbent-assisted PVD method, have been reported. Red-green-blue (RGB) emissions were obtained by exciting PPCP nanoribbon arrays with green (520–550 nm), blue (460–490 nm) and UV (330–380 nm) light respectively. Steady state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy of crystalline and amorphous films indicated the coexistence of three different kinds of emitting centers in the crystalline PPCP nanoribbons; the blue light emitting centers originated from the monomers while the green and red ones possibly arose from the energy levels created by defects.
Tunable emissions have also been observed from dye doped organic nanomaterials. Rubrene doped 1,3,5-triphenyl-2-pyrazoline (Fig. 1, TPP) nanowires and nanorods show tunable emissions from blue to orange with increasing rubrene content; interestingly, white light emission can be achieved when the molar ratio of TPP to rubrene is 100:1 (Fig. 13).81 These 1-D binary nanomaterials exhibit a unique optical waveguiding property due to the high degree of molecular orientation in the crystalline nanostructures. Similarly, 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM) doped TPP nanoparticles prepared through the reprecipitation technique, exhibit blue to red emissions with increasing concentration of DCM.156 The nonradiative intermolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer from an energy donor (TPP) to an acceptor (rubrene/DCM) was found to be responsible for the tunable emissions observed in the above mentioned nanostructures. Selective DCM doping was exploited to fabricate triblock organic microrods exhibiting micro level blue-orange heterogeneous emission and macroscopic white light emission.157 An interesting case of electro-generated chemiluminescence has been reported in solutions as well as nanoparticles of a spiro compound with a D–A–π–A–D structure, where D and A are triphenylamine and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole moieties respectively.158
 Fig. 13  (a) Tuning of the emission spectra of TPP-rubrene (Fig. 1) nanowires deposited on quartz wafers by varying the composition. (b) Fluorescence microscopy image of the nanostructures with 100:1 ratio of TPP:rubrene, excited with UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright © 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.). 
D. Nonlinear optical effects
Nonlinear optical (NLO) characteristics of molecular materials have been at the focus of extensive investigations. A wide range of molecular crystals,159–162 and thin films163–165 exhibiting efficient quadratic and cubic nonlinear optical responses have been developed over the past few decades. While many of the NLO-phores developed for bulk materials continue to be investigated in the form of nanoparticles, within the context of molecular nanomaterials it is important to revisit factors such as phase-matching and nonlinear coupling optimization which are of fundamental interest at the macroscale. Molecular nanocrystals are potential candidates for the development of microscopy based on quadratic nonlinear responses, with applications in areas like bio-imaging.166 NLO responses and surface topography of nanocrystals of N-(4-nitrophenyl)-(L)-prolinol (NPP) have been mapped with subdiffraction-limited resolution using second harmonic generation (SHG) and sum frequency generation with photon scanning tunneling microscopy.167 Phase-matching requirements are relaxed for both processes as the crystal size is less than the coherence length. Nanofibers of non-symmetrically functionalized p-quaterphenyl grown on a mica surface have been investigated by SHG spectroscopy.168 Two-photon induced luminescence and SHG have also been observed in nanofibers of p-hexaphenyl.74
The efficient optical SHG observed in many of the thin films fabricated from small molecule NLO-phores arises from the molecular nano/microcrystals present in them. Vapor deposited thin films of a family of zinc-pyridine complexes containing perfectly polar crystallites, spontaneously organized with uniaxial orientational order, produce appreciable SHG responses.169,170 On the other hand, thermally assisted electric field poling was employed to orient nanocrystals of NPP and 3-methyl-4-methoxy-4′-nitrostilbene in sol–gel thin films to produce new SHG active materials.171 Nanocrystals of 1-cyano-1-(4-nitrophenyl)-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)ethene grown in a sol–gel thin film were shown to produce strong SHG and 2-photon induced fluorescence.172 The fluorescence lifetime was considerably smaller than that in bulk crystals; this was attributed to the fast isomerization of molecules on the surfaces. Electro-optic phase modulation at the telecommunication wavelength of 1.55 μm has been demonstrated in crystalline waveguides and nanowires of (2-(3-(2-(4-dimethylaminophenyl)vinyl)-5,5-dimethylcyclohex-2-enylidene)malononitrile grown from the melt confined between bonded structured borosilicate wafers.173
J-aggregated merocyanine microcrystals dispersed in water have been shown to possess large third order nonlinear susceptibilities even at non-resonant wavelengths leading to appreciable optical Kerr effects.174 Efficient optical limiting in the visible range at nanosecond time scales has been demonstrated in nanocrystals of a stilbene derivative grown inside sol–gel glass175 and aggregates of copper phthalocyanine–fullerene adducts.176 The optical limiting effect has been attributed to 2-photon and excited state absorption processes in the former and reverse saturable absorption in the latter. Colloids of BCADQ (Fig. 1) nano/microcrystals showed optical limiting responses in the femtosecond time scale. The NLO responses were found to be sensitive to the size distribution (Fig. 14).177 Multiphoton absorption effects were more pronounced in colloids with smaller particles, but saturation intensities increased with particle size. Interestingly, nonlinear refraction was found to be largely insensitive to the particle size. Two-photon absorption enhancement in nanoparticles of a porphyrin dimer was investigated and single particle imaging achieved through the use of fiber aperture near-field scanning optical microscopy.178 Linear optical and NLO responses of organic nanorods of N,N-dimethyl-4–4((4-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)phenyl)ethynyl)aniline have been shown to be strongly enhanced over that of the solutions; 1-photon as well as 2-photon induced fluorescence showed at least an order of magnitude increase.179
 Fig. 14  FESEM images of (a) BCADQ30, (b) BCADQ60, (c) BCADQ90 nanocrystals obtained by digestion at 30, 60 and 90 °C respectively (scale bar = 500 nm). (d) Normalized transmittance from open aperture Z-scans for the reference solvent and the BCADQ (Fig. 1) colloids at different input intensities, I00; the red solid line indicates theoretical fitting of the data taking into account 4-photon absorption and saturation effects (adapted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society). 
E. Applications
The last several years have witnessed an exponential growth of nanotechnology, and device applications of nanomaterials based primarily on metals, semiconductors and solids like carbon and silicon with extended covalent bonding. Compared to these, the direct application of molecular nanoparticles and optical materials based on them is still in its infancy. However a range of potential areas of application have emerged in recent years throwing up unique challenges and opportunities to unveil a new vista of nanotechnology. We consider some representative examples below.
1. Sensors
A traditional technique like fluorescence based sensing can achieve higher levels of sensitivity and sophistication by making use of the versatility and efficient response of molecular nanoparticles. The photostability of these nanosensors are generally found to be superior to that of fluorophore molecules dispersed in solvent media. Highly fluorescent perylene nanoparticles synthesized through the reprecipitation route and stabilized with CTAB have been shown to readily interact with DNA leading to fluorescence based detection of the latter down to 10−2 μg ml−1.180 The fluorescence responses including excited state decay kinetics, of rubrene nanocrystals grown in silicate thin films have been shown to be very sensitive to the presence of analytes like methylene blue.181 Molecular nanoparticles based on pyrene and its derivatives serve as efficient sensors for a variety of analytes like chromium(VI) ions,182 nucleic acids183 and proteins such as γ-globulin.184 Nanofiber based sensors for vapors of explosives (e.g. TNT) and organic amines have been developed using an alkoxycarbonyl-functionalized carbazole-cornered, ethynylene-bridged tetracycle,185 and the n-type organic semiconductor molecule, N-(1-hexylheptyl)perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxyl-3,4-anhydride-9,10-imide186 respectively. Selective and sensitive detection of Hg2+ down to a few tens of ppb has been demonstrated using a ratiometric fluorescence sensor based on thiourea–thiadiazole–pyridine linked organic nanoparticles.187
2. Photonics and optoelectronics
Organic nanophotonics is emerging as a field of exciting research, holding considerable promise for a variety of applications in areas such as photoswitching,102,154,188 waveguiding,42,189–191 ultraviolet lasers,191 and optical memory.192 Single crystalline nanowires of 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole have been demonstrated to serve as nanoscale active waveguides and optically pumped UV lasers (Fig. 15).191 Nanodot arrays of photochromic fulgide molecules fabricated on patterned substrates covering millimetre-squared areas have been shown to function as optical memory devices with remarkable storage capacity;192 a storage density of 74 Tbit/in2 has been achieved. Based on their efficient electroluminescence (EL) responses, molecular nanoparticles can form the active elements in light emitting diodes.193 Nanoparticles of 4,4′-bis(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)biphenyl formed by reprecipitation from THF–water show aggregation induced emission with 100% quantum efficiency and an efficient EL response at low bias voltages in multi-layer devices.194 Single layer EL devices with visible emission have been fabricated using a nanocrystalline J-aggregated phase of a cyanine dye in an electron–hole transporting aromatic polyimide film.195 Similar polymer composites based on organic nanocrystals have been used to fabricate devices showing efficient EL in the near infrared as well.196 Enclosing luminescent small molecules inside an active polymer shell that controls electron/hole migration, has been shown to be an effective route to fabricate EL nanocapsules.197
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (structure shown in inset) nanowires. (b) Photoluminescence microscopy image of the nanowires deposited on a quartz wafer (adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright © 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.). 
Molecular nanocrystals also find applications in improving the photovoltaic performance of organic solar cells. An illustrative case is that of hydrothermally treated perylene nanoparticles with tunable emission which were used to enhance the power conversion efficiency of bulk heterojunction devices based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester.139 Organized assemblies of fullerene-encapsulated zinc meso-tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin nanorods display controlled photoinduced electron transfer and efficient solar energy conversion.198 Single crystalline organic semiconducting nanowires fabricated from small molecules have been investigated extensively in field-effect transistor devices as well.31,79,199–203
3. Medicine
Small molecule based nanoparticles have been used for probing biological systems such as cells and their constituent organelles. Coating or functionalization on the surface of the nanoparticles and their successful integration with a host of biomolecular moieties open up a range of applications in molecular biology and biomedicine. Low inflammatory activation of the human Calu-3 epithelial cell by water soluble, self-assembling lysine functionalized organic nanotubes has been demonstrated.204 Prolyl functionalized amphiphilic resorcinarenes form stable nanoparticles which could further be functionalized at the surface with proteins such as bovine serum albumin (BSA).205 Demonstration of its interaction with surface bound anti-BSA antibodies suggests the potential application of these nanoparticles in drug targeting. Organic nanoparticle based agents developed for biosensing and bioanalytical applications include antibody conjugated fluorescein diacetate nanocrystals with releasable fluorophores for immunoassays,206 HBC (Fig. 1) functionalized with fluorescein labeled peptides for developing novel bioprobes207 and rhodamine based nanocrystals anchored in a sol–gel film and grafted with hairpin shaped DNA for detection of the complementary DNA.208 Aggregation induced enhancement of fluorescence has been exploited in the development of organic nanoparticles useful in bioimaging applications. 10H-phenothiazine based donor–acceptor molecules upon protonation and aggregation form fluorescent nanoparticles in the lysosomes of cancer cells but not in normal cells, facilitating selective imaging.209 Similar applications have been investigated using nanoparticles of novel naphthalimide derivatives as well.210
F. Conclusion
The field of metal and semiconductor based nanomaterials has grown exponentially in the last few decades. Even though the study of colloids and molecular ultrathin films have been initiated a long time back, focused investigation of nanoparticles assembled from small molecules with special attention paid to their unique nanoscale features is of more recent origin. As highlighted at various points in this article, several aspects of these explorations are still in their early stages. A rigorous and detailed understanding of the fundamental physics of these materials is yet to be developed and a general picture of the size-dependence of their unique characteristics to be established. The relatively weaker interactions between the basic building blocks of molecular nanomaterials compared to their counterparts in metals and semiconductors are more difficult to model. The extensive work carried out in the field of organic materials over the past several decades has to be brought to bear upon the challenging problems posed by molecular nanomaterials and is likely to boost fundamental research in this area. Application avenues of these versatile materials are wide open and hold great promise. This intermediate regime between the ‘molecules-as-materials’ and ‘molecules-to-materials’ paradigms is likely to blossom into a rich arena in the field of soft materials and nanomaterials technology.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi as well as infrastructure support from the Centre for Nanotechnology and the National Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer Facility at the School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, are gratefully acknowledged. CGC thanks the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi for a Senior Research Fellowship.
References
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1857, 147, 145–181 CrossRef .
C. L. Brown, G. Bushell, M. W. Whitehouse, D. S. Agrawal, S. G. Tupe, K. M. Paknikar and E. R. T. Tiekink, Gold Bull., 2007, 40, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sardar, A. M. Funston, P. Mulvaney and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13840–13851 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Balandin and K. L. Wang, ed. Handbook of Semiconductor Nanostructures and Nanodevices, American Scientific Publishers,  2005 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5492–5513 RSC .
S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 804–815 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gatteschi, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1996, 1, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Roth and D. Carroll, One Dimensional Metals, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .

          A. Lebed, ed. The Physics of Organic Superconductors and Conductors, Springer Series in Materials Science,  2008, vol. 110 Search PubMed .
S. Horiuchi and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 357–366 CrossRef CAS .
D. Horn and J. Rieger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4330–4361 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Masuhara, H. Nakanishi and K. Sasaki, ed. Single Organic Nanoparticles, Springer, Berlin,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. L. Atwood and J. W. Steed, ed. Organic Nanostructures, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Zelzer and R. V. Ulijn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3351–3357 RSC .
A. Y. Utekhina and G. B. Sergeev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2011, 80, 219–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pecher and S. Mecking, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6260–6279 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Spokoyny, D. Kim, A. Sumrein and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1218–1227 RSC .
L. Maggini and D. Bonifazi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c1cs15031f .
L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, M. Masuda and H. Minamikawa, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1401–1443 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Vemula and G. John, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 769–782 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Li, P. Duan and M. Liu, Chem. Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8034–8040 CAS .
D. Wu, R. Liu, W. Pisula, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2791–2794 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. J. Medforth and J. A. Shelnutt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15954–15955 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Velázquez, D. D. Díaz, Á. G. Ravelo and J. J. M. Tellado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7967–7973 CrossRef .
B. An, D. Lee, J. Lee, Y. Park, H. Song and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10232–10233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Prasanthkumar, A. Gopal and A. Ajayaghosh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13206–13207 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gomar-Nadal, J. Puigmartí-Luis and D. B. Amabilino, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 490–504 RSC .
L. Jiang, Y. Fu, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3937–3941 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, R. Martel, P. Avouris, M. L. Bushey, L. Brus and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5234–5242 CrossRef CAS .
B. An, S. Kwon and S. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1978–1982 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pisula, A. Menon, M. Stepputat, I. Lieberwirth, U. Kolb, A. Tracz, H. Sirringhaus, T. Pakula and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, R. Bao, X. Zhang, X. Ou, C. Lee, J. C. Chang and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2811–2815 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Popović, M. Busby, S. Huber, G. Calzaferri and L. D. Cola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8898–8902 CrossRef .
L. Grill, M. Dyer, L. Lafferentz, M. Persson, M. V. Peters and S. Hecht, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 687–691 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekhar and R. Chandrasekar, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2915–2917 RSC .
V. Duzhko, J. Du, C. A. Zorman and K. D. Singer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12081–12084 CAS .
L. Kang, H. Fu, X. Cao, Q. Shi and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1895–1901 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kang, Z. Wang, Z. Cao, Y. Ma, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7305–7312 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. Fu, J. Ma and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 159–166 RSC .
E. V. Keuren, A. Bone and C. Ma, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6079–6084 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, C. Zhao, J. Lv, C. Dong, X. Ou, X. Zhang and S. Lee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3677–3680 CAS .
H. Kasai, H. S. Nalwa, H. Oikawa, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, N. Minami, A. Kakuta, K. Ono, A. Mukoh and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 31, L1132–L1134 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Nakanishi and H. Oikawa, in Single Organic Nanoparticles, ed. H. Masuhara, H. Nakanishi and K. Sasaki, Springer, Berlin,  2003, pp. 17–31 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Ma, D. Xiao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2859–2876 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, D. Xiao, J. Yao and G. Yang, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2883–2886 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Guo, H. Liang, L. Wan and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17090–17095 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bertorelle, D. Lavabre and S. Fery-Forgues, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6244–6253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bîrlă, F. Bertorelle, F. Rodrigues, S. Badré, R. Pansu and S. Fery-Forgues, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6256–6265 CrossRef .
Y. Komai, H. Kasai, H. Hirakoso, Y. Hakuta, H. Katagi, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, T. Adschiri, H. Inomata, K. Arai and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L81–L83 CAS .
H. Yao, M. Yamashita and K. Kimura, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1131–1137 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Kasai, H. Oikawa and H. Nakanishi, in Organic Mesoscopic Chemistry, ed. H. Masuhara and F. C. de Schryver, Blackwell Science, Oxford,  1999, pp. 145–170 Search PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, H. Chung, A. Masuhara, H. Kasai, H. Oikawa, H. Nakanishi, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15944–15945 CrossRef CAS .
Ch. G. Chandaluri, A. Patra and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8699–8706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayanty and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 791–797 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asahi, T. Sugiyama and H. Masuhara, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, R. Métivier, J. Piard and K. Nakatani, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6385–6387 RSC .
H. Fukumura and H. Masuhara, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 221, 373–378 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hosokawa, M. Yashiro, T. Asahi and H. Masuhara, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 142, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
A. Spangenberg, R. Métivier, J. Gonzalez, K. Nakatani, P. Yu, M. Giraud, A. Léaustic, R. Guillot, T. Uwada and T. Asahi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
C. Destrée, J. Ghijsen and J. B. Nagy, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1965–1973 CrossRef .
E. Kwon, H. Oikawa, H. Kasai and H. Nakanishi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 600–602 CAS .
V. Monnier, N. Sanz, E. Botzung-Appert, M. Bacia and A. Ibanez, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1401–1409 RSC .
J. Ha, M. A. Hillmyer and M. D. Ward, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1392–1399 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Al-Kaysi and C. J. Bardeen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1224–1226 RSC .
S. Cui, H. Liu, L. Gan, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2918–2925 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, W. Yang, Y. Ma, J. Yao, Y. Li and H. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2442–2443 RSC .
H. Gan, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, T. Jiu and D. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 399, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, W. Yang, Y. Luo, T. Zhai, G. Zhang and J. Yao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3773–3778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, D. Xiao, W. Yang, A. Peng and J. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2302–2306 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Jiang, Y. Tong, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balzar and H. Rubahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 17–24 CrossRef .
A. M. Ng, A. B. Djurišić, K. Tam, W. Kwok, W. Chan, W. Y. Tam, D. L. Phillips and K. Cheah, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 566–574 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Chung, B. An, J. W. Kim, J. Kim and S. Y. Park, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2998–3000 RSC .
H. Ji, R. Majithia, X. Yang, X. Xu and K. More, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10056–10057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chiu, C. Kei, T. Perng and W. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1361–1364 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Li, Y. Liu and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14634–14639 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, F. Hu, A. Peng and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3554–3558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, F. Hu, A. Peng, W. Yang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Köstler, A. Rudorfer, A. Haase, V. Satzinger, G. Jakopic and V. Ribitsch, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2505–2510 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Li, D. Tu, Z. Ji, C. Wang, Q. Tang, M. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12917–12922 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Gan, T. Jiu, H. Li, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu, B. Xiang and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10794–10795 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balzer and H. Rubahn, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 747–750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sakai, M. Iizuka, M. Nakamura and K. Kudo, Synth. Met., 2005, 153, 293–296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent and P. Hadley, Small, 2005, 1, 1–3 CrossRef .
J.-P. Savy, D. de Caro, L. Valade, J.-P. Legros, P. Auban-Senzier, C. R. Pasquier, J. Fraxedas and F. Senocq, Europhys. Lett., 2007, 78, 37005 CrossRef .
H. Imahori, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 31–41 RSC .
B. D. Gates, Q. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171–1196 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Rolland, B. W. Maynor, L. E. Euliss, A. E. Exner, G. M. Denison and J. M. DeSimone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10096–10100 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jeong, M. E. Napier and J. M. DeSimone, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 633–639 CrossRef .
A. B. Braunschweig, F. Huo and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1959, 31, 162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abyan, D. de Caro and S. Fery-Forgues, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, F. Wang, H. Zhao, X. Liu, R. Tu, D. Wang and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 2837–2841 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giovannetti, L. Alibabaei and L. Petetta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 211, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bhongale, C. Chang, C. Lee, E. W. Diau and C. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13472–13482 CrossRef CAS .
B. An, S. Kwon, S. Jung and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410–14415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heier, R. Steiger, F. Nüesch and R. Hany, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3955–3961 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, S. P. Anthony and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2077–2084 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lim, B. An, S. D. Jung, M. Chung and S. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6346–6350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, D. Bwambok, B. El-Zahab, J. Monk, S. L. de Rooy, S. Challa, M. Li, F. R. Hung, G. A. Baker and I. M. Warner, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12867–12876 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
Y. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, J. Liu, Z. Li and B. Z. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 011111 CrossRef .
R. Davis, N. S. S. Kumar, S. Abraham, C. H. Suresh, N. P. Rath, N. Tamaoki and S. Das, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2137–2146 CAS .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4332–4353 RSC .
J. N. Wilson, M. D. Smith, V. Enkelmann and U. H. F. Bunz, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1700–1701 RSC .
T. Hirose and K. Matsuda, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5832–5834 RSC .
S. Su, H. Lin and C. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8653–8658 RSC .
T. E. Kaiser, H. Wang, V. Stepanenko and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5541–5544 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chahine, N. Saffon, M. Cantuel and S. Fery-Forgues, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2844–2853 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2nd edn,  1999 Search PubMed .
S. R. Forrest, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1793–1896 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhu, Q. Yang and M. Muntwiler, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1779–1787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasai, H. Kamatani, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, H. Matsuda and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, L221–L223 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasai, H. Kamatani, Y. Yoshikawa, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, A. Watanabe, O. Itoh and H. Nakanishi, Chem. Lett., 1997, 1181–1182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oikawa, T. Mitsui, T. Onodera, H. Kasai, H. Nakanishi and T. Sekiguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, L111–L113 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asahi, H. Matsune, K. Yamashita, H. Masuhara, H. Kasai and H. Nakanishi, Polish J. Chem., 2008, 82, 687–699 CAS .
D. Xiao, L. Xi, W. Yang, H. Fu, Z. Shuai, Y. Fang and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6740–6745 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiao, W. Yang, J. Yao, L. Xi, X. Yang and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15439–15444 CrossRef CAS .
H. Auweter, H. Haberkorn, W. Heckmann, D. Horn, E. Lüddecke, J. Rieger and H. Weiss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2188–2191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1434–1439 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, B. H. Loo, D. Xiao, R. Xie, X. Ji, J. Yao, B. Zhang and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 962–965 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han and M. Hara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10951–10955 CrossRef CAS .
M. Breton, G. Prével, J. Audibert, R. Pansu, P. Tauc, B. L. Pioufle, O. Français, J. Fresnais, J. Berret and E. Ishow, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13268–13276 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, H. You and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9177–9183 CAS .
L. Heng, J. Zhai, A. Qin, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, B. Z. Tang and L. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1513–1518 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Shi, X. Meng, C. Lee and S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1525–1528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, N. Hebalkar, B. Sreedhar, M. Sarkar, A. Samanta and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Small, 2006, 2, 650–659 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, N. Hebalkar, B. Sreedhar and T. P. Radhakrishnan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16184–16191 CAS .
A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki, T. Wada and T. Hasobe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19209–19216 CAS .
F. Ito, T. Kakiuchi, T. Sakano and T. Nagamura, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 10923–10927 RSC .
A. J. Gesquiere, T. Uwada, T. Asahi, H. Masuhara and P. F. Barbara, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1321–1325 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Wu, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2163–2167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kwon, H.-R. Chung, Y. Araki, H. Kasai, H. Oikawa, O. Ito and H. Nakanishi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 441, 106–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, W. Yang and J. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3300–3303 RSC .
E. H. Cho, M. S. Kim, D. H. Park, H. Jung, J. Bang, J. Kim and J. Joo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3056–3063 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Shi, X. Meng, C. Lee and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18777–18780 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Dong, J. A. Zapien, S. Ismathullakhan, Z. Kang, J. Jie, X. Zhang, J. C. Chang, C. Lee and S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9121–9123 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Park, S. G. Jo, Y. K. Hong, C. Cui, H. Lee, D. J. Ahn, J. Kim and J. Joo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8002–8007 RSC .
S. Li, L. He, F. Xiong, Y. Li and G. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10887–10892 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Al-Kaysi and C. J. Bardeen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS .
A. Datar, K. Balakrishnan, X. Yang, X. Zuo, J. Huang, R. Oitker, M. Yen, J. Zhao, D. M. Tiede and L. Zang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12327–12332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, X. Yang, K. Balakrishnan, J. Zuo and L. Zang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2930–2934 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and B. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 10881–10885 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. L. P. N. Jeukens, P. Jonkheijm, F. J. P. Wijnen, J. C. Gielen, P. C. M. Christianen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, E. W. Meijer and J. C. Maan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8280–8281 CrossRef CAS .
C. Simbrunner, F. Quochi, G. Hernandez-Sosa, M. Oehzelt, R. Resel, G. Hesser, M. Arndt, M. Saba, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni and H. Sitter, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6244–6250 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. L. P. N. Jeukens, M. C. Lensen, F. J. P. Wijnen, J. A. A. W. Elemans, P. C. M. Christianen, A. E. Rowan, J. W. Gerritsen, R. J. M. Nolte and J. C. Maan, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1401–1406 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Eisele, J. Knoester, S. Kirstein, J. P. Rabe and D. A. V. Bout, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 658–663 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xi, H. Fu, W. Yang and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2005, 492–494 RSC .
H. Yao, H. Sasahara and K. Kimura, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Benedetto, E. Mele, A. Camposeo, A. Athanassiou, R. Cingolani and D. Pisignano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 314–318 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, Y. Feng, D. Zhang, G. Zhang, Q. Fan, S. Sun and D. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Peng, D. Xiao, Y. Ma, W. Yang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2070–2073 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, Q. Liao, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1742–1743 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Omer, S. Ku, J. Cheng, S. Chou, K. Wong and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5492–5499 CrossRef CAS .

          D. S. Chemla, J. Zyss, ed. Nonlinear Optical Properties of Organic Molecules and Crystals; Academic Press, New York,  1987, vols. 1 and 2 Search PubMed .
D. R. Kanis, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 195–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Delaire and K. Nakatani, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1817–1845 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Radhakrishnan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 367–376 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Rashid, C. Erny and P. Gunter, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2024–2027 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Ashwell, G. Jefferies, D. G. Hamilton, D. E. Lynch, M. P. S. Roberts, G. S. Bahra and C. R. Brown, Nature, 1995, 375, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chandra, M. G. Krishna, H. Mimata, J. Kawamata, T. Nakamura and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1937–1941 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Brasselet and J. Zyss, in Nanocrystals, ed. Y. Masuda, InTech,  2010, pp. 249–270 Search PubMed .
Y. Shen, J. Swiatkiewicz, J. Winiarz, P. Markowicz and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2946–2948 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pedersen, M. Schiek, J. Rafaelsen and H.-G. Rubahn, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2009, 96, 821–826 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Anthony, N. K. M. N. Srinivas, D. N. Rao and T. P. Radhakrishnan, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 739–742 RSC .
S. P. Anthony, S. Porel, D. N. Rao and T. P. Radhakrishnan, Pramana, 2005, 65, 871–879 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wang, P. L. Baldeck, E. Botzung, N. Sanz and A. Ibanez, Opt. Mater., 2002, 21, 569–572 CrossRef .
F. Treussart, E. Botzung-Appert, N. Ha-Duong, A. Ibanez, J. F. Roch and R. Pansu, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 757–760 CrossRef CAS .
H. Figi, M. Jazbinšek, C. Hunziker, M. Koechlin and P. Günter, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 11310–11327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasai, H. Kanbara, R. Iida, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, H. Oikawa and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 34, L1208–L1210 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sanz, A. Ibanez, Y. Morel and P. L. Baldeck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2569–2571 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, C. He, C. Liu, W. Yang, J. Yao, Y. Nie, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 94, 444–448 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, N. Venkatram, D. N. Rao and T. P. Radhakrishnan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16269–16274 CAS .
J. E. Raymond and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 329–333 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Raymond, G. Ramakrishna, R. J. Twieg and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7913–7921 CAS .
L. Jinshui, W. Lun, G. Feng, L. Yongxing and W. Yun, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377, 346–349 CrossRef .
E. Botzung-Appert, V. Monnier, T. Ha Duong, R. Pansu and A. Ibanez, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1609–1611 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Wang, T. Xia, L. Dong, G. Bian and H. Chen, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20, 1013–1017 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Xia, L. Wang, H. Chen, L. Dong and G. Bian, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 149, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Wang, L. Dong, G. Bian, T. Xia and H. Chen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2005, 61, 129–133 CrossRef .
T. Naddo, Y. Che, W. Zhang, K. Balakrishnan, X. Yang, M. Yen, J. Zhao, J. S. Moore and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6978–6979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, X. Yang, S. Loser and L. Zang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7526–7530 CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Li, Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. Li, W. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Hu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2624–2628 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takazawa, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5293–5301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schiek, F. Balzer, K. Al-Shamery, J. R. Brewer, A. Lützen and H. Rubahn, Small, 2008, 4, 176–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1661–1665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rath, M. Heilig, H. Port and J. Wrachtrup, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3845–3848 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jagannathan, G. Irvin, T. Blanton and S. Jagannathan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, S. Chen, X. Shen, F. Mahtab, Y. Yu, P. Lu, J. W. Y. Lam, H. S. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 686–688 RSC .
E. I. Maltsev, D. A. Lypenko, B. I. Shapiro, M. A. Brusentseva, V. I. Berendyaev, B. V. Kotov and A. V. Vannikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3641–3643 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Maltsev, D. A. Lypenko, V. V. Bobinkin, A. R. Tameev, S. V. Kirillov, B. I. Shapiro, H. F. M. Schoo and A. V. Vannikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3088–3090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heo, N. Park, J. Ryu and K. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 822–826 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Wada and Y. Araki, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3372–3374 RSC .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, X. Lu, Y. Xiong, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 668–675 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Lei, L. Wang, J. Pei, Y. Cao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1484–1487 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mu, W. Song, Y. Zhang, K. Ye, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4905–4909 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Gao, E. Wang, H. Li, Z. Wang, W. Hu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2735–2740 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Li, M. He, W. Hu, C. Liu, K. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Journeay, S. S. Suri, J. G. Moralez, H. Fenniri and B. Singh, Small, 2008, 4, 817–823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ehrler, U. Pieles, A. Wirth-Heller and P. Shahgaldian, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2605–2607 RSC .
C. P. Chan, Y. Bruemmel, M. Seydack, K. Sin, L. Wong, E. Merisko-Liversidge, D. Trau and R. Renneberg, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 3638–3645 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, J. Shen, W. Pisula, M. Liang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14618–14619 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dubuisson, S. Szunerits, M. Bacia, R. Pansu and A. Ibanez, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2416–2421 RSC .
H. Lin, S. Su and C. Chang, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 2036–2039 CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Chan, J. Chen and C. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3170–3177 RSC .

Footnote† Present address: Makromolekulare Chemie, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Gauss-Str. 20, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany; Email: apatrachem@yahoo.comThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
A. Patra	A. Patra was born in West Bengal, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Burdwan, Bardhaman in 2003 and working under the supervision of Prof. T. P. Radhakrishnan, his PhD degree from University of Hyderabad in 2009. Following a post-doctoral stint with Prof. Keitaro Nakatani in PPSM, ENS Cachan, France, currently he is working as an Alexander von Humboldt researcher in the group of Prof. Ullrich Scherf at the University of Wuppertal, Germany. His research interests are in the area of fabrication and optical properties of molecular and macromolecular nanomaterials.
Ch. G. Chandaluri	Ch. G. Chandaluri was born in Andhra Pradesh, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc. degree in Chemistry from the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad in 2007. He is currently pursuing his PhD. degree at the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad under the guidance of Prof. T. P. Radhakrishnan. His research interests are in the area of synthesis, fabrication and applications of molecular crystals, nanocrystals and thin film based optical materials.
T. P. Radhakrishnan	T. P. Radhakrishnan was born in Kerala, India and received his early education from there. He obtained his MSc. degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai in 1982 and working under the supervision of Prof. Zoltan Soos, his PhD. degree from Princeton University, Princeton in 1987. Following a post-doctoral tenure with Prof. William Herndon at the University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, he joined the University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad in 1989. He is currently a Professor in the School of Chemistry. His research interests span various domains and facets of molecular and nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Structure of some of the molecules discussed in this review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the reprecipitation method.	 

 	Fig. 3  Formation of BT2-NaPSS (Fig. 1) colloid by polyelectrolyte-assisted reprecipitation, TEM image of the nanoparticles and fluorescence enhancement (adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright © 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 4  The laser ablation process for the fabrication of molecular nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the template method for the fabrication of molecular nanotubes/nanorods.	 

 	Fig. 6  The two-zone vapor deposition system for the fabrication of molecular nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a cell for electrochemical deposition of molecular nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the PRINT process.91,92	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Hexagonal nanoprisms of J-aggregated zinc mesotetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin and (b) their organization into a smectic 3-D architecture (adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright © 2005, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Enhancement of fluorescence upon aggregation of CN-MBE (Fig. 1) induced by the addition of water to a THF solution. (b) SEM image of the nanoparticles formed in 80% volume fraction of water in THF (adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright © 2002, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) AFM image of BCADQ (Fig. 1) nanocrystals fabricated by reprecipitation and digestion at 30 °C. (b) Absorption and emission (λexc = 365 nm) spectra of BCADQ colloids digested at 0, 30, 45, 60, 75 and 90 °C resulting in increasing size of nanoparticles. (c) Schematic drawing of the computed ground and excited electronic states of BCADQ monomers and dimers (1: H-bonded, 2: antiparallel, 3: parallel) used to model the absorption (black arrow) and emission (red arrow) of solution, colloids and solid (adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright © 2006, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fluorescence microscopy image of nanobelts of a PTCDI (Fig. 1) derivative; inset shows the image of a horizontally aligned nanobelt with horizontal and vertical orientation of the emission polarizer. (b) Fluorescence intensity as a function of the angle between the polarizer and the long axis of the nanobelt (reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Tuning of the emission spectra of TPP-rubrene (Fig. 1) nanowires deposited on quartz wafers by varying the composition. (b) Fluorescence microscopy image of the nanostructures with 100:1 ratio of TPP:rubrene, excited with UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright © 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 14  FESEM images of (a) BCADQ30, (b) BCADQ60, (c) BCADQ90 nanocrystals obtained by digestion at 30, 60 and 90 °C respectively (scale bar = 500 nm). (d) Normalized transmittance from open aperture Z-scans for the reference solvent and the BCADQ (Fig. 1) colloids at different input intensities, I00; the red solid line indicates theoretical fitting of the data taking into account 4-photon absorption and saturation effects (adapted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (structure shown in inset) nanowires. (b) Photoluminescence microscopy image of the nanowires deposited on a quartz wafer (adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright © 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).	 
Footnote
† Present address: Makromolekulare Chemie, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Gauss-Str. 20, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany; Email: apatrachem@yahoo.com

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
