Facile synthesis of Ag/ZnO metal–semiconductor hierarchical photocatalyst nanostructures via the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CE01305E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CE01305E
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 7492-7501Facile synthesis of Ag/ZnO metal–semiconductor hierarchical photocatalyst nanostructures via the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method†

        
          
            Ulugbek 
            Shaislamov
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Heon-Ju 
            Lee
          
        
      *
      Department of Nuclear and Energy Engineering, Jeju National University, Jeju-si 690-756, South Korea. E-mail: sulugbek@gmail.com; hjlee@jejunu.ac.kr
Received 
      4th August 2018
    , Accepted 3rd October 2018First published on 3rd October 2018AbstractHierarchical metal–semiconductor nanostructures (NSs) composed of a backbone made of Ag nanowire and ZnO nanorod (NR) branches were successfully prepared using the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method. A galvanic cell structure was formed between an Al bottle anode that was used as a hydrothermal reactor and an Ag NW cathode dispersed in a hydrothermal solution. As a result, the contact-potential-driven hydrothermal growth of the ZnO NRs on the sidewalls of the Ag NWs could be achieved. The morphological and microstructure characterization confirmed the formation of well-arranged hierarchical NSs composed of Ag NW trunk and ZnO NR branch structures. The photocatalytic properties of the hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs were investigated by degrading methylene blue (MB) dye as a model pollutant. It was found that the hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs demonstrated a more than two-fold faster degradation rate than the pristine ZnO NSs. The high-performance photocatalytic activity of the Ag/ZnO hierarchical NSs was attributed to the synergetic effect of the metallic Ag NWs and the ZnO NRs that enhanced the charge separation and diffusion by suppressing charge recombination, as well as enhanced reaction sites and light absorption.
Introduction
The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants is considered a promising technology for energy-efficient environmental solutions.1,2 Well-designed photocatalyst materials can be used in organic pollutant degradation as well as in photocatalytic water splitting.3–6 Therefore, this technology is believed to be an efficient solar energy conversion route.7–9 Among the semiconductors, ZnO has been intensively investigated for photocatalytic water treatment application due to its high photocatalytic activity, environmental compatibility, abundance, and low cost.10–14 Upon light illumination on ZnO, photo-induced electrons and holes are generated, which migrate to the reaction sites on the semiconductor surface, where they get involved in the surface reactions.8,15–18 The collected electrons and holes participate in the reduction and oxidation reactions with the water molecules to form superoxide radical anions and hydroxyl radicals. The formed hydroxyl radicals readily oxidize the organic pollutants and decompose them.1,19 Due to the charge-recombination in ZnO, however, most of the photo-induced electrons and holes recombine, causing decreased overall photocatalytic efficiency. To overcome this issue, many effective strategies have been reported, such as the design of p–n junction structures20–22 and co-catalyst deposition.23,24 Growth of the ZnO nanostructures on the nanostructured metallic building blocks, such as Ag NWs,25 Cu NWs,26 and carbon nanofibers,27 would be another advantageous strategy to overcome the charge recombination issue in ZnO. In such cases (ZnO grown on the conducting element), photo-induced electrons in the ZnO/conductor photocatalyst would be effectively collected at the conducting element and transferred to the reaction sites. Remaining holes would be used for surface reactions on the semiconductor avoiding recombination losses. In particular, metal–semiconductor nanostructures (NSs) with a multi-branched hierarchical arrangement will greatly enhance the reaction rate due to the increased active reaction sites in the form of branches. Moreover, branched geometry would facilitate light absorption through multiple photon reflection and scattering.
Hanxing Chen et al. reported the synthesis of ZnO NSs on Cu nanowires (NWs) and demonstrated their excellent photocatalytic efficiency for aromatic dye decomposition.28 In a recent report, Z. Zheng et al. presented a very fascinating method of growing vertically aligned, dense ZnO nanorods (NRs) without coating the various conducting substrates with an additional seed layer, based on the galvanic cell effect.29 This method utilizes the contact potential difference of two materials with different work functions that act as a driving force for ZnO deposition.30–32 Later, this concept was effectively employed to grow ZnO NRs on the metallic NWs forming hierarchical NSs.33 The galvanic cell effect was achieved by the metal-to-metal contact between Al foil and intercalated NW networks deposited on the substrate. This method is mostly limited to on-substrate systems, where the as-synthesized hierarchical NSs are formed on a planar substrate. For practical photocatalyst application, it is recommended that a powdered photocatalyst with a high yield is developed.
Among the many reported studies on the synthesis of one-dimensional hierarchical metal–semiconductor heterostructures for photocatalytic application, most employed complex, multi-step synthesis procedures, such as the metal NW functionalization step, the seed layer coating step, and finally the hydrothermal reaction step. Therefore, the development of a facile, less complex synthesis method of functional hierarchical metal–semiconductor NSs is important.
Reported herein is a facile synthesis method of Ag/ZnO hierarchical NSs using the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method, which is similar to the galvanic cell structure approach. A galvanic cell structure was achieved between the Ag NW cathode dispersed in a hydrothermal solution and an Al vessel that simultaneously acted as a sacrificial anode and a hydrothermal reactor. It was found that during the hydrothermal reaction, the as-formed Ag/Al galvanic contact drives the directional growth of the ZnO NRs on the Ag NWs, resulting in hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs. This approach eliminates additional steps, such as NW filtration, functionalization, ZnO seed layer deposition, and formation of complicated metal-to-metal contact, and allows the one-pot synthesis of various metal–semiconductor NSs.
Experimental section
Materials
Silver nitride (AgNO3, 99%, CAS: 7761-88-8, Sigma-Aldrich), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, CAS: 9003-39-8, Sigma-Aldrich), ethylene glycol (C2H6O2, 99%, CAS: 107-21-1, Daejung), zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2, 98%, CAS: 10196-18-6, Daejung), hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4, 99%, CAS: 100-97-0, Sigma-Aldrich), potassium hydroxide (KOH, 93%, CAS: 1310-58-3, Daejung), methylene blue (C16H18CIN3S, 97%, CAS: 7220-79-3, Daejung).
Ag NW synthesis
Silver NW was prepared using a typical polyol method, as reported in ref. 25. One gram of AgNO3 was dissolved in 40 ml ethylene glycol at room temperature. Another solution was prepared by dissolving 0.8 g polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Mw = 360000) in 50 ml ethylene glycol and then vigorously stirring the solution at 60 °C. After complete dissolution of the PVP, the two solutions were mixed together, and a 13.6 g FeCl3 ethylene glycol solution was added to the mixture. The mixture was then stirred at 250 rpm for 10 min and subsequently heated at 110 °C in an oven for 5 h. The product obtained was sequentially washed with acetone and ethanol three times, by centrifugation at 3000 rpm. Finally, the as-obtained Ag NWs were dispersed in ethanol for further use.
Ag/ZnO NS synthesis
In the typical synthesis, a desired amount of the as-prepared Ag NWs was dispersed in a 60 ml solution containing 0.25 mM Zn(NO3)2 and (CH2)6N4. The solution was mixed well by stirring at 500 rpm for 15 min, and by occasionally shaking in an ultrasonic bath. Finally, the solution was poured into an Al bottle and was kept at 90° for 3 h. A control experiment was performed in a glass bottle instead of an Al bottle, while keeping the other experimental conditions constant.
ZnO NS synthesis
Pristine ZnO NSs were synthesized using the hydrothermal method in an alkaline solution.34 The hydrothermal solution consisted of two parts: 0.5 M Zn(NO3)2 and 4 M KOH aqueous solutions. The 0.5 M Zn(NO3)2 solution was slowly dropped into the 4 M KOH solution under vigorous stirring. The final solution was transferred into a glass reaction cell and was kept in the oven at 70 °C for 4 h. Thereafter, the reaction product was filtered and then washed with deionized (DI) water and ethanol, and was finally dried overnight at 60 °C.
Characterization
The surface morphology and microstructure characterization of the prepared samples was performed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM-6500F, JEOL, Japan) and an X-ray diffractometer (XRD; GI-XRD, PANalytical, Empyrean), using Cu Kα radiation (1.54 Å). Transmission electron microscopy analysis was performed using an in situ transmission electron microscope (TEM; JEM-3011 HR, JEOL). The chemical and surface states of the elements on the outermost surfaces of the prepared materials were examined using an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS; Thermo-Scientific K-Alpha X-ray spectrophotometer, USA). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured at room temperature with the excitation source of the 266 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser. The power of the excitation laser on the sample surface was 20 mW. The spectra were measured in the 300–900 nm range by using an ICCD detector equipped with a spectrometer (f = 0.5 m, Acton Research Co., Spectrograph 500i, USA), and an intensified CCD (PI-MAX3) (Princeton Instrument Co., IRY1024, USA).
Photocatalytic properties
The photocatalytic activities of the prepared NSs were evaluated by observing the degradation of aqueous methylene blue (MB) dye solution under irradiation by a 9 W UV-A lamp. In a typical experiment, 5 mg of the catalyst was dispersed in a 100 mL aqueous MB (100 mg L−1) solution, and the obtained suspension was magnetically stirred in the dark for 1 h to achieve adsorption–desorption equilibrium. During UV illumination, 3 mL of the suspension was periodically withdrawn from the reactor chamber, followed by centrifugation and filtration. The absorbance spectrum of the obtained clear solution was analyzed using a UV-vis spectroscope (Scana 3100).
Results and discussion
Hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs were synthesized through the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. This approach is similar to the conventional electrodeposition technique, where the galvanic cell structure is used instead of external power. The desired amount of Ag NWs was dispersed in a hydrothermal solution and was transferred into a hydrothermal reactor made of Al and kept in an oven for hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 1(I)). Here, the Al bottle served both as a sacrificial anode for the galvanic cell and a hydrothermal reactor. The Ag NWs that settled at the bottom of the Al container established Al–Ag contact, where the Ag NWs acted as a cathode (see Fig. 1(II)). In addition, the Ag NWs that are still dispersed in the solution would form Al–Ag contact at the sidewalls of the Al vessel, ensuring maximum contact-potential sites. The physical contact of two materials with different work functions, Al and Ag, creates a bias that can drive the necessary reaction for ZnO deposition.29
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal synthesis of Ag/ZnO hierarchical nanostructures. 
As the reduction potential of Al is more negative than that of Ag, Al loses electrons and transfers to the Ag NW cathode (Fig. 1(II)). The electrons reduce the dissolved oxygen from the electrolyte at the Ag NW cathode, and form OH− species. The formation of Zn(OH)2 followed by its dehydration initiates the growth of ZnO NRs on the Ag NW cathode (Fig. 1(III)). The chemical reactions occurring at the Al anode and Ag cathode, and the ZnO formation, can be expressed as eqn (1), (2), and (3), respectively. Al → Al3+ + 3e−(1) O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(2) Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O(3)

Fig. 2 shows the low- and high-magnification FESEM images of the hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs synthesized through galvanic replacement reaction. Fig. 2(a) shows the collection of Ag/ZnO hierarchical NSs. It can be seen that ZnO NR branches grew across the entire network of Ag NWs. The NSs were composed of a backbone made of Ag NWs with an average diameter and length of 100 nm and 20 μm, respectively, as can be seen in Fig. S1.† The ZnO NR nanobranches grew perpendicular to the side surface of the Ag NW backbone along its long axis. The enlarged FESEM image shown in Fig. 2(b) depicts the distinct morphology of the five-sided grown ZnO NRs with a 200 nm diameter. An unintentionally exposed Ag NW backbone further confirms the well-developed “trunk–branch” structure. ZnO NSs without the Ag NW backbone were also prepared for comparative studies. The pristine ZnO NSs had a sea-urchin-like morphology, with densely packed NRs, as can be seen in Fig. 2(c). A high-magnification FESEM image of an isolated ZnO NS is shown in Fig. 2(d). To confirm that the growth of Ag/ZnO hierarchical NSs is governed by the galvanic potential, a series of control experiments were carried out. The first control experiment was carried out under identical hydrothermal conditions in the glass bottle instead of the Al vessel as a hydrothermal reactor. Fig. S2† shows the FESEM images of the NSs synthesized in the glass bottle. The reaction did not result in a hierarchical structure; instead, only isolated ZnO NRs were formed. The Ag NWs introduced to the glass reactor could not form a galvanic cell structure without a sacrificial anode. Thus, in the absence of the necessary driving force, the ZnO NRs grow independently in the hydrothermal solution without interacting with dispersed Ag NWs. Similarly, without the presence of Ag NWs in the hydrothermal solution, only ZnO NRs are formed as presented in Fig. S3.† Another control experiment was performed by using a glass substrate coated with Ag NWs as a cathode, as shown in Fig. S4(a).† A galvanic-cell structure was formed by attaching Al foil as an anode on the Ag NW layer (see Fig. S4(b)†). After the hydrothermal reaction, the ZnO NRs were selectively grown only on the Ag NWs as shown in Fig. S4(c).† Growth of the ZnO NRs on the Ag NW cathode further confirms that the growth is based on the galvanic cell reaction.
 Fig. 2  FESEM images of the hierarchical Ag/ZnO and pristine ZnO nanostructures. (a) Low and (b) high magnification FESEM images of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures. (c) Low and (d) high magnification FESEM images of the pristine ZnO nanostructures. 
Further, it was found that the amount of Ag NWs introduced to the hydrothermal solution has a crucial effect on the formation of well-developed Ag/ZnO hierarchical NSs. A series of experiments were carried out by using hydrothermal solution with low, medium and high concentrations of Ag NWs. Fig. S4† shows FESEM images of the Ag/ZnO NSs synthesized in the hydrothermal solution containing 0.08 wt%, 0.17 wt% and 0.6 wt% Ag NWs, respectively. It is clearly seen that the presence of extremely low or high concentration of the Ag NWs in the hydrothermal solution results in random, irregular Ag/ZnO NSs with many by-products in the form of ZnO NSs or AgNWs. It should be noted that along with the regular Ag/ZnO NSs, individual ZnO NSs inevitably grow in the hydrothermal solution (during galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal reaction in the Al reactor). Thereby, when a low concentration Ag NW solution was used (0.08 wt% Ag NWs, Fig. S4(a)†), hydrothermal reaction products mostly consist of the ZnO NSs. On the other hand, hydrothermal reaction products synthesized from the solution having high concentration Ag NWs (0.6 wt% Ag NWs or more, Fig. S4(c)†) contain a large amount of “unutilized” Ag NWs, often in the form of large bundles. Our results suggest that regular and highly uniform hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs can be synthesized when the Ag NW concentration in the hydrothermal solution is higher than 0.1 wt.% and not more than 0.5 wt.%.
The microstructures of the synthesized NSs were further characterized with the use of XRD, and are presented in Fig. 3. The XRD results of the as-prepared Ag NWs showed sharp diffraction peaks at 2Θ 38.08°, 44.28°, and 64.48°, corresponding to the (111), (200), and (220) reflection planes of the face-centered cubic Ag structure (JCPDF #8937-22), respectively. The ZnO NSs showed distinct reflection peaks at 2Θ 31.76°, 34.4°, 36.24°, 56.6°, 62.88°, 66.32°, 67.96°, and 69.08°, corresponding to the (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (200), and (201) planes, respectively, of pure, close-packed hexagonal ZnO (blue line) (JCPDF #361451). The hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs showed both Ag and ZnO peaks, confirming the coexistence of these compounds within the structure. No diffraction peaks of other impurities were observed, suggesting the high crystalline purity of the Ag/ZnO NSs.
 Fig. 3  XRD diffraction patterns of the Ag/ZnO, ZnO and Ag nanostructures. 
The elemental composition of the hierarchical NSs was further characterized by the FESEM-EDS technique and presented in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) shows the FESEM image of an isolated Ag/ZnO NS selected for EDS characterization. The elemental mapping images presented in Fig. 4(b)–(d) confirm that the branches of the NS are composed of Zn and O elements, while the central backbone is Ag, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Photocatalytic properties of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures for MB photodegradation. Time dependent UV-VIS absorbance spectrum for (a) Ag/ZnO NSs, (b) pristine ZnO NSs and (c) pristine Ag NWs. (d) Plot of C/C0vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs. 
The formation of a distinct hierarchical structure was further confirmed via TEM analysis, and is shown in Fig. 5. The low-magnification, bright-field TEM image of a single Ag/ZnO NS clearly reveals the trunk–branch architecture of the structure, where the exposed Ag NW backbone is indicated by arrowheads (Fig. 5(a)). The enlarged view of the Ag NW/ZnO NR interfacial region clearly shows that ZnO nanobranches with a 124 ± 22 nm average diameter grew nearly perpendicular to the Ag NW surface (Fig. 5(b)). Further, the crystalline structures of the Ag NWs, ZnO NRs and their interface (the regions indicated by the white box) were studied using high-resolution TEM (HRTEM). Fig. 5(c) reveals a distinct interface between Ag and ZnO, where inter-planar lattice fringes with distances of 0.28 nm and 0.24 nm were assigned to the (002) plane of the hexagonal ZnO (ref. 35) and the (111) plane of the face-centered cubic Ag,36 respectively. It is well established that Ag NWs synthesized using a polyol method have a pentagonal cross-section and the ends are terminated by {111} facets as schematically shown in Fig. 5(d).37 Under galvanic cell conduction, the negatively charged Ag NW cathode will attract Zn cations followed by initiation of the ZnO nucleation. Once ZnO nucleation occurs on the (111) plane of the Ag, due to the low lattice mismatch parameter,38 subsequent growth of the ZnO NRs will be governed by the anisotropy of the ZnO crystal. The metastable polar (001) plane of the ZnO crystal has higher surface energy than other non-polar planes, so anisotropic growth of the ZnO NRs along the [001] direction can be observed.29,39
 Fig. 5  (a) Bright field TEM images of a single Ag/ZnO nanostructure selected for microstructural analysis. (b) High-magnification bright field TEM image of the Ag NW trunk–ZnO NR branch interface. (c) HRTEM image of the Ag/ZnO interface. (d) Graphical illustration of the Ag/ZnO cross-section. 
XPS measurements were carried out to explore the elemental composition and chemical states of the study samples. The XPS survey spectrum of the Ag/ZnO NSs presented in Fig. 6(a) reveals the presence of peaks corresponding to the Ag, O, and Zn elements.
 Fig. 6  XPS analysis of Ag/ZnO nanostructures. (a) XPS survey spectra of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures. High resolution spectra of O (b), Ag (c) and Zn (d) elements. 
The presence of a weak C 1s peak in the survey spectra at 285.1 eV can be attributed to the adventitious carbon that was formed mainly due to the exposure of the samples to an ambient atmosphere before XPS analysis. Fig. 6(b)–(d) show the high-resolution spectra of the O, Ag, and Zn species respectively. The enlarged spectra of the Zn 2p peak shown in Fig. 6(d) have two peaks (2p 3/2 and 2p 1/2) at 1019.4 and 1042.7 eV, respectively, which resulted from the implied multiple splitting of the 2p electrons in Zn(II). In addition, the O 1s peak of 529.8 eV implied that the O species existed as a Zn–O bond. The binding energies of Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 could be observed at 367.4 and 373.4 eV, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6(c). The XPS spectrum of Ag/ZnO did not show any other peak corresponding to Ag2O (367.8 eV) or AgO (367.4 eV), which confirmed that the Ag NW backbone is still in metallic form after hydrothermal reaction. It can be noted that the Ag 3d5/2 peak slightly shifted to the lower binding energies compared with the standard values (about 368.2 for bulk Ag (ref. 40)), which can be attributed to the interaction between the Ag and ZnO NSs.41
The photocatalytic properties of the NSs were investigated by degrading the MB dye, a commonly used model pollutant, under UV illumination. Fig. 7 shows the time-dependent absorbance spectra of the MB dye solution in the presence of the Ag/ZnO NS (Fig. 7(a)), pristine ZnO NS (Fig. 7(b)), and Ag NW (Fig. 7(c)) samples. It can be seen that the absorption peak at 665 nm gradually decreased over the reaction time, indicating reduced MB concentration in the solution. It can be noted that the reduction in the absorption peak was faster for the Ag/ZnO catalyst than that for the pristine ZnO. The absorption variation spectra measured for the pristine Ag NWs preformed for the control test showed that the MB concentration changes little after UV irradiation, indicating the negligible photocatalytic activity of the Ag NWs. To gain more information on the degradation rate of MB in the presence of photocatalyst materials, the concentration normalized with respect to that of the reference solution (C/C0) vs. the exposure time (t) was calculated from the absorbance at 665 nm, and is presented in Fig. 7(d). In the presence of the Ag/ZnO photocatalyst, complete degradation of MB was observed after 150 min UV irradiation. On the other hand, the degradation of MB in the presence of pristine ZnO NSs was only 28.7% during the same time period (it took about 280 min for MB in the presence of ZnO NSs to be completely degraded), indicating a 46.4% slower degradation rate compared to the Ag/ZnO catalyst. Obviously, the Ag NWs did not show any photocatalytic activity during the 300 min UV irradiation.
 Fig. 7  Photocatalytic properties of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures for MB photodegradation. Time dependent UV-VIS absorbance spectrum for (a) Ag/ZnO NSs, (b) pristine ZnO NSs and (c) pristine Ag NWs. (d) Plot of C/C0vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs. 
The photodegradation of MB by the semiconductor nanomaterials follows a pseudo-first-order kinetics derived from the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism, and its degradation kinetics was quantitatively determined from the following equation: ln(Ct/C0) = −kt,(4)where C0 and Ct are the concentrations of the dye at times 0 and t, respectively, and k is the pseudo-first-order rate constant.

Fig. 8(a) shows the time-dependent variation of ln(Ct/C0) for the studied photocatalyst materials. The reaction time constant k values for the hierarchical Ag/ZnO, pristine ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs were 0.023, 0.010, and 2.97 × 10−5 min−1, respectively. The results clearly show that the hierarchical Ag/ZnO NSs demonstrate superior photocatalytic activity compared to the pristine ZnO NSs owing to their novel hierarchical metal–semiconductor structure.
 Fig. 8  (a) Plot of ln(C/C0) vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs. (b) Photocatalytic stability of the Ag/ZnO NS photocatalyst for six cycles of the photodegradation test. 
One of the crucial factors determining the practical application of a photocatalyst material is its photocatalytic stability. Therefore, the cyclability of the Ag/ZnO photocatalyst was evaluated in this study by reusing the same photocatalyst powder after centrifugation recycling. As shown in Fig. 8(b), there was nearly no decrease in the photocatalytic activity after six cycles of the photocatalyst test, indicating good photocatalytic stability. Moreover, the hierarchical morphology of the Ag/ZnO NSs was well preserved after multiple photodegradation test cycles, as can be seen in Fig. S5.†
The photocatalytic mechanism of the hierarchical Ag/ZnO metal–semiconductor NSs under UV illumination was studied as schematically illustrated in Fig. 9. In this hierarchical metal–semiconductor heterostructure, enhancement of the photocatalytic activity is mainly ascribed to the synergetic effects of the metal backbone and the semiconductor branch. Photo-induced electrons will be effectively injected into the Ag NWs from the conduction band of the ZnO.
 Fig. 9  Photocatalytic dye degradation mechanism over Ag/ZnO NSs. (a) Schematic band diagram of the Ag/ZnO metal–semiconductor junction. (b) Dye photodegradation mechanism over the Ag/ZnO hierarchical photocatalyst. 
The remaining holes at the valence band will be transferred to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and will be involved in the oxidation reaction (see Fig. 9(a)). The highly conductive Ag NW backbone promotes more effective charge separation, significantly reducing the recombination. The Ag NW backbone, acting as an extended conducting pass for the electrons, provides fast electron/hole transfer to the reaction site, thus enhancing the degradation reaction (see Fig. 9(b)). Moreover, a hierarchically assembled structure provides a large specific surface area and more accessible active sites for the absorption and diffusion of the dye molecules. In addition, the branched structure of ZnO NRs is beneficial for enhanced light absorption through multiple photons scattering and trapping.
Suppression of the charge recombination in the Ag/ZnO nanostructures was examined by measuring the room temperature PL spectra. Fig. 10 shows the room temperature PL spectra of the Ag/ZnO and ZnO nanostructures. In general, ZnO exhibits two distinct PL peaks at the UV and visible ranges, which are attributed to the near-band-edge (NBE) emissions and deep level emissions (DLE), respectively.42–45
 Fig. 10  Room temperature PL spectra for the Ag/ZnO and ZnO nanostructures. 
The DLE peak is a combination of green and yellow emissions and often ascribed to the intrinsic structural defects and impurities.46 Both nanostructures demonstrate broad DLE peaks centered at ∼590 nm where the intensity of the DLE peak for the Ag/ZnO NSs is lower than that of the pristine ZnO NSs. In addition, the NBE emission of the Ag/ZnO NSs is enhanced while it is almost undetectable for the pristine ZnO NSs. Similar behavior of the NBE and DLE was observed by M. Mahanti et al.47 and N. Zhang et al.48 for the ZnO NSs loaded with Ag and Au nanoparticles. This was attributed to the suppressed recombination between the electrons in deep/surface level defects and the holes in the valence band, as well as effective charge transfer from the conduction band of the ZnO to the Ag as shown in Fig. 9(a). Therefore, it can be concluded that the Ag in the Ag/ZnO NS photocatalyst acts as a bridge to effectively transfer the photogenerated electrons from the ZnO to the reaction solution.
Conclusion
In conclusion, hierarchical, metal–semiconductor nanostructures (NSs) composed of ZnO nanorod (NR) branches and a backbone made of Ag nanowire were successfully synthesized using the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal method. Here, a galvanic cell structure was achieved using an Al reservoir, which served as both a hydrothermal reactor and a sacrificial anode. It formed contact potential with the Ag NWs, providing the directional growth of the ZnO NRs branched on the specific facet of the Ag NWs. The as-formed metal–semiconductor hierarchical NSs demonstrated higher photocatalytic activity than the pristine ZnO NSs without a metal backbone. The enhanced photocatalytic performance was attributed to the synergetic effect of the highly conductive Ag NW backbone and hierarchical ZnO branches, showing 46.4% faster photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) compared to the pristine ZnO. This simple, large-scale processing method may prove considerably important in the synthesis of other multi-component NSs for solar energy conversion application.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the ITER Technology R&D Program – “Study on the laser aided diverter diagnostics of ITER burning plasma”, through the National Fusion Research Institute (NFRI) of Korea funded by the Korean Government and the Priority Research Centers Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2010-0020077).
References
I. K. Konstantinou and T. A. Albanis, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 49, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Khataee, M. N. Pons and O. Zahraa, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 168, 451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasr, C. Eid, R. Habchi and P. Miele, ChemSusChem, 2018, 3023–3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Peleyeju and O. A. Arotiba, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2018, 1389–1411 RSC .
S. Chandrasekaran, C. Bowen, P. Zhang, Z. Li, Q. Yuan, X. Ren and L. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11078 RSC .
S. Bagheri, A. Termehyousefi and T. O. Do, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4548 RSC .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 11 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
R. M. Navarro Yerga, M. C. A. Galvan, F. del Valle, J. A. Villoria de la Mano and J. L. G. Fierro, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hsu and D. H. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15538 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumari, S. Sharma, N. Singh, A. Verma, V. R. Satsangi, S. Dass and R. Shrivastav, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18216 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guo, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao, J. Han, Y. Li, B. Wang and T. Cui, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13408 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, X. Wang, H. Zhou, T. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, C. He, B. Wang, J. Zhang and H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 16755 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, M. Shao, F. Ning, S. Xu, Z. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 231 CrossRef .
T. Lopes, L. Andrade, H. A. Ribeiro and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11601 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, H. B. Tao, J. Miao, H. Bin Yang and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14950 RSC .
X. Zhao, P. Wang, Z. Yan and N. Ren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 609, 59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Noh, K. Sun, C. Choi, M. Niu, M. Yang, K. Xu, S. Jin and D. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 351 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Khataee and M. B. Kasiri, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 328, 8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, W. Guo, J. Qiu, X. Mou, A. Li, J. P. Claverie and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24 RSC .
L. Kornblum, D. P. Fenning, J. Faucher, J. Hwang, A. Boni, M. G. Han, M. D. Morales-Acosta, Y. Zhu, E. I. Altman, M. L. Lee, C. H. Ahn, F. J. Walker and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 377 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 894 RSC .
C. Peng, X. Yang, Y. Li, H. Yu, H. Wang and F. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Jiu, T. Araki, M. Nogi, T. Sugahara, S. Nagao, H. Koga, P. He and K. Suganuma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 7, 51 Search PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, W. Zhou, G. Tian and H. Fu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4041 RSC .
H. Chen, M. Wen, Z. Huang, Q. Wu, J. Liu and T. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 600 RSC .
Z. Zheng, Z. S. Lim, Y. Peng, L. You, L. Chen and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Song, Z.-D. Gao, J. J. Kelly and X.-H. Xia, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, C148 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Brevnov, T. S. Olson, G. P. López and P. Atanassov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17531 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Tan, S. A. B. Azmansah, H. Zhu, Q. H. Xu and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1 Search PubMed .
C. F. Tan, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(7), 7661–7670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Cauda, S. Stassi, A. Lamberti, M. Morello, C. Fabrizio Pirri and G. Canavese, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, S. Sain, B. Satpati, S. R. Bhattacharyya and S. K. Pradhan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 23101 RSC .
M. B. Gebeyehu, T. F. Chala, S. Y. Chang, C. M. Wu and J. Y. Lee, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16139 RSC .
D. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Mayousse, C. Celle, D. Bellet and J. P. Simonato, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 16139–16148 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Fan, Y. Ding, D. Y. Liu, Z. Q. Tian and L. W. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, K. Keis, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13(12), 4395–4398 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Seah, I. S. Gilmore and G. Beamson, Surf. Interface Anal., 1998, 649, 642 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng and K. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Allabergenov, U. Shaislamov, H. Shim, M.-J. Lee, A. Matnazarov and B. Choi, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 494 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Yang, Q. X. Zhao, M. Willander, X. J. Liu, M. Fahlman and J. H. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Lin, Q. Zhu, Z. Tian, J. Dai, S. Wang and C. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Qin, Y. Xue, P. Yu, B. Zhang, L. Wang and R. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4 Search PubMed .
E. J. Guidelli, O. Baffa and D. R. Clarke, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Mahanti and D. Basak, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 542, 110 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, W. Tang, P. Wang, X. Zhang and Z. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 3301 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce01305eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for the galvanic-potential-enhanced hydrothermal synthesis of Ag/ZnO hierarchical nanostructures.	 
Al → Al3+ + 3e−	(1)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−	(2)
Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 2  FESEM images of the hierarchical Ag/ZnO and pristine ZnO nanostructures. (a) Low and (b) high magnification FESEM images of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures. (c) Low and (d) high magnification FESEM images of the pristine ZnO nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD diffraction patterns of the Ag/ZnO, ZnO and Ag nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photocatalytic properties of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures for MB photodegradation. Time dependent UV-VIS absorbance spectrum for (a) Ag/ZnO NSs, (b) pristine ZnO NSs and (c) pristine Ag NWs. (d) Plot of C/C0vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Bright field TEM images of a single Ag/ZnO nanostructure selected for microstructural analysis. (b) High-magnification bright field TEM image of the Ag NW trunk–ZnO NR branch interface. (c) HRTEM image of the Ag/ZnO interface. (d) Graphical illustration of the Ag/ZnO cross-section.	 

 	Fig. 6  XPS analysis of Ag/ZnO nanostructures. (a) XPS survey spectra of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures. High resolution spectra of O (b), Ag (c) and Zn (d) elements.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalytic properties of the Ag/ZnO nanostructures for MB photodegradation. Time dependent UV-VIS absorbance spectrum for (a) Ag/ZnO NSs, (b) pristine ZnO NSs and (c) pristine Ag NWs. (d) Plot of C/C0vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs.	 
ln(Ct/C0) = −kt,	(4)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Plot of ln(C/C0) vs. time for MB photodegradation in the presence of Ag/ZnO NSs, ZnO NSs, and Ag NWs. (b) Photocatalytic stability of the Ag/ZnO NS photocatalyst for six cycles of the photodegradation test.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocatalytic dye degradation mechanism over Ag/ZnO NSs. (a) Schematic band diagram of the Ag/ZnO metal–semiconductor junction. (b) Dye photodegradation mechanism over the Ag/ZnO hierarchical photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 10  Room temperature PL spectra for the Ag/ZnO and ZnO nanostructures.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce01305e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
