Toward practical solar hydrogen production – an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00699G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00699G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908-1971Toward practical solar hydrogen production – an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge

        
          
            Jin Hyun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dharmesh 
            Hansora
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pankaj 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ji-Wook 
            Jang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jae Sung 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jiwjang@unist.ac.kr; jlee1234@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      25th August 2018
    First published on 11th March 2019AbstractSolar water splitting is a promising approach to transform sunlight into renewable, sustainable and green hydrogen energy. There are three representative ways of transforming solar radiation into molecular hydrogen, which are the photocatalytic (PC), photoelectrochemical (PEC), and photovoltaic–electrolysis (PV–EC) routes. Having the future perspective of green hydrogen economy in mind, this review article discusses devices and systems for solar-to-hydrogen production including comparison of the above solar water splitting systems. The focus is placed on a critical assessment of the key components needed to scale up PEC water splitting systems such as materials efficiency, cost, elemental abundancy, stability, fuel separation, device operability, cell architecture, and techno-economic aspects of the systems. The review follows a stepwise approach and provides (i) a summary of the basic principles and photocatalytic materials employed for PEC water splitting, (ii) an extensive discussion of technologies, procedures, and system designs, and (iii) an introduction to international demonstration projects, and the development of benchmarked devices and large-scale prototype systems. The task of scaling up of laboratory overall water splitting devices to practical systems may be called “an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge”.
Jin Hyun Kim
Jin Hyun Kim received his undergraduate degree from the University of Seoul, Republic of Korea, in 2012 and joined Prof. Jae Sung Lee's research group as an integrated MS + PhD candidate of Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his PhD on the subject of semiconductor photoelectrode development for photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion in 2016. He is now working as a postdoctoral fellow in Jae Sung Lee's group (2012–2018) at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) to undertake a project to develop metal oxide-based solar energy harvesting, conversion, and storage.
Dharmesh Hansora
Dharmesh Hansora is pursuing his PhD degree (2017 onwards) under the guidance of Prof. Jae Sung Lee at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, South Korea. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degree in Chemical Engineering from MS University of Baroda, India. His current research area includes benchmarking of devices and scale-up to large-scale systems for solar water splitting.
Pankaj Sharma
Pankaj Sharma received his PhD degree in Chemistry from Jiwaji University, India, in 2008. He worked as a Senior Lecturer at Lovely Professional University, Punjab, and MM University, Haryana, India, from 2008–2009. In December 2009 he joined Myongji University, Republic of Korea, as a Research Professor. After that he worked at the Korea Institute of Energy Research as a Research Scientist (2010–2012), and then as a Research Professor at Chungnam National University (2012–2017), Republic of Korea. Presently, he is working as a Senior Research Scientist with Prof. Ji-Wook Jang at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. His research interests include the synthesis of multifunctional, hybrid and nanomaterials for their applications in energy, environmental and biomedical fields.
Ji-Wook Jang
Ji-Wook Jang studied Chemistry at Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Republic of Korea, and obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the same university in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Jae Sung Lee. He continued extensive research on different types of photocatalysts, and photocatalytic systems while working at Boston College, USA, and Institute for Solar Fuels, Germany, under the guidance of Prof. Dunwei Wang, and Prof. Roel van de Krol, respectively. He is presently working as an Assistant Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering from 2016. His research interest includes the photochemical production of future energy carriers (H2, H2O2, NH3, etc.) and high valued chemicals.
Jae Sung Lee
Jae Sung Lee received his BS degree from Seoul National University in 1975, MS degree from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1977, Korea, and PhD degree from Stanford University in 1984. After a brief tenure at Catalytica Inc. as a research fellow, he returned to his native Korea to become a professor of chemical engineering at Pohang University of Science and Technology. He and his group moved to Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology in 2013. He has been leading a research group of the “eco-friendly catalysis and energy laboratory”, whose research interests are focused on photocatalysis for energy applications, electrocatalysis for fuel cells, and heterogeneous catalysis of CO2 utilization. In photocatalysis, his research focuses on the development of photocatalytic solid semiconductor materials for solar energy conversion using heterojunction, surface modification, doping and solid solution technologies.
1. Introduction
A fundamental solution to ever-growing concerns on global warming, air pollution, and energy security is to replace the current carbon-rich fossil fuels with renewable and environment-friendly carbon-free or carbon-neutral energy sources.1,2Fig. 1 provides a brief view of the energy reserves available on the earth, which demonstrates the dominant position of solar energy among all renewable and non-renewable energy sources. The total sum of recoverable energy from all the reserves is around 1% of the solar energy supplied to the earth surface by the sun. Moreover, the solar energy (173000 TW)3 supplied to the total surface (land and water) of the earth is nearly 9600 times larger than today's total energy consumption of the world (17.91 TW in 2017).4 Evidently, solar energy is much more than enough to meet all energy needs for the lifetime of the solar system, but the challenge lies in the development of economically viable technologies for its harnessing, storage, and utilization.
 Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of solar energy with other energy resources. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from the IEA/SHC Solar Update, copyright 2009. (b) Worldwide mean solar irradiance variation. (Source: https://www.3tier.com/static/ttcms/us/images/support/maps/3tier_solar_irradiance.jpg.) Reproduced with permission from the Vaisala Inc., copyright 2014. (c) Solar thermal power plant. (Source: https://www.solarreserve.com/en/.). Reproduced with permission from the Solar Reserve, copyright 2016. (d) Silicon PV panels and wind turbines. (Source: https://www.shutterstock.com/image-photo/wind-generator-solar-panel-81569431?irgwc=1&utm_medium=Affiliate&utm_campaign=Skimbit%20Ltd.&utm_source=10078&utm_term=.) Reproduced with permission from Shutterstock, copyright 2018. (e) Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) implemented on a building's glass windows. (Source: http://www.elettronews.com/celle-solari-a-sensibilizzante-organico-con-materiali-a-band-gap/.) (f) Biofuel (bioethanol) production from corn. (Source: https://greentumble.com/how-does-biofuel-work/.) (g) Photoelectrochemical water splitting for solar hydrogen production. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
There are several technologies available for solar energy utilization – solar thermal (Fig. 1c), photovoltaic (PV) (Fig. 1d and e), and solar fuels (Fig. 1f and g). Today, PV represents the most widely disseminated technology and is one of the fastest growing industries.7 But PV produces electricity, which has an intrinsic difficulty in terms of storage. Considering the intermittent nature of solar energy, converting solar energy into easily storable chemical energy or a fuel has emerged as an ideal option of solar energy utilization. Among the potential solar fuels, hydrogen (H2) generated from solar water splitting (Fig. 1g) has received attention as the most promising fuel especially for powering fuel cell vehicles.
Hydrogen has a higher gravimetric heating value (141.9 MJ kg−1) than most of the conventional fossil fuels (methane 55.5 MJ kg−1, gasoline 47.5 MJ kg−1, diesel 44.8 MJ kg−1, and methanol 20.0 MJ kg−1), and burns with zero emission producing only harmless water. But H2 is industrially produced mostly by the reforming of fossil fuels (most commonly natural gas containing mainly CH4) that emit a large amount of CO2. Hence, there is an urgent need to establish a sustainable, carbon-neutral, and high efficiency H2 production system on an industrial scale at a reasonable cost.8–13 PEC water splitting has a high potential to become such a solar hydrogen production pathway. Extensive techno-economic analysis (TEA) reports have been recently published to evaluate the viability of H2 production by using renewable energy sources including water electrolysis.14,15
There have already been several comprehensive reviews published on sunlight-driven water splitting with an emphasis on materials development,1,16–19 involved physical chemistry,20 and systems.20–25 However, our present review focuses more on technological and engineering aspects to establish a large scale solar hydrogen production system. We discuss three solar-driven water splitting systems based on photocatalytic (PC), photovoltaic–electrochemical (PV–EC) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells. We attempt to evaluate the viability of the practical large scale PEC system from technical, economical, and operational points of view and discuss practical cell architectures and conceptual designs. Large-scale demonstration projects that have taken place worldwide are also introduced. Some of the miniature laboratory devices for solar hydrogen production have been called “artificial leaves”.26,27 Then the subject of this review regarding upscaling to practical systems may be termed “artificial plants” or “solar fuel farms”, thus here we call it “an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge”.
2. Photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting
2.1 Principle and mechanism
Overall water splitting into H2 and O2 molecules is an energetically uphill reaction requiring a standard free energy change (ΔG°) of 237.2 kJ mol−1, or a potential of 1.23 eV per electron. Two electrons are needed to produce a H2 molecule and four holes to produce an O2 molecule according to eqn (1) and (2):Absorption of light: SC + hν (>Eg) → e−cb + h+vb Water oxidation (OER): 2H2O + 4h+vb → O2 + 4H+(1) Proton reduction (HER): 2H + 2e−cb → H2(2) Overall water splitting: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2 ΔG° = 237.2 kJ mol−1(3)
SC indicates a semiconductor which acts as a light absorber. Therefore, to perform water splitting, photons with an energy of >1.23 eV (corresponding to λ < 1010 nm) are needed to generate photo-excited charge carriers and carry out redox reactions at the respective surface sites of a photocatalyst as shown in Fig. 2. In practice, the photons are supplied from sunlight with an energy spectrum shown in Fig. 2a. Thus, a photocatalyst must have a band gap energy (Eg = ECB − EVB) large enough to split water, as well as appropriate band positions to drive the two half reactions by using the photogenerated electrons (ecb−) and holes (hvb+) upon light irradiation. Since both half reactions require significant amounts of kinetic overpotentials, a practical photocatalyst should have a band gap energy in the range of 1.6–2.4 eV to drive the overall water splitting.
 Fig. 2  Solar energy-driven water splitting using a light absorber. If a single light absorber is used, the energy of the photon (hν) should be greater than 1.23 eV. Otherwise, multiple light absorbers are needed to drive the overall water splitting. (a) Spectrum of AM 1.5 G (i.e. 1 sun condition, 100 mW cm−2 power density). (b) Photoelectrolysis of water is an energetically uphill reaction. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2009. (c) Photochemical redox reactions for overall water splitting driven by light of sufficient energy (hν > Eg) to excite electron/hole pairs. E(hν) is the voltage achievable from photons with an energy of hν and Eg is the voltage that the light absorber can achieve using photons. ηloss includes potential loss from the internal resistance (material's own mobility and charge transfer efficiency), quenching of the photon's energy, and overpotential for oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions (ηOER and ηHER). (d) Technical challenges of photon-driven overall water splitting. 
If the overall water splitting takes place in a PEC cell made of a photoanode (n-type semiconductor) and a photocathode (p-type semiconductor) as shown in Fig. 2c, the process proceeds stepwise: (i) light-induced generation of electron–hole pairs that induce the photocurrents of an n-type semiconductor material as a photoanode, resulting in the formation of electronic charge carriers (excited electrons and holes); (ii) oxidation of water at the photoanode by holes; (iii) transport of H+ ions from the photoanode to the photocathode through the electrolyte, and electron transport through the external circuit to the photocathode; (iv) reduction of hydrogen ions at the photocathode by the electrons. If the semiconductor is immersed in an aqueous electrolyte, band bending near the semiconductor/electrolyte interface provides a driving force for the separation of the photogenerated charge carriers. Band bending can also be generated through the use of a p/n junction or other solid state junctions analogous to a solar cell. The excited holes must reach the surface of the photoanode to drive the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) while the electrons are consumed by the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at a counter electrode.
A simplified schematic description of the overall water splitting and related technical challenges are summarized in Fig. 2d. Major factors to consider are high solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency, cost competitiveness relative to other H2 production technologies, and stability, which are the major challenges in general for realizing a practical solar H2 production system.28–30 The system is usually composed of 4 components: (i) a photo-electrolysis device, (ii) an electrolyte, (iii) a reactor and (iv) a membrane or separator. The photo-electrolysis device, the core of the system and the main subject of this review, has two major issues of current research – criteria for material selection and efficiency-related factors. The criteria of material selection include the fabrication method, earth abundancy of the elements, cost, and environmental effects. Regarding environmental effects, the solar H2 production does not emit CO2 and is regarded as eco-friendly resembling natural photosynthesis. Extensive reviews and perspectives31,32 are available on strategies and factors to enhance the efficiency, and thus this review will not cover them in detail, but bring the established efficiency and evaluate its viability for practical applications.
2.2 Solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency
The performance of PEC water splitting cells is most commonly quantified by the STH conversion efficiency (ηSTH), by which all water splitting systems and devices can be reliably compared.20,33–39 It is determined under standard solar irradiation generated with the Air Mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) filter or one sun (100 mW cm−12) with no applied bias.36,39 The STH efficiency is defined as the amount of chemical (H2) energy produced against the incident solar energy; (4)
The rate of H2 production can be directly measured by gas chromatography or mass spectrometry. Alternatively, it can be determined from the generated photocurrent density (Jsc); (5)where ηF is the Faradaic efficiency of H2 or O2 production, i.e. the efficiency with which charges (electrons/holes) contribute to HER or OER.
There have been a number of studies and reviews20,33,35,40 that report theoretical efficiencies for solar-driven water splitting cells of various configurations. A maximum ηSTH efficiency of ∼31.1% was calculated for PEC water splitting with two light absorbers. The PV–EC system can reach a maximum ηSTH of 28.7% using an efficient bipolar alkaline electrolyzer (73% efficiency) and 2jn PV cells with ∼41% power conversion efficiency (PCE), and an ηSTH of 31.8% using the same efficient electrolyzer and 3jn III–V material-based PV cells with a PCE of ∼43.5%.41 Hisatomi et al.19 showed that the maximum achievable ηSTH is 1.7% for a PC system with a four photon configuration at an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 1%. However, AQYs of 62, 40 and 30% were needed to achieve an ηSTH of 10% at wavelengths of 600, 700 and 800 nm, respectively.19 The experimental STH efficiencies are discussed in detail in Section 3, but the trend is clear that the highest efficiencies are observed for PV–EC systems, followed by PEC systems, and PC systems show the lowest ηSTH values.
An important analysis was reported by Lewis and coworkers,41 who calculated the maximum efficiency and optimal band gap of light absorbers for PEC tandem systems with three configurations as depicted in Fig. 3; a single light absorber (S2), a side-by-side dual photoabsorber (D4), and a stacked dual photoabsorber (D4).20,40 Previous works reported that the S2 and D4 systems could reach theoretical efficiencies of 29–31% and 40–41%, respectively, thermodynamically without any account of losses.38,40,42 In the S2 system shown, the absorption of a photon (hν) by a semiconductor with a band gap (Eg) creates an electron–hole pair that can be separated by the space charge layer to generate a photo-potential as indicated by the splitting of the Fermi level in Fig. 3a. The maximum theoretical ηSTH for this S2 system is 11.2% for Eg of 2.26 eV. Note that this value falls far short of the thermodynamic limit of ∼30%, highlighting the significant losses associated with reaction overpotentials and the need for better catalysts.
 Fig. 3  (a) Single light absorber-2 electron system (S2) configuration. (b) Maximum theoretical ηSTH of the S2 configuration as a function of the bandgap of the photoabsorber. (c) Dual light absorber (D4) of side-by-side configuration. (d) Maximum theoretical ηSTH of side-by-side D4. (e) Stacked D4 configuration, (f) maximum theoretical ηSTH of stacked D4. Images (b, d and f) were reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
The combination of two absorbers increases the available free energy (Δμex). This free energy must be greater than the energy needed for water splitting (1.23 eV) plus the overpotential losses at both anode and cathode, ηOER and ηHER, for the water splitting reaction to occur. Schematics in Fig. 3c and e show the relation of band gaps and photo-voltages for an ideal two light absorber (side-by-side and stacked configurations) tandem photoelectrolysis device in which the anode is the top absorber. Free energy losses in each absorber (Vloss) and catalytic overpotentials for each half-reaction (η) are fundamental loss pathways. The maximum ηSTH is 15.5% for a dual side-by-side light absorber with photoabsorber(s) of the same band gap of 1.59 eV. In comparison, the maximum ηSTH for a dual stacked light absorber system is 22.8% with bottom and top photoabsorbers having Eg of 1.23 eV and 1.84 eV, respectively. These values provide a baseline for reasonable device efficiencies, which can be projected for materials designs within these ranges of band gaps.40
2.3 Types of solar driven water splitting devices
Sustainable solar H2 production systems are based on three water splitting systems19,23,43–46 as schematically depicted in Fig. 4; (i) particulate PC systems, (ii) PEC water splitting cells, and (iii) PV–EC systems. In a particulate PC system, the photocatalyst powders are dispersed in the medium, and thus the charge transfer pathway is significantly shorter (several micrometers) than usual charge collectors in the other systems (sometimes tens of meters). Since both H2 and O2 are generated from each of the PC particles, a separate gas separator is needed. The system is the simplest with only a light absorber and an electrocatalyst. But when the Z-scheme is used, the system becomes D4 and needs a charge mediator adding complexity.
 Fig. 4  Various photo-driven water splitting systems and their charge flows upon light absorption; (a) PC, (b) PEC and (c) PV–EC systems. Typical performance data acquired by these systems are also shown – H2, O2 gas evolution from PC, current matching of the photoanode and photocathode for PEC, and current matching of the PV cell and electrocatalyst (OEC, HEC combined) for the PV–EC system. They also show how to determine the STH efficiency from each system: (a) PC system requires measuring H2 produced per illumination area and time (μmole cm−2 h−1). (b) PEC (photoanode–photocathode) system requires two electrode J–V curves, and the operating point is the photoanode–photocathode cell's short circuit current density, which corresponds to the current density at 0.0 V bias. (c) PV–EC system requires J–V curves of PV and EC, and operating point will be the PV–EC cell's short circuit current density. All data were assumed values for demonstration purposes. For systems like (b) and (c), faradaic efficiency of the reaction is usually confirmed before calculating ηSTH from the current density generated from the system. 
In a PV–EC system, independent power is generated by a PV device, which is connected to electrocatalysts. Thus, the performances of PV and electrocatalysts are of primary importance, while charge transfer between them does not matter. The light absorber is completely out of water, and hence, stability against corrosion in the aqueous medium is of little concern. Also, sizes of PV and EC components can be freely modulated because they have very different balance of system (BOS). The BOS denotes auxiliary components needed for operating the device such as piping, controller, fuel or charge transfer roads, which will be depicted in more detail later. A disadvantage of the PV–EC system is the highest complexity in PV designs, but most of the related technologies are already mature and commercialized.
In a PEC cell, photoelectrodes are connected to charge collectors, and only the light absorber side of the photoelectrode contacts the liquid medium while the charge collector is isolated. Fuel separation can be achieved spatially because H2 and O2 evolve from different electrodes. Band bending is quite obvious relative to PC along the photoanode and photocathode for facile charge separation and transfer. A unique semiconductor–liquid junction (SLJ) is established as described above, but it is also possible to use a semiconductor with a buried junction. For these cases of semiconductor–semiconductor junction (SSJ) (e.g. Pt/TiO2/p/n-Si), metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) (e.g. Pt/SiO2/n-Si), or electrocatalyst–metal oxide–semiconductor (e.g. Ni/SnO2/p/n-Si as photoanode),47 their driving force of charge transfer comes from the built-in potential from the interface of solid state materials, not from the semiconductor|electrolyte interface. An extensive review on such principles and examples has been published recently by Bae et al.48
Performance figures of merits for (i) particulate PC systems, (ii) PEC water splitting cells, and (iii) PV–EC systems are discussed in the rest of this paper. For instance, (i) gas evolution for PC, (ii) J–V curves of photoelectrodes and operating point of PEC cells, and (iii) J–V curves of PV cells and electrochemical cells composed of electrocatalyst-based electrodes are presented as typical examples in Fig. 4.
The PEC cells can be operated in different configurations as summarized in Fig. 5. The basic form is either an n-type photoanode–H2 evolution catalytic cathode (HEC) (Fig. 5a), or a p-type photocathode– O2 evolution catalytic anode (OEC) (Fig. 5b). But these single light absorber PEC systems need bias voltage to compensate for the overvoltages and other losses. For spontaneous water splitting, another light absorber is introduced as a photoanode–photocathode tandem cell (Fig. 5c) or a photoanode–photovoltaic (PEC–PV) tandem cell (Fig. 5d) for unbiased operation. Relative to the electrocatalytic water splitting, the PEC cell can reduce the externally supplied power (external bias) or possibly eliminate it completely for overall water splitting. This is accomplished by the photovoltage generated from the photoelectrodes (Vph).49 For instance, the photoanode replaces the OEC anode, while the photocathode replaces the HEC cathode of the electrocatalytic cell to conduct half reactions for water splitting with reduced biases as much as Vph, Fig. 5a and b. If the sum of Vph of the system is larger than E(H2/H2O) + overpotentials of HER/OER (∼1.6 V), the PEC cell can conduct overall water splitting without any applied bias, Fig. 5c and d. Mayer49 arranged Vph achieved from many types of photoelectrodes to show that high Vph (0.8–1.0 V) and Jph (>10 mA cm−2) were achievable mostly by the so called “PV grade, buried junction type” photoelectrodes as discussed later (part 4).
 Fig. 5  Types of PEC cells for water splitting. (a) Photoanode–HEC cathode, (b) photocathode–OEC anode, (c) photoanode–photocathode tandem cell, and (d) photoanode–photovoltaic (PEC–PV) tandem cell for unbiased overall water splitting. Graphs below each figure are examples of J–V curves and operating points achieved from the system. Max ABPE (applied bias to photocurrent efficiency = Jph × (1.23 V – applied bias)/P(100 mW cm−2, 1 sun condition)) indicates maximum power density achievable from the system. Description and denotation were reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. 
3. Current status of solar water splitting at laboratory scales
Extensive research studies of the past 45 years have observed great advancements in converting sunlight to H2 as a future energy carrier by PC, PEC and PV–EC. In addition to a fundamental understanding of the photon-assisted water splitting reaction with photocatalytic semiconductors, high ηSTH's have been achieved enough to consider practical solar hydrogen production through scale-up of laboratory results. In this section, we summarize and evaluate the past advancements and current status of the photon-driven water splitting at laboratory scales.
3.1 Particulate photocatalysis
The PC water splitting is the simplest solar hydrogen production system with just light and water. As in the schematic image of Fig. 6, the photogenerated charge carriers (h+ and e−) should diffuse rapidly within their lifetimes to respective active sites (HER and OER) on the surface of the semiconductor usually decorated with co-catalysts (HEC and OEC) for high efficiency. Even though the PC system needs the smallest complexity for achieving OWS, there are still many requirements for the light absorber of a proper band gap, band edge potentials, and stability in aqueous medium. In addition, it is difficult to control the charge carriers since there is no applied bias.50 Hence, viable light absorbers for PC systems are extremely limited compared to PEC and PV systems, and their efficiency is relatively much lower as a result of this difficulty.
 Fig. 6  Importance of reaction selectivity for photocatalysis. (a) Energetics of photocatalysis (energetically downhill) and “artificial photosynthesis” (energetically uphill). (b) Selectivity improvement of the photocatalyst via application of a cocatalyst (HEC, OEC) for suppression of unproductive back reactions (HOR, ORR). Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
It is also necessary to mention the importance of selectivity functions of photocatalysts in PC water splitting systems. Since HER and OER of water splitting occur on the same PC particle in most cases, backward reactions of HOR (hydrogen oxidation reaction) and ORR (oxygen reduction reaction) occur readily, which are energetically more favorable. Osterloh51 illustrated this issue by explaining two possible reaction pathways (Fig. 6) – usual photocatalysis that includes all possible reactions and “artificial photosynthesis” that we specifically want. While photocatalysts can catalyze both energetically uphill (e.g. H2 production) and downhill (consumption of H2 by hole) reactions, application of HEC and OEC can greatly reduce the chance of the backward reactions to occur. The application of these co-catalyst is in fact quite general in photocatalysis and especially application of HEC is often mandatory to have a high efficiency.
Besides ηSTH as the major efficiency, apparent quantum yield (AQY) is a commonly used figure of merit for assessing the efficiency of a PC system.52 The AQY is defined as (6)where n = number of electrons involved in the photocatalytic reaction, R = the production rate of molecules and I = rate of incident photons. Ultimately, AQY of ∼100% till its band gap will grant the theoretical ηSTH corresponding to Eg of the photocatalyst. In reality, AQY at 420 nm is only ∼20%50 even for some of the best photocatalysts known today.
Three selected examples of overall water splitting (OWS) under visible light are introduced in Fig. 7. A pioneering work on successful OWS under visible light (<510 nm) was reported in 2006 by Domen and his coworkers.53,54 Before this work, OWS was achieved only under UV light, and visible light water splitting was observed only for half reactions (HER/OER) in the presence of a sacrificial agent. The solid solution (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) was synthesized by mixing GaN and ZnO at 850 °C for ∼15 h under NH3 to obtain yellow powders shown in Fig. 7b. A key to the success is core–shell Rh@Cr2O3 particles as a co-catalyst, which promoted HER while suppressing the reverse reaction of water formation. The catalyst showed stability for 35 h in aqueous H2SO4 solution (pH 4.5) and generated nearly 10.8 mmol H2, which represented a marked improvement from its earlier version RuO2/(Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx)54 (Table 1). Recently, C3N4 has received much attention as a metal-free conjugated photocatalyst for stable visible light water splitting.50,55 With carbon dots (CDots) as a co-catalyst, a CDots–C3N4 nanocomposite photocatalyst showed quite high ηSTH of 2.0%, a robust stability of 4800 h, and generated H2 at a remarkable rate of 8.4 μmol h−155 (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  Single step PC water splitting systems. (a) Energy diagram. Redrawn from ref. 50 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Photographic image of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) yellowish solid solution obtained by mixing GaN and ZnO. Photocatalytic performance of Rh@Cr2O3-loaded (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) under visible light (>400 nm) for 35 h with evacuation every 5 h. (red; H2, blue; O2). Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2006. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of C3N4 and CDots–C3N4 nanocomposites, and the time variation H2 and O2 production under >420 nm irradiation using a 300 W Xe lamp for the CDots–C3N4 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (d) Overall water splitting on a greenish BiVO4 (GBVO4·Bi1−xInxV1−xMoxO4) photocatalyst obtained by dual doping with In and Mo. The overall water splitting under >420 nm irradiation to H2 (solid curves) and O2 (dashed curves) production. The gas evolution test set I, GBVO4; sets II–V, 3 wt% RuO2/GBVO4 and tint-colored line is for bare or 3 wt% RuO2/BiVO4. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the American Association for the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. 
Table 1 A comparison of STH conversion efficiency and durability of PC water splitting systems




Photocatalytic system/cell structure
Irradiation area, cm2
Performance
Electrolyte, pH
Ref.


OEP and HEP
STH,a %
Durability, h





a AQY: apparent quantum yield.





One-step excitation


Cdots-C3N4
9.0
2.0
4800.0
Water, pH 7
Liu et al. (2016)55


RuO2/In, Mo:BiVO4
—
3.2AQY
50.0
Water, pH 7
Jo et al. (2015)56


Pt/mesoporous g-C3N4
7560
0.12
720.0
Water
Schroder et al. (2015)63


Rh@Cr2O3/GaN:ZnO
—
2.5AQY
35.0
H2SO4, pH 4.5
Maeda et al. (2006)54


RuO2/GaN:ZnO
—
0.14AQY
15.0
H2SO4, pH 3
Maeda et al. (2005)53


RhCrOx + CoOx/Al:SrTiO3
9801
0.4
1000.0
Water, pH 7
Goto et al. (2018)64






Two-step excitation (Z-scheme)


Mg:GaN
Rh@Cr2O3/Mg:InGaN
—
3.3
4
Water, pH 7
Chowdhury et al. (2018)60


GaN
Rh@Cr2O3/Mg:InGaN
3.0
1.8
6.0
Water, pH 7
Kibria et al. (2015)65


RuOx/Mo:BiVO4 with carbon
Rh@Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3
25.0
1.2
17
Water, pH 6.8
Wang et al. (2017)62


RuOx/Mo:BiVO4 with Au
Ru/Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3
7.5
1.1
14.0
Water, pH 6.8
Wang et al. (2016)61


Bi4NbO8Cl
Ru/Rh:SrTiO3
—
0.4AQY
24.0
HCl, pH 2.4
Fujito et al. (2016)66


WO3 with IO3−/I−
Pt/MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON
15.9
6.8AQY
—
Water
Chen et al. (2015)58


BiVO4
Ru/Rh:SrTiO3
33.0
1.6AQY
—
Water
Jia et al. (2013)57


CoOx/Ta3N5 with Au
Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3
13.0
0.1
16.0
H2SO4, pH 3.9
Wang et al. (2014)67


BiVO4 with Fe3+/Fe2+
Ru/Rh:SrTiO3
33.0
0.1
8.0
2M FeCl3
Kato et al. (2013)68


CoOx/BiVO4/Au with [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−
Rh@Cr2O3/ZrO2/TaON
—
0.5
12.0
NaH2PO4 pH 6.0
Qi et al. (2018)59


BiVO4 with [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+
Ru/Rh:SrTiO3
33.0
0.1AQY
8.0
H2SO4, pH 2.4
Kato et al. (2013)69


CoOx/BiVO4
Pt/Rh:SrTiO3
33.0
2.1AQY
100.0
Water
Sasaki et al. (2013)69


WO3 with IO3−/I−
Pt/ZrO2/TaON
3.5
6.3AQY
10.0
Water
Maeda et al. (2010)70


BiVO4
Ru/Rh:SrTiO3
33.0
0.12
120.0
H2SO4, pH 3.5
Sasaki et al. (2009)71




BiVO4 is a well-known water oxidation photocatalyst with a modest band gap (2.4 eV). However, the more positive conduction band (CB) position than the hydrogen reduction potential (H+/H2, 0 VRHE) makes it incapable of overall water splitting. Jo et al.56 simultaneously substituted In3+ for Bi3+ and Mo6+ for V5+ in the host lattice of m-BiVO4 to form Bi1−xInxV1−xMoxO4. The material had a slightly larger band gap energy (2.6 eV) showing a greenish color, but more importantly the CB position was pushed up to become more negative than the hydrogen reduction potential. As a result, the material became an overall water splitting photocatalyst (Fig. 7d), showing an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 3.2% under visible light irradiation, or H2 production of 17 μmol h−1 H2 with RuO2 photo-deposited as a co-catalyst.56
A single photocatalyst for achieving OWS is extremely difficult to find, thus an ingenious strategy is to employ two photocatalysts to increase their overall OWS efficiency, which is often called as the “Z-scheme” for its resemblance to the natural photosystem (PSII/PSI).50 As a particulate D4 PC system, the Z-scheme OWS evolves H2 and O2 separately from two different photocatalysts (Fig. 8a). Thus photogenerated electrons in a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst (HEP) reduce H+ to H2, whereas holes in an oxygen evolution photocatalyst (OEP) oxidize H2O to O2 and H+. The unused electrons and holes in OEP and HEP, respectively, undergo recombination via an aqueous shuttle redox mediator or solid charge conductive materials.50 However, Jia et al.57 reported electron mediator-free Z-scheme PC water splitting by making an efficient BiVO4–Ru/Rh:SrTiO3 composite as depicted in Fig. 8b. The crystallinity and morphology of m-BiVO4 particles played a decisive role for the high activity of the composite photocatalyst, which showed an AQY of 1.6% at 420 nm under AM1.5 solar irradiation.57
 Fig. 8  Two-step photocatalytic water splitting systems. (a) Z-Scheme composed of two photocatalysts decorated with OEC/HEC and connected by an aqueous or solid mediator. Redrawn from ref. 50 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Z-Scheme of the BiVO4–Ru/Rh:SrTiO3 composite (0.3 g catalyst under 1 sun and irradiation area of 33 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) Z-Scheme of the PtOx/WO3–Pt/Mg:Ta2O6−xNy/TaON water splitting system using an IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator (75 mg Pt/Mg:Ta2O6−xNy/TaON and 150 mg PtOx/WO3, 150 mL 2 mM NaI solution under 1 sun, irradiation area 15.9 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. (d) Wafer level photochemical OWS on nanowire arrays of Mg:InGaN decorated with Rh/Cr2O3 HEC. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (e) Z-Scheme RuOx/Mo:BiVO4–Au–Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3 system prepared by the particle transfer method (under 1 sun and two reaction conditions: 288 K, 5 kPa (open symbols), and 331 K, 10 kPa (closed symbols)). The inset shows the generation of gas bubbles on the photocatalytic sheet. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
The use of an aqueous redox mediator (IO3−/I−) to form a Z-scheme system by using Pt/MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON and PtOx/WO3 as HEP and OEP was reported by Chen et al.58 This system in Fig. 8c showed 6.8% AQY under irradiation area of 15.9 cm2. Very recently, Qi et al.59 reported a [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− redox-mediated CoOx/BiVO4/Au OEP, and a Rh@Cr2O3/ZrO2-modified TaON HEP with AQY of 10% at 420 nm and STH of 0.5%, which are currently the highest for Z-scheme systems with a liquid charge mediator.
Recent work by Chowdhury et al.60 reported the synthesis of a double-band InGaN nanosheet device, which had the ability to spontaneously induce charge separation and transportation of respective charge carriers to their distinct sites for water redox reactions (Fig. 8d). The InGaN nanosheets were fabricated on Si substrates under a nitrogen atmosphere using the radio frequency plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxial technique. To make an efficient water splitting photocatalyst, p-type Mg was doped into GaN/InGaN and then Rh@Cr2O3 nanoparticles were deposited as a HEC. The Rh@Cr2O3/Mg:GaN/InGaN photocatalyst evolved H2 (1.62 mmol h−1) and O2 (∼0.81 mmol h−1) at 0 V. To make effective charge transfer across HEP (Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3) and OEP (RuOx/Mo:BiVO4), Domen and co-workers61 used Au metal as a charge mediator (Fig. 8e). They prepared RuOx/Mo:BiVO4–Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3 Z-scheme sheets by their unique particle transfer method. They also reported the use of carbon as a charge mediator for the same photocatalysts to observe enhanced STH efficiency (Table 1). The carbon charge mediator significantly improves its scalability owing to lower dependence on noble metals.62
 Fig. 9  PV–electrolysis cell (EC) for overall water splitting. (a) Schematic view. (b) Different types of PV geometry of efficiencies >20%: (A) TOPCon crystalline Si (Fraunhofer). (B) IBC crystalline Si (SunPower). (C) Heterojunction IBC crystalline Si (Panasonic). (D) Multicrystalline Si (Trina Solar). (E) GaAs thin film (Alta Devices). (F) CIGS thin film (ZSW Stuttgart). (G) CdTe thin film (First Solar). (H) Perovskite thin film (KRICT). (c) Theoretical Shockley–Queisser detailed-balance efficiency limit under 1 sun condition as a function of band gap and 75% and 50% of the limit. (c and d) were reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016. (d) Experimentally measured overpotentials for HEC (Pt, MoS2, CoP, MoS|P, NiMo) and OEC (IrO2, RuO2, BSCF, NiCeOx/Au, NiFeOx). The overpotentials required to generate 10 mA cm−2 geometric area (grey) or electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the catalysts (red) are expressed as bar graphs. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) Generalized J–V diagram of a directly coupled PV–EC device. Data of EC (OEC and HEC) for budget (green), state of the art (SOA, yellow) and SOA with 10 times greater surface area of SOA OEC/HEC were all assumed values for illustration. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2013. 
3.2 Photovoltaic–electrolysis (PV–EC) system
The technology is straightforward in that electricity generated from a solar cell is used to convert water into H2 and O2. Other renewable energy sources such as wind72 or geothermal energy could also be used. But solar energy is the most important because it is the most abundant source of energy available (Fig. 1a). The major advantage of PV–EC in comparison to PC and PEC is that PV and water electrolysis are already well-established technologies and a high ηSTH of >10% is easily achievable.73 As a result, partial commercialization of the system was already realized (see part 7, Table 4).
In this system, PV cells and the electrolyzer are connected in series making the operating current and voltage the same for the two devices. Therefore, the crossing point between current (J)–voltage (V) curves for the two devices determines the current (Iop) and the voltage (Vop) under operation. Commonly, the PV junction is electrically wired to the HER and OER catalysts in PV–EC wired systems (Fig. 9a), or the catalysts are directly deposited on the PV component often as a thin nano film or as nanoparticles.46,74 The PV device is used only for the light absorber to generate charge carriers (electricity), which are transferred as direct current to the EC cell specifically to the anode (OEC) and cathode (HEC) for OER and HER. These PV cells are kept out from the water electrolyte to avoid the degradation by water. Unassisted water splitting could be realized with a cell voltage of ∼1.8 V, which is totally supplied by the PV cell. Therefore, the key aspects of the PV–EC device are the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the PV and the overpotentials of water splitting reactions, which are influenced by HEC and OEC.43,75
The primary consideration for a PV–EC system is highly efficient and stable PV cells and low overpotentials of the EC cell. Fig. 9b shows geometry of various solar cells with record power conversion efficiencies (PCE) above 20%; crystalline n-Si with a high quality passivation layer (TOPcon design), interdigital back contact (IBC) design, silicon heterojunction (SHJ), and a passivated emitter, rear cell (PERC) p–n junction design, GaAs high-band gap layers, CIGS with a transparent conducting layer (TCL), CdTe with interfacial layers, and perovskite with hole-selective top layers.76Fig. 9c shows the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit of a single junction solar cell under standard conditions of 1 sun illumination.76 The maximum efficiency of 33.7% could be achieved for a semiconductor with a single junction with a band gap of 1.34 eV. With multi-junction solar cells, such efficiency can be higher, and to date, the highest efficiency of 38.8% has been achieved with a GaInAs/GaInP/GaAs/AlGaInAs/AlGaInP five-junction tandem geometry under simulated 1.0 sun condition.76 Fundamentally, the PV–EC system's efficiency comes from the power output of PV, thus less than ∼30% of STH is expectable from PV–EC systems under 1.0 sun condition. However, under concentrated sun conditions (e.g. ∼500 sun), the efficiency can go up to 86.8% in theory, while the highest record achieved is currently 46.0%.76 Unlike PC and PEC systems, PV has the advantage of utilizing highly concentrated illumination, which reduces the actual size of PV, which accounts for the majority of cost in PV–EC systems as discussed in depth in part 4.
Besides PV, EC should also come with a high efficiency with a low potential requirement for conducting water splitting by using efficient electrocatalysts.1,77,78 Water splitting involves HER and OER, which require overpotentials to drive a meaningful degree of reaction. As shown in Fig. 9d, at least 1.6 V is needed to conduct overall water splitting even with highly efficient electrocatalysts. This is a lot higher than 1.23 V of theoretical water dissociation energy. Since the overall efficiency of PV–EC depends on both the power conversion efficiency of PV and the over-potential requirement of EC, reducing such a potential requirement is crucial for maximizing ηSTH of PV–EC.
The generalized J–V diagram in Fig. 9e of a directly coupled PV–EC device graphically identifies the power flows relative to the total incident solar power. The plot represents a highly efficient solar cell (ηpv > 30.8%) with an open circuit voltage Voc and a short-circuit current density Jsc; the total plot area is scaled to the incident solar power (100 mW cm−2). The PV–EC system operates at the intersection of the J–V curves of the solar cell and OECs. At the operating current density Jop, power (Jop ·Vop) is dissipated whereas energy is stored at a rate of Jop·μth, where μth is the thermodynamic reaction potential. The difference represents overpotential losses. Coupling loss is defined as the difference between the solar cell maximum output and the power dissipated in the electrochemistry. These losses are represented by the region J > Jop.75
A very good benchmarking study of electrocatalysts for overall water splitting was done by McCrory et al.79 by comparing various electrocatalysts as shown in Fig. 10. In general, HEC is favored in acidic media while OEC is favored in alkaline media with both low overpotentials (∼0.1 V for HER, ∼0.4 V for OER) and longer stability. The work also emphasized the importance of a prolonged (2 h or more) testing time to ensure the validity of an electrocatalyst's capability. Besides traditional precious metal-based electrocatalysts (Pt, Ir, Ru), there are many recent works reporting base metal-based catalysts of comparable or even better activity than that of precious metals.
 Fig. 10  Electrocatalysis for water splitting. (a) Schematic illustration of bias requirement in addition to the theoretical voltage needed for the water splitting reaction (E = 1.23 V), minimum requirement for the actual reaction (overpotential) and bias needed to conduct water splitting with ∼10 mA cm−2 (geometric area of each catalyst). (b) Benchmarking of HEC and OEC in acidic (pH 1.0, 1.0 M H2SO4) and basic (pH 13.6, 1.0 M NaOH) electrolytes. Overpotential needed to generate 10 mA cm−2 was used as the figure of merit. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) J–V curves of HER for CoPS films on graphite, CoPS NWs on graphite, and CoPS NPls on carbon fibre paper, and Pt wire. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (d) iR-corrected polarization curves of NiFe:LDH/Fe foam in 1 and 10 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 

Fig. 10c shows the electrochemical properties of earth abundant nanostructured cobalt phosphosulphide (CoPS) electrodes and their HER catalytic performance in 0.5 M H2SO4. The CoPS electrodes made as films, wires, and plates achieved geometric current densities of −10 mA cm−2 at very low overpotentials of −128 mV, −61 mV and −48 mV, respectively, versus RHE. As compared to CoPS films and CoPS nanowires, CoPS nanoplates were more stable for >35 h without any degradation in 0.5 M H2SO4.75 Active OECs are generally metal and metal oxides,78 and IrO2 is the most common practical OER catalyst in acids, which is explained on the basis of an optimum binding energy of the reaction intermediates. Earth abundant OEC materials like NiFe-LDH are active and cost effective.78,80 Corrosion engineering employed to form NiFe-LDH on iron substrates resulted in an electrocatalyst with the best stability (6000 h) in bases ever demonstrated for non-noble metal catalysts.81 The result shows the feasibility of replacing the noble metal electrocatalysts in bases. Fig. 10d shows the iR-corrected polarization curves of NiFe-LDH measured in 1 M and 10 M KOH.81 The OEC can afford current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 at 300 and 400 mV in 1 M KOH, while in 10 M KOH it requires only 257 and 280 mV to generate the same current densities. The performance is close to that of practical water–alkali electrolyzers and hence meets the requirement of practical large-scale water splitting technology.
Chang et al.83 discussed the design principles for combining PV cells, electrolyzers, and electrocatalysts. All these components can be integrated into solar water splitting devices while minimizing their power loss during the conversion of electrical energy into fuel. The effects of exchange current density, Tafel slope, system resistance, electrode area, light intensity, and PCE of PV are the governing factors. More importantly, an effective combination of independent PV and EC cells is the key for improving the STH efficiency of the whole PV–EC system. Modelling of the PV–EC device showed a maximum STH conversion efficiency of up to 30.8% using a single light absorber.75 Different solar cells such as c-Si, CIGS, GaAs, CdTe and a-Si could reach theoretical limiting STH efficiencies of 26.9, 26.1, 19.7, 19.2 and 26.8%, respectively. The maximum ηSTH for a tandem absorber + electrocatalyst configuration was calculated to be 28.7% with band gap combination of 1.60 eV/0.95 eV and electrolyzer efficiency of 73%. However, ηSTH can be increased up to 31.8% using a 3jn PV cell, and to 62% with an efficient 4jn PV cell.41,83 These have to be considered for practical solar hydrogen production by the PV–EC technology.
A crystalline silicon (c-Si) 3jn solar cell was integrated with NiMoZn (as cathode) and Ni-Bi (as anode) of an EC cell (Fig. 11a), which showed ηSTH greater than 10%.84 Connecting OEC to the p-type terminal and HEC to the n-type terminal of the PV cell, the current–voltage of the PV–EC system has to be equal regardless of the mode of implementation, i.e. wired or wireless. The PV–EC cell was composed of multiple series buried junctions of c-Si solar cell–Ni-Bi (OEC)/NiMoZn (HEC) for both wired and wireless systems. The point of intersection determines Jop and ηSTH of the PV–EC system. The ηSTH was estimated as 2.8% for the 3-cell module and 10% for the 4-cell module of the c-Si solar cell. The maximum current density for H2O oxidation at the anode was 8.13 mA cm−2 with an ηSTH of 9.8%. This approach allows independent modular optimization, after which the PV cell, anode and cathode could be integrated into a monolithic design.84 A typical wired Si PV – membrane electrode assembly (MEA) electrolyzer is shown in Fig. 11b.
 Fig. 11  PV–EC systems and their water splitting performance. (a) c-Si solar cell–Ni-Bi–NiMoZn. J–V curves of PV modules of three (dashed) and four (solid) single junction c-Si solar cells under simulated 1 sun and EC (dashed line, the ideal curve for Ni-Bi/NiMoZn catalysts; solid line, Ni-Bi/NiMoZn electrodes in a two-electrode cell (0.5 M KBi/0.5 M K2SO4, pH 9.2)). The point of intersection represents Jop and ηSTH of the PV–EC system. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2014. (b) A 3 series connected c-Si/a-Si heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell – membrane electrode assembly (MEA) electrolyzer; operating point of the system under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Electrochemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC)-Pt system. J–V curve of DSSC-Pt in 1 M NaOH under 1 sun irradiation. ABPE and ηSTH at zero voltage. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (d) A triple-junction organic photovoltaic (OPV) cell architecture connected to Pt–Ni electrocatalysts. The PCEs and ηSTH at various operating voltages under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (e) Perovskite solar cell coupled with NiFe-LDH/Ni. J–V curves of the perovskite tandem cell and the NiFe-LDH/Ni foam electrodes in a two-electrode configuration under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014. (f) A triple-junction solar cell (InGaP/GaAs/GaInAsSb), and two PEM electrolyzers (Ir–Pt/C) connected in series with ηSTH over 30%. J–V curves at the beginning-of-operation (BOO) and end-of operation (EOO) for the triple-junction solar cell (under concentrated 42 suns) and the dual-electrolyser. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 

Fig. 11c shows a system of a parallel tandem DSSC with a Pt electrode, which demonstrates an ABPE of 7.4% and ηSTH of 5.75% measured with applied biases of 0.248 V and 0 V, respectively, under 1 sun illumination for 5 h.85Fig. 11d shows PBDTT:PCBM-PEDOT:PSS as an organic photovoltaic (OPV) and Pt wire–Ni foam as cathode–anode, which shows PCE and ηSTH at various operating voltages of the PV–EC system measured in 1 M NaOH.86 An EC cell driven by a highly efficient homo tandem 3jn polymer solar cell demonstrated an ηSTH of 6.1% at 1.5 V. Fig. 11e shows a perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) solar cell–NiFe-LDH (as both OEC and HEC) system for overall water splitting, where low-cost bifunctional earth-abundant NiFe-LDH catalysts were loaded on Ni foam. Perovskite solar cells were arranged side-by-side and connected through wires to catalysts immersed in water.87 The operating point at an ηSTH of 12.3% was demonstrated in a stable operation for 10 h in 1 M NaOH. This ηSTH is equivalent to 78.3% of the maximum power of the PV cell.87
Recently, Jia et al.88 achieved the highest ever ηSTH (>30%) with a PV–EC system of InGaP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb 3jn solar cell connected to 2 polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzers in series with Pt–Ir as the cathode–anode coated on a Nafion membrane under 42 sun (Fig. 11f). The PEM electrolyzer is composed of a thin solid state ion conducting membrane (e.g. Nafion) instead of an aqueous solution between two electrodes with precious metal electrocatalysts such as Ir, Ru, and Pt. Its operating conditions (20–200 °C, 200–2000 psi) are harsher than those of well-established alkaline electrolyzers (20–80 °C, <500 psi) using cheaper base metal electrocatalysts like Ni, Co, and Fe.72,73 Water flows in the anode compartment of the first electrolyzer and then into the anode compartment of the second electrolyzer, and in the same way, H2 flows from the cathode of the first electrolyzer to the cathode of the second electrolyzer. The current–voltage characteristics of the PV–EC system show beginning of operation (BOO) and end of operation (EOO). This efficient system was stable up to ∼48 h without interruption in pure water. The current–voltage characteristics of both solar cell and PEM electrolyzers were the same before and after 48 h of operation.
Efficient non-precious metal electrocatalysts have been extensively explored to replace expensive noble metal catalysts like Pt, IrO2, and RuO2 as OEC and HEC for water splitting. For example, NiFe-LDH (OEC) is efficient90 as well as durable up to 6000 h (8 months)81 as discussed earlier. A transition metal hexacyanometallate (MHCM)–NiMoS catalyst as anode–cathode powered by a commercial III–V (InGaP/GaAs/Ge) 3jn solar cell demonstrated an ηSTH of 17.9% and stability for 100 h at neutral pH.91 A wireless and integrated PV–EC device (a-Si:H/c-Si:H 1jn and 2jn solar cell–Ni–Mo or Ni–Co) showed an ηSTH of 3.9% under bias free operation of 40 h in 1 M KOH. The concept was successfully scaled-up up to 64 cm2 device area.92 A miniature device concept was presented by a simple, small and stand-alone bias-free device. A small membraneless solar driven water splitting device (1.35 cm2) consisting of series-connected spherical Si solar cells and non-noble metal electrocatalysts (NiMo–NiFe as cathode–anode) showed ηSTH values of 7.4% and 6.4% using 3-series and 4-series PV solar cells, respectively. This stand-alone and easily-scalable modular PV–electrolyzer device performed a stable operation for 2 h in 0.5 M KOH.93 A PV–electrolysis system composed of a c-Si/a-Si:H heterojunction solar cell (1.9 cm2 for single cell, and 3 series connected for total illumination area 3p c-Si, ∼5.7 cm2) and an MEA electrolyzer with microstructured Ni foam-based earth abundant electrocatalysts showed ηSTH up to 14.2% (Fig. 11b).89 This system containing a Pt–IrOx catalyst layer on a Nafion membrane also demonstrated stable ηSTH of 14.2–14.5% for >100 h, and also comparable ηSTH with Ni–Ni foam electrocatalysts for an alkaline electrolyzer in 1 M KOH. Just usual Ni foam was in fact efficient enough for achieving a high ηSTH. Bonke et al.94 achieved an ηSTH of 22.4% using Ni–Ni foam connected to a GaInP/GaAs/Ge 3jn solar cell under simulated 1.0 sun condition. They also showed the size dependence of Ni foam (1–20 cm2) and evaluated stability and efficiency in various electrolytes with pH ranging from 7.0–14.0, showing that pH 14.0 was the best condition.
In addition to these examples, Table 2 summarizes recently reported PV–EC systems that show ηSTH values of 10–30% under 1 sun illumination under different pH conditions. The ηSTH values have been improved over time and there is still room for further improvement by interface engineering and optimization of each compartment.107
Table 2 Recently reported photovoltaic–electrolysis systems




Photovoltaic–electrolysis system/cell structure
Area, cm2
Performance
Electrolyte, pH
Ref.


Electrolyzer, anode (OEC) cathode (HEC)
Solar cell
STH,c % (light intensity)
Durability, h





a Concentrated PV cell, 1 sun = 100 mW cm−2.
b Artificial leaf (monolithic and wireless device).
c Unless specified otherwise, simulated 1.0 sun condition is used.





PV–electrolyzers


MEA electrolyzer, IrO2–Pt/C
n-AlGaAs/p-AlGaAs 1jn solar cell + DC/DC converter
1.0
20.6 (1 sun)
1.1
0.1 M HClO4 pH 1
Chang et al. (2017)83


2 PEM electrolyzer, Ir–Pt
InGaP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb,a 3jn, concentrated PV (CPV)a
0.316
30.0 (42 sun)
48.0
Water, pH 7
Jia et al. (2016)88


MEA electrolyzer, IrOx–Pt
c-Si 3p
5.7
14.2 (1 sun)
100.0
Water, pH 7
Schüttauf et al. (2016)89


5 PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt
InGaP/GaAs/Ge 3jn, (CPV)a
0.57
24.4 (800 sun)
Not tested
Water, pH 7
Nakamura et al. (2015)95


PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt
InGaP/GaAs/Ge 3jn, CPVa
0.57
17.1 (800 sun)
—
Water, pH 7
Sugiyama et al. (2015)96


PEM electrolyzer, RhO2–Rh
GaInP/GaInAs 2jn, CPVa
0.0314
16.8 (500 sun)
12.0
Water
Rau et al. (2014)97


PEM electrolyzer, Ir–Pt
GaInP/GaInAs 2jn, CPVa
0.033
15.0 (500 sun)
2.3
Water, pH 7
Peharz et al. (2007)98


3 PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt
GaInP/InGaAs/Ge 3jn, CPVa
1.0
12.9 (10.95 sun)
1.0
Water, pH 7
Fujii et al. (2013)100


PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt
c-Si 4p
81.2
5.7 (0.49 sun)
1.0
Water, pH 7
Fujii et al. (2013)100






PV–electrochemical cells


MHCM–NiMoS
GaInP/GaAs/Ge 3jn
0.325
17.9
100.0
Sea water, pH 8
Hsu et al. (2018)91


Ni foam–Ni foam
GaInP/GaAs/Ge 3jn
0.09
22.4 (100 sun)
72
1 M NaOH (pH 14)
Bonke et al. (2015)94


Na:NiFeOx–NiP
Lead halide perovskite solar cell 2p
0.25
11.22
30.0
1 M KOH (pH 14)
Weng et al. (2017)90


Pt–Pt
DSSC solar cell 2p, 4 terminal
0.141
5.75 (0.5 sun)
5.0
0.1 M NaOH
Kang et al. (2017)85


NiFe LDH–CoP
Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite 2p
0.32
12.7
16.0
pH 13.6/BPM/pH 0.9
Luo et al. (2016)99


Ni–Pt
PBDTTPD:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS 3jn
0.1
6.1
—
1 M NaOH
Gao et al. (2016)86


RuO2–RuO2 Co3O4–NiMoZnb
PCDTBT/PMDPP3T/PMDPP3T 3jnb
0.1 (wired) 1.7 (wireless)
5.7 (wired) 3.6 (wireless)
+20 min
1 M NaOH
Esiner et al. (2015)100


NiFe LDH–NiFe LDH
Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite 2p
0.318
12.3
10.0
1 M NaOH
Luo et al. (2014)87


Ni-Bi–NiMoZn
c-Si 4p
6.0
10.0
168.0
0.5 M KBi, pH 9.2
Cox et al. (2014)84


Ni–Ni
c-Si 3jn
5.7
14.5
100.0
1 M KOH, pH 14
Schüttauf et al. (2016)89


Pt–Ptb
CuInGaSe2 3pb
4.0
10.5
27.0
3 M H2SO4 pH 1
Jacobsson et al. (2013)101


Co-Bi–NiMoZn
a-Si 3jn (wired device)
2.0
4.7
10.0
0.5 M KBi (pH 9.2)
Reece (2011)26


Co-Bi–NiMoZnb
a-Si 3jn (wireless device)b
2.0
2.5
10.0
0.5 M KNO3 (pH 9.2)
Reece (2011)26




3.3 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) system
As mentioned earlier, the PEC cell is located between PC and PV–EC in its complexity, choice of material (light absorber), and obtained overall efficiency. In this section, a number of examples of photoanodes and photocathodes are discussed for PEC water splitting cells. Usually photoelectrodes have the following configuration:
Photoanode = OEC/protection layer/dopant:light absorber/substrate
Photocathode = HEC/protection layer/dopant:light absorber/substrate
The substrates are commonly transparent conductive oxides on glass, i.e. fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO). However, metal-based substrates are used in some cases, which are specified as appropriate. Since there are various types of PEC cells, strategies used to develop them are different from each other.102 Therefore, we would like to address only common general backgrounds behind their performance.

3.3.1. Photoanodes. 
Various n-type metal oxide semiconductors (TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3, BiVO4, etc.) are candidates for practical photoanode owing to their inherent stability in water, which requires lower complexity and less stringent protection.16,31,103 However, these material classes have two major challenges. First, they have relatively large band gaps with poor optical properties. For instance, BiVO4 is currently the best oxide-based photoanode material, but has a relatively large band gap of 2.4 eV,16 while the ideal band gap for the D4 tandem cell's photoanode is 1.84 eV.40 In addition, the absorption properties of the majority of metal oxides are rather poor because of their pronounced indirect bandgap characteristics in comparison with PV grade materials. The second challenge is their poor conductivity, low charge carrier transfer efficiency and small mobility. The charge mobility of metal oxides is only 1.0–0.0001 cm2 V−1 s−1, while that of typical PV grade materials is 100–10000 cm2 V−1 s−1.16,102 A number of strategies have been employed to address these two issues; developing advanced synthesis methods and improving charge carrier dynamics by (i) intrinsic/extrinsic doping, (ii) fabricating a heterojunction of an electron transfer layer (ETL) or hole transfer layer (HTL), (iii) co-catalyst loading (OEC, HEC), (iv) nano-structuring, and (v) surface passivation.103,104 Herein, we introduce some of the highest performing metal oxide semiconductors to assess their viability for practical applications.
TiO2 (3.0–3.2 eV) and WO3 (2.6–2.8 eV) have good electrical properties and stability, but they show moderate PEC performance (Jph of 1–3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE),16 because of their too large band gaps. Hence here we cite only a few examples for these materials that nicely demonstrated the modification strategies mentioned above. A nanoplate array film of WO3 exhibited unprecedented high PEC performance (3.7 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE) without adding any cocatalyst or sacrificial reagent.105 Co-doping of tungsten and carbon into TiO2 nanowires, W, C:TiO2 NWs, showed water splitting performance (1.81 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE) due to the synergistic effects of co-doping. No obvious degradation of the photocurrent was observed during 30 min experimental time interval, and even after over 6 months of storage in a strong base (2 M KOH) solution, indicating excellent chemical stability.106
Thus the major focus has been moved towards narrower band gap materials like BiVO4 and Fe2O3. Selected examples of state-of-the-art photoanodes based on BiVO4 and Fe2O3 are presented in Fig. 12. Among metal oxide-based photoanodes, most remarkable progress has been made in the performance of BiVO4 since the discovery of its photocatalytic water oxidation capability by Kudo et al.107 Its photoelectrochemical and charge transfer properties are not necessarily favorable as an efficient photoanode material. Hence, multiple modification strategies have been addressed including morphology control, formation of composite structures, composition tuning, and coupling with oxygen evolution catalysts.104 In particular, in situ metal organic deposition (MOD), electron transport layers (ETLs) as well as scaffolds such as WO3, and electrocatalysts such as cobalt phosphate (Co-Pi), FeOOH and NiFeOx have contributed greatly to the development of this photoanode material. The current state-of-the-art, solution-processed BiVO4 photoanodes demonstrated by Choi and coworkers108 (double OEC NiOOH/FeOOH109 loaded, nanoporous, N2 gas treated BiVO4) routinely record a photocurrent density of ∼5.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, ABPE of ∼2.1% and high stability of ∼30 h.
 Fig. 12  State-of-the-art BiVO4 and Fe2O3 photoanodes for PEC water splitting. (a) A PEC cell with NiOOH/FeOOH coated BiVO4 photoanode, fabricated by thermal conversion of BiOI films, from ref. 122 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. The J–V curve for the FeOOH/NiOOH/BiVO4 photoanode in the presence of V5+ in KBi buffer (pH 9.5). Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (b) Structure and energy band diagram of a W:BiVO4/WO3 core/shell NW photoanode, and its PEC performance in 0.5 M KPi electrolyte buffered at pH 8. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (c) The fabrication of the conductive 3D nanocone array substrate and BiVO4 deposition. The 60° tilted SEM image of the final F:SnO2/Pt/SiO2 nanocone arrays, and the cross section image of the uniformly grown Mo:BiVO4 on the 3D nanocone arrays. J–V curves of the Mo:BiVO4 nanocone in 0.5 M Na2SO3-containing KPi buffer solution, and NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4 nanocone photoanode in KPi buffer solution. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016. (d) Co-Pi loaded Si-doped α-Fe2O3 photoanode. Inset image; the tree shaped morphology of the nanostructured Co-Pi/Si:α-Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011. (e) Synthesis of TiO2/Ti:α-Fe2O3 3D branched nanorod arrays (BNRs) on TiO2/FTO substrates. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. (f) Modified Fe2O3/FTO photoanodes prepared by PADD and their J–V curves in 1 M KOH, under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
In a PEC cell with a NiOOH/FeOOH/N2 gas-treated BiVO4 photoanode (Fig. 12a),110 Lee et al. demonstrated that the use of a V5+-saturated electrolyte (KB + V) inhibited the photooxidation-coupled dissolution of BiVO4, thereby effectively suppressing the anodic photocorrosion of BiVO4. The V5+ species in the solution can also be incorporated into the FeOOH/NiOOH OEC layer present on the BiVO4 surface during water oxidation to further enhance water-oxidation kinetics. The J–V plots measured in the KB and KB + V electrolytes shows a similar trend, suggesting that the presence of H2VO4−/HVO42− species does not interfere with the interfacial charge transfer of holes from BiVO4 to water. The J–t curve shows the photostability of NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4 at 0.6 VRHE in KB + V electrolyte over 500 h. The formation of a BiVO4/WO3 heterojunction111 turned out to be one of the most efficient strategies to obtain highly active BiVO4-based photoanodes for improved bulk and surface charge transfer efficiency. In Fig. 12b, a WO3@W:BiVO4 core@shell nanowire (NW) photoanode was fabricated by coating a thin layer of BiVO4 on a vertical array of electrically more conductive WO3 nanowires. Thus WO3 NWs acted as an electron conductor while W:BiVO4 acted as the light absorber. A combination of both achieved high light absorption and a photocurrent of 3.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under 1 sun. This photoanode was stable for 1 h without degradation in 0.5 M KPi at pH 7.112 Light management by nanostructured substrates can also be achieved by using a scaffold such as nanocone or pillar-type TCO. Nanoporous Mo:BiVO4 on top of light trapping nanocone architectures was fabricated by a two-step process113 as shown in Fig. 12c. In the first step, SiO2 nanoparticles of controlled diameters were densely arranged by the Langmuir–Blodgett method and 3D nanocones were formed by a reactive ion etching process. Next, nanoporous Mo:BiVO4 was formed on the nanocone arrays by a sol–gel method. The optimized Mo:BiVO4 nanocone exhibited a very high photocurrent density of 6.05 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V RHE in phosphate buffer solution containing 0.5 M sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) as the hole scavenger. The NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4 nanocone photoanode showed photocurrents approaching this value under water oxidation conditions and a good stability for 5 h. Kuang et al.114 also demonstrated yet one of the longest stability values of BiVO4 (∼1100 h) at 0.4 VRHE by adding Ni cations for regenerative healing of the surface of NiFeOx OEC.
Hematite (Fe2O3) has been one of the most popular materials of choice with BiVO4 for metal oxide-based photoanodes. With a band gap of 2.1 eV (indirect), its theoretical ηSTH is as high as ∼15%. Iron is the 4th most abundant element on the earth and has inherent stability in alkaline water. These attributes would make it an excellent candidate for a practical photoanode for PEC water splitting cells if its poor optical and electrical properties are overcome. In particular, it has an extremely short hole diffusion length of 2–4 nm, which is much shorter than those of BiVO4 (∼70 nm) and WO3 (∼500 nm).24 However, steady improvement in PEC performance of hematite has been made over the past few decades through extensive research led by the research groups of Grätzel and Sivula,23,115–117 making it a highly performing metal oxide photoanode material, yet still having much room for further improvement.32

Fig. 12d shows that photoelectrodeposition of Co-Pi on Fe2O3 photoanodes improves the photocurrent density to 2.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under 1 sun at pH 13.6.118 Both Fe2O3 and Co-Pi/Fe2O3 films showed comparable cathodic shifts of their photocurrent onset potentials. The FeOOH/TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 nanorods (NR) and branched nanorods (BNR) were fabricated by the hydrothermal method, annealing, doping, interlayer deposition and cocatalyst loading as shown in Fig. 12e.119 The J–V curves of TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 NR, and TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 BNR and FeOOH/TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 BNR photoanodes exhibit photocurrent densities of 1.5, 2.5, and 3.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, respectively, in 1 M KOH under 1 sun illumination. The FeOOH/TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 BNR also showed noticeable stability by maintaining 95% of the performance after 50 h of operation. Platinum-doped and Co-Pi surface modified wormlike hematite photoanodes are also promising. Stable and efficient hematite-based photoanodes were prepared by a solution method followed by high temperature (800 °C) annealing, and the resulting Co-Pi/Pt:Fe2O3 photoanode showed a record performance of 4.32 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under 1 sun irradiation.120 Multi-dimensional nano/micro-architectures of Fe2O3 nanoflakes decorated by CoOx OEC showed high photoactivity (3.25 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE) as a photoanode for water oxidation under 1 sun.121 More recently, Kim et al.6 reported polymer-assisted decomposition deposition (PADD) to make nanoporous (particle size: ∼20 nm) Fe2O3, and Ti doping and post H2 treatment (by decomposition of NaBH4) were applied to increase the bulk charge separation efficiency (Fig. 12f). Eventually, a Ni2FeOxHy/TiO2 overlayer/H2-treated Ti:Fe2O3 photoanode showed a photocurrent density of ∼4.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE in 1.0 M KOH, which is yet the highest Jph achieved for a Fe2O3 photoanode. Since Fe2O3 has a theoretical Jph of 12.4 mA cm−2, there is still more than 2 fold room for improvement even though the progress is extremely slow.
An interesting material class of semi-stable nitrides and oxynitrides have been extensively studied by Domen and co-workers such as TaON, BaTaO2N, Ta3N5, LaTaON2, LaTiO2N, SrTaO2N, CaTaO2N, Li2LaTaO6N, and CaLaTiON as shown in Fig. 13a. The hybridization of O 1s and N 1s for the VB makes its potential rather reduced, thus narrowing its band gap and making it more suitable for visible light harvesting.52,54 Even though their efforts have been devoted mostly to PC applications (Fig. 7, 8 and Table 1), these nitride materials also turned out to be pretty good photoanodes. To acquire long term stability, surface protection is absolutely necessary as recently demonstrated for Ta3N5.123,124 As in Fig. 13b, anodically grown Ta2O5 NR on Ta metal foil showed a uniform green color originating from light interference in the nanostructured film, which transformed into red Ba:Ta2N5 upon nitridation.125 The vertically aligned Ba:Ta3N5 NR array had a uniform diameter and length of ∼60 nm and ∼600 nm, respectively. The Co-Pi/Ba:Ta3N5 NR photoanode showed a cathodic shift of 50 mV relative to the undoped Co-Pi/Ta3N5 NR photoanode and a very high photocurrent density of 6.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE.
 Fig. 13  Oxynitride photoanodes for PEC water splitting. (a) Photocatalytic oxynitrides and nitrides (with courtesy of Domen's group). (b) The transformation of green Ta2O5 film into red Ba-doped Ta3N5. Vertically aligned Ba:Ta3N5 NR arrays. J–V curves for Co-Pi/Ta3N5 and Co-Pi/Ba:Ta3N5 NR photoanodes under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 125 and 130 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2013. (c) The three-electrode cell with an InGaN photoanode for PEC water oxidation. The J–V curve of InGaN and IrO2/InGaN photoanodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Water oxidation on a CoOx/BaTaO2N/Ta/Ti photoelectrode in 0.2 M KPi solution of pH 13 under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (e) The molecular catalyst integrated Ta3N5 photoanode. J–V curves of the WOC complex 2/WOC complex 1/Ni(OH)x/FeOOH/TiOx/Ta3N5 photoanode (1 sun, 1 M NaOH). Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
An InGaN NW photoanode was prepared on a large-area wafer as in Fig. 13c.126 In PEC water oxidation in 0.5 M H2SO4 under 1 sun illumination, IrOx/InGaN NWs produced a photocurrent density of 10.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. However, a photocurrent density of 21.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V RHE was obtained in the presence of a hole scavenger, which is near the theoretical limit for 1.7 eV InGaN. But real water splitting without the scavenger was not realized due to stability issues under water oxidation conditions. The co-catalyst IrOx loading shifted the photocurrent onset potential by 500 mV. A BaTaO2N photoanode was prepared by the particle transfer method in Fig. 13d.127 The Co/BaTaO2N photoanode produced ∼4.2 mA cm−2 at 1.2 VRHE and showed stability for 6 h in 0.2 M KPi solution at pH 13. Ta3N5 has attracted great attention as the best nitride-based photoanode material. As shown in Fig. 13e, an integrated Ta3N5 photoanode (Ni(OH)2/FeOOH/TiO2/Ta3N5) shows a record photocurrent of 12.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE approaching the theoretical limit (12.9 mA cm−2) for the material, which represents the highest record for non-PV grade materials. In this efficient photoanode, Ni(OH)x/FeOOH is a hole storage layer that mediates interfacial charge transfer from Ta3N5 to coupled molecular catalysts (Co-oxycubane and Ir complex) for water oxidation, and the TiOx blocking layer reduces the surface electron–hole recombination.128 Efficient perovskite-type BaNbO2N photoanodes showed solar-driven water oxidation photoactivity of ∼5.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE absorbing visible light up to 740 nm.123 Nanostructured core@shell (Si@Ta3N5) heterojunction photoanodes along with CoTiOx as OEC (CoTiOx/Si@Ta3N5) showed water oxidation performance of 2.6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE by overcoming the charge transport limitations of Ta3N5. Photoanodes (NiOx/CoTiOx/Si@Ta3N5) showed stability up to 24 h after coating with NiOx.129
Another class of photoanodes is the buried junction, PV-grade semiconductors composed of elements like Si, Ga, In, Ge, Zn, Cd, Cu, P, S, Se, As, Sb, Te, etc.102 which are protected against corrosion. This class of light absorbers like c-Si, CdTe, GaAs, GaP, a-Si, etc.131 have excellent bulk charge transfer efficiency. For instance, the typical oxide semiconductor Fe2O3 has a very low hole mobility (0.0001 cm2 V−1 s−1), while PV grade InP has an extremely high hole mobility of 5400 cm2 V−1 s−1.102,132 But their instability in water requires a sophisticated protection layer for PEC application in water.48,102
As shown in Fig. 14a, ALD coatings (44 nm) of TiO2 along with NiO electrocatalysts on n–p+-Si photoanodes showed a stable photocurrent density of 34.7 ± 1.7 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VSCE in water oxidation under 1.25 sun in a continuous operation for 100 h in 1 M KOH. Instead of corroding the anode, the photogenerated holes are conducted through the TiO2 layer to Ni electrocatalysts, where the holes are used to oxidize water.131 In Fig. 14b, ultrathin Ni (2 nm) and TiO2 (118 nm)-coated np+-GaAs and GaP photoanodes showed photovoltages of 0.89 and 0.59 V, and water oxidation photocurrent densities of 14.3 and 3.4 mA cm−2 at 1.2 VRHE, respectively, under 1 sun.131 CdS/CdTe forms a p–n junction that serves as a photoanode for OER with a photocurrent density of 3.8 mA cm−2 at 1.2 VRHE. The CdTe-based photoanode was layered with Co(OH)x/Ti/MoOx/CdTe/CdS. A biphotoelectrode PEC cell composed of a CdTe-based photoanode as well as a photocathode exhibited a STH conversion efficiency of 0.22% without an external voltage.133
 Fig. 14  Photoanodes with PV grade materials with buried junctions. (a) Protected semiconductors by TiO2 deposited by ALD. (b) J–V curves of 2 nm Ni/118 nm TiO2-coated np+-GaAs and n-GaP photoelectrodes under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), copyright 2014. (c) Chronoamperometry and (d) J–V curve of NiOx/TiO2/HTJ-Si, NiOx/n-CdTe and NiOx/a-Si:H photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the American Association for the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. (e) J–V curves of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si and NiOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes in 1 M KOH. (f) Chronoamperometry of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes biased at 1.63 V RHE under 1 sun. The inset shows the TEM image. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 

Fig. 14c shows NiOx/TiO2/HTJ-Si (HTJ = heterojunction), NiOx/n-CdTe and NiOx/a-Si:H based photoanodes, with reactively sputtered NiOx films that provide transparent, anti-reflective, electrically conductive, and chemically stable coatings as well as a highly active electrocatalyst.134 The NiOx films stabilized all of these self-passivating, high-efficiency semiconducting photoanodes (NiOx/TiO2/HTJ-Si and NiOx/a-Si:H) for >100 h of stability, while NiOx/n-CdTe showed 1000 h stability at 1.73 VRHE in 1 M KOH.134Fig. 14d shows the cyclic voltammetry performance (J–V curves) under 1 sun, where the photocurrent onset potentials were −70 mV and −116 mV for photocurrent densities of 5.2 and 3.3 mA cm−2 for NiOx/a-Si:H and NiOx/n-CdTe photoanodes, respectively. The Ni(II/III) redox peaks in general increased in current and separated in potential during the stability tests, suggesting an increment in catalytically active sites, loss of reversibility, and/or an increase in resistance. An ultrathin (2 nm) film of CoOx on an n-Si photoanode and multifunctional coating of NiOx provided a stable photoanode for water oxidation at a photocurrent density of 27.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE in 1 M KOH under 1 sun.

Fig. 14e presents the J–V curves of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si and NiOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes in 1 M KOH under 1 sun illumination.135 The presence of the interfacial CoOx layer between SiOx/n-Si and NiOx resulted in 165 mV shift in the photocurrent-onset potential. The photocurrent density for the NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode structure was 27.7 mA cm−2, while the NiOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode showed only 6.3 mA cm−2. The chronoamperometry of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes in 1 M KOH biased at 1.63 VRHE under 1 sun recorded a current density of 30 ± 2 mA cm−2 for 1700 h of continuous operation (Fig. 14f). The TEM image of the NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode shows ∼2 nm thin SiOx layer on the surface of crystalline Si and 2–3 nm thin layer of CoOx.135


3.3.2. Photocathodes. 
Water splitting can also be achieved with a p-type semiconductor as a photocathode for electron transfer toward the electrolyte. The ideal band gap for the D4 tandem cell is 1.23 eV for the photocathode,40 thus lower band gap materials compared to photoanodes are preferred for photocathodes. Fig. 15 shows state-of-the-art examples of photocathodes made from metal oxides, oxy (nitrides), perovskites and PV grade materials. Only a very limited number of metal oxide-based p-type semiconductors are used for photocathodes like Cu2O, CuFeO2, CuBi2O4etc., which show only modest performances.136,137 The most intensively studied metal oxide-based photocathode is Cu2O, which has a band gap of 2.0 eV, and thus can theoretically deliver an ηSTH of 18%. But it is unstable against reduction by photoelectrons and needs proper surface protection for stable operation. Conformal TiO2/AZO protection (buried junction) of Cu2O was first demonstrated by Paracchino et al.138 Electrodeposition of Cu2O on various substrates (Au, Cu, Cu:NiO as a hole transfer layer, HTL) with surface protection resulted in the highest performance for metal oxide-based photoelectrodes of about ∼5 mA cm−2 @0.0 VRHE and stability of ∼2 h.198,199 Luo et al.139 showed that the nanowire morphology of Cu2O greatly increased Jph (10 mA cm−2 at −0.3 VRHE) as compared to planar Cu2O (7.8 mA cm−2) as well as led to marked stability over >55 h by firm protection with RuOx/TiO2/AZO. Very recent demonstration of Pan et al.140 showed an outstanding performance for a metal oxide-based light absorber achieving ∼10 mA cm−2 of Jph as well as Vph near 1.0 V by NiMo/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O as a photocathode. Fig. 15a demonstrates a NiMo-modified, vertically grown Cu2O photocathode that recorded a photocurrent density of 8.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE.140
 Fig. 15  Photocathodes for solar hydrogen production. (a) Cu2O nanowire-based NiMo/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathodes in different pH buffer solutions under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 139 and 140 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (b) Pt/TiMo/CdS/Cu2Cd0.4Zn0.6SnS4 and Pt/TiMo/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4 in 1 M K2HPO4/KH2PO4 solution of pH 3. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Elsevier B. V., copyright 2018. (c) a-SiC, isolated TiO2/a-SiC in 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution of pH 4. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Lead halide based perovskite photocathode in 0.1 M borate solution of pH 8.5. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) NiMo/SiO2/Al:np-Si microwire array photocathode. J–V curves for bare SiO2/Al:np-Si, Pt/SiO2/Al:np-Si, and NiMO/SiO2/Al:np-Si microwire arrays in 0.1M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (f) Energy band diagram for the Pt/TiO2/InP photocathode. J–V curves of Pt loaded bare p-InP and TiO2/p-InP photocathodes in 1 M HClO4 solution. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
The PV-grade light absorbers such as Si, CIGS, III/V semiconductors could be used for photocathodes with a similar working mechanism to a buried junction. However, complete isolation from the electrolyte is mandatory for stable performance of the photocathodes.48 Copper-based chalogenides such as CuInS or Se (CIS), Cu(InGa)Se2 (CIGS), and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) are promising light absorbers with band gaps around 1.5–1.2 eV, which are tunable by adjusting their elemental composition.16,102 At the moment, this type of light absorber presents the highest performance in Jph (10–35 mA cm−2) as photocathodes as discussed later. Fig. 15b shows the PEC performances of Cu2Cd0.4ZnSnS4 (CCZTS) and CZTS photocathodes coated with Pt/TiMo/CdS in water reduction in a pH 7 electrolyte under 1 sun.141 An enhanced photocurrent was recorded from −4 to −17 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE by introduction of Cd into CZTS. Efficient and robust chalcopyrite based CIGS prototype photocathodes coupled with CdS, an Al2O3 passivation layer and a protective TiO2 layer showed an excellent PEC performance (−30 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE). The prototype photocathode (Pt/TiO2/Al2O3/CdS/CIGS) showed an ABPE of 6.6% in neutral (pH 6.8) electrolyte and 9.3% under acidic (pH 0) conditions with 8 h stability.142 A CdS and Pt surface-modified Cu(In,Ga)Se2 photocathode (Pt/Ti/CdS–Pt/Mo:CIGS) demonstrated efficient solar HER of −27 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE in a neutral electrolyte, and the CIGS photocathode also showed 8.5% of ABPE.143 A photocathode composed of CdS and CdTe treated with CdCl2 [Pt/CdS/CdTe(CdCl2)/Cu] showed a high photocurrent density of −22 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE with 1.1 h stability at pH 8.144 All these PV grade materials make highly efficient photocathodes with an appropriate protection layer to complement their limited stability in aqueous solutions. Yet, their long time durability is still of concern for practical PEC water splitting systems.

Fig. 15c shows an a-SiC-based photocathode with a front surface layer of n-TiO2145 decorated with earth-abundant Ni-Mo as HEC. The Ni-Mo/a-SiC photocathode showed an improved photocurrent density of 2.8 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE as compared to a bare a-SiC photoanode. Introduction of noble metal Pt (Pt/TiO2/a-SiC) showed a photocurrent density of −8.7 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, while a cheap Ni-Mo catalyzed photocathode, (Ni-Mo/TiO2/a-SiC) showed a similar photocurrent density of −8.3 mA cm−2. The protecting layer of a-TiO2 enhanced the stability up to 12 h at pH 4.
Recently, Micaela et al.146 demonstrated a lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)-based photocathode, which showed an interesting PEC performance (Fig. 15d). Thus, the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/PEIE recorded a photocurrent of −9.8 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE in 0.1 M borate (pH 8.5) under 1 sun illumination. Yet, the stability of the material in the electrolyte should be a huge issue (sustained for only ∼1 h) in addition to the complexity of the MAPbI3 solar cell (PSC). However, another demonstration of MAPbI3 particles used as a photocatalyst showed that these kinds of PSCs in electrolytes might be stabilized by unique protection strategies that need to be further developed.147

Fig. 15e shows various Si microwire arrays as a photocathode in 0.1 M H2SO4.148 Without an electrocatalyst, the SiO2/Al:np-Si photocathode showed negligible photocurrents. The Ni-Mo/SiO2/Al:np-Si photocathode showed a photocurrent density of −35.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE with stability of 72 h. A photocathode of B and P-doped Si microwire arrays improved the H2 evolution from water. Pt/p-Si and Pt/np-Si of planar morphology showed the highest photocurrent densities of −23 and −28 mA cm−2, respectively, while Pt/p-Si and Pt/np-Si wires showed −7.3 and −15 mA cm−2, respectively. However, only np-Si showed stable and reproducible performance in acidic medium, hence Pt/np-Si performed the best among them.149 Yet another silicon-based photocathode with an epitaxial SrTiO3 protection layer and a nanostructured (Ti–Pt) catalyst (Ti–Pt/SrTiO3/p-Si) showed a photocurrent density of −35 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, ABPE of 4.9% and 35 h stability in 0.5 M H2SO4.150Fig. 15f shows a band alignment of TiO2/InP photocathodes before and after equilibrium.151 In PEC water reduction in 1 M HClO4 under 1 sun, the Pt/TiO2/InP photocathode showed high onset potential >800 mV and photocurrent of −25.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, which are significantly better than bare Pt/InP. InP nanowires on Si substrates as a photocathode also showed a high photocurrent of −18 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 10 h stability in acidic, neutral and basic electrolytes.152

3.4 Unassisted photoelectrochemical water splitting
As discussed above, the performances of photoelectrodes for OER (photoanodes) and HER (photocathodes) are evaluated under external bias. In practice, we need an unbiased, only solar energy-driven overall water splitting (OWS) system, which can be accomplished by using multiple light absorbers including PV. More specifically, unassisted PEC OWS systems are usually realized by constructing tandem cells of photoanode–photocathode, photoanode–PV, or photocathode–PV. These systems are models of practical large scale solar hydrogen production facilities.

3.4.1. Photoanode–photocathode tandem cell. 
For this type of tandem PEC cell, a photoanode (n-type for OER) and a photocathode (p-type for HER) are integrated into a cell through a conductive metal wire or wireless connection with a good ohmic contact. The “wired” configuration is convenient for assembling the components, whereas the “wireless” configuration (also known as “artificial leaf”) is more suitable for a compact design. Two main configurations for the photoanode and photocathode have been developed, one is side-by-side or parallel illumination mode (Mode P), and the other is in series, or tandem illumination mode (Mode T).153 Mode P exposes each photoelectrode to the full solar spectrum without requiring a transparent substrate, whereas Mode T more efficiently utilizes solar energy, with the photoanode positioned in front of the photocathode. Modes T and P illumination-based PEC cells are summarized in Table 3 and Fig. 16. Theoretically a PEC tandem system of photoanode–photocathode configuration can achieve a maximum STH conversion efficiency of 29.7% at a band gap combination of 1.60 eV/0.95 eV.41 In reality, it is very difficult to find such ideal materials of suitable band gaps, band positions, and charge transfer characteristics, and thus measured efficiencies are much lower than the theoretical value.
Table 3 Performance of recently-reported tandem cells for unassisted solar water splitting




Photoelectrochemical system/cell structure
Electrode area, cm2
Performance
Electrolyte, pH
Ref


Photoanodes, photocathodes, solar cellsa
STH,b %
Durability, h





a Artificial leaf (monolithic and wireless device). Unless noted otherwise, the tandem cell has light absorbers aligned in series. For side-by-side alignment, it is noted as parallel.
b Unless noted otherwise, irradiation is simulated under 1.0 sun condition.





Photoanode–photocathode tandem cells


NiFeOx/BiVO4
Pt/TiO2/CdS/CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2/Mo/SLG
0.1
3.7
>0.5
0.5 M KBi, pH 9.3
Kobayashi et al. (2018)155


NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4
RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O/Au
0.54
3.0
12.0
0.2 M KBi, pH 9
Pan et al. (2018)140


NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4
NiMo/SiO2//n+/p-Si
0.28
2.1
1.0
pH 10-BPM-pH 1
Vijselaar et al. (2018)148


NiFeOx/BiVO4
Pt/Mo/Ti/CdS/In2S3/(ZnSe)0.85(CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2)0.15/Mo/SLG/Ti foil (parallel)
1.08
1.0
20.0
0.5 M KBi, pH 9.5
Higashi et al. (2017)177


NiFeOx/BiVO4
Pt/Mo/Ti/(ZnSe)0.85(CIGS)0.15/Mo/SLG (parallel)
0.9
0.91
2.0
0.5 M KBi, pH 9.5
Kaneko et al. (2016)178


Co-Pi/BiVO4
Pt/TiO2/Zn:InP NWs (parallel)
1.0
0.5
1.0
0.1 M KPi, pH 7
Kornienko et al. (2016)152


NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4
Pt/CdS/CuGa3Se5/(Ag,Cu)GaSe2/Mo/SLG (parallel)
0.36
0.67
>2.0
0.1 M KPi, pH 7
Kim et al. (2016)154


NiOOH/BiVO4
Pt/In2S3/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4
1.13
0.28
—
0.2 M NaPi, pH 6.5
Jiang et al. (2015)179


NiFeOx/Fe2O3
Pt/a-Si
0.125
0.91
10.0
0.5 M KPi, pH 11.8
Jang et al. (2015)157


TiCoOx/BiVO4
TiNiOx/p-Si
0.5
0.59
5.0
0.1 M KBi, pH 9.2
Lai et al. (2015)180


Co-Pi/W:BiVO4
RuOx/TiO2/Al:ZnO/Cu2O
0.283
0.87
1.4
0.5 M KPi, pH 7
Bornoz et al. (2014)159


IrO2/n-TiO2
Pt/p-Si
1.0
0.12
1.5
0.5 M H2SO4, pH 6
Liu et al. (2013)156


IrOx/n-GaAs
Pt/Ti/Pt/Au/p-GaAs
0.025
13.1%
8.0
0.5 M H2SO4, pH 0.55
Kang et al. (2018)121


MnO–n-GaAs
Pt/ZnO/p-InP
0.125
8.2
10.0
6 M KOH,
Kainthla et al. (1987)181


TiO2
p-GaP
1.9
0.25
—
0.2 N H2SO4
Nozik et al. (1976)182






Photoelectrode–photovoltaic tandem cells


RuO2a
GaAs/GaInAs/GaInP/AlInP/TiO2/Rh 3jn, (monolithic device)a
0.1–0.3
19.3–15
20.0 (pH 7)
1 M HClO4 pH 0 0.5 M KPi pH 0
Cheng et al. (2018)176


RuOx NPs
GaInP/GaInAs, IMM-AlGaAs/GaInAs–Pt
0.16
16.2
1.5
3 M H2SO4 pH 1
Young et al. (2017)8


IrO2a
InGaP/GaAs/Ge-Pt 3jn Solar cell (wireless device)a
6.25
11.2
9.0
3 M KHCO3
Okamoto et al. (2017)183


RuO2–Rha
GaInP/GaInAs/AlInP/3jn, (monolithic device)a
1.0
14.0
40.0
1 M HClO4, pH 0
May et al. (2015)184


Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs (monolithic device)a
NiMoa
1.0
10.5
80.0
1 M KOH, pH 13.6
Verlage et al. (2015)175


RuO2–Pta
AIGaAs/Si 2jn Solar cell (monolithic wireless device)a
0.22
18.3
14.0
1 M HClO4, pH 0
Licht et al. (2000)185,186


Pt
p-GaInP2/n-GaAs 2jn, (monolithic device)
0.2
12.4 (11 sun)
20.0
3 M H2SO4
Khaselev et al. (1998)174


Fe2O3
a-Si-Pt 2jn, reactor: cool PEC cell [PEC-DEMO project]
50.0
0.6
1008.0
1 M KOH, pH 7
Vilanova et al. (2017)187 PEC DEMO


BiVO4
a-Si-Pt 2jn, reactor: Cool PEC cell
200
2.52
∼200.0
0.1 M KCi pH 7.0
(2016)188 PEC DEMO


0.57


BiVO4
Si module (∼5.0 V)
1600 (total device size)
3.0 to >2.0 (after 300 h)
∼300
0.1 M KPi pH 7.0
Tolod et al. (2017)189 Artiphyiction


WO3
DSSC
130.56
1.41
Not reported
1 H2SO4 pH 1.0
Lee et al. (2011)190 KERI


NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4
Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite solar cell–Pt (selective light filter applied)
0.25
6.2
10.0
0.5 M KPi, pH 7
Qiu et al. (2016)113


HDP (FeOOH NiOOH/Mo:BiVO4)-(NiFeOx/H:TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3)
c-Si, series connected-Pt 2p
0.25
7.7
8.0
1 M KCi, pH 9.2
Kim et al. (2016)6


NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4/WO3
DSSC solar cell–Pt
2.25
5.7
12.0
0.1 M NaPi, pH 7
Shi et al. (2015)191


Co-Pi/BiVO4/WO3
GaAs/InGaAsP-Pt 2jn
0.16
8.1
>1.0
0.5 M KPi, pH 7
Pihosh et al. (2015)163


IrOx–lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3 or CH3NH3PbBr3) perovskite solar cell
Pt/TiO2/CdS/CuInxGa1−xSe2 photocathode
0.2
6.3
1.0
0.5 M H2SO4, pH 0
Luo et al. (2015)170


IrOx–lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite solar cell
RuOx/TiO2/Al:ZnO/Cu2O/Au/FTO
0.057
2.5
2.0
0.5 M K2SO4, buffered pH 5
Dias et al. (2015)164


Co-Ci/H,Mo:BiVO4a
Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3)–Pt 1jn, (monolithic device)a
0.56
4.3 (wired)
>12.0
0.1 M KCi, pH 7
Kim et al. (2015)166


3.0 (wireless)


NiFeOx/Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3
Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite–NiMoZn
1.0
1.9
8.0
1 M KOH, pH 13.6
Morales et al. (2015)162


Co-Pi/W:BiVO4
(p-i-n a-Si:H/p-i-n/nc-Si:H)- Pt 2jn
0.283
5.2
1.0
0.1 M KPi, pH 7.3
Han et al. (2014)192


Co-Pi/W:BiVO4
(p-i-n a-Si:H/p-i-n nc-Si:H)-Pt 1jn and 2jn
1.0
4.9 (2jn)
1.0
0.1 M KPi, pH 7
Abdi et al. (2013)169


WO3
DSSC solar cell–Pt
0.196
3.1
>8.0
1 M HClO4, pH 0
Brillet et al. (2012)160


Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3
DSSC solar cell–Pt
0.196
1.17
>10.0
1 M NaOH, pH 13.6
Brillet et al. (2012)160




 Fig. 16  Photoanode–photocathode tandem cell for overall water splitting. (a) A tandem cell consisting of a NiOOH/FeOOH/3%Mo:BiVO4 photoanode and a Pt/CdS/CGS/(Ag,Cu)GaSe2 photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (b) α-Fe2O3 photoanode and amorphous Si photocathode in a tandem configuration. J–V plots of α-Fe2O3, rgH II (Fe2O3-II), and NiFeOx-coated rgH II (NiFeOx/Fe2O3-II) photoanodes and the current density of the Si photocathode. The net photocurrent generated during the first 10h of operation using NiFeOx/α-Fe2O3-II and Pt/TiO2/a-Si tandem in 0.5M KPi of pH 11.8 without external bias. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) BiVO4-c-Si tandem cell showing the radiation losses on passing through each layer. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) An inverse-structure perovskite and PEC tandem cell. The front and back sides of the PEC tandem cell. The J–V curves for a TiCoOx/BiVO4 photoanode (blue), a perovskite-based photocathode (red), and the photocathode in tandem configuration with TiCoOx/BiVO4 light filtering (green). Reproduced with Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2018. (e) RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode and Mo:BiVO4 photoanode measured in 0.2 M potassium borate of pH 9. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 

Fig. 16a represents a typical photoanode (NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4)–photocathode (Pt/CdS/CuGa3Se5/(Ag,Cu)GaSe2) configuration for overall water splitting under sunlight without external bias.154 The anodic–cathodic J–V curves determine operating potentials of 0.55 VRHE and 0.48 VRHE for parallel and tandem schemes, respectively, at the crossing points of the J–V curves, corresponding to a STH conversion efficiency ηSTH of 0.67%. The PEC tandem cell exhibited a photocurrent of 0.55 mA cm−2 for 2 h without degradation in a neutral phosphate buffer solution. The highest ηSTH for the photoanode–photocathode approach was very recently achieved by a similar type of chalcogenide-based photocathode. Kobayashi et al.155 reported Pt/TiO2/CdS/CIGS/Mo/SLG with ABPE of 12.5% and Jsc of ∼28 mA cm−2 at 0.0 VRHE, which is one of the highest values for photocathodes. With this photocathode and NiFeOx/BiVO4 photoanode, an ηSTH of 3.7% was achieved. Liu et al.156 described a fully integrated PEC tandem system of n-TiO2–p-Si for unassisted water splitting with an ηSTH of 0.12% in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.156 The lower ηSTH was due to the limited ohmic contact and light-absorption area. Jang et al.157 improved the PEC tandem cell using Mode T configuration of n-type Fe2O3 as a photoanode coated with an NiFeOx overlayer and a-Si as a photocathode coated with a TiO2/Pt overlayer in Ohmic contact.157 The tandem system, NiFeOx/Fe2O3–Pt/TiO2/a-Si, in Fig. 16b achieved an ηSTH of 0.91% and stability of 10 h in pH 11.8 electrolyte. Li and coworkers153 reported a PEC tandem cell using FeOOH/BiVO4 as a photoanode and Pt/Si as a photocathode with Mode P illumination, which showed an ηSTH of 2.5% in a neutral electrolyte.

Fig. 16c introduces a PEC tandem system combining a backside-illuminated photoanode (BiVO4) and a front side-illuminated photocathode (c-Si) in combination with a bipolar membrane.148 The BiVO4–c-Si tandem system showed unbiased water splitting at 0 VRHE for 1 h. Fig. 16d shows an architectural design of a 3D printed versatile PEC tandem cell made of a BiVO4–lead halide perovskite (MAPbI3) solar cell.158 Typical chopped J–V characteristics were measured under 1 sun for a PEC device made of a TiCoOx/BiVO4 photoanode and a Pt/MAPbI3 photocathode and their tandem cell (BiVO4–MAPbI3). The organic–inorganic halide perovskite as a photocathode with NiOx as the HTL showed −12.1 mA cm−2 at 0 V RHE with stability up to 7 h. A PEC tandem cell with a robust TiCoOx/BiVO4 photoanode exhibited 1.31 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE and stability up to 20 h under bias-free operation. The 3D printed PEC tandem cell, BiVO4–MAPbI3 can be scaled up to 10 cm2 for bias-free operation with an ηSTH of 0.35%.158 The 3D printed components of the PEC cell could be easily assembled and adapted for large scale prototypes.
Bornoz et al.159 demonstrated a PEC tandem cell using an n-BiVO4 photoanode and a p-Cu2O photocathode along with Co-Pi and RuOx as OEC and HEC, respectively. The photoelectrodes with an illuminated area of 0.283 cm2 in the PEC tandem system showed an ηSTH of ∼0.87% and stability of >1.5 h at pH 7. Very recently, Pan et al.140 reported a similar PEC tandem cell composed of a NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4 photoanode and a NiMo/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode as in Fig. 16e. In 0.1 M NaHCO3 (pH 9) under 1 sun illumination, the Cu2O photocathode showed −10 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 100 h stability in a weak alkaline electrolyte. The crossing point of the PEC tandem cell BiVO4–Cu2O system corresponded to −2.4 mA cm−2 and ηSTH of 3% with ∼12 h of stability in 0.2 M KBi (pH 9.0) electrolyte. This is the highest STH from metal-oxide based photoanode–photocathode tandem systems as well as the most stable system yet to be presented.140 Although highly efficient photoanodes and photocathodes are used, the unbiased PEC water splitting system of the photoanode–photocathode tandem cell shows low performance in general due to the mismatch between the two performance curves of the n-type photoanode and p-type photocathode.


3.4.2. Photoelectrode–photovoltaic cells. 
As mentioned, PEC tandem cells of photoanodes and photocathodes depend on well-matched bandgap energies and band edge positions of p-type photocathodes and n-type photoanodes. In contrast, photoelectrode–photovoltaic (PEC–PV) tandem cells are more attractive because there is no such requirement. In the PEC–PV configuration, the band levels of the photoelectrode have no direct relationship with the water redox potentials, because PV cells could supply the required potential, and thus there is less limitation on the material type. However, balancing solar light absorption between the PEC and PV cells should be important for optimization. Thus, a PEC–PV tandem cell with an n-type front light absorber is the most common and favorable geometry, since it can grant high photovoltage to the OER that accounts for the majority of overpotential for water splitting.1
Sivula and coworkers realized various PEC–PV tandem cells, e.g. Fe2O3-DSSC (ηSTH = 1.17%) and WO3-DSSC (ηSTH = 3.1%) for spontaneous overall water splitting without any bias.160 There are several reports on the WO3-DSSC tandem device.161 The results illustrate that developing n-type metal oxide semiconductors and their surface engineering are key factors to achieve better ηSTH. Fig. 17a shows the general scheme of a WO3-DSSC tandem cell, which showed unassisted water splitting with 9 h stability. Hydrogen evolves from the Pt surface attached to the DSSC and oxygen directly from the surface of the WO3 photoanode. The crossing point of J–V curves gives an ηSTH of 3.1%. Fig. 17b shows the unassisted water splitting by using an Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3–MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell tandem. The hematite absorbs high energy photons as a front light absorber and low energy photons are transmitted to the perovskite solar cell. The photo-generated holes are transferred to the OER catalyst to evolve oxygen, while the excited electrons flow to the ohmic contact with the perovskite solar cell. Light absorption in the perovskite cell also generates electron/hole pairs. The holes are driven to the back contact to recombine with the electrons from the hematite photoanode. The excited electrons in the perovskite cell are transferred through a wire to a NiMo hydrogen evolution catalyst to evolve H2 to complete the water splitting. This PEC–PV tandem device (NiFeOx/Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3 and MAPbI3/TiO2 solar cell) demonstrated an ηSTH of 1.9% at 1 VRHE with 8 h stability in pH 13.6 electrolyte.162
 Fig. 17  PEC–PV tandem cells for overall water splitting. (a) WO3-DSSC tandem cell and J–V curves of WO3 (yellow) and DSSC (blue) under simulated 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (b) A nanostructured α-Fe2O3–perovskite solar cell in a tandem configuration. J–V plots for NiFeOx/Al2O3/α-Fe2O3, Co-Pi/Al2O3/α-Fe2O3, and perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2) solar cells after light screening by the top α-Fe2O3 electrode. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) A tandem cell equipped with a hetero-type dual photoanode (HDP) (BiVO4||α-Fe2O3) and a 2p c-Si solar cell. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (d) A BiVO4/WO3-2jn GaAs/InGaAsP tandem cell where the PV cell operates under reflected light from the photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (e) A Cu2O–perovskite ((FAPbI)3−x(MAPbI3)x) solar cell–IrO2 tandem cell. J–V curves of the photocathode and anode components with overlaid PV cell. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. 
Kim et al.6 reported a novel PEC–PV tandem cell design of hetero-type dual (HDP) photoanodes of NiOOH/FeOOH/H,Mo:BiVO4 and NiFeOx/H,TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3 with a series-connected two parallel (2p) c-Si solar cell with a photovoltage of 1.2 V as the bottom absorber as in Fig. 17c. This system can be classified as a quadruple absorber (‘Q6’) system, i.e. six photons are needed for production of a H2 molecule. The operating point of the HDP type PEC–PV tandem cell showed an ηSTH of 7.7% and 8 h stability, which represents a step forward to efficient design of PEC water splitting. Fig. 17d shows a PEC–PV tandem cell with Co-Pi/BiVO4/WO3 nanorods as the photoanode and a 2jn GaAs/InGaAsP solar cell operating under reflected light from the photoanode.163 The PEC–PV tandem cell showed a stable water splitting photocurrent of 6.56 mA cm−2, which corresponds to an ηSTH of 8.1%. Fig. 17e shows a photocathode–solar cell tandem cell (Cu2O–MAPbI3), where the two light absorbers are placed back-to-back, the PV electron collector is wired to the PEC, and its hole collector is wired to a water oxidation anode. In a dual absorber PEC–PV tandem cell, the Cu2O–MAPbI3 solar cell–IrO2 anode showed unbiased water splitting with an ηSTH of 2.5% and stability of 2.5 h at pH 5.164
The PEC–PV tandem cells need a PV cell that produces bias power using light transmitted through the transparent photoelectrode. Usual PV materials are more expensive than materials for photoelectrodes, hence the cost of the PV component would determine the economic viability of the PEC–PV system. The perovskite solar cells (PSC) attract great attention as a next-generation PV cell because they have a rare combination of high efficiency and low price, although their low stability against moisture delays practical applications. Hence, it is natural to attempt to apply PSC to PEC–PV tandem cells.43
In 2013, Mathews and coworkers165 successfully applied a CH3NH3PbI3 (Eg ∼ 1.55 eV) perovskite PV cell in a PEC–PV tandem cell with a Fe2O3 photoanode for unassisted water splitting to obtain an ηSTH of 2.4% in 1 M NaOH electrolyte, which is twice as high as the 1.17% ηSTH of the Fe2O3-DSSC tandem cell reported by Sivula et al.160 The PEC–PV tandem cell contained a single PSC and a Mn-doped hematite photoanode. However, PSC must be immersed in water electrolyte, which induces an inherent stability problem. As a result, these perovskite-based PEC–PV tandem devices cannot be operated for longer than 1 h. Kim et al.166 fabricated a MAPbI3 perovskite PV cell completely sealed in glass and epoxy for a PEC–PV tandem cell with a BiVO4 photoanode modified with extrinsic (Mo)/intrinsic (H2-treatment) dual doping and a cobalt carbonate (Co-Ci) catalyst. The ηSTH was as high as 4.3% in a “wired” configuration and 3.0% in “wireless” configuration, and the cells were stable for at least 10 h. Groups of Kamat167 and Shen168 also fabricated a MAPbI3 PSC-based PEC–PV tandem cell using Co-Pi loaded BiVO4 or BiVO4/TiO2 as a photoanode, which yielded an ηSTH of 2.5% or 1.24%, respectively. Their activity, however, decreased continuously indicating poor stability. A PEC–PV tandem cell (Co-Pi/W:BiVO4–2jn a-Si) was demonstrated with an ηSTH of 4.9% and 1 h stability at pH 7.3.169 A NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4 – PSC tandem cell showed an ηSTH of 6.2% using single PSC with stability of 5 h.113 Interestingly, Luo et al.170 inverted the PEC-PV configuration from the usual alignment to a PV-PEC configuration using a semitransparent perovskite MAPbBr3 (Eg ∼ 2.3 eV) PV cell in front and a CIGS (Eg ∼ 1.1 eV) as the photocathode. The well matched band gaps enabled efficient panchromatic harvesting of the solar spectrum, resulting in an ηSTH of approximately 6.3%.170
Another approach to PEC–PV tandem is wireless, monolithic devices.156,171 This sheet-like device can function without any external connection and bias, and has a plant's leaf-like structure. This type of devices usually has reduced overall efficiencies compared to wired devices, because of ineffective contacts relative to wiring.172 But such a geometry has lower complexity and may be useful for fabrication of small devices. Fig. 18a and b show nanoscale photoelectrodes (TiO2/a-Si) assembled from inorganic nanowires or nanotree-like heterostructures for direct solar water splitting. The system comprises two semiconductor light absorbers with a large surface area, an interfacial layer for charge transport, and spatially separated cocatalysts to facilitate the water reduction and oxidation. Under simulated sunlight of 150 mW cm−2 (1.5 suns), an ηSTH of 0.12% and 1.5 h stability in 0.5 M H2SO4 were determined.156Fig. 18c shows a tandem junction microwire array with a buried homojunction (n–p+-Si) coated with ITO and WO3.171 The J–V curves in Fig. 18d show the superior performance of tandem junction microwire devices in 1 M H2SO4. Fig. 18e shows the fabrication and structural characterization of the nanotree-like core–shell heterostructures (Co-Pi/W:BiVO4/n–p-Si).173 Fabrication steps include (i) black Si deposition (b) pre-diffusion and etching, and (iii) spray coating of black Si. J–V curves in Fig. 18f show an ηSTH of 0.45% for unassisted solar-driven water splitting for 1 h in 0.5 M KPi electrolyte at pH 7. The small diameter TiO2 nanowires (blue) were grown on the upper half of a Si nanowire (gray), and the two semiconductors absorb different regions of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 18  Wireless back-to-back connection of PEC–PV tandem. (a) A Si/TiO2 nanotree array with a magnified view of the TiO2 segment used for water oxidation. The photographic images compare a TiO2 nanowire, a Si nanowire, and a Si/TiO2 nanotree substrate. (b) The solar water splitting on nanotree heterostructures under 150 mW cm−2 (1.5 suns) in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (c) A tandem junction microwire array with a buried homojunction (n–p+-Si) coated with ITO and n-WO3, and an energy diagram and reaction pathway for water splitting in the tandem device. (d) J–V curves for single and tandem junction microwire devices in 1.0 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (e) Co-Pi/W:BiVO4/SnO2/n-p-Si nanotree heterostructures with black-Si core/W:BiVO4 shell decorated with the CoPi oxygen evolution catalyst. (f) J–V plots of the black-Si core/W:BiVO4 devices for unassisted overall water splitting in 0.5 M KPi. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. 
Integrated tandem cells can also be constructed with buried junction-type photoelectrodes. As mentioned above, their extremely high PV efficiency leads to the tandem PEC cell with the highest ηSTH (10–19%), even though it comes with the highest complexity and the highest cost to fabricate. Such difficulty is unfavorable for scale up and practical applications. But again, only this device type accomplished ηSTH above 10%, which is the common target of PEC projects worldwide. The pioneering work of Khaselev and Turner174 on a Pt/GaInP2/GaAs multijunction photoelectrode recorded an ηSTH of 12.4% in 3 M H2SO4 electrolyte under ∼12 concentrated sun condition. The system is not practical because it showed serious corrosion only after 20 h of operation, but the work inspired extensive subsequent research studies on buried junction-type photoelectrodes.

Fig. 19a shows the direct STH conversion via inverted metamorphic multi-junction (IMM) semiconductor architectures as a photocathode, coupled with RuOx as an anode and GaInP/GaInAs as a tandem absorber, which show 60% improvement over the previous high ηSTH of 16% using a tandem III–V device.8Fig. 19b shows a monolithically integrated device, consisting of a GaAs/InGaP photoanode coated with a-TiO2 as a stabilization layer, in conjunction with NiMo as OEC and HEC used for solar-driven water splitting. This unassisted device showed an ηSTH of 10.5% under 1 sun illumination, with stability for 440 h in 1 M KOH. The protected monolithically integrated tandem device is an intrinsically safe prototype system (area ∼ 1 cm2) for a H2 production rate of 0.81 μL s−1 and an ηSTH of 8.6% with separate streams of H2 and O2.175
 Fig. 19  Integrated tandem cell of buried junction type photoelectrodes. (a) An inverted metamorphic multi-junction (IMM) device architecture for maximizing light harvesting with GaInP (Eg = 1.8 eV) and GaInAs (Eg = 1.2 eV) junctions. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoelectrode (inset: generation of gas bubbles). J–V plots of the Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoanode measured in 1.0 M KOH under 1 sun. The short-circuit photocurrent density and the corresponding ηSTH as a function of time in a two-electrode configuration. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) Bifacial GaAs photoelectrode tandem system for unassisted solar water splitting. Separately prepared GaAs photocathode and photoanode are co-integrated on a glass substrate. J–V curves of the GaAs photocathode and photoanode with an ohmic metal contact. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (d) The dual-junction tandem as the photoelectrode for water splitting; Rh/TiO2/AlInPOx/AlInP–GaInP/GaInAs/GaAs/RuOx. The comparison of realized ηSTH and historical development, and theoretical benchmarking values. The PEC performance of the tandem device of the full surface-functionalized photoelectrode and after cap-layer etching. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 

Fig. 19c illustrates a tandem electrode system for unassisted solar water splitting, where separately-prepared GaAs is co-integrated on a glass substrate as both photocathode and photoanode.121J–V curves of printed GaAs photocathode and photoanode with an ohmic metal contact were measured under 1 sun illumination to record an ηSTH of 12.7%. Similarly, Fig. 19d shows a monolithic PEC tandem device of Rh/TiO2/AlInP–GaInP/GaInAs/GaAs/RuO2 for direct water splitting with an ηSTH of 19%.176 Crystalline TiO2 is a corrosion protection layer for the tandem cell, and the monolithic tandem device showed stable performance for 20 h in a neutral electrolyte.


3.4.3. Artificial leaf – monolithic system. 
Monolithic overall water splitting devices are made with compact assembly of light absorbers. This is often called an “artificial leaf” because of its resemblance to the natural photosynthesis of plants, which was termed by Nocera and his coworkers.26 The compact wireless geometry would give less complexity of the device without wires and external connections. As mentioned, the artificial leaf devices developed so far usually underperform relative to corresponding wired devices due to ineffective charge transfers and ohmic contacts. Various combinations of monolithic devices have been developed for photoanode–photocathode, PV–EC, and PEC–PV tandem cells. Most of the demonstrations were made using a buried junction PV protected with an ohmic contact and an electrocatalyst. For monolithic PEC–PV cells, a robust and cheap metal oxide semiconductor like BiVO4 or Fe2O3 can be used as a front light absorber while a solar cell as the back light absorber.6,166
Some examples of artificial leaf device for overall water splitting based on PEC–PV configuration are shown in Fig. 20. In Fig. 20a, Co-Bi/3jn-a-Si/NiMoZn composed of earth-abundant NiMoZn (HEC) and Co-Bi (OEC), and a (3jn) Si solar cell is shown. The device was illuminated for >2 h under AM 1.5 illumination in 1 M KBi (red trace) and 1.5 M KNO3 (blue trace) to observe an ηSTH of 2.5%.26Fig. 20b shows a modulated III–V 3jn solar cell used for a wireless water splitting device (Pt/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs/Ge/IrOx)183 with a total area of 6.25 cm2. The device demonstrated an ηSTH of 11.2% and 7 h of stability in 3 M KHCO3 under 1 sun illumination. Fig. 20c presents a monolithic PEC–PV device composed of a CIGS module and two electrodes deposited with catalysts and encapsulated with epoxy.190 The CIGS-Pt device was illuminated in 3 M H2SO4 under 1 sun to produce a steady gas flow of 1.57 μL s−1 cm−2. Fig. 20d presents an organic artificial leaf (NiMoZn–organic solar cell–Co3O4).100 Using earth abundant catalyst NiMoZn (HEC) and Co3O4 (OEC), ηSTH was 4.9%, while it was 5.4% using RuO2 (OEC and HEC) catalyst for a small area of <0.1 cm2 of the solar cell. Fig. 20e shows an artificial leaf combining in tandem a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite 1jn solar cell with dual-doped photoanodes Co-Ci/H,Mo:BiVO4 for oxygen evolution.244 The device recorded a PEC performance of 4.8 mA cm−2 in KCi solution (pH 7) under 1 sun illumination and irradiation area 0.56 cm2. It actually produced stoichiometric H2 and O2 with an ηSTH of 3% with an irradiaton area of 1.3 cm2.
 Fig. 20  Monolithic, bias and wire-free “artificial leaf” devices for overall water splitting. (a) A Co-Bi/3jn a-Si/NiMoZn cell under 1 sun in 1 M KBi (red trace) and 1.5 M KNO3 (blue trace). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011. (b) The generation of H2 and O2 on a modulated III–V triple-junction solar cell (Pt/AgAu/InGaP/GaAs/Ge/IrOx) under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) A monolithic 3 series-connected CIGS solar cell module connected to a Pt electrocatalyst (for both OER, HER), and accumulated gas evolution under 1.0 sun in 3 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) An organic artificial leaf (RuO2/organic solar cell/RuO2) with RuO2 covered ITO electrodes for H2 (right) and O2 (left) evolution. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (e) A wireless solar water splitting device without external energy supply by combining in tandem a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell with Co-Ci/H,Mo:BiVO4. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Artificial leaves based on PV–EC integrate PV and EC components into a single, monolithic device. An efficient device of the multijunction a-Si solar cell connected to CoMo (HEC)–NiFexOy (OEC) was reported by Miller et al.191 with 7.8% STH conversion efficiency and robust durability of over 7200 h in 1 M KOH. Esiner et al.100 demonstrated an organic artificial leaf composed of a 3jn polymer solar cell and NiMoZn (HEC) and Co3O4 (OEC) for H2 and O2 evolution, respectively. This organic leaf showed a STH conversion efficiency of 4.9% with more than 20 min of stability.
A highly versatile artificial leaf based on PV–EC design with floatability and planar compact design is applicable in various natural environments.192 A monolithic device based on CIGS absorbers demonstrated ηSTH above 10% both in PV–EC and PEC–PV configurations.98 A miniature solar water splitting device with 3PV or 4PV solar cell connected to an earth abundant electrocatalyst showed ηSTH values of 7.4% and 6.4%, respectively, using a size of 0.80 cm.2,157 A CuInS2 solar cell and Pt (HEC) and NiFeOx/Ni (OEC) catalysts of a planar design module for large-scale artificial leaves showed an ηSTH of 3.14% and H2 gas evolution of 83 μmol in 150 min.

3.5 Summary of laboratory results of solar water splitting
In this section, we graphically summarize in Fig. 21 the performance of various solar water splitting systems discussed so far in terms of STH conversion efficiency ηSTH and stability for three system categories of PV–EC, PEC, and PC based on data summarized in Tables 1–3. Similar summaries were presented in 2014 by Ronge et al.15,21 and in 2015 by Ager et al.46 Here we update the evolution of ηSTH, and add the trend of stability and the light absorber's size, which are also important factors for practical solar hydrogen production. In addition, we subdivide PEC devices into PE buried (devices similar to PV cells but function in water with sophisticated surface protection), PE–PV (at least one side of the device directly contacts water forming a semiconductor||liquid junction, SLJ), and PE–PE (made with only photoelectrodes) devices, all having a main light absorber working inside of the electrolyte. In contrast, PV–EC devices work outside of the electrolyte, and PC devices are free or fixed powders with no charge collector or photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 21  A comparison of photon-driven water splitting systems. (a) Reported STH from various device types (PV–EC, PEC and PC). PEC devices are further classified: PE buried indicates devices similar to PV cells but functioning in water by surface protection. PE–PV indicates that at least one side of the device directly contacts water forming a semiconductor||liquid junction (SLJ). PE–PE is a device made with only photoelectrodes. (b) Stability and (c) the device's light absorber's geometric size with reported STH. (d) Golden triangles for a practical solar hydrogen production system and their simplified evaluation. Left side is for PV–EC, PEC and PC and right side is for PEC related devices. 
In general, PV–EC systems clearly show the highest ηSTH (up to 20% by III/V, ∼10% by Si), followed by PEC (3.7% for PE–PE, ∼8.1% for PE–PV, ∼19% for PE buried), and then PC (mostly around 1.0%) systems. Also there is an appreciable trend of steady improvement in ηSTH over the last two decades. The PEC systems show the largest variation of ηSTH because of the largest system variation. Thus, the systems of PE buried show the most complexity and the highest ηSTH, while PE–PE systems of the minimum complexity show the lowest ηSTH. Unfortunately, none of those experimentally studied systems meet the criteria for practical solar hydrogen production, i.e., a high efficiency above 10%, a long lifetime over 10 years, and scalability up to several km2, which we discuss in more detail in later parts of this paper.
Benchmarking stability is not simple because the reported period of stability does not necessarily mean the lifetime of the device. But the trend is clearly seen. The best stability is observed with PC or PEC systems using intrinsically stable oxide semiconductors or C3N4. However, there are few p-type semiconductors that are stable under photocathode conditions. Many successful cases of protection layer strategies have been reported for unstable p-type or PV grade materials. However, the practical devices require durability as long as 10 years, and longevity of the protection layers for such a time scale is of concern. There is a review specifically addressing the stability issue of photoanodes.48 It also should be mentioned at this point that efficiency and durability are only two of the many factors that determine the economic competitiveness of the system as will be discussed in later sections.
4. Scaling-up of solar water splitting system: artificial leaf to tree and to farm
Due to the rapid progress of past decades in the basic research of efficient and durable solar water splitting materials and systems, it is about time to consider practical applications through scale-up.193 Wind or PV-powered PEM electrolyzers have been well investigated to semi-commercial levels,72 but PEC cells and PC systems have not been explored in such a depth of development. Hence, development of cost-effective, functional, scalable, deployable and practical solar hydrogen production system is in dire need considering the ever-increasing demand for a climate-friendly energy carrier. The PEC water splitting has the potential of meeting the above requirements, yet numerous challenges are involved such as: (i) improved efficiency of photoelectrode materials; (ii) reduced internal resistance losses; (iii) long lifetime, especially of the photoelectrodes; (iv) maximal photon absorption; (v) efficient gas separation and storage; (vi) scaling-up and (vii) reduced plant capital costs.194 All the requirements are needed for reduction of H2 production cost to be competitive with those of the current commercial processes of steam reforming of natural gas (∼1 $ per kg) or electrolysis of water (∼5.5 $ per kg14). DOE's target for the cost of solar H2 production is 4 $ per kg by 2020 for commercialization.15 In this section, we discuss the feasibility of scale up of the laboratory results addressing techno-economic aspects of the solar water splitting technologies and introducing large-scale prototypes and demonstration projects.
4.1 Factors to consider in scale up
First consideration in the scale up is that the overall efficiency of the scaled up device is inevitably lower than the small scale laboratory devices regardless of system type due to unique factors involved in the process as qualitatively discussed in Fig. 22. In Fig. 22a and b, a photoanode and photocathode pair with band gaps of 1.84 eV and 1.23 eV and their tandem cell (D4) are shown, which would achieve an ηSTH of 22% theoretically according to calculation by Pinaud et al.40 The assumed “ideal device” has a total photovoltage of 1.68 V and thus shows an onset potential of −0.45 V in a two electrode mode. Faradaic efficiency of gas evolution was assumed to be 100%. The performance of a real laboratory scale device (scale of 1–10 mm and an assumed size of 0.1 cm2) is lowered by overpotentials of OER (∼0.3 V) and HER (∼0.1 V),77 charge recombination in the bulk/surface of the semiconductor, surface Fermi level pinning (which will be dominant if the light absorber forms an adaptive junction), decreased light harvesting by reflection, and so on. Thus experimentally achievable STH efficiency is reduced to 15% with reduced photovoltage by ∼0.15 V and current loss by 35% (Fig. 22c). It should be noted that the total current load for the device is only ∼1.2 mA, which would not induce any significant potential gradient by reactants (H+), and the distance between electrodes is rather small, thus a laboratory scale device is often free from a large ohmic loss.
 Fig. 22  Efficiency loss in scaled-up photoanode–photocathode tandem cells. (a) Device model on the experimental scale. (b) Band gap alignment. (c) J–V curves of an ideal device with no energetic loss and a real experimental device with known loss mechanisms. (d) Scaled-up tandem photoelectrochemical device based on cell architecture.29,30 (e) J–V curves of the experimental device and the scaled up device with expected energy losses. 
When the device is scaled up to a scale of ∼1 m or much larger (10 m2 panel, 106 times larger than laboratory scale), there are problems that are not usually considered at small scales (Fig. 22d). First, making a bigger device requires different fabrication methods, and usually accompanies spatial defects195 and increased total Ohmic resistance,196 which would decrease the efficiency lower than 15%. Another thing that large solar hydrogen production systems need is fuel separation, which is usually done by a membrane separator. Only a few studies are available28–30,41,172,197 on membranes applied for PEC cells, not like the extensive studies in the fields of fuel cells and PEM electrolyzers. Studies showed surprisingly high energy loss from simply applying a good membrane and large potential and current losses are expected from the fuel separator. Also, the light intensity is usually less than the standard 100 mW cm−2 in many places of the world and not uniform over a large area, which will further lower the overall performance of the device.195,196
Finally, the above factors would affect to different degrees depending on cell architectures and materials (light absorbers, electrocatalysts, substrates, housing, electrolytes, etc.) of a scaled up PEC system. Thus from a theoretical (ideal) device to experimental (laboratory), and then to large-size scaled-up devices, continuous efficiency loss is inevitable (Fig. 22e), and it is one of the major tasks of scale up to minimize the losses. Here we assume modest loss in current (33%) and potential (∼0.15 V), which results in STH efficiency of ∼10% for the panel size device, which is the commonly noted efficiency for practical solar hydrogen production by a PV–EC device.
4.2 Techno-economic assessment
There are attempts to assess the state of the solar hydrogen production in comparison with existing technologies of hydrogen production. Ardo et al.198 recently proposed readiness perspective about solar hydrogen production in the time scale of 2050 in comparison with already existing ones. They also tried to identify pathways to implementing solar-hydrogen technologies. Particularly, the fields of market opportunities for short term (10 years of service time) are also noted such as grid-level energy storage, transportation, local or isolated permanent energy systems, military industry, agriculture sector, high-margin products, and for long term like space industry. For specific examples of solar to hydrogen production systems, PV–EC (e.g. Jia et al., ηSTH of 30%88) and PEC (e.g. Verlage et al., ηSTH of 10%175) were compared for a similar light absorber class of III–V semiconductors, which is quite complex but highly efficient. It was shown that the PV–EC system clearly outperformed the PEC cell at the technology readiness level.198
Recently, the Royal Society conducted a technology readiness level (TRL) investigation to show the current state of solar fuel production technologies in comparison with conventional technologies.199 Steam methane reforming and the alkaline electrolyser were rated as TRL 8 and ‘mature’, and solar fuel production was rated at a low TRL of 1–3, meaning it is still in the stage of basic technology research. It is even lower than PEM electrolysis (TRL: 5–7). Yet, they predicted that solar fuel production, especially by PEC or PC, would present lower capital costs. In addition, CO2 tax is also going to be a major issue, for which solar-to-fuel technology is an option that is fully free from CO2. Nuclear energy is also carbon-free,200 but it is out of the scope of this review (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Technical readiness level (TRL) of solar hydrogen production technology. (a) Scheme representing PV–electrolysis and PEC device concepts, including current relative level of use, projected cost, required amount of raw materials, and current relative level of technology readiness. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (b) Technology readiness level evaluation alongside of solar to fuel technology to other ones. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from the Royal Society, copyright 2018. 
In this early stage of development, techno-economic assessment for practical solar hydrogen production systems is mandatory, starting from why such a scale-up is needed in spite of already existing technologies of hydrogen production. Indeed, there are a number of published perspective and techno-economic assessment papers including Ronge et al.,15,21 Zhai,28 Sathre et al.,29,30 Pinaud et al.40 and Shaner et al.,14 and an overview of such studies.172
An economic analysis of solar H2 production by the U.S. Department of Energy estimated that the PC systems with an ηSTH of 5% can produce H2 at a cost of $2.30 kg−1. The STH efficiency data summarized in Table 1 reveal that we are not far from realization of 5% STH efficiency by PC solar H2 production. The results suggest that the PC approach could be a promising strategy for solar H2 production because of its extremely simple reactor design and ease of scale up. However, it requires separation of the explosive H2 and O2 gas mixture.

Fig. 24 exhibits a few selected examples of scaled-up photocatalytic H2 production systems. In 2015 Schröder et al.63 reported the use of Pt-loaded mesoporous carbon nitride (Pt/mp-C3N4) to design a large scale PC solar H2 production reactor of nearly 1 m2 area under natural sun light (Fig. 24a). This reported reactor had an ηSTH of 0.12% and produced a total 18.2 L per month of H2. In another large scale PC solar H2 production system, Goto et al.64 emphasized the use of an easily expandable panel system (Fig. 24b). The 1 m2 panel actually consisted of 3 × 3 RhCrOx + CoOx/Al:SrTiO3 photocatalytic sheets of 33 × 33 cm2 area. This reported scale up system had a better ηSTH (0.4%) than the earlier one. They also emphasized the importance of continuous release of gas bubbles from the photocatalytic surface and proposed a 1 mm deep water layer for the purpose.64 To resolve the gas separation issue in the PC system, Osterloh and Parkinson201,202 reported the utilization of a hydrogen selective polymeric membrane as schematically illustrated in Fig. 24c.201,202 The selective diffusion of photogenerated H2 through the polymeric membrane led to H2 separation from the mixed gas. The Z-scheme solar water splitting in a vertically stacked particle-suspension photocatalytic reactor in Fig. 24d was proposed by Chandran et al.203
 Fig. 24  A few selected examples of scaled-up PC H2 production systems: (a) Photo-reactor composed of a Pt/C3N4 PC sheet of ∼1 m2. The averaged H2 evolution reaction rates from the reactor with respect to the irradiated energy and those of the laboratory-scale experiment (horizontal dashed line). Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. (b) A 1 m2 Al:SrTiO3 panel for long term overall water splitting. The detailed assembly of this 1 m2 Al:SrTiO3 water splitting panel of 9 photocatalyst squares (each 33 × 33 cm2). The H2 evolution performance of a 5 cm2 RhCrOx + CoOx/Al:SrTiO3 panel. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2018. (c) A circulating photocatalytic water splitting reactor consisting of hydrogen selective polymeric membrane pipes for selective separation of H2. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from the Cambridge Press, copyright 2011. (d) The Z-scheme solar water splitting in a vertically stacked particle-suspension photocatalytic reactor. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
For large scale solar hydrogen production, the PV–EC system is steps ahead of PEC or PC cells. Rodriguez and Moser204 analyzed a PV–EC system with Si PV (11% 3jn a-Si/a-Si/uc-Si) as a model light absorber and varying other balance of system (BOS) like electrocatalyst (OER/HER), housing, and membrane for calculating hydrogen price (Fig. 25). Results showed an excellent hydrogen cost below $2.90 kg−1 even with PV of the modest efficiency (Fig. 25b). In addition, the calculation shows that nearly 97% of cost comes from the PV component and that electrocatalysts contribute insignificantly even with expensive IrOx/Pt for the PV–EC system. The use of IrOx/Pt gave the highest ηSTH of ∼8.26% while cheaper RuO2/NiMo catalysts gave ∼8.17%, and thus the latter provided a better price option.
 Fig. 25  (a) Cost analysis for integrated PV–EC systems with a 3jn a-Si/a-Si/uc-Si solar cell. (b) Cost comparison of solar-hydrogen generators that incorporate different catalysts. The results show that the PV component dominates the price of H2 produced in optimized systems. F and average STH efficiencies (η) are shown for each system. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
Sathre et al.29 conducted a life-cycle net energy assessment (LCA) for a 1 GW (continuous annual average) PEC hydrogen production facility (1 GW HHV = 610 metric tons of H2 per day)29 based on a basic capacity calculation previously conducted by Zhai et al.28 Their calculation started from assuming a model system and the calculation was conducted by Oracle® Crystal Ball software. In Fig. 26, four hierarchical levels of a solar hydrogen production facility are depicted – (1) a PEC “cell” of 2 m2; (2) a truck-transportable panel of 29 m2 comprising multiple cells; (3) a “field” of 1000 panels plus gas compression and storage, occupying 12 ha; and (4) the 1 GW (continuous annual average) “facility” of 1510 fields occupying 180 km2 of land. The facility was assumed to be located at southwest US.
 Fig. 26  Four hierarchical levels of a 1 GW (continuous annual average) hydrogen production facility. (a) The full size of the PEC cell, shown partially in cut-away view, is 1.7 m × 1.2 m. (b) PEC panel with dimensions of 12.0 m × 2.4 m. Flow rates are based on base-case conditions, and do not include water vapor lost with vented O2. (c) Diagram of a PEC field, comprising 1000 panels (100 rows of ten panels) plus compression and storage equipment for one day's production of H2 (and O2, if collected). (d) Diagram of a PEC facility producing 1 GW (annual average) H2. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
In system assessment studies for practical scales, one needs to consider balance of system (BOS) in addition to the main components of light absorber and reactor, which includes the supporting structure, manifolds/pipes, pumps/compressors, storage tanks for H2, roads and monitor/controller. As shown in Fig. 27a, Sathre et al.31 conducted assessment of the initial energy input for 1 GW H2 production facility, which includes 3 big parts of light active cell, inactive module (reactor) and the BOS of the system. BOS is responsible for almost ∼50% of energy input for the system. In order to show the actual BOS components, Fig. 27b introduces a large scale PEC–PV system composed of a BiVO4 photoanode and Si PV with size of 1.284 m × 1.613 m and with a maximum H2 production rate of 7.7 L h−1 (=∼0.68 g h−1) constructed by a consortium between UNIST and Elchemtech Co., Ltd of South Korea. For the PEC cell, BiVO4 was fabricated on FTO using Sayama's auto combustion method205 using water-based solvent. Thus, ∼20 cm2 sized NiFeOx/BiVO4/FTO achieved ∼1.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. counter electrode, which is similar to the performance of PECDEMO's BiVO4 (∼50 cm2). The overall performance of the PEC–PV tandem cell is also similar to that of the Artiphyction prototype (maximum ηSTH ∼2%). Notably, they achieved complete H2 separation from mixed gas products to feed to a fuel cell. Fig. 27b shows BOS of the system–flowmeter, control panel, pipes, steel frame, H2 separator, and compressor.
 Fig. 27  Composition assessment of balance of system in a photoelectrochemical cell. (a) One-time primary energy inputs (PJ) required to construct and decommission a 1 GW (annual average) facility. For comparison, the base-case annual delivered net energy of the completed facility in operation is shown as a blue dashed line. Reproduced from ref. 29 and 30 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014 and 2016. (b) Proof in concept scaled-up PEC–PV device. Left-side picture image of 1 m2 NiFeOx/BiVO4/FTO with 0.2 m2 c-Si panel (left) and control panel connected to hydrogen separation modules. Reproduced with courtesy of Elchemtech and UNIST consortium. 
Based on mass and energy balance, the life-cycle primary energy balance describes the amount of energy provided by the facility to society during its life span. In units of PJ, it is calculated as the total energy output minus the total energy input, and it is given by the following equation: Energy balance = {T × EH} − {Ep + (T × EO)} + ED(7)
The energy return on energy invested (EROEI or EROI) describes how much usable energy will be delivered by the facility or system, relative to its required energy inputs. EROEI is unitless, and it is calculated as the total energy output divided by the total energy input: (8)
In (4) and (5), T = service life of the facility (years); EH = energy (HHV) in hydrogen produced in 1 year (PJ per year); EP = energy used to produce the facility (PJ); EO = energy used to operate the facility for 1 year (PJ per year) and ED = energy used to decommission the facility (PJ). For actual operation, energy balance must be greater than 0 and EROEI must be greater than 1.
The energy payback time describes how long the facility must operate for it to deliver H2 equivalent of the energy required for its manufacturing, construction, and decommissioning. Energy payback time (EPBT) of practical PEC technology depends on materials and operation: (9)
EPBT is not a life-cycle metric, i.e. energy is not delivered after the payback time; hence above eqn (6) does not include the variable T, the facility service life.
Multiple factors are considered including ηSTH (5, 10, 20%) and life span (5, 10, 20 and 40 years) of the PEC panel, fabrication of photoactive materials, other materials and capacity factor, solar transmittance loss, and gas storage capacity to determine energy balance, EROEI, EPBT, while the base case was set for ηSTH of 10% and a lifetime of 10 years. Analysis showed EBPT of 8.1 years and EROEI of 1.6. Analysis showed very large dependence of capital cost of panel replacement, which was the cost of the photoelectrode (Fig. 28b) and return of benefits also greatly depended on the efficiency and life span of this panel (Fig. 28c). For instance, an increase in ηSTH from 5% to 20% shortened the EBPT from 17.9 years to only 3 years with a life span of 20 years, and elongation of lifetime from 5 to 20 years shortened the EBPT from 18.2 years to 6.4 years for an ηSTH of 10%. The results indicate that the base case performance (ηSTH of 10% and a lifetime of 10 years) is required for making the scaled up device in any sense.
 Fig. 28  Life-cycle net energy assessment based on a model facility for 1 GW HHV. (a) Annual energy balance of 1 GW H2 production facility in operation (PJ per year). Energy use for panel replacement is based on steady-state conditions with 10 year life span (10% of panels replaced each year) and base-case energy use for cell materials and fabrication. Error bars for “panel replacement” show 5- and 20 year life spans. Error bars for “panel heating” are based on the coldest and warmest geographic locations. Error bars for other categories are based on Monte Carlo simulation. (b) Change in base-case energy payback time (EPBT) due to variation of individual parameters between low and high estimates. (c) Life cycle net energy metrics for a 1 GW H2 production facility, under various assumptions of facility life span, specific cell life span (20 years) with variation of ηSTH (5, 10, and 20%). The numbers in bold represent base-case conditions. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
Recently, Shaner et al.14 compared solar energy-driven H2 production cost by PEC cells (type 3, and 4 configuration of Pinaud et al.40), PV–EC, and with grid-supplemented EC (GSPV–EC) as in Fig. 29. Calculation was made assuming H2 production of 3.65 kiloton per year and price for PV-electricity of 0.03 $ per kW h,206 which is a critical factor for comparison. With base case (ηSTH of 9.76% for systems, PV efficiency of 16% and nearly 60% electrolyzer efficiency), the levelized cost of hydrogen (LCH) and capital cost of Type 3 systems are $11.4 kg−1 and $205MM dollars and areal capital cost is $293 m−2 with major price factor coming from the semiconductor ($48) and membrane ($50), which are lower than LCH for the comparable base-case PV–EC system with LCH of $12.1 kg−1 and $260MM ($371 m−2). The type 4 system had an even lower LCH of $9.2 kg−1 and $160MM ($428 m−2), while semiconductors (InGaP/GaAs) ($175) and light concentrator ($48) took the 1st and 2nd highest price portions. The lowest LCH was expected from GSPV–EC with LCH of 5.5 $ per kg and $34 MM for water electrolysis, while the control case-steam methane reforming (SMR) showed LCH of only 1 $ per kg, which is currently the cheapest way to produce hydrogen.
 Fig. 29  (a) Block diagram depicting the power flow through a PEC plant (left) and PV–EC system. The insets show Type 3 and 4 systems studied by Pinaud et al.40 Right side is for the PV–EC system with or without grid assistance. (b) Contour plots of the LCH ($ per kg H2) for the aforementioned systems as a function of the plant efficiency and active component (PEC cell for type 3 and 4, PV modules and electrolyzers for PV–EC) areal capital expense normalized by the required solar collection area ($ per m2) for PEC systems and electrolyzer capital for PV–EC ($ per W generated). The base-case result is indicated by the yellow circle. Contours are labeled at $2 per kg intervals. (c) Summary plot. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
Obviously, all systems would have lower LCH with higher system efficiencies and lower capital costs of the system, as well elucidated in Fig. 29b. With the perspective of improved efficiency (25% is assumed to be the practical limit) and lowering capital cost (100–200$ for base case), LCH of 3–4 $ per kg is expected, which is still higher than SMR. However, global energy scenario and CO2 emission should be considered in actual selection of technology to implement.198 In addition, we need to find a way to circumvent such “seeming limits” of solar hydrogen production technologies. In conclusion, significantly higher energy-return on energy-invested (EROI) and lower LCH should be achieved to realize practical solar hydrogen production.
4.3 Selection of materials
For practical large scale systems, the criteria of materials selection should be different from those of laboratory devices because the cost competitiveness should be a primary concern. Complexity of the device is considered as a major factor for differentiating PV–EC and PEC, which often employ similar materials.190,207 Jacobsson et al.190,207 made a simple criterion whether the photoelectrode or the light absorber works inside or outside of the electrolyte. Recently Yao and Li102 proposed that the materials should be classified as PV grade (c-Si, a-Si, GaAs, GaP, InP, GaInP, CdS, CdSe, CdTe, ZnSe, ZnTe, CuInS2, CuInGaSe2etc.), and non-PV grade (TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3, BiVO4, GaN:ZnO, TaON, Ta3N5, BaTaO2N, Cu2O, CuWO4, CaFe2O4), since PV grade material-based photoelectrodes in fact often share or even have exactly the same structure and geometry as those of PV materials. Ronge et al.15,21 also cited lower complexity as a potential merit of the PEC system over PV–EC, which would directly affect the capital cost of the scaled up system.
The material's complexity could be represented by “layers”, and reducing the number of layers would be a direction of photoelectrode development for scale up with capital cost saving. As schematically shown in Fig. 30, highly active photoelectrodes (photocurrent above ∼10 mA cm−2 at short circuit voltage) always involve more than 2 layers (protection + electrocatalyst) and often 3 layers (charge collector + protection layer + electrocatalyst). This is owing to the fact that light absorbers with good charge mobility and light harvesting capability are PV grade non-oxide materials, which are generally expensive as well as unstable in water and thus need protection.48,208 To reduce the complexity of photoelectrodes, light absorber itself is better to be air- and water-stable requiring less degree of protection.16 Hence, a material's capital cost expected from its complexity should be balanced out for its efficiency. Of course, an efficient, stable, and cheap material would be ideal for scale up, which is not yet available, and in reality, we need to make a smart compromise.
 Fig. 30  (a) Reported photocurrent density under short circuit conditions (Jsc) of photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting under standard conditions: 1.0 sun, short circuit condition of 1.23 VRHE for photoanode, and 0.0 VRHE for photocathode. Materials and references: TiO2,106 WO3,209 BiVO4,108,210,211 TaON,212 Cu2O,140 Fe2TiO5,213 Fe2O3,6 Ta3N5,128 BaTaO2N,127 BaNbO2N,123 CuFeO2,214,215 CuBi2O4,216 p-MAPbI3,146,217 n-CdTe,134 p-CdTe,133 ACGSe,218 CuInS2,219 CZTS,141 CIGS,220 p-Sb2Se3,221 p-InP,151 n-InGaN,126 n-GaAs,131 p-GaP,222 n-GaP,131 SiC,145 n-Si,135 p-Si.148 (b) Known composition of photoelectrodes in (a). 
To achieve ηSTH above 10% for instance, Jph of ∼8.13 mA cm−2 should be generated by the water splitting reaction, so band gap should be smaller than ∼2.3 eV. But as shown in Fig. 30, it is rare to find materials other than PV grade that achieved Jph above 8.0 mA cm−2. The value is above the theoretical limit of BiVO4, the best metal oxide-based photoanode at the moment. As the photocathode, Cu2O achieved the highest Jph (10 mA cm−2 at 0.0 VRHE) as well as a photovoltage of ∼1.0 V, which are remarkable for a metal oxide light absorber. Semi-stable Ta3N5 recorded Jph ∼12 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. Besides them, most of the photoelectrodes showing Jph above 8.0 mA cm−2 are based on PV grade light absorbers with buried junctions and protection layers, which make their complexity rather high. Notably, p- or n-Si, III/V based semiconductors, CIS and CIGS achieved Jph at short circuit above 15–20 mA cm−2. But their photovoltages are rather low, around 0.6–1.0 V. In conclusion, photoelectrodes showing high ηSTH above 10% are limited mainly to PV grade light absorbers of limited stability.
As mentioned, most of the high performance PEC water splitting systems utilize PV-grade light absorbers and noble metal-based electrocatalysts. Even if a high efficiency system is successfully developed, it may not make a practical system if it is made of rare and precious materials. Hence, elemental abundance is certainly an important aspect to consider for scale-up not only for solar H2 generation but many other industries.223

Fig. 31a presents a relation of abundance in the Earth's crust, annual production, and cost (pure form) of some common elements.224–227 It demonstrates that the global production of the materials (from U.S. Geological Survey 2018) is not necessarily consistent with their crustal abundance, but instead reflects their demand. Since renewable H2 production will be a huge market in the future, the current research should focus more on earth abundant materials that can substitute the high valued materials in functionality.223,228–231Fig. 31b summarizes the three different aspects of materials; earth crust abundance to highlight the availability, yearly production to demonstrate the demand, and cost of pure element to signify the complexity of the processing process of the essential elements used in PEC water splitting systems. Moreover, a simplistic view has been presented of the sustainable clean energy production depending on available reserves of elements and earth abundance of photoactive materials.
 Fig. 31  (a) Annual production, abundance in the Earth's crust, and cost (pure form) of common elements used in PEC water splitting.224,226,227,232 (b) Relation between available reserves of elements, earth abundance, and supply risk of photoactive materials for sustainable clean energy production.233 
4.4 Fabrication techniques on a large scale
In addition to the choice of materials, the fabrication method should also be suitable for scale-up.175 For scaling-up the PEC water splitting systems, we have to consider first whether we can apply the laboratory fabrication techniques on a large scale such as metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD),121,234 molecular beam epitaxy (MBE),60,126,235 atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), sputtering, sol–gel or solution based coating (MOD, PADD) via spray pyrolysis, screen printing and spin coating, etc. The technique giving the highest efficiency is not always the choice in large scale fabrication. In general, solution-based methods near ambient conditions are desirable without harsh pressure, temperature, vacuum, and inert gas environment.31,104 Fabrication of PV grade materials (GaP, GaAs, InP, GaInP2, c-Si, a-Si, CIS, CIGS etc.) in a large size requires different strategies as well established in PV applications. However, it should be noted that the III/V material classes made by MOCVD236 and similar methods requiring O2-free atmosphere contributed significantly to the development of high efficiency PEC and PV–EC systems (Tables 2, 3 and Fig. 21).
Many metal oxide semiconductors are inherently stable in air, and nearly the whole synthetic process could be conducted under ambient conditions. The hydrothermal method is a simple and widely used technique for making both particle and film types. As shown in Fig. 32a, a WO3 nanoparticle array (NPA) film with sizes above 400 cm2 was made by the hydrothermal method.237 Hydrothermal synthesis of FeOOH from Fe salt at 80–120 °C and its conversion into Fe2O3 film are widely used for fabricating Fe2O3 nanorod films (Fig. 32d).32,119,120Fig. 32e shows electrodeposition of Cu2O films with a sequential deposition process on ∼50 cm2 FTO for the PECDEMO project.238,255
 Fig. 32  Solution-based methods for photoelectrodes on a modest scale (>5 cm2). (a) Hydrothermal synthesis of WO3 NPA films on substrates of various sizes. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. (b) Metal organic decomposition deposition of BiVO4 on FTO films with 5 × 5 cm2 scale. Reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Electrodeposition of BiOI (red) and thermal conversion to BiVO4 films (yellow). Reproduced with permission of ref. 109 and 253 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014 and Elsevier B.V., copyright 2015. (d) Hydrothermal synthesis of Fe2O3. (d) Spray pyrolysis deposition of Fe2O3 in a large area (>100 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 254 copyright 2015, imperial college UK (DOI: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/research-centres-and-groups/electrochemical-engineering/5–10thESEE_Photo-electrochemical-Production-of-H2.pdf). (e) Electrodeposition of Cu2O films with a sequential deposition process, reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. The right side image is for the Cu2O film deposited on ∼50 cm2 FTO. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation). 
Metal organic decomposition (MOD) is also a versatile and scalable method invented by Galembeck et al,239 and applied first to the synthesis of BiVO4 by Sayama et al.240,241 It requires a metal precursor decomposable (preferably organometals like acetate, acetyl acetate, oleate) in organic solvents (acetyl acetonate, acetic acid, or methanol).104,239,242 Since MOD denotes the nature of the precursor and solvent, the deposition can be varied from drop casting,243 spin coating,244 screen printing,245 spray pyrolysis,169,189,246–248etc. Yao et al.249 reported BiVO4/WO3/FTO, in which MOD BiVO4 was drop cast on substrates as large as 25 cm2. They also found that efficiency dropped by 50% when the film size increased from 0.125 cm2 to 2.0 cm2. Kim and Lee250 showed microwave-assisted synthesis of BiVO4 using a MOD precursor, within immensely short 5–8 minutes of synthesis time compared to usual 60–300 min for traditional thermal synthesis (Fig. 32b). The MOD is a branch of the sol–gel method which has been widely applied on various scales. For photoelectrode fabrication, Hong et al.111,251 showed polymer assisted decomposition deposition (PADD) for a WO3 photoanode and Kim et al.6 reported a Fe2O3 film made with similar PADD with PEG polymer.
Electrodeposition is very useful for making light absorber materials.31 In fact, multi-component photoelectrodes processed in solution are often made by electrodeposition like NiFeOx or Co-Pi OEC for Fe2O3162 and BiVO4,252 NiMo HEC for Cu2O photocathodes.140 It is one of the most useful methods available for non-PV-grade photoelectrode fabrication as recently reviewed by Kang and Choi.31 Many materials including SnO2, TiO2, ZnO, In2O3, WO3, Fe2O3, BiVO4, CuWO4, Cu2O, CuFeO2, CuBi2O4, CIS, CIGS, CZSS etc. could be synthesized by the electrodeposition method under mild conditions, yet giving high efficiencies. Electrocatalysts such as MOOH (M = Co, Fe, Ni, Mn, etc.), IrO2, RuO2, various metal alloys and Pt could also be deposited by electrodeposition in large scale fabrication. Specifically, Choi and coworkers109,253 developed highly porous BiVO4 on FTO by electrodeposition and thermal conversion of BiOI that showed extremely high efficiency for PEC water oxidation (Fig. 32c). There is a subsequent report on the synthesis of BiVO4 photoanodes of higher efficiency, but it involves glancing angle deposition (GLAD) of WO3163 and nanostructuring of SiO2 by sputter/E-beam deposition,113 thus it is not suitable for large scale fabrication, although scaling up of the method was also attempted by fabricating a ∼25 cm2-sized film.253
4.5 Charge collectors or substrates
Another basic component of the PEC cell is the charge collector or substrate such as transparent conductive oxides (TCO) like F:SnO2 (FTO), In:SnO2 (ITO), and Al:ZnO (AZO), as well as metals like Ti, Au, and Mo. The TCOs are preferred substrates in order to construct a tandem system of multiple light absorbers for unassisted water splitting. The importance of the selection of the substrate for photoelectrodes has been greatly underrated especially when PV-grade materials are used, because the light absorber–substrate combination optimized for PV applications is harnessed in the photoelectrode fabrication as well (e.g. soda lime glass/Mo for CIGS and sapphire or Ge for III/V, etc.). However, the substrate is an important price factor of the whole PEC cells and efficiency loss (by ohmic loss) from the substrate is significant. Since a photoelectrode always comes with a substrate of equivalent size to the device, a large device needs a large substrate accompanied by high price and high ohmic loss.
Holmes-Gentle et al. estimated the loss by the FTO substrate for selected model photoelectrodes.196 Ohm's law (J = σE) and the continuity of charge were used in order to simulate the electric currents through a conductive medium under an electric field. Here, J is the current density, σ the conductivity (=1/resistance), E the electric field, and Φ the electric potential. The term Q is the current sources/sinks within the medium. Loss can be numerically calculated from the formula ∇J = Q and E = −∇Φ. The analysis assumes 2D geometry of σ since the thickness ranges from 150 nm to 10 μm, and thus the major σ factor would be TCO itself (2.2 × 10−6 Ω m−1). Fig. 33 shows that a large size (L = 5–50 cm) gives a large potential drop for the same photoelectrode. For all model photoelectrodes, efficiency achieved on the laboratory scale would decrease to nearly 15% for a 50 cm device losing nearly 80% of current density. Thus such a potential drop is indeed a serious problem.
 Fig. 33  Potential distribution across the substrate for model photoelectrodes. (a) Color map of substrate potential overlaid with model equations and boundary conditions, for U0 = 1.23 VRHE and L = 10 cm. (b) Potential distribution at y = L/2 for a boundary condition U0 = 1.23 VRHE for various electrode sizes. (c) Effective current density results for various electrode sizes using model photoelectrode datasets. (d) Current losses for various electrode widths for model photoelectrode datasets. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
An easy way to reduce ohmic loss is to use metallic grids on a substrate.256 Recently, Hankin et al.195 proposed an interesting substrate design to overcome such a problem for Sn:Fe2O3 on an optimized Ti metal substrate. Thus, a modestly large Fe2O3 photoanode (10 × 10 cm2) prepared by spray pyrolysis on a Ti substrate showed 250 mA/100 cm2 at 1.6 VRHE, which is one of the highest current density values for such a large scale photoelectrode. Calculation of potential drop for a flat or perforated Ti substrate was conducted using the COMSOL Multiphysics 4.4 program. As shown in Fig. 34, the perforated substrate has a lower potential gradient not only from the photoanode to the Pt cathode but also at the photoanode itself. Unfortunately, better performance could not be achieved in three electrode analysis (Fig. 34d), which requires further optimization of the system. The total device, assuming two back to back photoanodes/cathodes, was also calculated to show the significant current density drop from 2.5 mA cm−2 (at edge point of photoanode/cathode) to 1.0 mA cm−2 (for longest L = 100 cm). This work not only emphasizes the importance of substrate design but also cell architecture for minimizing such potential and current drop.172
 Fig. 34  (a) Electrode geometries for analysis in a PEC reactor: (a1) directly illuminated photoanode surface (Fe2O3 film on a Ti foil) facing away from the counter electrode; (a2) directly illuminated photoanode surface (hematite film on a perforated Ti foil substrate) facing away from the counter electrode. (b) Solid and perforated 100 cm2 Ti substrates for Sn:Fe2O3 photoanodes fabricated by spray pyrolysis. (c) Secondary current density distribution at the illuminated solid (c1) and perforated (c2) Sn:Fe2O3 photoanode surfaces in 1 M NaOH electrolyte as a function of spatial coordinates in a PEC reactor at 1.5 VRHE. (d) Effects of potential and electrode structure on experimental and predicted current densities for 100 cm2 Sn:Fe2O3/Ti in 1 M NaOH solution. (e and f) Predicted local current density distribution of Pt cathode – Sn:Fe2O3/Ti photo-bipole under a Xe arc lamp of 312 W m2 and 0.7 VSHE (1.5 VRHE). Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
4.6 Stability
As discussed above, there are many semiconductor materials (especially PV-grade materials) that show ηSTH way above 10%. But in practice, a more important question is whether such inorganic light absorbers are stable in aqueous electrolytes under irradiation. A highly efficient, low band gap material that is also stable at the same time is yet to be found. For photoanode materials, it is very common that destructive oxidation of the material itself by holes (e.g. CdS + 2h+ → Cd2+ + S) occurs instead of oxidation of water. A material's inherent chemical stability can be predicted from its own oxidation/reduction potential as illustrated in Fig. 35. Thus, when photoelectrons/holes can move to reduction/oxidation potentials, the material becomes unstable due to electron/hole attacks. These routes are blocked for metal oxides like the first case of Fig. 35a and stable for both HER and OER.208 Other non-oxide materials allow either or both of these attacks. This instability problem of non-oxide materials could be mitigated by using a protection layer and efficient co-catalysts like Ni/TiO2/p–n Si or Ni/TiO2/p–n GaAs.175 But the protection measures increases the complexity of the photoelectrode, which will increase the capital cost of the solar hydrogen production device.16
 Fig. 35  (a) Chemical stability of a photoelectrode without any bias in view of thermodynamics. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Calculated oxidation (red bars) and reduction (black bars) potentials, HER/OER potentials with NHE (pH 0), and band gaps of various photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
As shown in Fig. 36a, stability is one of the most important factors for lowering the price of produced hydrogen. Stability determines the life span of the light absorber, and varying it from 5 to 20 years makes the expected ERORI nearly 5 times different.28,29 System analysis showed that at least 10 years of lifetime are needed to have a positive outlook for the system to be practical.30,198 The stability issue on the experimental bench scale is well addressed in a review by Bae et al.48 The longest stability test for ∼100 days was reported,48 but those tests over 10 days used materials protected with relatively expensive methods like ALD and sputtering, which would face scalability problems. In addition, the stability up to 100 days would not guarantee the stability during the expected life span of the devices of more than 10 years.29,30,40
 Fig. 36  Bench scale stability test of photoelectrodes. (a) Cost of H2 produced by a PEC device with 10% efficiency as a function of panel lifetime and cost. The calculations include only capital costs, maintenance and process control costs. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the IFP Energies nouvelles, copyright 2015. (b) 1100 h discontinuous water splitting with a NiFeOx/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn electrode at 0.6 VRHE in KBi buffer (pH ∼ 9.2). Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (c) Stability test at a fixed bias of 0.5VRHE with chopped illumination for a RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode in pH 5 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Stability of a CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode held at 1.63 VRHE under 1.1 Sun in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (e) A device architecture of a c-Si based photocathode. HR-TEM shows the carrier-selective contact (c-Si/SiOx/nc-Si). Long-term stability test of the c-Si photocathode with a TiO2 protection layer at an applied bias of 0.4 VRHE in 1 M HClO4 (pH 0). Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. 

Fig. 36b–e shows examples of long term stability tests reported for photoelectrodes. Metal oxides like TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 are reported to have stability up to 10–100 h in proper electrolytes258 and recently Kuang et al. reported 1100 h for NiFeOx/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn photoanodes under a slightly basic condition (pH 9.2).114 A relatively high current density of up to 3.0 mA cm−2 was obtained, but the used fabrication method was not fully solution-based. The work also emphasized the importance of anions in the electrolyte, which greatly affected the stability of the photoanode. As mentioned above, Lee and Choi211 fabricated all solution-based photoanode–NiOOH/FeOOH/N2:BiVO4/FTO in vanadium-dissolved electrolyte under a slightly basic condition (pH 9.2) to achieve ∼500 h of stability. But this also requires dissolution of vanadium, which increases the cost of operation. Fe2O3 was also reported with the highest stability of ∼1000 h187 under alkaline conditions (pH 13.6), reported by the PECDEMO project.255 However, all of these recently achieved results indicate meaningful progress toward photoelectrodes stable over the scale of years.
The stability problem is more serious in photocathode materials. Hence, the majority of photocathodes come with protection and charge collecting layers between semiconductor||electrolyte interfaces. For example, RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O achieved nearly 100 h of stability, which is a significantly improved record from its first demonstration.138 As mentioned, Lewis's group successfully demonstrated ∼1000 h scale stability for both photoanodes and photocathodes made from PV grade materials.131,134,175,259 A TiO2 protected, Pt electrocatalyzed Si photocathode achieved stability of up to 40 days in a highly acidic electrolyte.260 In spite of these successful demonstrations of adequate stability of the protected photocathodes, their practical application in year-scale operation has to be investigated further because exposure of the materials to electrolytes by cracks or pin holes of the protection layer would kill the device almost instantly. In addition, the protective layers, such as Al2O3 or TiO2, are fabricated employing sophisticated and expensive methods instead of cheap solution-based methods.
4.7 Fuel separation and membranes
Fuel separation and transfer is an important factor in practical large scale solar hydrogen production, but has been rarely studied. Fuel separation is mostly accomplished by a membrane electrolyte.172 In laboratory investigations, the performance of the membrane does not affect the overall performance of the device because of the short proton exchange pathway. Of course, this pathway becomes much longer as the device size increases and then the membrane performance becomes much more important. A simple porous ceramic brings gas crossover and unwanted back reactions, as well as possible safety issues. There are two types of ionic membrane; cation-exchange membrane (CEM, e.g. Nafion) and anion-exchange membrane (AEM, e.g. Selemion). The expected duration of the membrane's functional time should be counted as an operational factor, since the price for membrane and fuel separation is far from negligible (for usual planar type, nearly 20% of the light absorber cost).14,29
The importance of membranes was investigated by Jin et al.261 through experiments and simulation. Thus, a “membrane-less” system showed a significant pH gradient and a high crossover of H2 gas (40% in O2 chamber!) as shown in Fig. 37a. Thus, a membrane or at least a similar system is needed especially for the case of high current density and a large amount of fuel like a practical large system.
 Fig. 37  (a) Devices with and without membranes (a1). An integrated, membrane-free solar water-splitting device (a2). Cross-sectional pH profiles in the membrane-free device (a3). Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (b) A CoP/Ti mesh cathode in H2SO4 (pH = 0) and a Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoanode in KBi (pH 9.3) with a bipolar membrane (BPM) made of anion and cation exchange membranes (b1). Stability of an unbiased, two-electrode configuration (b2). (b3) Electrochemical potentials in the KBi (pH 9.3)/Fumasep® FBM/H2SO4 (pH 0) cell. (b4) Simulated pH profile across the BPM. Reproduced from ref. 263 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. 
Usually, OER favors an alkaline electrolyte, while HER favors acidic medium. A way to solve the electrolyte discrepancy problem in the same PEC cell is a bipolar membrane (BPM) made of double-sided two different types of membrane, which sustains different pH of two different electrolytes. Luo et al.99 showed a 2p PSC based PV–EC system operating with CoP HEC in pH 0 while NiFe LDH in pH 14, which are optimum pH for individual components. Similar work done by Jin et al.261 with a CoP/Ti mesh cathode in H2SO4 (pH = 0) and a photoanode of Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs in KBi (pH 9.3) with BPM demonstrated significant stability of ∼100 h (Fig. 37b). Calculation showed a large pH gradient inside of the membrane.
Efforts are also underway to avoid the usage of membranes by using a clever geometry of the system. Recently, Landman et al.262 demonstrated that an auxiliary electrode NiOOH/Ni(OH)2-based capacitor connecting two water electrolysis cells could be operated without a membrane. Powered by Si PV, two different reactors without any membrane achieved an ηSTH of 7.5%.
4.8 Cell architecture design
Design of cell architecture of scaled-up devices plays a huge role in the output of the system and involved BOS.29,30,172 Cell architecture determines the balance of individual components, their integration and operating conditions. Simulation is an effective approach of cell architecture design reflecting the multi-dimensional (3D) configuration of the cell and mass transport, which become more important when device dimensions increase.15 The topic is well discussed by Lewis and coworkers.14,172 Many studies commonly indicate that completely different geometry and component assembly would be needed for PEC cells and PV–EC systems.172,198 We would like to discuss currently proposed and actually realized cell architectures of PEC cells (at least one light absorber is immersed in electrolyte) based on schemes shown in Fig. 38.
 Fig. 38  Proposed cell architectures of PEC cells for overall water splitting. (a) Planar panel with back to back stack. (b) Planar panel with side-by-side geometry. (c) Planar panels with tilted geometry, facing the membrane separator. (d) Reflection scheme for the 2nd light absorber. (e and f) Solar concentrator-coupled PEC cell with a focus light concentrator266 and a reflection concentrator. Architectures are drawn based on Xiang et al.'s164 arrangements. Reproduced from ref. 172 and 266 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. 

Planar panel design. 
In this most common and simplest design, light absorbers are piled up back to back with an internal charge collector. The overall geometry resembles a solar panel dipped in an electrolyte. This geometry, however, requires a good transparency of the two light absorbers and substrates, which would limit the material selection. In particular, p-type materials use a hole transfer layer of low transparency, e.g. CIGS-based photocathodes often use opaque Mo/SLG as a substrate.141,154,178,264 An alternative is a “cappuccino cell”, in which front and back light absorbers face each other and only the front absorber is supposed to be transparent. But this also brings a greater issue for anion/cation exchange since the membrane is between the two light absorbers. Proper selection and design of membrane is needed to minimize the pH gradient. For example, a recent study about BiVO4 (pH 7) with a bipolar membrane and a cathode in different pH (pH 0) showed a moderate current density of 2.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE without significant potential gradient loaded to the PEC cell and showed the importance of membranes in such a planar design.265 Xiang et al.197,261,266 implemented a “tilted” design to compensate for this problem at least in part. As mentioned, many studies are of the opinion that PEC devices need their unique geometry rather than traditional planar solar panels because of the necessity of fuel separation and chemical gradient compensation.


Reflection. 
Pihosh et al.163 proposed that a photoanode facing up and a photocathode or a PV module at 90 degrees to the cell (Fig. 38d) can get reflected light from the photoanode. The position of the membrane was not discussed but it can be spatially separated for the case of PV as the bottom light absorber (HER in the dark). This scheme has less stringent material requirement for the front light absorber since transparency is not important.


Light concentrator. 
Simulation studies about PEC cells for scale-up showed that the light absorber is the key factor for the overall system's energy balance and expected benefits.40,266 Naturally, reducing the size of the light absorber is the easiest way to reduce the cost. For example, usage of a light concentrator, with 10 times concentrated light, significantly reduced the expected price of hydrogen compared to the planar device.


Vapor feed of water. 
Vapor feed of water as the reactant may present an advantage for materials and cell operation. For PV–EC, it was already proven that the reaction scale of ∼10 mA cm−2 was viable for the vapor feed system, which had significantly better stability and provided the possibility of using sea water, which would make scaled up device operation greatly cheaper. But the system requires a very different material configuration, reactant permeable membrane||photoelectrode (for PV–EC, electrocatalyst) interface should be well suited, and mass transfer should have much greater dominance. An integrated PEC cell sustained by water vapor was simulated and studied using a multi-physics numerical model197

5. Dissemination of solar hydrogen production systems
In this section, proposed dissemination scenarios of scaled up H2 production systems are discussed. Among the three solar H2 production systems, PV–EC is a mature and highly efficient technology that has already been applied to solar H2 refueling stations, but PEC and PC water splitting have never been used on a practical scale.
In Fig. 39, three scenarios for production and application of solar H2 are analyzed:255 hydrogen refueling station, industrial process applications and single home applications with nominal productivities of ∼400 kg per day, ∼4000 kg per day, and ∼1 kg per day, respectively. The H2 refueling station offers H2 at 810 bar to fuel the fuel cell vehicles (FCV), which carry a pressurized hydrogen tank. The introduced industrial process considers H2 at 20 bars for the utilization as feedstock for further processing. Finally, the single home application refers to a decentralized approach of solar H2 production and subsequent use for fuel cells to provide electric power needed in small buildings.255 These operations could be done in centralized and decentralized manners.
 Fig. 39  Solar hydrogen production and overview about potential utilization. (a) A hydrogen production and application scenario. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation). (b) A vision of a sustainable hydrogen fuel community based on artificial photosynthesis. Hydrogen is produced from a solar water-splitting power plant using seawater on floating ports, tankers and seashore plants. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (c) A personalized energy system. Reproduced from ref. 269 and 270 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (d) A solar refinery for supporting carbon dioxide conversion to fuel. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
Centralized operation of solar H2 production considers reduced land price and better maintenance for centralized facilities and fuel distribution located in areas of high intensity solar illumination. Thus, centralized solar H2 production would have a similar grid system to PV technology. Thus, the Desertec Initiative proposed a network of concentrated solar and other renewable power plants in Northern Africa and around the Mediterranean region, where solar illumination of high intensity and low seasonal variation is available.15 There is even 1600 km of H2 pipelines already installed in Europe. On top of utilization as fuel for FCV, H2 can also be used for hydrogenation of CO2 to produce hydrocarbons, which also has fuel values. The hydrocarbons are easier for transportation than H2. Large capacity plants are required for centralized application such as large-scale solar H2 plants or solar refinery for solar fuel and chemical production by mimicking natural photosynthesis using CO2 produced from traditional power plants (Fig. 39a).267
Maeda and Domen52 also provided a perspective about solar hydrogen plants to provide a third of energy demand in 2050 as shown in Fig. 40. Estimation showed about 250000 km2 area of solar plant with an ηSTH of 10%. With an individual plant of 5 km × 5 km, 10000 of them would be needed. The 250000 km2 area corresponds to ∼1% of the earth's desert area and produces 570 ton of H2 gas per day.
 Fig. 40  Large-scale H2 production via solar water splitting. Reproduced from ref. 52 and 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. 
In spite of the advantages of the centralized solar H2 production facility, the intrinsic merits of solar energy harvesting and storage lie in de-centralized, small capacity systems. Small capacity systems are suitable for residential use (single home application) and storage systems, as in Fig. 39d, whose main elements are rooftop solar energy panels to produce electricity for heating, cooking, lighting, and charging the batteries of the owner's electric cars. An electrolyzer using excess power can convert water into H2 for storage and as a fuel for a residential fuel cell.269,270 Ronge et al.15 also remarked that only ∼8.6% of all urbanized areas are enough for solar panels to meet the world's demand of energy. The decentralized H2 production also mitigates transportation issues of H2 gas.271
Another good example of a decentralized solar H2 production facility is the H2 refueling station for FCV. Fig. 41 shows a conceptual design of solar H2 station that could work around the clock. During the day, sunlight is used to produce solar H2 that is directly used for FCV, and electricity generation by fuel cells and the rest is stored. At night, H2 stored during the day is used for FCV and electricity generation.
 Fig. 41  Use of solar energy around the clock. Capture of sunlight to produce fuel, storage, usage as solar fuel from hydrogen station and electricity generation. Reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. 
Utilization of solar energy on the large scale requires a huge amount of land and competition for space limits the scale up of solar H2 production.199 When land is limited, sea could be used instead for solar H2 production. Floating solar farms for electricity production (Fig. 42) have already been realized in China, Japan, United Kingdom, India and recently Singapore.273,274 Since the majority of the earth's surface is occupied by sea (∼70%), centralized solar H2 production on the sea could be a viable option. Since all solar H2 production needs water, use of sea water as an electrolyte would have great cost advantage. Recent development of electrocatalysts174 and photoelectrodes243 working properly in sea water (pH 8.0) instead of usual electrolytes suggests high promise of using sea water as a potential electrolyte. The device could perform water electrolysis without pumps or membranes and could lead to low-cost sustainable hydrogen production.
 Fig. 42  Solar farms installed on (a) land, Australia (Nyngan Solar Farm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 276 and (b) lake, Singapore, the world's largest floating solar photovoltaic cell. Reproduced from ref. 273 with permission of The Straits Times, copyright 2016. 
A photovoltaic-powered electrolysis device was developed that can operate as a stand-alone platform that floats on open water described as a “solar fuels rig”.275 The device relies on an electrode configuration that allows the gases to be separated and collected using the buoyancy of bubbles in water. The prototype is the first demonstration of a practical membrane-less floating PV–electrolyzer system, and could inspire large-scale ‘solar fuels rigs’ that could generate large quantities of H2 fuel from abundant sunlight and seawater without taking up any space on land or competing with fresh water for agricultural uses.
6. Large-scale demonstrations of PEC water splitting
For solar H2 production, PV–EC has already been demonstrated on large scales. It is rare to find actual demonstration of large scale PEC cells. But owing to the rapid development, in the past decade, of the laboratory scale PEC water splitting technology, there are small but increasing numbers of PEC demonstration projects that we like to introduce in this section. These case studies are invaluable trials of field operation at this early stage of technology development and have a goal to implement prototypes to test the techno-economic feasibility of practical larger commercial scale PEC water splitting plants or solar H2 farms.
As mentioned already, the first barrier of the scale up is that the bigger photoelectrode gives greatly reduced overall efficiency owing to the sheet resistance of the substrate. The substrate with a conductive grid reduces the efficiency loss as practiced for solar cells. Lee et al.256 demonstrated WO3/FTO films up to size of ∼130 cm2 by screen printing of WO3 nanoparticle paste synthesized by sol–gel precipitation (Fig. 43a). Enlarged WO3/FTO suffered great performance decrement – Jph at 1.23 VRHE decreased from 2.63 mA cm−2 to 1.5 mA cm−2 to 1.18 mA cm−2 for photoanode sizes of 0.36, 4.8 and 130.6 cm2. In the meantime, an Ag grid embedded in the film was greatly beneficial – for the 4.8 cm2 photoanode, nearly 130% enhanced photocurrent density was observed relative to a photoanode of the same size with no Ag grid. With the optimized Ag grid-applied WO3 photoanode, a tandem cell of WO3-DSSC achieved a high photocurrent of 150 mA/130.56 cm2 (ηSTH of 1.41%). It is much lower than the laboratory scale ηSTH of 3.24% and 2% for 0.36 cm2 and 4.8 cm2 WO3 photoanodes, but the efficiency is quite high relative to other reports with similarly sized photoanodes. Under 1 sun, the tandem cell of the large area photoanode (130.56 cm2) produced 3 mL min−1 of H2. This work demonstrates the importance of charge collector optimization to minimize efficiency loss of large scale devices.
 Fig. 43  Large scale WO3 photoanode-DSSC tandem cell. (a) Schematic diagram of small area 0.6 × 0.6 cm2; 0.6 × 3.8 cm2; and 9.6 × 13.6 cm2 WO3 photoanodes with Ag grid-embedded FTO as the substrate, coating of WO3 on the Ag grid-embedded FTO substrate, and Ag encapsulation using epoxy. (b) J–V curves of photoanodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under 1 sun illumination. (c) Experimental PEC set-up with 130.56 cm2 WO3 photoanode, platinum counter electrode and calibrated cylindrical syringe for gas collection immersed in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Operating point of a scaled-up WO3 photoanode (130.56 cm2) and a DSSC module (front-side series, 3 cell connected). Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2011. 
A full study of actual large scale PEC cell operation was conducted by Vilanova et al.,187 which nicely reflects the majority of issues for scale up of PEC cells that were discussed so far (Fig. 44). They designed a PEC cell with a planar cell architecture named a “CoolPEC cell” and observed fundamental factors related to the operation of PEC cells; (i) fluid dynamics for gas separation, (ii) temperature profile, and (iii) actual large sized Fe2O3/FTO photoanode (50 cm2) operating up to 1008 h, one of the longest successful operations of the photoanode with 0.45 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V, which was provided by a Si solar cell. First, a PEC cell was devised with a housing composed of a stainless steel frame and acrylic body, double side window used as the reactor, working electrode (Fe2O3/FTO as backside window), Pt loaded Ti as the cathode, and an ion exchange membrane. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and actual observation of electrolyte flow was studied to reduce bubble effects under gas generation corresponding to 5.4 mA cm−2, demonstrating that their CoolPEC cell showed negligible effect of light blocking by gas bubbles, which was a serious problem for large scale operation. The CoolPEC cell also maintained a moderate temperature of 45 °C without a significant gradient in the reactor with a constant flow rate of 0.5 L min−1 electrolyte feeding.
 Fig. 44  (a) CoolPEC cell. 1 – acrylic embodiment; 2 – front window (synthetic quartz); 3 – front stainless steel frame; 4 – internal acrylic plate dividing the WE compartment; 5 – main electrolyte inlet; 6 – external screw (current collector for the CE); 7 – back stainless steel frame; 8 – back window (photoelectrode); 9 – acrylic cap; 10 – electrolyte outlet; 11 – internal gasket; 12 – external gasket; 13 – platinized-Ti mesh; 14 – ion exchange membrane; 15 – acrylic holders; 16 and 17 – metal connectors between the Pt–Ti mesh and the external screw. (b) Assessment of light trapping due to bubble accumulation inside the PEC cell. 1 – simulated sunlight (1000 W m−2); 2 – front window (synthetic quartz); 3 – back window (FTO glass, 2.2 mm, 7 Ω sq); 4 – electrolyte outlet; 5 – electrolyte inlet; 6 – Si calibrator used to monitor the solar irradiance reaching the outer surface of the back window. Solar irradiance reaching the external surface of the back window was monitored over 4 min with the PEC cell operating at 5.4 mA cm−2 with 1.0 M KOH and a feeding flow rate of 0.5 L min−1. (c) Long-term stability of a hematite photoelectrode under a constant bias of 1.6 V and simulated solar irradiation (1000 W m−2). Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2018. 
The above reactor design and study conducted by Vilanova et al.187 was well implemented in PECDEMO's demonstration of a large scale PEC cell.255 The project investigated a multitude of aspects of PEC cell scale up including development of photoelectrode materials, simulation of the cell and a large scale system. First, large sized photoelectrodes of BiVO4, Cu2O and Fe2O3 were fabricated. For the large area BiVO4 electrode (>50 cm2), Mo metal grids were deposited on FTO glass to improve the charge collection efficiency as shown in Fig. 45a. They performed 4 times of mosaic spray pyrolysis (3.6 × 3.6 cm2) with mask to obtain a modest current of ∼70 mA at a bias of 1.23 VRHE, which was much lower than that observed with a 1.0 cm2 scale device. The PECDEMO project group also designed a 4-stripe type Cu2O photocathode with metal grid lines (Fig. 45c). Two metal grids of Au and Ag showed a significant improvement in the performance of the large scale photocathode relative to a plane photocathode, again indicating the importance of the substrate design.
 Fig. 45  Large scale fabrication of photoelectrode conducted by PECDEMO. (a) Large area BiVO4 (7.1 × 7.1 cm2 excluding metal grids). (b) J–V curve of large area BiVO4 (1 sun, 0.1 M phosphate + 0.5 M Na2SO3). (c) Large area Cu2O photocathode with grid lines (7.1 cm × 7.1 cm = 50.4 cm2 active area). (d) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of large area Cu2O photocathode for the vertical PEC cell under chopped illumination (0.6 sun) in the pH 5 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation). 
The large area (50 cm2) photoanodes showed a bit lower performance than laboratory scale (∼1.0 cm2) as expected, but a more serious problem was the instability of BiVO4. Etching of BiVO4 on FTO was observed visually, which is an indicator of corrosion. But when the W:BiVO4 photoanode with Co-Pi as OEC in 0.1 M KPi as electrolyte was replaced with a Co-Ci/W:BiVO4 photoanode, near 70–100 h of stability in bicarbonate electrolyte was observed, emphasizing the importance of good OEC and electrolyte. Moderate stability with the same OEC and electrolyte combination was also reported by Kim et al.166 on a laboratory scale.
Tandem cells of a BiVO4-heterojunction with intrinsic thin layer (HIT) Si PV or Fe2O3–HIT Si PV were tested under outdoor sunlight using a planar “vertical” or solar concentrator based on angled illumination as shown in Fig. 46. The vertical device tested at the test facility SoCRatus of German Aerospace Center (DLR) showed maximum unbiased current density of 1.88 mA cm−2 (ηSTH =2.3%) for BiVO4–HIT Si PV and 0.52 mA cm−2 (ηSTH = 0.74%) for Fe2O3–HIT Si PV.
For the “angled” device tested at UPorto, actual illumination was much larger than the size of the device (∼200 cm2) since a reflection concentrator was used (Fig. 46a and b). Operation was conducted for 15–48 h with no significant degradation of efficiency. Unfortunately, the efficiency observed in laboratory for the 50 cm2 device could not be achieved. Thus, the BiVO4–HIT Si PV tandem cell showed an ηSTH of 0.2% and the Fe2O3–HIT Si PV tandem cell only 0.058% for only the “angled” device (Fig. 46e and f). Even though the light concentrator-based system was expected to achieve much better system operation from system assessment and actual observation for III/V light absorbers, this was not the case here. Indeed, numerous factors exist for scale up of PEC cells, including very large intermittence of illumination. In Fig. 46f, for instance, the variation of ηSTH ranges from 0.42% to 0.12% for 8 days, or by a factor of almost 4.
 Fig. 46  Demonstration of a PEC cell with a solar concentrator based on angled illumination. (a) DLR's test facility SoCRatus with its main components. (b) Prototype module in acrylic embodiment composed of four individual 50 cm2 PEC cells (1 × 4 array, total active area of 200 cm2) mounted in the focal plane of the SoCRatus (here without reflective shields). (c) Modular prototype with Fe2O3 and (d) BiVO4 photoelectrodes. (e) Total irradiation on the prototype (smoothed ± 30 s), average current density (smoothed ± 30 s), and hydrogen flow relative to the respective mean values as well as average ηSTH without and with bias voltage of the particular days associated with Fe2O3 photoelectrodes. Gray field refers to test of single compartments. (f) Total irradiation on the prototype (smoothed ± 30 s), average current density (smoothed ± 30 s), and hydrogen flow relative to the respective mean values as well as average ηSTH of the particular days associated with BiVO4 photoelectrodes. The ηSTH achieved from the device is marked on the upper side of the graph. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation). 
Tolod et al.277 used the Artiphyction project to scale up BiVO4-based photoelectrodes with PEC–PV tandem cells of 1.6 m2 photoelectrodes (Fig. 47), which they described as the TRL5 development. Many smaller 64 cm2 size modules of the BiVO4-Si tandem cell achieved an ηSTH of 3%, which fell to 2% during the long-term operation due to multiple factors such as bubble formation in the reactor. As mentioned, bubble coverage blocks light and mass transfer becomes sluggish.
 Fig. 47  (a) Progress of large scale PEC cell devices from the Artiphyction prototype. (b) Photograph and close view of the 1.6 m2 Artiphyction prototype made of 100 PEC cell modules (8 × 8 cm2 of Co-Pi/BiVO4/FTO window and Co nanoparticle as cathode). (c) J–V plots for a single PEC window (thus unit is mA/64 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the MDPI AG (Basel, Switzerland) and Professor Guido Saraco and Professor Simelys Hernandez, copyright 2017. 
7. Solar hydrogen refueling stations
The first commercial solar hydrogen production will find its application to solar hydrogen refueling stations. So far, solar H2 stations constructed have employed PV–EC systems as summarized in Table 4. Typically, they are made of PV panels, an electrolyzer and a separate compressor unit to create high-pressure hydrogen to fuel FCV.
Table 4 Hydrogen refueling stations powered by renewable energies. (Data are summarized from ref. 279)




Location with country
Name of company for hydrogen station
Type of water splitting technology
Production and dispensing capacity with pressure





a Source: https://www.greenfleetmagazine.com/129899/hawaii-researchers-commission-hydrogen-fueling-station.
b Source: http://www.yesemk.com/eng/business/energy_h2_station.html.





Ramea
NL Hydro
Wind–electrolyzer
250 kW capacity, 2000 m3 storage capacity at 145 psi


Torrance, California
Honda
PV–electrolyzer
2 Nm3 h−1 with 400 L storage capacity at 350 psi


Hamburg, Germany
HydroGenics-Vattenfall-Linde
PV–electrolyzer
780 kg per day, with 430 kg storage capacity at 45 bar, dispensing capacity@350/700 bar


Stuttgart, Germany
HydroGenics-EnBW-Linde
PV–electrolyzer
130 kg per day with 215 kg storage capacity at 45–830 bar, dispensing capacity@700 bar


Brussels, Belgium
HydroGenics-WaterstofNet
PV–electrolyzer
65 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350 bar


Istanbul, Turkey
HydroGenics-UNIDO
PV–electrolyzer
65 kg per day with 135 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@220/350 bar


Oslo, Norway
HydroGenics-AirLiquide-CHIC
PV–electrolyzer
260 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350/700 bar


West LA, CA, USA
HydroGenics-Shell
PV–electrolyzer
32 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity @350 bar


Brugg, Switzerland
PostAuto-AirLiquide-CHIC
PV–electrolyzer
130 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350 bar


Los Angeles, USA
HydroGenics-Calstate LA
PV–electrolyzer
65 kg per day with 60 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@700 bar


Dunkerque, France
HydroGenics-Shell
PV–electrolyzer
21 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@220 bar


Hawaii, USAa
Chevrolet, General Motors
PV–electrolyzer
250 kW capacity, 2000 m3 storage capacity at 145psi, dispensing capacity @350/700 bar


Gwangju, Daegu and Jeju in South Koreab
EM Korea Co. Ltd.
Electrolysis
500 Nm3 h−1 with 400 Litre storage capacity at 350/700 psi, recharge capacity 240 car per day


Wallingford
SunHydro
PV–electrolyzer
65 kg per day with 490 kg storage capacity at 350/700 psi




Honda conducted a development program towards a solar H2 powered society of the future by studying the entire process of solar H2 production, storage and supply, including the investigation of technologies that would reduce the level of carbon dioxide. Honda's next-generation solar hydrogen station (SHS) reduces the size of the system, while producing enough H2 (0.5 kg) through an 8 h overnight fill for daily commuting (16000 km per year) for a fuel cell vehicle. Compatible with a smart grid energy system, Honda's SHS would enable users to refill their vehicle overnight without the requirement for hydrogen storage. During daytime peak power times, SHS can export renewable electricity to the grid, providing a cost benefit to the customer. Engineered for slow, overnight refilling of a FCV, the home-use SHS can replenish the H2 required for typical daily driving and commuting. The home station was also designed to complement a public network of fast-fill hydrogen stations. The General Motor's Chevrolet fueling system consists of two subsystems: (i) a set of solar arrays, and (ii) an electrolyzer, storage, and dispensing system (ESD).278
About 100 H2 fueling stations exist in the United States, most of which are in private ownership by companies. Los Angeles hosts 8 public fueling stations, and 100 more are planned in California by 2024. In Europe, Germany is at the forefront of public H2 fueling stations. The current number of ca. 20 is to be augmented to 400 by 2023. A solar-driven H2 station was built in Freiburg, which produces its own H2 using solar energy captured by PV panels on the roof. Almost 20 such stations exist in Germany and USA. Nanoptek developed a water splitting device that combines an integrated photocatalyst with external PV panels. One of the main energy applications of H2 today remains its use in forklifts in distribution centers. Over 6200 such forklifts are in operation in the US, used by Walmart, Sysco, Central Grocers and BMW. Colruyt, a Belgian retailer, together with WaterstofNet and Hydrogenics installed a H2 fueling station that is powered by their own excess wind and solar energy. Another success story of H2 was found in public transportation, with dozens of H2 fueled buses involved in pilot projects in cities such as London, Beijing, Berlin and Perth.15 Different hydrogen stations available in the world are summarized with their capacity, in Table 4.
8. Summary and outlook
Solar overall water splitting has been widely and intensively studied for the past 50 years using photovoltaic, photocatalyst and photoelectrode-driven systems. These technologies achieved significant improvements during the last 10 years reaching solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies ηSTH of nearly 2% (PC), 3% (PE–PE), 8% (PEC–PV hybrid), 19% (buried junction PV) and 30% (PV–EC with PEM electrolyzer), and are still rapidly under progress for under-developed PC and PEC technologies. A technology map is plotted in Fig. 48 for efficiency vs. system complexity. The trend is quite clear; intrinsically stable metal oxide materials in general have low efficiencies and low complexity. The PV-grade materials exhibit high efficiencies, but their higher complexity means higher cost. Thus, efficiency is one of the many considerations to make in the selection of solar hydrogen production technology.
 Fig. 48  Technological map showing various photon-driven water splitting approaches for solar energy conversion and specific experimental demonstrations. Presentation format followed that of Sayama et al.280 with permission from the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, copyright 2014. 
With achievements in enhancing ηSTH to approach the target value of at least 10%, attention has been paid to the scale up of the solar hydrogen production technologies. In this aspect, the PV–EC technology is way ahead of PC or PEC technologies because many solar hydrogen refueling stations are under commercial operation in many parts of the world. Yet, there are several demonstration projects ongoing in order to scale up PEC solar hydrogen production systems. So far, demonstrations of PEC cells have been done only around 1 m2 scale, but many expected problems and challenges have already been identified in scaling up of materials themselves, balance of systems, and operation issues for serious consideration. The results of those scale-up projects and techno-economic assessments indicate that, at the current level of development, PEC water splitting cannot compete with PV–EC devices. To make the PEC cells competitive, their ηSTH should go above 10%, and lifetime longer than 10 years. This suggests that material developments have to go in parallel with the scale up and demonstration projects for practical application of PEC hydrogen production technology on a large scale.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Basic Science Grant (NRF-2015R1A2A1A10054346), Climate Change Response project (2015M1A2A2074663, NRF-2017M1A2A2087630), Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (KCAP, No. 2009-0093880) funded MSIT, and Project No. 10050509 funded by MOTIE of the Republic of Korea. This work was also supported by the 2018 Research Fund (1.180006.01).
References
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Archer, Global Warming: Understanding the Forecast, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .

Full report – BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2018, 2018.

          M. Perez and R. Perez, IEA-SHCP-Newsletter,  2015, vol. 62 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, Y. H. Jo, F. F. Abdi, Y. H. Lee, R. van de Krol and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O. Reese, S. Glynn, M. D. Kempe, D. L. McGott, M. S. Dabney, T. M. Barnes, S. Booth, D. Feldman and N. M. Haegel, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1002–1012 CAS .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Jacobson, W. G. Colella and D. M. Golden, Science, 2005, 308, 1901–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2004, 305, 962–963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nikolaidis and A. Poullikkas, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 597–611 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 1954–1971 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
J. Rongé, T. Bosserez, L. Huguenin, M. Dumortier, S. Haussener and J. A. Martens, Oil Gas Sci. Technol., 2015, 70, 863–876 CrossRef .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ronge, T. Bosserez, D. Martel, C. Nervi, L. Boarino, F. Taulelle, G. Decher, S. Bordiga and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7963–7981 CAS .
T. Bosserez, J. Rongé, J. van Humbeeck, S. Haussener and J. Martens, Oil Gas Sci. Technol., 2015, 70, 877–889 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CrossRef .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhai, S. Haussener, J. Ager, R. Sathre, K. Walczak, J. Greenblatt and T. McKone, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2380–2389 CAS .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264 RSC .
R. Sathre, J. B. Greenblatt, K. Walczak, I. D. Sharp, J. C. Stevens, J. W. Ager and F. A. Houle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 803–819 RSC .
D. Kang, T. W. Kim, S. R. Kubota, A. C. Cardiel, H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12839–12887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707502 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 RSC .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 3–16 CrossRef .
H. Döscher, J. L. Young, J. F. Geisz, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 74–80 RSC .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CAS .
O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Grimes, O. Varghese and S. Ranjan, Light, Water, Hydrogen, Springer, US,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. Dotan, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Grätzel and A. Rothschild, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3330–3334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, M. Ma, P. Li, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 160060 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L.-D. Koh, S. Liu, C. P. Teng and M.-Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Alfaifi, H. Ullah, S. Alfaifi, A. A. Tahir and T. K. Mallick, Veruscript Funct. Nanomater., 2018, 2, BDJOC3 CrossRef .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801155 CrossRef .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
M. T. Mayer, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jo, H. J. Kang, K.-J. Kong, Y. S. Lee, H. Park, Y. Lee, T. Buonassisi, K. K. Gleason and J. S. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 13774–13778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513–1519 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, T. Hisatomi, Q. Ding, T. Asai, Z. Li, S. S. K. Ma, F. Zhang, K. Domen and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8498–8501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, Y. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Li, Z. Li, F. Zhang and C. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 2393–2402 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Chowdhury, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1707 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schröder, K. Kailasam, J. Borgmeyer, M. Neumann, A. Thomas, R. Schomäcker and M. Schwarze, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 1014–1017 CrossRef .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 509–520 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, F. A. Chowdhury, S. Zhao, B. AlOtaibi, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fujito, H. Kunioku, D. Kato, H. Suzuki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, S. S. K. Ma, Y. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, Y. Sasaki, N. Shirakura and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12327–12333 RSC .
Y. Sasaki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5441–5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536–17542 CrossRef CAS .

          G. D. M. K. W. Harrison, T. G. Ramsden, and W. E. Kramer and F. J. Novachek, Wind-To-Hydrogen Project: Operational Experience, Performance Testing, and Systems Integration, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado,  2009 Search PubMed .
F. M. Sapountzi, J. M. Gracia, C. J. Weststrate, H. O. A. Fredriksson and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 58, 1–35 CrossRef .
A. C. Nielander, M. R. Shaner, K. M. Papadantonakis, S. A. Francis and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 16–25 RSC .
M. T. Winkler, C. R. Cox, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E1076–E1082 CrossRef CAS .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Liang, L. Gu, Y. Zhang, G.-D. Li, X. Zou and J.-S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2609 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. L. Stone, J. R. Schmidt, J. G. Thomas, Q. Ding, H.-C. Chang, M.-L. Tsai, J.-H. He and S. Jin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1245 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Chang, K.-H. Lee, H. Ha, K. Jin, G. Kim, S.-T. Hwang, H.-M. Lee, S.-W. Ahn, W. Yoon, H. Seo, J. S. Hong, Y. K. Go, J.-I. Ha and K. T. Nam, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 1009–1018 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Cox, J. Z. Lee, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14057–14061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kang, M. J. Jeong, Y. K. Eom, I. T. Choi, S. M. Kwon, Y. Yoo, J. Kim, J. Kwon, J. H. Park and H. K. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 7, 1602117 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, V. M. Le Corre, A. Gaïtis, M. Neophytou, M. A. Hamid, K. Takanabe and P. M. Beaujuge, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3366–3373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
B. Weng, F. Xu, C. Wang, W. Meng, C. R. Grice and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 121–128 RSC .
S.-H. Hsu, J. Miao, L. Zhang, J. Gao, H. Wang, H. Tao, S.-F. Hung, A. Vasileff, S. Z. Qiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707261 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Turan, J.-P. Becker, F. Urbain, F. Finger, U. Rau and S. Haas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12681 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kageshima, T. Shinagawa, T. Kuwata, J. Nakata, T. Minegishi, K. Takanabe and K. Domen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2791–2796 RSC .
A. Nakamura, Y. Ota, K. Koike, Y. Hidaka, K. Nishioka, M. Sugiyama and K. Fujii, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 107101 CrossRef .

          M. Sugiyama, A. Nakamura, K. Watanabe, Y. Ota, K. Nishioka, Y. Nakano and K. Fujii, 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 2015 Search PubMed.
S. Rau, S. Vierrath, J. Ohlmann, A. Fallisch, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Smolinka, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 43–53 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248–3252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600100 CrossRef .
S. Esiner, R. E. M. Willems, A. Furlan, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23936–23945 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Sahlberg, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3676–3683 RSC .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
D. K. Lee, D. Lee, M. A. Lumley and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019 10.1039/C8CS00761F .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
S. Wang, H. Chen, G. Gao, T. Butburee, M. Lyu, S. Thaweesak, J.-H. Yun, A. Du, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, Y. Feng, M. Logar, P. M. Rao, L. Cai, D. R. Kim, R. Sinclair and X. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459–11467 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 RSC .
P. M. Rao, L. Cai, C. Liu, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, J. M. Weisse, P. Yang and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16191 CrossRef .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, in Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting: Materials, Processes and Architectures, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2013, pp. 83–108,  10.1039/9781849737739-00083 .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 RSC .
Z. Luo, T. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Li, H. Li and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12878–12882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kang, J. L. Young, H. Lim, W. E. Klein, H. Chen, Y. Xi, B. Gai, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Govindaraju, G. P. Wheeler, D. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 355–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800094 CrossRef .
Y. He, J. E. Thorne, C. H. Wu, P. Ma, C. Du, Q. Dong, J. Guo and D. Wang, Chem, 2016, 1, 640–655 CAS .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2566 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, S. Vanka, Y. Wang, J. Gim, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Ra, R. Hovden, H. Guo, I. Shih and Z. Mi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 307–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueda, T. Minegishi, J. Clune, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama, N. Shibata, J. Kubota, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2227–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, S. Ye, P. Yan, F. Xiong, P. Fu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Shi and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1327–1334 RSC .
I. Narkeviciute, P. Chakthranont, A. J. M. Mackus, C. Hahn, B. A. Pinaud, S. F. Bent and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7565–7572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2566 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi and P. B. Sean, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 193002 CrossRef .
J. Su, T. Minegishi, Y. Kageshima, H. Kobayashi, T. Hisatomi, T. Higashi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5712–5717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, F. H. Saadi, M. F. Lichterman, W. G. Hale, H.-P. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Plymale, S. T. Omelchenko, J.-H. He, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3612 CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 RSC .
W. Yang and J. Moon, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M.-K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Cat., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef .
Y. F. Tay, H. Kaneko, S. Y. Chiam, S. Lie, Q. Zheng, B. Wu, S. S. Hadke, Z. Su, P. S. Bassi, D. Bishop, T. C. Sum, T. Minegishi, J. Barber, K. Domen and L. H. Wong, Joule, 2018, 2, 537–548 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Li, A. Li, X. Chang, W. Liu, Y. Sun, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2025–2034 RSC .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 RSC .
J. Su, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13154–13160 RSC .
I. A. Digdaya, L. Han, T. W. F. Buijs, M. Zeman, B. Dam, A. H. M. Smets and W. A. Smith, Energy
Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1585–1593 RSC .
M. Crespo-Quesada, L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. Warnan, M. F. Kuehnel, R. H. Friend and E. Reisner, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, W. J. Chang, C. W. Lee, S. Park, H.-Y. Ahn and K. T. Nam, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16185 CrossRef .
W. Vijselaar, P. Westerik, J. Veerbeek, R. M. Tiggelaar, E. Berenschot, N. R. Tas, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 84 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, R. Kapadia, J. Yang, M. Zheng, K. Chen, M. Hettick, X. Yin, C. Battaglia, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2308–2313 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kornienko, N. A. Gibson, H. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, S. Aloni, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5525–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, W. Qin, N. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Yan, J. Shi and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15608–15614 RSC .
J. H. Kim, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 61–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7447 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Andrei, R. L. Z. Hoye, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Bajada, S. Ahmad, M. De Volder, R. Friend and E. Reisner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801403 CrossRef .
P. Bornoz, F. F. Abdi, S. D. Tilley, B. Dam, R. van de Krol, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16959–16966 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park and A. J. Bard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, G371–G375 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, M. T. Mayer, A. Yella, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9927–9936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11141 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Zhang, K. Cao, J. Brillet, J. Chen, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21630–21636 RSC .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Luo, Z. Li, S. Nishiwaki, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, P. Cendula, Y. H. Lee, K. Fu, A. Cao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler, S. D. Tilley, L. H. Wong, A. N. Tiwari and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501520 CrossRef .
M. R. Shaner, K. T. Fountaine, S. Ardo, R. H. Coridan, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 779–790 RSC .
C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber, S. Ardo, A. Berger, Y. Chen, R. Coridan, K. T. Fountaine, S. Haussener, S. Hu, R. Liu, N. S. Lewis, M. A. Modestino, M. M. Shaner, M. R. Singh, J. C. Stevens, K. Sun and K. Walczak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12974–12988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashi, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, H. Kobayashi, M. Zhong, Y. Kuang, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, T. Takata, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11674–11677 RSC .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Kuang, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4570–4577 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, Gunawan, T. Harada, Y. Kuang, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and S. Ikeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13691–13697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lai, D. W. Palm and E. Reisner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501668 CrossRef .
R. C. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okamoto, M. Deguchi and S. Yotsuhashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1393–1398 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. May, H.-J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 653–659 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vilanova, T. Lopes, C. Spenke, M. Wullenkord and A. Mendes, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 175–188 CrossRef .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, M. Ma, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, J. K. Kim, H. K. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 182–191 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol, R. Liu, Z. Huang, H.-J. Lewerenz, B. Dam, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2832–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, T. Kim, S. Lee, S. Baek, T. Park and K. Yong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702431 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, ed. R. van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. Hankin, F. E. Bedoya-Lora, C. K. Ong, J. C. Alexander, F. Petter and G. H. Kelsall, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 346–360 RSC .
I. Holmes-Gentle, H. Agarwal, F. Alhersh and K. Hellgardt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 12422–12429 RSC .
C. Xiang, Y. Chen and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3713–3721 RSC .
S. Ardo, D. Fernandez Rivas, M. A. Modestino, V. Schulze Greiving, F. F. Abdi, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Artero, K. Ayers, C. Battaglia, J.-P. Becker, D. Bederak, A. Berger, F. Buda, E. Chinello, B. Dam, V. Di Palma, T. Edvinsson, K. Fujii, H. Gardeniers, H. Geerlings, S. M. H. Hashemi, S. Haussener, F. Houle, J. Huskens, B. D. James, K. Konrad, A. Kudo, P. P. Kunturu, D. Lohse, B. Mei, E. L. Miller, G. F. Moore, J. Muller, K. L. Orchard, T. E. Rosser, F. H. Saadi, J.-W. Schüttauf, B. Seger, S. W. Sheehan, W. A. Smith, J. Spurgeon, M. H. Tang, R. van de Krol, P. C. K. Vesborg and P. Westerik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2768–2783 RSC .

          H. Thomas, F. Armstrong, N. Brandon, B. David, A. Barron, J. Durrant, A. Guwy, A. Kucernak, M. Lewis, J. Maddy, I. Metcalfe and A. Porch, Options for producing low-carbon hydrogen at scale, The Royal Society,  2018 Search PubMed .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825–2850 RSC .
R. Bala Chandran, S. Breen, Y. Shao, S. Ardo and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 115–135 RSC .
C. A. Rodriguez, M. A. Modestino, D. Psaltis and C. Moser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3828–3835 RSC .
I. Fujimoto, N. Wang, R. Saito, Y. Miseki, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2454–2461 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1977–1979 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 RSC .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarnowska, K. Bienkowski, P. J. Barczuk, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600526 CrossRef .
H. S. Han, S. Shin, D. H. Kim, I. J. Park, J. S. Kim, P.-S. Huang, J.-K. Lee, I. S. Cho and X. Zheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1299–1306 RSC .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1348–1357 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702428 CrossRef .
M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1359 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Prevot, Y. Li, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3018–3026 RSC .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, H. Wang, W. Ma, X. Zong and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800795 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 894–901 RSC .
Gunawan, W. Septina, S. Ikeda, T. Harada, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and M. Matsumura, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8941–8943 RSC .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, Y. Moriya, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16386 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, H.-C. Kwon, J. Kim, W. Jo, J. Kim and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702888 CrossRef .
A. Standing, S. Assali, L. Gao, M. A. Verheijen, D. van Dam, Y. Cui, P. H. L. Notten, J. E. M. Haverkort and E. P. A. M. Bakkers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Septina and S. D. Tilley, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .

          R. K. Zinke, W. H. Werkheiser and J. A. Ober, U.S. Department of the interior, U.S. Geological Survey, 2018, https://doi.org/10.3133/70194932.
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
Abundance in Earth's Crust of the elements, DOI: http://periodictable.com/Properties/A/CrustAbundance.html.

          A. Cowley, M. Ryan, L. Bloxham, S. Brown, L. Cole, A. Cowley, P. Duncan, M. Fujita, L. Han, J. Jiang, R. Raithatha, M. Ryan, E. Shao and F. Xiaoyan, Summary of Platinum supply & demand in 2017, PGM Market Report, 2018.
J. Li, D. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zeng and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700744 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sinha, D. K. Nandi, S.-H. Kim and J. Heo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14120–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Dalapati, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha, S. L. Liew, V. Suresh and D. Chi, Mater. Lett., 2016, 183, 183–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Taylor, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1964, 28, 1273–1285 CrossRef CAS .

          C. National Research, The Role of the Chemical Sciences in Finding Alternatives to Critical Resources: A Workshop Summary, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Gu, J. A. Aguiar, S. Ferrere, K. X. Steirer, Y. Yan, C. Xiao, J. L. Young, M. Al-Jassim, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16192 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, W. Fan, Y. He, P. Ma, S. Vanka, S. Fan, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700312 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Woodhouse and A. Goodlich, A Manufacturing Cost Analysis Relevant to Single- and Dual-Junction Photovoltaic Cells Fabricated with III-Vs and III-Vs Grown on Czochralski Silicon, NREL Technical Report PR-6A20-601267563, 2013.
Q. Zeng, J. Li, J. Bai, X. Li, L. Xia and B. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 388–396 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu, T. Moehl, W. Cui, R. Wick-Joliat, L. Zhu and S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1702323 CrossRef .
A. Galembeck and O. L. Alves, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 1923–1927 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, T. Arai, T. Sugita, R. Abe, M. Yanagida, T. Oi, Y. Iwasaki, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11352–11360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, Z. Zou, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2003, 11352–11360 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Focus., 2014, 3, 339–353 CrossRef .
W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046–4051 RSC .
J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Lee and J. S. Lee, J. Catal., 2014, 317, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, H. C. Lee, P. D. Nunez, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4554–4565 RSC .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, N. Firet and R. van de Krol, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 490–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 RSC .
X. Yao, D. Wang, X. Zhao, S. Ma, P. S. Bassi, G. Yang, W. Chen, Z. Chen and T. Sritharan, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jo, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17623–17631 RSC .
S. J. Hong, H. Jun and J. S. Lee, Scr. Mater., 2010, 63, 757–760 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Ye, Z. Chai, J. Gu, X. Yu, C. Zhao, Y. Zhang and W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 222–231 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Hankin, G. Kelsall, C. K. Ong and F. Petter, Photo-Electrochemical Production of H2 Using Solar Energy, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK,  2015 Search PubMed .

          F. F. Abdi, J. Jang, A. Bronneberg, R. V. D. Krol, S. Kirner, B. Stannowski, M. Son, J. Luo, M. Mayer, T. Lopes, P. Dias, A. Vilanova, A. Mendes and F. Oswald, PEC DEMO-Project Deliverable Report, 2016.
W. J. Lee, P. S. Shinde, G. H. Go and E. Ramasamy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5262–5270 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Ling, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y.-C. Pu, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2849–2855 RSC .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 892–897 RSC .
D. Bae, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Iandolo, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, K. Walczak, M. R. Singh, C. Karp, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3371–3380 RSC .
A. Landman, H. Dotan, G. E. Shter, M. Wullenkord, A. Houaijia, A. Maljusch, G. S. Grader and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, R. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600379 CrossRef .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, Coatings, 2015, 5, 293 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vermaas, M. Sassenburg and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19556–19562 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. Xiang, S. Hu and N. S. Lewis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1101–F1110 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Herron, J. Kim, A. A. Upadhye, G. W. Huber and C. T. Maravelias, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 126–157 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10001–10017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 387–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov and W. I. F. David, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2007, 365, 1043–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

http://www.rsc.org/globalassets/04-campaigning-outreach/policy/research-policy/global-challenges/solar-fuels-2012.pdf
        .

          S. Boh, World's largest floating solar photovoltaic cell test-bed launched in Singapore, DOI: https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/worlds-largest-floating-solar-photovoltaic-cell-test-bed-launched-in-singapore.
Wikipedia, Floating solar, DOI: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating_solar.

          D. Esposito, Introducing Floating Solar Fuel Rig for Production of Hydrogen, DOI: https://worldmaritimenews.com/archives/238368/introducing-floating-solar-fuel-rig-for-production-of-hydrogen/.
Nyngan Solar Farm, Australia, DOI: https://ramblingsdc.net/Australia/SeAust/20170405_09Bs.jpg.
K. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 13 CrossRef .
N. A. Kelly, T. L. Gibson and D. B. Ouwerkerk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15803–15825 CrossRef CAS .
Hydrogenics, Hydrogenics Selected References: Fueling Stations, 2013.
K. Sayama and Y. Miseki, Synthesiology, 2014, 7, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Jin Hyun Kim
	Jin Hyun Kim received his undergraduate degree from the University of Seoul, Republic of Korea, in 2012 and joined Prof. Jae Sung Lee's research group as an integrated MS + PhD candidate of Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Republic of Korea. He received his PhD on the subject of semiconductor photoelectrode development for photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion in 2016. He is now working as a postdoctoral fellow in Jae Sung Lee's group (2012–2018) at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) to undertake a project to develop metal oxide-based solar energy harvesting, conversion, and storage.

Dharmesh Hansora
	Dharmesh Hansora is pursuing his PhD degree (2017 onwards) under the guidance of Prof. Jae Sung Lee at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, South Korea. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degree in Chemical Engineering from MS University of Baroda, India. His current research area includes benchmarking of devices and scale-up to large-scale systems for solar water splitting.

Pankaj Sharma
	Pankaj Sharma received his PhD degree in Chemistry from Jiwaji University, India, in 2008. He worked as a Senior Lecturer at Lovely Professional University, Punjab, and MM University, Haryana, India, from 2008–2009. In December 2009 he joined Myongji University, Republic of Korea, as a Research Professor. After that he worked at the Korea Institute of Energy Research as a Research Scientist (2010–2012), and then as a Research Professor at Chungnam National University (2012–2017), Republic of Korea. Presently, he is working as a Senior Research Scientist with Prof. Ji-Wook Jang at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. His research interests include the synthesis of multifunctional, hybrid and nanomaterials for their applications in energy, environmental and biomedical fields.

Ji-Wook Jang
	Ji-Wook Jang studied Chemistry at Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Republic of Korea, and obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the same university in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Jae Sung Lee. He continued extensive research on different types of photocatalysts, and photocatalytic systems while working at Boston College, USA, and Institute for Solar Fuels, Germany, under the guidance of Prof. Dunwei Wang, and Prof. Roel van de Krol, respectively. He is presently working as an Assistant Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering from 2016. His research interest includes the photochemical production of future energy carriers (H2, H2O2, NH3, etc.) and high valued chemicals.

Jae Sung Lee
	Jae Sung Lee received his BS degree from Seoul National University in 1975, MS degree from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1977, Korea, and PhD degree from Stanford University in 1984. After a brief tenure at Catalytica Inc. as a research fellow, he returned to his native Korea to become a professor of chemical engineering at Pohang University of Science and Technology. He and his group moved to Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology in 2013. He has been leading a research group of the “eco-friendly catalysis and energy laboratory”, whose research interests are focused on photocatalysis for energy applications, electrocatalysis for fuel cells, and heterogeneous catalysis of CO2 utilization. In photocatalysis, his research focuses on the development of photocatalytic solid semiconductor materials for solar energy conversion using heterojunction, surface modification, doping and solid solution technologies.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of solar energy with other energy resources. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from the IEA/SHC Solar Update, copyright 2009. (b) Worldwide mean solar irradiance variation. (Source: https://www.3tier.com/static/ttcms/us/images/support/maps/3tier_solar_irradiance.jpg.) Reproduced with permission from the Vaisala Inc., copyright 2014. (c) Solar thermal power plant. (Source: https://www.solarreserve.com/en/.). Reproduced with permission from the Solar Reserve, copyright 2016. (d) Silicon PV panels and wind turbines. (Source: https://www.shutterstock.com/image-photo/wind-generator-solar-panel-81569431?irgwc=1&utm_medium=Affiliate&utm_campaign=Skimbit%20Ltd.&utm_source=10078&utm_term=.) Reproduced with permission from Shutterstock, copyright 2018. (e) Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) implemented on a building's glass windows. (Source: http://www.elettronews.com/celle-solari-a-sensibilizzante-organico-con-materiali-a-band-gap/.) (f) Biofuel (bioethanol) production from corn. (Source: https://greentumble.com/how-does-biofuel-work/.) (g) Photoelectrochemical water splitting for solar hydrogen production. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 
Absorption of light: SC + hν (>Eg) → e−cb + h+vb
Water oxidation (OER): 2H2O + 4h+vb → O2 + 4H+	(1)
Proton reduction (HER): 2H + 2e−cb → H2	(2)
Overall water splitting: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2 ΔG° = 237.2 kJ mol−1	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Solar energy-driven water splitting using a light absorber. If a single light absorber is used, the energy of the photon (hν) should be greater than 1.23 eV. Otherwise, multiple light absorbers are needed to drive the overall water splitting. (a) Spectrum of AM 1.5 G (i.e. 1 sun condition, 100 mW cm−2 power density). (b) Photoelectrolysis of water is an energetically uphill reaction. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2009. (c) Photochemical redox reactions for overall water splitting driven by light of sufficient energy (hν > Eg) to excite electron/hole pairs. E(hν) is the voltage achievable from photons with an energy of hν and Eg is the voltage that the light absorber can achieve using photons. ηloss includes potential loss from the internal resistance (material's own mobility and charge transfer efficiency), quenching of the photon's energy, and overpotential for oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions (ηOER and ηHER). (d) Technical challenges of photon-driven overall water splitting.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Single light absorber-2 electron system (S2) configuration. (b) Maximum theoretical ηSTH of the S2 configuration as a function of the bandgap of the photoabsorber. (c) Dual light absorber (D4) of side-by-side configuration. (d) Maximum theoretical ηSTH of side-by-side D4. (e) Stacked D4 configuration, (f) maximum theoretical ηSTH of stacked D4. Images (b, d and f) were reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 4  Various photo-driven water splitting systems and their charge flows upon light absorption; (a) PC, (b) PEC and (c) PV–EC systems. Typical performance data acquired by these systems are also shown – H2, O2 gas evolution from PC, current matching of the photoanode and photocathode for PEC, and current matching of the PV cell and electrocatalyst (OEC, HEC combined) for the PV–EC system. They also show how to determine the STH efficiency from each system: (a) PC system requires measuring H2 produced per illumination area and time (μmole cm−2 h−1). (b) PEC (photoanode–photocathode) system requires two electrode J–V curves, and the operating point is the photoanode–photocathode cell's short circuit current density, which corresponds to the current density at 0.0 V bias. (c) PV–EC system requires J–V curves of PV and EC, and operating point will be the PV–EC cell's short circuit current density. All data were assumed values for demonstration purposes. For systems like (b) and (c), faradaic efficiency of the reaction is usually confirmed before calculating ηSTH from the current density generated from the system.	 

 	Fig. 5  Types of PEC cells for water splitting. (a) Photoanode–HEC cathode, (b) photocathode–OEC anode, (c) photoanode–photocathode tandem cell, and (d) photoanode–photovoltaic (PEC–PV) tandem cell for unbiased overall water splitting. Graphs below each figure are examples of J–V curves and operating points achieved from the system. Max ABPE (applied bias to photocurrent efficiency = Jph × (1.23 V – applied bias)/P(100 mW cm−2, 1 sun condition)) indicates maximum power density achievable from the system. Description and denotation were reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  Importance of reaction selectivity for photocatalysis. (a) Energetics of photocatalysis (energetically downhill) and “artificial photosynthesis” (energetically uphill). (b) Selectivity improvement of the photocatalyst via application of a cocatalyst (HEC, OEC) for suppression of unproductive back reactions (HOR, ORR). Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  Single step PC water splitting systems. (a) Energy diagram. Redrawn from ref. 50 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Photographic image of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) yellowish solid solution obtained by mixing GaN and ZnO. Photocatalytic performance of Rh@Cr2O3-loaded (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) under visible light (>400 nm) for 35 h with evacuation every 5 h. (red; H2, blue; O2). Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2006. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of C3N4 and CDots–C3N4 nanocomposites, and the time variation H2 and O2 production under >420 nm irradiation using a 300 W Xe lamp for the CDots–C3N4 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (d) Overall water splitting on a greenish BiVO4 (GBVO4·Bi1−xInxV1−xMoxO4) photocatalyst obtained by dual doping with In and Mo. The overall water splitting under >420 nm irradiation to H2 (solid curves) and O2 (dashed curves) production. The gas evolution test set I, GBVO4; sets II–V, 3 wt% RuO2/GBVO4 and tint-colored line is for bare or 3 wt% RuO2/BiVO4. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the American Association for the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015.	 



One-step excitation
Cdots-C3N4	9.0	2.0	4800.0	Water, pH 7	Liu et al. (2016)55
RuO2/In, Mo:BiVO4	—	3.2AQY	50.0	Water, pH 7	Jo et al. (2015)56
Pt/mesoporous g-C3N4	7560	0.12	720.0	Water	Schroder et al. (2015)63
Rh@Cr2O3/GaN:ZnO	—	2.5AQY	35.0	H2SO4, pH 4.5	Maeda et al. (2006)54
RuO2/GaN:ZnO	—	0.14AQY	15.0	H2SO4, pH 3	Maeda et al. (2005)53
RhCrOx + CoOx/Al:SrTiO3	9801	0.4	1000.0	Water, pH 7	Goto et al. (2018)64


Two-step excitation (Z-scheme)
Mg:GaN	Rh@Cr2O3/Mg:InGaN	—	3.3	4	Water, pH 7	Chowdhury et al. (2018)60
GaN	Rh@Cr2O3/Mg:InGaN	3.0	1.8	6.0	Water, pH 7	Kibria et al. (2015)65
RuOx/Mo:BiVO4 with carbon	Rh@Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3	25.0	1.2	17	Water, pH 6.8	Wang et al. (2017)62
RuOx/Mo:BiVO4 with Au	Ru/Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3	7.5	1.1	14.0	Water, pH 6.8	Wang et al. (2016)61
Bi4NbO8Cl	Ru/Rh:SrTiO3	—	0.4AQY	24.0	HCl, pH 2.4	Fujito et al. (2016)66
WO3 with IO3−/I−	Pt/MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON	15.9	6.8AQY	—	Water	Chen et al. (2015)58
BiVO4	Ru/Rh:SrTiO3	33.0	1.6AQY	—	Water	Jia et al. (2013)57
CoOx/Ta3N5 with Au	Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3	13.0	0.1	16.0	H2SO4, pH 3.9	Wang et al. (2014)67
BiVO4 with Fe3+/Fe2+	Ru/Rh:SrTiO3	33.0	0.1	8.0	2M FeCl3	Kato et al. (2013)68
CoOx/BiVO4/Au with [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−	Rh@Cr2O3/ZrO2/TaON	—	0.5	12.0	NaH2PO4 pH 6.0	Qi et al. (2018)59
BiVO4 with [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+	Ru/Rh:SrTiO3	33.0	0.1AQY	8.0	H2SO4, pH 2.4	Kato et al. (2013)69
CoOx/BiVO4	Pt/Rh:SrTiO3	33.0	2.1AQY	100.0	Water	Sasaki et al. (2013)69
WO3 with IO3−/I−	Pt/ZrO2/TaON	3.5	6.3AQY	10.0	Water	Maeda et al. (2010)70
BiVO4	Ru/Rh:SrTiO3	33.0	0.12	120.0	H2SO4, pH 3.5	Sasaki et al. (2009)71

 	Fig. 8  Two-step photocatalytic water splitting systems. (a) Z-Scheme composed of two photocatalysts decorated with OEC/HEC and connected by an aqueous or solid mediator. Redrawn from ref. 50 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Z-Scheme of the BiVO4–Ru/Rh:SrTiO3 composite (0.3 g catalyst under 1 sun and irradiation area of 33 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) Z-Scheme of the PtOx/WO3–Pt/Mg:Ta2O6−xNy/TaON water splitting system using an IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator (75 mg Pt/Mg:Ta2O6−xNy/TaON and 150 mg PtOx/WO3, 150 mL 2 mM NaI solution under 1 sun, irradiation area 15.9 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. (d) Wafer level photochemical OWS on nanowire arrays of Mg:InGaN decorated with Rh/Cr2O3 HEC. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (e) Z-Scheme RuOx/Mo:BiVO4–Au–Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3 system prepared by the particle transfer method (under 1 sun and two reaction conditions: 288 K, 5 kPa (open symbols), and 331 K, 10 kPa (closed symbols)). The inset shows the generation of gas bubbles on the photocatalytic sheet. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  PV–electrolysis cell (EC) for overall water splitting. (a) Schematic view. (b) Different types of PV geometry of efficiencies >20%: (A) TOPCon crystalline Si (Fraunhofer). (B) IBC crystalline Si (SunPower). (C) Heterojunction IBC crystalline Si (Panasonic). (D) Multicrystalline Si (Trina Solar). (E) GaAs thin film (Alta Devices). (F) CIGS thin film (ZSW Stuttgart). (G) CdTe thin film (First Solar). (H) Perovskite thin film (KRICT). (c) Theoretical Shockley–Queisser detailed-balance efficiency limit under 1 sun condition as a function of band gap and 75% and 50% of the limit. (c and d) were reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016. (d) Experimentally measured overpotentials for HEC (Pt, MoS2, CoP, MoS|P, NiMo) and OEC (IrO2, RuO2, BSCF, NiCeOx/Au, NiFeOx). The overpotentials required to generate 10 mA cm−2 geometric area (grey) or electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the catalysts (red) are expressed as bar graphs. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) Generalized J–V diagram of a directly coupled PV–EC device. Data of EC (OEC and HEC) for budget (green), state of the art (SOA, yellow) and SOA with 10 times greater surface area of SOA OEC/HEC were all assumed values for illustration. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrocatalysis for water splitting. (a) Schematic illustration of bias requirement in addition to the theoretical voltage needed for the water splitting reaction (E = 1.23 V), minimum requirement for the actual reaction (overpotential) and bias needed to conduct water splitting with ∼10 mA cm−2 (geometric area of each catalyst). (b) Benchmarking of HEC and OEC in acidic (pH 1.0, 1.0 M H2SO4) and basic (pH 13.6, 1.0 M NaOH) electrolytes. Overpotential needed to generate 10 mA cm−2 was used as the figure of merit. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) J–V curves of HER for CoPS films on graphite, CoPS NWs on graphite, and CoPS NPls on carbon fibre paper, and Pt wire. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (d) iR-corrected polarization curves of NiFe:LDH/Fe foam in 1 and 10 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  PV–EC systems and their water splitting performance. (a) c-Si solar cell–Ni-Bi–NiMoZn. J–V curves of PV modules of three (dashed) and four (solid) single junction c-Si solar cells under simulated 1 sun and EC (dashed line, the ideal curve for Ni-Bi/NiMoZn catalysts; solid line, Ni-Bi/NiMoZn electrodes in a two-electrode cell (0.5 M KBi/0.5 M K2SO4, pH 9.2)). The point of intersection represents Jop and ηSTH of the PV–EC system. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2014. (b) A 3 series connected c-Si/a-Si heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell – membrane electrode assembly (MEA) electrolyzer; operating point of the system under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Electrochemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC)-Pt system. J–V curve of DSSC-Pt in 1 M NaOH under 1 sun irradiation. ABPE and ηSTH at zero voltage. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (d) A triple-junction organic photovoltaic (OPV) cell architecture connected to Pt–Ni electrocatalysts. The PCEs and ηSTH at various operating voltages under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (e) Perovskite solar cell coupled with NiFe-LDH/Ni. J–V curves of the perovskite tandem cell and the NiFe-LDH/Ni foam electrodes in a two-electrode configuration under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014. (f) A triple-junction solar cell (InGaP/GaAs/GaInAsSb), and two PEM electrolyzers (Ir–Pt/C) connected in series with ηSTH over 30%. J–V curves at the beginning-of-operation (BOO) and end-of operation (EOO) for the triple-junction solar cell (under concentrated 42 suns) and the dual-electrolyser. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 



PV–electrolyzers
MEA electrolyzer, IrO2–Pt/C	n-AlGaAs/p-AlGaAs 1jn solar cell + DC/DC converter	1.0	20.6 (1 sun)	1.1	0.1 M HClO4 pH 1	Chang et al. (2017)83
2 PEM electrolyzer, Ir–Pt	InGaP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb,a 3jn, concentrated PV (CPV)a	0.316	30.0 (42 sun)	48.0	Water, pH 7	Jia et al. (2016)88
MEA electrolyzer, IrOx–Pt	c-Si 3p	5.7	14.2 (1 sun)	100.0	Water, pH 7	Schüttauf et al. (2016)89
5 PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt	InGaP/GaAs/Ge 3jn, (CPV)a	0.57	24.4 (800 sun)	Not tested	Water, pH 7	Nakamura et al. (2015)95
PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt	InGaP/GaAs/Ge 3jn, CPVa	0.57	17.1 (800 sun)	—	Water, pH 7	Sugiyama et al. (2015)96
PEM electrolyzer, RhO2–Rh	GaInP/GaInAs 2jn, CPVa	0.0314	16.8 (500 sun)	12.0	Water	Rau et al. (2014)97
PEM electrolyzer, Ir–Pt	GaInP/GaInAs 2jn, CPVa	0.033	15.0 (500 sun)	2.3	Water, pH 7	Peharz et al. (2007)98
3 PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt	GaInP/InGaAs/Ge 3jn, CPVa	1.0	12.9 (10.95 sun)	1.0	Water, pH 7	Fujii et al. (2013)100
PEM electrolyzer, Pt–Pt	c-Si 4p	81.2	5.7 (0.49 sun)	1.0	Water, pH 7	Fujii et al. (2013)100


PV–electrochemical cells
MHCM–NiMoS	GaInP/GaAs/Ge 3jn	0.325	17.9	100.0	Sea water, pH 8	Hsu et al. (2018)91
Ni foam–Ni foam	GaInP/GaAs/Ge 3jn	0.09	22.4 (100 sun)	72	1 M NaOH (pH 14)	Bonke et al. (2015)94
Na:NiFeOx–NiP	Lead halide perovskite solar cell 2p	0.25	11.22	30.0	1 M KOH (pH 14)	Weng et al. (2017)90
Pt–Pt	DSSC solar cell 2p, 4 terminal	0.141	5.75 (0.5 sun)	5.0	0.1 M NaOH	Kang et al. (2017)85
NiFe LDH–CoP	Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite 2p	0.32	12.7	16.0	pH 13.6/BPM/pH 0.9	Luo et al. (2016)99
Ni–Pt	PBDTTPD:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS 3jn	0.1	6.1	—	1 M NaOH	Gao et al. (2016)86
RuO2–RuO2 Co3O4–NiMoZnb	PCDTBT/PMDPP3T/PMDPP3T 3jnb	0.1 (wired) 1.7 (wireless)	5.7 (wired) 3.6 (wireless)	+20 min	1 M NaOH	Esiner et al. (2015)100
NiFe LDH–NiFe LDH	Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite 2p	0.318	12.3	10.0	1 M NaOH	Luo et al. (2014)87
Ni-Bi–NiMoZn	c-Si 4p	6.0	10.0	168.0	0.5 M KBi, pH 9.2	Cox et al. (2014)84
Ni–Ni	c-Si 3jn	5.7	14.5	100.0	1 M KOH, pH 14	Schüttauf et al. (2016)89
Pt–Ptb	CuInGaSe2 3pb	4.0	10.5	27.0	3 M H2SO4 pH 1	Jacobsson et al. (2013)101
Co-Bi–NiMoZn	a-Si 3jn (wired device)	2.0	4.7	10.0	0.5 M KBi (pH 9.2)	Reece (2011)26
Co-Bi–NiMoZnb	a-Si 3jn (wireless device)b	2.0	2.5	10.0	0.5 M KNO3 (pH 9.2)	Reece (2011)26

 	Fig. 12  State-of-the-art BiVO4 and Fe2O3 photoanodes for PEC water splitting. (a) A PEC cell with NiOOH/FeOOH coated BiVO4 photoanode, fabricated by thermal conversion of BiOI films, from ref. 122 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. The J–V curve for the FeOOH/NiOOH/BiVO4 photoanode in the presence of V5+ in KBi buffer (pH 9.5). Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (b) Structure and energy band diagram of a W:BiVO4/WO3 core/shell NW photoanode, and its PEC performance in 0.5 M KPi electrolyte buffered at pH 8. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (c) The fabrication of the conductive 3D nanocone array substrate and BiVO4 deposition. The 60° tilted SEM image of the final F:SnO2/Pt/SiO2 nanocone arrays, and the cross section image of the uniformly grown Mo:BiVO4 on the 3D nanocone arrays. J–V curves of the Mo:BiVO4 nanocone in 0.5 M Na2SO3-containing KPi buffer solution, and NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4 nanocone photoanode in KPi buffer solution. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016. (d) Co-Pi loaded Si-doped α-Fe2O3 photoanode. Inset image; the tree shaped morphology of the nanostructured Co-Pi/Si:α-Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011. (e) Synthesis of TiO2/Ti:α-Fe2O3 3D branched nanorod arrays (BNRs) on TiO2/FTO substrates. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. (f) Modified Fe2O3/FTO photoanodes prepared by PADD and their J–V curves in 1 M KOH, under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 13  Oxynitride photoanodes for PEC water splitting. (a) Photocatalytic oxynitrides and nitrides (with courtesy of Domen's group). (b) The transformation of green Ta2O5 film into red Ba-doped Ta3N5. Vertically aligned Ba:Ta3N5 NR arrays. J–V curves for Co-Pi/Ta3N5 and Co-Pi/Ba:Ta3N5 NR photoanodes under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 125 and 130 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2013. (c) The three-electrode cell with an InGaN photoanode for PEC water oxidation. The J–V curve of InGaN and IrO2/InGaN photoanodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Water oxidation on a CoOx/BaTaO2N/Ta/Ti photoelectrode in 0.2 M KPi solution of pH 13 under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (e) The molecular catalyst integrated Ta3N5 photoanode. J–V curves of the WOC complex 2/WOC complex 1/Ni(OH)x/FeOOH/TiOx/Ta3N5 photoanode (1 sun, 1 M NaOH). Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photoanodes with PV grade materials with buried junctions. (a) Protected semiconductors by TiO2 deposited by ALD. (b) J–V curves of 2 nm Ni/118 nm TiO2-coated np+-GaAs and n-GaP photoelectrodes under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), copyright 2014. (c) Chronoamperometry and (d) J–V curve of NiOx/TiO2/HTJ-Si, NiOx/n-CdTe and NiOx/a-Si:H photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the American Association for the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. (e) J–V curves of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si and NiOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes in 1 M KOH. (f) Chronoamperometry of NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes biased at 1.63 V RHE under 1 sun. The inset shows the TEM image. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  Photocathodes for solar hydrogen production. (a) Cu2O nanowire-based NiMo/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathodes in different pH buffer solutions under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 139 and 140 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016 and Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (b) Pt/TiMo/CdS/Cu2Cd0.4Zn0.6SnS4 and Pt/TiMo/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4 in 1 M K2HPO4/KH2PO4 solution of pH 3. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Elsevier B. V., copyright 2018. (c) a-SiC, isolated TiO2/a-SiC in 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution of pH 4. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Lead halide based perovskite photocathode in 0.1 M borate solution of pH 8.5. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) NiMo/SiO2/Al:np-Si microwire array photocathode. J–V curves for bare SiO2/Al:np-Si, Pt/SiO2/Al:np-Si, and NiMO/SiO2/Al:np-Si microwire arrays in 0.1M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (f) Energy band diagram for the Pt/TiO2/InP photocathode. J–V curves of Pt loaded bare p-InP and TiO2/p-InP photocathodes in 1 M HClO4 solution. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 



Photoanode–photocathode tandem cells
NiFeOx/BiVO4	Pt/TiO2/CdS/CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2/Mo/SLG	0.1	3.7	>0.5	0.5 M KBi, pH 9.3	Kobayashi et al. (2018)155
NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4	RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O/Au	0.54	3.0	12.0	0.2 M KBi, pH 9	Pan et al. (2018)140
NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4	NiMo/SiO2//n+/p-Si	0.28	2.1	1.0	pH 10-BPM-pH 1	Vijselaar et al. (2018)148
NiFeOx/BiVO4	Pt/Mo/Ti/CdS/In2S3/(ZnSe)0.85(CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2)0.15/Mo/SLG/Ti foil (parallel)	1.08	1.0	20.0	0.5 M KBi, pH 9.5	Higashi et al. (2017)177
NiFeOx/BiVO4	Pt/Mo/Ti/(ZnSe)0.85(CIGS)0.15/Mo/SLG (parallel)	0.9	0.91	2.0	0.5 M KBi, pH 9.5	Kaneko et al. (2016)178
Co-Pi/BiVO4	Pt/TiO2/Zn:InP NWs (parallel)	1.0	0.5	1.0	0.1 M KPi, pH 7	Kornienko et al. (2016)152
NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4	Pt/CdS/CuGa3Se5/(Ag,Cu)GaSe2/Mo/SLG (parallel)	0.36	0.67	>2.0	0.1 M KPi, pH 7	Kim et al. (2016)154
NiOOH/BiVO4	Pt/In2S3/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4	1.13	0.28	—	0.2 M NaPi, pH 6.5	Jiang et al. (2015)179
NiFeOx/Fe2O3	Pt/a-Si	0.125	0.91	10.0	0.5 M KPi, pH 11.8	Jang et al. (2015)157
TiCoOx/BiVO4	TiNiOx/p-Si	0.5	0.59	5.0	0.1 M KBi, pH 9.2	Lai et al. (2015)180
Co-Pi/W:BiVO4	RuOx/TiO2/Al:ZnO/Cu2O	0.283	0.87	1.4	0.5 M KPi, pH 7	Bornoz et al. (2014)159
IrO2/n-TiO2	Pt/p-Si	1.0	0.12	1.5	0.5 M H2SO4, pH 6	Liu et al. (2013)156
IrOx/n-GaAs	Pt/Ti/Pt/Au/p-GaAs	0.025	13.1%	8.0	0.5 M H2SO4, pH 0.55	Kang et al. (2018)121
MnO–n-GaAs	Pt/ZnO/p-InP	0.125	8.2	10.0	6 M KOH,	Kainthla et al. (1987)181
TiO2	p-GaP	1.9	0.25	—	0.2 N H2SO4	Nozik et al. (1976)182


Photoelectrode–photovoltaic tandem cells
RuO2a	GaAs/GaInAs/GaInP/AlInP/TiO2/Rh 3jn, (monolithic device)a	0.1–0.3	19.3–15	20.0 (pH 7)	1 M HClO4 pH 0 0.5 M KPi pH 0	Cheng et al. (2018)176
RuOx NPs	GaInP/GaInAs, IMM-AlGaAs/GaInAs–Pt	0.16	16.2	1.5	3 M H2SO4 pH 1	Young et al. (2017)8
IrO2a	InGaP/GaAs/Ge-Pt 3jn Solar cell (wireless device)a	6.25	11.2	9.0	3 M KHCO3	Okamoto et al. (2017)183
RuO2–Rha	GaInP/GaInAs/AlInP/3jn, (monolithic device)a	1.0	14.0	40.0	1 M HClO4, pH 0	May et al. (2015)184
Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs (monolithic device)a	NiMoa	1.0	10.5	80.0	1 M KOH, pH 13.6	Verlage et al. (2015)175
RuO2–Pta	AIGaAs/Si 2jn Solar cell (monolithic wireless device)a	0.22	18.3	14.0	1 M HClO4, pH 0	Licht et al. (2000)185,186
Pt	p-GaInP2/n-GaAs 2jn, (monolithic device)	0.2	12.4 (11 sun)	20.0	3 M H2SO4	Khaselev et al. (1998)174
Fe2O3	a-Si-Pt 2jn, reactor: cool PEC cell [PEC-DEMO project]	50.0	0.6	1008.0	1 M KOH, pH 7	Vilanova et al. (2017)187 PEC DEMO
BiVO4	a-Si-Pt 2jn, reactor: Cool PEC cell	200	2.52	∼200.0	0.1 M KCi pH 7.0	(2016)188 PEC DEMO
0.57
BiVO4	Si module (∼5.0 V)	1600 (total device size)	3.0 to >2.0 (after 300 h)	∼300	0.1 M KPi pH 7.0	Tolod et al. (2017)189 Artiphyiction
WO3	DSSC	130.56	1.41	Not reported	1 H2SO4 pH 1.0	Lee et al. (2011)190 KERI
NiOOH/FeOOH/Mo:BiVO4	Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite solar cell–Pt (selective light filter applied)	0.25	6.2	10.0	0.5 M KPi, pH 7	Qiu et al. (2016)113
HDP (FeOOH NiOOH/Mo:BiVO4)-(NiFeOx/H:TiO2/Ti:Fe2O3)	c-Si, series connected-Pt 2p	0.25	7.7	8.0	1 M KCi, pH 9.2	Kim et al. (2016)6
NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4/WO3	DSSC solar cell–Pt	2.25	5.7	12.0	0.1 M NaPi, pH 7	Shi et al. (2015)191
Co-Pi/BiVO4/WO3	GaAs/InGaAsP-Pt 2jn	0.16	8.1	>1.0	0.5 M KPi, pH 7	Pihosh et al. (2015)163
IrOx–lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3 or CH3NH3PbBr3) perovskite solar cell	Pt/TiO2/CdS/CuInxGa1−xSe2 photocathode	0.2	6.3	1.0	0.5 M H2SO4, pH 0	Luo et al. (2015)170
IrOx–lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite solar cell	RuOx/TiO2/Al:ZnO/Cu2O/Au/FTO	0.057	2.5	2.0	0.5 M K2SO4, buffered pH 5	Dias et al. (2015)164
Co-Ci/H,Mo:BiVO4a	Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3)–Pt 1jn, (monolithic device)a	0.56	4.3 (wired)	>12.0	0.1 M KCi, pH 7	Kim et al. (2015)166
3.0 (wireless)
NiFeOx/Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3	Lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite–NiMoZn	1.0	1.9	8.0	1 M KOH, pH 13.6	Morales et al. (2015)162
Co-Pi/W:BiVO4	(p-i-n a-Si:H/p-i-n/nc-Si:H)- Pt 2jn	0.283	5.2	1.0	0.1 M KPi, pH 7.3	Han et al. (2014)192
Co-Pi/W:BiVO4	(p-i-n a-Si:H/p-i-n nc-Si:H)-Pt 1jn and 2jn	1.0	4.9 (2jn)	1.0	0.1 M KPi, pH 7	Abdi et al. (2013)169
WO3	DSSC solar cell–Pt	0.196	3.1	>8.0	1 M HClO4, pH 0	Brillet et al. (2012)160
Al2O3/Si:Fe2O3	DSSC solar cell–Pt	0.196	1.17	>10.0	1 M NaOH, pH 13.6	Brillet et al. (2012)160

 	Fig. 16  Photoanode–photocathode tandem cell for overall water splitting. (a) A tandem cell consisting of a NiOOH/FeOOH/3%Mo:BiVO4 photoanode and a Pt/CdS/CGS/(Ag,Cu)GaSe2 photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016. (b) α-Fe2O3 photoanode and amorphous Si photocathode in a tandem configuration. J–V plots of α-Fe2O3, rgH II (Fe2O3-II), and NiFeOx-coated rgH II (NiFeOx/Fe2O3-II) photoanodes and the current density of the Si photocathode. The net photocurrent generated during the first 10h of operation using NiFeOx/α-Fe2O3-II and Pt/TiO2/a-Si tandem in 0.5M KPi of pH 11.8 without external bias. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) BiVO4-c-Si tandem cell showing the radiation losses on passing through each layer. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) An inverse-structure perovskite and PEC tandem cell. The front and back sides of the PEC tandem cell. The J–V curves for a TiCoOx/BiVO4 photoanode (blue), a perovskite-based photocathode (red), and the photocathode in tandem configuration with TiCoOx/BiVO4 light filtering (green). Reproduced with Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2018. (e) RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode and Mo:BiVO4 photoanode measured in 0.2 M potassium borate of pH 9. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 17  PEC–PV tandem cells for overall water splitting. (a) WO3-DSSC tandem cell and J–V curves of WO3 (yellow) and DSSC (blue) under simulated 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (b) A nanostructured α-Fe2O3–perovskite solar cell in a tandem configuration. J–V plots for NiFeOx/Al2O3/α-Fe2O3, Co-Pi/Al2O3/α-Fe2O3, and perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2) solar cells after light screening by the top α-Fe2O3 electrode. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) A tandem cell equipped with a hetero-type dual photoanode (HDP) (BiVO4||α-Fe2O3) and a 2p c-Si solar cell. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (d) A BiVO4/WO3-2jn GaAs/InGaAsP tandem cell where the PV cell operates under reflected light from the photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (e) A Cu2O–perovskite ((FAPbI)3−x(MAPbI3)x) solar cell–IrO2 tandem cell. J–V curves of the photocathode and anode components with overlaid PV cell. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  Wireless back-to-back connection of PEC–PV tandem. (a) A Si/TiO2 nanotree array with a magnified view of the TiO2 segment used for water oxidation. The photographic images compare a TiO2 nanowire, a Si nanowire, and a Si/TiO2 nanotree substrate. (b) The solar water splitting on nanotree heterostructures under 150 mW cm−2 (1.5 suns) in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (c) A tandem junction microwire array with a buried homojunction (n–p+-Si) coated with ITO and n-WO3, and an energy diagram and reaction pathway for water splitting in the tandem device. (d) J–V curves for single and tandem junction microwire devices in 1.0 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (e) Co-Pi/W:BiVO4/SnO2/n-p-Si nanotree heterostructures with black-Si core/W:BiVO4 shell decorated with the CoPi oxygen evolution catalyst. (f) J–V plots of the black-Si core/W:BiVO4 devices for unassisted overall water splitting in 0.5 M KPi. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 19  Integrated tandem cell of buried junction type photoelectrodes. (a) An inverted metamorphic multi-junction (IMM) device architecture for maximizing light harvesting with GaInP (Eg = 1.8 eV) and GaInAs (Eg = 1.2 eV) junctions. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoelectrode (inset: generation of gas bubbles). J–V plots of the Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoanode measured in 1.0 M KOH under 1 sun. The short-circuit photocurrent density and the corresponding ηSTH as a function of time in a two-electrode configuration. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) Bifacial GaAs photoelectrode tandem system for unassisted solar water splitting. Separately prepared GaAs photocathode and photoanode are co-integrated on a glass substrate. J–V curves of the GaAs photocathode and photoanode with an ohmic metal contact. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (d) The dual-junction tandem as the photoelectrode for water splitting; Rh/TiO2/AlInPOx/AlInP–GaInP/GaInAs/GaAs/RuOx. The comparison of realized ηSTH and historical development, and theoretical benchmarking values. The PEC performance of the tandem device of the full surface-functionalized photoelectrode and after cap-layer etching. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  Monolithic, bias and wire-free “artificial leaf” devices for overall water splitting. (a) A Co-Bi/3jn a-Si/NiMoZn cell under 1 sun in 1 M KBi (red trace) and 1.5 M KNO3 (blue trace). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011. (b) The generation of H2 and O2 on a modulated III–V triple-junction solar cell (Pt/AgAu/InGaP/GaAs/Ge/IrOx) under 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) A monolithic 3 series-connected CIGS solar cell module connected to a Pt electrocatalyst (for both OER, HER), and accumulated gas evolution under 1.0 sun in 3 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) An organic artificial leaf (RuO2/organic solar cell/RuO2) with RuO2 covered ITO electrodes for H2 (right) and O2 (left) evolution. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (e) A wireless solar water splitting device without external energy supply by combining in tandem a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell with Co-Ci/H,Mo:BiVO4. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 21  A comparison of photon-driven water splitting systems. (a) Reported STH from various device types (PV–EC, PEC and PC). PEC devices are further classified: PE buried indicates devices similar to PV cells but functioning in water by surface protection. PE–PV indicates that at least one side of the device directly contacts water forming a semiconductor||liquid junction (SLJ). PE–PE is a device made with only photoelectrodes. (b) Stability and (c) the device's light absorber's geometric size with reported STH. (d) Golden triangles for a practical solar hydrogen production system and their simplified evaluation. Left side is for PV–EC, PEC and PC and right side is for PEC related devices.	 

 	Fig. 22  Efficiency loss in scaled-up photoanode–photocathode tandem cells. (a) Device model on the experimental scale. (b) Band gap alignment. (c) J–V curves of an ideal device with no energetic loss and a real experimental device with known loss mechanisms. (d) Scaled-up tandem photoelectrochemical device based on cell architecture.29,30 (e) J–V curves of the experimental device and the scaled up device with expected energy losses.	 

 	Fig. 23  Technical readiness level (TRL) of solar hydrogen production technology. (a) Scheme representing PV–electrolysis and PEC device concepts, including current relative level of use, projected cost, required amount of raw materials, and current relative level of technology readiness. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (b) Technology readiness level evaluation alongside of solar to fuel technology to other ones. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from the Royal Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 24  A few selected examples of scaled-up PC H2 production systems: (a) Photo-reactor composed of a Pt/C3N4 PC sheet of ∼1 m2. The averaged H2 evolution reaction rates from the reactor with respect to the irradiated energy and those of the laboratory-scale experiment (horizontal dashed line). Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. (b) A 1 m2 Al:SrTiO3 panel for long term overall water splitting. The detailed assembly of this 1 m2 Al:SrTiO3 water splitting panel of 9 photocatalyst squares (each 33 × 33 cm2). The H2 evolution performance of a 5 cm2 RhCrOx + CoOx/Al:SrTiO3 panel. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2018. (c) A circulating photocatalytic water splitting reactor consisting of hydrogen selective polymeric membrane pipes for selective separation of H2. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from the Cambridge Press, copyright 2011. (d) The Z-scheme solar water splitting in a vertically stacked particle-suspension photocatalytic reactor. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Cost analysis for integrated PV–EC systems with a 3jn a-Si/a-Si/uc-Si solar cell. (b) Cost comparison of solar-hydrogen generators that incorporate different catalysts. The results show that the PV component dominates the price of H2 produced in optimized systems. F and average STH efficiencies (η) are shown for each system. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 26  Four hierarchical levels of a 1 GW (continuous annual average) hydrogen production facility. (a) The full size of the PEC cell, shown partially in cut-away view, is 1.7 m × 1.2 m. (b) PEC panel with dimensions of 12.0 m × 2.4 m. Flow rates are based on base-case conditions, and do not include water vapor lost with vented O2. (c) Diagram of a PEC field, comprising 1000 panels (100 rows of ten panels) plus compression and storage equipment for one day's production of H2 (and O2, if collected). (d) Diagram of a PEC facility producing 1 GW (annual average) H2. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 27  Composition assessment of balance of system in a photoelectrochemical cell. (a) One-time primary energy inputs (PJ) required to construct and decommission a 1 GW (annual average) facility. For comparison, the base-case annual delivered net energy of the completed facility in operation is shown as a blue dashed line. Reproduced from ref. 29 and 30 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014 and 2016. (b) Proof in concept scaled-up PEC–PV device. Left-side picture image of 1 m2 NiFeOx/BiVO4/FTO with 0.2 m2 c-Si panel (left) and control panel connected to hydrogen separation modules. Reproduced with courtesy of Elchemtech and UNIST consortium.	 
Energy balance = {T × EH} − {Ep + (T × EO)} + ED	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 28  Life-cycle net energy assessment based on a model facility for 1 GW HHV. (a) Annual energy balance of 1 GW H2 production facility in operation (PJ per year). Energy use for panel replacement is based on steady-state conditions with 10 year life span (10% of panels replaced each year) and base-case energy use for cell materials and fabrication. Error bars for “panel replacement” show 5- and 20 year life spans. Error bars for “panel heating” are based on the coldest and warmest geographic locations. Error bars for other categories are based on Monte Carlo simulation. (b) Change in base-case energy payback time (EPBT) due to variation of individual parameters between low and high estimates. (c) Life cycle net energy metrics for a 1 GW H2 production facility, under various assumptions of facility life span, specific cell life span (20 years) with variation of ηSTH (5, 10, and 20%). The numbers in bold represent base-case conditions. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Block diagram depicting the power flow through a PEC plant (left) and PV–EC system. The insets show Type 3 and 4 systems studied by Pinaud et al.40 Right side is for the PV–EC system with or without grid assistance. (b) Contour plots of the LCH ($ per kg H2) for the aforementioned systems as a function of the plant efficiency and active component (PEC cell for type 3 and 4, PV modules and electrolyzers for PV–EC) areal capital expense normalized by the required solar collection area ($ per m2) for PEC systems and electrolyzer capital for PV–EC ($ per W generated). The base-case result is indicated by the yellow circle. Contours are labeled at $2 per kg intervals. (c) Summary plot. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Reported photocurrent density under short circuit conditions (Jsc) of photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting under standard conditions: 1.0 sun, short circuit condition of 1.23 VRHE for photoanode, and 0.0 VRHE for photocathode. Materials and references: TiO2,106 WO3,209 BiVO4,108,210,211 TaON,212 Cu2O,140 Fe2TiO5,213 Fe2O3,6 Ta3N5,128 BaTaO2N,127 BaNbO2N,123 CuFeO2,214,215 CuBi2O4,216 p-MAPbI3,146,217 n-CdTe,134 p-CdTe,133 ACGSe,218 CuInS2,219 CZTS,141 CIGS,220 p-Sb2Se3,221 p-InP,151 n-InGaN,126 n-GaAs,131 p-GaP,222 n-GaP,131 SiC,145 n-Si,135 p-Si.148 (b) Known composition of photoelectrodes in (a).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Annual production, abundance in the Earth's crust, and cost (pure form) of common elements used in PEC water splitting.224,226,227,232 (b) Relation between available reserves of elements, earth abundance, and supply risk of photoactive materials for sustainable clean energy production.233	 

 	Fig. 32  Solution-based methods for photoelectrodes on a modest scale (>5 cm2). (a) Hydrothermal synthesis of WO3 NPA films on substrates of various sizes. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. (b) Metal organic decomposition deposition of BiVO4 on FTO films with 5 × 5 cm2 scale. Reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Electrodeposition of BiOI (red) and thermal conversion to BiVO4 films (yellow). Reproduced with permission of ref. 109 and 253 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014 and Elsevier B.V., copyright 2015. (d) Hydrothermal synthesis of Fe2O3. (d) Spray pyrolysis deposition of Fe2O3 in a large area (>100 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 254 copyright 2015, imperial college UK (DOI: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/research-centres-and-groups/electrochemical-engineering/5–10thESEE_Photo-electrochemical-Production-of-H2.pdf). (e) Electrodeposition of Cu2O films with a sequential deposition process, reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. The right side image is for the Cu2O film deposited on ∼50 cm2 FTO. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation).	 

 	Fig. 33  Potential distribution across the substrate for model photoelectrodes. (a) Color map of substrate potential overlaid with model equations and boundary conditions, for U0 = 1.23 VRHE and L = 10 cm. (b) Potential distribution at y = L/2 for a boundary condition U0 = 1.23 VRHE for various electrode sizes. (c) Effective current density results for various electrode sizes using model photoelectrode datasets. (d) Current losses for various electrode widths for model photoelectrode datasets. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Electrode geometries for analysis in a PEC reactor: (a1) directly illuminated photoanode surface (Fe2O3 film on a Ti foil) facing away from the counter electrode; (a2) directly illuminated photoanode surface (hematite film on a perforated Ti foil substrate) facing away from the counter electrode. (b) Solid and perforated 100 cm2 Ti substrates for Sn:Fe2O3 photoanodes fabricated by spray pyrolysis. (c) Secondary current density distribution at the illuminated solid (c1) and perforated (c2) Sn:Fe2O3 photoanode surfaces in 1 M NaOH electrolyte as a function of spatial coordinates in a PEC reactor at 1.5 VRHE. (d) Effects of potential and electrode structure on experimental and predicted current densities for 100 cm2 Sn:Fe2O3/Ti in 1 M NaOH solution. (e and f) Predicted local current density distribution of Pt cathode – Sn:Fe2O3/Ti photo-bipole under a Xe arc lamp of 312 W m2 and 0.7 VSHE (1.5 VRHE). Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Chemical stability of a photoelectrode without any bias in view of thermodynamics. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Calculated oxidation (red bars) and reduction (black bars) potentials, HER/OER potentials with NHE (pH 0), and band gaps of various photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 36  Bench scale stability test of photoelectrodes. (a) Cost of H2 produced by a PEC device with 10% efficiency as a function of panel lifetime and cost. The calculations include only capital costs, maintenance and process control costs. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the IFP Energies nouvelles, copyright 2015. (b) 1100 h discontinuous water splitting with a NiFeOx/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn electrode at 0.6 VRHE in KBi buffer (pH ∼ 9.2). Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (c) Stability test at a fixed bias of 0.5VRHE with chopped illumination for a RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode in pH 5 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Stability of a CoOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode held at 1.63 VRHE under 1.1 Sun in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (e) A device architecture of a c-Si based photocathode. HR-TEM shows the carrier-selective contact (c-Si/SiOx/nc-Si). Long-term stability test of the c-Si photocathode with a TiO2 protection layer at an applied bias of 0.4 VRHE in 1 M HClO4 (pH 0). Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Devices with and without membranes (a1). An integrated, membrane-free solar water-splitting device (a2). Cross-sectional pH profiles in the membrane-free device (a3). Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (b) A CoP/Ti mesh cathode in H2SO4 (pH = 0) and a Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoanode in KBi (pH 9.3) with a bipolar membrane (BPM) made of anion and cation exchange membranes (b1). Stability of an unbiased, two-electrode configuration (b2). (b3) Electrochemical potentials in the KBi (pH 9.3)/Fumasep® FBM/H2SO4 (pH 0) cell. (b4) Simulated pH profile across the BPM. Reproduced from ref. 263 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 38  Proposed cell architectures of PEC cells for overall water splitting. (a) Planar panel with back to back stack. (b) Planar panel with side-by-side geometry. (c) Planar panels with tilted geometry, facing the membrane separator. (d) Reflection scheme for the 2nd light absorber. (e and f) Solar concentrator-coupled PEC cell with a focus light concentrator266 and a reflection concentrator. Architectures are drawn based on Xiang et al.'s164 arrangements. Reproduced from ref. 172 and 266 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 39  Solar hydrogen production and overview about potential utilization. (a) A hydrogen production and application scenario. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation). (b) A vision of a sustainable hydrogen fuel community based on artificial photosynthesis. Hydrogen is produced from a solar water-splitting power plant using seawater on floating ports, tankers and seashore plants. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (c) A personalized energy system. Reproduced from ref. 269 and 270 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (d) A solar refinery for supporting carbon dioxide conversion to fuel. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 40  Large-scale H2 production via solar water splitting. Reproduced from ref. 52 and 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 41  Use of solar energy around the clock. Capture of sunlight to produce fuel, storage, usage as solar fuel from hydrogen station and electricity generation. Reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 42  Solar farms installed on (a) land, Australia (Nyngan Solar Farm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 276 and (b) lake, Singapore, the world's largest floating solar photovoltaic cell. Reproduced from ref. 273 with permission of The Straits Times, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 43  Large scale WO3 photoanode-DSSC tandem cell. (a) Schematic diagram of small area 0.6 × 0.6 cm2; 0.6 × 3.8 cm2; and 9.6 × 13.6 cm2 WO3 photoanodes with Ag grid-embedded FTO as the substrate, coating of WO3 on the Ag grid-embedded FTO substrate, and Ag encapsulation using epoxy. (b) J–V curves of photoanodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under 1 sun illumination. (c) Experimental PEC set-up with 130.56 cm2 WO3 photoanode, platinum counter electrode and calibrated cylindrical syringe for gas collection immersed in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Operating point of a scaled-up WO3 photoanode (130.56 cm2) and a DSSC module (front-side series, 3 cell connected). Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) CoolPEC cell. 1 – acrylic embodiment; 2 – front window (synthetic quartz); 3 – front stainless steel frame; 4 – internal acrylic plate dividing the WE compartment; 5 – main electrolyte inlet; 6 – external screw (current collector for the CE); 7 – back stainless steel frame; 8 – back window (photoelectrode); 9 – acrylic cap; 10 – electrolyte outlet; 11 – internal gasket; 12 – external gasket; 13 – platinized-Ti mesh; 14 – ion exchange membrane; 15 – acrylic holders; 16 and 17 – metal connectors between the Pt–Ti mesh and the external screw. (b) Assessment of light trapping due to bubble accumulation inside the PEC cell. 1 – simulated sunlight (1000 W m−2); 2 – front window (synthetic quartz); 3 – back window (FTO glass, 2.2 mm, 7 Ω sq); 4 – electrolyte outlet; 5 – electrolyte inlet; 6 – Si calibrator used to monitor the solar irradiance reaching the outer surface of the back window. Solar irradiance reaching the external surface of the back window was monitored over 4 min with the PEC cell operating at 5.4 mA cm−2 with 1.0 M KOH and a feeding flow rate of 0.5 L min−1. (c) Long-term stability of a hematite photoelectrode under a constant bias of 1.6 V and simulated solar irradiation (1000 W m−2). Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 45  Large scale fabrication of photoelectrode conducted by PECDEMO. (a) Large area BiVO4 (7.1 × 7.1 cm2 excluding metal grids). (b) J–V curve of large area BiVO4 (1 sun, 0.1 M phosphate + 0.5 M Na2SO3). (c) Large area Cu2O photocathode with grid lines (7.1 cm × 7.1 cm = 50.4 cm2 active area). (d) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of large area Cu2O photocathode for the vertical PEC cell under chopped illumination (0.6 sun) in the pH 5 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation).	 

 	Fig. 46  Demonstration of a PEC cell with a solar concentrator based on angled illumination. (a) DLR's test facility SoCRatus with its main components. (b) Prototype module in acrylic embodiment composed of four individual 50 cm2 PEC cells (1 × 4 array, total active area of 200 cm2) mounted in the focal plane of the SoCRatus (here without reflective shields). (c) Modular prototype with Fe2O3 and (d) BiVO4 photoelectrodes. (e) Total irradiation on the prototype (smoothed ± 30 s), average current density (smoothed ± 30 s), and hydrogen flow relative to the respective mean values as well as average ηSTH without and with bias voltage of the particular days associated with Fe2O3 photoelectrodes. Gray field refers to test of single compartments. (f) Total irradiation on the prototype (smoothed ± 30 s), average current density (smoothed ± 30 s), and hydrogen flow relative to the respective mean values as well as average ηSTH of the particular days associated with BiVO4 photoelectrodes. The ηSTH achieved from the device is marked on the upper side of the graph. Reproduced from ref. 255. PECDEMO is funded by the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) (DOI: http://www.fch.europa.eu/project/photoelectrochemical-demonstrator-device-solar-hydrogen-generation).	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Progress of large scale PEC cell devices from the Artiphyction prototype. (b) Photograph and close view of the 1.6 m2 Artiphyction prototype made of 100 PEC cell modules (8 × 8 cm2 of Co-Pi/BiVO4/FTO window and Co nanoparticle as cathode). (c) J–V plots for a single PEC window (thus unit is mA/64 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the MDPI AG (Basel, Switzerland) and Professor Guido Saraco and Professor Simelys Hernandez, copyright 2017.	 


Ramea	NL Hydro	Wind–electrolyzer	250 kW capacity, 2000 m3 storage capacity at 145 psi
Torrance, California	Honda	PV–electrolyzer	2 Nm3 h−1 with 400 L storage capacity at 350 psi
Hamburg, Germany	HydroGenics-Vattenfall-Linde	PV–electrolyzer	780 kg per day, with 430 kg storage capacity at 45 bar, dispensing capacity@350/700 bar
Stuttgart, Germany	HydroGenics-EnBW-Linde	PV–electrolyzer	130 kg per day with 215 kg storage capacity at 45–830 bar, dispensing capacity@700 bar
Brussels, Belgium	HydroGenics-WaterstofNet	PV–electrolyzer	65 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350 bar
Istanbul, Turkey	HydroGenics-UNIDO	PV–electrolyzer	65 kg per day with 135 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@220/350 bar
Oslo, Norway	HydroGenics-AirLiquide-CHIC	PV–electrolyzer	260 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350/700 bar
West LA, CA, USA	HydroGenics-Shell	PV–electrolyzer	32 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity @350 bar
Brugg, Switzerland	PostAuto-AirLiquide-CHIC	PV–electrolyzer	130 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@350 bar
Los Angeles, USA	HydroGenics-Calstate LA	PV–electrolyzer	65 kg per day with 60 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@700 bar
Dunkerque, France	HydroGenics-Shell	PV–electrolyzer	21 kg per day with 40 kg storage capacity, dispensing capacity@220 bar
Hawaii, USAa	Chevrolet, General Motors	PV–electrolyzer	250 kW capacity, 2000 m3 storage capacity at 145psi, dispensing capacity @350/700 bar
Gwangju, Daegu and Jeju in South Koreab	EM Korea Co. Ltd.	Electrolysis	500 Nm3 h−1 with 400 Litre storage capacity at 350/700 psi, recharge capacity 240 car per day
Wallingford	SunHydro	PV–electrolyzer	65 kg per day with 490 kg storage capacity at 350/700 psi

 	Fig. 48  Technological map showing various photon-driven water splitting approaches for solar energy conversion and specific experimental demonstrations. Presentation format followed that of Sayama et al.280 with permission from the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, copyright 2014.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
