Electrochemical surface charge-inversion from semi-insulating Sb 2 Se 3 photoanodes and abrupt photocurrent generation for water splitting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE00923F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00923F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2540-2549Electrochemical surface charge-inversion from semi-insulating Sb2Se3 photoanodes and abrupt photocurrent generation for water splitting†

        
          
            Young Been 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joo Sung 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seung Ki 
            Baek
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Young Dae 
            Yun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sung Woon 
            Cho
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sung Hyeon 
            Jung
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hyung Koun 
            Cho
          
        
      *
      School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon Gyeonggi-do 16419, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chohk@skku.edu
Received 
      29th March 2018
    , Accepted 18th June 2018First published on 20th June 2018AbstractBinary chalcogenide Sb2Se3 shows dominantly p-type electrical conductivity and poor photocathodic performance; however, its narrow band gap and low work function suggest satisfactory conditions for the generation of the inversion state at the surface if used as a photoanode. We propose a fabrication design for the synthesis of n-type Sb2Se3 by suppressing the formation of antisite SbSe defects, where excessively thick Se layers deposited on the electrodeposited Sb–Se precursors and high N2 pressure are introduced during the annealing step. Surprisingly, the linear sweep voltage (LSV) measurement from the n-type Sb2Se3 shows remarkably enhanced photocurrent density (up to approximately 5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode) under light illumination, which is the highest performance among pristine binary photoelectrodes yet recorded. In addition, the LSV curve exhibits non-typical behavior with a significant increase of the photocurrent at the specific potential. The measured current density under light illumination and no dark current indicate a vigorous photoactive reaction from photogenerated carriers. Here, the abrupt increase in photocurrent density is attributed to the conduction path of hole carriers originating from the charge inversion state with p-type conductivity at the surface, allowing significant carrier injection into the electrolyte. Based on electrochemical analyses, the mechanism that results in outstanding photocurrent gain from the novel n-type Sb2Se3 photoanodes was proposed and their further development possibilities via additional improvements were presented.

Broader context
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising technology for producing hydrogen fuel directly from water using solar energy. Hydrogen gas is an eco-friendly, zero carbon fuel resource, which can be reacted with oxygen to supply electrical power. It is desirable to use highly photo-responsive and robust photoanodes based on oxide semiconductors, and these oxides conventionally have wide band gaps and high work functions. However, in this work, we suggest a new photoelectrochemical model in which an abrupt increase in photocurrent density is related to the formation of a charge inversion state with p-type conductivity on the surface of the photoanode. We achieved this by synthesizing antimony selenide (Sb2Se3), a binary chalcogenide with n-type characteristics, and controlling the origin of its electrical conductivity. Here, the narrow band n-type semiconductor with a low work function can create large energy band bending at the surface and show enhanced charge separation performance at equilibrium. The synthesized n-type Sb2Se3 exhibited outstanding photocurrent density when used as a photoanode, and insight into the mechanism of photocurrent gain is provided by analyzing electrochemical data and the energy band diagram.

Introduction
Previous studies on photoelectrode films for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting cells have been mainly focused on synthesizing oxide semiconductors with wide band gaps, such as TiO2 (3.2 eV), WO3 (2.8 eV), and Fe2O3 (2.3 eV).1 Unfortunately, these pristine oxide photoanodes without any catalysts have relatively low photocurrent densities because of the inherent limitation of insufficient visible light absorption due to the wide band gap. Specifically, there is a tradeoff between high photocurrent and photoelectrochemical corrosion behavior, which represent crucial performances of PEC materials. In essence, it is accepted that the photo-driven electrochemical water splitting reaction process from typical semiconductor photoelectrodes is carried out via the following three steps [Fig. 1(a)]: (1) light absorption and generation of electron–hole pairs with greater energy than the band gap of photo-absorbers, (2) subsequent separation and migration of these photo-generated charge carriers in the depletion region of the electrode/electrolyte junction, and (3) water oxidation/reduction reactions of the holes/electrons.2 Here, the light absorption was closely related to the band gap of the photoelectrodes, and the charge separation efficiency was strongly affected by the energy band bending of photoelectrodes at the junction. In the dark state, the depletion region formed at the surfaces of semiconducting photoelectrodes is naturally formed by making contact with the electrolyte, which causes energy band bending, which accelerates the charge separation process. At equilibrium among the three phases (the electrolyte, a metal counter electrode, and a semiconductor), the formed energy band bending was dictated by the position of the work function of the photoelectrodes.3
 Fig. 1  (a) Three-step photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction using typical semiconductor photoanodes. Energy band diagrams of the Pt counter electrode and n-type photoanode before and after electrical contact, where ΦPt = the Pt work function; Φw = the photoanode work function; CB = the energy of the conduction band minimum; EF = the Fermi energy level; Ei = the intrinsic energy level; and VB = the energy of the valence band maximum: (b) the band diagram and surface depletion state of a photoanode with a wide band gap and the work function similar to ΦPt; (c) the weak inversion state at the surface of the photoanode with a wide band gap and the work function lower than ΦPt; and (d) the strong inversion state at the surface of the photoanode with a narrow band gap and the work function much lower than ΦPt. 
Because the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) level is positioned at 1.23 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), similar to the work function of a counter Pt electrode (ΦPt), the lower work function of the semiconductor photoanode can cause larger energy band bending at the equilibrium state. However, the Fermi energy (EF) of conventional wide band gap photoanodes such as TiO2, WO3, and Fe2O3 is not far from ΦPt, and consequently, their EF values at the surfaces are mainly located above the middle level of the band gap (intrinsic level, Ei), as shown in Fig. 1(b). Light irradiation on the photoelectrodes leads to a reduction of surface band bending caused by the photovoltage. The resultant surface potential under the illumination condition directly determines the activities of carrier separation and delivery efficiency. Thus, as the work function of the semiconductor photoanodes decreases, steep band bending at equilibrium or caused by light irradiation can be generated [Fig. 1(c)], which is expected to strongly enhance the charge separation.
Unlike typical oxide photoanode materials with wide band gaps and moderate band bending, photoanode materials with relatively narrow band gaps and lower work functions can provide advantageous situations by effectively absorbing visible and infrared light below 2 eV and forming large surface potentials at the same time. Specifically, as an ideal case, these physical properties allow us to expect the important change of surface potential design from the typical surface depletion to the abnormal inversion state at the junctions, as shown in Fig. 1(d). Here, the inversion state indicates the transition point at which the EF value of the surface reaches Ei. Typically, in the metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) structure, the inversion state provides conducting layers or channel layers for minority carriers at the insulator oxide/semiconductor interface above a critical electric field, and induces the inversion of carrier types (such as p → n or n → p) by forming transport pathways for the minority carriers.2 To the best of our knowledge, there is no research into inversion-related PEC driving with different operating principles (unlike the research into conventional PECs); few reports have theoretically described conceptual models for inversion operating behavior in PEC cells.
In this regard, chalcogenide materials are highly likely to allow inversion-induced PEC operation because of their relatively narrow band gap, such as Cu2ZnSnS4 (1.5 eV), CdS (2.39 eV), and CuInSe2 (1.04 eV).4 Although these chalcogenide compounds are well known to exhibit high energy conversion efficiency in photovoltaic cells, related products were mainly p-type photoabsorbers. Unfortunately, because p-type photoabsorbers have intrinsically higher work functions than n-type photoabsorbers, these conventional chalcogenides with p-type characteristics require photocathodes with considerably higher work functions for the formation of inversion layers at the junction. Thus, it is impossible to realize the inversion state in the photocathodes, because of the narrow band gap and the Ohmic contacts with the metal electrodes. Alternatively, n-type chalcogenides as photoanodes for plain demonstration of the inversion state are inferred to be very attractive, despite the difficulty in obtaining high quality n-type conductivity.
As a simple binary chalcogenide that is a relatively uncommon material because of its low-performance in PEC cells, antimony selenide (Sb2Se3) has a narrow band gap (1.1–1.3 eV) and good absorption properties; furthermore, it contains only earth-abundant and non-toxic elements.5 Furthermore, Sb2Se3 is the only stable crystal phase in the Sb–Se system, unlike conventional chalcogenide compounds, which have various crystal phases.6 Thus, the issues related to the presence of secondary phases in the crystal products can be ignored, resulting in photoelectrodes with uniform composition. Until now, similar to the case for other typical chalcogenides, Sb2Se3 in photovoltaic applications has mainly shown p-type behavior with relatively low photocurrents and electrical conductivity.7–9 Nevertheless, the binary compound and low p-type conductivity of Sb2Se3 provide the possibility of the tunability of the conductivity type by controlling point defects during the synthesis process.10 Additionally, because it has relatively low electron affinity and an adequate band position for photoanode operation, we suggest Sb2Se3 as a strong candidate for the realization of the progressive inversion state at the junction. In this study, we found that the low PEC performance of the p-type Sb2Se3 is due to its inadequate energy band structure when acting as a photocathode; therefore, we designed a new synthesis process to prepare n-type Sb2Se3via control of the Se vapor pressure. The synthesized n-type Sb2Se3 distinctly exhibited photoelectrochemical performance via the photoanode for the first time. Furthermore, we proposed that the high photocurrent generation was closely related to the transition of conductivity type at the surface potential, which induced the high carrier transport.
Results and discussion
In a typical MOS structure, when the potential variation across the semiconductors corresponds to more than twice the bulk potential (EF − Ei), it is regarded as being in the complete inversion state (so-called “strong inversion”) and minority carriers (holes) can form a charge-transport path as primary carriers.12 Our original strategy in this study is to improve minority carrier transport efficiency by forming the inversion state from n-type (p-type) to p-type (n-type) at the surface of the photoelectrodes. To implement this inversion state in the photoanode and photocathode, the following equations should be satisfied. Photoanode: EfbfromOER > Ei − EF(1) Photocathode: EfbfromHER > EF − Ei(2)where Ei is the middle of the energy band gap and Efb is the flat band potential from water oxidation/reduction levels. EfbfromOER is the difference between the Fermi energy level (EF) and the OER level for the photoanode material. EfbfromHER is the difference between the Fermi energy level (EF) and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) level for the photocathode material. Eqn (1) and (2) imply that the smaller difference between the Fermi energy level (EF) and the intrinsic level (Ei) is more favorable to the formation of an inversion layer, because the applied bias is less necessary in implementing the inversion state. In addition, the low EF value could allow the inversion state to easily form because of the large value of EfbfromOER. Therefore, photoanode materials with lower work functions, intrinsic electrical properties, and narrow band gaps are preferred for inducing both the large band bending and the inversion state. However, the conventional photoanode materials inevitably need large applied biases to create the inversion state because of the wide band gap and high work function. Therefore, these devices have been driven in the depletion state. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no reports on demonstrations of photoelectrodes using the inversion state, and only conceptual theoretical approaches have been introduced. Fig. 1(d) shows the energy band indicating an inversion state of a photoanode with a narrow band gap and low work function. This structure is the foundation of our original photoanode design. In particular, the minority hole carriers in the photoanodes determine the chemical reaction (or photocurrent) with the electrolyte. Our structure will provide plentiful hole carriers at the interface via the inversion state, resulting in a remarkable improvement in the photocurrent.2
Among the various photoabsorber materials, Sb2Se3 has a narrow band gap (1.0–1.3 eV) and a low work function; these fundamental physical properties satisfy the conditions for the generation of an inversion state at the photoanode, as shown in Fig. 1(d).5 Additionally, the intrinsic electrical properties of Sb2Se3 have been utilized to create topological insulators rather than photoabsorbers.13,14 Until now, previous studies of Sb2Se3 photoabsorbers for photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells revealed only p-type electrical conductivity and relatively poor photocurrent performance, although they had suitable band alignment as an n-type photoanode (rather than as a p-type photocathode).15,16 The greatest photocurrent density using single-layer Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes was a relatively low photocurrent density of −300 μA cm−2 with p-type characteristics.15 This poor performance could be ascribed to ineffective charge separation from a suboptimal conduction band minimum position and numerous non-radiative recombination sites. On the contrary, if Sb2Se3 photoabsorbers have n-type characteristics, the creation of inversion behavior is expected to be relatively simple, based on the fundamental band alignment and intrinsically low work function, whereas the p-type inversion state (requiring a high work function) could not be realized using the Sb2Se3 photocathode. Unfortunately, the previous research into Sb2Se3 synthesis has predominantly focused on p-type Sb2Se3 photocathodes.
In this study, for the realization of Sb2Se3 photoanodes with n-type characteristics, we first determined the origin of the p-type conductivity of Sb2Se3 compounds, and designed a differentiated strategy to produce n-type conductivity by suppressing the intrinsic sources of p-type conductivity. The key factor in our synthesis process is control of the point defects influencing the specific conductivity during the crystallization process of Sb2Se3. Based on theoretical calculation results, the substitutional antisite defects of SbSe could be preferentially generated, because the formation energy of SbSe defects was lower than that of VSe, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†).10 It should be noted that antisite SbSe defects create the acceptor levels, resulting in dominant p-type characteristics.10 In other words, the excess Se loss in the synthesis of Sb2Se3 is the origin of the SbSe defects responsible for the p-type conductivity. Typically, the Se-poor condition could easily occur, because of the high vapor pressure of the Se element with lower melting temperature; therefore, excessive Se-loss was inevitable when using conventional high-temperature synthesis methods such as vapor–solid and vapor–liquid–solid processes.8,9,17 Even in solution-based processes such as spin-coating or sol–gel processes, it is difficult to prevent excess Se loss during the heat treatment process.7,15 Here, we propose a fabrication design for the synthesis of n-type Sb2Se3 by artificially maintaining a Se-rich atmosphere during the annealing step at high temperature. Fig. 2 shows a schematic diagram of synthesizing the Se-poor and Se-rich Sb2Se3 compounds by controlling the process pressure and the Se supply from Sb–Se/Se by-layer precursors. To maintain a Se-rich process during selenization, excessively thick Se layers were deposited on the electrodeposited Sb–Se precursors. In addition, the Se loss caused by vaporization can be suppressed by providing high N2 pressure, as shown in Fig. 2. For Se-poor synthesis, on the contrary, the N2 atmosphere is modified to low vacuum conditions (approximately 10−2 Torr), in which the formation of SbSe defects (acceptors) becomes favorable. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the cross-sectional SEM images of the Sb2Se3 reveal that there is no difference in the surface morphology between the p-type Sb2Se3 and the n-type Sb2Se3. Additionally, the XRD patterns of both samples show identical peaks to the crystalline Sb2Se3, where the diffraction peaks were perfectly indexed as orthorhombic Sb2Se3 (JCPDS Card no. 15-0861). This result indicates that the change of conductivity type was not caused by secondary phases.
 Fig. 2  Strategic fabrication processes for the p-type and n-type Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes via control of the process pressure and Se vaporization. 
To check the conductivity type of the Sb2Se3 synthesized under the general Se-poor condition, voltage sweep PEC measurements were first performed, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). This figure confirms that photo-generated electrons flow from the Sb2Se3 working electrode into the electrolyte, indicating typical p-type photoelectrodes. There is no meaningful leakage current under the dark condition, which indicates that no reactions such as chemical corrosion have occurred without light illumination. However, this sample shows a very low photocurrent density of −0.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, which is similar to the value in the previous report. Fig. 3(a) shows the LSV measurement from the Sb2Se3 synthesized via the Se-rich process; the results are clearly identified as n-type characteristics because anodic current exists at a positive sweep potential (vs. RHE) under light illumination. Furthermore, the photocurrent density is significantly enhanced to 5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, which is the highest performance among the values reported for bare Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes. Additionally, the photocurrent density of the fabricated Sb2Se3 is comparable to that of BiVO4, one of the most promising photoanodes, despite its photoanodic performance being the first reported.18–20 Specifically, the significant photocurrent from pristine binary chalcogenide photoanodes with no metal catalysts is quite interesting, although additional effort to improve the slope of the current increase at low applied bias, i.e., increasing the fill factor, is required. The shape of the current–voltage curve indicates that the photocurrent density begins to increase rapidly at the specific potential. This behavior resembles the current profile of an electrolysis reaction from representative electro-catalysts such as Pt, Co-P, and IrO2, rather than that of typical semiconductor photoanodes.21–23 The active OER of the water splitting electrolysis from metal catalysts had an onset potential of greater than 1.23 V vs. RHE (with an overpotential of a few hundred mV) without the assistance of light illumination and a rapid increase in the current density. However, the LSV curve of Fig. 3(a) exhibited a considerable current density at low potential (i.e., below 1.23 V vs. RHE); additionally, meaningful currents are absent in the dark state. The measured current occurs only under light illumination, indicating a photoactive reaction from photogenerated carriers (i.e., not an electrolysis reaction). Thus, this abrupt increase of photocurrent density at biases exceeding approximately 1.0 V is abnormal in single-layer semiconductor photoelectrodes. In Fig. S4 (ESI†), the Tafel slope at the potential range of the second photocurrent region was calculated to be approximately 150 mV per decade, which is relatively small among oxide and chalcogenide photoanodes, considering that it was obtained at below 1.23 V vs. RHE. The conventional Tafel slopes of electrocatalysts were measured above 1.23 V vs. RHE; the values were calculated to be near 100 mV per decade.22,23 For typical semiconductors, a large overpotential was needed to achieve similar slopes.24,25 These results show that the photoelectrochemical process of the Sb2Se3 photoanode exhibiting a large photocurrent increase did not follow the behavior of typical oxide materials and that no significant chemical reactions (i.e., electrochemical corrosion) with the electrolyte occurred.
 Fig. 3  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) results for the n-type Sb2Se3 measured in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) under 1.5 AM light illumination (red line) and in the dark state (black line). (b) Enlarged LSV results for the categorization of the two photocurrent regions. 
As shown in Fig. 3(b), the increase in photocurrent can be categorized into two regions: the first photocurrent region, indicated by a blue dotted line, shows relatively low photocurrent similar to that observed for the reported Sb2Se3 photocathodes (0–0.2 mA cm−2), and the second photocurrent region, with an abrupt increase in photocurrent density, exhibits an additional onset potential at approximately 0.9 V vs. RHE. We infer that the photocurrent of the second region operates with another mechanism acting on photocurrent gain. Fig. S5(a) (ESI†) illustrates the breakdown phenomenon via electron tunneling in the reverse bias of the Schottky diode. It is generally accepted that the typical photoelectrochemical reaction results in a similar operation mode to the Schottky contact. Thus, when excessive reverse bias enhancing energy band bending is applied, electron tunnelling may occur, and thus, the explosive current increase can be measured. However, the current increase due to this breakdown in our photoanode can be ignored because of the significant contribution of only photocurrent (i.e., not dark current). As shown in Fig. S5(b) (ESI†), photoelectrochemical analysis performed with light chopping shows that no current flows, even in the potential range above 1.23 V vs. RHE in the dark state. Thus, results confirm that the photocurrent density of 5 mA cm−2 originated from light illumination. Consequently, we can assume that this abnormal photocurrent behavior of n-type Sb2Se3 is not only due to the band bending effects with increasing applied bias, but also due to the effect of abnormal increases of charge density in the surface at the specific bias. Considering the material's properties and the band alignment of Sb2Se3, we suspect the presence of the charge inversion state at the surface, as suggested in the model shown in Fig. 1(d). In this case, energy band bending can be enhanced to as large as Ei − EF after the intersection of the Fermi energy level (EF) and the intrinsic level (Ei) in the region of the OER level. In particular, a strong inversion in the photoanode surface can occur and induce conversion of conductivity-type by forming a surface path with p-type conductivity.2 This phenomenon allows the presence of plentiful hole carriers in the surface region of photoanodes that are driven by the movement of photogenerated holes, and thus, the surface region acts as an effective transport layer for the minority hole charges and induces large carrier injection into the electrolyte.
To determine the origin of the high photocurrent, we analysed the surface capacitance as it relates to the inversion effect. First, the energy band structure of n-type Sb2Se3 was established from electrochemical capacitance–voltage measurements performed with the voltage sweep at a fixed frequency for Mott–Schottky plots [Fig. 4(a)]. The flat-band potential and the carrier concentration in the surface region can be obtained by extrapolating the linear fit plot of the 1/C2vs. voltage curve, according to the Mott–Schottky equation (eqn (3)): (3)where C is the capacitance of the n-type Sb2Se3 interface with the electrolyte, e is the electron charge, ε is the dielectric constant of Sb2Se3, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ND is the donor density, A is the contact area between Sb2Se3 and electrolyte, T is the absolute temperature, E is the applied potential, and Efb is the flat-band potential.5 From the Mott–Schottky plots, the flat-band potential obtained from the intercept of the x-axis of the linear fit plot is approximately 0.2 V vs. RHE at an electrolyte pH of 5 [Fig. 4(a), red line]. Here, because the RHE level is located at −4.2 eV from the vacuum level, the Fermi level of Sb2Se3 was estimated to be −4.4 eV from the vacuum level. Additionally, the conduction band minimum can be determined from the equations  and the difference between the Fermi energy level and the intrinsic level (EF − Ei = 0.325 eV). The energy band structure of n-type Sb2Se3 can be comprehensively described as shown in Fig. 4(b). Fig. 4(c) shows the band diagram of the strong inversion state, where an additional potential of 2(EF − Ei) (0.65 eV) is oppositely applied, and it corresponds to approximately 0.85 V vs. RHE. Consequently, this result implies that the surface of Sb2Se3 at 1.23 V vs. RHE has already reached the strong inversion condition.
 Fig. 4  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of n-type Sb2Se3 based on electrochemical capacitance–voltage measurements in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) in the dark state. (b) The energy band structure of n-type Sb2Se3 established from the calculation of the Mott–Schottky equation, where Efb = the flat band potential and Eg = the band gap. (c) The estimated energy band diagram for the strong inversion of n-type Sb2Se3 at the potential 0.85 V vs. RHE, where Vapp = the potential applied into the Sb2Se3 electrode; EF − Ei = 0.325 eV. 
To verify that the strong inversion potential estimated from the energy band diagram is well matched with the measured result, a capacitance vs. voltage (C–V) plot is drawn, as shown in Fig. 5. In essence, Fig. 5(a) shows the typical accumulation, depletion, inversion, and strong inversion regions from the fundamental C–V plots, and a comparison with the capacitance measured from the Sb2Se3 [Fig. 5(b)].12 Here, the depletion region begins at the flat band potential (0.2 V). The inflection point initiating the weak inversion state is observed at 0.65 V vs. RHE. These results are similar to the estimation from the energy band diagram. As the applied potential increases, the inversion is strengthened; the next inflection point is detected at approximately 0.9 V vs. RHE. This position can be regarded as the occurrence of the strong inversion. Based on this capacitance analysis, we expect that a linear photocurrent increase will mainly be observed below 0.65 V vs. RHE, and that the rapid increase is produced by the strong inversion at 0.9 V vs. RHE. However, this expectation is inconsistent with the LSV results shown in Fig. 3. This discrepancy can be attributed to the photovoltage generated under light illumination. In general, the photovoltage generated in photoanodes reduces energy band bending in the surface region, whereas our capacitance results were measured in the dark state.26,27 That is, the energy band bending reduced by the photovoltage is responsible for the discrepancy in both results. Thus, we characterized the generation of photovoltage [Fig. 5(c)], which is estimated to be approximately −0.23 V. This result means that the energy band bending of −0.23 V under light illumination is reduced, and thus, the actual capacitance of the Sb2Se3 must consider the shift of the capacitance result along the x-axis direction. As a result, the energy band bending reconstructed using the photovoltage allows a direct comparison between the photocurrent behavior in the LSV and capacitance results. Fig. 5(d) shows that the capacitance in the dark state initializes the inversion state at 0.65 V vs. RHE; however, band bending is weakened under light illumination. Therefore, the starting point of the actual inversion under light illumination can be estimated to be 0.88 V vs. RHE, which is shifted by the photovoltage (−0.23 V) from the inversion point in the capacitance result (0.65 V vs. RHE), as shown in Fig. 5(e). This potential is almost identical to the second photocurrent onset point of 0.9 V vs. RHE in the LSV plot. Similarly, the beginning of actual strong inversion under light illumination is found to be 1.13 V vs. RHE, which is obtained by compensating for the photovoltage (−0.23 V) from the strong inversion point of the capacitance measured in the dark state [Fig. 5(f)]. Using these results, we confirm that the abnormal behavior of the explosive photocurrent increase is due to the formation of an inversion or strong inversion layers by analyzing the capacitance of the Sb2Se3 under light illumination, yielding high density minority hole charges.
 Fig. 5  (a) Theoretical capacitance–voltage plot including four regions of accumulation, depletion, inversion, and strong inversion states. (b) The capacitance–voltage plot measured from n-type Sb2Se3 with the four typical regions, and the positions of the flat band potential and inflection points. (c) Photovoltage measurements for n-type Sb2Se3 under chopped AM 1.5 G illumination. The energy band diagrams of the capacitance state of Sb2Se3 in electrolytes at various potentials with and without light illumination, where Vphoto = photovoltage: (d) the initiation of the inversion state in the dark state and depletion state under light illumination at 0.65 V vs. RHE; (e) the strong inversion state in the dark state and the initiation of weak inversion under light illumination at 0.88 V vs. RHE; and (f) the strong inversion in the dark and light illumination states at 1.13 vs. RHE. 

Fig. 6 shows the impedance spectra in the light illuminated condition for the n-type Sb2Se3 and the p-type Sb2Se3 to investigate the overall charge transfer efficiency (i.e., including contributions from semiconductor, electrolyte, and counter-electrode). In typical EIS measurements, the x-axis and the y-axis indicate the resistance and the capacitance of the equivalent cell circuit, respectively, and the general Nyquist plots can be separately interpreted as the charge transfer-controlled and diffusion-controlled processes based on the frequency.28 The charge transfer-controlled term associated with the space-charge depletion region is typically observed to have a semicircular shape at high frequency (approximately 104 Hz), where the radius of the semicircle indicates the resistance. In Fig. 6, the red line for the p-type Sb2Se3 did not form a completely semicircular profile because the resistance was too large. On the contrary, the n-type Sb2Se3 photoelectrode (blue line) shows the formation of a perfect semicircle with a diameter of 130 Ω at a relatively low frequency (102 Hz to 104 Hz), as shown in the inset of Fig. 6. This significantly smaller radius seems to be due to significantly enhanced charge transfer efficiency originating from the large supply of hole carriers, unlike the high resistance of p-type Sb2Se3 following the general PEC process.
 Fig. 6  Impedance spectra for the n-type (blue) and p-type (red) Sb2Se3 in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolytes buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) under AM 1.5 light illumination. 
Finally, the water splitting performance of the pristine n-type Sb2Se3 photoanode was characterized using chronoamperometry in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered at pH 5 with H2SO4 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, as shown in Fig. 7(a). As explained in the LSV result shown in Fig. 3, the photocurrent density of n-type Sb2Se3 is approximately 5 mA cm−2 under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5), and no current appears in the absence of illumination. However, although the dark-current maintains stable behavior without abrupt changes related to corrosion reactions, the photocurrent density gradually decreases during the long-term measurement and severe photocorrosion is found after a few minutes. This stability issue should be improved in future work via the coating of appropriate passivation layers and catalysts. Our current work emphasizes the discovery of novel photoanodes with high photocurrent gain and proposes operation mechanisms. Additionally, the chemical stability of the Sb2Se3 in the electrolytes is significantly better than that of other chalcogenide compounds with vulnerable corrosion characteristics. Interestingly, we observed small transient spikes in the photocurrent profiles [Fig. 7(a)]; for further analysis we carried out additional chronoamperometry measurements at various applied biases with a light on/off interval of 10 s using a pulse chopper, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†). This measurement shows that the transient spikes of photocurrent are related to the strong inversion state. The result at 1.129 V vs. RHE corresponding to the weak inversion state reveals no transient behavior [Fig. 5(a)]. On the other hand, with increasing applied bias, Fig. S6(b) (ESI†) shows the occurrence of slight transient behavior; the strong inversion regions of Fig. S6(c) and (d) (ESI†) indicate the reinforcement of transient spikes, even for a very slight change of applied voltage (ΔV < 0.1 V). Thus, this observation is expected to be due to the formation of an effective transport path for minority hole carriers generated by light illumination. Therefore, we can consider that the supply of transient excessive hole carriers and the kinetic barriers from the slight mismatch of the OER level and the VBM of n-type Sb2Se3 appear to hinder sufficient consumption of hole carriers via the water splitting reaction, resulting in the production of transient spikes. Nevertheless, the n-type Sb2Se3 photoanodes have revealed a competitive high photocurrent density without any passivation or catalysts. We performed additional chronoamperometry measurements on the electrolytes including the 0.5 M Na2SO3 scavenger. In general, the photoelectrochemical measurements in the solution containing the scavenger result in a Faradaic efficiency of approximately 100%, which overcomes the barrier of the kinetic reaction (water reduction/oxidation) and suggests an expectation value of maximum photocurrent density of the photoanode materials.29 The Na2SO3 scavenger has been primarily used as a scavenger of chalcogenide absorber materials.29 Surprisingly, the spontaneous initial photocurrent density at light-on status significantly increased to 15 mA cm−2; however, the saturated photocurrent continuously decreased and finally reached 5 mA cm−2, which is the value measured without the scavenger. Specifically, although there was a continuous decrease in the saturated photocurrent, the initial photocurrent density at the starting point of light-on is almost the same. This result implies that the strong inversion layer acts as an effective transport path of photo-generated hole carriers and provides the large gain of photocurrent with ideal photoanode performance at initial illumination. If these carriers can be effectively utilized for photoelectrochemical reactions (assuming appropriate catalysts and buffer layers with better band alignment), it is expected that n-type Sb2Se3 will have excellent PEC performance.
 Fig. 7  Chronoamperometry results for n-type Sb2Se3 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5 light chopping: (a) 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) and (b) the electrolyte including 0.5 M Na2SO3 scavenger. 
Experimental
Preparation of Sb–Se precursors
For the synthesis of crystallized Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes, we utilized the previously reported approach.11 Briefly, Sb–Se precursors were prepared using electrochemical deposition on soda-lime glass coated with a 1 μm Mo layer as the working electrode. The Versastat 3 potentiostat system (AMETEK) was used to monitor and control the synthesis process in the three-electrode system. A Pt mesh and Ag/AgCl were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Sb–Se electrodeposition was carried out at −0.95 V with an electric charge density of 1 C cm−2 in an aqueous solution containing 0.055 M K(SbO)C4H4O6·0.5H2O (antimony potassium tartrate), 0.045 M H2SeO3 (selenous acid), and 1 M NH4Cl (ammonium chloride). For intermediate recrystallization, the electrodeposited precursors were thermally treated at 300 °C for an hour in a N2 atmosphere (500 Torr) using a rapid thermal annealing system (RTA).
Selenization process and control of conductivity type via modification of the selenization atmosphere
Additional thick Se layers (approximately 3 μm) were coated to provide a Se supply on the recrystallized Sb–Se precursors using a thermal evaporation system in a vacuum atmosphere (approximately 10−6 Torr). Selenization was immediately performed at 300 °C for one hour. After the selenization process, the residue of the excess Se was completely removed via evaporation at 200 °C in vacuum (approximately 10−3 Torr). The resultant final Sb2Se3 products were p-type. On the contrary, the selenization for n-type Sb2Se3 was carried out in a N2 atmosphere (600 Torr). The high N2 pressure effectively suppressed vaporization from the top Se layer because of the relatively high vapor pressure, thus providing a Se-rich atmosphere, resulting in the formation of n-type Sb2Se3.
Basic characterization of material properties
Morphological variation between the n-type and p-type Sb2Se3 was investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-6700F, 10 kV). The crystal phases of the Sb2Se3 products were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker AXS D8 Discover with a Cu Kα radiation source). To estimate the work functions of the Sb2Se3, various electrochemical measurements were utilized.
Electrochemical analysis
Photoelectrochemical analyses were performed with a Versastat 3 potentiostat system (AMETEK), where a three-electrode system with a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl saturated by NaCl) and a counter electrode (Pt mesh) is employed. The electrolyte was 1 M Na2SO4 (sodium sulfate) buffered to pH 5 with H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The light illumination condition was the AM 1.5 condition using a 150 W Xenon lamp with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated using a standard silicon photodetector. The scan rate for linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was 10 mV s−1 in the positive direction. The Mott–Schottky plot was obtained at a frequency of 1 kHz, with a potential range from 0 to 1.0 V vs. RHE. The photovoltage of n-type Sb2Se3 was measured using galvanostatic analysis at a fixed current density of 0 mA cm−2 with chopped light illumination. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at potentials of 0 V and 1.23 V vs. RHE in a frequency range from 1 Hz to 10 kHz. Chronoamperometry tests were performed in the 1 M Na2SO4 solution (above pH 5) and in the added hole scavenger solution (pH 5) with chopped light illumination. The Na2SO3 (sodium sulfite) was incorporated into the Na2SO4 electrolytes as a hole scavenger.
Conclusions
In summary, we have strategically synthesized n-type Sb2Se3 photoanodes for applications in PEC water splitting, where the Sb–Se compound precursors were prepared using the cost-effective solution-based electrodeposition method and additional thick Se layers were added for the suppression of excessive Se vaporization to induce p-type conductivity. As intended, the produced Sb2Se3 compounds showed anodic currents with the absence of dark current; the photocurrent values were remarkably high (approximately 5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE), as compared to those of previous chalcogenide compounds. The outstanding photocurrent performance of the single-layer n-type Sb2Se3 was comparable to that of conventional photoelectrodes with surface modification such as a charge transport layer and catalysis. From electrochemical analyses, the energy band diagram of the n-type Sb2Se3 was established and the mechanisms of such a large improvement in the photocurrent were assumed to be based on the strong inversion model of typical semiconductors. This model makes it possible to understand the abrupt generation of the photocurrent, resembling the current profile of an electrolysis reaction from metal catalysts rather than that of typical semiconductor photoanodes. Specifically, the Sb2Se3 properties such as a lower work function, semi-insulating conductivity, and a narrow band gap are favorable for the formation of charge inversion paths. In addition, PEC tests revealed the possibility of the creation of chalcogenide photoanodes capable of generating a large photocurrent of approximately 15 mA cm−2.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (Grant No. 2018R1A2B2004050).
Notes and references
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan, O. V. Khavryuchenko, V. D. Khavryuchenko, P. C. Ricci, J. Strunk, T. Cremer, C. Kolbeck and R. Beranek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21511–21519 RSC .

          R. van de Krol and M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer US, New York,  2012 Search PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645 RSC .
S. Chu, W. Li, Y. Yan, T. Hamann, I. Shih, D. Wang and Z. Mi, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 022001 CrossRef .
K. Zeng, D. Xue and J. Tang, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 063001 CrossRef .
G. Ghosh, J. Phase Equilib., 1993, 14, 753 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Leng, Z. Xia, J. Zhong, H. Song, X. Liu, B. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Chen, K. Zhou, J. Han, Y. Cheng and J. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301846 CrossRef .
M. Leng, M. Luo, C. Chen, S. Qin, J. Chen, J. Zhong and J. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 083905 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Chen, S. Qin, X. Liu, J. Chen, D. Xue, M. Luo, Y. Cao, Y. Cheng, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 409–415 CrossRef .
M. A. Tumelero, R. Faccio and A. A. Pasa, J. Phys. Chem., 2016, 120, 1390–1399 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Kwon, Y. B. Kim, M. Jeong, H. W. Do, H. K. Cho and J. Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 11–17 CrossRef .

          B. G. Streetman and S. K. Banerjee, Solid state electronic devices sixth edition, Pearson, London,  2006 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhu, U. Schwingenschlögl and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2345–2352 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bera, K. Pal, D. V. S. Muthu, S. Sen, P. Guptasarma, U. V. Waghmare and A. K. Sood, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 107401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Lee, H. Shin, J. Kim and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2180 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Li, Q. Chen, Z. Zhen, X. Jiang, M. Zhong, F. Zhang and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12753–12763 CrossRef PubMed .
L. S. Brooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 227–229 CrossRef .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Eisenberg, H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14011–14014 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, Z. Zou, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2908–2909 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, H. Li and J. Zhong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22516 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Qiu, J. Zhang, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. Cao, P. Hu and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18060–18066 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. Zhou and H. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
M. Li, H. Liu, T. Lv and M. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3488–3499 RSC .
M. Orlandi, A. Mazzi, G. Arban, N. Bazzanella, P. Rudatis, S. Caramori, N. Patel, R. Fernandes, C. A. Bignozzi and A. Miotello, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 214, 345–353 CrossRef .
M. T. Mayer, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 104–110 CrossRef .
B. AlOtaibi, S. Fan, S. Vanka, M. G. Kibria and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2015, 10, 6821–6828 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Baek, J. S. Kim, Y. B. Kim, J. H. Yoon, H. Lee and H. K. Cho, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8213–8221 CrossRef .
T. W. Kim and K. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00923fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising technology for producing hydrogen fuel directly from water using solar energy. Hydrogen gas is an eco-friendly, zero carbon fuel resource, which can be reacted with oxygen to supply electrical power. It is desirable to use highly photo-responsive and robust photoanodes based on oxide semiconductors, and these oxides conventionally have wide band gaps and high work functions. However, in this work, we suggest a new photoelectrochemical model in which an abrupt increase in photocurrent density is related to the formation of a charge inversion state with p-type conductivity on the surface of the photoanode. We achieved this by synthesizing antimony selenide (Sb2Se3), a binary chalcogenide with n-type characteristics, and controlling the origin of its electrical conductivity. Here, the narrow band n-type semiconductor with a low work function can create large energy band bending at the surface and show enhanced charge separation performance at equilibrium. The synthesized n-type Sb2Se3 exhibited outstanding photocurrent density when used as a photoanode, and insight into the mechanism of photocurrent gain is provided by analyzing electrochemical data and the energy band diagram.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Three-step photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction using typical semiconductor photoanodes. Energy band diagrams of the Pt counter electrode and n-type photoanode before and after electrical contact, where ΦPt = the Pt work function; Φw = the photoanode work function; CB = the energy of the conduction band minimum; EF = the Fermi energy level; Ei = the intrinsic energy level; and VB = the energy of the valence band maximum: (b) the band diagram and surface depletion state of a photoanode with a wide band gap and the work function similar to ΦPt; (c) the weak inversion state at the surface of the photoanode with a wide band gap and the work function lower than ΦPt; and (d) the strong inversion state at the surface of the photoanode with a narrow band gap and the work function much lower than ΦPt.	 
Photoanode: EfbfromOER > Ei − EF	(1)
Photocathode: EfbfromHER > EF − Ei	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Strategic fabrication processes for the p-type and n-type Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes via control of the process pressure and Se vaporization.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) results for the n-type Sb2Se3 measured in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) under 1.5 AM light illumination (red line) and in the dark state (black line). (b) Enlarged LSV results for the categorization of the two photocurrent regions.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of n-type Sb2Se3 based on electrochemical capacitance–voltage measurements in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) in the dark state. (b) The energy band structure of n-type Sb2Se3 established from the calculation of the Mott–Schottky equation, where Efb = the flat band potential and Eg = the band gap. (c) The estimated energy band diagram for the strong inversion of n-type Sb2Se3 at the potential 0.85 V vs. RHE, where Vapp = the potential applied into the Sb2Se3 electrode; EF − Ei = 0.325 eV.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Theoretical capacitance–voltage plot including four regions of accumulation, depletion, inversion, and strong inversion states. (b) The capacitance–voltage plot measured from n-type Sb2Se3 with the four typical regions, and the positions of the flat band potential and inflection points. (c) Photovoltage measurements for n-type Sb2Se3 under chopped AM 1.5 G illumination. The energy band diagrams of the capacitance state of Sb2Se3 in electrolytes at various potentials with and without light illumination, where Vphoto = photovoltage: (d) the initiation of the inversion state in the dark state and depletion state under light illumination at 0.65 V vs. RHE; (e) the strong inversion state in the dark state and the initiation of weak inversion under light illumination at 0.88 V vs. RHE; and (f) the strong inversion in the dark and light illumination states at 1.13 vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 6  Impedance spectra for the n-type (blue) and p-type (red) Sb2Se3 in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolytes buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) under AM 1.5 light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chronoamperometry results for n-type Sb2Se3 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5 light chopping: (a) 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered with H2SO4 (pH 5) and (b) the electrolyte including 0.5 M Na2SO3 scavenger.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00923f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
