Novel low-carbon energy solutions for powering emerging wearables, smart textiles, and medical devices   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02695C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02695C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4928-4981Novel low-carbon energy solutions for powering emerging wearables, smart textiles, and medical devices†

        
          
            Brindha 
            Ramasubramanian
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Subramanian 
            Sundarrajan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rayavarapu Prasada 
            Rao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. V. 
            Reddy
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Vijila 
            Chellappan
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Seeram 
            Ramakrishna
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Nanotechnology and Sustainability, Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117576, Singapore. E-mail: seeram@nus.edu.sg
bInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), #08-03, 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, Singapore, 138634, Singapore. E-mail: c-vijila@imre.a-star.edu.sg
cNouveau Monde Graphite, 481 Rue Brassard, Saint-Michel-de-Saints, QC J0K 3B0, Canada
Received 
      21st August 2022
    , Accepted 12th October 2022First published on 28th October 2022AbstractOne of the most major agendas to mitigate climate change is the transition to low-carbon energy extraction. Furthermore, developing cutting-edge prototypes for wearable technology, innovative housing, transportation, telecommunications, sophisticated electronics, and other related technologies necessitates the use of clean and readily available energy sources, which has become a fundamental priority. Sentient beings (humans and wildlife) have a variety of biological, mechanical, and thermal energy sources. Using the energy from these sources might be a viable way to circumvent the increasing electricity demand. This study looks at a variety of low-carbon-emitting energy capture materials, methods, and approaches that have recently been applied for solar, wind, hydrogen, mechanoelectrical, and biological response. Furthermore, this article discusses the proven approaches for harvesting energy from human bodies for self-powered gadgets. We provide material considerations, system topologies, and functioning concepts for these power extractors, with an emphasis on low-carbon solutions. We investigate various power sources placed in or on pre-existing and anthropological models. We conclude the review by emphasising the significance of merging various energy extractors with cutting-edge circuitry, which provides a new foundation for developing creative designs for self-powered electronics in healthcare and textiles.
Brindha Ramasubramanian
Brindha Ramasubramanian, a PhD student at National University of Singapore, working on the field of sustainable materials for energy conversion & storage and piezoelectric sensors. Her specific interests include developing sustainable electrodes for metal–sulfur batteries and organic solar cells, leveraging machine learning. She also works on developing high performing catalysts for metal–air batteries. She obtained her undergraduate and a graduate degree in Nanoscience and Technology from India with Gold medal. More details: https://www.linkedin.com/in/brindharamasubramanian/ and https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=mh9_87YAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.
Subramanian Sundarrajan
Dr. Subramanian Sundarrajan graduated with an M.Sc. in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of Madras, India in 1996. He was awarded one of the prestigious fellowships of India to by CSIR and completed his Ph.D. at the University of Madras in 2003. He joined the National University of Singapore in 2003 where he is working on synthesis of polymers, electrospinning of nanofibers and their applications in battery, air, water, and tissue engineering, clean and sustainable energy. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=2rdfJ3sAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.
Rayavarapu Prasada Rao
Dr. Rayavarapu Prasada Rao received his Ph.D. from IIT Madras in 2006. He is currently R&G (NRF, Singapore) Senior Research Fellow at Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore and Programme Coordinator at C-MET, MeitY, India. His research interest is development of solid electrolytes for rechargeable batteries to understand fundamental correlation between structure & properties using both experimental and atomistic simulations. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=uMjmDpkAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.
M. V. Reddy
Dr. M.V. Reddy is currently working as a senior Professional Researcher at Nouveau monde Graphite, Quebec, Canada. For the last 20 years, he has been working on Materials for Energy Storage: cathodes, anodes, and solid electrolytes for Li/Na/K- ion batteries and supercapacitors. He has published over 210 papers, his has been work cited over 16100 times, with an h index of 66 and he is a top 2% highly cited researcher in Energy. He is a member of ICDD USA, IPS and MRS Singapore. He has won many awards and given 150 talks all over the world. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=pWKr2M0AAAAJ&hl=en.
Vijila Chellappan
Dr. Vijila Chellappan is a Senior Scientist in the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A-STAR), Singapore. She has experience over 20 years with strong expertise on optoelectronic device technologies (photovoltaics, displays, lasers), material systems (semiconducting polymers, oxides, transition metal dichalcogenides, conducting composites) and transient optical/electrical characterization capabilities including high-throughput optical methodologies for machine learning enabled process optimization. Her current research interest is on sustainable energy storage materials and device development. She received her Ph.D. degree in Physics from Anna University, India, in 2001, and carried out postdoctoral research at Åbo Academy University, Turku, Finland from 2001 to 2002. More details: https://scholar.google.com.sg/citations?user=zrj38lkAAAAJ&hl=en.
Seeram Ramakrishna
Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng, Everest Chair, is a world-recognized researcher in materials and sustainability and a senior professor at the National University of Singapore. Thomson Reuters identified him among the World's Most Influential Scientific Minds. Clarivate Analytics recognized him among the Top 1% Highly Cited Researchers in the world in materials science as well as cross-field categories. He is regarded as the Guru of electrospinning and applications. His Google Scholar shows over 148600 citations, 175 H-index, and over 1250 i10 index. He is an elected international Fellow of major professional societies and academies of Singapore, India, UK and USA. European Commission Director-General for Environment, Excellency Daniel Calleja Crespo said, “Professor Seeram Ramakrishna should be praised for his personal engagement leading the reflections on how to develop a more sustainable future for all” in his foreword for the Springer Nature book on Circular Economy (ISBN: 978-981-15-8509-8). More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=a49NVmkAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.

Broader context
As we monitor the shifting of climatic niches on the heating globe, biological groups are experiencing a massive redistribution. This has far-reaching implications for global ecological sustainability. We consider the worldwide disparities in environmental challenges on ecosystems and suggest altering conventional electricity production systems with low carbon or zero-carbon renewable technologies across economies. Herein, we explore the significance of available low carbon energy production materials and methodologies promoting multilateral safety, especially in the medical, textile, and electronics sectors with the aim of subduing CO2 emission and technological headway. Subsequently, we discuss the aspects of recent medical technologies like biometric recognition, clinical documentation, surveillance, recording, and therapy of human biological attributes that are becoming increasingly common, thanks to implantable technology. Energy harvesting from human action, eyeball motion, and cochlear acoustics, on the other hand, remains as a hot topic of the day. Self-powered implanted gadgets that harness the energy from humans are appealing in this sense for protracted detection of patients’ biological functionalities. Energy capturing systems based on piezoelectricity, thermoelectricity, biofuels, and photovoltaics are developing due to advances in materials science and nanomaterials. We further discuss various self-powered human implantable electronics powered via piezoelectricity, triboelectricity, photovoltaics, and thermoelectricity. Such systems are especially exciting since they are designed for humans with great flexibility, making them ideal for use as wearable technologies.

1. Introduction
The energy crisis and environmental degradation have opened the way for the development of alternative energy harvesting and storage solutions.1 According to the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), the global energy consumption will increase by approximately 50% from 2018 to 2050,2 as shown in the ESI† (Fig. S1 and S2). As a result, there has been a tremendous push to create clean and renewable energy harvesting and storage systems in recent years.3–5 Renewable energy technologies (RET) provide a range of fiscal advantages, especially for energy importers, since this clean energy is less expensive in the longer run than other non-renewable forms (oil and gas).6 Further, renewable energy is among the essential attributes to include while fostering a green economy.6 Noticeably, more utilization of solar and wind power technologies is a potential remedy to the looming energy deficit.7–9 The administrators and policymakers have already begun to examine the adverse effects of GHGs and have taken measures to mitigate them (SDGs).10 Several nations committed to achieving zero CO2 emission targets by 2050 at the UN Climate Action Summit in 2019, which are highlighted in Fig. S3 and S4, (ESI).†10 These are lofty ambitions, and achieving them will need a significant energy renaissance. The optimum solutions are isolating different sectors, evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of present electricity sources, and suggesting innovative approaches for lowering global climate consequences via low carbon emission technologies.
The electronic, medicinal, and textile sectors are some of the largest beneficiaries of the available energy.11,12 These sectors are now versatile and have user-requested functionality, allowing for limitless interactions between machines and machinists. Especially, “wearable technology” coupling e-textiles and integrating health monitoring devices with low carbon powering sources will yield viable, ecologically benign, widespread, and accessible prospects for on-body automatics.13 Despite harming the actual origin, energies created by machinery, automobiles, buildings, biological sources, anthropogenic aspects, and the motion of body organs may be collected and turned into useable power. Many power-capturing systems employing electrostatic, triboelectric, piezoelectric, thermoelectric, magnetic, and pyroelectric transduction pathways at the micro- and nanoscales have been suggested.14
Seyyed et al. reviewed the recent developments in solar energy harvesting for powering wearable electronics.15 Zhou et al. discussed recent scientific achievements in flexible metal–gas batteries, emphasizing the usefulness of flexible cathodes and polymer electrolytes.16 Until now, there hasn’t been a comprehensive article discussing the growth of low-carbon energy systems, including renewables and mechanoelectrical (piezoelectric, triboelectric, thermoelectric) sources for powering wearables, healthcare devices, and textiles. This review paper provides a detailed overview of both energy harvesting and storage technology, for powering electronics in medical devices, textiles and smart wearables (Fig. 1). We intend to aggregate, evaluate, and review contemporary research on available energy capturing materials. The subsequent subtopics give a comprehensive overview of specifications and possible energy harvesting architectures, and operation regimes. Systematic examination of a variety of flexible materials, encompassing polymers, alloys, ceramics, bio-inspired materials, and relevant technology for powering wearable devices is provided in this review. Ultimately, the usage and prospects of self-powered wearables in the textile and healthcare fields with low carbon emission have been embraced, highlighting the machine architecture, performance features, and future opportunities, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the review. 
2. Low carbon energy harvesting and storage systems
Multifunctional self-powered electronics in energy harvesting and storage are being hailed as next-generation wearable systems with numerous applications in health care, artificial intelligence, textiles, and clinical practice.14,17 Additionally, enabling low carbon technology with long-term sustainability and eco-friendliness for supplying power to smart wearables is an assuring and the most suitable option.18 Recently, a photon conversion efficiency of ∼25% was achieved for perovskite and organic solar cells.19,20 Powering wearables directly through solar photons reduces the CO2 emission and is less expensive in the longer run. Though direct powering of devices via solar energy is an alternative renewable approach, the availability of solar radiation depends on the weather, locality, and time.21 One viable option is to integrate solar conversion systems with electrochemical energy storage devices like batteries and supercapacitors, or with mechanical energy storage devices like compressed air storage devices to enable self-powered electronics capable of storing and delivering electrical energy for device functionalities. Du et al. developed flexible self-powered electronics through combination of photovoltaics and supercapacitors consisting of solid-state graphene electrodes.22 The photon derived energy was stored in the supercapacitor with an OCV of 0.75 V and a specific capacitance of 245 F g−1 with 83% capacity retention.23 Qi et al. designed a solar powered wireless sensor with reduced efficiency loss using a two port hybrid photovoltaic device structure. The excess energy was framed to be stored in a supercapacitor by regulating energy loss using buffer management. The overall energy loss was decreased by 15.5% using the novel PV-supercapacitor device design.24 Understanding past research and the fundamentals of renewable systems and alternative energy harvesters is critical for merging them with storage devices. The next part focuses on the materials and advances in solar cells, piezoelectric, pyroelectric, magnetoelectric energy harvesters and electrochemical energy storage systems.
2.1 Solar technology
Solar technology is viable since it is a source of energy that is everlasting, immaculate, and boundless.25,26 Besides, solar energy may be harnessed effectively using modern science and low-cost conversion of UV light to electricity using photovoltaic (PV) technology.27,28 The PV package incorporates several parts such as cells, panels, and arrays for power production.29 Also, new design structures, digital equipment, electrical wiring, and mechanical components are employed to boost operating efficiency.30,31 Apart from PVs, concentrated solar technologies (CVT, CSP) transform solar radiation into electrical energy, yet PV-generated electricity can be fed effortlessly into grid systems.32 Further, the light conversion efficiency can be improved by attaching an insulation set-up above the grid field; therefore, PVs have a promising future usage.33,34 The expansion rate of PV installation was projected to be 35 percent in 2010 and 2020, as per Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE, emphasizing the tremendous potential and desire for this type of sustainable technology.35
The effectiveness of energy collection is hampered by fluctuating solar flux and trap states.36 This may be remedied by employing the solar tracking concept, which entails one- and two-axis tracking, and increasing capture efficiency.37,38 The solar tracker keeps the PV panels in the best position for maximal energy harvest, perpendicular to the sun's rays.37 Abdallah and colleagues devised and built a two-axis, accessible PLC-controlled solar monitoring device.39 They found that using a two-axis tracking interface leads to a 41.34% gain in overall daily capture compared to using static single-axes.39 In regions where solar panels fail to provide reliable electricity, hybrid energy systems are occasionally implemented.40 Stand-alone PV systems have many uses, especially in remote regions that aren’t connected to the Internet since they can’t connect to the primary connections.41,42 As a result, they may be used as protected miniature power stations in stand-alone or independent machine setups to generate electricity.43,44 The reliability, consistency, and financial viability all influence the scale of these systems. Solar technology must enhance its process and working materials to offer superior results.45,46 In solar photovoltaics, commonly used semiconductors are silicon wafers, silicon carbide, microcrystalline silicon, indium gallium arsenide, and cadmium telluride. A myriad of criteria impacts the choice of these materials.46–48

2.1.1 Promising materials for solar technology. 
Copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), cadmium selenide (CdSe), cadmium telluride (CdTe), cadmium sulfide (CdS), zinc sulfide (ZnS), gallium arsenide (GaAs), indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), and titanium dioxide (TiO2) are some of the most promising materials used in present day solar cells.49–51 The production costs of CIGS, CdS, and CdTe are substantially lower.50 Researchers have suggested organic solar cells (η = 17%), dye-sensitized solar cells (η = 15%), quantum dot solar cells (η = 10%), and perovskite solar cells (η = 23%) as current generation technologies.
The open-circuit potential (Voc) and short circuit current (Isc) play an essential role in determining the PCE of a solar cell. The thickness of the active light absorbing layer, surface energy, crystalline defect, and acceptor and donor HOMO–LUMO levels must also be considered while designing a solar cell. Jsc is proportional to the crystallinity of the polymer system. On the other hand, when the donor's crystallinity improves, so does its ionization potential (HOMO level). In bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells, Voc depends on the difference between the donor's HOMO level and the acceptor's LUMO level. As a result, as the HOMO level varies, so does Voc. The simplest example is the difference between pristine and annealed P3HT:PCBM devices. Fig. 2a shows the comparison between the electrode materials with respect to Voc, Jsc and Eg. Crystalline silica solar cells have a higher Voc, which is strongly impacted by acceptor and donor doping. Also, the donor buffer layer helps in tuning the lifetime of the carriers and reduces recombination (surface/bulk) by decreasing the carrier path loss. Organic and perovskite solar cells still have opportunities to improve their Voc and Isc. The significant factors influencing the PCE of a solar cell are shown in Fig. 2b. Surface passivation, crystal structure, carrier mobility and conducting interfaces can be altered for better photon absorption and collection by tuning the surface roughness, doping, bandgap, diffusion length, hot carriers, and device structure. The discovery of non-fullerene small acceptors has resulted in a rapid increase in the conversion efficiency of next-generation organic solar cells (OSCs).52,53 Ghasemi et al. developed a non-fullerene-based acceptor enabling rapid diffusion into a donor material (polymer) relative to the Arrhenius function. They identified the direct relation between activation energy and enthalpy characteristics. They predicted that the combination of the non-fullerene acceptor and the polymer has a stabler morphology.54 Similar to Ghasemi et al.'s work, Zhu et al. utilized ITIC (C94H82N4O2S4) as a non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) and PM6:Y6 structures in organic solar cells. These structures absorbs longer wavelength photons and causes rapid carrier transfer, boosting efficiency to 16.8%.55 They combined benzothiadiazole with thiophenes and pyrrole, providing excellent conversion efficiency (16.88%), open-circuit voltage (Voc: 0.83 V), fill factor (FF: 76.2%), and short circuit current density (Jsc: 26.52 mA cm−2) values. A mild modification of morphology and functional groups led to enormous improvements in efficiency. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has previously been reported for the efficiency of 7–8% in flexible OSCs. P3HT was mixed with a cyano-based dione group nonfullerene structure and employed in OSCs.56,57 However, due to its vigorous miscibility, the conversion efficiency was poor. The same group removed the cyano group and found improvements in the power conversion efficiency (PCE, ∼10%). This is due to nanoscale phase separation changes, which generate a conducive environment for exciton segregation and rapid charge transport.58,59 Jeong and coworkers developed large-scale OSCs with a PCE of 9.43% with low thermal treatment using NFAs, which is lower than that of small-scale devices (15%), yet a decent PCE value.
 Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of Voc, Jsc and Eg of active electrode materials in solar cells and (b) the critical parameters required for the evolution and development of solar cell efficiency. 
Recently, remarkable bi-sulfur interaction was discovered in layered 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites (An+1BnX3n+1), specifically alkylammonium, 2-(methylthio)ethylamine hydrochloride, allowing fast charge transfer with an efficiency of 18.06%. Cells based on these perovskites preserved moisture for up to 1512 hours, temperature stability for 375 hours (at 360 F), and pressure stability for 375 hours (at the highest power threshold, 85% of the starting efficiency was preserved after 1000 work-hours).60 The efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) can be increased by integrating low-dimensional structures. A 1D–3D perovskite structures obtained using a polymer crosslinking process that served as a stable passivation layer exhibited a maximum efficiency of 21.19%, reducing energy loss and residual strain.61
Multi-dimensional tailored structures with extremely resilient 2D perovskite enclosures, electrospun fibers and needles as absorbers enhance the structural stability of solar cells.62–64 In terms of the electrode surface, replacing conventional Au, Cu, and Ag with combinations of Cr, Au, and Cr2O3 can minimize metal ion migration, which would be detrimental to device performance.65,66 Further, the stability will be enhanced while employing a highly conductive oxide electrode or surface passivation with a hybrid tandem design.67
The use of ultrathin protective plating and carbon-based chemicals increased the performance properties of solar cells. To improve the mobility of the charge carriers and the temperature stability of the system, various carbon structures such as graphene, CNTs, mesoporous carbon, and carbon black were coated on substrates using the doctor blade technique, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), inkjet printing, and multiphase deposition.104 Yeo et al. fabricated a planar solar cell functionalized with graphene, exhibiting a PCE of 10%.68 Additionally, due to their high efficiency, low cost, and easy fabrication, carbon-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are a suitable option for solid-state solar cells. Researchers examined hydrazine derived graphene oxide (GO) coupled with carbon (C) as an anode material and discovered a PCE of 6.55%. The PCE was observed at 7.9% in PV cells using conductive materials like PEDOT.69


2.1.2 Surface passivation for improving photon conversion efficiency. 
The most utilized solar cells are crystalline silicon photocells, which inherently restrict the theoretical energy conversion efficiency (33.8%, due to Shockley and Queisser's (SQ) limit, i.e., radiative efficiency limit).70 The SQ limits of common solar materials are shown in Fig. 3. The maximum theoretical efficiencies of a solar cell estimated at 1.1 eV and 1.34 eV are 30% and 33.7%, respectively. Due to dangling bonds and surface instability, intrinsic and extrinsic faults are generated in the crystallographic structure of Si.71 The bandgap flaws and recombination losses reduce the solar cell's overall working efficiency by causing auger coupling, surface recombination, and trap-assisted recombination.72,73 As a result, the minority carrier's overall endurance and conversion efficiency deteriorate. The SQ limitation or efficiency decrement can be overcome by layering or doping various materials, each of which absorbs a specific portion of the solar spectrum.74 Passivating the silicon wafer electrically is one of the strategies to alleviate recombination losses to a minimum level. Further, to achieve higher efficiency, passivation must be done at both the positive and negative ends.72
 Fig. 3  S–Q limit threshold and values of different solar materials. 
In the 21st century, a multi-junction solar cell can effectively exceed the SQ threshold.27,76–78 Doping the absorbing material may allow rapid charge carrier transit to the terminals, but the dopant concentration must be kept low to avoid auger recombination.79 After adding dopants, the Fermi level shifts towards the conduction or valence band, facilitating electron or hole-rich substrates.79 Also, electron or hole selectivity can be achieved through doping, allowing a straightforward electron or hole transfer path without any perturbance.80 Surface passivation and doping of aluminum or alkali metals at the rear end helps in deflecting undesired carriers back, enhancing the form factor, despite the minor loss in efficiency,70,75,80–82 as shown in Fig. 4a. In typical designs, phosphorus and alumina are used as electron and hole dopants, with light invasion from the n+ electron carrier front.83,84
 Fig. 4  (a) Alkali metal doping with and without defects, revealing low temperature and high-temperature carrier population (reproduced with permission70 Copyright 2020, RSC EES). (b and c) Exciton dis-integration via radioactive electron and hole recombination; and exciton decay via auger recombination (Reproduced with permission75 Copyright 2020, RSC). (d) Surface passivated PV device and construction. 
Low dimensional structures have excellent trap polarization, particularly for quantum dot structures; as a result, a thorough analysis of passivation processes, as well as associated effects on carrier kinetics, can aid in the pragmatic design of low dimensional structures for a variety of purposes (Fig. 4b and c). The general construction and working of surface passivated solar cells are shown in Fig. 4d.
Heat treated SiO2 and TiO2 produced by atomic vapor deposition were used to achieve top surface passivation. The most successful Si surface passivation approach for solar cells is the development of silicon oxide via heat.67,85 However, this process is not appropriate for inexpensive commercial operations, since it involves high thermal processing (>1000 °C).85 As a replacement for high-temperature degradation of silicon, SiNx top surface passivation utilizing plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) was previously developed. New interface methods like carrier selective passivating contacts (CSPCs) have been researched to reduce the deficits caused by conventional interface designs.86,87 Unlike traditional solar cells, which are based on the development of PN junctions, these strategies rely on contact patterns present exterior to the photoanode. The backside passivation procedures for silicon solar cells include atomic level deposition of Al2O3, the dip coating process of Si:H/SiO2 or Al2O3/SiNx, and passivation with phosphorus-doped a-SiCxNy:H(n) alloys.32,88,89
In conclusion, the c-Si, CdTe, and CIGS module technologies are commercially well established with PCEs of ∼25%. c-Si solar cells with PCEs of about 29.5% have been recently developed by interface tuning to remove recombination losses and optimizing the device architecture.90,91 Testing how well lab-scale technologies perform in real-life settings is one of the first stages toward exploring their potential for use in the real world. Moving lab research outside allows for studying the effects of sunshine and environmental changes. Lab-scale research studies on solar cells are frequently carried out using minimal materials in terms of volumes or sizes, which poses a concern when scaling up to real-world technologies. Many people also have doubts about how consistently a lab-scale solar cell would work. For instance, even when the process settings and conditions are identical, the produced OPV cells frequently do not have the same PCE. This is due to the limited predictability of the interactions between organic reactants (donor:acceptor), polymers, interface ions, and complex device structures. Overall, the economic viability of the lab-scale development in OPVs will depend on their long-term stability under real-world circumstances.92

2.2 Piezoelectric energy harvesters
Piezoelectric energy generators (PEGs) have gained popularity due to their ecologically friendly energy-conversion technology, which turns excess mechanical power into electricity.93 The efficient translation of surface stimuli into electrical impulses is the key method for power transmission and data acquisition of foldable, wearable piezoelectronics. It is a viable way to produce energy harvesting devices using the piezoelectric effect.94 Wang et al. originally proposed the concept of piezoelectricity, while utilizing the AFM method to investigate the piezo characteristics of ZnO nanowires. The synergy of semiconducting and piezoelectric characteristics of the ZnO nanowires was responsible for the power produced. While considering their flexibility and easy processability, poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and fluoroethylene combined PVDF have shown promising piezoelectric behavior suitable for energy harvesting.
Fe doped-PVDF with the addition of rGO by simple solution casting showed an excellent production of energy with an OCV of 5.1 V and a short circuit current of up to 0.254 μA accelerated via repetitive force from human finger movement, as illustrated in Fig. 5A–C.95 Moreover, the Fe–PVDF–rGO composite (Fig. 5D) was observed to have a high energy density of ∼0.8 J cm−3 at an electric field of 537 kV cm−1. Fig. 5A shows the energy generation methodology and generated output voltages with high flexibility (Fig. 5E). Further, short circuit currents get developed upon pressing the active area as depicted in Fig. 5F, with an enlarged wavefront in Fig. 5G and H, and output voltages in Fig. 5I.
 Fig. 5  (A) Voltage produced upon human finger touch,95 (B and C) single touch and release response,95 (D) synthesised PVDF/Fe–rGO film,95 (E) flexibility check,95 (F) short circuit current generated upon finger touch and release,95 (G and H) enlarged views of short circuit current,95 (I) output voltage and Jsc,95 (J) working mechanism of a finger touch piezo harvester96 and (K) photographs of instant turn on LEDs powered by a finger tapping piezoelectric harvester96 (reproduced with permission95 Copyright 2015, RSC) (reproduced with permission96 Copyright 2018, RSC). 
The authors revealed the surface-induced polarization effects due to the interaction of oppositely charged Fe–rGO and –CF2–CH2– dipoles of PVDF accelerating the stabilization of piezoelectric points. The human finger force builds up additional potential in the piezo material, stimulating the single direction alignment of PVDF dipoles owing to induced polarization.96,97 This polarization has been unveiled to increase the output voltage response, showcasing the superior energy harvesting capabilities. The self-polarization of dipoles and induced stress due to external force from finger movement results in a self-powered flexible energy-generating ability. Similarly, Jella et al. showed the finger tapping energy generating self-powered piezo concept (Fig. 5J) utilizing PVDF and methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite. The maximum obtained Voc and Jsc values were 9.43 V and 0.76 μA cm−2 at 25% volume of PVDF–MAPbI3, due to the high polarization of 0.83 μC cm−2. The device capable of powering 10 green LEDs is shown in Fig. 5k.96 Other semiconducting materials such as InN, CdS, GaN, PbZrTiO3, BaTiO3, ZnSnO3, and polymers (PTFE) have been employed in piezoelectric energy harvesting.98 Piezoelectric energy harvesters have the financial and environmental advantages of replacing batteries and other charging methods, as well as their associated replacement costs. Some of the disadvantages such as mechanical losses, electrical losses, unstable frequency, and bulky device structures should be addressed in future research to improve the efficiency of piezoelectric harvesters.

2.2.1 Piezo-phototronics. 
Concepts like piezo-phototronics and piezotronics have emerged as a result of multi-linkages of piezoelectric, semiconductor and photoexcitation characteristics.99 Some materials generate a luminescence impact, which stems from the notion that materials crack or distort under the influence of mechanical exogenous stress to emit light, converting mechanical power effectively into photons.99 ZnO, GaN, ZnOS, and CaZnOS have been extensively studied in the past years for photon emission with piezo energy generating viability.100 The asymmetric architecture in the c-axis of ZnO and GaN nanostructures facilitated the spontaneous polarisation in their lateral axis accompanied by semiconducting properties. The solid-state process was used to dope Mn2+ and lanthanide Er3+, forming quaternary piezoelectric material MZnOS (M = Ca, Sr, Ba), resulting in intelligent optoelectronics. A novel family of piezoelectric optical devices with a ZnS/CaZnOS heterostructure was discovered, which exhibited photon emitting properties outwardly with no additional energy when subjected to a minor mechanical motive force (roughly 1 N).100,101
Recently, the idea of aggregation-induced emission (AIE) has been popularised, revealing that molecules can emit when they clump together.102 Molecules with deformed spatial arrangement exhibit moderate fluorescence in dispersion but high luminescence in their aggregated form, promoting the development of molecular mechanoluminescent (ML) compounds by providing a concept for designing structures with high photon emission under less stress.103 Zhang et al. demonstrated the recoverable ML activity of xCaO·Nb2O5 (where x = 1, 2, 3) when doped with praseodymium (Pr3+) ions. Defects associated with Pr3+ with one positive charge operate as electron capturing centres, allowing them to engage in trap related luminous actions.104 With variable mechanical stimuli, the piezophotonic effect uses the piezo potential to drive charge transfer, coupling, and energy exchange for activating the emission centers to release photons. For including piezophotonic units in stretchable devices, organic materials are broadly used: namely, epoxy polymer, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET).105–107 A Pb–Mg–Nb piezoelectric composite substrate coated with a ZnS–Mn film exhibits ML because of the reverse piezoelectric effect integrating the film's luminosity and ultrasonic signal, which may be changed by varying the AC electric field.108
The ability to fabricate piezoelectric devices following the demands of many areas has been made possible by advances in nano- and micro-scale materials and production techniques. MEMSs may readily be constructed using thin coatings of piezoelectric materials based on polymers and nanocomposite materials. In addition, nanomaterials potentially generate electricity from small mechanical stresses, enabling self-powered sensors and nanoscale energy harvesting. When it comes to microfabrication techniques, electrospinning is regarded as one of the most straightforward and adaptable approaches for creating nanoscale materials with various compositions and customized morphologies and producing fibers with exceptionally long lengths and a broad range of diameters. With the investigation of novel piezoelectric materials and new vibrating sources, it is also projected that interest in piezoelectric energy harvesting will continue to increase.

2.3 Magnetoelectric energy harvesters
Magnetoelectric energy generators produce power comparable to piezoelectric harvesters due to their high magnetomechanical coupling. Fe, Co, Ni, Si, and Ti-based composites have been popularly used for magnetic energy harvesting. Lasheras et al. developed an amorphous Fe64Co17Si7B12 ribbon as a piezoelectric material, which exhibited a power density of 1.5 mW cm3.109 A PZT–Terfenol mixture exhibited an output power of 620 μW.110 Similarly, Talleb et al. modeled a magnetoelectric conversion device consisting of a piezoelectric material (terfenol) and an actuator, rendering an output power of 1.7 mW. Another numerical study using terfenol revealed that reducing the thickness of the terfenol layer improves the voltage and magnetic field amplitudes relative to frequency.111
Magnetic plucking exploits the up-conversion strategy in momentum for increased energy harvesting when energy sources, such as body motions, supply resonances with extremely weak and changing harmonics. A slow-moving mass pulls a piezoelectric cantilever magnetically, converting kinetic energy to electricity. For instance, a low frequency magnetic plucking device with a rotating cylindrical magnet was recently developed, which gave a reliable output. The researchers employed the finite element method involving the Maxwell stress tensor for conjecturing the magnetic field intensity and spread, modeling the rotation of a car tire with a radius of 1.2 m at a velocity of about 20 km h−1. Experimental validation under specified settings was done and the highest mean output among all frequencies (0.5–5.0 Hz) was 13.13 mW, a gain of 215.9% over the generator lacking the resetting mechanism.112 Dong et al. presented a lift cantilever made of dual layer PZT, BFeSiC alloy, and a nonmagnetic apex material that could harness the power from lower frequency magnetic disturbance (20 Hz). The nonferrous tip weight increases the vibration intensity in tiny AC magnetic forces (2 Oe), allowing the beam to boost magnetization efficacy despite the requirement of a DC supply.113 Composites of Ni, Co, Nb, PZT, and PVDF are also used for magnetoelectric applications. A PVDF based magnetostrictive laminate showed good performance while using trilayer composites. Peng et al. demonstrated an Fe73.5Cu1Nb3–Si13.5B9–terfenol film with a magnetic energy harvesting capability of ∼0.4 to 7.4 V cm−1 Oe−1. Using the pulse laser deposition technique, PZT films were dropped onto nickel substrates with coupling coefficients of ∼94 to 130 V cm−1 Oe−1.114
Polymer metal oxide composite structures have high potential for magnetoelectric application in the coming years. Narita et al. constructed a unique Fe–Co wire inserted magnetoelectric composite of radius 0.5 mm on an epoxy polymer framework, and the fabrication procedure is shown in Fig. 6a. Under a stress of 2.8 MPa, the output voltage reached its maximum value. When the polymer composite was cured, tensile stress was generated, resulting in a significant inverse magnetostriction enhancement.115 Maharjan et al. fabricated a magnetic field harvester for powering wireless sensors utilizable for smart living residences. The device fabrication consists of two stages: (i) assembly of two C shaped ferrite cores (inner radius – 6.5 mm, outer radius – 11 mm, and height – 14.5 mm) and (ii) installation of a charge transferring conductor insulated with PVC, placed in the vertical axis across the core structures such that the coils split the magnetic field lines produced by the conductor (Fig. 6b). A split-core type device harvester with an Fe core, wrapped using a conductor, was proposed to provide an uninterrupted power supply. If the power supply needs to be cut off, then the insulated conductive cables must be pierced or disturbed, which will disrupt the steady supply of power. The authors used an electric load of 2000 W, and the harvester generated a maximum of 49 V at 60 Hz frequency. The observed maximum rms voltage and current were 9.2 V and 40.4 mA, respectively, with a mean/average output power of ∼105 mW and a resistive load of 230 Ω. Overall, the device with an energy harvester provides power to the sensor, followed by a signal processing unit and a data converter. A wireless Bluetooth carries the transformed signals and displays the details on the smartphone. For the interface, unique software was also designed for showcasing the sensor data actively in an intelligent way. Functioning of a smart phone-controlled sensor based on a magnetic harvester is shown in Fig. 6c(i).116
 Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis process of Fe29Co71 wire/polymer composites,115 (b) schematic of an indoor power line magnetic field energy harvester,116 and (c-i) working of indoor magnetic harvester powering environmental, moisture and motion sensor with detected real time data acquisition in a smart phone116 (reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2017, Wiley) (reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, Elsevier). 
Ghodsi et al. developed a layered piezoelectric material on which a magnetostrictive material was placed and exposed to a magnetic field. Upon exposure, the material reveals a strain, which gets converted into an electrical signal. The signal response mimics a damped mass-spring resonator devoid of structural damping, verifying the power usage in the output circuitry. The authors also used finite element analysis for analyzing the distribution of stress related to the production of harvested energy.117
Wearable energy harvesters are next level economical and comfortable designs, which opens a large spectrum of opportunities in health care and real time tracking systems. Cai et al. proposed a wrist worn device that could harvest energy from arm rotation using a repulsive magnetic spring inertial simulator. The design consisted of two pairs of magnetic springs, proving flexibility and improving energy production. The authors utilized a bench-top excitation source, which stimulates the oscillating movement of the arm, with frequencies of 0.7 to 1.3 Hz. The device harvested power was 151 μW, further improved by reducing the air gap from 2.6 mm to 2.2 mm.118 Yan et al. used the concept of bistability, integrating both magnetic attraction and magnetic repulsion in a single device. The quantum charge transports can be varied by adjusting the distance between the permanent magnets. The energy harvesting output was 28 mW and operable at broad bandwidths.119 Though magnetic energy harvesters have several benefits, the primary problem with using a magnetic field as a long-term storage medium is that it requires a circulating current and is not portable for longer distances, which implies contact resistance losses unless dealing with a superconductor. Superconductors, on the other hand, demand the use of energy-intensive cryogenic equipment and are less efficient. Integrating a dielectric medium with linear current, a piezo material, and a superconductor with magnetic forces may reduce the energy losses. Standalone magnetic energy harvesters are less typically utilised for self-powered devices, although they may be of interest for study. Apart from piezoelectric and magnetoelectric energy harvesters, pyroelectric and thermoelectric energy harvesters may potentially be employed in self-powered devices.
2.4 Thermal energy harvesters
Thermoelectric generators produce electricity through natural heating systems and heat recovery from industries, carbureted engines, frictional heat, power plants, and human metabolic heat.120,121 The Seebeck–Peltier effect, based on the temperature gradient and thermocouple, forms the basis for the thermoelectric generator (TEG). In general, at different temperatures (Th and Tc), the thermocouple (two junctions consisting of two dissimilar metals) functions. The temperature fluctuation between the metals generates an electric potential (Vth) relative to the difference between Th and Tc, as shown in the equation:Vth = α(Th − Tc)Here, α is the Seebeck coefficient.122

2.4.1 Thermoelectric materials. 
Thermoelectric materials convert temperature fluctuations into electric potential to generate energy directly via heat.123 Because of the existence of cold and hot edges at the temperature gradient, these materials must have low temperature conductivity and high electrical conductance in order to create a substantial quantity of electric potential.124 In this regard, low thermal conductivity materials such as bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3),125 silicon germanium (SiGe),126 and lead telluride (PbTe)127 have shown promising activity in thermoelectric generators, apart from the high prices of bismuth and tellurium.126,128 Most exploration on thermoelectric materials has concentrated on increasing the Seebeck coefficient and lowering the heat conductance (i.e. high ZT) mainly through altering the thermocouple compounds’ microstructures using nanotechnology.120,129 Since charge carriers are related to conductivity, alternative methods must be developed to reconcile the paradox between good electrical conductivity and poor heat conductivity.130 A non-dimensional figure of merit (ZT) is generally used to measure the thermoelectric performance of a specific material.ZT = S2σT/κwhere σ is the electrical conductivity, κ is the thermal conductivity and T is the temperature.
The ZT values of n-type (ZTmax 2.3) and p-type (ZTmax 1.8) materials and their evolution from 1940 to 2020 are shown in Fig. 7a–c. N-Type PbTe/PbSe has a higher figure of merit (ZT ∼2.2) followed by copper selenides/copper tellurides (ZT ∼2), SnSe (∼1.8 to 2), CoSb3 (ZT ∼1.5 to 2), and half-Heusler alloys (ZT ∼1.5). ZnSb (ZT ∼0.3), PbTe, Bi2Te3, Zn4Sb3, AgPb18SbTe20, the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattice and PbSeTe/PbTe quantum dots (ZT ∼2) are some of the promising thermoelectric materials. It is difficult to enhance the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient while simultaneously decreasing the thermal conductivity as the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient are inversely proportional. ZT can be altered by changing the crystal structure, adding nanoscale structures, and minimizing phonon scattering. ZT can also be tuned by changing the temperature externally or by changing the carrier concentration (less than 500 K). The finest examples are Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 alloys, where ZT can be tuned by changing the carrier concentration in p-type and n-type alloys.
 Fig. 7  Common thermoelectric materials and their ZT values:131 (a) p-type materials for thermoelectric harvesters, (b) n-type materials for thermoelectric harvesters and (c) timeline of the development of ZT of materials from 1940 to 2017131 (reproduced with permission131 Copyright 2017, Wiley). 
The thermoelectric generator (TEG) is implemented in rovers, gas stations and vehicles. Curiosity, the Mars Science Laboratory rover, is powered by a radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG). The RTG powers the spaceship by transforming the radiation produced by the decay of plutonium-238 fuel into energy. TEGs will be utilised in BMW vehicles to generate power from excess heat to enhance the overall efficiency of the engine. However, thermoelectric materials for commercial devices remain problematic due to efficiency constraints. The efficiency of the thermoelectric devices can be improved by employing nanostructures. At the nanoscale, materials such as silicon germanium (SiGe), zinc antimonite (ZnSb) and cadmium selenide composites (CdS–Cu2S) have demonstrated improved thermoelectric performance. Further, as conducting materials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene exhibit increased thermoelectric properties, consistent with high ZT trends. Additionally, nanomaterials may be used to strengthen thermoelectric system optimization, which can minimize greenhouse gas emissions and boost energy productivity.130
Thermoelectric devices used today are reliable, and the concept has previously been used in specialized fields like the aerospace industry. However, the poor efficiency of conventional thermoelectric systems prevents the widespread implementation of the technology. It must be ensured that thermal technology can fight the effectiveness of existing technologies if it is to spread into non-niche industries. It will be necessary to make a determined effort to develop novel, environmentally friendly materials with high thermoelectric performance, e.g., sustainable chalcogenides and ceramic materials, and to design nanoscale interfaces. State-of-the-art conductive polymers such as polyaniline, PEDOT:PSS, polythiophene, and polyvinyl pyrrolidine (PVP) have been researched for their utilization in thermoelectric generators due to their flexibility, lightweight, low cost, eco-friendliness, and processability. Non-conductive polymers can also be utilized as insulating templates or matrices after inducing porosity by acid treatments, activation, and filling the pores with conductive materials (e.g., CNTs).
Han et al. revealed the increase in thermoelectric behavior (ZT ∼10−6 to 10−2) in a carbon polymer fiber matrix with the addition of bismuth telluride (2 vol%), carbon black (2 vol%), and tellurium particles (13 vol%), due to the thickness enhancement of the matrix and the continuity of the fiber–epoxy matrix.132

2.5 Wind energy extraction
Wind energy is a clean, sustainable, and safe energy source that is quickly emerging as one of the world's most dominating and speediest energy sources.133,134 Improvements in structural engineering, materials, and micrometeorology have resulted in a 5% yearly improvement in turbines’ energy production since 1980.135 By spinning the rotors, turbines transform wind energy into electric power. Since the 20th century, the estimated total operational energy production from wind energy has increased rapidly, reaching 733 GW by the beginning of 2021.136,137

2.5.1 Aerodynamics of wind turbines. 
Miller investigated the physics and dynamics of lateral axis wind rotors and the necessity for a complete construction theory.138 Wind shear produces unstable wind pressure, which may be estimated using a basic momentum notion. One of the most essential and challenging processes is the development of speedier and more cost-effective wind turbines. As a result, the expansion of the wind industry is dependent on its primary component, blade design. Aerodynamic architectural developments have aided in achieving higher wind energy extraction efficiency in the last decade.138 Some of the factors affecting aerodynamics are as follows:
(i) Architectural integrity to handle folding stresses, airfoil, and mechanical loads and to keep expenses within limits139,140
(ii) Aesthetic and acoustic concerns141,142
(iii) Materials chosen, e.g., graphite vs. carbon fibres; accessibility of required materials – fabrication techniques used143,144
In turbine aerodynamics, the determinant of power is the most significant constituent. The Buckingham theory was applied in the equation below, presenting the non-dimensional equalization for force.145,146  where Cp is the power coefficient, A is the area of the turbine, ρ is the density of air, and V is the speed of the wind. And the thrust coefficient is given by  
Drag triggers the blade material in the path of the relative flow, whereas lift forces the blade in the reverse direction.147,148 While the blade is perpendicular and moving upwards, gravity is dragging it down, lowering the overall thrust on the edges and the torque on the spindle. While heading downhill after the shaft's 180° rotation, the “lift pull” caused by the wind elevates the blade and amplifies the downforce of gravity, increasing the torque on the rotor.148 The gravitational force acts perpendicular to the lift and drag. Once the blade is upright, the core of the driveshaft, regardless of the top or bottom of its rotation, does not influence the torque,149,150 which is solely attributable to uplift.


2.5.2 Nanotechnology for efficient wind turbines. 
Nanomaterials can improve the performance of rotor blades in a variety of ways. Some of these ways include preventing frost development (which reduces resource gathering) and increasing the blades’ resilience and longevity.151,152 Since the worldwide power market is shifting towards an all-renewable paradigm across the entire system, significant scientific advancements in turbomachinery are crucial.153 Nanotechnology's effects are likely to help the expansion of offshore wind renewable energy grids. Off-shore turbines are exposed to horrific meteorological conditions, exceptionally high impact loading, abrupt changes in wind patterns, strong wind surges, wake effects from neighboring wind energy generating units, and lightning storms.153 The median frequency of lightning-caused failures every 100 turbines in Japan might be as large as 36 per year. CNTs have a significant electrical conductance to divert thunderbolt current, excellent thermal stability to spread the heat generated by thunderstorms, and excellent chemical and mechanical stability to withstand the excess warmth by power surges. According to previous research studies, thin-film coating on blades can enhance the stiffness, Young's modulus, and impact resistance by 20%, 24%, and 60%, respectively.154,155 Experiments have already shown that epoxy polymer nanocomposites containing a tiny amount of carbon nanotubes could indeed boost the blade's life expectancy.155
Muhammed et al. used ANSYS simulation to compare the tensile strengths and load-bearing capacities of glass fiber and nano TiO2–epoxy composites. They observed that adding 3% nanoscale TiO2 composite enhanced the flexural toughness of the turbine.156 Graphdiyne-based carbon material has been found to exhibit exceptional superhydrophobicity, contact stiffness, and mechanical properties when coated in situ on the electrodes for triboelectric energy dynamos for harvesting wind power (Fig. 7a–c), suitable for harsh environmental conditions.157–159
Organic fibres have emerged as common reinforcing materials due to their desirable qualities such as minimal price, excellent mechanical capabilities, durability, and non-abrasive, recyclable, and eco-friendly attributes. Incorporation of bamboo in polymer matrices improves their mechanical properties and restricts moisture deposition on blades.160 Coir fiber has a remarkable tensile and impact resistance comparable to glass fiber, but its functionality decreases with time and under varying environmental extremes.160 Thermoplastic nanodimensional polymer coatings, such as polyetherimide (PEI), poly(phenylene sulphide) (PPS), and poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK), display excellent durability and mechanical properties.160
However, the continuous working of rotor blades causes frictional and wear damage to the mechanical parts, reducing productivity and increasing maintenance expenses. Regarding characteristics for wind blades, it's important to create new lubricants and additives with excellent anti-wear properties and friction-reduction abilities to overcome frictional losses. Recently, the addition of MoS2 nanoflowers in the engine oil of the turbine system enhanced the colloidal stability, reducing wear and friction effects. MoS2 grafted with a longer alkyl chain exhibits greater tribological behavior and antifriction property.161
Overall, the research investigations on wind energy harvesters have produced several encouraging findings based on nanomaterials; it is apparent that this nanotechnology has not yet been used in practical applications. This is because several performance factors, such as environmental conditions, the cut-in speed, and the working bandwidth of the device, should be carefully considered to boost the output efficiency and lengthen the system's life on a commercial scale which is different from lab scale production.

2.6 Energy from biomass
Biomass generates 5 × 1019 kJ energy annually, which accounts for 10% of global energy utilization. With the diversity of biofuel resources available, this value is expected to increase to 150 × 1019 kJ by 2050.165 As shown in Fig. 8a–d, the USA produced the most bioethanol, accounting for 57% of the total world output, followed by Brazil (29%), and EU-28 (4%). The main sources of bioethanol production were maize and wheat in the USA. Rapeseed, soybean, and palm oil were the main sources of biodiesel in Europe, the USA and Brazil respectively. Pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, plastics, and hydrocarbons, which are now made from raw petroleum resources, are expected to be made from biomass resources.166 Biofuel is made from CO2 and moisture (H2O) with the help of solar energy, while air (O2) is exhaled as a by-product.166 The use of bioenergy has several advantages, including lower carbon pollution emissions, which results in a cleaner environment, less reliance on foreign sources as a result of biofuel replacing imported coal and oil, job opportunities in rural areas, and simpler waste processing.167,168 Biomass offers a variety of ecological and economic benefits, including electricity, thermal energy, and vehicle fuel. Despite its benefits, biomass has a poor energy density (a maximum thermal potential of 15–20 MJ kg−1).169 It must be transformed into valuable commodities, which may be done in a variety of ways. Biomass-based fuels, organic molecules, resins, and minerals are therefore produced using various conversion technologies, which are obstinate to examining and obtaining conclusions. Chemical and biochemical techniques are the two primary types of conversion technologies.170 Fast pyrolysis, fermentation, and hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) are helpful processes for converting biological feedstock into fluid fuels.166,171–176 The fuel (ethanol) and biomass are initially fed into the pyrolysis and fermentation tank, where the biochemical processes take place, before the wastes are collected in the fermentation residue tank. The liquid fuel will subsequently be utilised to generate energy. Research and advancements are needed in the areas of waste to fuel conversion efficiency and improvements in gas purification systems for extracting the unwanted gas. Although there exist numerous advantages in biofuels, there are a few challenges like lower conversion efficiency, and social, financial and economic constraints as shown in Fig. 8e.
 Fig. 8  Worldwide cultivation regions for food crops used to produce biofuel162 (a) with adjoining habitat types and regions in North America (b), South America (c), and Southeast Asia (d); the spatial production allocation model (SPAM) 2005 to calculate the total geographical area under development for crops; (e) challenges for biofuel production;163 and (f) various biofuel production technologies164 (reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission163 Copyright 2021, MDPI) (reproduced with permission164 Copyright 2021, Elsevier). 

2.6.1 Biofuel production. 
In general, there are four generations of biofuels as shown in Fig. 8f. First-generation biofuels: food resources (sugarcane, sweet corn, sorghum) cultivated in arable lands are fermented to yield bioethanol (BE) due to the existence of sugar, starch, and carbohydrates.177 BE is used in fuel cells for electricity production. India has the maximum arable land (156463000 hectares), followed by the United States (152262500 hectares) and Russia (123121820 hectares).178,179
Second-generation biofuels: they are produced from agricultural wastes such as bagasse and rice husk. Using the anaerobic decomposition process and gasification, biogas or fuel has been obtained.180
Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a feasible strategy for microbial waste treatment that quickly processes 95% of organic material. In the AD process, hydrolysis is employed to break down lengthy organic molecules into smaller bits.181,182 In completely anaerobic circumstances, CH4 and CO2 are produced from unstable fatty acids.172 Methanogens may also use H2 and CO2 to produce CH4via the hydrogen transfer mechanism, contributing to 70% of the overall CH4 made throughout AD.183 As a consequence, biogas is generated by AD with a contribution limit of almost 70% CH4. Similarly, CH4 is turned into electricity using fuel cells. Reducing cycle fluctuation, increasing ignition intensity, and mixing H2 to CH4 improve the thermodynamic performance.184 Given the potential benefits of biofuel generation and long-term waste treatment, it is critical for future generations, even though AD has specific drawbacks, including (i) microbes’ sluggish metabolic kinetics, (ii) microbes’ sensitivity to even minimal oxygenation, and (iii) the complexities of identifying waste, whether it could come from farming, commercial, or residential sources.175,185,186 Third and fourth generations of biofuels namely algal biofuels and genetically modified feedstocks for biofuel production, respectively, are in development stages and involve complicated thermochemical and biochemical processes for conversion of feedstocks to energy.


2.6.2 Green conversion technologies. 
According to the EU, 252 million tons of solid trash were dumped in 2018, with the composite trash accounting for 17% and landfill garbage accounting for 25%. GHGs are released when organic waste ferments slowly and uncontrollably, particularly CO2 and methane (CH4) accounting for 80% and 16% of global emissions, correspondingly.187–189 CH4 has a greater detrimental effect on the ecosystem than CO2. As a result, the design of low-cost, sustainable waste removal is currently aimed at cities globally.190 Although time-consuming, microorganisms such as bacteria and enzymes are used to convert biomass into liquid fuel or gas with minimal energy.191 Through fermentation (breaking of molecules) and digestion (biogas generation), biomass can be converted into biofuel. Before fermenting, preprocessing is usually employed to lower the reaction tendency of biomass, which is then accompanied by hydrolyase catalysts liberating glucose from polysaccharides, which are subsequently transformed into alcohol and perhaps other compounds with the assistance of microbes.192 In today's reduced fuel situation, the constraints connected with enzymatic conversion revolve around overhead cost issues, particularly the preparatory stage.192
Organic matter, oil, and coal are some of the natural producers of hydrogen. Breaking of molecules, water electrolysis, and microbial electrolysis are standard methods for producing H2.193 Organic H2 can be produced from waste biomass via specific fermentation methods, which have several advantages, including moderate chemical conditions and environmental friendliness.194 Combination of dark fermentation and photo-fermentation via volatile acid-rich effluents can enhance H2 production. Further, microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) are a class of microbial fuel cells (MFCs),195 which partly invert the ways to produce hydrogen or biogas from organic waste by adding a flow of electricity, whereas MFCs generate electricity from the anaerobic breakdown of organic molecules.196 Another carbon neutral process is biophotolysis, a common water splitting process occurring in microorganisms where H2 is produced by microorganisms such as cyanobacteria and green phytoplankton that directly biophotolyse water from sunlight with the help of the hydrogenase enzyme.197 Indirect production of H2 is also possible, which involves the conversion of sunlight to polysaccharides (carbohydrates or glucose) followed by anaerobic conversion of polysaccharides. During all these enzymatic conversions of biomass waste, different nanomaterials are used to improve oxygen tolerance and H2 release amounts.198 Nickel, copper, gold, silver, and titanium nanoparticles have been shown to improve biogas generation via various organic routes, including bio-photolysis, DF, and PF. Ferrous and nickel nanoparticles aid in biogas generation by serving as coenzymes in the synthesis of hydrogenase enzymatic complexes, resulting in a significant increase in output.198 Furthermore, nanoparticles aid in oxygen scavenging, improving the reduction potential, allowing for more significant amounts of H2 and biofuel to be generated with lower loss of efficiency. Zhang et al. found that adding 5 nm Au NPs to biomass increased the resource utilization by 56% during dark fermentation. The biogas production was also enhanced by 46%, owing to the presence of nanoparticles.199 Recently, 3D length adjustable Ni nanoparticles were produced and utilized for catalytic oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, demonstrating potential biomass conversion. By increasing the current density over 1.58 V, the oxidation becomes diffusion dependent, indicating that oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural is more efficient than the OER and might be used as a viable anodic process for water-splitting.200 Similarly, Lai et al. observed that cobalt inserted carbon nanotubes act as a catalyst in the formation of vanillin.201
The output yield of H2 can be increased with the aid of metabolic and genetic engineering of microbes. Escherichia coli is often genetically engineered to improve its metabolic activity in biomass conversion, especially glucose based. The genetically engineered E. coli HD701 strain used to transform nougat trash produced seven times more H2 than the normal variant due to the effectual activity of hydrogenase, triggered by the modified strain's genome.202 Raising knowledge of the benefits of using biomass to generate clean energy is also essential. In particular, affordable and clean energy, one of the primary sustainable development goals (SDGs) set for 2030, might be effectively achieved through bioenergy and biofuels.

2.7 Tidal and geothermal energy
The kinetic energy of the wave and the water within the ripple has the potential to generate electricity for distant, self-powered, and autonomous installations.203 Ocean thermal energy is obtained from the temperature difference between hot surface water and chilly deep water, whereas geothermal energy is stored in hot rocks and subterranean water. The overall annual wave power projection for the world was above 64000 MW in 2019, with expected advancements and demands in the upcoming years.204 Generally, tides are generated due to various factors, but the formation of a pressure gradient spanning the crest and trough induced by the wind passing above the wave is the essential one. The wind flows faster over the top of the wave ripple than it does over the bottom, resulting in high stress at the crest and low pressure over the trough.205 The wave's amplitude grows as a result of the pressure gradient. The kinematic and potential transition of momentum from one water molecule to the subsequent as the waves radiate outward is represented by the motion and altitude of the tidal currents.206 The energy is transferred at the wave group velocity, generally on a scale of 5 to 10 m s−1 for massive ocean waves in shallow water.207 Because of the comparatively slow energy transmission and negligible energy loss, the power output from the wave is typically predictable. Tidal power converters (TPCs) for capturing wave energy are divided into three types: oscillatory entities, overtopping structures, and rotating water columns (RWCs).207 The functioning of oscillating entities is such that the apparatus moves adjacent to the mooring site due to the periodic impulses generated by successive tides.208 Heave, surge, tilt, spin, twist, and wobble are the six dimensions of freedom that may be used to describe this entire cyclic oscillation. In wave energy, the most common forces are heave, surges, and tilt forces.208 The electricity generated by the ocean has improved as a result of technological development. In 2019, the economy grew by 13%, significantly greater than the previous three years’ development.209 Yet, for these technologies to meet the environmental sustainability framework, they must be deployed quickly, necessitating a yearly increase of 23% until 2030.209,210
Because geothermal energy is available continuously and may offer ceaseless generation and balancing of periodic and climate controlled intermittent sources like solar energy and wind, it has significant benefits as a carbon-free baseload sustainable resource.209 Three fundamental aspects constitute a spontaneously functioning geothermal system: warmth, fluid flow, and fluid mobility. Fluid should get into touch with hot rock, either through open cracks or by the turbulence of boulders, to acquire exposure to heat.211,212
Geothermal and tidal power plants utilize nano-lubricants to increase efficiency. In geothermal plants, anti-corrosive coatings are utilized by polymer processed montmorillonite, ZrO2, TiO2, and SiO2 nanoparticles. Heat exchangers were coated with PTFE–CNT composite coatings to minimize frictional wear and improve temperature stability.213 The infrastructure, maintenance, and intermittent extraction of energy from tides provide commercialization hurdles.
2.8 Hydrogen energy
Hydrogen is preferred as a possible green fuel because of its super clean combustion characteristics, local manufacturing ability, and higher efficiency than petroleum. H2 is abundant in liquid (H2O), hydrocarbon (methane), and other organic compounds.214 Stationary applications of hydrogen are possible nowadays; however, transportation of H2 poses safety issues and hinders its usage in portable applications.
Producing H2 in its purest form is the most challenging aspect of using it. When manufacturing hydrogen, four major frames must be considered: synthesis, storage, safety, and usage.216 Regardless of the fact that H2 is a zero-carbon fuel at the point of use, the quality of the manufacturing route and the method utilized to create it is critical.217 As a result, an assurance of hydrogen provenance is required to regard H2 as a pure energy source. Devices including proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFCs), solid-oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFCs), and alkaline fuel cells (AFCs) are employed globally to provide distributed power for local consumption as shown in Fig. 9a and b.215 The importance of the numerous high fuel cell technologies implemented by the end of 2018 is depicted in Fig. 9b. Three distinct types of technologies lead the market, with MCFCs having the biggest weight followed by SOFCs and PAFCs. Only a few high-capacity systems based on PEMFCs and AFC systems have been put into use in the past.215 For future research and improvement, a novel approach needs to be introduced as a gas cleanness scale.217 In the end, this implies that H2-based innovation is currently waiting for the optimal techniques to create H2 for practical use.218 In the next part, we have discussed in brief H2 generation techniques and their potential for application in the long term.215
 Fig. 9  (a) Relative weights of various installed stationary H2 storage as of 2018, (b) total installed capacity in relation to the fuel cell type, 2018, and (c) SWOT analysis of boosting H2 production and commercialization215 (reproduced with permission215 Copyright 2019, MDPI). 

2.8.1 Thermochemical approach. 
Thermal production approaches use temperature-aided molecular reactions to produce H2 and H2 plentiful gases. This process can produce H2 from biological, nuclear and coal sources, and the production paths vary greatly depending on the source conditions.219 Steam reformation of fossil fuels occurs when fossil energy interacts endothermically with steam at high temperatures.220 Fossil fuels are a popular option for reforming to H2 because they have excellent hydrogen-to-carbon ratios, and therefore reduce CO2 production, and this makes it easier to manage. Nevertheless, except for fossil fuels, many biomasses have low hydrogen-to-carbon ratios, necessitating a substantial part of the generated H2 to come from steaming.221 Biomass is now the sole clean resource that contains hydrogen and carbon; as a result, biomass resources have a promising possibility for H2 generation via steam reformation. Because vapor transformation is bidirectional and extremely endothermic, as per the Le Chatelier rule, it should be performed at extreme heat, with a significant vapor to fuel ratio and minimal force to optimize the yield. Synthetic gas production, the water–gas process (WGS), and gas filtration are the three chief steam reforming methods.221 Thermal reformation is typically favored for massive commercial operations because it may accomplish a conversion rate in the range of 75 to 90%. Yet, oil and gas aren’t easily accessible ubiquitously. Hence, a growing push is to increase renewables output, transferring organic matter and its metabolites to biogas prior to steaming, which is becoming a feasible alternative.222


2.8.2 Electrochemical approach. 
The electrochemical method for producing energy-dense fuels from renewables, water, and CO2 collected while sequestering CO2 is cost-effective. Electrochemistry focuses on electric potential through quantifiable and traceable redox reactions, with electrical activity resulting from a specific chemical change.223,224 In electrochemical reactions, electrons are transferred to and from a chemical substance, causing the electronegativity of the substance or molecule to change. This reaction happens when an external charge or chemical energy is delivered. At present, water electrolysis is the common technique for producing pure H2, and its importance is expected to grow substantially in the coming years.225,226 Electrolysis in water relies on the flow of electrons, which is aided by an external load. The basic electrolytic H2 generation systems are alkaline, solid oxide (SO) and proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers.227,228 As current density is crucial in electrolyzers, it has been the subject of research in recent times. One method for increasing the current density and pace of electrolytic processes is to use catalysts.228,229 Platinum is among the most widely used clean catalysts, and it is administered to the electrode surfaces in the electrolytic cell. Because of their high attrition rates, unadulterated catalysts may be utilized during the electrochemical reaction and are less expensive than doped electrocatalysts.230 Desalination,231,232 detoxification,233,234 and demineralization235 could perhaps be done before water electrolysis since electrolyzers are vulnerable to water quality. If seawater is fed into an electrolytic cell, it's conceivable that other undesirable processes, including the production of pollutants, such as chlorinated gas (Cl2), can occur. Using ion-selective filters as separators and electrodialysis to purify and treat water is one simple approach that can be powered entirely by solar energy.236 The state-of-the-art PEMFC utilizes Nafion and electrospun fluorine-containing polymer-ceramic membranes and sulfonated aromatic polymer ion-conducting membranes. Karthick et al. showcased the internal unification of a quasi-solid state DSSC and uninterrupted redox-flow salt filtration modules with an amphiphilic platinized graphite electrode that connects the photovoltaic cells and the water desalination equipment through positive and negative electrodes, respectively.237,238 The SWOT analysis related to the production of H2 as fuel is shown in Fig. 9c. In commercial aspects, the transportation and delivery vehicle of H2 needs to be carefully chosen. The idea of distributed hydrogen generation is another route that is being researched by many experts in the area and may make it easier to transport hydrogen to remote locations.

2.9 Carbon capture and usage
Use of carbon storage systems has been a critical strategy for lowering CO2 pollutants and reducing global warming. Even though they are not direct energy harvesting systems, they contribute to the reduction of carbon emissions through absorption of carbon dioxide straight from the air utilizing high speed extraction equipment, reducing both inevitable and previous CO2 pollution. This will encourage people to prevent climate change by removing CO2 from the atmosphere. After the CO2 has been extracted from the atmosphere, it should be transported to a specific destination after compression to critical points at 31 °C and 73.77 bar. CO2 can be extracted from saline, methane and water resources. Obtaining CO2 from earth is one of the promising approaches, depicted for improved understanding in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Concept of CO2 extraction from contaminated soil. 
The system (Fig. 10) consists of a CO2 plume, caprock and a detection system (monitoring well). The monitoring device detects the leakage of CO2via chemical sensors and triggers the capture device to accumulate the CO2. The amounts of CO2 leaked and captured can be tracked via a data analysis system, which requires a specific software set-up. Research and development is necessary on sensors and leakage prevention systems.
Carbon capture and storage face commercial challenges due to huge expenditures and non-standardized technologies. Carbon capture involves combustion techniques that have a few detrimental impacts on the ecosystem. Further, huge investments are needed, and considerable energy is required to separate CO2 from exhaust energy. Thus the achievable efficiency is less than 15% which is economically unfavorable. However, using waste materials to combust and capture carbon with the help of highly efficient combustion conversion systems and lower environmental impact may improve the opportunities for commercialization of carbon capture.
3. Flexible device technology
In recent days, there has been a lot of interest in wearable electronics. This technology is commonplace in modern lifestyle and is of interest in the advancement of future technology. The key parameters for flexible device technology are elasticity, semi-transparency, light weight and durability. A commercial example is the Galaxy S7 Edge, with a compact and foldable grip due to flexible technology. Carbon nanotubes and conducting polymers are the right choices of materials for flexible displays. The wearable technology is still in its early stages and requires study in areas such as transparency improvement, material selection, and multi-device integration (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  List of state-of-the-art device technologies (data sourced from ref. 90 and 239–247). 
3.1 Flexible photovoltaics
In recent years, elastic solid-state Si solar cells (SSCs) have been produced by coating silicon on flexible substrates or integrating microscale devices onto flexible substrates. In 2011, foldable photovoltaics were developed by combining microscale Si solar cells into luminous waveguides. Due to their unique architecture, incoming light may be reflected in the bendable array and deflected onto the solar cell, resulting in a 300% power gain with ultrathin, mechanically flexible devices.251 Textile solar harvesting fabrics were reported by Plentz et al. using amorphous Si coating on glass fibers as shown in Fig. 12a, appearing like interwoven knots. Adding an intrinsic semiconductor broadening layer in the depletion region of a P–N junction is one technique to improve efficiency. Fig. 12b shows the structure of the fabricated device with the hydrogenated amorphous Si-layer as the donor and acceptor and an intrinsic layer. The device is constructed with a 300 nm Ti layer in the rear end while light is allowed to pass through a glass fiber fabric. When light is allowed to travel through Ti at the front end, the thickness of the Ti layer is decreased from 300 nm to 10 nm. This decrease in thickness is done to reduce reflection loss and to improve light absorption. The realistic picture of a textile-based substrate is shown in Fig. 12c, in which the flexibility and bendability of the substrate can be visually seen. The PCE for these textile fibers was 2.1% with a flexible device design. Similarly, self-charging battery systems with Si solar cells which can be flexed and attached to dress sleeves were reported previously with the charging of LIBs up to 4.1 V.248 For the high flexibility of devices, polymer substrates such as polyimide, poly(ethylene naphthalate) and poly(ethylene terephthalate) were used along with stainless steel, titanium and glass.252
 Fig. 12  (a) Photos of two textile-based substrates,248 (b) structures of Si solar cells on a fabric substrate,248 (c) flexible solar cells on a textile substrate,248 (d) structure of epitaxially grown CdS/CdTe solar cell packing,249 (e) scale measurement of a flexible solar cell (∼2 cm)249 and (f) fabrication of a graphene:PEDOT:PSS paper based DSSC250 (reproduced with permission248 Copyright 2016, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission249 Copyright 2020, ACS) (reproduced with permission250 Copyright 2017, Elsevier). 
Next to Si, cadmium telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) have demonstrated high scalability and reproducibility.253 CdTe has a high absorption coefficient and acts as a super-thin photon absorber with reduced thickness (∼1 μm).253,254 Reducing the thickness of the substrate is a vital way to formulate flexible electronics, and many researchers have reported improved performance and flexibility for devices with reduced substrate thicknesses.255
However, the significant restriction is the requirement for flat or even surfaces, optimal for thickness reduction. Most wearable electronics come in diverse designs and shapes, requiring multi-shaped irregular or uneven substrates for flexible adherence. Changing the fabrication methods and employing flexible substrates can make it easier to reduce thickness for any form. Design structure and materials influence the flexibility and compactness of devices.256 CdTe solar cells perform best in the superstrate configuration. Protecting the PV components from environmental damage while permitting optimum absorption of the relevant wavelength on the top side of a module can be achieved in the superstrate configuration.257 Wen et al. designed CdS with epitaxially coated CdTe as an absorber for a thin film solar cell with 9.59% PCE.249 The fabrication was done involving two different device structures. CdTe was epitaxially grown on a mica substrate, and CdTe was grown on a buffer layer (CdS) positioned above the mica, as shown in Fig. 12d. The CdTe and CdTe/CdS films were effectively removed from the mica by the interfacial tension of hydrophilic molecules and transferred to the SU-8 substrate with no evident damage and great bendability, as shown in Fig. 12e. The CdS/CdTe solar cells outperform poly-CdS/epi-CdTe solar cells in terms of contact defects, PL lifetimes, and diode performance.
In another work, graphene was incorporated into a flexible thin film solar cell as a hole transport layer, conductive film, supportive electrode, etc. Graphene with PEDOT:PSS interfacial layers helps in achieving direct hole injection and has been reported to aid in achieving a PCE of 33%.258 Lee et al. fabricated a flexible DSSC with a Pt-free ink-based counter electrode containing graphene dots (GDs), PEDOT:PSS, which shows excellent performance after 150 cycling bending tests at meager cost and proves to be superior to a DSSC with a Pt counter electrode.250Fig. 12f shows the GD:PEDOT:PSS electrode based DSSC, which looks flexible and thin and can be rolled like tubes. Fig. 12f also depicts the top and side views of the fabricated DSSC, revealing the moderate transparency of the fabricated electrode. The I–V curves of the fabricated device reveal ∼5% PCE while using GD:PEDOT:PSS, which is three times greater than that of a DSSC with a Pt sputtered electrode.259 Similarly, Wu et al. fabricated a TiO2 coated plastic substrate for a highly flexible DSSC with a PCE of 3.27%.260 Zhou et al. demonstrated a flexible DSSC with a conductive and transparent Pt counter electrode exhibiting decent mechanical stretchability with a PCE of 3.8%, proposed for human finger wearable electronics.261
Park et al. developed dual grating organic solar cells (OSCs) on a stretchable and super thin substrate. The OSCs developed had a significant power output of 11.46 W g−1, an amazing PCE of 10.5%, and glossy exterior edges with ultra-suppleness. The OSCs were also combined with sustainably grown transistors to create self-powered devices placed on the skin, monitoring biometric data with excellent noise interference reduction.262 Chung et al. utilized a planar porous electron transport layer with metal oxide and perovskites serving as an influential part of a flexible perovskite solar cell with a PCE of 20.7%. The porous electron transport structure enhances the crystallinity of perovskites with the decent adjustment of bands suitable for increasing the PCE.263
Xi et al. developed a flexible FASnI (formamidinium iodide layer accompanied by an evaporated SnI2 layer) based solar cell using a poly(ethylene naphthalate) (PEN) ITO flexible substrate with a PCE of 3.12%.264 Flexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with low weight and high performance are ideal for portable power sources, with a broad range of applications in self-powered wearable technology.265 For example, a low-cost PEN substrate deposited with TiOx was used as a flexible PSC, which exhibited accelerated electron transport (PCE 12.2%) and outstanding endurance after multiple bending tests suitable for self-powered smart gadgets.266
Overall, flexible organic solar cells are the best options as they are compatible with integrating multidevices and are sustainable. Yet, OPVs have PCEs mostly around 6 to 8%,239 and this is because of the substrate instability, which reduces the charge collection and mobility of charges. Optimizing the interfacial kinetics and adding buffer layers to match the HOMO–LUMO of the photoactive layers might open up opportunities for commercialization.
3.2 Flexible piezoelectric energy harvesters
Modern research has concentrated on building flexible energy harvesters that primarily employ organic thin films made of piezoelectric materials or integrated piezoceramic particles into polymeric frameworks.269 Due to their elasticity and flexible nature, organic piezoelectric materials have been popularly used. Nevertheless, they exhibit low electromechanical coupling and low permittivity, which make them unsuitable for energy generation, especially PVDF.269 Alternatively, ceramic piezo materials have excellent electromechanical coupling and can be easily processed, but their piezo energy conversion is poor, making them unsuitable.270 Further, ceramic materials incorporated with polymers show reduced performance because of the uneven distribution of particles and agglomeration issues.271 With surface coatings and modifications, the abovementioned issues can be controlled. Apart from these challenges, generating a perfect polarization of ceramic particles is arduous; in particular, the vast difference between the dielectric constants of polymer matrix and ceramics leads to uneven polarization, resulting in fluctuating piezoelectric response. Jiang et al. developed a piezoelectric energy harvester with a lead zirconia titanate (all-inorganic) composite with epoxy, having flexible connecting wires, copper interconnects, and elastomeric encapsulation (Fig. 13a and b). Upon polarization, the fabricated device exhibited excellent energy detection, with conversion operating on even arched surfaces. The observed voltages for the curved surfaces were between 1.06 and 1.13 V. Fig. 13a and b shows the top and front views of a two-sided piezoelectric flexible device, having a bendability of greater than 90°.267 Wang et al. used a lead zirconium titanate (PZT) energy harvester fabricated on 2D mica substrates (Fig. 13c), facilitating a power density of 42.7 mW cm−3 at an OCV of 120 V. The reported device can operate a battery-free biomedical device.268 The measured circuit currents (−150 to 150 μA cm−2) and OCVs (−100 to 100 V) in stretch and compress modes are shown in Fig. 13d.
 Fig. 13  (a) Optical images of a piezoelectric element at various angles,267 (b) optical images of a flexible piezoelectric device under bending, twisting and loading,267 (c) photographs of a stretchable device upon bending and unbending in stretch and compress modes268 and (d) short circuit currents and OCVs measured during stretching and compressive modes268 (reproduced with permission.267 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission.268 Copyright 2018, Elsevier). 
Chopra et al. devised 2D nanosheet-based PZT films on a glass substrate, holding the benefit of reduced processing temperature due to their 2D structures. In general, the processing and growth of PZT, CeO2, SrTiO3, and YSZ require high temperatures (∼800 °C), making the glass substrate break. However, using 2D materials lessens the temperature requirement through their high surface area-to-volume ratios.272 Introducing porosity is another effective way to increase the piezoelectric properties. In one study, the energy harvesting capability of barium titanate (BT) was improved through porous structures, which reduced permittivity and improved energy capturing qualities.273,274 PZT, ZnO, and ZnS, have demonstrated promising piezoelectric capabilities and are widely utilized in flexible sensors. Mansouri et al. developed ZnO/PVDF nanofibers with inherent bendability and electrostatic force buildup generating piezoelectric properties on the β phase of the polymer (PVDF). The preparation strategy supported the formation of flexible piezoelectric composites. Further, ZnO/PVDF fibers were light in weight, exhibited softness and stretchability and could be prepared quickly, which makes them a suitable material for piezoelectric energy harvesters.275
Lead (Pb) is usually recognized as a poisonous substance that may affect both the atmosphere and human health. As a result, Pb has been restricted in its usage in the production of several items. Therefore, scientists have conducted studies on hard to generate lead-free piezoelectric substances, resulting in the development of a slew of novel piezoceramics.276 The most commonly employed lead-free piezoelectric materials are sodium bismuth titanate (Bi0.5Na0.5)TiO3, potassium sodium niobate (K0.5Na0.5)NbO3, and barium zirconium titanates.277 Kang et al. developed a lead-free sodium bismuth titanate processed at 1200 °C, having a high-power producing ability with high dielectric permittivity. By increasing the processing temperature and bismuth content, the piezoelectric properties increased significantly. The highest piezoelectric coefficient for charging was 164 pC N−1, as well as the output potential was 8.95 V, capable of powering wearable electronics.278 Barium zirconia titanate (BZT) Ba(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 and (Ba0.7Ca0.3)TiO3 (BCT) were also studied and were found to demonstrate high piezoelectric properties. Alternatively, NaxK1−xNbO3 had a good electromechanical coupling factor of 0.36 and a piezoelectric coefficient of ∼100 to 400 pC N−1.268,277,279,280 Aluminum nitride and perovskite-type (ABO3) materials have been shown to have large piezoelectric constants. However, weak Curie temperature, complex poling procedures, and low densities are also prevalent problems of these compounds.281–283 Hexagonal boron nitride (HBN), synthesized using mechanochemical exfoliation, molded into an electrode for a piezoelectric generator, which exhibited high piezoelectric response output (9 V) and current (200 nA).284
Organic piezoelectrics have high flexibility and are suitable for medical applications. However, as mentioned, the low electromechanical coupling factor must be addressed. Zhu et al. devised a poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) nanofiber-based piezoelectric energy harvester functioning through sensing and energy capture from human body motion. The electrode with PLLA was prepared via the electrospinning technique with highly ordered and porous characteristics. The authors employed a flexible strain measurement sensor that recorded a strain deformation angle of 28.9 with an OCV of 0.55 V. The energy generated from human joint movement was 19.5 nW. Further, the short circuit current increased on increasing the OCV, suggesting the dual role of the devised model as both an energy harvester and a strain sensor.285 Similarly, Siddiqui et al. designed a nano energy harvester using BaTiO3 and a PVDF-TRFE composite prepared via electrospinning. The device showed a power density of 2.28 μW cm2 and an OCV of 25 V generated through human motion (1000 steps and 600 N body weight) detected using a strain sensor.286 Ran et al. dispersed BiFeO3 nanoparticles in the PDMS framework using spin coating and devised a piezoelectric energy generator with high flexibility. The output voltage and current density recorded were 3 V and 0.12 μA cm2, respectively, powered by human hand impact, which could power a commercial LED.287 Another study performed by Abolhasani et al. revealed high energy generation of porous (45%) poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (PVDF-TRFE), which was 500-fold greater than its nonporous equivalents. The piezopolymer PVDF-TRFE was prepared using the electrospinning technique with a porous structure formed by adding water to the polymer before initiating the spinning process. This excess water creates a demixing effect on its liquid phase promoting porous features.288 One promising strategy apart from introducing porosity is to integrate conductive fillers, which helps in improving the mechanoelectrical conversions of polymer piezoelectric devices. Most commonly, conductive nanofillers such as graphene, carbon black, and CNTs and nonconductive fillers such as ZnO, MgO, and TiO2 were used to improve the transfer of electric charges and aid nucleation and dipole alignment, respectively.289,290
Apart from polymer and ceramic piezoelectric materials, natural and bio-inspired materials have also shown possibilities of their utilization in piezoelectric energy production, especially cellulose, peptides, fibrils, collagen, and glucose molecules, which exhibit non-toxic, eco-friendly piezoelectric energy generation.291 Karan et al. demonstrated an energy conversion efficiency of 62%, capable of powering a smartphone via capacitor charging, using a novel vitamin B2 added PVDF framework facilitating a flexible and organic piezo energy generator. The device achieved an output voltage of 6.15 V and a current of 12.2 μA.292 A naturally available sea sponge inspired BaCaZrTiO3 piezoelectric exhibited an enhanced power density of 25 V. The electromechanical and electrical effectivenesses of the generator were proved to be much better than those of a uniformly distributed conventional generator. Stretching produced a significant tension voltage efficiency with an output voltage of 5 V.293 Cellulose is a commonly used material with good piezoelectric characteristics, biocompatibility, and biodegradability. It has a piezoelectric sensitivity of 25 to 60 pC N−1, which is rather high.294 Alam et al. fabricated a cellulose PDMS composite MWCNT based hybrid generator, producing a voltage of 30 V. The generator works on absorbing the excited charges developed due to human punching.295 Maiti et al. used cellulose from onion shells as a self-poled piezoelectric material and generated a maximum output of 106 V with a conversion efficiency of 61.7%.296 Likewise, various biowastes like coconut shells, vegetable peels and animal feces can be used for designing electrodes and components for piezoelectric energy generators, which could improve their sustainability and enable them to serve as green alternatives.296
Implementation of flexible batteries is the present day need for self-powered integrated devices. However, their specific capacity and charge storage characteristics have to be still studied and standardized for commercialization.
3.3 Flexible pyroelectric energy harvesters
Certain dielectric materials show spontaneous polarization with the change in temperature, resulting in a pyroelectric effect. CoFe2O4 nanostructures have shown significant electrocaloric potential for pyroelectric energy harvesting.297 Lanthanum stannate titanate and lead lanthanum zirconate are highly efficient pyroelectric materials.298,299 Jiang et al. used a triboelectric and pyroelectric combined freestanding generator for thermal energy harvesting. Here the triboelectric device harvests kinetic energy, and the pyroelectric system harvests thermal energy (Fig. 14(i)). The authors conducted the experiments with high velocity video recording for understanding the water droplets’ dynamics. In this study, an industrial cooling tower was used to source hot water droplets generated through the nozzle. The device has six layers, namely, (i) hydrophobic layer, (ii) electrode layer (Ag), (iii) pyroelectric layer, (iv) electrode layer (Ag), (v) PVDF polarized film, and (vi) electrode layer (Ag). The designed hybrid energy generator exhibited a power density of 2.6 μW cm−2, 238% more than that of a single pyroelectric energy harvester (Fig. 14(ii)), capable of powering 28 LED bulbs.300 For sustainable and effective energy generation, Bevione et al. harvested energy from low enthalpy sources (liquids) with the idea of developing a thermal energy extraction method based on the difference in temperature between the hot and cold junctions of a reservoir proficient in both industrial and small scale designs. The authors used barium titanate nanoparticles dispersed colloids and a ferrofluid stabilizer. Initially, the colloid was heated using an external pump and allowed to flow on a polymer pipe, in which titanium electrodes were kept for collecting the electrical charges. The entire device resulted in a Carnot efficiency of 22.4% with a maximum power output of 7 mW m−3 at a thermal difference of 3.9 K between the electrodes.301 Gao et al. detailed PVDF-TRFE pyrogenerators induced by hot water vapor stimulating airflow oscillation, which supplied a power of 220 μW.
 Fig. 14  (i) Schematic illustration of the working of a PENG, based on the pyro- and triboelectric mechanism;300 (ii) OCV and short circuit curves of a hybrid energy generator;300 (iii) fabrication of leaf like Ag nanostructures on a flexible substrate;302 and (iv) photographs, working mechanism, and generated OCV of a TENG–PENG hybrid device302 (reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2018, Elsevier). 
Lee et al. fabricated a flexible pyroelectric generator using graphene and a PDMS–CNT composite owing to its high thermal conductivity.303 Using spin-coated PVDF-TRFE on a PDMS–CNT stretchable platform, mechanically deformable and thermal stimuli were recorded effortlessly, observing human motion.303 The resistance of the individual power capturing system fluctuates, requiring intermittent capacitors and batteries to synchronize different power collectors in a single gadget, in addition to integrating diverse power capturing technologies. Therefore, integrating multiple functionalities in a single device may reduce the cost and improve the performance. You et al. prepared a PVDF matrix integrating CNTs and PEDOT:PSS conductive films using the electrospinning process and devised a hybrid nanogenerator that can record and harvest energy from both arm rotation and walking steps in relation to temperature changes and mechanical deformation. Precisely, the authors employed both piezoelectric and pyroelectric effects in a single device capable of recording multiple sensor responses in the same machine.304 Sun et al. reported a highly flexible triple (piezo/pyro/tribo) energy harvester with highly transparent PVDF, PDMS, and Ag nanowires. The pattern on the substrate was derived from naturally available leaf structures, as shown in Fig. 14(iii). The fabricated device structure and working mechanism are shown in Fig. 14(iii and iv). Initially, two pieces of the PDMS layer were prepared via spin-coating, which acted as a protective and friction layer (molded with sandpaper). The nanowires were then transferred to the PDMS films for obtaining electrospun PVDF, encapsulated with PDMS.302
3.4 Flexible energy storage systems
Supercapacitors (SCs) have lately gained a lot of attention due to their excellent power densities, extended cycle life, and high specific capacitance. Flexible SCs are rapidly being employed in different smart wearables due to their small size, super lightweight, superior reliability, and structural resilience. The electrochemical performance of SCs is primarily determined by the electrode materials’ electrical conductance, porosity, topologies, and contact area. Paper-based foldable SCs are intriguing options for display panels in handheld electronics because they are compact, flexible, thin, transparent, and cheap to manufacture. Carbon nanotube (CNT) composites, recyclable polymer papers, and free-standing graphene sheets were successfully employed in flexible SCs. Foldable substrates with a multilayered porous and defect-free topology allow higher solvent penetration, increased interfacial area, and improved electrode–electrolyte interface reactions.305 For instance, high capacitance and optimal performance were achieved using an activated carbon/CNT/MnO2 flexible composite. Ben et al. fabricated a complete solid state flexible supercapacitor with flexible CNT/PANI electrodes on PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte as shown in Fig. 15a. In between the film electrodes, a separator with the gel electrolyte was kept to avoid short circuiting by electron transfer and to facilitate ion transfer. The device delivered a capacitance of 196.5 mF cm−2 along with excellent capacity retention (71.4% after 5000 cycles as shown in Fig. 15b) and cycling stability due to the high conductance of CNTs, and the pseudocapacitive behavior of PANI and the flexible architecture.305 The curve shown in Fig. 15c reveals the low Warburg impedance, promoting higher electron transfer outside the circuit. Wu et al. designed a low cost, flexible NiCo2O4@CNT thin film electrode through multiple stacking via a vacuum-based technique. Promising electrochemical characteristics (1590 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) with 95% capacity retention were achieved while utilizing the fabricated NiCo2O4@CNT thin film electrode supercapacitor.306 Similarly, a MoS2/CNT solid state electrode for a flexible supercapacitor was reported to have excellent power density and capacity retention at 120° bending angle.307 Likewise, a 3D MnCO3/graphene/CNT flexible electrode delivered a specific capacity of 467.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with 93% capacity retention when used in asymmetric SCs.308
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the fabricated CNT–PANI flexible supercapacitor,305 (b) CV curves,305 (c) Nyquist plots,305 (d) schematic synthesis of Co3O4 PNC nanosheets,309 (e) cycling performances of Co3O4@NC at a current density of 20 mA cm−2,309 (f) schematic of a Zn solid state air battery with a CNT cathode and chemical structure of a single layer polymer (hydrogen – white; carbon – green; nitrogen – blue and cobalt – pink),310 and (g) photographs of a bendable Zn air battery powering LEDs310 (reproduced with permission305 Copyright 2020, Springer) (reproduced with permission309 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission310 Copyright 2008, RSC). 
In recent days, MOFs and their derivatives have been popularly employed as electrode materials and additives for flexible SCs. Liu et al. developed a supercapacitor based on in situ doped Co3O4 nanoparticles combined with a P–N doped carbon framework, which had reduced ion diffusion paths, an increased surface area to volume ratio along with fresh active sites, and reduced defects, favoring fast transfer of charges and a high specific capacitance of 614 mC cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2. The P–N doped Co3O4 carbon framework prepared involving several processes such as etching, phosphorylation, oxidation and pyrolysis as shown in Fig. 15d is the electrode in flexible asymmetric solid-state SCs which exhibit high energy density (69.6 W h kg−1) and high-power density (750 W kg−1) and a superior capacity retention of 96.8% after 1000 cycles (Fig. 15e).309
Due to the synergistic effect of NiCo2O4 with Ni-MOF, an excellent specific capacity of 208 mA h g−1 was achieved, and for flexible asymmetric supercapacitors based on this effect with a power density of 348.9 W kg−1, nearly 80% capacity retention was reported.311 N doped carbon structures exhibited 56.8% capacity retention and an areal capacity of 580 mF cm−2.312 A conductive polypyrrole tube supported 3D MOF was reported to exhibit increased electron transfer and porosity, which enhanced flexibility and electrochemical performance.313 The flexible supercapacitor's performance was found to be improved by vertically positioned electrode materials.314 Recently, sustainable cellulose nanofiber-based MOFs have been used to fabricate flexible supercapacitors with an excellent electron conductivity of 100 S cm−1, 99% capacity retention after 10000 cycles and mechanical properties.315 MXene/graphene layers as electrodes in flexible supercapacitors have shown high volumetric capacitance (586.4 F cm−3) and electrical conductivity (2.9 × 104 S m−1), exhibiting superior electrochemical performance.316
There has recently been a surge of enthusiasm in investigating the use of sustainable fabrication techniques for electrode materials, such as printing technology (commonly referred to as 3D printing).317 Rapid prototyping allows for the creation of complex 3D shapes with a significant level of architectural flexibility and excellent reliability due to minimum production waste. It could aid in producing suitable materials for energy storage that are beyond the effectiveness of traditional fabrication technologies.317 Porous carbon, graphene, MXene, metal oxide and nanocomposite electrode materials have been fabricated using 3D printing and successfully utilized as electrodes in supercapacitors exhibiting high efficiency and device performance.317,318
Battery electrodes are made flexible in the same way as supercapacitors. In particular, LIBs, which are widely used, have been used as flexible rechargeable batteries. Gaikwad et al. utilized a CNT coated membrane with porosity as a flexible LIB electrode. In recent days, Li–air batteries have become more sustainable, especially with flexibility and optimum performance, exhibiting high specific capacity among other air batteries. Song et al. designed a 3D conductive MoS2 deposited flexible carbon cathode using an atomic level deposition process. The Li–O2 battery fabricated with the flexible cathode exhibited a low energy barrier for electron transport, reducing the required activation energy with a working efficiency of ∼83% after 190 cycles.319 Another sustainable approach reported by Chen et al. is to modify naturally available insulating wood to conductive material and use it as an electrode in Li–O2 batteries. The wood was turned into a flexible conductive electrode by coating Ru and CNT nanoparticles after removing active lignin. The fabricated cathode had plentiful pores and undisturbed electron transport through the wood lamina, exhibiting high areal capacity (67.2 mA h cm−2) and excellent mechanical and electrochemical durability.320 Similarly, a Li–CO2 battery was fabricated with a carbon nanotube flexible fiber electrode doped with nitrogen showing a high current density of 1000 mA g−1 and a stability of over 360 cycles.321 Dong et al. developed a dual-material (cobalt and nitrogen) doped carbon nanotube/fiber composite cathode through an in situ deposition process. The fabricated cathode used in Li–O2 batteries showed an excellent discharge capacity of 11512.4 mA h g−1 for 130 cycles under various bending conditions owing to its high flexibility and electrochemical activity.322 The following are the key impediments to flexible LIB applications: limited capacity retention and cycle life during cyclic mechanical deformations. Little research has been done on their high-rate and high-temperature/low-temperature capabilities, controlled manufacturing procedures are still difficult, and the fabrication setup is expensive. Flexible LIBs currently lack adequate gravimetric and volumetric energy densities.
Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) and air batteries have also been made flexible due to their abundance, low cost, and low toxicity. Zeng et al. fabricated a dendrite-free flexible CNT–Zn metal anode with low hysteresis loss, and excellent electrochemical performance with a deep depth of discharge of 28%.323 Carbon aerogel and Ru catalyst decorated with carbon have been found to improve the electrochemical performance of flexible ZIBs.324
A porphyrin/CNT flexible cathode demonstrated high energy efficiency (61%) and stability (even after 200 cycles).310 The flexible design and arrangement of a Zn–air battery is shown in Fig. 15f, with covalent linkages of the porphyrin (∼4 nm) acting as an electrocatalyst coated over the CNTs for the air cathode delivering an OCV of 1.39 V. The charge–discharge capacity of the Zn solid state and liquid battery with the porphyrin/CNTs has a similar curve exemplifying the meager difference in voltages with the highest power density of 22.3 mW cm−2. The bending test shows the flexibility of the device at different angles (0° and 90°; Fig. 15g).310 With actions like bending, the loaded electrode material in flexible batteries typically splits or crumbles off, which causes a sharp loss in electrochemical properties. In order to further enhance the capacity of flexible zinc batteries while increasing the mechanical performance of electrodes, it is thus important to develop the optimal material structure or develop the manufacturing technique of loading such that the electrode material remains stiffer upon bending or stretching.
4. Integration of low carbon energy powering systems in healthcare
Fiber-made devices have sparked a lot of scholarly and technical interest because they integrate the benefits of minimal weight and size with exceptional elasticity and sleekness. Bendable strain sensors are critical parts of smart wearables since they efficiently reduce the effects of dynamic imbalance between the device and delicate human muscle. With a photovoltaic capturing device, a Zn–MnO2 stretchable battery, and a flexible strain sensor, Zhang et al. built an entirely solar-powered multifunctional, all-in-one integrated sensing system with coaxial fibers. Zn nanosheets, MnO2 and PEDOT were deposited on an elastic carbon nanofiber electrode via an electrodeposition technique. ZnCl2, LiCl, and PVA were mixed and used as gel electrolyte for the stretchable battery. Polybutylene terephthalate and ZnO nanowires were deposited on a Mn substrate held in a solution of zinc acetate, above which a layer of CuI was coated as a sensitizer and Au wire as a counter electrode for a flexible solar cell. The robust construction of the integrated system and the stretchable sensor based on the piezoresistive effect are responsible for the detection system's broad distribution responses to low bandwidth and high frequency forces (0.19 and 21 Hz respectively).325
4.1 Medical devices and implants
In general, implanted medical equipment consumes electricity in the milliwatt to microwatt range. The required voltage is between 2 and 3 volts.326 PV cells can generate 10 to 200 μW mm−2 power, which is sufficient for an implanted device supply. Optimizing the supply power in an implanted device is vital for tuning the device functionality. There are two types of techniques to optimize power utilization and supply in implanted device prototypes, namely,
• Active energy control: reducing the amount of energy consumed by system components
• Power effectual signaling: increasing the intensity of power production
Minimizing power consumption and waste can extend the life of integrated biomedical devices. For example, it has been demonstrated that decreasing the power needs of an implanted device by 2 mW increases the system's lifespan from 72 hours to a decade.326 Reduced energy-consuming components enable increased system functionality, but increasing the number of system components raises power needs. The purpose of the application determines the energy-harvesting technology to be used in this circumstance. As a result, before settling on an energy extractor, it's critical to research the specifications and output requirements of various implants and equipment.

4.1.1 Pacemakers. 
Approximately 300000 individuals have endured ventricular dysrhythmias and cardiovascular disease, thanks to pacemakers, which were originally created in the 1960s.327 The pacemaker generally consumes microwatts of energy and requires minimal production techniques and a sluggish encoding conversion rate.327 Certain pacemakers need extensive cardiac defibrillation to achieve particular parameters, and this ventricular fibrillation must be induced by a strong and intense electrical shock. Pacemakers and microchips were the major prostheses, and they remain the most popular worldwide. Different implants have been developed to deal with a range of conditions. Nonetheless, recharging the batteries in implanted biomedical equipment remains a challenge.328,329 Implant batteries must be replaced every five years through clinical procedures. Surgically implanted solar cell devices are designed to provide a solution to this problem. The photovoltaics utilized must meet biocompatibility standards; this has been done by using biodegradable active solar cell components or encapsulating photovoltaic cells in biopolymers such as polyethylene, polystyrene, and polycaprolactone. Implantable photovoltaic cells, which produce energy by collecting daylight passed via the skin, have lately been demonstrated as a long-term energy supply for wearable healthcare implants in the body.330,331 Riaz et al. designed a solar cell that can collect photons from sunlight via human tissues. The fabricated device exhibited a PCE of 17% for silicon solar cells and 31% for GaAs solar cells. Further, the authors suggested additional device encapsulation with biodegradable polymers for enhanced photon capture, placed on the human arm with the integrated structure of solar cells, optical fibers, a PCB, a housing, and a detector as shown in Fig. 16(i).332 The device was then tied on the human arm as shown in Fig. 16(ii). The response current for the implanted arrays covered by skin was slightly higher than PV arrays covered by optical fibers which can be clearly seen in Fig. 16(ii). Thus, the absorption efficiency of photons remains similar for implanted PV devices. In a similar study, the performance of dermis implanted PV arrays was tested for 59 human cadavers. The findings revealed that the depth and color tone of the dermis influences the energy generated. As shown in Fig. 16(iii), light first passes through the epidermis followed by the dermis layer. The PV device was implanted in the dermis layer (Fig. 16(iii)), and it was observed that different color tones had different energy outputs. After analyzing the 59 human cadavers, the energy output was reported to be higher for fairer and thinner skin. The increased energy output is adequate to run advanced electronic prostheses such as stents, and pacemakers, up to a few microwatts.333
 Fig. 16  (i) Measurement device: (1) solar cells, (2) optical fibers, (3) PCB, (4) housing and (5) detector fixed on the upper arm;332 (ii) wavelength dependent short circuit current, upon a coverage of 2.3 mm skin;332 (iii) light transmission (∼32 μm epidermis) and signaling human implanted device, absorbing light;333 and (iv) anatomical positioning of the device, chR2 heart placed at the epicardial spot of a mouse334 (reproduced with permission332 Copyright 2017, Springer) (reproduced with permission332 Copyright 2017, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission334 2019, Springer Nature). 
Battery packs with lower power capacity are not suitable for today's vascular pacemakers. When the implant's battery life ends, it must be replaced. The cost of this therapeutic re-intervention is expensive, and there is a risk of negative repercussions. It is ideal to have a pacemaker that does not require interventions owing to insufficient energy for battery charging. Perhaps the greatest solution for long-lasting pacemakers has been solar-powered batteries with no interventions or harnessing energy from human body part motions. Recently, researchers used animal models to test the feasibility of solar powered pacemakers. Mouse and pig skins have frequently been substituted for living tissue in endurance tests. Song et al. attempted reported the use of subcutaneous photovoltaic cells placed in human tissue.335 They used implantable (GaAs/GaInP) embedded in a biodegradable polymeric substance which had an energy output of 9.05 mW cm−2 over normal skin specimens. They fabricated a stretchable and wearable version of the extremely slim GaInP/GaAs solar array laminated on a polyimide sheet and encased with a biodegradable organic molecule that absorbs photons passed via the epidermis and creates electricity. The density and tonality of skin had a comparable effect on the solar cell's energy production. Lu et al. developed a biodegradable solar cell with a lifetime of 4 months placed inside a rat, which could produce a power of 60 milliwatts, equal to powering a LED.336 Gutruf et al. developed battery-less multifunctional and permanently implantable pacemakers that are considered suitable for usage in animal models like mice. The tools allow continuous pacing of actively mobile mice in configurations suitable with CT and MRI mapping despite physical or operational deterioration (Fig. 16(iv)). Optical defibrillation of the ChR2 parading myocardium was performed apart from pacing by lighting a portion of the heart ventricle with a light stimulus, as shown in Fig. 16(iv).334
Self-powered pacemakers are less commercially developed due to the following technical constraints; most electromagnetic gadgets emit waves that can disrupt the operation of self-powered pacemakers. The magnet metal in MP3 players and earphones can interfere with the pacemakers. Data transmitted from cell phone antennas, on the other hand, provide only a little risk to patients. Because a strong magnetic field can interfere with the operation of an energy harvester and pacemaker, patients should remain at least six feet away from strong magnetic-field equipment. This seriously limits the commercialization of self-powered pacemakers. Further, self-powered implants must be smaller and provide higher energy density to be suitable for minimally invasive insertion. Using nanosensors to create a built-in magnetic resistance inside the implanted device and upscaling miniaturized energy conversion and storage systems may help overcome technological limits.


4.1.2 Retinal stimulators. 
Many scientific studies have reported the use of retinal implants to cure a damaged retina in people with vision problems. Recently, porous silicon-based solar cells were employed in the development of an artificial retina based on a photodiode produced on a silicon chip, allowing for the replacement of quasi-innate sensory receptors with passive components if the ocular nerve's ability to translate the pulse was not lost. The electrical signals from the diode pass via the triggering conductors and activate the ocular nerve endings. The prosthetic retina's mechanism makes no use of external energy sources. Solitary diode chips can generate up to 0.5 V under medically appropriate illumination. Higher voltages, on the other hand, can be securely operated when utilized under physiological conditions. The implant was made using 70 and 140 mm pixel stimulators with radii of 40 and 80 mm respectively.337 Similarly, Yang et al. developed a solar cell with perovskite memristors constituting a simulated retinal vision system. The self-powered bio-inspired retinal system was designed to integrate the silicon solar cell and halide perovskites forming tightly packed neural networks and rendering wider response from the near-infrared to visible region.338 Light rays of varying intensities and wavelengths were made to fall on the perovskite, and subsequently, with the help of neuromorphic computing, the artificial retina system was tested. As shown in Fig. 17(i) the system consists of neurons in the shape of rods in the retina, visual nerves, and an optic center capable of collecting and transmitting light signals, which get converted into electrical pulses. Through electron–ion changeover, the transformed electrical signals were fed into retinal cells. In the retina, the cortex processes the optoelectric signals and identifies them with the recognition center. The perovskite resistor analyses the history, brain characteristics and works based on it, enabling stimulus to nerves in the brain with frequency and amplitude adjustment.338 The image processing capacity with 5 pixel input and matching output (Fig. 17(ii)) shows the reliability and accuracy of the designed artificial neural networks (ANNs) through computational simulation. Fig. 17(iii) shows the matching 3D fitted current-intensity image and noise-removed output of the artificial optic system's signal processing,338 shown on the right side of Fig. 17(iii). Ansaripour et al. designed a CMOS energy harvester for retinal prostheses and observed an energy consumption of 53 pW per pixel and an energy harvest of 3.8 nW. The designed bitmap structure generates high power capacity in its harvesting state utilizing p–n junctions.339
 Fig. 17  (i) Design of a self-powered artificial retina system, (ii) illustration of self-powered perception and ANNs for image recognition, and (iii and iv) the perception system's input and output without image pre-processing338 (reproduced with permission338 Copyright 2020, Elsevier). 
Ultrasound energy harvesters were also used for the diagnosis and treatment of retinal malfunction. A maximum ultrasound intensity of 720 mW cm−2 can be used for human diagnostic aspects, making an ultrasonic energy harvester a potential method.340 Jiang et al. employed the piezoelectric effect for conversion of acoustic to electrical energy. The group fabricated a flexible electrode of size 100 μm using a stainless steel needle covered with copper wire forming a helical structure. The wire was then compressed into a plane shape using ingot. Later, the silver paste was used to bond the copper wire to the acoustic conversion device, followed by temperature treatment to form the flexible device. A potential gets generated through mechanical deformation because of the piezoelectric effect under intensive ultrasonic conditions analyzed with the help of software.340 Pillars in a piezo material may generate charge dipoles. The results observed in the study revealed a resonant frequency of 6 MHz, an acoustic impedance of ∼11.6 MRayl), and a voltage coefficient of 0.038 Vm N−1 with low permittivity, improving the piezo sensing to ultrasound.340 Zhang et al. demonstrated a mechanical vibration to energy transformer piezo model suitable for low-frequency pulsations. Damper and suspension systems along with a rope-based model connecting low frequency and high-frequency beams were numerically simulated. It was further observed that the piezo functionality might be easily altered by merely modifying the cable width or rigidity.341 The future discovery of novel piezoelectric materials and flexible substrates, as well as Artificial Intelligence, may lead to the development of new technologies for self-powered retinal implants. Overall, the chip's location influences the electrodes and retinal impact capabilities. It is a scientific problem to determine whether to position the device on or under the retina, and each strategy has trade-offs that must be considered. The most advanced design for self-powered retinal implants has yet to be established, and further real-time research is required to optimise the implant material, size, durability, and biodegradability with no adverse health effects.


4.1.3 Ear and hearing aids. 
Hearing loss interferes with verbal, emotional, and cognitive development. Though the cost of electronics has reduced dramatically, the cost of a hearing aid has steadily climbed to the point that it is now prohibitively costly for the majority of individuals who suffer from hearing loss due to ageing. Houguang et al. designed a stacked piezoelectric transducer attached to the body using a coupling rod, as shown in Fig. 18a. In reaction to the elastic deformation of its piezoelectric stacking, the device activates the ossicular (a small bone) sequence. A laboratory test of the transducer model and a temporal bone study were undertaken to determine its suitability for auditory impairment restoration. The novel transducer has a wide frequency spectrum, according to laboratory testing data. Furthermore, the device was discovered to exhibit negligible net harmonic aberration (less than 0.75%) and a short release period at all frequencies. The temporal bone investigation also shows that the transducer can generate enough signals to substitute for acute hearing impairment, particularly at extreme harmonics. The transducer uses 0.49 mW power to create a 100 dB analogous audio stress at 1 kHz, which is minimal for the device to be used for middle ear hearing aids.342 In another study, Shin et al. developed a piezoelectric transducer using silicone polymer, copper bellows, a tungsten cylinder, and a titanium housing layer. The piezoelectric device was placed near the cochlea as schematically shown in Fig. 18b. Vibratory reverberation was formed by the interplay of the bellows, polymer, and cylinder, which was mounted to the housing made of titanium. The vibrational assessment was used to determine the system output characteristics acceptable for correction of profound hearing damage using finite element analysis. The transducer created a mean deflection of 219.6 nm, with a frequency response of 2.3 kHz. The output response was matched to those of former studies to determine the output qualities. The deflection was 30 nm greater than that of the other transducer powered by the equivalent voltage (6 V), and zero anti-resonance was observed. As a result, the novel transducer acted as a cochlear hearing aid, boosting speech perception and treating high-frequency deafness relatively in a better way.343
 Fig. 18  (a) Piezoelectric transducer with an implantable middle ear hearing device,342 (b) diagram of a piezoelectric transducer installed in the round window,343 and (c and d) prototype of the annular accelerometer and MEMS sensor implanted at the umbo of the ear344 (reproduced with permission342 Copyright 2017, MDPI) (reproduced with permission343 Copyright 2021, MDPI) (reproduced with permission344 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature). 
Peripheral parts are a key drawback of today's cochlear hearing devices since they cause soreness and annoyance. To overcome such limitations, completely implanted cochlear implants have been explored recently; however, creating internal sensing elements has remained tricky. Gesing et al. presented a MEMS piezoelectric device, which was tiny in size, allowed fewer noise disruptions, consumed limited power, and worked in every bandwidth connected to the small bones in the ears. Using the finite element (FE) approach, various configurations of MEMS piezoelectrics were studied and optimized for maximum voltage responsiveness. A 2 × 2 mm2 annular structure with a 500 nm wide AlN film was chosen for the optimum architecture. The middle ear FE analysis and the design was examined, with a background noise spanning from 600 Hz to 10000 Hz. These findings provide an excellent validation for the use of MEMS sensors as implanted ear aids, the prototype of which shown in Fig. 18c and d.344 The transducer consists of inner and outer bonding pads and grounding pads with a 2 × 2 × 0.4 mm3 sensor placed below the incus (Fig. 18c and d). An acoustical core–shell reverberation energy generator based on the tribo-piezoelectric effect was developed for the use of a prosthetic hearing implant. The sonic harvester featuring innovative BaTiO3 core and PVDF-TRFE shell designs manifested outstanding piezo-triboelectric capabilities with an open-circuit voltage of 15.24 V. It was observed that the core particles resonated relative to acoustic waves, hopping towards the shell structure generating tribo- and piezo stimuli. Interestingly, the sonic energy extractor demonstrated excellent acoustic capturing capability and responsiveness, and can possibly be used for prosthetic cochlear hearing aids.345 Specific places on the ear operate as excitation areas for better piezoelectric energy harvesting and improved transducer response. Round window membranes and stapes in ears have recently been discovered to operate as triggering spots for improved piezoelectric responses. However, the stimulation's direction and strength must be determined.346 Because of its roughly circular form, the stapes can be equated to a fork. The posterior and anterior crura are two main branches that carry acoustic signals to the flattened bottom of the femur. The waves then go to the middle ear, where they are then transformed into neuronal impulses and transmitted to the cerebral cortex via the cochlea. Solar powered hearing aids are available commercially, and recent investigators focus on improving their efficiency and insulation, yet the domain needs more exploration and understandings.346


4.1.4 Dental implants. 
Plaque, dental cavities, oral malignancies, dental trauma, gum infection, and peri-implantitis are frequent soft and hard tissue problems. Photo-biomodulation (PBM) treatment, which may cure and renew damaged tissue, has recently gained popularity in orthodontics. However, using traditionally powered gadgets consumes more electricity and is less environmentally friendly. An artificial oral dental implant device powered by kinetic energy was presented as an itinerant PBM therapy technique. The therapy allows for in vivo light transmission by utilizing a created piezoelectric tooth cap, accompanying electronics, and small photodiodes that are powered by active mouth motions. Considering treatment guidelines, the prototype also provides excellent biomechanical resilience. This work established competent PBM treatment by employing basic adult gingival keratinocytes as a prototype recipient species and Pseudomonas aeruginosa lipopolysaccharides as a model inflammatory stimulus. The implant infection control works without patients’ reliance, ensuring long-term oral treatment.347 Lately, a skeletal window was created using a piezotransducer device positioned on the inferior alveolar nerve duct after a full mucoperiosteal overlay was grown. The clamp implant was fitted after four months, ensuring the recovery of the chewing ability.348
Despite the decades of development, oral composite repairs have a limited therapeutic use. Dental biofilms form on connected surfaces, generating acids and chemicals that take minerals from muscle tissues and destroy the matrix. Carolina et al. filled oral gaps with BaTiO3 biocompatible piezoelectric nanofillers as shown in Fig. 19a, which exhibit antimicrobial properties and increase dental mineral integrity. The production of dense and rigid calcium phosphate crystal layers dramatically decreased the plaque, biofilm, and germs. The above-proposed novel design for assessing the adhesion of filler composite surfaces exposed to concurrent bacterial infections and repetitive wear and tear has commercial viability.348 In another study, Pecheva and colleagues employed a piezoelectric dental scaler that uses ultrasonic pulses to operate. Scanning optical vibrometry was used to evaluate the resonance features of the piezoelectric tips in or beneath the moving water, in a water reservoir, and exposed to stresses to replicate therapeutic circumstances. The piezoelectric tips were then utilized to break a plaque prototype, which was created employing non-pathogenic bacteria. The piezoelectric tip's vibration frequency differs as shown in Fig. 19b, was determined mainly by its form, architecture and produced energy. Because the charges reduce resonance on increasing the volume of water, the piezoelectric force impacts tip effectiveness.349
 Fig. 19  (a) Photographs of implanting piezoelectric nanofillers replacing teeth,348 (b) piezo tip positions, where free end kept near tooth and tip vibrations in air, flow water and stagnant water,349 (c) design of an accelerometer on the calvarium and (d) bone trephination exposing the apex of the right maxillary for piezoelectric endodontic surgery350 (reproduced with permission348 Copyright 2019, Wolters Kluwer Health) (reproduced with permission349 Copyright 2016, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission350 Copyright 2015, Frontiers). 
Piezoelectric bone surgery requires more minor operating frequencies and power for slicing and removing ruptures. For carving and clearing the breaches, piezoelectric tooth therapy requires lower working frequencies and voltages. Compared to conventional instruments (5 to 15 W), current piezoelectric dental operation tools have a higher power (up to 90 W). In rigid bone, greater power has been noted to improve bone repair and restoration effectiveness with easy operation. Reduced inflammation, bleeding, and trauma were also observed while using piezoelectric surgical tools. Piezoelectric devices cause minimal hemorrhage during surgical interventions; bleeding was reduced by ∼25 to 30%.351 Vascular destruction was minimized due to improved vision and reduced impact on tendons. Additionally, the bubble effect accompanied by acoustic equipment has been proven to cause the operative site's pertinent lack of bleeding. Piezoelectric surgeries also offer better precision and user-friendliness and reduce the time of treatment with predesigned accelerometers, shown in Fig. 19c and surgical photographs (Fig. 19d).350,352
Solar cells might be employed to power customized toothbrushes that decompose plaque and bacteria. Bhusari et al. examined the working principle of photovoltaic toothbrushes. They found that the brushes included an n-type TiO2, in which the electrons get excited upon exposure to sunlight, leading to a metal ion reduction process.353 Hoover et al. reported that solar brushes significantly reduced plaques on the mandibular edges of all dentitions efficiently than regular brushes.354


4.1.5 Drug delivery. 
The usage of flexible, intelligent nanomaterials is experiencing a paradigmatic change in the realm of autonomous robotic structures. Delicate smart component inclusion in submicron and advanced robot-assisted technologies enables complex locomotor techniques and essentially mimics the functionality of natural processes. Because of the exact motility of nanorobotic systems, selective targeting, and real-time mechanism controlled by exogenous conditions such as pH, humidity, pressure, and temperature, they act as potential drug carriers. Nanorobots that respond to magnetic signals have been extensively studied for medication and drug administration purposes.354 Three distinct forms of nanoscale locomotion can be created by adjusting magnetism from incredibly minimal to the intense range, encompassing rotation and gliding movements. Mushtaq et al. employed advanced robotic systems to administer doxorubicin medication into PVDF-TRFE and polydopamine matrix using lithography technique. The elastic spine acted as a propeller while spinning magnetic forces facilitated the robot's transverse mobility. Doxorubicin was loaded onto the PVDF-TRFE surface via adsorption. Response to piezoelectric stimuli can be seen on the polymeric nanostructures, that can develop a zigzag movement with respect to the magnetism of the nanowire head by altering the intensity and amplitude of the induced field, resulting in an uninterrupted polarization and depolarization sequence. Pulsed delivery of drugs was achieved at the specified location by modifying electromagnetic settings in the drug delivery phase, which resulted in electrostatic dissociation.358
As electrical contact risks have been lowered with precision treatments, wireless control and medication delivery have become common. Marwan et al. designed a wireless piezoelectric controller stimulated by an inductor–capacitor circuit for delivering the drug based on magnetization variations. The electrical circuit was created by connecting the resistor and capacitor parallel to the piezoelectric actuator, which was then triggered using a 10 kHz resonant frequency magnetic field. Because the operational fluid is maintained in a reservoir and flows automatically with the pressure difference (Fig. 20(i and ii)), the unique configuration eliminates the need for pumps. The valving function was first evaluated in air and subsequently in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution to simulate the medication delivery dynamics in real intercellular bodily fluids. Despite the maximal percentage errors of 3.11 and 4.39, correspondingly, the apparatus was able to attain the required flow velocity values between 160 and 320 μL per day in the air and PBS solvent, respectively.355
 Fig. 20  (i) Illustration of a device with microscale parts,355 (ii) programmed release of PBS fluid at defined time intervals,355 (iii) schematic of a self-powered transdermal drug delivery system356 and (iv) in vivo treatment of acute ischemic stroke using hydrogen powered microswimmer propulsion systems357 (reproduced with permission355 Copyright 2018, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission356 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission357 Copyright 2021, Wiley). 
Qingling et al. designed a TENG integrated drug delivery model (Fig. 20(iii)). A self-powered management circuitry was used to initiate the non-invasive therapy for improved medication administration efficacy and to activate the electrically-responsive drug vehicle for regulated dosage delivery. A medication dose of 3 g cm−2 can be released by mechanically spinning the TENG for 1.5 minutes at 40 rpm. Additionally, the device has accomplished a customizable release velocity for transdermal delivery: the pace may be adjusted between 0.05 and 0.25 g cm−2 every minute by adjusting the TENG recharge time or the voltage control circuit's impedance. Ex situ tests on pig skin also show that a TENG-based medication delivery technique outperforms traditional dermal patches by 50%.356,357 Liu et al. designed a self-powered salicylic acid release system using a TENG in Na2SO4 aqueous solution. The self-powered system is projected to have promising efficiency in healthcare devices, drug-controlled delivery, and self-powered treatment due to its flexible architecture, and adjustable and sustainable strategy.359
Because of their small size, configurability, and adaptability, biodegradable microswimmers have a lot of opportunities for noninvasive, targeted treatments. One solution is to use hydrogen-powered microswimmer systems which may be made for accurate and proactive treatment of severe ischemic attacks. For instance, Shuanghu et al. devised a hydrogen (H2) producible system with a magnesium (Mg) microswimmer, which propels the movement and acts as the primary substance in scavenging ROS and swelling.357


4.1.6 Tissue regeneration. 
Electrically active scaffolds are especially useful in tissue regenerating architecture where electrical stimulation is required for muscle rehabilitation, such as neural tissue homeostasis, and bone and joint restoration. The direct piezoelectric effect could be seen in bone, collagen, tooth, ligament, and keratin components. Collagen protein is found in fibrocartilage, and it is accountable for its piezoelectric characteristics. Collagen may create electrical stimulation in reaction to physiological stresses because of its piezo characteristics. These impulses were transferred to the thyristors and voltage regulators in the cell surface via the extracellular matrix (ECM). The adoption of electrically active scaffolds, which imitate the piezoelectric performance of biological components, might be a good way of fixing and regenerating musculoskeletal tissues, including bones. BaTiO3, PVDF-TRFE, polyamides, cellulose, and PLA are commonly used piezoelectric materials.360 Martins et al. developed a PVDF skeletal scaffold and applied a piezoelectric stimulus, which enhanced cell adhesion and promoted the proliferation of cells.360 The osteoblastic development of human stem cells was aided by the piezoelectric PVDF superstructure.361 Using the reverse piezoelectric phenomenon, a new ultrasonic actuator device developed on PVDF has been shown to successfully induce osteoformation at the muscle interfaces.362,363
For generating angiogenic revascularization in ischemic muscle, Gun-Jae et al. used electrical stimulation from a wearable PV cell. In vitro studies revealed that electrical stimuli increased the production of vascular endothelial proliferation agents and promoted the migration of myoblasts, capillary progenitors, and cells.364 Gao et al. developed a solar cell based on reduced graphene oxide and bioinspired polydopamine, which was used for photothermal healing of wounds. By lowering the chronic inflammation and boosting re-epithelialization, vasculature, and keratinization, localized temperature increase considerably enhances the repair of wounds.365 MCNT–TiO2 nanocomposites show excellent photoconversion efficiency when used in solar cells and are suitable for biomedical treatments.366

4.2 Health monitoring and management
Wrist bands and smart watches are becoming increasingly popular as a result of their multifunctionality and built-in health tracking system. Zhao et al. in 2021 developed a self-powered wrist band using perovskite solar cell integrated ZIBs. They used carbon cloth as a flexible substrate and defective MnO2 as electrode material for ZIBs. Treatment with butyllithium resulted in oxygen vacancies and alterations in the interlayer distance, resulting in a flaw in the MnO2 structure. The XPS peaks confirm the presence of oxygen vacancies through the high intensity peak at 531 eV. Further, the flexible Zn batteries were in series connected to the outer surfaces of six flexible perovskite solar cells with an active area of 0.07 cm2 and a PCE of 12.48%. The voltage response of indoor biking and outdoor running as shown in Fig. 21(i and ii) was adequate to power smart watches.22 Kartsch et al. developed a solar harvesting wrist band, which can recognize and monitor hand gesture. The designed device with a printed circuit board (PCB) and a small solar panel exhibited a precision of 94.02% recognizing five hand signs.367 Further the battery achieved 500 working hours with powering to 200 mA h. Zhao et al. developed a sweat glucose monitoring sensor, which was totally self-powered by a photovoltaic system and integrated with Zn–MnO2 battery storage. The batteries were made flexible through hydrothermal deposition of MnO2 and Zn onto porous N doped carbon foam. The high porosity and conductance of the flexible carbon foam enhance the ion migration within the electrolyte owing to its superior electrochemical activity.368 A BiFeO3 smartwatch was developed using a solitary PV device that delivered a high voltage of 1.71 V at a luminosity of 48.7 mW cm−2. The increased output power is due to alterations in photogenerated carrier transportation and distribution.369
 Fig. 21  (i) The left side shows the charge and discharge curves of a smart bracelet in outdoor and indoor running, and the right side shows the digital photographs of a person wearing a watch during outdoor and inner running;22 (ii) digital photographs of a self-powered bracelet measuring heart beat;22 (iii) schematic of a self-powered human hand motion recognizer (man–machine interface control system);370 (iv) fabricated nano flexible sensor based hand bandage, which could sense, record and transmit data;370 (v) heartbeat wave acceleration and pulse controller spectrum powering wearables;371 (vi) schematic of a PENG pacemaker prototype with the PDMS/PVDF-TRFE/PDMS device architecture372 and (vii) (a) schematic of an in vivo self-powered flexible harvester attached to the porcine heart and data transmitted via a wireless transmitter, (b) photographs of the flexible harvester bent by the human hand and (c) photograph of the device fixed into the porcine heart between the ventricular and articular apices373 (reproduced with permission22 Copyright 2021, ACS) (reproduced with permission370 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission371 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission372 Copyright 2017, Wiley). 
For automation and motion tracking purposes, flexible sensing devices are the most critical parts of dynamic machine–human functionality. The obtained pressing and bending sensitivity with a reaction period of 16 ms with a responsiveness of 76 ms was 0.33 V kPa−1. Using the proposed sensor, a self-powered actual gesture monitoring system was effectively established by remotely transferring the pulse signal from the fingers to the palm of the robots,370 as shown in Fig. 21(iii and iv).
Cardiovascular defibrillators use batteries to repair abnormal heartbeats and generate electric currents to assist the heart function. They typically last 4 to 8 years until the batteries need to be replaced, resulting in increased mortality in patients due to bleeding, swelling, sickness, lengthy recovery periods, and high medical facility costs. Ansari et al. synchronized the heartbeat pulses to power a piezoelectric pacemaker with a fan fold architecture of 2 × 0.5 × 1 cm3 size. The specific geometry facilitated the low-frequency identification and autonomous powering of the device, with the observed spectrum of heart beat recognition shown in Fig. 21(v).371 Porous thin film wrapped structures for piezoelectric energy harvesting were devised to create inbuilt cardiac pacemakers eliminating the intervention of surgical tools, blood loss, and inflammation (Fig. 21(vi)).372 A few months back, a self-powered cardiac sensor for sensing pulse variations worked on converting motion from inhalation and exhalation of air into electric power in the porcine heart (Fig. 21(vii)). The device used PZT based Mg–Nb oxides as piezoelectric materials, and an OCV of 1.78 V was observed, equivalent to powering a light bulb.373
Inflation and hypertension are the leading drivers of serious illnesses such as neurological disease, atherosclerosis, visual impairment, kidney dysfunction, and cardiovascular disorder. In situ blood pressure monitors might aid in diagnosing various disorders and evaluating pharmacological medication feasibility. Zhang et al. developed a piezoelectric implantable blood pressure monitoring device based on PVDF. The device uses the flow pressure of blood to harvest energy for its powering. The maximum output voltage and generated power were 10.3 V and 681 nW respectively. The device's functionality was tested in situ by encircling it around the outside of a pig model's aorta. The highest generated voltage was 1.5 V at a blood pressure of 160/105 mmHg.374
Batteries fuel neurostimulators with a finite lifespan due to their high operating energy necessitating battery substitution or replacement operations. Hwang et al. fabricated an indium lead-based piezoelectric material for stimulating brain cells and cortex treatment. The device could harness the power from mice's biomechanical motions used. The maximum output recorded was 11 V at 0.57 mA current powered through the piezoelectric device relying on mice's forelimb movements.375 Self-powered wearables and healthcare devices can assist humans with less time consumption and advancement (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Schematic of human worn wearables, which can be powered using low carbon energy harvesters. 
5. Integration of low carbon energy powering systems in textiles and smart wearables
Sensors, transmitters, display panels, converters, and batteries are coupled in textile-wearing systems to monitor body parameters as well as environmental variables at the same time. Textile sensors incorporated into garments may detect and analyze global positioning systems (GPS), geographic data, and travel velocity. The need for a stable and easy-to-use electrical source to power these garments is vital, and there has been rapid development. Recently, researchers have investigated the integration of multilayer electrical components into textile fabrics and the creation of conductive layer coated textiles. The smart textile classes listed below depend on the energy sources used to power them.
Several publications on self-powered textiles have been published in recent years. Solar-powered textiles are covered in most articles (856), yet biochemically powered fabrics have the fewest (23), Fig. 23a. Polymer–CNT or polymer–metal oxide composites were commonly employed in most of these papers, followed by PVDF, PVP, and PDMS, Fig. 23b. The active electrode materials utilized in self-powered textiles from 2015 to 2022 are shown in Fig. 23c. In electronic research, graphene and MXenes are thriving. Electrospinning is one of the fiber production methods that has been utilized popularly to create smart textiles. Future advancements in fiber topologies such as layered, intertwined, and crisscross fibers may aid in the modification of device attributes, Fig. 23d.
 Fig. 23  (a) Publication count from 2015 to 2022 based on self-powering fabrics, (b) commonly used polymers for self-powered fabrics, (c) active electrode materials with polymers researched for smart fabrics from 2015 to 2022 and (d) perspective roadmap for future development. 
5.1 Fabrics based on mechanoelectrical power generation
Piezoelectric materials for textile power must be both flexible and conductive. Because of their lightweight, flexibility, and elasticity, polymers are commonly employed as substrates. Dimitroula et al. synthesized MWCNT and polypropylene composite fibers for converting mechanical stimuli to electric power. Initially, the output power was very low for single yarn; however, textile garments made of thousands of yarns together might have high power for powering wearable sensors.376 PDMS–CNT or PDMS–MXene or graphene-based textile films of 20 × 25 cm2 have shown high triboelectric and piezoelectric conversion with a maximum output of 2.22 W m−2, capable of powering 150 LEDs.377 The expansion and contraction of musculoskeletal muscles, which have a complex spiral design and the ECM, are liable for each mobility function and pressure load of lifeforms. Exterior pressure transmission and consistent shear forces on the muscular components are thought to be enabled by fibrous connective tissue winding along with the helix coils of muscle cells. The same idea was applied by Yuanjie et al. They designed electrospun barium titanate (BT)/PVDF nanofibers dispersed in polydopamine (PDA), forming a highly stable structure with excellent mechanical strength. The amine and –OH groups of PDA, which resembles connective tissue, react with BT via van der Waals force, improving the adhesion (Fig. 24(i)). Here, some BT particles do not part in the interaction and remain inert for electrical coupling. For making efficient mechanoelectrical conversion and covering the BT protrusions, PDA is coated on the BT particles, and PDA-BT fibers are coated with Al fibers. The fabricated structure acts as a flexible design, as shown in Fig. 24(i). The analysis revealed that 3.02% PDA addition boosts the piezoelectric performance up to 47%. A pressure sensor with a sensitivity of 3.95 V N−1 and exceptional endurance (only 3% loss over 7400 cycles) was developed.378
 Fig. 24  (i) Design and functionalities of a human muscle fiber inspired PENG embedded on a textile,378 (ii) schematic of a localized strain piezoelectric sensor and the device model on the human body with its application of energy harvesting based on human motion,379 (iii) structure and schematic of a PENG device with a ZnO nanorod active layer,380 (iv) schematic of the sample electrode preparation and poling procedure for the piezoelectric analysis,381 and (v) self-powered piezoelectric sensors embedded on textiles for monitoring the physiological state and running speed of athletes382 (reproduced with permission378 Copyright 2021, Wiley) (reproduced with permission379 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission380 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission381 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature) (reproduced with permission382 Copyright 2019, MDPI). 
Ahn et al. developed a novel sensing technique with higher electromechanical efficiency for the textile sensor by using a monofilament as a force transducer and applied 83% pre-strain to the filament to lower the energy uptake gap. By capturing body movements like respiration, heart pulse, voice vibrations and pressure-induced stimuli like gait and fingertip movements, the piezoelectric PVDF 3D textile structure converts the mechanical vibrations to electrical impulses of output ∼4 to 5 V, as illustrated in Fig. 24(ii). The jolting of the top and bottom layers of the 3D filament caused by body movements induces a strain on the PVDF matrix, enhancing the piezoelectric conversion, which was analyzed and confirmed using COMSOL simulation. The device can also identify alterations in posture, locomotion, and gait as an ominous predictor of dementia, which can predict cognitive impairment before diagnosis. By its link to the mobile program, the system brings up the prospect of remote clinical treatment. The device is also suited for use as a wearable sensing system due to its highly flexible permeability.379
Zhang et al. developed ZnO nanorods using the hydrothermal method and integrated them onto a Ag coated fabric. Ag, which acts as an electrode, was deposited onto the fabric via the screen-printing method. The ZnO nanorods proved to exhibit excellent piezoelectric and semiconducting characteristics. The entire piezoelectric device resulted in an output voltage of 4 V, facilitating the presence of health monitoring sensors and wearables (Fig. 24(iii)).380 Kim et al. used lead zirconate (PbZ), CNTs, PDMS, and Ag nanowires to form an integrated textile structure with excellent triboelectric and piezoelectric properties. Upon measuring the resistance change during the stretching of the thread, the magnitude of the capacitance was detected, and the power output was 108 μW at 3 MΩ.383 ZnO, rGO and PVDF/PET form a perfect basis for piezoelectric textile-based energy harvesters. Kan et al. used a PDMS mold, above which ZnO nanorods were deposited and supported with PVDF/PET membranes.384 The design exhibited an excellent voltage generation of 11.4 V with high mechanical stability, and the sensitivity of the sensor was 0.62 V kPa−1, making an ideal combination for energy harvesting from textiles. The design can be employed for powering blood pressure sensors and health monitoring devices. Textile-based piezoelectric devices are also used for entertainment purposes. Park et al. fabricated a textile speaker based on PVDF and ZnO nanopillars. The speaker shows high acoustic pressure and output (6 V and 69.7 dB respectively).385 Hyun et al. fabricated a PLA-BaTiO3 nanofibers by a melt spinning process as shown in Fig. 24(iv), which exhibited power production based on the piezoelectric effect and was suitable for energizing textile wearables.381
Self-powered textiles are also used in sports and recreational activities. Self-powered electromechanical biosensor integrated textiles have been created for monitoring vital signs and assessing time movement in athletics. The ZnO tetrapod morphology has shown promising conductivity and piezoelectric properties, suitable for wearable devices. Brindha et al. designed a ZnO nanotetrapod structure using a low-cost microwave technique. At first, Zn metal rods were sliced into tiny wire like structures and kept in an oven in an alumina plate, enclosed using an alumina crucible. The electromagnetic rays excite the Zn carrier and split the molecules into Zn2+ and electrons, wherein the Zn2+ ions sublime under the closed crucible and get deposited on the side walls of the crucible, as ZnO nanotetrapods.386 Yupeng et al. synthesized ZnO nanotetrapod shaped wires acting as a piezoelectric element embedded into a textile garment capable of monitoring the athlete running speed, angle, frequency, and lactate concentration in sweat, as shown in Fig. 24(v). Copper cables act as electrodes on both sides of the ZnO nanotetrapod wire forming a 3D structure, which can be fitted at any location, and on any desired size. Although the piezoelectric output was low (0.19 V) at 44° bending angle, cumulative assembly of ZnO on an entire textile fabric might result in high voltage production. The lactate test was conducted for two persons running on a treadmill at constant speed using a commercial lactate tester. The output voltage decreased significantly from 0.325 to 0.176 V due to the increased secretion of sweat glands (7.84 mmol L−1 to 21.64 mmol L−1). This is because the sweat contains H+ and e−; and when it falls on the ZnO nanowires, it reduces the output piezo voltage due to the piezo screening effect.382 Ming-hao et al. fabricated a light weight and efficient pyroelectric generator based on electrospun PVDF:PSS:PVP and CNTs. For further improving the elasticity of the fabricated device, thermoplastic polymers can be integrated. Upon exposure to variable strain and temperature, the pyro and piezo stimuli generated by body movements enable the possibility of wearable textiles.387,388
5.2 Solar powered smart textiles
The majority of solar radiation contains heat energy, which may be used in cold season for textile-based heating systems. Recently, thin nanophotonic textile structures using porous polyethylene and polydopamine assemblies have been used for indoor and outdoor heating. By reducing thermal heat loss using a minimal exterior layer, passive heating can be achieved. The device increases the skin temperature to 6.3 °C in an outdoor environment and 3.8 °C in an indoor environment. The nanophotonic textile structures featuring sunlight as heating source efficiently power individual fibers in the fabric and opens an exciting path to a more sustainable perpetuity.389 Jeong et al. designed a polymer solar cell (PSC) based smart clothing. The PSC was fabricated using alternate pairs of ZnO and Al2O3 layers on polymer substrates. At first, the electrons from Al2O3 scavenged H2O, creating a Lewis base reaction, forming a pseudoboehmite product. The pseudo compound underwent phase transition and altered its charges connected to the O atom. The installed solar modules on the cloth were washable and remained perfect even after 10 washes. After 30 days, subjected to various bending moments and stresses, the designed device retained 98.3% of the initial PCE and 94.2% of the initial intensity.390
Gao et al. devised a dual photo- and electrochemical conversion in a single textile fabric system. At first, cotton threads and Ag plated nylon were tied alternatively, forming a photoanode of the photoconversion system. Ag covered nylon was again integrated with the designed structure for the electrochemical part. The measured OCV and short circuit current of the photochemical part were 2 V and 0.14 mA, respectively, during the charging cycle of integrated battery assisted solar absorption, which accounted for effective power supply to the electrochemical part for 123 seconds. In the discharge phase, the electrochemical part had a discharge at current rates of 0.025 to 0.1 mA lasting for 358 to 75 seconds, respectively.391
A light weight and ultra-flexible solar powered e-textile was developed by Chaoxing et al., which was fabricated by employing a Ag-polyester and graphene core–shell architecture as an anode. The device exhibited a PCE of 2.27% and a low areal density of 5 mg cm−2. The structural stability, compactness and durability are the potential advantages of the fabricated e-textile.392
In 2019, flexible solar cell arrays were incorporated into fabrics, which were tested for their efficiency after several washes. After 15 cycle washes, ∼90% of the harvested power from solar cells remained intact, and these fabrics were later designed for charging portable earphones, mobiles and fitness monitoring devices.393 In many studies, a glass–metal oxide combo has been used to substitute metallic counter-electrodes helping to encapsulate the system and making it inflexible and unyielding, which is unsuitable for a fabric implementation. Yang et al. fabricated a rGO modified TiO2 photoanode based solar cell for textile application with a PCE of 8.45%.394 Researchers used DSSC electrodes with a metal covered polymer electrode, where the interlacing effect was the primary reason for high power output used in woven fabrics. The best PCEs were obtained by using warping thicknesses and woven structures that achieved the greatest quantity of interlacing spots.395–397
5.3 Biomass powered textiles
One of the primary problems is to achieve maximum usage from most biomass, because moisture management and waste management have significant influences on energy output. The utilization of bioenergy in textile mills has drawn the attention of scientists who have been continuously expanding their interest and focus.398 Achala et al. reported the use of pine wood chips as a biomass energy extraction source with a moisture content of 40%. They utilized the extracted energy for powering textile weaving and giant dying machines. To get a comparable effect, it is necessary to use roughly 645000 kg of woody biomass monthly, accounting for a total of 7095000 kg annually.398
Carbon based materials are obtained from biomass gasification and treatment. These carbonaceous substances have potential viability in self-powered electronics as electrode materials. Chunghsuan et al. used the Tetrapanax papyrifer plant and prepared carbonized materials out of it using chemical synthesis. The highest carbon percentage was observed for pith paper treated at 900 °C. Later, the pith paper, carbon nanofiber, and activated carbon composite was prepared via coating and used as the fabric electrode dipped in PVA–H3PO4 gel electrolyte.399 The specific capacitance observed was 20.8 mF cm−1, which can be used for smart textile applications. Itthipon et al. used biofuel cells for powering textile fabrics. The biofuel cells were embedded onto the garments via screen printing technology. Here, glucose and lactate were employed as single enzyme source materials for generating power from biofuel. The maximum power density reported was 250 μW cm−2 at an OCV of 0.46 V. The designed structure had excellent mechanical durability, withstanding the mechanical load with a steady supply of power even after 100% stretching. These stretchable electronics operate as extremely sensitive and reliable self-powered fabrics by generating power outputs according to sweat fueling content. These flexible skin-worn gadgets may help with the design of sophisticated textile energy harvesting systems with biomaterial sources.400
5.4 Biochemically powered textiles
Biofuels like glycogen, lactate, and sucrose retain chemical energies in the body, which can amount to 100 W for a grown individual. Biocatalysts can be used to oxidise such abundant biofuels to generate energy.401–403 Nishizawa and co-workers designed an enzymatic biofuel cell, where pantyhose textile coated CNTs were used for improved conductivity, and fructose dehydrogenase and bilirubin oxidase were used for electrode preparation.404 At last, a fructose biofilm layer was placed between the electrodes. The maximum output power density recorded during the redox reactions was 0.25 mW cm−2. However, upon stretching, a 25% decrease in maximum power was noted. Adopting a flexible polymer substrate might resolve the issue.404
By printing conductors on textile surfaces, Wang et al. created a unique energy harvester that can use the chemical energy from human fluids. For instance, CNT electrode printed fabrics act as active sites for redox mediation.400 Lactate gets oxidized at the bioanode with the liberation of electrons, which travel to the cathode and generates electricity. The e-built fabric had an output voltage of 0.49 V with a lactate content of 15 mM, which is equivalent to those of physiological secretions, and the output was sufficient to ignite three bulbs. Furthermore, while applying 100 cycles of consecutive bending, turning, and stretching procedures on the flexible fabric, ∼94% of the original electrical output was retained.400,405
Overall, the development of flexible components and fibrous structures with a high electrical conductivity that can withstand the stresses of loads on textiles is a significant hurdle to the adoption of wearable e-textile technology. However, metallic conductors’ lack of flexibility and weight are significant barriers to success in the emerging field of electronic textiles, often known as e-textiles. Use of conventional metallic conductors typically results in rigid and inflexible fabrics that lose effectiveness when exposed to harsh climatic conditions or after fabric care activities such as washing. One promising solution is to use conductive polymers, carbon matrices, CNTs, nano-metal oxides, ITO, and FTOs instead of metals.
6. Self-powered intelligent wearables
Wireless technology, low-power circuitry, the AI, and the realm of linked medicine propels wearable implantable equipment and its innovation at a breakneck speed. Smart wearables offer potential uses in the domains of automation and e-textiles, in addition to healthcare research. Multifunctional intelligent devices that are self-powered might serve as conduits for data exchange involving humans and machines.
6.1 Self powered motion detector and GPS tracking
The gait, movement condition, current condition, and several other data about the wearer are the key investigation themes. Among them, the individual body's locomotion and gait is an important indication for determining the prevalence of the aged or wounded.406 By gathering diverse biomechanical impulses produced by the individual anatomy on the feet, Lin et al. designed a savvy footwear based TENG to discern whether a user is jogging, leaping, sprinting, or motionless. Furthermore, this technology may respond to anomalous signals created by sudden fall and issue a prompt alert in the event of an aberrant accident in the aged. This device is extremely durable, has a quick reaction period, and is mechanically stable. As a standard smart wearable movement detection technique, it is worthy of prospective scientists’ attention.407
Waterproofing is a serious challenge with wearables. Whenever employed in mobility tracking, the gadget is frequently associated with the release of a high volume of perspiration and sweat from the body, putting pressure on the product's hydrophobic capability. In certain games and sports, like swimming and canoeing, the participants’ game sceneries are fully underwater, necessitating greater watertight capability demands for the players’ water submersible activity recognition. Li et al. created a cyborg energy cell-based submerged movement surveillance device. It collects the electric pulses produced by the player's legs during activity via the joint effect of contact ionization and electrostatic induction.408 It then uses a Bluetooth technology broadcasting gadget to transfer the collected information to a shoreline receiving device, which analyses the player's submerged position in the live moment. This device's power density could reach 18 mW m−2, making it ideal for swimmer postural information collection and focused coaching. Nevertheless, the device's compactness and cognition need to be enhanced. A smart wearable GPS (Global Positioning System) works by gathering kinetic energy created by the user's 10 minute jogging. The resulting power density is 2023 W g−1. When using hybrid generators to harvest electric power, they can provide several benefits, including increased efficiency.408
6.2 Self-powered man–machine hybrid systems
Polymers utilised in stretchable electronics are typically durable and it is simple to prepare them. The design is typically straightforward, and it's easy to create matrices and combine them, making it ideal for use in human to machine interface devices.409 Yang and colleagues created an organized artificial epidermis structure with high elasticity, clarity, and waterproofing (Fig. 25(i)).410 Relying on the TENG concept, the developed device matrix could distinguish various bulges of diverse shapes to produce simulated sensation. At 612.5 kPa stress, the OCV for one pixel might exceed 1.613 V.410 Relying on the TENG concept, researchers constructed an audio sensing system to transfer sound into mechanical data, subsequently turning them into electrical impulses for recognition. The TENG's physical data identification has a broad bandwidth range, encompassing the noise amplitude of people's everyday speech.411
 Fig. 25  (i) Device setup photograph and bending test image, and output voltage response as a function of pressure of the fabricated PEG;410 (ii) structural design of a TENG based on a powering shoe insole;412 (iii) photographs of the fabricated device bent at ∼0°, 45°, 75°, and 92°;413 and (iv) self-powered sensor for eye motion prediction and design414 (reproduced with permission410 Copyright 2013, ACS) (reproduced with permission412 Copyright 2013, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission413 Copyright 2017, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission414 Copyright 2020, Elsevier). 
Human walking and jogging motions can be converted into electrical impulses powering wearables using TENG systems. Zhu et al. designed a system for harvesting mechanical power from shoes while walking, which was then converted into electrical energy via a TENG and utilized for charging smart phones and gadgets. By accumulating the foot pressure, the TENG device used three layered stretchable substrates aligned in zigzag positions (Fig. 25(ii)). One contact surface of the layer was polished with aluminium and another with PTFE, serving as two electrodes; copper was fabricated on the backside of the PTFE.412 These combinations of electrodes aid in conversion of foot pressure into electrical energy, where the recorded OCV was 220 V, and the short circuit current density was 600 mA. A model of a unique sort of device for powering phones while exercising, allowing consumers to recharge their mobiles and wearable gadgets anytime and anywhere they desire.412
Alluri et al. utilized BaTiO3–Ca composite beads for energy extraction by observing the mechanical pressure while bending and stretching the body parts, as shown in Fig. 25(iii). The power extracted was 82 V, with the pressure ranging from 170 to 1.77 kPa. For flexor muscle motions of the right hand, the mean peak output of the bendable device ranged from 0.4 nW to 1.23 pW.413 Chemin et al. fabricated a flexible system that can record gestures and hand mobility, adopting the sensor and manipulating a TENG device for transforming mechanical pulses to electric energy powering a hand movement predicting machine.415 They identified motions by connecting the detector to the base of the wrist, and the sensor analyzed the activity of tendons and muscle. The TENG was fabricated with PET-coated ITO, which was a flexible and transparent layer. Above that, a PDMS layer of 20 μm thick was coated, and a polymer film enclosed the ITO substrate. Overall, the device was designed into a donut shape consisting of two triboelectric layers. The authors noted pulses from the thumb, index, and little finger, which contributed to maximum tendons’ displacement, recorded in the contact-separation mode of the TENG. Initially, the finger contacts lead to negative charge accumulation on the fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) surface and positive charge accumulation on the chitosan surface. When the hand moves, the triboelectric films use the surface charges to generate a potential difference between electrodes. Eventually, as the finger returns to its normal state, the progressive displacement of the two surfaces causes the voltage differential to increase, resulting in an opposite electron migration in the external loop until a stable equilibrium phase is achieved.415
Self-powered cameras and HD video recording devices help travellers and multisport players to capture and record real-time events. Enhanced GPS, waterproofing, and wireless linkage to smartphones allow easy transmission of data and usability in all circumstances, even for underwater recording. For instance, a T-shirt camera might enable fans to watch the football or cricket game from different angles and locations. For education purposes, intelligent camera wearables can aid in distributing lectures to millions of learners at their convenient place via inbuilt wearable cameras.416,417 Chongle et al. used a PVDF based PENG machine for tracking the motion, force and frequency of a basketball player's elbow, which was converted into an electrical signal, transmitted via Bluetooth for powering wearables.418 Vera Anaya et al. designed an eye motion predictive sensor that can track and use the charges developed by the motion of eyeballs and eye blinking, converting them into electrical signals powering hands-free remote cars and drones (Fig. 25(iv)).414 Wearables recognize the movement of body parts in real-time and provide energy to power electronics with high accuracy.
7. Other horizons of low carbon power supply systems
7.1 Self powered crop health monitoring
In an agroecosystem, actual surveillance of weather flow, encompassing wind velocity, is critical for crop cultivation and productivity. It was challenging for classic weather change monitors to satisfy the demands of current sustainable farming due to their size scale, limited precision, and depletion of power delivery. Establishing an interactive gateway connecting crops and the surroundings is critical for actual vegetation surveillance devices, particularly holding potential for achieving maximum farm yields. The progress of multiple detectors enables continuous automatic farm tracking, finding a long-term energy source for numerous gadgets, which remains a daunting task. Lingyi et al., in 2021, developed a TENG device based on PVDF and fluorinated CNTs, prepared via electrospinning and electrospraying, respectively, which was water breathable and hydrophobic and exhibited maximum electrostatic adhesion, generating a high output voltage of 330.6 μW cm−2. The TENG gadget may be put on plant leaves to monitor their health state, with energy provided by wind and rain drops.419 This study accomplishes the notion of creating a TENG crop that is ecologically sustainable and has the capacity to scavenge electricity, demonstrating significant promise in the development of self-powered farming structures.419 Researchers harvested energy from raindrops after considering the readily accessible nature of energy in raindrops and the potential for negative impacts on crops during surplus rain. Chengmei et al. combined TENGs and agro based textiles, creating a flexible and reliable electrode.420 They coated MXene substituted elastic fibers over the substrate, and integrated Ag nanoparticles and PDMS, forming a flexible TENG agro textile device with an output voltage of 7.7 V. Raindrop energies may be collected in addition to offering security for planting and livestock farming to increase the integrity and production of farm goods.
Shufen et al. implemented a wind energy harvester and a self-powered wind motion detector powered by a TENG harvester, producing a voltage of ∼600 V at a wind velocity of 7 m s−1. In addition, a 360° air current power extractor was built using eight self-powered TENGs, as well as an information procurement electrometer panel to precisely detect air patterns, directions and velocities spanning 0.5 to 10 m s−1 was developed.421 Zhang et al. designed a similar fluorinated hydrophobic TENG device for detecting atmospheric temperature and humidity for smart agro farming.422
Large land farming requires a lot of energy, and therefore increases carbon dioxide emissions and contributes to climate catastrophe. Intelligent cultivation is supposed to increase productivity and sustainability by tracking vegetation on a site-by-site basis. Helen et al. developed a multi-integrated device functionality in a single system consisting of a plant growth detector, an ammonia sensor, an energy harvester and a supercapacitor for energy storage. In contemporary farming, self-powered technologies with TENGs, sensors and supercapacitors have a lot of promise. Here, polyacrylic acid (PAA) or a polyaniline (PA) hydrogel with rGO was used for boosting the mechanical rigidity and flexibility. The overall 3 in 1 sensor, energy harvester and supercapacitor inbuilt system provided a power density of 424 mW m−2. The capacitance of the designed supercapacitor was 2330 mF cm−2 when operated beyond 5000 cycles. The combination of a self-powered device with a TENG and an energy storage device has a lot of possibilities in today's farming technologies.423 Because this technology has a sufficient voltage production and consistent supply, it could substitute conventional fossil fuels, assisting in the development of a self-powered smart farming paradigm.424
7.2 Self-powered transportation
Automobile producers were effective in reducing overall vehicle emissions with the aid of various current technologies. The employment of rechargeable battery powered motors is such an example of modern innovation. On the other hand, batteries must be charged with another source of power that isn’t necessarily clean. Identical restrictions apply to the usage of hydrogen fuel motors. Biodiesels have been promoted in several nations. However, they are only exploited as supplements to the existing gasoline, not as substitutes. Furthermore, because agrofuels are used from food crops, they have a significant influence on agricultural supply. The automotive sector has a big issue nowadays in fuelling contemporary automobiles using environmentally beneficial energy. The outcome of this venture might significantly affect the firm's prospects in the foreseeable years. As the oil sources worldwide are depleting more quickly than ever before, CO2 emissions from motor transportation are at an all-time high. Zhang et al. employed the notion of TENG and supercapacitor storage for self-powered telemetry in electric vehicles. For generating signal permutations, a sophisticated glove as shown in Fig. 26 with five self-powered TENGs on the posterior part of the finger was used as a motion detector. The microprocessor analysed the impulses before sending them remotely to the autonomous automobile for remote telemetry and control.425 Because sunlight has such a promising possibility for generating power using PV modules, powering electric vehicles would be a fantastic option and a good environmental initiative. In the early 2000s Kempton et al. examined the effectiveness of PV storage capacity. In comparison to standard grid voltage regulators and standalone PVs, the on-grid PV system proves to be more financially viable.426 The practical viability of solar-powered vehicles is still a question of doubt. An average speed of 80 km h−1 was achievable in the past decades in solar-powered bikes. The requirement is less weight, high efficiency, and less space-occupying PV arrays for powering vehicles. However, current PV modules for powering batteries in cars or bikes weigh more with less conversion efficiency (∼20 to 30%), necessitating research and development for identifying flexible, less-weight alternative solar structures for on-road vehicles. Indeed, we have better chances of discovering suitable solar structures for powerful vehicles like trains, ships, and planes since their entire weight and design are straightforward to implement.
 Fig. 26  (a) Photo shots of smart gloves with TENG sensors for detecting gestures, (b) monitoring motion of real time changes in voltages, (c) wiring diagram for a self-powered TENG device and (d) gesture control photographs – command-based motions of cars425 (reproduced with permission414 Copyright 2021, MDPI). 
7.3 Smart homes and consumer electronics
Because of the rapid growth of fields such as the IoT technology, AI, and the 5G wireless network accessibility, smart detector systems for accurate environmental monitoring and individual health surveillance are now probable. Zhilong et al. used a self-powered chemical sensor using a Si solar cell and wireless internet technology for monitoring the gas leakage and fire detection in smart homes. Sensors were constructed using nanoporous 3D Al2O3, SnO2 and Pd structures, which exhibited high response and sensitivity for H2, toluene, acetone and formaldehyde even at low frequency because of the high surface area and catalytic properties of the employed nanostructures. The mean power consumed by each sensor module was ∼4 to 4.5 μW, which was significantly less than those of commercial sensors; promoting the usage of solar powered chemical sensors.427 Automatically switching on and off electronic gadgets, mood related colour shades and lighting for ambience and digitally controllable gadgets through smart phones have also been developed in recent days.428 The home automation model links cloud computing and wireless technology to allow people to operate different household equipment from their comfort using a mobile.
The machine will eventually operate devices based on the detected information by continuously analyzing the residential surroundings and collecting sensor information from the cloud. Household devices such as speakers, AC, lights, ceiling fans, and cameras can be included in the house management solution to manifest the feasibility and suitability of the design.429
8. Hands-on restrictions of wearable technology and low carbon powering systems
There is still much progress to be made to address all the technological constraints, particularly in the areas of precision in data evaluation, information transmission consistency, security, and confidentiality, software streamlining, voltage regulation effectiveness, system longevity, consumer convenience, cost, comfort, and scalability. Device improvements in terms of accuracy and repeatability are now required. Wearable devices provide a risk of interfering with transmission networks and avionics, such as implanted pacemakers and stents; hence, solutions are required.430 Furthermore, environmental conditions such as excessive perspiration and rainfall could obstruct the correct functioning of smart fabrics and wearables. Heat and moisture detectors that are supplied continuously by renewables can produce credible and timely data. The Wi-Fi-driven intelligent sensing system disclosed is thought to have the possibility to be substantially used in everyday medical systems and wellness surveillance, but additional study and enhancement are required. Also, the issue of power efficiency due to distortion caused by folding, straining, or twisting remains in TENG and PENG devices. Appropriate information, regulations, and testing procedures are likewise necessary to comprehend the functioning of a novel item and generate data on gadget safety and performance overages. Universal standards and testing methods need to be fixed. The consumer may be exposed to dangers due to the absence of adequately established assessment procedures and a regulatory solicitude.431
Safety and protection are top priorities for surgical equipment, and they’re intimately linked to device redundancy at all stages. Several main client issues are becoming increasingly important. When a worn gadget is expected to execute essential duties safely, there is no margin for failure. A malfunction in such a gadget might result in death, necessitating extra labor, money, and research to properly evaluate and validate the equipment prior to its usage in acceptable and safe practice.432,433 Furthermore, from the customer viewpoint, the mainly acknowledged issues are technological adoption, data privacy, and protection issues, meaning that confidentiality and dependability are essential areas for additional research. Multifunctional gadgets, for instance, capture data such as geolocation and various confidential personal data. These gadgets can record and send data regarding their environment, for example, via Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and GPS. As a result, guaranteeing the privacy and integrity of sensitive data gathered using modern systems is critical, as sensitive data refer to a user's freedom to regulate the acquisition, utilization, dissemination, and preservation of their private details.434 It is an obvious necessity to safeguard personal data, as hacking systems and data theft are rapidly evolving, rendering it challenging to persuade users to embrace wearable technology, particularly in the medical and textile realms.
Thanks to innovative technologies, cameras, sensors, and triggering electronics may now be integrated into fabrics and as wearables without any need for complex components. Considering the wide range of wearable devices available in research and development with a few drawbacks can still meet all requirements and satisfy multifunctionality. Pre- and post-management may be required based on the textile e-structure to lay down, and minimization of circuitry is needed for developing low weight, comfortable, and easy fabrics. Every wearable technology, in essence, has software and hardware such as controllers; sensors; actuators; transmitters; energy, memory, visualization, and storage devices; and interconnectors.435 Accelerometers, motion sensors, inertial measurement units, thermistors, and gait sensors are among the various sub-units used in these operations. The number of extra hook-ups to wearables must then be kept to a minimum.
Specifically, massive manufacturing and minimal cost, high-performance components are required. It is essential to progressively improve the sensitivity and extend the functional durability of wearable sensors. The advancement of combat clothing, the incorporation of the Internet of Things, and the improvement of transceivers may all boost effectiveness. Fibreoptic cables, wireless connections, and data management using data science are the three critical domains of automated gadgets and connectivity.436–440 Apart from these concerns, smart wearable wastes contain both troublesome and undesirable chemicals, and they are frequently discarded alongside their batteries. It is vital to guarantee that the trash created by the advent of wearable textiles does not pose unforeseen medical and environmental threats.
9. IoT and wearables – state of play
The swift growth of the Internet of Things (IoT) has facilitated the development of miniature electrical and computer systems that can be implanted in the human body.441 Computer technologies have made it possible to acquire data from any place and at any time. Furthermore, beyond smartphones, wearable electronic gadgets are being offered as the next surge of universal technology.441 These intelligent devices are intended for usage in various industries, including informatics, healthcare, recreation, and individual safety. Digitally savvy devices, like smartwatches and armbands, have lately received a lot of interest.442,443 Garment-installed sensors, controllers, actuators, and therapeutic interventions are now on the market.444 One of the significant difficulties in smart wearables is material engineering, which is necessary to accomplish diverse qualities, including elasticity, convenience, scalability, and wearability.445,446 Another drawback is the deviation of the user experience of the product (UI/UX) from the design. The contemporary interface paradigm heavily relies on a linked smartphone, emulating the UI/UX of tap-sensitive interplay.447,448 Many believe that smartphone users are accustomed to touch-display interaction, which justifies adopting similar user designs for intelligent wearables. On the other hand, smart wearables are much smaller, and their wearability must be addressed in various circumstances, including on and off-device engagement. Likewise, smart sensors’ low flexibility and responsiveness are critical roadblocks for optimal functioning linked to the human host.449
Constraints imposed by insufficient wearable electrical supplies are becoming an increasingly formidable barrier for the advancement of wearables. As a result, establishing wearable energy sources in compliance with the desired smart system is critical to removing the requirement for lengthy cables and full synchronization with the human recipient.450 Also, new innovative substances and processes to provide ample power are essential because many existing autonomous systems lack satisfactory conversion efficiency and rate capability for durable smart technology. Current developments, notably in actuators, hardware, and programming modifications for wearable gadgets, are regularly improved to circumvent these constraints. Also, sophisticated sensor designs, embedded stretchable abilities, and assorted circuit designs can all help in enhancing performance. Significant progress has been made in the domain of self-powered wearable sensors, especially altering their powering sources. Globally, solar, mechanoelectrical and biomaterial energy harvesters have gained popularity.
10. Existing nations’ call for low-carbon technologies
Sweden flung up the challenge in 2015, announcing an audacious aim to phase out hydrocarbons from power generation inside its frontiers by 2040, and has increased funding in photovoltaics, turbine technology, battery storage, smart grids, and sustainable mobility.451 Costa Rica, a country in Central America, has acquired 95% of its power from tidal, geothermal, solar, and wind resources for the past three years. Costa Rica plans to achieve net-zero emissions by 2025.452,453 Nicaragua spent a three-fifths proportion of its gross domestic product (GDP) on green electricity development, aiming for complete carbon neutrality by 2022.454–456 Scotland's energy requirements are shifting towards wind power, currently providing 98% of Scotland's electricity using windmills.457 Geothermal energy now provides roughly half of Kenya's electricity; previously, in 2013, 13% of electricity was generated from geothermal energy. Kenya is also investing big in turbines, with Africa's biggest wind power station (310 MW) to add a further 20% to the nation's annual production.458 India, China, and Germany have also initiated a zero carbon emission plan to be accomplished by 2050.459,460 The US announces a 2030 goal for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, with the intent of developing decent local jobs.461,462
11. Key rubrics – a strategy of action
Technically, in the case of energy harvesting for powering wearables solar energy harvesters, batteries and piezoelectric harvesters are efficient and are getting popularized. Commercially, when a Si solar cell with 1 m2 area, exposed to 1000 W m−2 solar irradiation under standard test conditions for 2.7 hours per day, an efficiency of ∼20% can be achieved. Undoped crystalline Si solar cells have headed closer to their theoretical PCE of 29.5%.90,91 However, amorphous Si or crystalline Si heterojunction solar cells have achieved ∼27% and are still being researched to achieve up to 33%.90 Due to their higher PCE (∼29%), silicon solar cells can generate more energy per square meter. For a solar cell, the minimum required performance is the retention of 80% of the rated output for 25 or even more years. Due to its market dominance, silicon solar cells also have a well-established supply chain. However, Si solar cells are comparatively more vulnerable to temperature rises and contain toxic materials. In addition, Si solar technology is not compatible with low-cost manufacturing processes and flexible device structures.
Studies on CdTe solar cells over the past few decades have made it possible to produce stable devices with an efficiency of more than 20%.247 Though CdTe solar cells are reliable in the longer run with lower degradation of performance, their PCE was lower than that of Si solar cell technology. Also, Cd is scarce and toxic, developing a threat to the environment. CdTe flexible solar cells are commercially manufactured. However, additional research and development dealing with the stability of flexible electrodes during bending and stretching should be done. Group III–V flexible solar cells have higher PCEs but require expensive production methods. Thus, it is crucial at this time to create innovative methods that enable the manufacturing of superior III–V solar cells on affordable substrates with excellent interface quality.247 Perovskite solar cells had a record PCE of ∼27.3% for 1 cm2 Perovskite–Si tandem cells released by Oxford. Similarly, Huazhong University in China and Wonder solar explored the 110 m2 perovskite PV module fabricated via screen printing. The challenges with perovskites are their complex synthesis procedures, high cost and toxicity.246 One of the major obstacles to practical implementation is the instability related to the perovskite absorber and extra perturbations connected with material interfaces. The stability, cost of production and performance of perovskite solar cells, especially the charge transport at different temperatures, voltage and Jsc, must be studied.245,246
Organic solar cells are eco-friendly and sustainable and are compatible for flexible device integrations. However, their PCE is limited to ∼15 to 18%, and stability is the main issue, limited especially under light conditions.92 The lifetimes of carriers are lower when compared with inorganic materials, and a small amount of moisture or air can degrade the performance over time. Thus, developments in both materials and device architecture may enhance the PCE with stability.92 Flexible organic solar cells have recently been introduced with state-of-the-art PCEs of ∼8 to 10%.239,240 The constraint is the variation in the amount of charge extracted during bending of thin substrates. Further, the device structure is unstable in the longer run and the fabrication process has limitations in terms of annealing temperature (>120 °C), thus limiting the overall performance. Improvements should be made in the device structure, fabrication methodologies and active material interfaces.463
Researchers have used electrospun metal–oxide polymer fibers as active electrodes in piezoelectric energy harvesters and generated energy based on human motions (man–machine interfaces). Mostly, PVDF, PLLA, PDMS and PVP are electrospun with carbon allotropes or metal oxide composites for piezoelectric electrodes.244 Exploring flexible chalcogenides, perovskites and ceramic materials may shed light on new innovations in the era of piezoelectric energy harvesters. Researchers should focus on two main areas: improving the detection sensitivity and improving the conversion efficiency of wearable piezoelectric energy harvesters in order to accomplish technical progress and broaden their real-world applications. Comparatively easy, convenient, economical, and environmentally friendly production processes must be identified to create commercial products. These facts suggest that flexible electromechanical materials could play a significant role in the development of the newest wearable electronic gadgets.244
In case of energy storage, the cycling performance and flexibility of the battery are significantly influenced by the properties of the electrode materials. The main improvement in anodes is to lessen the production of dendrites throughout long-term cycling in order to increase the battery's lifespan and electrochemical stability. Recent studies have also suggested to use binder free- and free-standing electrodes, paving the way for high performing batteries with lower weight. Most researchers report on carbon-based nanomaterials as flexible electrodes as they have high tensile strength, and electronic conductivity. State-of-the-art LIBs with LiFePO4 cathodes have a specific capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1 and a specific energy of 260 W h kg−1, and flexible LIBs have comparatively lower capacities.243 The following are the key impediments to flexible LIB applications: limited capacity retention and cycle life during cyclic mechanical deformations. Little research has been done on their high-rate and high-temperature/low-temperature capabilities, controlled manufacturing procedures are still difficult, and the fabrication setup is expensive. Thus, flexible LIBs currently lack adequate gravimetric and volumetric energy densities.
This lack in performance for flexible batteries is due to actions like bending; the loaded electrode material in flexible batteries typically splits or crumbles off, which causes a sharp loss in electrochemical properties. In order to further enhance the capacity of flexible batteries while increasing the mechanical performance of electrodes, it is thus important to develop the optimal material structure or develop the manufacturing technique of loading, such that the electrode material remain stiffer upon bending or stretching. Fabrication processes like screen printing, 3D printing and inkjet printing, are used for loading active materials onto flexible electrodes, which has to be standardized and researched further in the future. Among them, the in situ development of active materials does not need a binder, ensuring quick charge transfer between active materials and collectors and improving the electrochemical performance of the designed flexible electrodes. 3D printing can be programmed according to the pattern that needs to be printed, enabling non-contact or contact printing on a range of substrates and producing electrodes that are low-cost, highly accurate, and highly efficient. Considering the toxicity, safety issues and scarcity of Li, Al-ion and Zn-ion batteries are being developed. In fact, a flexible Zn-ion battery with the highest power density of 22.3 mW cm−2 and 0 to 80° bending stability has been reported as one of the state-of-the-art technologies. In order to further enhance the capacity of flexible zinc batteries while increasing the mechanical performance of electrodes, it is thus important to develop the optimal material structure or develop the manufacturing technique of loading, such that the electrode material stays stiffer upon bending or stretching.310
For supercapacitors, the commercial capacitance achieved for supercapacitors is 50 F g−1; however, on a labscale, 600 to 800 F g−1 has been reported for EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. The gap between the industry and labscale data is because of the controlled device fabrication environment and test conditions on a lab scale, which considerably varies when applied in real world scenarios.241
Another challenge is developing flexible polymer electrolytes to replace existing organic leaking electrolytes in flexible batteries. These polymer electrolytes pose the challenges of low ionic conductivity, poor rate performance, narrow electrochemical voltage windows and complex synthesis processes. Future research must focus on developing highly flexible polymer gel electrolytes and optimization of their best manufacturing process and parameters, adaptable to commercial markets.464 Similarly, the mechanism of charge transport and the electrochemical characteristics of new world electrode structures including porous twisted nanofibers, pre-tensioned structures, impregnated structures, island structures, and 3D structures should be explored. Other horizons like thermoelectric, magnetic and pyroelectric energy harvesters must also be explored.464
Economically, continued research and innovation in high-tech domains, most of which are directly related to renewable energy technology, might help turn the scenario around. This might result in government-supported inventive commodities and job opportunities. The main issue in commercializing these technologies is presumably that materials researchers and engineers need to develop a common language for manufacturers for accelerating their real-time implementation. Previously, c-Si and CdTe solar cells and Li-ion batteries were implemented commercially because of academia and industrial collaborations. One such example is Sony Electronics, which commercialized LiCoO2 cathodes in their Li-ion batteries.4 The underlying holistic set of activities that must be carried out in particular to achieve the vitality and socioeconomic and ecological benefits that renewable technologies aid is listed below:
(i) Research and innovation: to reflect the needs of industries, technology transfer priorities should be determined in mutual relations with consumer utilization. Substantial research must be done on a cost-sharing basis and in the short run. Perhaps, stakeholders must also consider including a wide range of guidance from power generation sector leaders, including private enterprises, distributors across the nation, regional authorities, and relevant federal ministries.
(ii) Trials and assessment: statistical considerations on variables including cost–benefit, dependability, environmental effects, safety, and possibilities for growth should be obtained in laboratories through practical trials. Such figures should perhaps aid in the creation of technical progress reports and expertise strategic plans.
(iii) Policy architects: to promote the adoption of proven technologies in the marketplace, scientific and safety regulations must be developed. Domestic and international norms authoring bodies, and many other state and territory federal bodies, should collaborate on the standard formulation.
(iv) Dissemination of findings: the investment outcomes in research and development should be disseminated via sponsorships, scientific workshops, symposia, and summits, and using online tools. The distribution of technical manuals and toolkits to mediocre people can also enhance public awareness.
12. Conclusion and future prospects
In terms of giving highly accurate data, wearables will need to merge the monitoring of many variables such as force, stress, temperature, moisture, and chemicals into a unified gadget in the foreseeable future. Gesture surveillance, patient medical tracking, intelligent automation, temperature management, and combined peripheral sensing devices that can simultaneously recognize overall health symptoms will be required in the future. Movement, geolocation, climate, and heartbeat may all be measured using a variety of detectors. The data gathered and analyzed must be readily accessible to users, caregivers, and healthcare providers. Perhaps further appealing, innovative technologies which may communicate with human systems necessitate reliability and safety. Conventional methods take longer to react to actions taken and thus are more laborious. Information systems, data science and AI technologies can take a quick notice of the activity and guide response. However, the privacy and protection of distributed data must be addressed.
Furthermore, fabricating a wearable design employing concurrent “electrospinning” and “electrospraying” techniques enables lightweight, durable, and resilient materials. Polymers such as PVDF-TRFE, PLA, PDMS, PTFE, and fluorinated polymers and naturally available collagen and starch fibers have promising usage in wearable technologies. Inorganic chemicals such as rGO, CNTs, MWCNTs, MXenes, SnO2, Fe, Nb, Ni, Sr, La, titanates, and silicates have potential applicability in mechanoelectrical systems. By integrating multiple chemical elements by doping, compositing, and diffusing, core–shell structures and low dimensional structures (1D and 2D) can exhibit enhanced device performance and functionalities. Mg, Ti, Mn, Al, Si, Ca, Zr and Zn structures can be used to replace highly toxic elements like Pb, Sr, As, Ga, and Sb. Designing new morphologies, particularly for nanostructures, like tetrapods, flowers, prisms, balls and needles, may possibly improve the performance of nanogenerators while considering the material perspective.
Upcoming automated fabric systems and wearables may be viewed as seamless integration of fiber-based electronic devices with improved optoelectrical, biomechanical, and tribological properties. Furthermore, for widespread, sustained operations in healthcare, the formulation of biologically noxious and minimally bothersome chemicals must not be overlooked. The phrases “active wearables” and “green wearables” are uniquely used to describe the vibrant or engaging quality of low carbon energy technologies for wearables extending beyond the incorporation of electrical components. Symbiosis and interactions of low carbon systems provide unexplored panoramic views in textiles, healthcare, and human–machine interplays to develop scientific probing – “unfolding technological shifts in the future”.
Abbreviations

ADAnaerobic digestion
AIEAggregation-induced emission
ANNArtificial neural network
BEBioethanol
CMOSComplementary metal oxide semiconductor
CSPConcentrated solar power
CSPCCarrier selected passivating contact
CSTConcentrated solar technology
CVDChemical vapor deposition
CVTConstant-voltage transformer
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
ECMExtracellular matrix
EDXEnergy dispersive spectroscopy
FEFinite element
GDPGross domestic product
GHGGreenhouse gas
GPSGlobal positioning system
IoTInternet of Things
LEDLight emitting diode
LIBLi-ion battery
MECMicrobial electrolysis cell
MEMSsMicroelectromechanical systems
MFCMicrobial fuel cell
MOFMetal organic framework
NFANon-fullerene acceptor
NIBNa-ion battery
OECDOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OEROxygen evolution reaction
OSCOrganic solar cell
PBMPhoto-biomodulation
PCBPrinted circuit board
PCEPhotoconversion efficiency
PECVDPlasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PEGPiezoelectric energy generator
PEMProton exchange membrane
PENGPiezoelectric nanogenerator
PLCProgrammable logic controller
PSEPerovskite solar cell
PVsPhotovoltaics
QBTQuadrillion British thermal
RETRenewable energy technology
RWCRotating water column
SCSupercapacitor
SDGsSustainable Development Goals
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SOSolid oxide
SQShockley and Queisser's
SSCSolid-state Si solar cell
TEThermoelectrics
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TENGTriboelectric nanogenerator
TPCTidal power converter
TSCTandem solar cell
WGPwater–gas process
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
ZIBZn-ion battery

Author contributions
Brindha Ramasubramanian did the literature survey, collected & organised the data, and constructed the original draft; Subramanian Sundarrajan did formal analysis, and helped in review & editing; Rayavarapu Prasada Rao helped in technical discussion, review and editing; M. V. Reddy helped in technical discussion, review and editing; Vijila Chellappan conceptualized the work, helped in review & editing, and supervision; Seeram Ramakrishna conceptualized the work, helped in review & editing, and supervision.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This review was supported by SINGA (SING-2021-02-0819), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
References
N. Wen, L. Zhang, D. Jiang, Z. Wu, B. Li, C. Sun and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25499–25527 RSC .
Q. Lyu, J. Tan, L. Li, Y. Ju, A. Busch, D. A. Wood, P. G. Ranjith, R. Middleton, B. Shu, C. Hu, Z. Wang and R. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4203 RSC .
R. Brindha, R. Mohanraj, P. Manojkumar, M. Selvam and K. Sakthipandi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 120539 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ramasubramanian, M. v Reddy, K. Zaghib, M. Armand and S. Ramakrishna, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Kumar, R. Brindha, M. Nandhini, M. Selvam, K. Saminathan and K. Sakthipandi, Ionics, 2019, 25(4), 1699–1706 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsumoto and Y. Matsumura, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 162, 112456 CrossRef .
M. Z. Jacobson, M. A. Delucchi, G. Bazouin, Z. A. F. Bauer, C. C. Heavey, E. Fisher, S. B. Morris, D. J. Y. Piekutowski, T. A. Vencill and T. W. Yeskoo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2093–2117 RSC .
P. Sadorsky, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 289, 125779 CrossRef .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Mater. Today, 2021, 42, 178–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng and Y. Zheng, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2021, 9, 299 Search PubMed .
S. M. A. Iqbal, I. Mahgoub, E. Du, M. A. Leavitt and W. Asghar, npj Flexible Electron., 2021, 5(1), 1–14 CrossRef .
A. K. Yetisen, J. Leonardo Martinez-Hurtado, B. B. Barışünal, A. Khademhosseini, H. Butt, A. K. Yetisen, J. L. Martinez-Hurtado, B. Ünal, A. Khademhosseini and H. Butt, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706910 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. Peng and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1933–1970 RSC .
M. Gao, P. Wang, L. Jiang, B. Wang, Y. Yao, S. Liu, D. Chu, W. Cheng and Y. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2114–2157 RSC .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. Peng and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1933–1970 RSC .
C. K. Jeong, K. Il Park, J. H. Son, G. T. Hwang, S. H. Lee, D. Y. Park, H. E. Lee, H. K. Lee, M. Byun and K. J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4035–4043 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, W. Jin, Y. Jing, X. Chen, X. Han, Q. Bao, Y. Liu, X. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Qiu, C. A. Di and K. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2984–2994 RSC .
V. Rajendran, A. M. V. Mohan, M. Jayaraman and T. Nakagawa, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104055 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dauzon, X. Sallenave, C. Plesse, F. Goubard, A. Amassian and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Pattnaik and A. Tomar, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering,  2021, vol. 723, pp. 777–784 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Xu, Z. Zhou, S. Xi, Y. Xia, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, L. Mei, Y. Jiang, J. Gao, Z. Zeng and C. Tan, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10597–10608 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Du, X. Hu, C. Yi, H. C. Liu, P. Liu, H. L. Zhang and X. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2420–2427 CrossRef CAS .
N. Qi, Y. Yin, K. Dai, C. Wu, X. Wang and Z. You, Appl. Energy, 2021, 290, 116780 CrossRef .
J. A. Herron, J. Kim, A. A. Upadhye, G. W. Huber and C. T. Maravelias, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 8, 126–157 RSC .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
J. Jean, P. R. Brown, R. L. Jaffe, T. Buonassisi and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1200–1219 RSC .
S. Ardo, D. Fernandez Rivas, M. A. Modestino, V. Schulze Greiving, F. F. Abdi, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Artero, K. Ayers, C. Battaglia, J. P. Becker, D. Bederak, A. Berger, F. Buda, E. Chinello, B. Dam, V. Di Palma, T. Edvinsson, K. Fujii, H. Gardeniers, H. Geerlings, S. M. Hashemi, S. Haussener, F. Houle, J. Huskens, B. D. James, K. Konrad, A. Kudo, P. P. Kunturu, D. Lohse, B. Mei, E. L. Miller, G. F. Moore, J. Muller, K. L. Orchard, T. E. Rosser, F. H. Saadi, J. W. Schüttauf, B. Seger, S. W. Sheehan, W. A. Smith, J. Spurgeon, M. H. Tang, R. Van De Krol, P. C. K. Vesborg and P. Westerik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2768–2783 RSC .
C. J. M. Emmott, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1810–1818 RSC .
R. J. Detz, J. N. H. Reek and B. C. C. Van Der Zwaan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1653–1669 RSC .
S. Yun, Y. Qin, A. R. Uhl, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Yin, D. Li, X. Han and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 476–526 RSC .
M. Shahabuddin, M. A. Alim, T. Alam, M. Mofijur, S. F. Ahmed and G. Perkins, Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess., 2021, 47, 101434 CrossRef .
A. A. Azemati, R. K. Seyed Saeid, H. Khorasanizadeh, M. Petrů, G. A. Sheikhzadeh, M. Safi and B. S. Hadavand, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Amein, M. A. Kassem, S. Ali and M. A. Hassan, Renewable Energy, 2021, 171, 344–359 CrossRef .
E. Gervais, S. Shammugam, L. Friedrich and T. Schlegl, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 137, 110589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, Z. Huang, M. S. Martinez, J. C. Johnson, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1347–1376 RSC .
K. M. Emmanuel, T. Zeundjua and M. Oduetse, Procedia Manuf., 2019, 35, 580–588 CrossRef .
M. Ghassoul, Fuel Commun., 2021, 6, 100007 CrossRef .
S. Abdallah and S. Nijmeh, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 1931–1939 CrossRef .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
N. T. Nguyen, R. Matsuhashi and T. T. B. C. Vo, Renewable Energy, 2021, 163, 1878–1894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubaarak, D. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, S. A. Zaki, R. Yuan, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and M. Li, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 228 CrossRef .
H. Bakhtiari, J. Zhong and M. Alvarez, Appl. Energy, 2021, 290, 116719 CrossRef .
B. K. Das and M. Hasan, Energy, 2021, 214, 119036 CrossRef .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 RSC .
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T. W. Wang, X. Dang, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 236–246 RSC .
Z. Saki, M. M. Byranvand, N. Taghavinia, M. Kedia and M. Saliba, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5690–5722 RSC .
M. T. Klug, R. L. Milot, R. L. Milot, J. B. Patel, T. Green, H. C. Sansom, M. D. Farrar, A. J. Ramadan, S. Martani, Z. Wang, B. Wenger, J. M. Ball, L. Langshaw, A. Petrozza, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1776–1787 RSC .
J. Ramanujam and U. P. Singh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1306–1319 RSC .
S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. K. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 7, 45–102 RSC .
P. Dutta, M. Rathi, D. Khatiwada, S. Sun, Y. Yao, B. Yu, S. Reed, M. Kacharia, J. Martinez, A. P. Litvinchuk, Z. Pasala, S. Pouladi, B. Eslami, J. H. Ryou, H. Ghasemi, P. Ahrenkiel, S. Hubbard and V. Selvamanickam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 756–766 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Zhong, F. P. Wu, Y. Yuan, H. J. Bin, Z. Q. Jiang, Z. Zhang, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Li and L. S. Liao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3429–3435 RSC .
R. Sorrentino, E. Kozma, S. Luzzati and R. Po, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 180–223 RSC .
M. Ghasemi, N. Balar, Z. Peng, H. Hu, Y. Qin, T. Kim, J. J. Rech, M. Bidwell, W. Mask, I. McCulloch, W. You, A. Amassian, C. Risko, B. T. O’Connor and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20(4), 525–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Zhang, G. Zhou, T. Hao, J. Xu, J. Wang, C. Qiu, N. Prine, J. Ali, W. Feng, X. Gu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, H. Zhu, L. Ying, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904234 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Zhu, G. Zhou, T. Hao, C. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Q. Hu, B. W. Larson, H. Zhu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, W. Feng, Y. Zhang, T. P. Russell and F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, K. Gao, Y. Kan, M. Zhang, C. Qiu, L. Zhu, Z. Zhao, X. Peng, W. Feng, Z. Qian, X. Gu, A. K. Y. Jen, B. Z. Tang, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Ren, M. Gao, P. Bi, L. Ye, J. Hou, S. Zhang, L. Ye and J. Hou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2864–2869 RSC .
S. Jeong, B. Park, S. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kwon, J. H. Lee, M. S. Lee, J. C. Park, H. Kang and K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 41877–41885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, S. Zuo, F. Li, T. Niu, Y. Yang, H. Ju, B. Li, H. Du, X. Gao, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14(3), 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, H. Zai, C. Wang, X. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ma, Z. Gao, X. Wang, J. Hong, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, B. Bin Cui and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4344–4352 RSC .
Y. Shengyuan, A. S. Nair, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2010–2014 RSC .
T. Krishnamoorthy, V. Thavasi, M. G. Subodh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2807–2812 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. S. Khoo, P. Hacke, V. Naumann, D. Lausch, S. P. Harvey, J. P. Singh, J. Chai, Y. Wang, A. G. Aberle and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 43–68 RSC .
E. N. Kumar, R. Jose, P. S. Archana, C. Vijila, M. M. Yusoff and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5401–5407 RSC .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 RSC .
R. He, S. Ren, C. Chen, Z. Yi, Y. Luo, H. Lai, W. Wang, G. Zeng, X. Hao, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Wu, F. Fu and D. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5723–5759 RSC .
J. S. Yeo, C. H. Lee, D. Jang, S. Lee, S. M. Jo, H. I. Joh and D. Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 667–676 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Pezeshki and A. Zekry, Fundamentals of Solar Cell Design,  2021, pp. 393–460 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, J. A. Márquez, T. Unold and A. Walsh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1481–1491 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Li, Z. Gao, Y. Zhou, M. Li, D. Zhang, K. Tao, S. Jiang, H. Ge, S. Xiao and R. Jia, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 222, 110947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, R. Müller, J. Benick, F. Feldmann, B. Steinhauser, C. Reichel, A. Fell, M. Bivour, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6(4), 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Li, Z. Gao, Y. Zhou, M. Li, D. Zhang, K. Tao, S. Jiang, H. Ge, S. Xiao and R. Jia, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 222, 110947 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang and X. Zeng, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 3066–3071 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Y. Yang, A. L. Kaledin, S. He, T. Jin, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5779–5789 RSC .
Y. Cheng and L. Ding, SusMat, 2021, 1, 324–344 CrossRef .

          A. Pusch and N. J. Ekins-Daukes, Proceedings of the International Conference on Numerical Simulation of Optoelectronic Devices, NUSOD,  2021, pp. 49–50 Search PubMed .
B. Ehrler, E. Alarcón-Lladó, S. W. Tabernig, T. Veeken, E. C. Garnett and A. Polman, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3029–3033 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, T. Kirchartz, D. Cahen and U. Rau, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13(8), 501–505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Pomaska, W. Duan, D. Qiu, S. Li, A. Lambertz, A. Gad, U. Breuer, F. Finger, U. Rau and K. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 56615–56621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Wei, G. Yuan, Q. Liu, R. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Cao and P. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701575 CrossRef .
J. He, Y. Wan, P. Gao, J. Tang and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802192 CrossRef .
W. J. Ho, P. C. Lu and J. J. Liu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 46, 278–289 CrossRef .
M. K. Basher, M. Khalid Hossain, R. Afaz, S. Tayyaba, M. A. R. Akand, M. T. Rahman and N. M. Eman, Results Phys., 2018, 10, 205–211 CrossRef .
J. A. Raiford, S. T. Oyakhire and S. F. Bent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1997–2023 RSC .
X. Liu, P. R. Coxon, M. Peters, B. Hoex, J. M. Cole and D. J. Fray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3223–3263 RSC .
L. Fu, H. Li, L. Wang, R. Yin, B. Li and L. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4017–4056 RSC .
S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 RSC .
H. Huang, C. Modanese, S. Sun, G. von Gastrow, J. Wang, T. P. Pasanen, S. Li, L. Wang, Y. Bao, Z. Zhu, S. Sneck and H. Savin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 356–364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya and S. John, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. D. Smith, G. Reich, M. Baldrias, M. Reich, N. Boitnott and G. Bunea, Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2016, pp. 3351–3355 Search PubMed .
F. Zhao, H. Zhang, R. Zhang, J. Yuan, D. He, Y. Zou and F. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
H. Jinno, T. Yokota, M. Koizumi, W. Yukita, M. Saito, I. Osaka, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Karan, D. Mandal and B. B. Khatua, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10655–10666 RSC .
V. Jella, S. Ippili, J. H. Eom, J. Choi and S. G. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .
A. Feng and P. F. Smet, Materials, 2018, 11, 484 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Guo, J. Li, G. Zhang, M. Lu and Y. Shi, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 199, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Q. Huang, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, D. Ma, J. Zhao, C. Xu, Z. Mao, Y. Zhang and Z. Chi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22645–22651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Peng, Y. Jiang, B. Huang, Y. Du, J. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. Ma, S. Golovynskyi, B. Chen and F. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Peng, B. Huang, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 389–400 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, H. Kim, S. Ji, H. J. Kim, M. S. Kang, T. S. Kim, J. E. Won, J. H. Lee, J. Cheon, K. Kang, W. Bin Im and J. U. Park, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 66–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Marriott and C. N. Xu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 678–742 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Zhang, Y. Z. Long, X. Yan, X. Wang and F. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4052–4057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Ma, H. Zheng and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Des., 2021, 211, 110164 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bao, Y. Hu, Q. Yang and C. Pan, MRS Bull., 2018, 43(12), 952–958 CrossRef .
X. Xia, J. Chen, H. Guo, G. Liu, D. Wei, Y. Xi, X. Wang and C. Hu, Nano Res., 2016, 10(1), 320–330 CrossRef .
M. C. Wong, L. Chen, M. K. Tsang, Y. Zhang and J. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4488–4495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lasheras, J. Gutiérrez, S. Reis, D. Sousa, M. Silva, P. Martins, S. Lanceros-Mendez, J. M. Barandiarán, D. A. Shishkin and A. P. Potapov, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 065024 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, X. Li and J. Xu, Int. J. Appl. Electromagn. Mech., 2016, 52, 851–858 Search PubMed .
K. Mori, Y. Shindo, F. Narita and S. Okura, Mech. Adv. Mater. Struct., 2015, 23, 180–186 CrossRef .
G. Miao, S. Fang, S. Wang and S. Zhou, Appl. Energy, 2022, 305, 117838 CrossRef .
Z. Xing, J. Li and D. Viehland, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 013505 CrossRef .
J. Qiu, Y. Wen, P. Li and H. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 17D701 CrossRef .
F. Narita, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1600586 CrossRef .
P. Maharjan, M. Salauddin, H. Cho and J. Y. Park, Appl. Energy, 2018, 232, 398–408 CrossRef .
A. Ghodsi, H. Jafari, S. Azizi and M. R. Ghazavi, Energy, 2020, 207, 118268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cai and W. H. Liao, Mech. Syst. Signal Process., 2021, 150, 107251 CrossRef .
B. Yan, N. Yu, L. Zhang, H. Ma, C. Wu, K. Wang and S. Zhou, Smart Mater. Struct., 2020, 29, 025022 CrossRef .
Y. Jia, Q. Jiang, H. Sun, P. Liu, D. Hu, Y. Pei, W. Liu, X. Crispin, S. Fabiano, Y. Ma and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rogdakis, N. Karakostas and E. Kymakis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3352–3392 RSC .
M. Hong, W. Lyu, Y. Wang, J. Zou and Z. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 10568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Bubnova and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9345–9362 RSC .
D. Kraemer, J. Sui, K. McEnaney, H. Zhao, Q. Jie, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1299–1308 RSC .
C. H. Wang, H. C. Hsieh, Z. W. Sun, V. K. Ranganayakulu, T. W. Lan, Y. Y. Chen, Y. Y. Chang and A. T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27001–27009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Morozova, I. V. Korobeinikov, N. V. Abrosimov and S. V. Ovsyannikov, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 5416–5435 RSC .
E. Kanimba, M. Pearson, J. Sharp, D. Stokes, S. Priya and Z. Tian, Energy, 2018, 142, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mei, M. Liu, P. Vivo, V. Pecunia, J. Mei, V. Pecunia, M. Liu and P. Vivo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2106295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, J. Xu, B. Paul and P. Eklund, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 366–388 CrossRef .
G. J. Snyder and A. H. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2280–2283 RSC .
T. Zhu, Y. Liu, C. Fu, J. P. Heremans, J. G. Snyder, X. Zhao, T. J. Zhu, Y. T. Liu, C. G. Fu, X. B. Zhao, J. P. Heremans and J. G. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605884 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han and D. D. L. Chung, Composites, Part A, 2013, 48, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Marugán, F. P. G. Márquez, J. M. P. Perez and D. Ruiz-Hernández, Appl. Energy, 2018, 228, 1822–1836 CrossRef .
J. K. Lundquist, K. K. DuVivier, D. Kaffine and J. M. Tomaszewski, Nat. Energy, 2018, 4(1), 26–34 CrossRef .
C. J. Barnhart, M. Dale, A. R. Brandt and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2804–2810 RSC .
N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 16–18 RSC .
D. Emad, M. A. El-Hameed and A. A. El-Fergany, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 249, 114847 CrossRef .
M. A. Miller, S. Duvvuri, I. Brownstein, M. Lee, J. O. Dabiri and M. Hultmark, J. Fluid Mech., 2018, 844, 707–720 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Morrow, R. Gentry and T. Al Haddad, SEEDS,  2018 Search PubMed.
Y. Xu, N. M. M. Nascimento, P. H. F. de Sousa, F. G. Nogueira, B. C. Torrico, T. Han, C. Jia and P. P. Rebouças Filho, Appl. Soft Comput., 2021, 101, 107053 CrossRef .
C. Beale, C. Niezrecki and M. Inalpolat, Mech. Syst. Signal Process., 2020, 142, 106754 CrossRef .
R. Fuentes, R. S. Dwyer-Joyce, M. B. Marshall, J. Wheals and E. J. Cross, Renewable Energy, 2020, 147, 776–797 CrossRef .
M. Rani, P. Choudhary, V. Krishnan and S. Zafar, Composites, Part B, 2021, 215, 108768 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. J. Johansen, L. Mishnaevsky, A. Dashtkar, N. A. Williams, S. Fæster, A. Silvello, I. G. Cano and H. Hadavinia, Coatings, 2021, 11, 1104 CrossRef .
Y. Li, C. Sun, Y. Jiang and F. Feng, Energies, 2019, 12, 627 CrossRef .
S. Sutrisno, S. Iswahyudi and S. B. Wibowo, Energies, 2018, 11, 2374 CrossRef .
G. Lichtenegger, A. A. Rentizelas, N. Trivyza and S. Siegl, Waste Manage., 2020, 106, 120–131 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Cortés, F. Sánchez, A. O’Carroll, B. Madramany, M. Hardiman and T. M. Young, Materials, 2017, 10, 1146 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhao, Y. Jiang, S. Liu, T. Stoesser, L. Zou and K. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 247, 114680 CrossRef .
C. Ye, K. Dong, J. An, J. Yi, X. Peng, C. Ning and Z. L. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1443–1452 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Pradeep, S. V. Satya Prasad, L. V. Suryam and P. Prasanna Kumari, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 19, 556–559 CAS .
Z. Kınas, A. Karabiber, A. Yar, A. Ozen, F. Ozel, M. Ersöz and A. Okbaz, Energy, 2022, 239, 122369 CrossRef .

          F. N. Buyuknalcaci, Y. Polat, T. A. Negawo, E. Döner, M. S. Alam, T. Hamouda and A. Kilic, Polymer-based Nanocomposites for Energy and Environmental Applications: A volume in Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engineering,  2018, pp. 635–661 Search PubMed .
S. Boncel, A. Kolanowska, A. W. Kuziel and I. Krzyżewska, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6542–6555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Geng, M. Y. Liu, J. Li, X. M. Shi and J. K. Kim, Composites, Part A, 2008, 39, 1876–1883 CrossRef .
K. Ansal Muhammed, C. Ramesh Kannan, S. Marimuthu and S. Manivannan, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021 DOI:10.1016/J.MATPR.2020.12.1068 .
X. Li, Y. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Yang, K. Wang and C. Huang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106571 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dudem, N. D. Huynh, W. Kim, D. H. Kim, H. J. Hwang, D. Choi and J. S. Yu, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 269–281 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Hasan, S. Ahmed, K. Motahar Hossain Bhaban, M. Hasibul Hasan and S. Ahmed, Int. J. Eng. Mater. Manuf., 2017, 2, 37–48 Search PubMed .
L. Thomas and M. Ramachandra, Mater. Today: Proc., 2018, 5, 2635–2640 CAS .
M. Z. Saidi, C. El Moujahid, A. Pasc, N. Canilho, C. Delgado-Sanchez, A. Celzard, V. Fierro, R. Kouitat-Njiwa and T. Chafik, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 620, 126509 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Correa, H. L. Beyer, J. E. Fargione, J. D. Hill, H. P. Possingham, S. R. Thomas-Hall and P. M. Schenk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 107, 250–263 CrossRef .
N. M. Clauser, G. González, C. M. Mendieta, J. Kruyeniski, M. C. Area and M. E. Vallejos, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 794 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Ambaye, M. Vaccari, A. Bonilla-Petriciolet, S. Prasad, E. D. van Hullebusch and S. Rtimi, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 290, 112627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mao, N. Huang, L. Chen and H. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 635, 1081–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Alper, K. Tekin, S. Karagöz and A. J. Ragauskas, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4390–4414 RSC .
Y. Zhou, L. Schideman, G. Yu and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3765–3779 RSC .
L. R. Lynd, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1150–1152 RSC .
M. Fajardy and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1389–1426 RSC .
M. Amer, E. Z. Wojcik, C. Sun, R. Hoeven, R. Hoeven, J. M. X. Hughes, M. Faulkner, I. S. Yunus, S. Tait, L. O. Johannissen, S. J. O. Hardman, D. J. Heyes, G. Q. Chen, G. Q. Chen, M. H. Smith, P. R. Jones, H. S. Toogood, N. S. Scrutton, N. S. Scrutton and N. S. Scrutton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1818–1831 RSC .
F. Xu, J. Sun, N. V. S. N. M. Konda, J. Shi, T. Dutta, C. D. Scown, B. A. Simmons and S. Singh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1042–1049 RSC .
F. Monlau, C. Sambusiti, E. Ficara, A. Aboulkas, A. Barakat and H. Carrère, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2600–2621 RSC .
C. S. K. Lin, L. A. Pfaltzgraff, L. Herrero-Davila, E. B. Mubofu, S. Abderrahim, J. H. Clark, A. A. Koutinas, N. Kopsahelis, K. Stamatelatou, F. Dickson, S. Thankappan, Z. Mohamed, R. Brocklesby and R. Luque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 426–464 RSC .
M. Morales, M. Ataman, S. Badr, S. Linster, I. Kourlimpinis, S. Papadokonstantakis, V. Hatzimanikatis and K. Hungerbühler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2794–2805 RSC .
G. Kumar, S. Shobana, D. Nagarajan, D. J. Lee, K. S. Lee, C. Y. Lin, C. Y. Chen and J. S. Chang, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2018, 50, 136–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Łukajtis, I. Hołowacz, K. Kucharska, M. Glinka, P. Rybarczyk, A. Przyjazny and M. Kamiński, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 91, 665–694 CrossRef .
D. F. Correa, H. L. Beyer, H. P. Possingham, S. R. Thomas-Hall and P. M. Schenk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 74, 1131–1146 CrossRef .
M. Lesiv, D. Schepaschenko, E. Moltchanova, R. Bun, M. Dürauer, A. V. Prishchepov, F. Schierhorn, S. Estel, T. Kuemmerle, C. Alcántara, N. Kussul, M. Shchepashchenko, O. Kutovaya, O. Martynenko, V. Karminov, A. Shvidenko, P. Havlik, F. Kraxner, L. See and S. Fritz, Sci. Data, 2018, 5(1), 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Darwish and A. Fadel, Arabian J. Geosci., 2017, 10, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
P. Binod, E. Gnansounou, R. Sindhu and A. Pandey, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2019, 5, 317–325 CrossRef .
A. E. Inglesby and A. C. Fisher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7996–8006 RSC .
X. Yuan, X. Shi, D. Zhang, Y. Qiu, R. Guo and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1511–1515 RSC .
K. Verbeeck, L. C. Buelens, V. V. Galvita, G. B. Marin, K. M. Van Geem and K. Rabaey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1788–1802 RSC .
J. Colón, E. Cadena, M. Pognani, R. Barrena, A. Sánchez, X. Font and A. Artola, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5731–5741 RSC .
A. E. Rotaru, P. M. Shrestha, F. Liu, M. Shrestha, D. Shrestha, M. Embree, K. Zengler, C. Wardman, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 7, 408–415 RSC .
M. Sharifi, R. Pothu, R. Boddula and G. R. Bardajee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3220–3229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Chen and J. Wu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 240, 120–137 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khan, W. Ahmed and A. Najmi, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2019, 142, 49–58 CrossRef .
D. V. D. G. Delmonico, H. H. dos Santos, M. A. P. Pinheiro, R. de Castro and R. M. de Souza, Waste Manage. Res., 2018, 36, 48–58 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kumar and S. R. Samadder, Energy, 2020, 197, 117253 CrossRef CAS .
G. Srisowmeya, M. Chakravarthy and G. Nandhini Devi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 119, 109587 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dahiya, S. Chatterjee, O. Sarkar and S. V. Mohan, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 321, 124354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Valentini, V. Kozell, C. Petrucci, A. Marrocchi, Y. Gu, D. Gelman and L. Vaccaro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2646–2664 RSC .

          J. J. Lamb and B. G. Pollet, Hydrogen, Biomass Bioenergy,  2020, pp. 155–162 Search PubMed .
U. Schröder, F. Harnisch and L. T. Angenent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 513–519 RSC .
O. Schaetzle, F. Barrière and K. Baronian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 607–620 RSC .
S. Kosourov, M. Jokel, E. M. Aro and Y. Allahverdiyeva, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1431–1436 RSC .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sánchez-Sánchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, F. Del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 2, 35–54 RSC .
Y. Zhang and J. Shen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 17–23 CrossRef .
A. R. Poerwoprajitno, L. Gloag, J. Watt, S. Cychy, S. Cheong, P. V. Kumar, T. M. Benedetti, C. Deng, K.-H. Wu, C. E. Marjo, D. L. Huber, M. Muhler, J. J. Gooding, W. Schuhmann, D.-W. Wang, R. D. Tilley, A. R. Poerwoprajitno, L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, J. J. Gooding, R. D. Tilley, J. Watt, D. L. Huber, S. Cheong, C. E. Marjo, S. Cychy, M. Muhler, W. Schuhmann, P. V. Kumar, C. Deng, K.-H. Wu and D.-W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15487–15491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Lai, Y. Z. Chou, M. H. Lee and K. Y. A. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 332, 717–726 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Penfold, C. F. Förster and L. E. Macaskie, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2003, 33, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
K. Menberg, S. Pfister, P. Blum and P. Bayer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2720–2743 RSC .
S. Shaw, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2021, 1834, 012017 CrossRef .
J. W. Tester, K. Beckers, A. J. Hawkins and M. Z. Lukawski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6211–6241 RSC .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3193–3222 RSC .
M. Thiébaut, J. F. Filipot, C. Maisondieu, G. Damblans, R. Duarte, E. Droniou, N. Chaplain and S. Guillou, Energy, 2020, 191, 116550 CrossRef .
J. Geng, S. Xin, S. D. P. Williams and W. Jiang, J. Geophys. Res.: Solid Earth, 2021, 126, e2020JB020685 Search PubMed .
T. Wilberforce, Z. El Hassan, A. Durrant, J. Thompson, B. Soudan and A. G. Olabi, Energy, 2019, 175, 165–181 CrossRef .
P. Serras, G. Ibarra-Berastegi, J. Sáenz and A. Ulazia, Ocean Eng., 2019, 189, 106314 CrossRef .
E. Mendoza, D. Lithgow, P. Flores, A. Felix, T. Simas and R. Silva, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 112, 440–449 CrossRef .
M. Shadman, C. Silva, D. Faller, Z. Wu, L. P. de Freitas Assad, L. Landau, C. Levi and S. F. Estefen, Energies, 2019, 12, 3658 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Ahmadi, M. Ghazvini, M. A. Nazari, M. A. Ahmadi, F. Pourfayaz, G. Lorenzini and T. Ming, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 1387–1410 CrossRef .
R. Sathre, J. B. Greenblatt, K. Walczak, I. D. Sharp, J. C. Stevens, J. W. Ager and F. A. Houle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 803–819 RSC .
R. A. Felseghi, E. Carcadea, M. S. Raboaca, C. N. Trufin and C. Filote, Energies, 2019, 12, 4593 CrossRef CAS .
L. Van Hoecke, L. Laffineur, R. Campe, P. Perreault, S. W. Verbruggen and S. Lenaerts, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 815–843 RSC .
A. Sartbaeva, V. L. Kuznetsov, S. A. Wells and P. P. Edwards, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 79–85 RSC .
K. Rajagopalan, B. Ramasubramanian, K. Manojkumar, S. Ramakrishna, P. Marappan and K. Saminathan, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 19950–19962 RSC .
M. Dumortier, S. Tembhurne and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3614–3628 RSC .
D. P. Broom and M. Hirscher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3368–3380 RSC .
S. Chen, C. Pei and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3473–3495 RSC .
J. Ashok, N. Dewangan, S. Das, P. Hongmanorom, M. H. Wai, K. Tomishige and S. Kawi, Fuel Process. Technol., 2020, 199, 106252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niermann, S. Drünert, M. Kaltschmitt and K. Bonhoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 290–307 RSC .
G. Zhang, X. Yang, M. Dubois, M. Herraiz, R. Chenitz, M. Lefèvre, M. Cherif, F. Vidal, V. P. Glibin, S. Sun and J. P. Dodelet, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3015–3037 RSC .
J. Chi and H. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cao, K. Huang, Y. Shi and N. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 460–490 RSC .
Y. Shao, J. P. Dodelet, G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807615 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Abdalla, S. Hossain, A. T. Azad, P. M. I. Petra, F. Begum, S. G. Eriksson and A. K. Azad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 353–368 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 RSC .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 491–503 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Patel, S. K. Patel, C. L. Ritt, A. Deshmukh, Z. Wang, M. Qin, M. Qin, R. Epsztein, M. Elimelech and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1694–1710 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, Y. Zhong, S. Gong and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1771–1793 RSC .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, R. Thorne, T. Wenzel and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1092–1109 RSC .
A. Kumar, G. Sharma, M. Naushad, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, A. García-Peñas, G. T. Mola, C. Si and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122937 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and Y. Xiong, Energy Sources, Part A, 2020 DOI:10.1080/15567036.2020.1824038 .
W. Zhang and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 632, 119358 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramalingam, Q. Wei, F. Chen, K. Shen, M. Liang, J. Dai, X. Hou, Q. Ru, G. Babu, Q. He and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2021, 17, 2100490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ramalingam, M. Liang, N. L. W. Pyae, S. H. Aung, T. Z. Oo, P. Srimuk, J. Ma, V. Presser, F. Chen and T. D. Waite, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32788–32796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, T. Liu, Y. Kan, K. Gao, B. Tang and Y. Li, Small Sci., 2021, 1, 2100001 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, K. Yu and T. Someya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000765 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Adam, J. O. Dennis, Y. Al-Hadeethi, E. M. Mkawi, B. A. Abdulkadir, F. Usman, Y. M. Hassan, I. A. Wadi and M. Sani, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Q. Li, S. Y. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. J. Xia, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1723–1729 RSC .
B. Ramasubramanian, S. Sundarrajan, V. Chellappan, M. V. Reddy, S. Ramakrishna and K. Zaghib, Batteries, 2022, 8, 133 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sezer and M. Koç, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. il Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 365(6408), eaat8235,  DOI:10.1126/science.aat8235 .
B. Chen, N. Ren, Y. Li, L. Yan, S. Mazumdar, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2003628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barbato, E. Artegiani, M. Bertoncello, M. Meneghini, N. Trivellin, E. Mantoan, A. Romeo, G. Mura, L. Ortolani, E. Zanoni and G. Meneghesso, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 333002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Plentz, G. Andrä, T. Pliewischkies, U. Brückner, B. Eisenhawer and F. Falk, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 204, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, Z. Lu, X. Sun, Y. Xiang, Z. Chen, J. Shi, I. Bhat, G. C. Wang, M. Washington and T. M. Lu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4589–4599 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Lee, K. Y. Lai, C. A. Lin, C. T. Li, K. C. Ho, C. I. Wu, S. P. Lau and J. H. He, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoon, L. Li, A. V. Semichaevsky, J. H. Ryu, H. T. Johnson, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Q. Li, S. Zhang, R. Yin, X. Liu, Y. He, K. Dai, C. Shan, J. Guo, C. Liu, C. Shen, X. Wang, N. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12121–12141 RSC .
J. Ramanujam, D. M. Bishop, T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, J. Rath, R. Nekovei, E. Artegiani and A. Romeo, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 110, 100619 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, C. Y. Tsai, Z. Ju and Y. H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 181101 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bag, R. Radhakrishnan, R. Nekovei and R. Jeyakumar, Sol. Energy, 2020, 196, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese, S. Nanayakkara, T. Moot, J. Werner, J. Liu, B. To, S. T. Christensen, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, Z. Lu, X. Sun, Y. Xiang, Z. Chen, J. Shi, I. Bhat, G. C. Wang, M. Washington and T. M. Lu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4589–4599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Redondo-Obispo, T. S. Ripolles, S. Cortijo-Campos, A. L. Álvarez, E. Climent-Pascual, A. de Andrés and C. Coya, Mater. Des., 2020, 191, 108587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941–951 RSC .
C. Wu, B. Chen, X. Zheng and S. Priya, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 438–446 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, W. Guo, R. Yu and C. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23028–23034 RSC .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561(7724), 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chung, S. S. Shin, K. Hwang, G. Kim, K. W. Kim, D. S. Lee, W. Kim, B. S. Ma, Y. K. Kim, T. S. Kim and J. Seo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4854–4861 RSC .
J. Xi, Z. Wu, B. Jiao, H. Dong, C. Ran, C. Piao, T. Lei, T. Bin Song, W. Ke, T. Yokoyama, X. Hou and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606964 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Meng, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Xing, Z. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Cui, T. Hu, M. Su, X. Liao, L. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y. Y. Lee, H. W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y. C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N. G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 RSC .
L. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Chen, G. Lu, R. Li, D. Li, M. S. Humayun, K. K. Shung, J. Zhu, Y. Chen and Q. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 216–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, G. Yuan, G. Hao and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Yang, F. Yao, W. Zhang, B. Wang, G. A. Sewvandi, D. Yang and D. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005141 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Xia, D. Cui, Y. Shi, M. Dong, C. Liu, T. Ding, J. Zhang, Y. Ma, N. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, R. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12446–12467 RSC .
S. P. Yeap, Powder Technol., 2018, 323, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chopra, D. Pantel, Y. Kim, M. Alexe and D. Hesse, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 084107 CrossRef .
J. I. Roscow, Y. Zhang, M. J. Kraśny, R. W. C. Lewis, J. Taylor and C. R. Bowen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 225301 CrossRef .
J. I. Roscow, J. Taylor and C. R. Bowen, Ferroelectrics, 2016, 498(1), 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mansouri, T. F. Sheikholeslami and A. Behzadmehr, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 1608–1615 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baek, J. H. Yun, J. E. Wang, C. K. Jeong, K. J. Lee, K. Il Park and D. K. Kim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17632–17638 RSC .
N. A. Shepelin, A. M. Glushenkov, V. C. Lussini, P. J. Fox, G. W. Dicinoski, J. G. Shapter and A.
V. Ellis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1143–1176 RSC .
W. S. Kang and J. H. Koh, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 2057–2064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, K. I. Kakimoto and H. Ohsato, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, D. Xiao, J. Zhu, Y. Jin, J. Zhu, P. Yu, L. Wu and X. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 054101 CrossRef .
A. Khan, Z. Abas, H. Soo Kim and I. K. Oh, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 053002 CrossRef .
J. Kim and J. H. Koh, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 3819–3825 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Song, J. Liu and L. W. Zhong, Science, 1979, 2007(316), 102–105 Search PubMed .
G. J. Lee, M. K. Lee, J. J. Park, D. Y. Hyeon, C. K. Jeong and K. Il Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37920–37926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Jia and R. Huang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 12080–12085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siddiqui, D. Il Kim, E. Roh, L. T. Duy, T. Q. Trung, M. T. Nguyen and N. E. Lee, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 434–442 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, H. Fan, Y. Zhao and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26190–26197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Abolhasani, M. Naebe, K. Shirvanimoghaddam, H. Fashandi, H. Khayyam, M. Joordens, A. Pipertzis, S. Anwar, R. Berger, G. Floudas, J. Michels and K. Asadi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, T. K. Sinha, B. Mahanty and D. Mandal, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 1190–1197 CrossRef .
C. K. Jeong, C. Baek, A. I. Kingon, K. Il Park and S. H. Kim, Small, 2018, 14, 1704022 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Karan, S. Maiti, O. Kwon, S. Paria, A. Maitra, S. K. Si, Y. Kim, J. K. Kim and B. B. Khatua, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 655–666 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karan, S. Maiti, A. K. Agrawal, A. K. Das, A. Maitra, S. Paria, A. Bera, R. Bera, L. Halder, A. K. Mishra, J. K. Kim and B. B. Khatua, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 169–183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. K. Jeong, T. Yang, H. Sun, L. Q. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Chen and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14546–14552 RSC .
M. M. Alam and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, H. Zhang, H. Mi, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, S. Kumar Karan, J. Lee, A. Kumar Mishra, B. Bhusan Khatua and J. Kon Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 282–293 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vats, A. Kumar, N. Ortega, C. R. Bowen and R. S. Katiyar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1335–1345 RSC .
J. J. Serralta-Macías, F. Calderón-Piñar, O. García Zaldivar, D. Olguín and J. M. Yáñez-Limón, AIP Adv., 2021, 11, 065020 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, R. Sun, F. Wang, T. Feng, P. Zhang and H. Luo, J. Adv. Dielectr., 2021, 11, 2150023 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, Y. Su, K. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Xu, M. Dong and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bevione, E. Garofalo, L. Cecchini and A. Chiolerio, MRS Energy Sustainability, 2020, 7(1), 1–10 CrossRef .
J. G. Sun, T. N. Yang, C. Y. Wang and L. J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Kang, S.-J. Yoon, J.-B. Yoo and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 820 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Deng and Q. Fu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3130–3152 RSC .
J. Ben, Z. Song, X. Liu, W. Lü and X. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wu, S. Cheng, M. Yao, L. Yang, Y. Zhu, P. Liu, O. Xing, J. Zhou, M. Wang, H. Luo and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702160 CrossRef .
I. W. P. Chen, Y. C. Chou and P. Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 17864–17872 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, C. Liu, D. A. Dinh, K. S. Hui, K. N. Hui, J. M. Yun and K. H. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9763–9770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Kang, J. Zhang, E. Jung, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 167–177 CrossRef .
B. Q. Li, S. Y. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. J. Xia, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1723–1729 RSC .
G. Li, H. Cai, X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Yang and J. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37675–37684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Shi, D. Wei and H. Duan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 75–84 CrossRef .
X. Xu, J. Tang, H. Qian, S. Hou, Y. Bando, M. S. A. Hossain, L. Pan and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38737–38744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2866–2876 RSC .
S. Zhou, X. Kong, B. Zheng, F. Huo, M. Strømme and C. Xu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9578–9586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Xu, B. Fang, T. Huang, S. Cai, H. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Gopalsamy, W. Gao and C. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22113–22119 RSC .
M. Idrees, S. Ahmed, Z. Mohammed, N. S. Korivi and V. Rangari, Addit. Manuf., 2020, 36, 101525 CAS .
J. Liang, B. Tian, S. Li, C. Jiang and W. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000022 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, H. Tan, X. Li, A. I. Y. Tok, P. Liang, D. Chao and H. J. Fan, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900274 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Kuang, W. Gan, J. Song, G. Chen, G. Pastel, B. Liu, Y. Li, H. Huang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802964 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Bi, T. Liu, T. He, J. Cheng, F. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Mu, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903852 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. D. Yang, X. Y. Yang, T. Liu, Z. W. Chang, Y. Bin Yin, X. B. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800590 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, R. Qin, X. Liu, P. Fang, D. Zheng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903675 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wu, L. Zhang, Y. Yuan, L. Zhong, Z. Chen, X. Chi, H. Lu, Z. Chen, R. Zou, T. Li, C. Jiang, Y. Chen, X. Peng and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Li, H. Li, L. Tang, B. He, C. Li, Z. Pan, Z. Zhou, Q. Li, J. Sun, L. Wei, X. Fan, T. Zhang and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 267–274 CrossRef .
B. Shi, Z. Li and Y. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801511 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Burkhard, V. van Eif, L. Garric, V. M. Christoffels and J. Bakkers, J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis., 2017, 4, 4 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. Goyal, S. Agarwal, S. Barman, A. Pranav, D. Prasad and V. Nath, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering,  2019, vol. 556, pp. 649–654 Search PubMed .
E. Katz and K. MacVittie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2791–2803 RSC .
K. MacVittie, J. Halámek, L. Halámková, M. Southcott, W. D. Jemison, R. Lobel and E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 6, 81–86 RSC .
Y. Qi and M. C. McAlpine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1275–1285 RSC .
L. Bereuter, S. Williner, F. Pianezzi, B. Bissig, S. Buecheler, J. Burger, R. Vogel, A. Zurbuchen and A. Haeberlin, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 45, 1172–1180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Song, J. H. Han, H. C. Yang, K. Il Nam and J. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 364–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gutruf, R. T. Yin, K. B. Lee, J. Ausra, J. A. Brennan, Y. Qiao, Z. Xie, R. Peralta, O. Talarico, A. Murillo, S. W. Chen, J. P. Leshock, C. R. Haney, E. A. Waters, C. Zhang, H. Luan, Y. Huang, G. Trachiotis, I. R. Efimov and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Song, J. H. Han, T. Lim, N. Kim, S. Shin, J. Kim, H. Choo, S. Jeong, Y. C. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. Lee, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Wang, W. Ni, K. Li and B. Gao, Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., 2018, 5296406,  DOI:10.1155/2018/5296406 .
O. Aleksandrova, S. Khrypko and G. Iatsenko, Beytulhikme: An International Journal of Philosophy, 2020, 10(3), 771–785,  DOI:10.18491/beytulhikme.1582 .
X. Yang, Z. Xiong, Y. Chen, Y. Ren, L. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Zhou, F. Pan and S. T. Han, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105246 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ansaripour and M. A. Karami, Sens. Imaging, 2017, 18, 1–12 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Chen, G. Lu, R. Li, J. Xing, K. K. Shung, M. S. Humayun, J. Zhu, Y. Chen and Q. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902522 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Lin, W. Zhou, T. Luo and L. Qin, Micromachines, 2021, 12, 305 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Cheng, J. Yang, Z. Rao, G. Cheng, S. Yang, X. Huang and M. Wang, Sensors, 2017, 17, 2515 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Shin and T. J. Hamilton, Sensors, 2021, 21, 946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Gesing, F. D. P. Alves, S. Paul and J. A. Cordioli, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Fu, D. Chen and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(11), 17499–17507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Yang and Z. Rao, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 782 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Park, S. Islam, H. E. Kim, J. Korostoff, M. B. Blatz, G. Hwang and A. Kim, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 2000658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Naves Freire, T. M. E. Iunes Carrera, L. S. Rodriguez, M. Lara De Carli, A. P. Filho, J. A. Costa Hanemann, N. V. Ribeiro Júnior and S. C. Pigossi, Implant Dent., 2019, 28, 86–90 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Pecheva, R. L. Sammons and A. D. Walmsley, Med. Eng. Phys., 2016, 38, 199–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hennet, Front. Vet. Sci., 2015, 2, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Schaeren, C. Jaquiéry, M. Heberer, M. Tolnay, T. Vercellotti and I. Martin, J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg., 2008, 66, 593–596 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Von See, N. C. Gellrich, M. Rücker, H. Kokemüller, H. Kober and E. Stöver, Br. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg., 2012, 50, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Bhusari, K. A. Banavali and B. Kotak, IOSR J. Dent. Med. Sci. (IOSR-JDMS), 2015, 8, 30–32 CrossRef .
L. M. Wangatia, S. Yang, F. Zabihi, M. Zhu and S. Ramakrishna, Curr. Opin. Biomed. Eng., 2020, 13, 25–31 CrossRef .
M. Nafea, A. Nawabjan and M. S. Mohamed Ali, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 279, 191–203 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ouyang, X. Feng, S. Kuang, N. Panwar, P. Song, C. Yang, G. Yang, X. Hemu, G. Zhang, H. S. Yoon, J. P. Tam, B. Liedberg, G. Zhu, K. T. Yong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 610–619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, K. Liu, Q. Zhou, C. Xu, J. Gao, Z. Wang, F. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Ye, J. Ou, J. Jiang, D. A. Wilson, S. Liu, F. Peng and Y. Tu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mushtaq, H. Torlakcik, M. Hoop, B. Jang, F. Carlson, T. Grunow, N. Läubli, A. Ferreira, X. Z. Chen, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808135 CrossRef .
G. Liu, S. Xu, Y. Liu, Y. Gao, T. Tong, Y. Qi and C. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909886 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gimenes, M. Ap Zaghete, M. Bertolini, J. A. Varela, L. O. Coelho and N. F. Silva Jr., Proc. SPIE, 2004, 5385, 539–547 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Martins, S. Ribeiro, C. Ribeiro, V. Sencadas, A. C. Gomes, F. M. Gama and S. Lanceros-Méndez, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17938–17944 RSC .
C. Ribeiro, D. M. Correia, I. Rodrigues, L. Guardão, S. Guimarães, R. Soares and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahmadi, M. Kharaziha and S. Labbaf, Biomed. Mater., 2019, 15, 015007 CrossRef PubMed .
G. J. Jeong, J. Y. Oh, Y. J. Kim, S. H. Bhang, H. K. Jang, J. Han, J. K. Yoon, S. M. Kwon, T. Il Lee and B. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38344–38355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, H. Du, Z. Xie, M. Li, J. Zhu, J. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Tao and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3644–3651 RSC .
D. Awfa, M. Ateia, M. Fujii and C. Yoshimura, J. Water Process. Eng., 2019, 31, 100836 CrossRef .
V. Kartsch, S. Benatti, M. Mancini, M. Magno and L. Benini, Proc. - IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2018 DOI:10.1109/ISCAS.2018.8351727 .
J. Zhao, Y. Lin, J. Wu, H. Y. Y. Nyein, M. Bariya, L. C. Tai, M. Chao, W. Ji, G. Zhang, Z. Fan and A. Javey, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1925–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, T. Gao, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103909 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, T. Yang, L. Jin, C. Yan, H. Huang, X. Chu, Z. Wang, D. Xiong, G. Tian, Y. Gao, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 516–525 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Ansari and M. A. Karami, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2015, 660, 012121 CrossRef .
L. Dong, A. B. Closson, M. Oglesby, D. Escobedo, X. Han, Y. Nie, S. Huang, M. D. Feldman, Z. Chen and J. X. J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104085 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. J. Shin, H. Lee, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, G. T. Hwang, H. Y. Lee, D. J. Joe, J. H. Han, S. H. Lee, J. Kim, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700341 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. S. Zhang, X. Cheng, Y. Liu, M. Han, X. Xue, S. Wang, F. Yang, S. A. Smitha, H. Zhang and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 296–304 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Hwang, Y. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. Oh, C. K. Jeong, D. Y. Park, J. Ryu, H. Kwon, S. G. Lee, B. Joung, D. Kim and K. J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2677–2684 RSC .
D. Matsouka, S. Vassiliadis and D. V. Bayramol, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065508 CrossRef .
J. Song, B. Yang, W. Zeng, Z. Peng, S. Lin, J. Li and X. Tao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800016 CrossRef .
Y. Su, C. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Yang, G. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Li, Q. Gong, G. Xie, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Tai, Y. Jiang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010962 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, Y. Cho, S. Park, J. Kim, J. Sun, D. Ahn, M. Lee, D. Kim, T. Kim, H. Shin and J. J. Park, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104932 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. Guo, Phys. E, 2019, 105, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Oh, D. K. Kim, Y. C. Choi, S. J. Lim, J. B. Jeong, J. H. Ko, W. G. Hahm, S. W. Kim, Y. Lee, H. Kim and B. J. Yeang, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mao, M. Shen, B. Liu, L. Xing, S. Chen and X. Xue, Sensors, 2019, 19, 3310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim and K. S. Yun, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. Green Technol., 2019, 6(4), 699–710 CrossRef .
Y. Tan, K. Yang, B. Wang, H. Li, L. Wang and C. Wang, Nano Res., 2021, 14(11), 3969–3976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. Ahn, J. Kim, J. Jeong, T. H. Park, H. Yoon, J. Hur and J.-J. Park, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2018, 10, 1788–1792 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brindha, S. S. R. Ajith, M. Nandhini, M. Selvam, K. Subannajui, K. Khotmungkhun and K. Sakthipandi, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2019, 42, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. You, X. X. Wang, X. Yan, J. Zhang, W. Z. Song, M. Yu, Z. Y. Fan, S. Ramakrishna and Y. Z. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3500–3509 RSC .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Luo, Q. Li, K. Du, Z. Xu, H. Zhu, D. Liu, L. Cai, P. Ghosh and M. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 103998 CrossRef .
E. G. Jeong, Y. Jeon, S. H. Cho and K. C. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1878–1889 RSC .
Z. Gao, P. Liu, X. Fu, L. Xu, Y. Zuo, B. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14447–14454 RSC .
C. Wu, T. W. Kim, T. Guo and F. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. Satharasinghe, T. Hughes-Riley and T. Dias, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2020, 28, 578–592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Sun, T. Chen, L. Qiu, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7545–7548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Z. Gao, L. Xu, X. Shi, X. Fu, K. Li, B. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19947–19953 RSC .
W. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Pan, Y. Cheng, Z. Shao, H. Xiang, G. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Weng, H. Bai and M. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7009–7061 RSC .
X. Zhang, B. C. Shiu, T. T. Li, X. Liu, H. T. Ren, Y. Wang, C. W. Lou and J. H. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131923 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. R. Nunes, R. Godina, J. C. de and O. Matias, Sustainability, 2019, 11, 528 CrossRef .
C. Hsiao, C. Lee and N. Tai, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 6960–6972 RSC .
I. Jeerapan, J. R. Sempionatto, A. Pavinatto, J. M. You and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18342–18353 RSC .
C. H. Kwon, S. H. Lee, Y. B. Choi, J. A. Lee, S. H. Kim, H. H. Kim, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, M. D. Lima, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, I. Jeerapan, F. Tehrani, L. Yin, C. A. Silva-Lopez, J. H. Jang, D. Joshuia, R. Shah, Y. Liang, L. Xie, F. Soto, C. Chen, E. Karshalev, C. Kong, Z. Yang and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3431–3442 RSC .
Y. Ogawa, Y. Takai, Y. Kato, H. Kai, T. Miyake and M. Nishizawa, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 947–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jia, X. Wang, S. Imani, A. J. Bandodkar, J. Ramírez, P. P. Mercier and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18184–18189 RSC .
Z. Lin, J. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhou, K. Meng, W. Wei, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8830–8837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Z. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. C. Wang, H. Guo, G. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800360 CrossRef .
P. Tan, Q. Zheng, Y. Zou, B. Shi, D. Jiang, X. Qu, H. Ouyang, C. Zhao, Y. Cao, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901875 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. M. Wu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8456–8461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Z. H. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Q. Jing, Y. Su, J. Yang, J. Chen, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9213–9222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, X. Pu, J. Chen, Y. Meng, M. H. Yeh, G. Liu, Q. Tang, B. Chen, D. Liu, S. Qi, C. Wu, C. Hu, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Rob., 2018 DOI:10.1126/scirobotics.aat2516 .
G. Zhu, P. Bai, J. Chen and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Alluri, S. Selvarajan, A. Chandrasekhar, B. Saravanakumar, J. H. Jeong and S. J. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 142, 65–78 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vera Anaya, T. He, C. Lee and M. R. Yuce, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104675 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Chiu, S. W. Chen, Y. P. Pao, M. Z. Huang, S. W. Chan and Z. H. Lin, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 964–971 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. K. Nayar, D. C. Sims and M. Fridberg, IEEE International Conference on Computational Photography, ICCP 2015 - Proceedings,  2015 DOI:10.1109/ICCPHOT.2015.7168377 .
Y. Mao, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Guan, B. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Sun, L. Xing, S. Chen and X. Xue, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2019, 11, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Jia, Y. Zhu and T. Zhao, Sensors, 2021, 21, 5144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lan, J. Xiong, D. Gao, Y. Li, J. Chen, J. Lv, J. Ping, Y. Ying and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5307–5315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Ying and J. Ping, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104863 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, X. Li, C. Jiang, Q. Zhang, B. Peng, J. Ping and Y. Ying, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106686 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Jiang, X. Li, S. Dai, Y. Ying and J. Ping, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12314–12323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Hsu, X. Zhang, K. Xu, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, G. Luo, M. Xing and W. Zhong, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 422, 129499 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J. An, S. Shu, R. Cheng, J. Nie, T. Jiang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003066 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, L. Xie, J. Li, Z. Huang, H. Lei, Y. Liu, Z. Wen, Y. Xie and X. Sun, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kempton and J. Tomić, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 280–294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, W. Ye, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, M. Li, W. Tang, C. Wang, Z. Wan, S. Poddar, X. Wen, X. Pan, Y. Lin, Q. Zhou and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7659–7667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dong, Q. Shi, Y. Yang, F. Wen, Z. Zhang and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105414 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Govindraj, M. Sathiyanarayanan and B. Abubakar, Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference On Smart Technology for Smart Nation, SmartTechCon 2017,  2018, pp. 1059–1063 Search PubMed .
C. Nnaji and A. A. Karakhan, J. Building Eng., 2020, 29, 101212 CrossRef .

          M. Kumari and M. Gupta, Internet of Medical Things,  2021, pp. 37–50 Search PubMed .
S. F. Memon, M. Memon and S. Bhatti, IET Circuits, Devices Syst., 2020, 14, 115–129 CrossRef .
K. Rajagopalan, B. Ramasubramanian, K. Manojkumar, V. Sangeetha, A. M. Kannan, S. Ramakrishna and K. Saminathan, Mater. Circ. Econ., 2022, 4, 22,  DOI:10.1007/s42824-022-00064-4 .
A. D. Thierer, SSRN Electron. J., 2015 DOI:10.2139/SSRN.2494382 .
Y. Yan, H. Fan, Y. Li, E. Hoeglinger, A. Wiesinger, A. Barr, G. D. O’connell and C. Harris-Adamson, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 9636 CrossRef .
F. Bussolotti, H. Kawai, Z. E. Ooi, V. Chellappan, D. Thian, A. L. C. Pang and K. E. J. Goh, Nano Futures, 2018, 2, 032001 CrossRef .
T. Ye, X. Li, S. Ma, D. Wu, L. Wei, X. Tang, J. W. Xu, S. Ramakrishna, C. Vijila and X. Wang, Appl. Phys., 2018 DOI:10.48550/arXiv.1802.03128 .
V. Chellappan, A. L. C. Pang, S. Sarkar, Z. E. Ooi and K. E. J. Goh, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2018, 14, 766–773 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bash, Y. Cai, V. Chellappan, S. L. Wong, X. Yang, P. Kumar, J. Da Tan, A. Abutaha, J. J. W. Cheng, Y. F. Lim, S. I. P. Tian, Z. Ren, F. Mekki-Berrada, W. K. Wong, J. Xie, J. Kumar, S. A. Khan, Q. Li, T. Buonassisi and K. Hippalgaonkar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102606 CrossRef CAS .
B. Najafi, H. Mohseni, G. S. Grewal, T. K. Talal, R. A. Menzies and D. G. Armstrong, J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., 2017, 11, 668–677 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Shi, B. Dong, T. He, Z. Sun, J. Zhu, Z. Zhang and C. Lee, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 1131–1162 CrossRef .
M. Cai, J. Wang and W. H. Liao, Appl. Energy, 2020, 263, 114682 CrossRef .
M. S. Hossain, C. K. Gadagamma, Y. Bhattacharya, M. Numada, N. Morimura and K. Meguro, Prog. Disaster Sci., 2020, 7, 100116 CrossRef .
S. Liu, K. Ma, B. Yang, H. Li and X. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007254 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, K. H. Chan, Y. Zhou, X. Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, T. Li and G. W. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Fu, J. He, X. Shi, T. Chen, P. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon and S. H. Park, Sensors, 2020, 20, 1275 CrossRef PubMed .

          W. L. Chang and W. H. Lu, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),  2021, vol. 12762, pp. 66–76 Search PubMed .
R. A. Surmenev, R. V. Chernozem, I. O. Pariy and M. A. Surmeneva, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105442 CrossRef CAS .
T. Steinmetzer, S. Wilberg, I. Bönninger and C. M. Travieso, Microprocess. Microsyst., 2020, 77, 103118 CrossRef .
T. S. Adebayo, H. Rjoub, G. D. Akinsola and S. D. Oladipupo, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 1–12 Search PubMed .
G. Godínez-Zamora, L. Victor-Gallardo, J. Angulo-Paniagua, E. Ramos, M. Howells, W. Usher, F. De León, A. Meza and J. Quirós-Tortós, Energy Strategy Rev., 2020, 32, 100573 CrossRef .
C. Chinchilla-Soto, A. María Durán-Quesada, M. Monge-Muñoz, M. V. Gutiérrez-Soto, K. Novick, T. E. Gimeno and T. A. Martin, Forests, 2021, 12, 889 CrossRef .
M. Varnam, M. Burton, B. Esse, G. Salerno, R. Kazahaya and M. Ibarra, Remote Sens., 2021, 13, 935 CrossRef .
N. Apergis, J. E. Payne and M. Rayos-Velazquez, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 7, 158 CrossRef .
M. Liotta, M. Martínez Cruz, A. Ferrufino, J. Rüdiger, A. Gutmann, K. V. Rojas Cerda, N. Bobrowski and J. M. de Moor, Chem. Geol., 2021, 585, 120562 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jacobsen and M. Godvik, Wind Energy, 2021, 24, 149–161 CrossRef .
L. M. Kamp and L. Y. Vanheule, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 49, 470–480 CrossRef .
S. A. Sarkodie, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 751, 141912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Wang, C. W. Su, O. R. Lobonţ and M. Umar, Energy Policy, 2021, 153, 112281 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pfadt-Trilling and M.-O. P. Fortier, Energy Clim. Change, 2021, 2, 100020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rajamani, L. Jeffery, N. Höhne, F. Hans, A. Glass, G. Ganti and A. Geiges, Clim. Policy, 2021, 21, 983–1004 CrossRef .
K. Fukuda, K. Yu and T. Someya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000765 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, J. Huang, J. Yi, X. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903977 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02695cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Brindha Ramasubramanian
	Brindha Ramasubramanian, a PhD student at National University of Singapore, working on the field of sustainable materials for energy conversion & storage and piezoelectric sensors. Her specific interests include developing sustainable electrodes for metal–sulfur batteries and organic solar cells, leveraging machine learning. She also works on developing high performing catalysts for metal–air batteries. She obtained her undergraduate and a graduate degree in Nanoscience and Technology from India with Gold medal. More details: https://www.linkedin.com/in/brindharamasubramanian/ and https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=mh9_87YAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.

Subramanian Sundarrajan
	Dr. Subramanian Sundarrajan graduated with an M.Sc. in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of Madras, India in 1996. He was awarded one of the prestigious fellowships of India to by CSIR and completed his Ph.D. at the University of Madras in 2003. He joined the National University of Singapore in 2003 where he is working on synthesis of polymers, electrospinning of nanofibers and their applications in battery, air, water, and tissue engineering, clean and sustainable energy. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=2rdfJ3sAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.

Rayavarapu Prasada Rao
	Dr. Rayavarapu Prasada Rao received his Ph.D. from IIT Madras in 2006. He is currently R&G (NRF, Singapore) Senior Research Fellow at Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore and Programme Coordinator at C-MET, MeitY, India. His research interest is development of solid electrolytes for rechargeable batteries to understand fundamental correlation between structure & properties using both experimental and atomistic simulations. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=uMjmDpkAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.

M. V. Reddy
	Dr. M.V. Reddy is currently working as a senior Professional Researcher at Nouveau monde Graphite, Quebec, Canada. For the last 20 years, he has been working on Materials for Energy Storage: cathodes, anodes, and solid electrolytes for Li/Na/K- ion batteries and supercapacitors. He has published over 210 papers, his has been work cited over 16100 times, with an h index of 66 and he is a top 2% highly cited researcher in Energy. He is a member of ICDD USA, IPS and MRS Singapore. He has won many awards and given 150 talks all over the world. More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=pWKr2M0AAAAJ&hl=en.

Vijila Chellappan
	Dr. Vijila Chellappan is a Senior Scientist in the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A-STAR), Singapore. She has experience over 20 years with strong expertise on optoelectronic device technologies (photovoltaics, displays, lasers), material systems (semiconducting polymers, oxides, transition metal dichalcogenides, conducting composites) and transient optical/electrical characterization capabilities including high-throughput optical methodologies for machine learning enabled process optimization. Her current research interest is on sustainable energy storage materials and device development. She received her Ph.D. degree in Physics from Anna University, India, in 2001, and carried out postdoctoral research at Åbo Academy University, Turku, Finland from 2001 to 2002. More details: https://scholar.google.com.sg/citations?user=zrj38lkAAAAJ&hl=en.

Seeram Ramakrishna
	Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng, Everest Chair, is a world-recognized researcher in materials and sustainability and a senior professor at the National University of Singapore. Thomson Reuters identified him among the World's Most Influential Scientific Minds. Clarivate Analytics recognized him among the Top 1% Highly Cited Researchers in the world in materials science as well as cross-field categories. He is regarded as the Guru of electrospinning and applications. His Google Scholar shows over 148600 citations, 175 H-index, and over 1250 i10 index. He is an elected international Fellow of major professional societies and academies of Singapore, India, UK and USA. European Commission Director-General for Environment, Excellency Daniel Calleja Crespo said, “Professor Seeram Ramakrishna should be praised for his personal engagement leading the reflections on how to develop a more sustainable future for all” in his foreword for the Springer Nature book on Circular Economy (ISBN: 978-981-15-8509-8). More details: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=a49NVmkAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.

Broader context
As we monitor the shifting of climatic niches on the heating globe, biological groups are experiencing a massive redistribution. This has far-reaching implications for global ecological sustainability. We consider the worldwide disparities in environmental challenges on ecosystems and suggest altering conventional electricity production systems with low carbon or zero-carbon renewable technologies across economies. Herein, we explore the significance of available low carbon energy production materials and methodologies promoting multilateral safety, especially in the medical, textile, and electronics sectors with the aim of subduing CO2 emission and technological headway. Subsequently, we discuss the aspects of recent medical technologies like biometric recognition, clinical documentation, surveillance, recording, and therapy of human biological attributes that are becoming increasingly common, thanks to implantable technology. Energy harvesting from human action, eyeball motion, and cochlear acoustics, on the other hand, remains as a hot topic of the day. Self-powered implanted gadgets that harness the energy from humans are appealing in this sense for protracted detection of patients’ biological functionalities. Energy capturing systems based on piezoelectricity, thermoelectricity, biofuels, and photovoltaics are developing due to advances in materials science and nanomaterials. We further discuss various self-powered human implantable electronics powered via piezoelectricity, triboelectricity, photovoltaics, and thermoelectricity. Such systems are especially exciting since they are designed for humans with great flexibility, making them ideal for use as wearable technologies.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the review.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of Voc, Jsc and Eg of active electrode materials in solar cells and (b) the critical parameters required for the evolution and development of solar cell efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 3  S–Q limit threshold and values of different solar materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Alkali metal doping with and without defects, revealing low temperature and high-temperature carrier population (reproduced with permission70 Copyright 2020, RSC EES). (b and c) Exciton dis-integration via radioactive electron and hole recombination; and exciton decay via auger recombination (Reproduced with permission75 Copyright 2020, RSC). (d) Surface passivated PV device and construction.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Voltage produced upon human finger touch,95 (B and C) single touch and release response,95 (D) synthesised PVDF/Fe–rGO film,95 (E) flexibility check,95 (F) short circuit current generated upon finger touch and release,95 (G and H) enlarged views of short circuit current,95 (I) output voltage and Jsc,95 (J) working mechanism of a finger touch piezo harvester96 and (K) photographs of instant turn on LEDs powered by a finger tapping piezoelectric harvester96 (reproduced with permission95 Copyright 2015, RSC) (reproduced with permission96 Copyright 2018, RSC).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis process of Fe29Co71 wire/polymer composites,115 (b) schematic of an indoor power line magnetic field energy harvester,116 and (c-i) working of indoor magnetic harvester powering environmental, moisture and motion sensor with detected real time data acquisition in a smart phone116 (reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2017, Wiley) (reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, Elsevier).	 
Vth = α(Th − Tc)
ZT = S2σT/κ

 	Fig. 7  Common thermoelectric materials and their ZT values:131 (a) p-type materials for thermoelectric harvesters, (b) n-type materials for thermoelectric harvesters and (c) timeline of the development of ZT of materials from 1940 to 2017131 (reproduced with permission131 Copyright 2017, Wiley).	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Worldwide cultivation regions for food crops used to produce biofuel162 (a) with adjoining habitat types and regions in North America (b), South America (c), and Southeast Asia (d); the spatial production allocation model (SPAM) 2005 to calculate the total geographical area under development for crops; (e) challenges for biofuel production;163 and (f) various biofuel production technologies164 (reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission163 Copyright 2021, MDPI) (reproduced with permission164 Copyright 2021, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Relative weights of various installed stationary H2 storage as of 2018, (b) total installed capacity in relation to the fuel cell type, 2018, and (c) SWOT analysis of boosting H2 production and commercialization215 (reproduced with permission215 Copyright 2019, MDPI).	 

 	Fig. 10  Concept of CO2 extraction from contaminated soil.	 

 	Fig. 11  List of state-of-the-art device technologies (data sourced from ref. 90 and 239–247).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photos of two textile-based substrates,248 (b) structures of Si solar cells on a fabric substrate,248 (c) flexible solar cells on a textile substrate,248 (d) structure of epitaxially grown CdS/CdTe solar cell packing,249 (e) scale measurement of a flexible solar cell (∼2 cm)249 and (f) fabrication of a graphene:PEDOT:PSS paper based DSSC250 (reproduced with permission248 Copyright 2016, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission249 Copyright 2020, ACS) (reproduced with permission250 Copyright 2017, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Optical images of a piezoelectric element at various angles,267 (b) optical images of a flexible piezoelectric device under bending, twisting and loading,267 (c) photographs of a stretchable device upon bending and unbending in stretch and compress modes268 and (d) short circuit currents and OCVs measured during stretching and compressive modes268 (reproduced with permission.267 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission.268 Copyright 2018, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 14  (i) Schematic illustration of the working of a PENG, based on the pyro- and triboelectric mechanism;300 (ii) OCV and short circuit curves of a hybrid energy generator;300 (iii) fabrication of leaf like Ag nanostructures on a flexible substrate;302 and (iv) photographs, working mechanism, and generated OCV of a TENG–PENG hybrid device302 (reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2018, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the fabricated CNT–PANI flexible supercapacitor,305 (b) CV curves,305 (c) Nyquist plots,305 (d) schematic synthesis of Co3O4 PNC nanosheets,309 (e) cycling performances of Co3O4@NC at a current density of 20 mA cm−2,309 (f) schematic of a Zn solid state air battery with a CNT cathode and chemical structure of a single layer polymer (hydrogen – white; carbon – green; nitrogen – blue and cobalt – pink),310 and (g) photographs of a bendable Zn air battery powering LEDs310 (reproduced with permission305 Copyright 2020, Springer) (reproduced with permission309 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission310 Copyright 2008, RSC).	 

 	Fig. 16  (i) Measurement device: (1) solar cells, (2) optical fibers, (3) PCB, (4) housing and (5) detector fixed on the upper arm;332 (ii) wavelength dependent short circuit current, upon a coverage of 2.3 mm skin;332 (iii) light transmission (∼32 μm epidermis) and signaling human implanted device, absorbing light;333 and (iv) anatomical positioning of the device, chR2 heart placed at the epicardial spot of a mouse334 (reproduced with permission332 Copyright 2017, Springer) (reproduced with permission332 Copyright 2017, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission334 2019, Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 17  (i) Design of a self-powered artificial retina system, (ii) illustration of self-powered perception and ANNs for image recognition, and (iii and iv) the perception system's input and output without image pre-processing338 (reproduced with permission338 Copyright 2020, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Piezoelectric transducer with an implantable middle ear hearing device,342 (b) diagram of a piezoelectric transducer installed in the round window,343 and (c and d) prototype of the annular accelerometer and MEMS sensor implanted at the umbo of the ear344 (reproduced with permission342 Copyright 2017, MDPI) (reproduced with permission343 Copyright 2021, MDPI) (reproduced with permission344 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photographs of implanting piezoelectric nanofillers replacing teeth,348 (b) piezo tip positions, where free end kept near tooth and tip vibrations in air, flow water and stagnant water,349 (c) design of an accelerometer on the calvarium and (d) bone trephination exposing the apex of the right maxillary for piezoelectric endodontic surgery350 (reproduced with permission348 Copyright 2019, Wolters Kluwer Health) (reproduced with permission349 Copyright 2016, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission350 Copyright 2015, Frontiers).	 

 	Fig. 20  (i) Illustration of a device with microscale parts,355 (ii) programmed release of PBS fluid at defined time intervals,355 (iii) schematic of a self-powered transdermal drug delivery system356 and (iv) in vivo treatment of acute ischemic stroke using hydrogen powered microswimmer propulsion systems357 (reproduced with permission355 Copyright 2018, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission356 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission357 Copyright 2021, Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 21  (i) The left side shows the charge and discharge curves of a smart bracelet in outdoor and indoor running, and the right side shows the digital photographs of a person wearing a watch during outdoor and inner running;22 (ii) digital photographs of a self-powered bracelet measuring heart beat;22 (iii) schematic of a self-powered human hand motion recognizer (man–machine interface control system);370 (iv) fabricated nano flexible sensor based hand bandage, which could sense, record and transmit data;370 (v) heartbeat wave acceleration and pulse controller spectrum powering wearables;371 (vi) schematic of a PENG pacemaker prototype with the PDMS/PVDF-TRFE/PDMS device architecture372 and (vii) (a) schematic of an in vivo self-powered flexible harvester attached to the porcine heart and data transmitted via a wireless transmitter, (b) photographs of the flexible harvester bent by the human hand and (c) photograph of the device fixed into the porcine heart between the ventricular and articular apices373 (reproduced with permission22 Copyright 2021, ACS) (reproduced with permission370 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission371 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission372 Copyright 2017, Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic of human worn wearables, which can be powered using low carbon energy harvesters.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Publication count from 2015 to 2022 based on self-powering fabrics, (b) commonly used polymers for self-powered fabrics, (c) active electrode materials with polymers researched for smart fabrics from 2015 to 2022 and (d) perspective roadmap for future development.	 

 	Fig. 24  (i) Design and functionalities of a human muscle fiber inspired PENG embedded on a textile,378 (ii) schematic of a localized strain piezoelectric sensor and the device model on the human body with its application of energy harvesting based on human motion,379 (iii) structure and schematic of a PENG device with a ZnO nanorod active layer,380 (iv) schematic of the sample electrode preparation and poling procedure for the piezoelectric analysis,381 and (v) self-powered piezoelectric sensors embedded on textiles for monitoring the physiological state and running speed of athletes382 (reproduced with permission378 Copyright 2021, Wiley) (reproduced with permission379 Copyright 2020, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission380 Copyright 2019, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission381 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature) (reproduced with permission382 Copyright 2019, MDPI).	 

 	Fig. 25  (i) Device setup photograph and bending test image, and output voltage response as a function of pressure of the fabricated PEG;410 (ii) structural design of a TENG based on a powering shoe insole;412 (iii) photographs of the fabricated device bent at ∼0°, 45°, 75°, and 92°;413 and (iv) self-powered sensor for eye motion prediction and design414 (reproduced with permission410 Copyright 2013, ACS) (reproduced with permission412 Copyright 2013, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission413 Copyright 2017, Elsevier) (reproduced with permission414 Copyright 2020, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Photo shots of smart gloves with TENG sensors for detecting gestures, (b) monitoring motion of real time changes in voltages, (c) wiring diagram for a self-powered TENG device and (d) gesture control photographs – command-based motions of cars425 (reproduced with permission414 Copyright 2021, MDPI).	 
AD	Anaerobic digestion
AIE	Aggregation-induced emission
ANN	Artificial neural network
BE	Bioethanol
CMOS	Complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CSP	Concentrated solar power
CSPC	Carrier selected passivating contact
CST	Concentrated solar technology
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
CVT	Constant-voltage transformer
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
ECM	Extracellular matrix
EDX	Energy dispersive spectroscopy
FE	Finite element
GDP	Gross domestic product
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GPS	Global positioning system
IoT	Internet of Things
LED	Light emitting diode
LIB	Li-ion battery
MEC	Microbial electrolysis cell
MEMSs	Microelectromechanical systems
MFC	Microbial fuel cell
MOF	Metal organic framework
NFA	Non-fullerene acceptor
NIB	Na-ion battery
OECD	Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
OSC	Organic solar cell
PBM	Photo-biomodulation
PCB	Printed circuit board
PCE	Photoconversion efficiency
PECVD	Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PEG	Piezoelectric energy generator
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
PENG	Piezoelectric nanogenerator
PLC	Programmable logic controller
PSE	Perovskite solar cell
PVs	Photovoltaics
QBT	Quadrillion British thermal
RET	Renewable energy technology
RWC	Rotating water column
SC	Supercapacitor
SDGs	Sustainable Development Goals
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SO	Solid oxide
SQ	Shockley and Queisser's
SSC	Solid-state Si solar cell
TE	Thermoelectrics
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TENG	Triboelectric nanogenerator
TPC	Tidal power converter
TSC	Tandem solar cell
WGP	water–gas process
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
ZIB	Zn-ion battery
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02695c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
