Ti 3 C 2 MXene–polymer nanocomposites and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08023C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08023C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8051-8098Ti3C2 MXene–polymer nanocomposites and their applications

        
          
            Hossein 
            Riazi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Srinivasa Kartik 
            Nemani
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael C. 
            Grady
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Babak 
            Anasori
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Masoud 
            Soroush
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. E-mail: Soroushm@drexel.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute, Purdue School of Engineering and Technology, Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
Received 
      15th August 2020
    , Accepted 10th February 2021First published on 12th March 2021AbstractMXene/polymer nanocomposites simultaneously benefit from the attractive properties of MXenes and the flexibility and facile processability of polymers. These composites have shown superior properties such as high light-to-heat conversion, excellent electromagnetic interference shielding, and high charge storage, compared to other nanocomposites. They have applications in chemical, materials, electrical, environmental, mechanical, and biomedical engineering as well as medicine. This property-based review on MXene/polymer nanocomposites critically describes findings and achievements in these areas and puts future research directions into perspective. It surveys novel reported applications of MXene-based polymeric nanocomposites. It also covers surface modification approaches that expand the applications of MXenes in nanocomposites.Hossein RiaziHossein Riazi received his B.S. (2010) and M.S. (2012) degrees in polymer engineering from Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and Ph.D. degree in chemical engineering from Drexel University (2020), Philadelphia, U.S.A. He conducted his Ph.D. project under the supervision of Professor Masoud Soroush. His research interests are polymer membranes, polymerization science, surface chemistry, and polymerization modeling.Srinivasa Kartik NemaniKartik Nemani is a second year Ph.D. student and a research assistant in the layered materials and structures lab at the department of mechanical and energy engineering, IUPUI, Indianapolis. He joined Dr Anasori's research group in Fall 2019. He received his M.S. in mechanical engineering from the University of Toledo in 2018. His current scientific interests are in the field of MXenes, composites, and hybrid materials, and he is working on synthesizing MXenes and developing MXene reinforced materials for various applications.Michael C. GradyMichael C. Grady is an adjunct professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University and a Technical Fellow with Axalta Coating Solutions in Philadelphia, U.S.A. Mike spent 34 years with DuPont working in Performance Coatings, Central Research, and Industrial Biosciences. He received his B.S. (Chemical Engineering) from Drexel University, M.S. (Chemical Engineering) from the University of Pennsylvania, and a Doctor of Science (Polymer Science) from E.T.H.Z., Switzerland. His research interests include polymer reaction engineering, material and process developments, and process modeling and control. He currently holds over 20 patents and has authored/co-authored over 50 papers.Babak AnasoriBabak Anasori is an assistant professor in the Purdue School of Engineering and Technology at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis, USA. He received his Ph.D. in materials science and engineering from Drexel University in 2014. He is one of the inventors of ordered double-transition metal MXenes. His current research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of novel MXenes, their composites and mechanical properties. He is among the 2019 and 2020 Global Highly Cited Researchers, recognized by the Web of Science. He is the inaugural chair of the Early Career Professionals Subcommittee of the Materials Research Society.Masoud SoroushMasoud Soroush is a professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University, U.S.A. He received his B.S. (Chemical Engineering) from Abadan Institute of Technology, Iran, and M.S.E. (Chemical Engineering), M.S.E. (Electrical Engineering: Systems) and Ph.D. (Chemical Engineering) all from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, U.S.A. His research interests are in polymer membranes, polymer reaction engineering, model-predictive safety, multiscale modeling, probabilistic modeling and inference, and process systems engineering. He has edited/co-edited 6 books and authored/co-authored more than 330 publications including over 200 refereed papers. He is an elected fellow of AIChE and a senior member of IEEE.
1 Introduction
MXenes are a large family of electrically conductive, hydrophilic, layered, two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials made from transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbonitrides with a range of aspect ratios and few atomic layer thickness.1 More than 30 different compositions of MXenes have been synthesized to date.1,2 MXenes possess high electrical conductivity (∼15000 S cm−1 for Ti3C2 films), excellent solvent compatibility and stability, hydrophilicity, electrochemical behavior, and mechanical strength. A single-layer MXene is optically transparent (absorbing 3% of visible light) and can function as an electromagnetic interference shield.3,4 The general formula of MXenes is Mn+1XnTx, where M signifies an early transition metal such as Ti, X is carbon and/or nitrogen, T is a surface functional group such as OH, F, and O, and x is the number of functional groups. The value of n is an integer between 1 and 4. In this review, we do not show Tx in MXenes formulas for the sake of simplicity. The most widely studied MXene is Ti3C2, which was first reported in 2011.5 From a morphological point of view, MXenes are similar to GO, as the sheet thickness of a single layer of a MXene is approximately 1 nm, while their lateral dimensions can vary from a few hundred nanometers to tens of microns.6 MXenes usually appear in the form of stacked sheets and their properties strongly depend on their morphology, and the nature of chemical species that exist between their layers. Single-layer MXenes can be easily synthesized by sonication or vigorous manual shaking with hand of the multilayer counterpart.7–10 Colloidal single-layer Ti3C2 MXene has excellent dispersity in water and polar aprotic solvents.11
Polymers have exceptional properties in terms of impact and tensile strengths, fatigue, abrasion, corrosion, fracture resistance and other bulk properties. Their solubility in organic solvents enhances their compatibility with nanoparticles and facilitates their incorporation into 2D material systems. Hybrid materials simultaneously benefit from the properties of both polymers and nanoparticles; this has motivated the addition of 2D nanoparticles such as clay,12 graphene13 and GO14 into polymer matrices.
Graphene and GO have been widely explored as filler materials to develop polymer nanocomposites,15,16 with impregnation methods such as solution processing, in situ polymerization, grafting, melt blending and other covalent and non-covalent modification techniques.17–21 MXene and solution-processed graphene usually have similar processing routes due to their analogous surface morphologies. However, graphene and GO-based polymer nanocomposites have exhibited active adsorption of organic solvents into the graphene layers, which influences the properties of the materials adversely and impacts their mechanical strength, surface chemical activity, and electronic and thermal properties.22,23 Ti3C2 MXene, on the other hand, exhibits excellent solvent stability with tailorable adsorption properties due to the presence of surface functional groups. This relative advantage of MXenes over their close counterparts enables greater synergy between the filler and polymer matrix that can be harnessed to develop highly robust composite materials. MXene's ability to disperse within the polymer matrix without the addition of dispersing agents further facilitates its ability to be introduced during the initial polymer synthesis steps that can be adapted into an existing production line. Processes such as in situ polymerization not only induce strong interfacial interactions between the polymer and graphene but also affect the viscosity of the system which inhibits subsequent processing.17 MXene can be incorporated via in situ polymerization without the relative disadvantages of viscosity, stabilizing agents, active agglomeration, and solution incompatibility as discussed in later sections of this review. Another advantage of MXenes is their top-down synthesis approaches with high yields when compared to other 2D filler materials. Certain sensitive applications such as gas sensors and electronics require low error-prone systems which are expensive to manufacture with graphene via bulk processing routes. The synthesis of defect-free large area graphene sheets has been achieved with methods such as chemical vapor deposition. However, from an economic standpoint, they are less viable for large-scale synthesis and implementation in sensitive technological fields such as electronics and energy storage.24 With the size and morphology being important, surfactant-free stabilization is still a challenge to overcome in graphene synthesis.25 Robust synthesis routes to manufacture high-quality monolayer, defect-free graphene sheets are yet to be achieved.26
In terms of properties, MXenes, similar to GO, are shown to exhibit size dependent variations which especially impacts their dielectric properties in polymer composites.27,28 Similar to graphene, the ratio of permittivity to the loss factor of large flake composites is higher than that of the composites with small filler flakes. In addition, a strong correlation with the charge accumulation at the surfaces between the 2D flakes and the polymer matrix under an external applied electric field is also observed in MXene–polymer composites.28 Graphene based composites have exhibited lower conductivities especially when they are synthesized via melt processing, blending, solution casting, and CVD techniques. One reason for the latter can be the agglomeration of fillers in the matrix.29–31 However, the diverse chemistry of surface modification of graphene, similar to that of MXene, continues to be an essential bridging tool, particularly in energy and environmental technologies, which requires good interfacing with other functional components such as polymers.31
Despite the mechanical robustness of single-layer Ti3C2 MXene, there have not been many studies on the robustness, unlike for graphene and its derivatives.32–34 Single-layer MXene has reportedly exhibited the highest Young's modulus among all solution processed 2D materials.32 The effect and imbibement of MXene's mechanical properties in hybrids are yet to be evaluated in more detail to enable direct comparison with other 2D fillers. MXenes have been mixed with polymers to develop state-of-the-art materials for different applications.35–37 Recently, several review papers have been published on MXene/polymer nanocomposites.35,38 Unlike previously published review papers, this review focuses more on the processing aspects of MXene/polymer systems and describes the potential applications of MXene/polymer nanocomposites in terms of the inherent properties of MXenes. It first describes the surface chemistry of MXenes, their oxidation stability, interlayer distance, and synthesis methods. Next, MXene/polymer nanocomposite fabrication methods are explained. This section covers surface modification approaches to improve the affinity of MXene for polymers and delineates the development of MXene-based polymeric hydrogels, foams and aerogels. Next, the review paper describes the processing methods of the nanocomposites which include topics such as solvent selection criteria and solvent exchange techniques. In addition, techniques such as solution casting, vacuum filtration, spray coating, spin casting, dip-coating, latex blending, electrostatic assembly, wet spinning, and electrospinning are discussed. MXenes can be processed along with thermoplastic polymers in high-temperature conventional processes such as compression molding, extrusion, and melt blending, which are also covered herein. Different applications of MXene/polymer nanocomposites based on the inherent properties of MXene are discussed. The 2D structure of MXenes is highlighted, as it makes these nanomaterials appealing for use in anti-corrosive coatings, nanocomposites with high electromagnetic interference shielding capability, gas separation membranes, wastewater treatment membranes, air filters, smart textiles, sensors, wearable heaters, and self-healing coatings. In this review, we focus on Ti-based MXenes, and mostly on Ti3C2. The word “MXene” refers to Ti3C2, unless otherwise specified.
2 Ti3C2 MXene
2.1 Surface chemistry
The properties of MXenes can be tuned by modifying the surface chemistry of MXenes.39 MXenes inherently possess hydroxyl, fluorine, chlorine and oxygen groups on their surface depending on the synthesis protocol used for the etching of their precursor MAX phase.40 The distribution of these functional groups on the single-layer MXene surface is not uniform, and the functional groups are mobile enough to migrate.41 The concentration of the etching agent (HF) during MXene synthesis affects the population of oxygen groups as well as atomic defects in both single-layer and multilayer MXenes.42,43 Around 26% of all functional groups on the surface of a single-layer Ti3C2 MXene are hydroxyl groups that are dispersed randomly on the surface.44 At the present time, the synthesis of solution-processed MXenes with uniform surface distributions of these groups is a challenge. 1H and 19F NMR spectroscopy results have shown that the population of hydroxyl groups is much lower than those of oxygen and fluorine ones.45,46 However, it has been reported that the reaction of a single-layer MXene with an alkali changes the fluorine groups to hydroxyl groups.47 Also, it has been verified that thermal annealing of a pristine single-layer MXene removes fluorine and hydroxyl groups from the surface of the MXene.48 Oxygen-terminated MXenes are more stable than their hydroxyl-terminated counterparts which eventually transform into oxygen-terminated ones.49 Moreover, MXenes with more oxygen functional groups have stronger interactions with metal ions such as Li and possess higher mechanical strength compared with those MXenes containing fluorine or hydroxyl terminations.50,51
Several theoretical studies revealed that fluorine prefers to occupy the most thermodynamically stable sites of Ti3C2. The fluorine presence improves the stability of the MXene in aqueous electrolytes and simultaneously enhances its electron transport properties such as transmission/absorption.52–54 In addition, DFT studies have shown that a higher population of fluorine facilitates the delamination of multi-layer Ti3C2 into single- to few-layer Ti3C2.55 For single-layer Ti3C2 to work as an electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, however, DFT and experimental results showed that a high population of fluorine groups in the basal plane causes the Ti3C2 performance to deteriorate.1 In applications where the presence of fluorine is not desirable, treating single-layer Ti3C2 with argon removes fluorine groups and increases O-terminations which in turn leads to higher hydrophilicity.56 When multilayer Ti3C2 is used for energy applications, optimizing surface functional groups facilitates the tailoring of the energy band gap to enhance its performance.57 When 2D nanoparticles such as GO and Ti3C2 are used for wastewater treatment, the population of oxygen-containing groups on the surface affects water permeability, as these groups are capable of establishing transient hydrogen bonds.58 So, to increase water permeance, it is necessary to decrease the population of such groups. On the other hand, for applications such as ethanol dehydration by MXene membranes, a higher population of oxygen functional groups is favorable.59 Removing heavy metal ions with a single-layer Ti3C2 film is another example where a high population of surface hydroxyl groups is favorable.60 If single-layer Ti3C2 is used for air purification applications, the surface functional groups of Ti3C2 are again important as they can interact with air pollutants causing their adsorption on the Ti3C2 surface and invariably cleaning the air molecules to deliver purified air.48 It is imperative to control the nature and type of functional groups since their variable affinities may or may not be beneficial for the hybrid. In addition to the inherently available surface functional groups (F, Cl, OH, and O), other functionalities can also be attached on the MXene surface by electrostatic attraction forces, impregnation, reaction with silane coupling agents or grafting of polymer brushes. Surface functionalization of MXenes and its importance in the fabrication of hybrid materials will be discussed in the following sections in detail.
2.2 Oxidation stability of Ti3C2
MXenes colloidal dispersion in water is stable because of MXene's negative zeta potential. However, a potential impediment in the use of MXenes in an aqueous mixture is the relatively low shelf life of MXene flakes due to the oxidation of Ti layers, which leads to the formation of titanium oxide. The oxidation is a result of the interaction of the flakes with water. In the case of a non-aqueous mixture, the flakes can react with dissolved oxygen in the medium. MXene hydrolysis plays the main role in complete transformation of Ti3C2 MXenes into anatase (TiO2) in aqueous media.61 The degradation is indicated by a gradual change in the mixture color from black [colloidal solution] (Fig. 1A) to light gray (3 days), off-white (14 days), and milky white (28 days).62,63
 Fig. 1  (A) Color change of colloidal Ti3C2 due to degradation over time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (B) Hydrogels containing (I) water and (II) ethylene glycol both show good flexibility at 20 °C, but (I) turns into a brittle material at −40 °C due to freezing of the water. (C) (II) Hydrogel containing ethylene glycol does not lose its solvent after 8 days of storage at 20 °C but (I) its water-containing counterpart shrinks due to the evaporation of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (D) Three approaches to stop Ti3C2 degradation: (I) de-aerating with an inert gas, (II) sonication-free solvent exchange from water to an organic solvent, and (III) redispersion into an organic solvent by sonication. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. 
The degradation of a single-layer MXene may be explained by exponential growth kinetics. Nucleation initiates from the flake edges, and the flake size plays a crucial role in the rate of degradation.11 Smaller flakes degrade faster. Thus, the deterioration rate can be lowered by controlling the flake size during delamination steps or by altering the surface chemistry of the flakes. Multilayer MXenes with tailored surface moieties such as Al(OH)4− have shown greater structural stability while exhibiting passivation against oxidizing reagents.64 Moreover, altering the surface moieties has also shown greater stability for thinner and smaller flakes indicating the impact of lateral dimensions in tandem with surface functional groups being vital for the overall colloidal stability of MXenes.64
When the use of an aqueous medium is required, storing colloidal MXene in a hermitic Ar-sealed container at lower temperatures (i.e., refrigeration) and in a dark environment can reduce the oxidation rate significantly.11 Another potential route to develop MXenes with longer shelf life is by edge-capping MXene flakes with a polyanion such as a polyphosphate, polysilicate, or polyborate at a low concentration (<0.12 M). Since MXene oxidation starts from the flake edges, edge capping prevents oxide nucleation and growth right at the source, thereby increasing shelf life.65 More recently, it has been reported that the synthesis route to the MAX phase has a significant effect on Ti3C2 MXene aqueous colloidal stability.66 When the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase was synthesized by the use of excess aluminum, i.e., well above the required stoichiometric ratio (that is, two moles of aluminum instead of one mole), MXene flakes showed stability up to 6 months after storage in an aqueous solution. The higher stability can be attributed to the lower concentration of defects (i.e., Ti vacancies) in the material. However, the reason for the increased stability has not been fully understood yet.66
Water and oxygen are two main reasons for MXene degradation and this degradation is quicker in liquid media compared with their solid counterparts.67 To protect MXenes from degradation, at least one of them (oxygen or water) or preferably both of them should be eliminated.68 De-aerating aqueous MXene colloids with an inert gas such as argon is the first technique to remove oxygen. To remove water, one may think that the easiest way is the centrifugation of the MXene colloid followed by drying the sediment or filtration of the colloid to get MXene powder or film. However, for subsequent applications, the redispersion of these dried powders or films in a new solvent might need long sonication times. Sonication not only breaks down the flakes and impairs some good properties of MXene, but also rarely provides fully single-layer flakes again. Regarding MXene property deterioration by sonication, it has been reported that despite similar inherent conductivity, smaller flakes compared with their larger counterparts have less chance to form a conductive network due to the higher number of resistive contact points in their network. Thus, sonication should be avoided to keep electrical conductivity of MXene flakes high. Under these conditions, a solvent exchange method is favorable.62 In such a method, water is replaced with another solvent without the need for drying a colloid and subsequent sonication for redispersion.62 The detrimental effects of oxygen on MXenes are much lower in an organic solvent compared with water. Thus, a sonication-free solvent exchange method is an effective way to lower the degradation rate of MXenes, even more effective than de-aerating the colloid with a gas, such as argon or nitrogen.62
Another motivation for solvent exchange is the immiscibility of water with many organic polymers. An aqueous colloidal MXene cannot be mixed with a polymer dissolved in a water-immiscible organic solvent for nanocomposite fabrication. To overcome this problem, exchanging the aqueous medium of the MXene colloid with a solvent such as DMF is a decent option. In addition, for MXene-based devices that are supposed to work at temperatures lower than 0 °C, using an aqueous dispersion of MXene is not possible due to freezing of water at those temperatures. A good example is single-layer MXene-based hydrogels used as conductive motion sensors, working at sub-zero temperatures. By exchanging water with EG, which is a well-known anti-freezer material, the functionality of the sensors extends to temperatures as low as −40 °C (Fig. 1B). This figure shows that a MXene-based nanocomposite containing EG keeps its twistability at temperatures as low as −40 °C. However, the nanocomposite counterpart containing water shows brittleness at that temperature. In addition, replacing water with EG prolongs the service life of the hydrogel sensor at room temperature as the evaporation rate of EG is much lower than that of water. The EG-containing hydrogel sensors keep their functionality for a longer time compared with their water-containing counterparts (Fig. 1C).69
Recently, Seyedin et al.62 proposed a solvent exchange procedure to replace water with other solvents without using sonication. Fig. 1D shows this sonication-free solvent exchange procedure and compares it with another available solvent exchange method which needs sonication. According to Seyedin's method,62 the first solvent which is usually water is separated from MXene flakes by centrifugation. The supernatant will be decanted and a new solvent, DMF for example, will be added. Vigorous manual shaking with hand or a mechanical shaker is used to re-disperse the MXene sediment deposited at the bottom of the centrifuge tube into fresh DMF. Centrifugation is then repeated to separate the added DMF from MXene flakes followed by decantation. This cycle is repeated by adding fresh DMF, redispersion, centrifugation and supernatant decantation three times to ensure that there is no trace of initial solvent in the final solvent-exchanged colloidal MXene. As Fig. 1D(II) shows, no sonication is needed in this novel solvent exchange technique.
Using the technique described in the previous paragraph, solvent-exchanged Ti3C2 has been dispersed in polar solvents such as methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, acetone, DMF, and DMSO. The DMF and DMSO colloids were found to be stable, similar to the original MXene in a water colloid, without using any sonication. Fig. 4B indicates that methanol is a poor solvent for Ti3C2. However, Ti3C2 forms a stable colloid in methanol when the sonication-free solvent exchange technique is applied. This points to the superiority of Seyedin et al.'s method to other available methods.62 Solvent-exchanged colloids prepared by Seyedin et al. showed a dark color after 28 days, meaning no oxidation happened in non-aqueous media. In addition, this method is capable of further delaminating MXene flakes even compared with original fresh single-layer MXene in water. In comparison with aqueous colloidal single-layer Ti3C2 purged with argon, shown in Fig. 1D(I), dispersing solvent-exchanged Ti3C2 into ethanol, acetone, DMF, DMSO, etc. downshifts the 002 peak in the XRD spectrum. Moreover, this method allows for transferring MXene flakes from one medium to another sequentially. For example, one can start with a MXene colloid containing water as the dispersing medium, then exchange water with DMSO, DMSO with ethanol, ethanol with chloroform, and finally chloroform with acetone, to get a stable colloid in the last step of the solvent exchange process.62
2.3 MXene interlayer distance
Many experimental and theoretical studies have shown that the properties of MXene-based devices depend on the interlayer distance of MXenes, which is the distance between individual Mn+1XnTx flakes in MXene stacks. The interlayer distance of the sheets is affected by the composition of the etchant with which the A-group layers of the MAX phase precursors are selectively etched in the top-down synthesis process. In fact, the population of surface functional groups and consequently the population and strength of the hydrogen bonds formed between MXene layers, which affect the interlayer distance, are dependent on the etchant type and the MAX phase composition.70 The interlayer distance is also a pressure-dependent parameter which endows MXenes with piezoresistive properties.71 Argon treatment and nitrogen doping are some approaches to increase the distance between layers of a multilayer MXene.56,72 MXenes with enlarged interlayer distances have high capability for working as the anode of sodium-ion batteries.73
Intercalation allows for adjusting the distance between MXene layers (the interlayer distance). MXenes with tuned interlayer distances are suitable for different post processes such as interlayer monomer diffusion and subsequent polymerization. For example, Ti3C2 intercalated by ε-caprolactam undergoes ring opening polymerization to produce a MXene/nylon nanocomposite that shows excellent water barrier properties.73 In addition to monomers, many other chemicals such as surfactants and cationic solvents can be used for MXene intercalation. Each of these chemicals may affect the interlayer distance and other inherent properties of MXene differently. For example, hydrazine can intercalate Ti3C2 at the expense of decreasing its water content and number of hydroxyl and fluorine groups.74 In other cases, some cations such as Li+, Na+ and Mg2+ can intercalate Ti3C2 by replacing water molecules between layers causing contraction and consequent reduction in interlayer spacing.75 Some contrasting reports also mention that the intercalation of Na+ ions between Ti3C2 layers in nonaqueous media increases the interlayer distance of Ti3C2 as they work as a pillar.76 These disagreements remain as a simulation paper reported that the intercalation of Ti3C2 with K+ improves water stability between Ti3C2 layers.77 These three seemingly contradictory reports point to a need for a careful selection of an intercalant and processing medium for the Ti3C2 intercalation procedure.75–78 Some cationic surfactants such as CTAB can also work as spacers to increase the interlayer distance of Ti3C2 through pillaring.39,75 Moreover, use of high valence cations such as Al3+ for pre-intercalation is practiced to increase the interlayer distance of Ti3C2 sheets.79
As multilayer Ti3C2 is a conductive nanoparticle, its interlayer distance and the ion rejection capability of MXene-based membranes vary upon applying a voltage. Thus, voltage is a tool to inhibit or enhance the rate of ion intercalation. The control of the Ti3C2 interlayer distance and ion-rejection capability of MXene-based membranes by applying an electrical potential is a special feature that distinguishes MXene from other 2D nanomaterials.80
To suppress self-restacking of MXene nanosheets and increase the MXene inter-layer distance, electrostatic self-assembly between negatively charged Ti3C2 sheets and positively charged GO sheets was performed successfully.81 Self-assembly between negatively charged pristine single-layer Ti3C2 MXene and positively charged amine-functionalized Ti3C2 MXene also increased the MXene inter-layer distances.82 To suppress restacking, it is also possible to insert another 2D nanoparticle between MXene sheets. For example, reduced graphene oxide is inserted between MXene sheets to suppress their self-restacking and to prevent a reduction in the interlayer distance. The latter hybrid structure is implemented in heavy metal ion removal processes.60
Annealing of MXene sheets at high temperatures allows adjustment of the interlayer distance in MXene thin films and membranes. Sintering usually decreases the interlayer distance due to loss of water and surface functional groups at high temperatures. In addition, annealing increases the risk of multilayer MXene oxidation and the formation of TiO2 nanoparticles on the MXene flakes.83
2.4 MXene synthesis
MXenes have been synthesized using different approaches, leading to the production of MXenes of different qualities in terms of size,84 surface functional groups,45 and structural defects.43 Details of single-layer MXene synthesis are described elsewhere thoroughly.85,86 Here, we limit our focus to general guidelines and the reactions that are involved. In general, there are two MXene synthesis approaches, top-down and bottom-up.

2.4.1 Top-down synthesis. 
Top-down approaches involve an etchant addition to the parental material, a MAX phase, or in situ production of the etchant in the presence of a MAX phase. The etchant is usually HF or a mixture of HCl/HF. HF can be formed in situ by mixing of a fluoride salt with HCl. Different salts such as LiF, NaF, KF, and NH4F can be used. This in situ production of HF is safer for research labs than the external addition, as it does not require working with high concentration HF. In the case of in situ formation of HF, the cleanness of the surface of the synthesized MXene depends on the type of salt used, as the cations have different affinities for the surface of MXenes. For example, a single-layer MXene etched with a mixture of NaF/HCl contains less metal cations on its surface compared with the one synthesized with LiF/HCl, as it is much easier to wash out Na+ from the surface, compared with Li+.87 Some other environmentally friendly, green HF-free methods like electrochemical etching in dilute HCl, anodic corrosion, and etching in Lewis acidic melts like ZnCl2 are described in the literature.88
The MAX phase is a layer carbide with the general formula Mn+1AXn, where M is a transition metal such as Ti, A is an element from groups 13 and 14, and X is carbon and/or nitrogen. Ti3AlC2 is the most used MAX phase for MXenes synthesis. MXenes (Mn+1XnTx) are obtained by the removal of A-group element and the addition of the surface terminations (Tx), which are generated on the surface and edges of MXene during the etching process.5
The synthesis of single-layer MXene consists of three steps including etching, washing, and delamination (Fig. 2A). In the etching step, HF comes into contact with the MAX phase to remove its A element. The amount of HF should be adjusted accurately, otherwise an excessive amount of HF causes complete dissolution of the MAX phase which is unfavorable.88 In the case of Ti3AlC2, Al will be removed by an etchant with a HF concentration between 5 and 50 wt%. The required time for etching depends on HF concentration and temperature. For example, at room temperature, by using an etchant with a HF concentration of 50 wt%, only 2 hours is needed to remove Al from Ti3AlC2.85 As the reaction is exothermic, the MAX phase should be gradually added to the etchant to prevent uncontrollable heat generation. In situ formation of HF results in larger MXene flakes than direct addition of pure HF. The mole ratio of LiF to HCl significantly affects the quality of the resulting MXene. Two usual mole ratios of LiF to HCl are 5 M LiF:6 M HCl and 7.5 M LiF:9 M HCl. The most recent method is the addition of a HF/HCl mixture to etch the MAX phase, which similar to the LiF/HCl etchant, allows for the production of large size single-layer MXene.89
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis of a MXene from a MAX phase via etching, and MXene delamination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Expansion of the MXene sediment upon delamination after several centrifugation cycles; the top-right inset shows the obtained MXene film after filtration, and the bottom-right inset displays leftovers of the multilayer MXene and unetched MAX phase in the centrifuge tube. (C) XRD results showing that the peak at 2θ ∼39° of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase disappears after etching and its 002 peak also downshifts from 2θ ∼9° (yellow spectrum) to around 2θ ∼7° (red spectrum). Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The second step is washing which occurs after etching to remove the etchant and some by-products such as AlF3 or LiF. Due to the presence of HF and possibly HCl, the reaction medium is extremely acidic. Thus, it is necessary to wash off acids to increase the pH of the medium to around 6 and obtain a stable colloidal MXene. One cycle of washing consists of centrifugation, decantation of the supernatant which is acidic water, addition of fresh water, and re-dispersion of MXene sheets that have settled down on the bottom of the centrifuge tube. This cycle is repeated until the supernatant reaches neutral pH. The product of this step is an aqueous colloidal multilayer MXene, where the layers are held to each other by hydrogen bonding or van der Waals forces. If the purpose is the synthesis of multilayer colloidal MXene, the procedure finishes in this step. MXene dried powder or films can then be obtained from the colloid by filtration or casting of the colloid.85
The third step is the delamination of the multilayer MXene to a single-layer one. This can be done by ultrasonication, manual shaking with hand, addition of intercalants or all/some of them together. The need for sonication or hand shaking for the delamination is dependent on the etchant type. For example, MAX phases etched with a 7.5 M LiF:9 M HCl mixture or HCl/HF mixture do not usually need sonication for delamination. The approaches that do not need sonication for delamination are called MILD approaches. The advantage of MILD methods is that single-layer large flakes can be produced. Sound waves generated during the course of sonication usually break down MXene flakes and create defects. A large-flake MXene usually has better properties than its small-flake counterparts. For example, although the inherent conductivity of a large MXene flake is the same as that of a small flake of the same MXene (assuming the same number of defects), larger flakes form a more conductive network due to the lower total contact resistivity of larger flakes. To facilitate delamination, different materials are used as intercalants, e.g. LiCl, DMSO, tetraalkylammonium hydroxides, and lithium ions. In the MILD approaches, after the addition of an intercalant such as LiCl, the delamination of multilayer MXene is expected to happen after stirring the colloid for several hours followed by vigorous hand shaking. Next, the colloid undergoes another centrifuge cycle to separate single layers from multilayer sheets and possibly the remaining unetched MAX phase. When delamination occurs, the sediment at the bottom of the centrifuge tube swells up significantly which is observable with the naked eye (Fig. 2B). In addition, the existence of a dark supernatant after centrifugation is another sign of successful delamination. That dark supernatant contains single-layer MXene that should be collected as the final product.85
To conclude this section, a few more points are worth mentioning. XRD and EDX spectroscopies are the best characterization techniques to ensure the success of the etching. A peak at 2θ ∼39° in the XRD spectrum of the MAX phase disappears after a successful etching (Fig. 2C). Also the 002 peak of Ti3AlC2 downshifts from ∼9.5° to ∼6–8° upon etching followed by delamination. In addition, no trace of Al should be observed in the EDX spectrum. If a MXene with a large flake size of several microns is required, etching of a MAX phase with large grain size has been recommended. Whenever sonication is needed for whatever reason, it is advised to purge colloidal MXene with an inert gas such as argon or nitrogen and also keep it in an ice bath during the sonication. If MXene is not used immediately after production, it is recommended to store it in argon or nitrogen sealed vials and keep it in a refrigerator. This is important as it is shown that single-layer Ti3C2 MXene degrades by 42%, 85% and 100% after 5, 10 and 15 days of storage, respectively, in open vials.11 Finally, if MXene degradation due to long-time storage is suspected, a UV-Vis test can be used. Possible degradation changes the 700–800 nm peaks of Ti3C2 MXene.85
2.4.1.1 Large-scale production. 
Ti3C2 MXene has commonly been synthesized using a top-down approach. Although it looks simple at the first glance, the scale-up of the approach needs great attention with respect to heat transfer, mixing, and safety issues. To synthesize MXene from a MAX phase in large quantities, a reactor with the following properties is needed: (1) a screw feeder to feed a MAX phase automatically and gradually to the reaction medium to minimize the exposure of human staff to dangerous HF acid as well as to ensure the uniform addition of the MAX phase; (2) a cooling jacket to remove heat from the reactor, preventing an exothermic reaction runaway; (3) a gas outlet to release the generated gases; (4) engineered mixing blades to improve homogeneity and prevent MAX phase settlement; (5) internal gas feeding to feed a gas into the reaction medium if needed; and (6) an internal thermocouple.91 Using a reactor with the aforementioned features, Shuck et al.91 synthesized 50 g single-layer MXene in one batch and found that the properties of the obtained MXene are similar to the properties of the MXene obtained via a 1 g synthesis procedure. Fig. 3A and B show the reactor that they used and the product that they obtained from that reactor. In MXene synthesis, yield is defined as the ratio of the obtained single-layer MXene to the fed MAX phase. A 60% yield is usually obtained when Ti3C2 MXene synthesis starts with 1 g of Ti3AlC2 MAX phase. However, this value decreased to 52% when the synthesis started with 50 g of the MAX phase. Losing some of the material in discarded supernatants in each washing cycle, inability to delaminate all multilayer MXene, and multilayer MXene sedimentation are the main reasons for the decrease in the yield.91
 Fig. 3  (A) A pilot-scale setup including a reactor to synthesize a large quantity of MXene of ∼50 g. (B) Images showing 1 g and 50 g of the produced MXene as well as colloidal single-layer MXene. (C) XRD results. (D) UV-Vis spectra showing the similarity of the spectra of the large-batch-produced MXene and the small-batch-produced MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. 
Comparing the properties of a single-layer MXene synthesized in a small reactor with those of a MXene produced in a large reactor, it was found that there is no difference in terms of particle size, surface functional groups, optical properties, crystalline structure, atomic composition and conductivity. Fig. 3C and D show the similarity of the XRD and UV-Vis spectra of MXenes produced in a small and a large reactor. The scale-up does not require changing the temperature, reaction time or any other reactor operating conditions. Finally, this scale-up approach to synthesize single-layer Ti3C2 seems to be applicable to other kinds of MXenes.91


2.4.2 Bottom-up synthesis. 
This approach has been used for the synthesis of only a few non-Ti MXenes so far. Although the focus of this review is on Ti3C2, for completeness we briefly review bottom-up synthesis methods. In these methods, the synthesis starts from smaller building blocks, that is, atoms and molecules. CVD is a usual bottom-up approach for the synthesis of MXenes. For example, CVD has been used to synthesize defect-free φ-Mo2C crystals with a lateral size of around 100 microns, which is much larger compared with that of defect-prone MXenes synthesized with top-down methods (around 10 microns). So, for applications where a high lateral length and a perfect crystalline structure are required, CVD is recommended.92 φ-Mo2C was synthesized at a reaction temperature of 1085 °C while gaseous methane was fed into the reaction medium as a carbon source and a bilayer substrate of Cu/Mo was used as the source of Mo. At such a high temperature, the Cu/Mo substrate melts and an alloy of Cu–Mo forms. The Mo species from the Cu/Mo interface diffuses through the molten Cu layer to reach the surface of the Cu layer where decomposed methane gas exists as a source of carbon. When the reaction between Mo and carbon is complete, the system needs to be cooled down carefully to allow the formation of perfect defect-free 2D layers.92 Plasma-enhanced-pulsed-laser deposition can also be used in conventional CVD to improve the efficiency of the reaction between molybdenum and carbon and prevent the oxidation of the former.93
Salt-templated synthesis is another bottom-up approach for the synthesis of 2D nanomaterials. Here, 2D metal oxides are used as precursors for the synthesis of 2D metal nitrides via the ammoniation reaction. For example, to synthesize MoN, firstly a MoO3-coated NaCl powder is obtained via the reaction of a Mo precursor in NaCl powder under an argon environment at 280 °C. The 2D MoO3-coated NaCl is ammoniated in an NH3 environment at 650 °C. This ammoniation reaction converts MoO3 to MoN, and NaCl helps MoO3 keep its 2D structure during the conversion. The leftover NaCl in the final product can be washed out with deionized water.94 Similar to the protocol described above for the synthesis of MoN, the synthesis of Mo2C through the conversion of MoO2 is possible.95

3 Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite fabrication
3.1 Solvent selection and solvent exchange
Selection of a solvent to disperse MXene is the first step for solvent-mixing processes. The solvent should be able to dissolve the concomitant polymer to form a stable solution. In this section, important parameters and selection criteria are laid out to identify suitable processing conditions for fabricating MXene/polymer nanocomposites. Also, in this section, several MXene surface modification methods are reviewed. Fabrication of foams, hydrogels, and aerogels from MXene and MXene/polymer mixtures is discussed as well.
MXene synthesis in water is well established.1 Aqueous colloids of single-layer Ti3C2 possess excellent stability and safety for processing, and are inexpensive to prepare.1 However, MXenes in the presence of water and oxygen degrade over time. In addition, water intercalated between MXene flakes may decrease MXene's performance in electrochemical applications. A stable suspension of MXenes in an organic solvent is sometimes needed for mixing the MXene with a polymer. A stable suspension is a suspension in which MXene flakes do not agglomerate over time (Fig. 4A). Drying single-layer Ti3C2 MXene to remove water followed by redispersion in an organic solvent has shown that the MXene is stable in ethanol, DMF, DMSO, NMP, and PC. However, it has poor stability in 1,2-dichlorobenzene, hexane, toluene and methanol.63Fig. 4B shows the dispersibility of single-layer Ti3C2 in different organic solvents at 24 hours and 96 hours after the redispersion.63
 Fig. 4  (A) Images showing the stability of Ti3C2 flakes in a good and a poor solvent after sonication. (B) The evolution of Ti3C2 colloid stability over time showing that only ethanol, water, DMSO, acetone, NMP, DMF, and PC are good solvents for Ti3C2 dispersion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
To analyze systematically the suitability of a solvent for MXene dispersion, the surface tension, viscosity, dielectric constant, and boiling points of various solvents should be considered. As a rule of thumb, a polar solvent with a high boiling point, high surface tension and high dielectric constant is a decent choice for MXene dispersion. Thermodynamic properties like Hilderbrand and Hansen solubility parameters of the solvents allow for a better evaluation of a solvent.63 A good solvent for MXene dispersion should ideally have high dispersion interactions and high polarity. However, establishing hydrogen bonds is not important. As evidence, H2O, NMP, PC, DMF, and DMSO are good solvents for MXene dispersion, as they exhibit high polarity and dispersion interactions. An analysis of solvent properties with thermodynamic tools helps one to design a mixture of poor solvents in a way to convert it into a good solvent for MXene dispersion. For example, acetonitrile is a poor solvent for MXenes but it is highly polar. On the other hand, aromatic solvents are not polar but have high dispersion interactions. A 1:8 v/v mixture of DMF and chloroform has been reported to disperse Ti3C2 well.96 Thus, the right composition of appropriate solvents is needed for good single-layer MXene dispersion.63
It is also possible to modify the surface of a single-layer MXene to tailor its dispersibility in different solvents. Surface energies of MXenes are strongly dependent on their surface chemistry which consequently determines MXene wettability in different solvents.97 For example, the presence of long hydrocarbon chains on a single-layer MXene surface may negatively affect its dispersibility in DMF which is already known to be a good solvent for pristine single-layer MXene.97 Moreover, it is observed that the dispersibility of pristine single-layer MXene in water decreases upon grafting 2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate on its surface. At the same time, however, DMF disperses this kind of surface modified MXene better than water.98 The surface chemistry and consequently the dispersion of MXene in a solvent may be affected by etchant composition. For example, MXene etched with HF may show a slightly different dispersibility in a solvent compared with an MXene etched with a LiF/HCl mixture. The reason is the difference in the population of surface functional groups and the kind of species between MXene layers.63
3.2 MXene surface engineering
MXene inherently has hydroxyl, fluorine and oxygen groups on its surface. However, for many other applications, new surface functional groups are required. Hydrophobic Ti3C2 membranes were synthesized by reacting single-layer Ti3C2 with a silane coupling agent bearing fluorine groups. This allowed for selective salt filtering in water treatment (solar desalination).17 Silane coupling agents were also used to develop vertically aligned Janus Ti3C2-based aerogels where one end is hydrophilic, and the other end is hydrophobic for seawater purification through solar desalination. The hydrophobic end of the aerogel inhibits salt accumulation on the surface, increasing the longevity of the polymer membrane for longer durations of functional use.99 Non-inherent surface functional groups may also be created by altering the MXene synthesis steps. For example, applying sound waves during MAX phase etching creates peroxide groups on the surface of the MXene flakes. This new functional group enables a MXene to work as a conventional initiator to initiate a free-radical polymerization. Acrylate monomers in the presence of peroxide-containing single-layer MXene were recently polymerized.100 Similarly, the addition of alcohol to water during the etching step may lead to the creation of the alkoxy group on the MXene surface which is a non-inherent functionality.101
The presence of amine groups on the MXene surface opens many new applications for MXenes. Aminosilane coupling agents can be grafted on the MXene surface (Fig. 5A). It is shown that the surface charge of pristine Ti3C2 changes from negative to positive in a wide pH range of 2 to ∼10.5 due to the grafting of an aminosilane coupling agent and the protonation of its amine groups.82 Other silane coupling agents bearing methacrylate,102 perfluoroalkyl17 and alkyl groups103 are also grafted on the Ti3C2 surface. These silane coupling agents usually react with hydroxyl groups on the surface of Ti3C2.82 In one example, methacrylate bearing silane coupling agents were grafted on the surface of Ti3C2 followed by grafting of sulfonated polyelectrolyte brushes on the Ti3C2 surface by polymerization of sodium-p-styrenesulfonate from the methacrylate sites. These modified MXenes were then used as nanofillers and incorporated into sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) or chitosan to make proton conducting membranes.102
 Fig. 5  (A) Grafting of an aminosilane coupling agent on the surface of MXene flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. (B) Grafting of a stimuli responsive polymer brush on the surface of a MXene flake by polymerization of dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate to produce a hybrid material sensitive to heat and CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Attachment of three different cationic surfactants to the surface of MXene flakes by electrostatic attraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2019, MDPI. 
Grafting of polymer brushes on MXene surfaces through surface initiated photografting and polymerization can generate hybrid structures where the polymerization is initiated with solution mixing of the constituents followed by UV irradiation of the system. Although this review paper focuses on Ti3C2 MXene, in the following we discuss a paper published on the surface modification of V2C MXene as it introduces a novel method for surface modification. In Fig. 5B, grafting of poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) brushes on the surface of vanadium carbide (V2C) resulted in a hybrid stimuli-responsive material which shows sensitivity to changes in temperature and carbon dioxide concentration. Poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) has an LCST of around 40 °C and its grafting on the Ti3C2 MXene surface improves MXene dispersibility in water at T < 40 °C. In the presence of CO2, its tertiary amine groups can get protonated and show increased conductivity. Thus, these stimuli-responsive behaviors may open new applications for MXene/polymer nanocomposites in new areas such as sensors and biological areas.104
To help Ti3C2 participate in free-radical polymerization, Huang et al.98 modified the surface of single-layer Ti3C2 with 2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate. They dispersed 0.1 g of Ti3C2 powder in DMF by bath sonication and added 3 g of 2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate (weight ratio of 30). In surface modification reactions of nanoparticles, it is always recommended to add the modifying agent in excess. The reaction was continued for 4 hours. It is believed that the bonding happens due to the reaction between –NCO groups of the surface modifier and OH groups of MXene. The modified Ti3C2 was obtained by centrifugation followed by vacuum drying.98 Here, it is necessary to recall that most surface modification reactions of Ti3C2 occur through its OH groups.
The impregnation of Ti3C2 with PEG is another example of surface modification of MXenes. When a PEG grade with a molecular weight of 10000 g mol−1 was used, the interlayer distance between Ti3C2 flakes increased from 15.4 to 19.7 Å. PEG is a water-soluble polymer. Thus, it can be added to an aqueous dispersion of Ti3C2 easily. By freeze-drying the Ti3C2/PEG at −60 °C for 96 hours, PEG-treated Ti3C2 was obtained and then added to TPU. The increase in interlayer distance and interaction improvement between the oxygen/hydroxyl groups of Ti3C2 and polar groups of TPU cause an enhancement in the dispersion of Ti3C2 in TPU during a melt blending process.105
PANI has been polymerized on the surface of Ti3C2 to change the Ti3C2 surface charge and to increase its interlayer distance. In acidic media, aniline changes into a radical–cationic monomer and undergoes polymerization. It is also possible to impregnate the Ti3C2/PANI hybrid with CTAB which is a cationic surfactant. This process also changes the surface charge of pristine Ti3C2 from negative to positive. It is important here to highlight that even without impregnation with CTAB, Ti3C2/PANI shows a positive surface charge up to pH ∼8.5. However, impregnation with CTAB causes multilayer Ti3C2/PANI to keep its positive surface charge in a wider pH range of 3–12.106 Thus, in addition to aminosilane coupling agents, one can consider PANI polymerization or cationic surfactant impregnation as methods to change the surface charge of Ti3C2 from negative to positive. In addition to CTAB, the impregnation of Ti3C2 with other cationic surfactants like OTAB, DTAB, and DDAB has also been practiced. As Fig. 5C shows, these cationic surfactants interact with single-layer Ti3C2 through their positively charged head.97
Silver has plasmonic and antibacterial properties. Similarly, Ti3C2 has excellent antibacterial and antifouling properties. Several researchers have impregnated Ti3C2 with silver nanoparticles to take advantage of possible synergistic effects. For example, single-layer Ti3C2 was impregnated with silver nanoparticles to develop ultrahigh-flux, fouling-resistant nanofiltration membranes for water purification and biomedical applications.107 The process of incorporation of silver nanoparticles into Ti3C2 usually starts by the addition of an aqueous solution of AgNO3 to an aqueous suspension of MXene. The Ag+ ions are adsorbed on the surface functional groups of Ti3C2, OH for example, due to electrostatic attraction. Subsequently, the cation receives an electron from Ti3C2 and undergoes a further reduction reaction to form Ag0. The latter works as a nucleation center for further growth of silver nanoparticles on the single-layer MXene surface. In this hybrid system, usually named AgNP@MXene, spherical silver nanoparticles are anchored firmly to the Ti3C2 surface, and their size is usually between 20 and 50 nm.108
3.3 Hydrogels, foams and aerogels
This section describes several important MXene-based intermediate products that have been prepared such as foams, hydrogels, and aerogels. It then reviews processing techniques that can be applied to these products to make devices for real-world applications.
Hydrogels are a three-dimensional network of hydrophilic polymer chains connected to each other by crosslinking agents.109–111 Hydrogels are usually used as water absorbents. Nanocomposite hydrogels containing a MXene as the crosslinking agent can be synthesized by in situ polymerization of a monomer like acrylamide in the presence of a colloidal MXene. As Fig. 6A shows, conventional initiators like KPS can be used to synthesize hydrogels through a free-radical polymerization.112 Zhang et al.112 sonicated re-dispersed Ti3C2 powder for three days continuously in water. They then added acrylamide which is a water-soluble monomer to the colloidal Ti3C2 along with KPS to initiate the polymerization. Compared with conventional hydrogels made from organic crosslinkers like N,N-methylene bisacrylamide possessing an irregular collapsed pore structure, Ti3C2-based hydrogels had a honeycomb regular fine structure. In addition to the hydrophilic acrylamide groups of the polymer, the hydroxyl and fluorine groups on the surface of Ti3C2 form hydrogen bonds with water molecules resulting in a significant water uptake by these Ti3C2-based hydrogels.112
 Fig. 6  (A) In situ synthesis of a MXene-based hydrogel by free-radical polymerization where the MXene plays the role of crosslinking agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis of a MXene-based hydrogel with two polymers as the hydrogel matrix (3) and ethylene glycol (4) as the liquid phase with the ability of hydrogen bond formation and dynamic covalent bonding for self-healing application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (C) Synthesis of a foam with oriented MXene flakes (2) by the freeze-drying technique (3) coated with PDMS (4) for EMI shielding (5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
It is even possible to synthesize a MXene-based hydrogel via free-radical polymerization without using any conventional initiator. Tao et al.100 introduced a method called sonication-assisted MILD etching in which delamination simultaneously happens with etching. The MXene produced by this technique inherently has peroxide groups on its surface. Thus, it is possible to initiate a free-radical polymerization without the need to add any conventional initiator. It is believed that cavitation bubbles, produced by sound waves, generate H2O2 in the etching reaction medium which then interacts with OH groups on the surface of MXene to form peroxide groups. However, experimental results have shown that these peroxide groups on the surface of Ti3C2 stay active for around one week at room temperature and then lose their activity to initiate polymerization. Single-layer Ti3C2 MXene with peroxide surface functional groups is still water dispersible and the addition of monomers like isopropylacrylamide to it gives the chance of running a free-radical polymerization (Fig. 6A). In addition to isopropylacrylamide, Ti3C2-based hydrogels made from the polymerization of other monomers including acrylamide, N,N-dimethylacrylamide, methyl methacrylate and hydroxyethyl methacrylate have been synthesized using peroxide-decorated Ti3C2.100
It is also possible to use two polymers simultaneously to synthesize a MXene-based hydrogel. For example, Liao et al.69 mixed an aqueous solution of PVA with an acrylamide monomer, methylene-bis-acrylamide crosslinker, AIBI initiator, and single-layer Ti3C2 aqueous suspension and then in situ polymerized the mixture at 60 °C to form a hydrogel (Fig. 6B, steps 1–3). They also added borax (sodium tetraborate decahydrate) to the polymerization system to give the ability of dynamic crosslinking between the hydroxyl groups of PVA and tetrahydroxy borate ions. The dynamic bond formation endows the hydrogel with the chance of self-healing. Some of the water was also exchanged with EG to give it anti-freezing features69 (Fig. 6B, step 4).
In a research study by Wu et al.,113 three polymers were used simultaneously to synthesize a hydrogel. Dopamine grafted sodium alginate and phenylboronic acid grafted sodium alginate were mixed with a water/glycerol mixture and then acrylamide was polymerized in situ to make the third polymer of the hydrogel network. The presence of three polymers as the hydrogel network creates a self-healing structure which will be discussed in detail in the following sections. Glycerol was added to the hydrogel to increase its moisture retention. Glycerol establishes hydrogen bonds with water, helping the hydrogel to keep its moisture for a long time. Consequently, the retention of moisture endows the hydrogel with enough flexibility to be bent and twisted without any mechanical damage over a long period of time.113 Keeping a large amount of water in a hydrogel structure is advantageous. Ti3C2/cellulose hydrogels made via crosslinking of cellulose with epichlorohydrin were able to keep 98 wt% water in their structure and also showed stable drug release and heat-generation upon UV-irradiation.114 This huge amount of water is stored inside the pores of the Ti3C2/cellulose hydrogels. It is also possible to adjust the size of the pores by light irradiation.
Foams and aerogels are other MXene-based products that can be used for various applications. The conversion of a MXene film to a MXene foam is possible using hydrazine as a foaming agent. Hydrazine reacts with hydroxyl groups on the surface of MXene resulting in the generation of many gaseous products due to the occurrence of a series of reactions. The pressure generated by these gases overcomes the van der Waals forces between MXene layers which pushes them apart from each other. As a result, a porous cellular MXene structure is formed. This process changes a MXene from a hydrophilic material to a hydrophobic one but does not alter the MXene's electrical conductivity even in the foam state.115
MXene-based foams with better mechanical properties can be fabricated by incorporating a polymer into the MXene structure. Compared with pure MXene foams which were discussed in the previous paragraph, MXene/polymer foams are durable and keep their electrical and mechanical properties after several hundreds of compression cycles.116 To develop such foams, in what follows we describe a method based on the freeze-drying technique, which is widely used by researchers for foam fabrication. The first step is the preparation of an aqueous solution of a water-soluble polymer such as sodium alginate followed by the addition of a MXene suspension to the solution (Fig. 6C(1)). We call this polymer the primary polymer. The role of the primary water-soluble polymer, e.g., sodium alginate, in this process is to improve the gelation ability of MXene sheets to keep the porous structure of the system and to improve its stability after foam formation. The next step is (non-)directional freezing by immersing the system in liquid nitrogen (Fig. 6C(2)). It is important to note that when just one side of a container containing a colloidal MXene is in contact with a cold source such as liquid nitrogen, the MXene flakes are oriented to form a unidirectional system upon freezing.117 The next step is freeze-drying which causes the formation of a porous material through the sublimation of ice between MXene flakes (Fig. 6C(3)). To incorporate a secondary reinforcing polymer into the foam structure, the material is immersed in a pre-polymer. Curing of the pre-polymer improves the mechanical properties of the foam (Fig. 6C(4)). Usually an elastic polymer like PDMS is used as the secondary reinforcing polymer to coat the interior parts of the foam.116 Such aerogels are able to withstand a load 1000 times higher than their original weights (Fig. 6C(5)).116 It is also important to note that the amount of the primary water-soluble polymer affects the size of vertically formed channels.
PVA is a decent polymer for fabricating MXene/polymer foams. Because of the strong hydrogen bonds between the surface functional groups of single-layer Ti3C2 and hydroxyl groups of PVA, the foam is able to withstand a load ∼5000 times higher than its own weight.118 Polyimide is also another decent choice for foam fabrication.119 In a study by Liu et al., colloidal single-layer Ti3C2 was mixed with polyamic acid, and the mixture was then subjected to a freeze-drying technique. Strong interactions between this polymer and surface functional groups of single-layer Ti3C2 caused the formation of a 3D robust aerogel structure.119 Thermal annealing of the aerogel at 300 °C in an argon atmosphere converted polyamic acid to polyimide.119
4 Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite processing
4.1 Rheology of MXene containing systems
The rheological properties of MXene need to be known to select an appropriate processing method for shaping MXene-based products. Here, various coating, thin film and nanocomposite processing methods are described in detail. To keep the paper short and focused, however, we do not discuss the coatings and thin film processing techniques that are not used widely in academia. Interested readers are referred to ref. 121–123.
Good dispersion of MXenes in a polymer solution is the first step to obtain a homogeneous MXene distribution in a thin polymer film after solvent removal. Rheology can be used to evaluate the distribution of a MXene in a polymer solution based on the quality of interactions in the solution. An increase in storage modulus (G′) indicates the possibility of the formation of a 3D elastic network between a polymer and Ti3C2. Mirkhani et al.124 assessed the dispersion of Ti3C2 in a PVA solution and determined that there are strong interactions between Ti3C2 and PVA.124
Having a good understanding of the rheological properties of MXenes is necessary to select a suitable processing method for a specific target. Some of these processing methods are solution casting, vacuum filtration, spray coating, spin casting, dip-coating, latex blending, electrostatic assembly, wet spinning, electrospinning, ink-jet printing, and extrusion printing. It is shown that the rheological properties of single-layer Ti3C2 in water are very different from the rheological properties of its multilayer counterparts.125 For example, multilayer Ti3C2 aqueous suspensions with a concentration of 70 wt% still show flowability while a single-layer Ti3C2 aqueous suspension shows elasticity at much lower concentrations. Generally, the rheological properties of Ti3C2 colloids depend on their surface charge, particle size, surface chemistry and the number of layers in a MXene sheet stack.125
Processability charts for single-layer and multilayer MXenes (Fig. 7) help to select a suitable processing method based on an application. Colloids with dominant loss moduli (G′/G′′ < 1) are suitable for processes with a high shear rate such as spray or spin coating. However, colloids with dominant elastic moduli (G′/G′′ > 1), which are able to keep their given shape, are suitable for processes such as extrusion that require a high viscosity. These processing charts can be used as a map. By knowing the type of MXene suspension (single-layer or multilayer), and the shear rate that the suspension will experience, we can locate a point inside these maps and determine whether the located point is in the region of our intended processing method or not. Usually, single-layer MXene colloids are used for high shear-rate processes while multilayer MXene colloids are used for low shear-rate processes.125
 Fig. 7  Processability chart (frequency versus the storage-modulus-to-loss-modulus ratio) to determine the suitability of electrospraying, spray coating, ink-jet printing, wet spinning, dry spinning, and extrusion printing for an aqueous MXene suspension depending on the applied shear rate: (A) single-layer Ti3C2 and (B) multilayer Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Coating techniques
Solution casting is a simple method to make pure MXene and MXene/polymer nanocomposite films. Pristine or surface functionalized MXene is dispersed in a solvent in which the polymer is also soluble. Sonication and/or magnetic stirring are usually required to improve the homogeneity of the mixture. Upon casting the mixture followed by the evaporation of the solvent, a thin solid film will be obtained (Fig. 8A). Casting can also be carried out by some automatic instruments to yield higher quality thin films, compared with manual casting.126 For water-soluble polymers, usually water is used to dissolve the polymer and also disperse MXene. For organic polymers, usually DMF is used as it is a good solvent for both polymer dissolution and MXene dispersion. For example, MXene flakes with surface grafted sulfonated polyelectrolyte brushes were dispersed in DMF in which sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) was also dissolved as a polymer matrix. The mixture was then cast on a glass substrate and annealed at 60 °C for 12 hours to develop a proton conducting membrane.102 In another study, acrylic terpolymers of styrene, butyl acrylate and hydroxyethyl acrylate were dissolved in DMF.127 Pristine Ti3C2 or PPy-intercalated Ti3C2 were also dispersed in DMF, and the mixture was subjected to stirring, sonication and then casting onto a Teflon disc to develop nanocomposite films with a high dielectric constant. After casting, it is recommended to dry the product in an oxygen-free environment, for example, a glovebox, and then carry out a thermal annealing process to ensure the removal of solvent residues. To ensure safety, it is better to carry out the thermal annealing in a vacuum oven to avoid oxygen.
 Fig. 8  (A) Solution casting method for the fabrication of MXene/polyvinyl alcohol thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Multilayer casting of a polymer solution and MXene suspension. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (C) Alternative vacuum filtration to produce multilayer MXene/polymer thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (D) Spray coating process to make a thin film from a MXene colloid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Wiley Online Library. (E) Spin coating process to make a thin film from a MXene colloid or MXene/polymer mixture consisting of three steps of deposition, spinning and solvent drying. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2019, Scientific Reports. (F) Dip-coating of a foam in a MXene colloid bath. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (G) Layer-by-layer dip-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Solution casting can be utilized to stimulate an in situ reaction during the nanocomposite formation process. For example, after the addition of single-layer Ti3C2 to epoxy resin Epon 862 in acetone, it was cured in situ with diethyl methyl benzene diamine.48 The mixture was stirred at 70 °C for 1 hour, then transferred to a mold for casting, and finally cured at 120 °C for 5 hours.48 Multilayer casting is also a good technique to produce alternative multilayered films (Fig. 8B). As the first step, a polymer solution, such as PVA in water, with a predetermined concentration is cast on a substrate and then left to dry. This is followed by depositing a colloidal suspension of Ti3C2. This cycle can be repeated many times to develop a multi-layer film with the desired number of layers.128
Vacuum filtration is another widely used technique for coating/thin-film fabrication. The starting material in this technique is usually a suspension of MXene flakes or a MXene/polymer mixture. The filtration setup consists of filter paper with a pore size smaller than the MXene flake size and a Buchner flask connected to a vacuum pump to accelerate solvent suction. The final product is a dried or paste-like thin film.129,130 Water-soluble polymers are often selected for this technique. When there are interactions between the polymer and MXene (e.g., via hydrogen bonding or electrostatic attraction), defect-free, mechanically stable thin composite films can be fabricated. Pristine MXene or MXene/polymer thin films with adjustable thicknesses can be obtained by changing the concentrations of the materials introduced to the vacuum filtration setup. Due to the presence of a vacuum force in this technique, the flakes can be oriented in the force direction enabling the development of hierarchically structured films.124
Vacuum filtration is suitable for the fabrication of MXene-based nanocomposite films from electrically neutral polymers such as PVA or electrically charged polymers like PADC. To prepare a solution for vacuum filtration, it is sometimes necessary to warm up the MXene/polymer mixture to obtain a homogeneous system. This may worry one about MXene degradation especially in aqueous systems. For example, PVA dissolves in water at high temperatures and the addition of aqueous colloidal MXene to a warmed PVA solution may degrade the MXene. However, no MXene degradation is reported even upon stirring a single-layer MXene/polymer aqueous mixture at 80 °C for 12 hours.131 A single-layer MXene/cellulose nanocomposite is another system that was fabricated by the vacuum filtration technique through dispersing/dissolving both components in deionized water.132
Alternative vacuum filtration is another technique for the fabrication of multilayered thin films where each layer is made from pristine MXene or pure polymer. Fig. 8C shows a multilayer film containing 6 layers of CNFs and 5 layers of MXene. During this process, MXene suspensions and CNF solutions are filtered alternatively and usually the top and bottom layers of the multilayered structure are made from polymers. It is important to note that when a single-layer composite film of MXene/CNF with a similar composition to that of the multilayered film was made by mixing the CNFs and MXene and running the vacuum filtration for one cycle, the properties of the single-layer structure were not comparable with those of its multilayer counterpart. The multilayer one with an exact chemical composition showed higher electrical conductivity, mechanical properties and EMI shielding capability.112 It is also interesting to note that the electrical conductivity and EMI shielding capability are dependent on the number of MXene and polymer layers in the multilayer film.
The pore size of the filter and the intensity of the vacuum are important factors determining the required time for the vacuum filtration process.121 In addition, sufficient attention should be paid to peeling off the MXene/polymer thin film from the filter to avoid any damage. As the vacuum force causes orientation of MXene flakes, the samples prepared by vacuum filtration may show some changes in their XRD pattern compared with a similar sample prepared by other methods such as solution casting. As a result, one can conclude that at similar chemical compositions, the processing method of the MXene/polymer mixture for the fabrication of a thin film may affect its X-ray diffraction pattern by changing the intensity and broadness of the peaks.133
Spray coating is an easy-to-use technique to form a MXene-based coating over a large surface area (Fig. 8D).73,134 Thin, transparent, conductive, pure MXene or MXene-based nanocomposite films can be developed by this method. An advantage of this method is its compatibility for different kinds of substrate, the creation of a coating without surface damage and its flexibility for use with different kinds of MXene suspension containing different intercalants.73 Spray coating was used to coat the surface of PU foams with a flame-retardant mixture containing single-layer Ti3C2.98 The mixture was dispersed in DMF and then applied on the surface of PU by spray coating.98 The thickness of the coatings can be controlled by adjusting the concentration of the sprayed material as well as the spraying duration.121
Spin coating is a widely used technique for the creation of thin films from a solution or suspension.135,136 A tiny amount of a liquid containing the material to be deposited is placed on a substrate, and the rotation of the substrate then starts (Fig. 8E). Most of the material is usually thrown away from the substrate, and what is left forms a thin, defect-free homogeneous smooth film. The thickness of the film can be adjusted by controlling the rotation speed, and the amount and concentration of the material to be deposited in the liquid. In addition to the usual substrates, thin MXene-based films can be deposited on a transparent substrate by this technique to develop conductive and transparent systems.121
The substrate that is used in a spin coating process may affect the properties of the deposited film. Thus, it is necessary to minimize the contact of the deposited material with the substrate. Wu et al.137 developed thin hybrid films of multilayer Ti3C2 and PDT by adding the components to DMF and carrying out a spin coating process on the Ti3C2–FTO substrate. After the process, the system was dried at 80 °C under vacuum for 8 hours, and the thin hybrid MXene/PDT film was carefully peeled off from the Ti3C2–FTO substrate. The FTO substrate itself was coated with Ti3C2 to minimize direct contact between the PDT/Ti3C2/DMF paste and FTO, preventing FTO from affecting the structural and mechanical properties of the obtained film. Other researchers have also used this technique to deposit MQD/PVP on an ITO electrode.138
Similar to spin or solution casting, dip coating is a robust and controlled technique for developing homogeneous MXene/polymer hybrids (Fig. 8F).139 Complex polymer materials such as electrospun polymer fibers or thermoplastic polymers such as PU can be coated with an MXene to develop a uniform film thickness on their surface. The thickness of the deposited film is dependent on the viscosity of the dipping solution and the dipping/withdrawal velocities of the substrate.121 Moreover, in typical dip coating processes, the thickness of the coatings can be controlled by regulating the number of dipping cycles and the rate of solvent evaporation during thermal annealing. PET surfaces were coated with PPy-functionalized Ti3C2 by the dip coating process to fabricate conductive textiles for EMI shielding applications.140 Similarly, a PU sponge was coated with single-layer Ti3C2 to develop free standing MXene–polymer foams for flame-retardancy applications.141
Layer-by-layer dip-coating was used to fabricate MXene/polyelectrolyte multilayers. In case of using pristine Ti3C2 that has a negative surface charge, the coating process starts with immersing the substrate in the polycation solution for a specific amount of time. Next, it is removed from the solution, rinsed for several minutes, and then immersed in colloidal MXene suspension. This process is repeated several times to reach a desired thickness. Two points should be highlighted here. First, the thickness of each layer in the final multilayer film can be adjusted by changing the immersion duration. In other words, it is not necessary to have an equal immersion time for both positively and negatively charged components. Second, layer-by-layer dip-coating has advantages over ordinary dip-coating. For example, layer-by-layer dip coating is suitable for coating with charged components,142 as mixing of the charged components may cause the precipitation of the components before the formation of a coating, which decreases the smoothness and homogeneity of the final coating. For example, layer-by-layer dip-coating has been used for the deposition of single-layer Ti3C2 that has negative charge and chitosan that has positive charge on the surface and internal pores of PUF (Fig. 8G).143 Also, dip-coating was used to coat small-size and large-size single-layer MXene on cellulose yarns.144
Latex blending is a common method of fabricating polymer blends. It involves mixing of two lattices followed by removing the liquid phase. A latex can also be mixed with colloidal MXene to make a nanocomposite. Polymer lattices produced by emulsion, suspension, and dispersion polymerizations can be used in this process.145,146 Luo et al.147 used this technique to make a nanocomposite of single-layer Ti3C2 and NR. In the pH range of 2–12, both Ti3C2 and NR nanoparticles have negative surface charge and the electrostatic repulsion between them ensures their homogeneous dispersion in water. Vacuum filtration of the mixture led to a flexible and conductive MXene/NR nanocomposite film. It was shown that Ti3C2 flakes locate between NR particles and create a conductive network of flakes across the cross section of the film. It is also possible to use this method to crosslink a rubber by adding crosslinkers such as dicumyl peroxide followed by thermal compression. For example, the obtained single-layer MXene/NR nanocomposite was crosslinked at 170 °C under a pressure of 10 MPa for 20 min.147
MXenes inherently have negative surface charge due to the presence of hydroxyl and oxygen groups on their surface. Thus, they can participate in electrostatic assembly coating. MXenes stick to any species with positive surface charge due to electrostatic attraction. The positively charged species can be a single polycation chain (Fig. 9A), a positively charged polymer particle (Fig. 9B), or any other (in)organic nanoparticle with positive surface charge. As steps 3 and 4 in Fig. 9A show, the coating process can be repeated several times to reach a desired thickness. Usually, the layer-by-layer assembly technique works well for the fabrication of nanocomposites from components that establish electrostatic attraction with each other. Nanocomposites made from oppositely charged species are defect-free and have high structural and mechanical stability. Here, we give some examples to highlight the versatility of this technique. A tiny amount of Ti3C2, 0.26 vol%, was added to a positively charged polystyrene latex to make conductive polymeric nanocomposite thin films (Fig. 9B). When the Ti3C2 content was increased to 1.9 vol%, the conductivity increased to 1081 S m−1. To reach such high conductivity with a conventional compression molding method, a larger amount of single-layer Ti3C2 is required.148 Another example is self-assembly between MXene flakes driven by electrostatic attraction. By grafting aminosilane coupling agents on the surface of single-layer Ti3C2, positively charged flakes were synthesized and retained their positive charge in a wide pH range up to ∼10.5. Upon mixing with pristine single-layer Ti3C2 that inherently has negative surface charge, a multilayer film was formed due to the contact of these oppositely charged species.82 Pristine single-layer Ti3C2 can also participate in self-assembly or layer-by-layer assembly processes with other positively charged species such as modified carbon nanotubes.139 One advantage of layer-by-layer assembly is its repeatability. The process can be repeated many times to form several layers of deposited material to reach a desirable thickness.139 It is worth mentioning that the concept of electrostatic assembly can be implemented via different techniques such as layer-by-layer dip, spin, and spray coatings, which are discussed in detail in ref. 121.
 Fig. 9  (A) Layer-by-layer assembly driven by electrostatic attraction between Ti3C2 with negative surface charge and a polymer chain with positive surface charge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) Self-assembly between positively charged polystyrene nanoparticles produced by emulsion polymerization (1) and Ti3C2 (2) leading to a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite (3) through latex blending and filtration (4) followed by molding (5) to get a thin nanocomposite film (6) for EMI shielding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2017, Wiley Online Library. 
4.3 Fiber spinning and melt processing
Wet spinning is a fiber processing method in which a polymer solution is passed through a spinneret and then enters into a coagulation bath containing polymer non-solvent (Fig. 10A).149 Upon solvent/non-solvent exchange, polymer fibers are formed. To prepare a MXene/polymer mixture for wet spinning, the solvent of the polymer and dispersing medium of the MXene should be similar. If they are not similar, the solvent exchange technique allows for using a similar solvent for polymer dissolution and Ti3C2 dispersion. Using the solvent exchange technique, Seyedin et al.62 fabricated Ti3C2/PCL, Ti3C2/PAN and Ti3C2/PVDF fibers by wet spinning. The solvent was exchanged from water to DMF allowing Ti3C2 to be mixed homogeneously with PCL, PAN and PVDF solutions. SEM images of the obtained fibers show that Ti3C2 disperses in the polymers very finely and creates an electrically conductive fiber with very smooth surface morphologies. As mentioned before, solvent exchange without using sonication retains the larger Ti3C2 flakes and delaminates them further. This caused the Ti3C2/PCL nanocomposite with 23 wt% Ti3C2, produced by the wet spinning technique, to show a conductivity of 1.84 mS cm−1, which is ideal for applications requiring active conductive pathways.62
 Fig. 10  (A) Wet spinning setup for the production of MXene-based nanocomposite fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Electrospinning causing the orientation of MXene sheets along the axis of the nanocomposite nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Electrospinning is a widely used technique for the fabrication of nanofibers from polymer solutions or polymer melts using electrical force (Fig. 10B). The electrospinning setup consists of an injection pump, syringe, needle, high-voltage supply, and a collector. An electrical field is generated between the tip of the needle and the collector by applying high voltage. Upon pumping the polymer solution, charged threads are formed and are drawn toward the collector by electrical forces. In contrast to wet spinning, electrospinning does not require a coagulation bath to solidify the ejected polymer thread from the needle. Polymer solutions containing dispersed MXene flakes can also undergo electrospinning to produce composite nanofibers.150 Conductive nanofibers from Ti3C2/PAA in a DMF/water mixture, Ti3C2/PEO in an ethanol/water mixture and Ti3C2/PVA in an ethanol/water mixture were synthesized by electrospinning.151 Different voltages and tip-to-collector distances are required to successfully run the electrospinning process. Viscosity is another factor which needs to be adjusted as it significantly affects the diameter of the produced nanofibers. In MXene/polymer systems, viscosity is dependent on the concentration of the polymer as well as MXene/polymer interactions. Hydrogen bonding is one of these interactions. Hydrogen-bond-forming polymers like PVA and PEO interact with hydroxyl and fluorine groups of MXene and affect the viscosity of the system significantly. The positive effects of single-layer MXene on nanofiber properties, for example, conductivity, can be observed at concentrations as low as 1 wt% with respect to polymer.151
MXene coated nanofibers produced by electrospinning can be used for the fabrication of wearable electronics and sensors. To develop such devices, MXene flakes can be dispersed in an aqueous solution containing a water-soluble polymer such as PEO and then coated on a substrate such as PET by electrospinning. The coated yarns can be used for manufacturing wearable electronics and sensors.152 These wearable devices have enough mechanical strength to keep their electroactivity even after thousands of bending cycles. An advantage of the MXene/polymer electrospinning process is the self-orientation of 2D MXene nanosheets in the flow direction (Fig. 10B). This phenomenon increases the chance of inter-connection of MXene flakes in a nanofiber and thus electrically conductive nanofibers can be obtained at lower MXene concentrations compared with a process in which self-orientation does not happen.153
Compression molding is another method of nanocomposite manufacturing. In this method, the applied pressure reduces the contact resistance between MXene nanosheets in a nanocomposite. It was used to enhance the conductivity of films made from a single-layer Ti3C2/polystyrene composite.148 In this study, the mixture was compression molded for 30 min at 130 °C under a pressure of 500 MPa, and no Ti3C2 degradation was reported.148 In another study,154 multilayer Ti3C2/UHMWPE was compression molded. Ti3C2 powder was mixed with UHMWPE powder using a high-speed mixer, and the mixture was then heated up at a rate of 10 °C min−1 to 220 °C and kept at that temperature for 30 min under a pressure of 10 MPa. Again, no thermal degradation of multilayer Ti3C2 was reported under these processing conditions.154 Compression molding of multilayer Ti3C2/PVDF at 190 °C for 20 min at a pressure of 5 MPa has also been carried out.155 These studies showed that Ti3C2 does not degrade during high temperature processes. An advantage of compression molding is that the thickness of the MXene/polymer films can be easily adjusted by controlling the hot-pressing parameters such as pressure and temperature.105
Extrusion and melt blending are other techniques of nanocomposite manufacturing. Extruders can be used for polymer compounding, adding an additive to a polymer, and dispersing nanoparticles within a polymer. Using this technique, Cao et al.156 added Ti3C2 into LLDPE where no degradation of Ti3C2 is reported during this extrusion process.156 Using a melt blending technique, Sheng et al.105 blended PEG-treated-Ti3C2 with TPU in a Brabender Plasticorder mixer working at 180 °C for 6 min with a screw speed of 60 rpm. They then compression molded these samples at 180 °C for 10 min at a pressure of 10 MPa. They did not report any need for an inert gas stream to prevent Ti3C2 degradation. These studies indicate that Ti3C2 keeps its outstanding physical, chemical and mechanical properties even after being processed at those high temperatures and pressures.105
5 Applications based on MXene properties
In this section, various applications of MXene-based devices are discussed. These applications include textile engineering, fire retardancy, sensors, self-healing coatings, and electromagnetic interference shields. For each of these applications, a suitable processing method is described. We categorize the applications of MXene/polymer devices based on each MXene property that is of interest.
5.1 Heat generation capability

5.1.1 Joule heating and wearable heaters. 
Wearable heaters can appear in the form of a cloth, bandage, or knee brace made from thin films or fabrics that produce heat upon applying an external stimulus including sunlight or voltage. Before the discovery of MXenes, other materials such as graphene, CNTs, silver nanowires and copper wires had been used for Joule heating applications.157–159 However, the discovery of MXenes revolutionized these applications. The development of Joule heating clothes that generate enough heat upon applying low voltages can have several applications. Fortunately, MXene-based fabrics are able to generate a huge amount of heat and provide temperatures as high as 150 °C just by applying voltages as low as 6 V. An ordinary cotton fabric can be converted to a Joule heating cloth by spray-drying a Ti3C2 colloid on its surface. Zhang et al.158 used a spray gun and a hairdryer to repeat a spray-drying cycle several times to produce a single-layer Ti3C2-based Joule heating fabric (Fig. 11A). The process is robust and allows for mass production of Joule heating fabrics.
 Fig. 11  (A) Coating of a cotton fabric with colloidal Ti3C2 and its applications as an EMI shield, a Joule heater and a motion sensor. (B) Joule heating ability of Ti3C2-coated cotton fibers which reaches 150 °C after 1 min under an applied voltage of 6 V (1) and local heating of a body part when the fabric is worn by a person (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) Transparent sunlight-driven Ti3C2-based wearable heater mounted on a human hand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In MXene-based Joule heating fabrics, the amount of generated heat increases with voltage and with the amount of incorporated MXene. Fig. 11B(1) shows that the temperature of a cotton fabric containing 6 wt% Ti3C2 goes from room temperature to 150 °C in less than one minute upon applying a voltage of 6 V. The temperature stays at 150 °C as long as the voltage is applied. When these Ti3C2-containing cotton fabrics are worn by a human, it is possible to locally warm a part of the body which is in contact with the fabric (Fig. 11B(2)). The amount of MXene incorporated to induce Joule heating is usually not too high so as to not impair the breathability of the fibers.
Thin transparent films of PU containing AgNP@MXene can generate heat under sunlight.108Fig. 11C shows a 100 micron thick film that attaches to human skin very easily. The film contains only 0.08 wt% AgNP@Ti3C2.108 The ability of the film to convert sunlight to heat was monitored in an experiment in which the ambient temperature was −12 °C and the human skin temperature was initially 18.3 °C. The figure shows that sunlight irradiation for 1 min increased the temperature of the bare skin to 18.8 °C and the temperature of the part covered by the PU nanocomposite film to 24.3 °C. This experiment shows the effectiveness of AgNP@Ti3C2/PU nanocomposites as a skin-mountable, sunlight-driven wearable heater.108


5.1.2 Self-healing coatings. 
Nature has inspired engineers to develop self-healing coatings that are able to repair their physical damage and recover their original functionality without any or with minimum intervention.160 There are mainly two underlying mechanisms for self-healing: the formation of dynamic covalent bonds and the establishment of non-covalent interactions. Imine bonds, coordination bonds, bonds formed in the Diels–Alder reaction, boronate ester bonds, and disulfide bonds are some examples of dynamic covalent bonds. Electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic interactions, host–guest interactions, and hydrogen bonds are examples of non-covalent interactions that can be used for the formation of self-healing coatings (Fig. 12A).161 To have a real self-healing polymer coating, remote activation and suitable mechanical properties are required.
 Fig. 12  (A) Various dynamic covalent bonds and noncovalent interactions for developing self-healing coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Monomer used for epoxy oligomer synthesis (1), the oligomer mixing with Ti3C2 (2), crosslinking to form a polymer network (3), and dissociation of the polymer network upon temperature increase to develop a Ti3C2/epoxy self-healing coating (4). (C) Temperature increase in an epoxy coating containing different amounts of Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2018, MDPI. (D) Ability of a hydrogel to pass electrical current (i), its inability when it is damaged (ii), and recovering its conductivity to pass electrical current after self-healing (iii). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. 
Any functional filler with the capability of converting light, electrical field, or (electro)magnetic field into heat is favorable for the self-healing application. The incorporation of a MXene into a polymeric coating not only improves the mechanical properties of the coating, but also enhances its light-to-heat conversion efficiency, which is of interest in self-healing coatings. In addition, MXenes have hydrogen-bond-forming groups on their surface that can be exploited to develop self-healing polymer coatings. A necessary condition to have a self-healing coating is the reversibility of the polymer network. A crosslinked polymer network should dissociate to let polymer chains move to fill the damaged part of the coating under an external stimulus including heat or light. Upon the removal of the stimulus, the crosslinked polymer network should then be re-formed. By the addition of Ti3C2 to PVA, self-healing hydrogels were developed by hydrogen bond formation between surface groups of the Ti3C2 and hydroxyl groups of the polymer.162 Single-layer MXene/epoxy self-healing coatings are also prepared using the Diels–Alder reaction.163 Based on this reaction, a crosslinked network of an epoxy resin dissociates at high temperatures of around 150 °C and forms again when the coating cools down (Fig. 12B). As this figure shows, an epoxy oligomer bearing dangling furan rings is formed by reaction between DGEBA and FA. In the presence of Ti3C2, this oligomer reacts with BMI at 60 °C for 12 hours to form a crosslinked network via a reaction between furan rings and maleimide of BMI. The same reaction is reversed at 150 °C.
Light-induced self-healing coatings are much more valuable than thermally induced self-healing coatings, as they allow for repairing damaged parts of the coatings remotely. In such a coating, solar radiation can be used to stimulate and repair the damaged area. As Ti3C2 is an excellent photothermal filler for both near infrared and solar light, a 3 minute 3.28 W cm−2 solar irradiation has been found to increase temperatures of epoxy coatings with 0.57, 1.42, 2.8 and 5.44 wt% Ti3C2 from room temperature to 33.1, 43.4, 68.4, and 125.9 °C, respectively. Fig. 12C shows the trend of temperature increase of the epoxy coating containing different amounts of Ti3C2versus sunlight irradiation intensity. Thanks to the remote-triggered self-healing capability, a crack in a Ti3C2/epoxy coating containing 2.8 wt% Ti3C2 can be fixed after 10 min by irradiation with a 4 W cm−2-intensity solar light.163
As mentioned before, MXene-based hydrogels with a double network of PVA and PAAm show self-healing properties due to the presence of borax (Na2B4O7·10H2O). In the presence of borax, dynamic crosslinking bonds between hydroxyl groups of PVA and tetrahydroxy borate ions are formed. In addition, some interactions between PVA, multilayer MXene and solvent-exchanged EG endow the hydrogel with self-healing properties. Similarly, in hydrogels made from a tertiary polymer network of dopamine grafted sodium alginate, phenylboronic acid grafted sodium alginate and PAAm, the presence of B–O–C leads to the formation of dynamic covalent ester bonds which endow the hydrogel with self-healing abilities.113 Ti3C2-based hydrogels are conductive and their conductivity correlates with their self-healing abilities. Any rupture or damage in the hydrogels causes the continuity of electron-conducting passages to deteriorate and consequently reduces the conductivity of the hydrogel. On the other hand, reforming the passages by taking advantage of the self-healing properties facilitates electron transport, and increases the conductivity of the hydrogel. As Fig. 12D shows, undamaged hydrogel is conductive and transfers electrical current in a circuit to light up an LED lamp. However, the light turns off when the hydrogel is cut. The lamp turns on again as the Ti3C2-based hydrogel wire heals. This example shows the high capability of the hydrogel for the recovery of the damaged parts and the retrieval of its electrical properties.69
Thermoplastic polymers can be used for developing a self-healing coating as well. The chains of this family of polymers have enough mobility to move and fill a crack or ruptured area at temperatures higher than their melting point. Thus, adding effective light-to-heat converting nanoparticles to a thermoplastic material and taking advantage of visible or infrared light result in the fabrication of self-healing thermoplastic coatings. For example, AgNP@single-layer-MXene was added to a PU matrix with a melting temperature of ∼95 °C. The presence of 0.16 wt% of the nanoparticles in the PU coating with a thickness of 100 microns caused a temperature increase to 106 °C and 145 °C after 1 and 5 min, respectively, under Vis-IR light irradiation with 600 mW cm−2 intensity. This excellent photothermal conversion property of AgNP@MXene originates from the synergistic effects and cannot be obtained by using a single-layer MXene or silver nanoparticles alone.108 The presence of silver in AgNP@MXene helps this hybrid nanoparticle to absorb more light in the wavelength range of 400 to 650 nm. Driven by its plasmonic effect, the silver part of the AgNP@MXene, similar to its MXene part, converts light to heat and then transfers the generated heat to MXene sheets which are located in their close vicinity. Moreover, due to the high aspect ratio and thermal conductivity of MXene sheets, the generated heat is distributed homogeneously in the whole of the coating. By this mechanism, it is shown that the healing efficiency of transparent PU coatings containing just 0.16 wt% AgNP@MXene is 98%.108

5.2 Thermal conductivity and heat stability

5.2.1 Thermally conductive nanocomposites. 
MXene has excellent thermal conductivity along with exceptional electrical conductance. MXene addition to polymers which are usually thermal insulators can convert them to their conductive counterparts. Compared with graphene-based nanocomposites that showed typical thermal conductivities of 0.14 to 0.41 W m−1 K−1 for a 2 wt% loading,164,165 MXene-based polymer hybrids have exhibited slightly better thermal properties of 0.5 W m−1 K−1 with lower filler loadings.166,167 Thermal conductivity requires strong interactions between the polymer and the additives to facilitate the kinetics of heat transfer. MXenes' high thermal conductivity significantly overcomes the thermal resistivity of a polymeric matrix leading to a uniform and high thermal conductivity, when the concentration of MXene is high enough to form a network.
To develop an efficient thermally conductive system, it is important to make a connection between MXene flakes inside the nanocomposite to form a MXene network. The concentration at which network formation happens is called percolation concentration. To have percolation at a low concentration, it is recommended to embed a 3D network of oriented MXene flakes inside a polymer matrix, rather than just randomly dispersing MXene flakes (Fig. 13A). As was mentioned before, the synthesis of a unidirectional, 3D MXene structure is possible by freeze-drying. It is shown that such 3D oriented structure provides excellent heat transfer pathways in a polymer matrix (Fig. 13B). The incorporation of just 0.7 wt% single-layer Ti3C2 into PDMS, a thermally insulating polymer, improved the thermal conductivity of the polymer by 220% and its electrical conductivity by 14 orders of magnitude.117 Yan et al.168 deposited silver nanoparticles on the surface of single-layer Ti3C2 and then connected Ti3C2/Ag nanoparticles to each other using silver nanowires through a hot pressing technique. The silver nanoparticles on the Ti3C2 surface acted as welding points for the attachment of the silver nanowires. Yan et al.168 reported that the thermal conductivity of an epoxy nanocomposite containing just 15 wt% Ti3C2/Ag nanoparticles is 100% higher than that of pure Ti3C2.168 Liu and Li169 reported that adding 12.71 wt% PVA into Ti3C2 decreased the thermal conductivity of Ti3C2 from 55.2 to 47.3 W m−1 K−1, which is still higher than that of many materials such as stainless steel, Fe, SiO2, and Al2O3. This indicates that the Ti3C2/PVA nanocomposite can ideally replace many materials that are used in thermal conduction applications.169
 Fig. 13  (A) The formation of a 3D MXene network via the freeze-drying technique followed by embedding it in a PDMS matrix. (B) Heat transfer pathways generated in a PDMS matrix by a MXene network. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Having high thermal conductivity is advantageous when a nanocomposite is designed to work as an EMI shielding material.170 In fact, high thermal conductivity helps to dissipate EM energy as heat quickly. For example, Ti3C2/PVDF nanocomposites are used as EMI shielding materials. The thermal conductivity of the nanocomposite with 22.55 vol% Ti3C2 is 0.766 W m−1 K−1, which is four times higher than that of pure PVDF. In these nanocomposites, the heat generated upon the absorption of EM waves dissipates quickly due to the existence of phonon transfer pathways. By quick heat dissipation we mean that their cooling thermogram shows an exponential decay with time.155


5.2.2 Anti-dripping, flame-retardancy and smoke suppressive nanocomposites. 
In order for polymer nanocomposites to have more real-life applications, their thermal properties should be improved.171–173 When plastics burn, the combustion products can form a liquid droplet which possibly separates from the bulk of the burning material. This unfavorable phenomenon is called dripping and is dangerous as it can spread fire and accelerate fire growth.174 Anti-dripping additives are usually added to virgin polymers to improve their resistance during a fire incident. MXenes can work as an excellent anti-dripping additive. The addition of single-layer Ti3C2 to PVA thin films and PU sponges improved the anti-dripping properties of both polymers.141
The thermal behavior of MXenes and how they increase the thermal resistance of polymer nanocomposites can be explained as follows. Upon heating Ti3C2, firstly entrapped water molecules between MXene flakes evaporate. This usually happens at temperatures up to 130 °C. In the next step, when the temperature increases up to 350 °C, surface functional groups of Ti3C2 including O, F and OH are removed according to the following equation:Ti3C2Tx → Ti3C2 + Tx
In the next step when the temperature goes up to 550 °C, the oxidation of Ti3C2 to TiO2 happens:Ti3C2 + 3O2 → 3TiO2 + 2C

Fig. 14A schematically shows the conversion of Ti3C2via combustion in air. Thus, when a polymer nanocomposite containing Ti3C2 burns in air, Ti3C2 oxidizes into TiO2 which forms a protective layer on the surface of the nanocomposite, imparting excellent anti-dripping properties. Fig. 14B also schematically shows the formation of this protective layer.
 Fig. 14  (A) Conversion of Ti3C2 to TiO2via combustion in air. (B) Formation of a fire protective layer, made mainly from TiO2, in a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite which undergoes combustion in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
PU is used in many laboratories, industrial areas, and residential places. However, its flammability and rapid flame spread have always been a matter of concern. Ti3C2 has been used to develop self-extinguishing PU foams. Ti3C2 as a part of an intumescent flame-retardant mixture was coated on PU foams by spray coating. The presence of Ti3C2 synergistically helps in the formation of a barrier layer during a fire incident. This layer which is called an intumescent char layer works as an insulator and sticks to the surface of PU. Ti3C2 flakes work as a compact protective layer during combustion and suppress oxygen, fuel and heat transfer between PU foam and the fire zone by creating a tortuous barrier layer. A burning PU foam coated with Ti3C2 self-extinguished after 10 seconds and did not reignite. However, the same PU foam without a Ti3C2 coating burned completely in 20 seconds.98
When using a MXene as a flame-retardant agent, it is important to incorporate an optimal amount of the MXene. An excess amount of MXene in an intumescent flame-retardant mixture decreases MXene's efficacy for flame retardancy, smoke suppression, and self-extinguishment. It increases the thermal conductivity of the protecting layer, which is unfavorable here, and outweighs the favorable barrier effect of the MXene. In addition, it decreases the interfacial adhesion of the char layer and consequently lowers its fire protection efficiency. Excellent fire protection properties are usually obtained only by adding 1 wt% single-layer MXene, while the addition of more than 2 wt% is not recommended.98 Regarding the smoke suppression ability of single-layer Ti3C2, it is believed that during the combustion, Ti3C2 converts into anatase TiO2in situ where the latter reduces the amount of CO2 and CO emitted during burning.98 In a similar research study,143 to improve the thermal stability (flame-retardancy and smoke suppression) of PUF, a single-layer Ti3C2/chitosan coating was applied via a layer-by-layer dip coating process. It was found that 8 bilayers of Ti3C2/chitosan impart the best flame retardancy and smoke suppression as the total smoke and heat release decreased by 66.5% and 71.1%, respectively, compared with neat PUF. Similar to previous reports, the presence of Ti3C2/chitosan improved char layer formation during the combustion, which works as a protective layer and prevents the release of volatile combustion products into the outer environment.143 The addition of PEG-treated Ti3C2 to TPU also increased the onset degradation temperature, maximum degradation temperature and char formation amount.105 Technically, onset degradation temperature is the temperature at which 5 wt% weight loss is observed. Single-layer Ti3C2/PI aerogel also showed anti-flammability properties.119 Pan et al.175 showed that the addition of Ti3C2 into PVA retards thermal decomposition of the nanocomposite and significantly reduces the release of hydrocarbons and carbonyl products formed by the combustion of the PVA matrix.175 Si et al.97 used a grade of single-layer Ti3C2 modified with a cationic surfactant to enhance the flame-retardancy and smoke suppression of polystyrene. They reported improvements in the latter properties due to enhanced dispersion of the modified Ti3C2 in the polystyrene matrix, thanks to the presence of the cationic surfactant.

5.3 Electrical conductivity

5.3.1 Conductive films. 
Polymers in general are electrical insulators. However, they can turn into conductive nanocomposites upon the addition of conductive nanomaterials such as MXene. When conductive nanoparticles are added to polymers, there is a concentration at which filler percolation happens. This causes an insulating polymer to turn into a conductive material with an isotropic electronic conductivity. A conductive polymer nanocomposite can be fabricated with lower MXene contents if the MXene lateral size increases. Ti3C2 in acrylic polymers has shown a percolation threshold as low as 6–7 vol%.127 Conductive, flexible, transparent, and self-standing nanocomposite films are obtained by adding 1.7 vol% single-layer Ti3C2 to copolyimide-6,10, resulting in improved conductivity and flexibility.126
Water-soluble polymers are a decent option for the fabrication of MXene-based conductive nanocomposite thin films. For example, water-soluble PAAm-based nanocomposites exhibited a conductivity of 3.3 × 10−2 S m−1 upon incorporating 6 wt% Ti3C2.176 Reaching a desirable conductivity with a smaller amount of MXene is feasible through replacing multilayer MXene with a single-layer one. The intercalation of Ti3C2 by intercalants like DMSO facilitates the production of single-layer MXene. The addition of intercalated MXene to a polymer solution followed by processing of such a system leads to a conductive polymer film with isotropic properties.176
Surface chemistry of Ti3C2 is an important aspect which affects the conductivity of Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposites. The removal of surface functional groups from the surface of MXene eliminates electron transfer resistance sites, which ultimately increases the conductivity of a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite. Conductive Ti3C2/epoxy nanocomposites have been developed for EMI shielding application. The epoxy resin containing 15 wt% annealed Ti3C2 shows 176% and 37% higher electrical conductivity and EMI shielding, respectively, compared with an epoxy resin containing 15 wt% pristine single-layer Ti3C2.48 As discussed before, annealed Ti3C2 does not have OH or F groups. Some other examples of hybrid systems to fabricate conductive nanocomposite films are Ti3C2/PI,119 Ti3C2/NR147 and Ti3C2/C hybrid foam/epoxy.177 In general, the addition of MXenes to polymer matrices can be similar to their addition to other nanomaterials. However, recent studies on Ti3C2 MXene exhibited the highest electrical conductivity of 15000 to 20000 S cm−1 (ref. 66 and 178) obtained up to now from any solution processed 2D material. This high conductivity outweighs the advantages of MXenes over other nanomaterials, including reduced graphene oxide, for conductive nanocomposite fabrication.


5.3.2 Sensors. 
5.3.2.1 Motion sensors. 
Sensitive tools for the detection of molecular species and tiny movements, as well as effective algorithms, are required to monitor a process and safely operate it.179,180 The development of hybrid materials containing low-defect fillers for sensing applications is widely investigated to fulfill the above purposes. Defect-free MXene can be synthesized via a top-down synthesis approach with mild etching procedures. A relative advantage of MXenes over other materials such as graphene24 is their easy and cost-effective synthesis with minimal structural defects. MXene-based nanocomposites are excellent motion detectors with capability to detect both the intensity and direction of a motion. Their working principle is based on a change in resistivity upon compression and tensile deformations. Under tensile deformation, the distance between MXene flakes in a MXene-based sensor increases which results in less contact between MXene flakes, harder electrical charge transport and consequently lower electrical conductivity. On the other hand, under compression deformation, the distance between MXene flakes decreases which means a higher chance of charge transport and thus higher electrical conductivity. Usually MXene-based hydrogels are used as a sensor. They are sensitive enough to show lower or higher electrical conductivity, depending on the direction of a moving object on their surface. For example, when a cylinder moves on the surface of a MXene-based PVA hydrogel, it shows an increase in electrical conductivity if the cylinder moves in the x-direction while showing a decrease in electrical conductivity if the cylinder moves in the y-direction. The reason is that movement in the x-direction creates compression deformation and movement in the y-direction creates tensile deformation. In addition, the extent of change in the electrical conductivity varies with changes in the speed of the moving cylinder. These observations confirm that PVA hydrogel sensors containing single-layer MXene are both speed and direction detectors. MXene-based hydrogels easily attach to various parts of the human body without any adhesives. Their attachment to fingers, wrist, and abdomen of a human allowed for detecting movements of each of these parts (Fig. 15A). For example, when a finger bends, the resistivity of the hydrogels changes and thus the electric current passing through the hydrogels. This current signal can then be transferred wirelessly to a device such as a smartphone for real-time monitoring (Fig. 15B). MXene-based hydrogels can be used for signature detection as well. Each person has his own unique style of signing and writing. This means that the amount of pressure that a person puts on a pen or his speed of signing varies from that of another person. This means each person creates a distinct pattern of change in electrical conductivity if he signs on a piece of such hydrogel sensor.162Fig. 15C shows that MXene-based fabrics can be used as pressure sensors as well. These capacitance pressure sensors are accurate enough to distinguish different load levels (low, moderate, high) exerted by a human finger.144
 Fig. 15  (A) Ti3C2/polymer sensor is able to detect wrist and abdomen movements (B). The hydrogel sensor detects a finger's movement and transfers the corresponding signal to a smartphone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2020), Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Pressure sensors made from Ti3C2-containing fabric worn by a person (1) and its capacitance sensitivity to a finger touch (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. 
MXene-based hydrogel sensors made from a tertiary polymer network of dopamine grafted sodium alginate, phenylboronic acid grafted sodium alginate and PAAm were synthesized. Again, the deformation of the sensor changes its electrical conductivity. An important parameter in designing MXene-based sensors is the amount of MXene added. As mentioned before, deformation changes the distance between MXene flakes in a polymer network. If flakes get close to each other upon deformation, conductivity increases and vice versa. If more-than-required MXene is loaded into a polymer network, the flakes are always in contact with each other regardless of the deformation extent. Thus, the system usually shows high conductivity and is consequently not sensitive enough to work as a good sensor. By adjusting the amount of single-layer Ti3C2, Wu et al. developed a wearable, self-adhesive, healable epidermal sensor which is able to detect very tiny movements in the abdomen during breathing, (Fig. 15A).113
MXene-based hydrogels made from a double network of PVA and PAAm can act as motion-detection sensors. As before, the relative electrical resistivity changes upon sensor deformation due to a change in distance between MXene flakes and consequently a change in the ease of electron transfer. The sensing response is defined as R/R0 (%) = ((R − R0)/R0) × 100 (%). In this equation, R0 is the original resistance of the sensor before deformation and R is the resistance of the sensor after the deformation. Sensors developed from single-layer Ti3C2/PVA/PAAm are so sensitive that they can detect the motion of the throat during swallowing or motion of a finger upon bending.69 Three more examples are Ti3C2/chitosan nanocomposite biosensors to detect organophosphate based pollutants in water and foods,181 single-layer Ti3C2/PI aerogel sensors for motion detection,119 and single-layer Ti3C2/cellulose fibers as pressure sensors.144
5.3.2.2 Humidity sensors. 
MXene/polymers are used as humidity sensors and their underlying mechanism is similar to that of motion sensors. As Fig. 16A shows, these sensors are sensitive enough to detect humidity changes during human breathing. Upon a change in humidity, water molecules can be adsorbed or desorbed reversibly onto/from the MXene-based sensors which changes the interlayer distance between single-layer Ti3C2 flakes. Consequently, this affects the electron tunneling resistance. Fig. 16B shows a multilayer structure of Ti3C2/PDAC achieved via a layer-by-layer dip coating technique for use in humidity sensing. When humidity is low, the interlayer distance decreases and therefore resistivity (conductivity) decreases (increases). In the same figure, equivalent electrical circuits corresponding to dry and humid states are shown as well. Rt1 and Rt2 resistances are added to the circuits when a sensor experiences a humid environment. Another assumption is that water (polar molecules) adsorbed by Ti3C2, in a high humidity environment, interacts with surface functional groups of Ti3C2 and decreases the conductivity. However, experimental results show that a change in interlayer distance upon water adsorption is the dominant mechanism in decreasing the conductivity rather than water interaction with single-layer Ti3C2 surface functional groups.142 One of the outstanding features of Ti3C2-based humidity sensors is their fast response and recovery times. They are quick enough to distinguish the inhalation/exhalation rates of a person during running and walking.142 The results of the sensors are accurate enough as they show that both the frequency and domain of the resistivity signal are low when the person is walking. However, they increase when that person starts to run and again decrease when the person walks again.142
 Fig. 16  (A) Illustration of Ti3C2/polymer sensors showing that they are sensitive enough to detect a change in humidity during human breathing. (B) Change in the interlayer distance of a Ti3C2/polymer humidity sensor upon water adsorption/desorption and the corresponding electrical circuit in both dry and humid states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
5.3.2.3 Bio-electrochemical sensors. 
MXene-based biosensors are used for measuring the concentrations of urea, uric acid, and creatinine in the blood of a patient continuously and online during a hemodialysis treatment. This online monitoring system determines the required dialysis time to reach an acceptable level of the species in a patient's blood. Liu et al.182 developed a bio-electrochemical sensor which consists of four different layers for blood analysis. The top layer receives the blood and sends it to the second layer, which works as a dialysis member and lets just some species in the blood (Da <1000) reach the third layer. The third layer contains some microchannels and a detection chamber that collects the species that had the chance to pass through the second layer. The sensing electrode which contains single-layer Ti3C2 is the fourth layer, which is able to analyze the blood sample accumulated in the detection chamber. In the work of Liu et al.,182 urea, uric acid and creatinine were three species of interest that were simultaneously detected by a Ti3C2 biosensor through three different detection mechanisms.
Uric acid is an electroactive material which allows it to be detected by a Ti3C2-based biosensor. Through hydrogen bonding with the surface functional groups of Ti3C2, uric acid is adsorbed on the surface. This causes a change in the electrical flow rate (I) of the Ti3C2-based biosensor depending on the concentration of the adsorbed uric acid. To detect creatinine, it is first brought into contact with copper cations, the complex is adsorbed on the negatively charged surface of Ti3C2, and creatinine is then detected using square wave voltammetry. Urea detection is also possible through immobilizing urease on MXene and using glutaraldehyde to catalyze urea, generating specific signals for urea analysis. Detailed mechanisms of the detection can be found elsewhere;182 however, the important point here is that Ti3C2-based biosensors can simultaneously detect several components in a blood sample through different mechanisms.

5.4 2D layered structure

5.4.1 Polymer reinforcement. 
Similar to many other 2D nanomaterials, MXenes can improve the mechanical properties of polymers.183 The morphology of MXene/polymer nanocomposites is usually recognized as “brick-and-mortar”. This morphology is favorable for increasing the mechanical properties of hybrid structures. In a “brick-and-mortar” morphology, a single-layer MXene works as the brick and the polymer plays the role of the mortar, which facilitates stress transfer to MXene flakes. In fact, the polymer works as an intermedium glue to improve the mechanical properties of the nanocomposite.133 However, Zhou et al.112 showed that sometimes the multilayer structure of an MXene/polymer system is more effective than the “brick-and-mortar” structure for improving the mechanical properties of nanocomposites. For example, they showed that in comparison with a single-layer Ti3C2/CNF film with “brick-and-mortar” morphology, the multilayer Ti3C2/CNF film with the same composition shows 1.2, 1.9, and 2.4 times higher tensile strength, fracture strain and toughness, respectively. They believe that this difference originates from the different mechanisms of crack propagation in these two systems under pressure, which is discussed in detail in ref. 112.
Simulation results for the Ti3C2/epoxy system have shown that the presence of Ti3C2 improves the elastic properties of the nanocomposites. Acrylate resins which are a family of polymers with low glass transition temperature and high flexibility are also mixed with Ti3C2.184–186 Experimental results have shown that the addition of Ti3C2 flakes to acrylate resins increases their glass transition temperature and elastic modulus by limiting polymer chain movements.127 If Ti3C2 flakes orient in a specific direction in a nanocomposite, the enhancement of mechanical properties in the alignment direction will be more pronounced. Moreover, the extent of improvement in mechanical properties correlates with the Ti3C2 aspect ratio. Usually, a higher aspect ratio endows higher stiffness to a MXene/polymer system.187 Surface functional groups of MXenes also play an important role in improving the mechanical properties of MXene-based nanocomposites, as they are the sites which form interactions with polymers. For example, due to strong hydrogen bonding between the surface functional groups of Ti3C2 and PVA, their nanocomposite showed improved tensile strength and elongation at break, compared with pristine PVA, with the addition of just 2 wt% Ti3C2.175 A similar improvement in mechanical properties was reported when single-layer Ti3C2 was mixed with NR.147 On the other hand, annealed Ti3C2 which has fewer surface functional groups is not effective enough in improving the mechanical properties of polymers compared with pristine single-layer Ti3C2, which has hydroxyl, fluorine and oxygen groups.48
The addition of Ti3C2 to polymers can increase their crystallinity, as it works as a nucleation agent. Ti3C2 may increase both crystallinity and crystallization temperature of a polymer.155 Higher crystallinity subsequently improves the thermal and some mechanical properties. Also, the creep resistance of a polymer can be improved by the addition of just a tiny amount (∼2 wt%) of a MXene, if a perfect interface between the polymer and the MXene is formed. To obtain a perfect interface, usually surface modified MXenes are used as fillers. For example, a surface modified multilayer Ti3C2 was added to UHMWPE, and a perfect interface between the polymer and multilayer Ti3C2 was formed which facilitated stress transfer.154 The presence of multilayer Ti3C2 also decreases the friction coefficient of the polymer, and improves the abrasion resistance as well as hardness of UHMWPE.154 The addition of Ti3C2 to LLDPE also showed that Ti3C2 works as a nucleation agent in this polymer and increases the polymer crystallization rate at 2 wt% loading. However, the crystallization rate decreased upon 4 wt% Ti3C2 loading due to chain movement restrictions. For crystallization, polymer chains need to nucleate and then move to complete the crystal structure. High mobility is not favorable because it prevents nucleation. Low mobility is also not favorable as it does not let polymer chains move and reorganize themselves as a crystal. This is the reason why the maximum crystallization rate in polymers is observed at temperatures between the glass transition temperature and melting temperature. The glass transition temperature is a region with a high chance of nucleation and low rate of chain movement. The melting temperature is a region with a high chance of chain movement and low rate of nucleation. Thus, the maximum crystallization rate is observed in a region where an acceptable combination of nucleation rate and chain movement exists. The addition of 4 wt% multilayer Ti3C2 to LLDPE decreases the movement of chains so significantly that it reduces the crystallization rate.156
MXenes can affect the crystallization rate of water-soluble polymers as well. Ti3C2/PEO nanocomposites with 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 wt% Ti3C2 were prepared by Huang et al.188 using the latex blending method. The maximum crystallization rate and minimum half-crystallization time were observed for the nanocomposite containing 0.5 wt% Ti3C2 as a nucleation agent causing optimum nucleation and chain movement rates at this Ti3C2 weight percentage. In addition to the improvement in crystallization properties, the presence of Ti3C2 enhanced the ionic conductivity of PEO nanocomposites. This is important as PEO is widely used as a solid electrolyte in energy storage devices.188 PVA as a water-soluble polymer, along with Ti3C2, can undergo a solution blending process to yield a nanocomposite. Due to the presence of many hydroxyl groups in the PVA structure, there is a high chance of hydrogen bond formation between the polymer and Ti3C2. These favorable interactions provide a perfect interface between the nanocomposite's components and yield a mechanically durable nanocomposite. In fact, stress is easily transferred to Ti3C2 flakes when the PVA/Ti3C2 nanocomposite is subjected to an external load. These favorable interactions also improve the stiffness and the strength of the nanocomposite films.130 The same favorable interactions exist when a polycation is selected as the water-soluble polymer matrix to be mixed with MXene flakes.
As mentioned above, surface modified MXenes are added to polymers for the sake of improving interfacial interactions and developing a perfect interface. For example, the addition of 0.5 wt% PEG-treated Ti3C2 to TPU increased the tensile strength and elongation at break simultaneously. Covering of Ti3C2 sheets with PEG chains caused their favorable interactions with TPU and consequently Ti3C2 exfoliation in the TPU matrix. The interactions were effective enough to increase tensile strength without causing the toughness of the nanocomposite to deteriorate. In fact, the PEG chains establish hydrogen bonds with TPU causing the creation of a perfect interface between Ti3C2 and TPU. At the same time, the stiffness of the Ti3C2/TPU nanocomposite and glass transition temperature of TPU were increased, which are attributed to chain movement restrictions.105 These pieces of evidence show that MXene has positive dual effects on toughening and strengthening a polymer nanocomposite.
Regarding hydrogels, MXenes improve their mechanical properties by optimizing their pore structure. For example, single-layer Ti3C2-based polyacrylamide hydrogel showed enhanced mechanical properties due to a honey-comb pore structure induced by the presence of Ti3C2. This structure facilitates the release of mechanical stress significantly due to its uniform fine structure.112 Ti3C2-based hydrogels have shown elongation up to 1000% and bending deformation up to 180 degrees. After deformation or compression, such hydrogels can recover their initial geometry very quickly. These outstanding mechanical properties are obtained by the addition of just 0.0145 to 0.0436 wt% Ti3C2 with respect to polyacrylamide.112 Compared with regular hydrogels made from organic crosslinkers, Ti3C2-based hydrogels show higher deformation tolerability and quicker recovery. These properties are derived from the lower crosslinking density of Ti3C2-based hydrogels compared with that of hydrogels made from organic crosslinkers. Moreover, Ti3C2-based hydrogels have higher chain molecular weight between crosslinking points which endows them with higher flexibility and extensibility.112
Ti3C2 with surface-grafted sulfonated polyelectrolyte brushes was added to sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) to make a proton conducting membrane. The surface-grafted Ti3C2 increased the Young's modulus, tensile strength, and thermal stability of the proton conductive membrane, but decreased its elongation at break.102 The addition of Ti3C2 to PVA hydrogels increased their elastic modulus, toughness, and stretchability significantly. For example, a 2.5 cm piece of hydrogel was stretched to 86 cm, which means a stretchability of 3400%. Under similar conditions, the same hydrogel without MXene showed a maximum stretchability of 2200%.162


5.4.2 Corrosion resistive coatings. 
Metal substrates are vulnerable to corrosion when they are in contact with water or aqueous electrolytes such as salt solutions. Organic coatings on a metallic substrate can decrease the corrosion rate by preventing the diffusion of corrosive media into the metal/coating interface. Yan et al.189 mixed few-layer Ti3C2 with epoxy resin and then applied the obtained mixture on the top of a steel sheet to analyze the anti-corrosive properties of the coating. The best anti-corrosion results were obtained with the addition of 1 wt% Ti3C2. This is the concentration at which the pores of the epoxy coating are covered by Ti3C2 flakes. The organic coatings applied on a metal substrate usually contain some micron-size pores which are channels for the diffusion of corrosive materials to the metallic substrate. Thus, the presence of 2D MXene flakes can cover these pores and increase the anti-corrosive properties of a coating. It is shown that the presence of Ti3C2 in the epoxy coating limits the diffusion of corrosive species such as O2, Cl− and H2O toward the metallic surface.189
The presence of Ti3C2 in an epoxy coating also decreases its water absorption over time. For example, the immersion of a pure epoxy coating in a 3.5% NaCl solution for 96 hours caused the absorption of 0.96 wt% water; however, under the same conditions, an epoxy coating containing 1 wt% Ti3C2 showed a water absorption of just 0.23 wt%. Spray salt test results also showed improved anti-corrosion properties of the epoxy coating upon the addition of Ti3C2. It confirmed that the presence of an epoxy coating containing 1 wt% Ti3C2 on the metal surface significantly suppresses the metal corrosion after a 15 day period.189


5.4.3 Electromagnetic interference shielding. 
To lower the extent of damage caused by radiation pollution, materials with electromagnetic interference shielding ability are needed.190 Shielding is important to ensure safe operation of sensitive electronic devices as well as the safety of humans. Electrically conductive polymer nanocomposites are favorable for use in EMI shielding applications due to their light weight and high enough electrical conductivity to work as a shield.
Currently, effective EMI shielding materials have thicknesses higher than 1 mm.133Fig. 17A shows the correlation between thickness and EMI shielding efficacy of some common materials and compares with those of different MXene, including Ti3C2, Ti3CN, Mo2TiC2, and their composites. Although an increase in thickness improves shielding efficiency, increases in material consumption and weight gain make this strategy unsuitable for improving EMI shielding efficiency. Given that lightweight, low-density, ultrathin and efficient materials are always favorable for EMI shielding, these properties are attainable through MXene-based polymeric nanocomposites. The excellent EMI shielding of MXenes originates from their high conductivity, layered structure, and unique surface chemistry, especially their fluorine functional groups.
 Fig. 17  (A) Correlation between thickness and EMI shielding efficiency as well as comparison between the ability of Ti3C2 and other materials for this application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2020, Science. (B) Mechanism of internal reflection of an electromagnetic wave between three Ti3C2 flakes to dissipate its energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016, Science. 
EMI shielding is the result of reflection or absorption of electromagnetic waves. When a wave hits a MXene flake in a MXene/polymer nanocomposite shield, a part of the wave is reflected due to the presence of the free electrons on the surface of MXene. The non-reflected portion of the wave passes through the layers of MXene and loses some of its energy upon traveling through each flake of MXene. As Fig. 17B shows, each MXene flake acts as a barrier of the wave and dissipates some of its energy. In addition to absorbing the energy of the wave, the MXene flakes inside the shield can work as a reflective surface where repetitive internal reflection of some traveling waves inside the shield further intensifies the energy dissipation. Finally, the dissipated energy of the waves will increase the temperature of the EMI shield.129 Thus, shielding is the result of absorption and reflection of the waves in a material.
Thin Ti3C2-based films mainly have good EM wave absorption capability.129 It is advantageous to develop absorption-dominant EMI shielding materials as they minimize the electromagnetic pollution, reducing it twofold compared with their reflection-dominant counterparts.118 When an EM wave reaches an EMI shielding material, it can enter the material or reflect from its surface. The chance of entrance is higher for absorption-dominant materials compared with their reflection-dominant counterparts. Usually, the presence of a large number of free electrons on a material's surface increases the chance of wave reflection.133 If the EM wave enters a MXene-based polymer nanocomposite foam material, it has a high chance of undergoing several internal reflections to dissipate its energy as heat. The porous structure of the foam and the layered structure of MXene hasten the energy dissipation of the EM wave. However, the same MXene-based polymer nanocomposite with the same chemical composition in the form of a thin film does not have the ability to dissipate the EM wave quickly. Thus, to have an absorption-dominant EMI shielding material, foams are recommended.118
The morphology of a MXene-based nanocomposite also affects its EMI shielding mechanism. In a thin MXene-based nanocomposite film with “brick-and-mortar” morphology, there are a lot of interfaces between MXene flakes for wave scattering and repetitive reflections. Thus, the hybrid nanocomposite behaves as an absorption-dominant EMI shielding material.133 However, multi-layer morphology can result in the development of reflection-dominant EMI shielding materials. Zhou et al.112 prepared single-layer Ti3C2/CNF polymer nanocomposites using an alternative vacuum filtration technique and found that the EMI shielding capability of the nanocomposite depends on the number of Ti3C2 and CNF layers. Maximum shielding was obtained when there were 4 layers of Ti3C2 and 5 layers of CNFs. More than 90% of the incident EM waves were reflected right after reaching the system due to the conductivity of the nanocomposite and the high impedance mismatch. In fact, when the impedance mismatch at the interface between the air and the nanocomposite increases, the chance of reflection of the EM waves from the interface increases. Zhou et al.112 showed that multilayer Ti3C2/polymer systems, compared with single-layer mixed Ti3C2/polymer systems, are more effective in developing reflection-dominant EMI shielding materials due to increased impedance mismatch.112
In EMI shielding materials, the energy of a wave is dissipated as heat. Thus, for stable operation, it is necessary to transfer the generated heat. As an electron and heat conductive material, Ti3C2 conducts both electrons and phonons efficiently. Thus, a defect-free network of Ti3C2 in a thin nanocomposite film creates an expressway for phonon transport and increases the in-plane thermal conduction of the nanocomposite. The dissipation of EM waves as heat can significantly increase the temperature of a shield and create the risk of burning. Thus, in addition to thermal conductivity, an efficient EMI shielding material should possess high thermal stability and anti-dripping properties. Fortunately, Ti3C2 endows a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite with excellent flame-retardancy and anti-dripping properties, as discussed before.128 Thermally stable polymer nanocomposites with degradation temperatures over 100 °C are fabricated for the EMI shielding application by mixing single-layer MXene as thermally stable nanoparticles with PANI, which is a conductive polymer.191
Pure Ti3C2 foams with a hydrophobic surface are introduced as excellent EMI shielding materials for working under wet conditions.115 Nanocomposites of single-layer Ti3C2 and water soluble polymers are also used as EMI shields.129 An increase in the MXene content of these nanocomposites caused an improvement in their EMI shielding efficiency. Some other conductive Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposites used for EMI shielding are single-layer Ti3C2/polystyrene thin films,148 single-layer Ti3C2/PDMS foams,116 single-layer Ti3C2/epoxy,192 PET fibers coated with single-layer PPy-functionalized Ti3C2,140 PVB/Ba3Co2Fe24O41/Ti3C2,193 single-layer Ti3C2/cellulose nanofibers,132 Ti3C2/PEDOT:PSS,194 polyaniline/Ti3C2,195etc.196 Graphene-based polyurethane composites were also developed as EMI shielding materials. However, the presence of less-conductive pathways (compared with MXene-conductive pathways) resulted in a decreased ability of graphene-based materials for EMI shielding.197


5.4.4 Gas separation and air filtration. 
Two-dimensional materials have evolved as building blocks for developing high performance membranes towards selective ion permeation, gas separation, water treatment, bio-fouling resistance, and nanofluidics.199–203 Their sub-atomic level thickness and stacking behavior, coupled with high structural and morphological integrity, endow them with minimal transportation resistance and high permeation flux which are ideal for selective sieving of intercalating species.204,205
MXenes due to their layered morphology with a single-layer thickness of ∼1 nm possess a highly active surface containing termination groups such as –O, −F, –OH and sometimes –COOH,1,206 enabling strong and favorable interactions, dispersion, and stability within the incorporating matrix. Due to its lamellar structure, the channels created in the hybrid matrix provide selective transport of ions and particles by generating micro-pathways (Fig. 18A).207 In addition, high solubility in aqueous media along with precisely tailorable interlayer spacing of MXene sheets can enable the confinement of a specific molecule while allowing other species to permeate easily through the porous inter-planar channels.
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic diagram of selective permeation of species through MXene–polymer membranes. (B) Flexible Ti3C2–PEBAX membranes exhibiting high functional stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) High CO2 permeance of the membranes. (D) Absorbance rates of Ti3C2–PAN membranes with extended performance and durability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
MXenes' stacking behavior, tunable interlayer spacing and surface properties as discussed earlier have created great opportunities to explore MXene-based composites for membrane applications.208 Low membrane resistance is favorable for selective separation. In addition, MXenes' active surface can be chemically functionalized to adjust selective interaction between species based on the nature of the permeating species. For example, membranes with reversible carrier activity are envisioned which are capable of interacting selectively with one gas component while allowing free permeation of other components in the mixture.209
Pristine Ti3C2 films have exhibited diffusion control mechanisms27 causing molecular sieving effects that are ideal for separation membranes. Single-layer Ti3C2 MXene films exhibit a H2 permeability greater than 2000 barrer exceeding the Robeson upper bound.210 In membrane gas separation, there is always a trade-off between selectivity and permeability. The performance (selectivity and permeability) of a membrane in separating a gas pair is evaluated relative to the most-recent Robeson bound for the gas pair.211,212 A membrane whose separation performance is above the Robeson bound is better than one whose performance is below the bound.212
A freestanding Ti3C2 MXene lamellar membrane was developed to harvest osmotic power generated by the salinity gradient. These ion-selective membranes exhibited an osmotic energy conversion efficiency of 40% at room temperature.203 Ti3C2 MXene-based flexible polymer hybrids (mixed matrix membranes) were developed for CO2 capture using PEBAX-1657 with high CO2/N2 permeability above the 2008 CO2/N2 upper bound (Fig. 18B and C).213 Liu et al. developed a stable, robust Ti3C2-based poly(ether-block-amide) (PEBA) hybrid membrane for CO2 absorption with a Ti3C2 loading as low as 0.15% and got permeation rates as high as ∼22 GPU. In another study, single-layer Ti3C2 decorated PAN fibers were developed for selective trapping of atmospheric particulates enabling a one-step air purification in tandem with anti-bacterial functionality.48 The membranes exhibited extended performance life coupled with a stable structural morphology (Fig. 18D). In another study, borate and polyethylenimine (PEI) molecules interlocked between Ti3C2 MXene sheets exhibited H2/CO2 selective transport and separation.214 MXene's additional functionality as an active bacteriostatic agent can be further harnessed to integrate and develop multi-role purification and anti-biofouling functionalities for membranes in industrial scale air/water treatment facilities.


5.4.5 Wastewater treatment. 
Polymer membranes containing nanoparticles are widely used in wastewater treatment and desalination applications.215,216 High surface hydrophilicity is favorable in such membranes as it prevents fouling and increases the membrane service life. Han et al. developed a MXene/polysulfone membrane to separate dyes and inorganic salts from water. They also reported that dye and salt rejection rates of the membrane improve upon increasing the single-layer Ti3C2 content.217 A tradeoff between membrane flux and solute rejection has been an ever-existing challenge in alcohol-purifying membranes based on graphene and other filler materials such as metal–organic frameworks.218,219 Ti3C2 can address this tradeoff. Ti3C2 is added to polyethyleneimine to develop membranes for purifying alcohol-based mixtures. The presence of Ti3C2 facilitates the transport of alcohol through the membrane thanks to its surface hydroxyl groups and, at the same time, blocks the transport of solutes with a molecular weight cutoff of 200 Da.220
The development of MXene/polymer hybrid materials for membrane applications is relatively new and provides a large scope for future development. In a recent study, flexible and structurally stable single-layer Ti3C2–cellulose photothermal membranes exhibited nearly 100% efficiency in inhibiting bacterial growth and showed efficient solar-driven water evaporation.221 The inherently strong interactions between Ti3C2 and cellulose fibers enable a synergistic coupling of flexibility without the loss of the membrane's functional integrity, which paves the way for an easily scalable and sustainable fabrication process for long-term wastewater treatment technologies.
To remove nitro compound pollutants from wastewater, nanofibers of PVA/PAA/Fe3O4/Ti3C2@AgNP are produced by the electrospinning process. Ti3C2@AgNP here means Ti3C2 nanosheets containing silver nanoparticles on their surface. This nanocomposite nanofibers are capable of catalytically reducing 4-nitrophenol and 2-nitroaniline which are two well-known nitro compound pollutants. The presence of Fe3O4 endows single-layer Ti3C2 with magnetic properties and recyclability.131


5.4.6 Textile engineering. 
Wearable electronics, energy storage devices, and sensors are some applications of MXenes in textile engineering. MXenes allow the production of multifunctional fibers which are conductive, water repellent and possess exceptional EMI shielding. In addition, such fibers and mats can have excellent Joule heating performance to create heat by applying an electrical voltage to them. These multifunctional textiles, for example, can be used to produce cloth for a pregnant woman who wants to protect her fetus from detrimental microwave radiation. Wearable heaters for self-heating garments, thermotherapy and sensor fabrics are some areas where these multifunctional textiles can be used.140,158
PET is a polymer which is widely used for fiber manufacturing and its combination with MXenes can lead to the development of multifunctional textiles. To improve interactions between PET and Ti3C2, Wang et al. polymerized pyrrole between Ti3C2 layers to prepare a stable conductive single-layer Ti3C2 ink.140 PPy creates additional polar groups on the Ti3C2 surface and improves the adhesion of Ti3C2 to PET. Next, the PET fibers were coated with this ink through a repetitive dip coating process. Finally, to change hydrophilic fibers into their hydrophobic counterparts, a silicon coating was applied on the Ti3C2-containing PET fibers again by the dip coating process. Compared with hydrophilic fibers, hydrophobic ones can keep their performance in humid environments for a long time and protect their sensitive components, including MXenes, from oxidation and degradation.140 Hydrophobic fibers not only work for a long time, but are also durable against repetitive washing with detergents. In addition, they keep their breathability even though a hydrophobic coating, for example, silicon, is applied on their surface. Regarding the combination of a MXene and PET in textile engineering, single-layer Ti3C2/PEO nanofibers coated on a PET yarn were developed for supercapacitor applications. Such yarn supercapacitors with excellent flexibility, strength and high-power density can be used in wearable energy storage devices.152
Their poor mechanical properties are one of the challenges in producing MXene-based nanofibers. To overcome this problem, it is possible to add another filler to the MXene/polymer mixture to reinforce the system. For example, the mechanical properties of Ti3C2-based PVA nanofibers produced by electrospinning were improved by the addition of CNC. In fact, when two fillers are used in a polymer matrix simultaneously, tailoring of the electrical, mechanical and thermal properties is much easier compared with when just one filler is used. As both CNC and MXene are fillers with high aspect ratios, both have the chance of self-orientation along the fiber axis. Thus, their simultaneous presence not only improves the mechanical properties of the nanofibers significantly, but also enhances their thermal stability without impairing flexibility. These excellent properties make multilayer Ti3C2/CNC/PVA nanofibers suitable for flexible and wearable energy storage devices.153
The flexibility of Ti3C2-containing fibers is very important as they are supposed to be knitted by industrial knitting machines. Fibers undergo higher tension and bending stresses when they are knitted by industrial machines, compared with hand knitting. Fig. 19 shows three usual patterns of fiber knitting where each one needs a different level of fiber flexibility. For example, the single jersey knitting pattern needs the highest fiber flexibility while the half gauge pattern needs the lowest one. It is possible to adjust the flexibility of MXene-containing fibers by changing the size of the incorporated MXene flakes. Usually, fibers coated with bigger MXene flakes show higher conductivity/lower flexibility and vice versa. As a result, when both conductivity and flexibility matter, a fiber can be coated with a mixture of small and large MXene flakes to exhibit both flexibility and conductivity in an acceptable level. In addition, great attention should be paid to the knitting method. Less-flexible fibers cannot be knitted through the single jersey pattern which needs the bending of fibers with a small bending radius; however, they can usually withstand bending and tension stresses exerted by other knitting patterns including half-gauge and interlock (Fig. 19).144
 Fig. 19  Different knitting patterns: single jersey (a and d), half-gauge (b and e), and interlock (c and f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. 

5.5 Electrochemical activity

5.5.1 Supercapacitors. 
The advent of MXenes has further advanced battery and supercapacitor technologies. A combination of a MXene and a conductive polymer, for example, MXene/PPy, is usually used for supercapacitor applications. The advantage of MXene/conductive polymer nanocomposites is that they address the tradeoff between the transport properties and charge storage capability of a supercapacitor.222 An in situ electrochemical polymerization technique can be used to synthesize a nanocomposite thin film of MXene/conjugated conductive polymer. The electrochemical polymerization in the presence of a MXene can be carried out for polymerization of different organic monomers and the produced nanocomposites can be used in mobile power supplies, and micro-portable electronic and electromechanical systems.223
The PPy homopolymer has intrinsic flexibility as well as high electrochemical activity; however, it suffers from low capacitance and limited charging/discharging cycling stability. Intercalation of PPy chains between MXene flakes overcomes these problems.224 To efficiently intercalate MXene, pyrrole is polymerized between MXene layers by the electrochemical polymerization mechanism:  
Similar to the polymerization of pyrrole, the polymerization of PANI occurs between Ti3C2 MXene layers. The in situ polymerization of PANI allows the development of bendable and foldable electrodes for the fabrication of all-solid-state supercapacitors.225
MXenes have been used widely as anodes in supercapacitors, but their use as a cathode has been limited due to the risk of oxidation in this electrode. To overcome this problem and develop a high-performance supercapacitor, an asymmetric structure with MXene as the negative electrode and a MXene/PANI nanocomposite as the positive electrode of the supercapacitor was introduced.226 This novel positive electrode showed a volumetric capacitance of 1632 F cm−3 and a rate capability of 827 F cm−3 at 5000 mV s−1 which are among the highest ever-reported values. An asymmetric supercapacitor made from this MXene/PANI positive electrode and pure MXene negative electrode showed a high energy density of 50 W h L−1 and a power density of 127 kW L−1.226
Recently, a fine review paper on MXene-based supercapacitors was published by Hu et al.227 The review discusses different topics including charge storage mechanisms in aqueous and non-aqueous media, and the effects of surface chemistry of MXene and the structure of the MXene-containing electrodes on the performance of the supercapacitor. Other topics including MXene-containing symmetric supercapacitors, asymmetric supercapacitors, microsupercapacitors, and transparent supercapacitors are also discussed. Covered in this review paper are also MXene/polymer composites used for supercapacitor fabrication. Other examples of Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposites used for energy storage are Ti3C2/polysulfide,228 Ti3C2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiphene), Ti3C2/PDT,137 Ti3C2/PANI/CCG,106 and Ti3C2/PVA as on-chip micro-supercapacitors.229 Another recent review on MXene-based nanocomposites for rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors is ref. 230, which is worth reading, as it extensively discusses MXene/carbon nanocomposites, MXene/metal oxide/sulfide nanocomposites, and MXene/metal nanocomposites.


5.5.2 High dielectric materials. 
High dielectric materials are used in the semiconducting industry to replace silicon dioxide. In this context, an ideal material is one which stores a lot of electrical charge with minimum loss. To successfully develop a material with a high dielectric constant, high dielectric permittivity and low dielectric loss are required. The former demonstrates the ability of a material to store electrical charge and the latter represents how dissipated a material is with respect to an external electric field.
Single-layer Ti3C2/PVA nanocomposites have shown extremely high dielectric constants, because Ti3C2 is a conductive nanoparticle and disperses well in a PVA matrix. The good dispersion of Ti3C2 causes the formation of a network of nanocapacitors. High conductivity of Ti3C2 also causes a significant electrical conductivity disparity between the MXene and PVA, which increases interfacial polarization. If MXene sheets align perfectly in a way to face each other completely, a larger surface and consequently a larger network of nanocapacitors can be formed, compared with the outcome with random orientation. This provides the chance of storing a huge amount of electrical charge. Every manufacturing technique that increases the alignment of MXene flakes to make them face each other completely creates a nanocomposite with a higher dielectric constant. This is the reason why despite their similar composition, single-layer Ti3C2/PVA nanocomposites prepared via vacuum filtration show higher dielectric constants compared with those prepared via solution casting.124 It is very important to mention that the formation of a network of nanocapacitors by MXene flakes is favorable here. However, the formation of a conductive network by MXene flakes in the polymer matrix must be avoided completely as it causes the leakage of electrical charge. The presence of an insulator polymer between MXene flakes prevents charge leakage. To avoid charge leakage, it is also important to keep the loading content of MXene lower than its percolation threshold. A “brick-and-mortar” morphology containing no inter-connected network of MXene flakes is favorable here. Ti3C2/PVA nanocomposite films with 10 wt% single-layer Ti3C2 obtained by solution casting and vacuum filtration have been reported to have dielectric constants of 371 and 3166, respectively.124 These dielectric constant values highlight the importance of MXene orientation in a polymer matrix. As another example, the addition of Ti3C2 to PVDF has been reported to increase dielectric permittivity significantly.231


5.5.3 Artificial muscles and actuators. 
Electroactive polymers are used as actuators and artificial muscles. In these systems, stored electrical energy is converted into mechanical deformation. To work as an actuator, a material should have acceptable bending strength, quick response time, long service life in air and low driving voltage. Each actuator consists of three parts including an electrolyte and two electrodes. An ionic polymer membrane can be used as the electrolyte which is sandwiched between two conductive electrodes.232
MXenes have high enough electrical conductivity to be used as electrodes. However, their low stretchability limits their application in actuators. To overcome this problem, polymers such as PP are mixed with MXenes. The polymer ionically bonds to the MXene surface and causes its intercalation. This hybrid structure exhibits fast charge transport as well as ion intercalation/de-intercalation ability with improved stretchability, making this so-called ionically crosslinked Ti3C2/PP nanocomposite an excellent material for preparing electrodes of actuators. The polymer is able to establish hydrogen bonds with oxygen and hydroxyl groups on the surface of Ti3C2, and serves as a pillar to prevent the restacking of Ti3C2 flakes. It can also facilitate reversible transportation of electrons and ions between the electrolyte and the electrodes.232
Actuators made with Nafion as the electrolyte and a mixture of Ti3C2:PP (1:2 weight ratio) as an electrode were fabricated.232 They showed 1.37% bending strain when they were subjected to 1 V. To develop durable actuators, adhesion between the electrolyte and the electrodes is important. A pristine MXene film as an electrode does not enable good adhesion with the electrolyte. However, its hybrid nanocomposite with PP showed significant adhesion with the electrolyte which lets the actuator keep its functionality even after 18000 bending cycles.232Fig. 20A shows that the actuator made from a pristine MXene cannot tolerate manual bending while the actuator made from the Ti3C2/PP electrode undergoes bending without mechanical degradation.
 Fig. 20  (A) Pristine Ti3C2 as an electrode does not have enough adhesion to the electrolyte to yield a mechanically stable actuator against bending (1). However, its nanocomposite with PP improves its adhesion and makes it possible to fabricate an actuator with bending ability (2). (B) A Ti3C2-based artificial flower blooms like a real flower upon application of electrical current (1) and can be mounted on a coat for decoration (2). (C) Ion migration is the driving force for the bending of an actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2019, Science. 
Different nanoparticles such as GO233 and carbon nanotubes234 can also be used for actuator manufacturing. However, Ti3C2 is superior to other nanoparticles for actuator development due to its high capacitance. It is important to note that the magnitude of the bending deformation and the response time of ionic actuators are directly proportional to the capacitance of electrodes. MXene-based actuators show high energy transduction which is defined as the ratio of received electrical energy to generated mechanical energy. To show a few applications, artificial flowers made from Ti3C2-based actuators are displayed in Fig. 20B. Similar to the blooming of a real flower, applying an electrical current can open the artificial flower. It is also interesting to note that under a voltage of 2 V, this actuator generates a force which is 28 times higher than that produced by its weight.232Fig. 20C shows the driving force of the bending. Higher ion migration and faster charge transfer cause a larger bending strain in the actuator. Under an applied voltage, the Ti3C2-based electrode intercalates with a higher number of cations on the cathode of the actuator. This increases the Ti3C2 interlayer distance, causes swelling of the electrode, and bends the actuator.232

5.6 Biocompatibility
Similar to graphene, MXenes are bio-compatible nanomaterials. Consequently, their applications in biomedical areas are expanding, thanks to their large surface area, cytocompatibility, good adhesion for cell proliferation, tunable surface chemistry, and high absorbance in the near-infrared region.235 MXene/polymer nanocomposites are widely used in nanomedicine due to their synergistic antibacterial properties, excellent light-to-heat conversion, selectivity, and stimuli-responsiveness toward malignant cells. Recently, two review papers discussing the applications of MXene/polymer nanocomposites in medical science were published.235,236 Below we briefly review some applications of MXene/polymer nanocomposites in the biomedical area.
MXene/polymer nanocomposites are used as antimicrobial agents. It is reported that 2D nanoparticles improve cell membrane permeability, damage membrane cells by their sharp edges, and destroy the DNA of bacteria.237 Compared with other 2D nanosheets, Ti3C2 has outstanding antibacterial properties even better than those of GO due to its high electrical conductivity, which causes better interaction with the cell membrane. Ti3C2 oxidation causes the formation of TiO2 which is also a well-known antibacterial agent.38 MXene's ∼100% light-to-heat conversion efficiency as well as its high thermal stability compared with organic materials enables MXene/polymer nanocomposites to be used as a photothermal agent for cancer treatment. Recent studies have explored mono-elemental 2D materials based on borophene, silicene, germanene, stanene, phosphorene, arsenene, antimonene, bismuthene, selenene, gallenene, and tellurene, which are chemically tractable materials for cancer nanomedicine.238 MXene-based polymer nanocomposites in tandem with other mono-elemental materials such as germanene have potential for clinical translation in the near future.239–241 In a research study by Xing et al.,114 a Ti3C2/cellulose hydrogel was used as an anticancer treatment. The hydrogel attacked the tumor cells by two different mechanisms of photothermal and chemotherapy activities. As a chemotherapy approach, an anticancer drug was loaded into the hydrogel where its in vivo controlled release was also possible. As a photothermal approach, irradiation with near infrared light let Ti3C2 generate heat locally in the vicinity of tumor cells and fortunately malignant cells are vulnerable to the generated heat. Given that, the photothermal efficacy of the Ti3C2/cellulose hydrogel is dependent on light irradiation duration, laser power, and the amount of Ti3C2 in the hydrogel. In addition, the light irradiation helped the chemotherapy approach through faster drug release under near infrared light irradiation. In fact, the pores of the hydrogel storing the drug in themselves expand under light irradiation and release more drug over time.114
Drug delivery is another area where MXene/polymer nanocomposites have been used. As Ti3C2 has negative surface charge, drugs with positive surface charge can attach to it. A polymer with negative surface charge is usually coated on drug-loaded MXene flakes to protect it during circulation in the bloodstream. The drug-loaded MXene has been reported to be pH and temperature responsive. Fortunately, tumor cells have a lower pH compared with healthy cells. Thus, pH responsive materials, for example, MXene/polymer nanocomposites, can distinguish healthy cells from their malignant counterparts to deliver the drug to the target cells. Ti3C2-based polyacrylamide hydrogels are found to be excellent drug carriers as a high amount of drug can be loaded into them. The hydrogels also show high drug release rates compared with conventional polyacrylamide hydrogels with no Ti3C2. The uniform porous structure and high water-uptake of Ti3C2-based hydrogels are the main reasons for such excellent drug carrier properties. In addition, conductive MXene-based polyisopropyl acrylamide hydrogels show a LCST of around 34 °C which is a great property for drug delivery. The latter is used as photothermal agent for drug delivery and cancer treatment.100
In addition to drug delivery, MXene-based nanocomposites have found applications in bioimaging and bone regeneration.236 The following are some other examples showing MXene/polymer nanocomposite applications in the areas of health and medical science: MXene/PVDF membranes as antibacterial surfaces,242 MXene/polyoxometalates for tumor cell eradication,243 and MXene/polycaprolactone with hydrophilicity, protein absorption and cell viability for bone tissue engineering, cancer therapy and wound dressing.96
5.7 Other properties

5.7.1 Mechanical dampers. 
Having excellent reversible compressibility is a necessary condition for a material to work as a damper. Ti3C2/PI aerogels have shown excellent reversible compressibility even under large strains up to 80%. After such large deformations, the MXene/PI aerogel returns to its original shape, while keeping its robust structure. The aerogel shows energy loss upon deformation which is required for a good damper. For example, under a strain deformation of 80%, an energy loss coefficient of 80% was observed. High reversible compressibility and excellent damping capability make the Ti3C2/PI aerogel an appropriate material for shock absorption. When a piece of this damper is attached on the back of a glass slide, the protected glass can withstand a mechanical strike exerted by a pendulum. However, the removal of the damper causes the fracture of the unprotected glass upon the same strike. In addition, the intensity and extent of the pendulum's return after the strike are significantly lower in the presence of the damper. This shows the excellent ability of the damper for energy dissipation.119 It is also worth mentioning that the aerogel is very deformable and superlight and can thus stand on top of a dandelion. It has exceptional fatigue resistance showing just 7% volume deformation after 1000 loading–unloading cycles at a fixed strain of 50%. In addition to the good reversible compressibility, the aerogel showed acceptable reversible stretchability below 20% strain. Thus, it can be concluded that reversible compressibility of a material can be different from its reversible stretchability.119


5.7.2 Data storage and flash memories. 
MXene quantum-dots are tiny MXene flakes with a size of about 3 nm. Ti3C2 quantum-dots can be produced via the following steps:138 multilayer Ti3C2 powder is dispersed in water; a very small amount of ammonia (1–2 drops per 0.3 g MXene in 20 mL water) is added to the mixture; and the mixture is made to undergo a hydrothermal process at 100 °C for 6 hours. The Ti3C2 quantum dots obtained with this method are less than 10 nm in lateral size and show higher hydrophilicity as well as a higher edge effect compared with the pristine Ti3C2. Quantum dot Ti3C2, which contains the same F, O and OH surface groups, disperses in solvents such as ethanol.138
Similar to MXenes, MXene quantum dots (MQDs) disperse easily in aqueous solutions containing water-soluble polymers. For example, quantum dot Ti3C2 can be dispersed in a PVP matrix finely. It is possible to adjust the conductivity of this MQD/PVP by changing the amount of MQDs in the system. In fact, this system can show insulating, irreversible resistive switching, reversible resistive switching and conducting behavior with increased amounts of MQDs in the system. These materials with irreversible resistive switching properties show a write-once-read-many-times effect and materials with reversible resistive switching properties benefit from the flash memory effect. These features make way for MQD-based polymeric nanocomposites as secure data storage materials.138

6 Risk assessment of MXene/polymer nanocomposites
In every technology, process safety is of prime importance. Despite advances in process safety and the introduction of increasingly tighter safety regulations, more than 50 serious incidents have happened in the U.S. over the past ten years.244 Product safety is also of great importance, as the users of a product and the environment should not be harmed by the product. Risk assessment allows for identifying and evaluating process and product safety risks.
Although MXene/polymer nanocomposite devices provide a lot of benefits, their production and use cannot be risk-free to human health, equipment, or the environment. Risks associated with each step of MXene synthesis and MXene/polymer nanocomposite fabrication can be summarized as follows. The first step is the synthesis of a MAX phase. Aluminum, titanium, titanium carbide or graphite that are used in the MAX phase synthesis are combustible powders. Thus, there is a risk of dust explosion. The risk of dust ignition increases as the particle size of the raw materials decreases.245 After sintering the powders to prepare the MAX phase, a milling step is required to convert the bulk material to powder. Here again dust inhalation and dust ignition risks exist. To overcome these risk factors, powders should be handled in a gentle way to prevent their release into the environment, and any static charge generation should be avoided. To eliminate the ignition risk, one can work in an inert environment such as argon to avoid oxygen, although MAX phase powders are usually handled and milled in air at ambient conditions.245
MXene synthesis itself starts with the direct addition of HF to the MAX phase or in situ generation of the acid from a mixture such as LiF/HCl. HF is very corrosive and dangerous to human health. If it comes into contact with human tissue, it can degrade it and even dissolve the bone. In addition, HF used for the synthesis of MXene can create a great risk for metal-based and glass-based instruments. HF can dissolve and damage any glassy or metallic part of an instrument that comes into contact with it during MXene synthesis. Heat, hydrogen gas, and water vapor which are generated during etching of a MAX phase are other sources of possible incidents. Hydrogen is highly flammable and its generation rate should be determined especially if the etching process is going to be scaled up. A MAX phase should be added to an etchant solution at a very slow rate, as the reaction is very exothermic [etching of one gram of Ti3AlC2 releases 9.12 kJ of heat]. For example, when 500 g of the MAX phase is suddenly added to an etchant solution, the reaction medium temperature can increase up to 270 °C.245
Moreover, a large amount of acidic wastewater is produced during MXene synthesis. This is the water that has been used for washing the etched MAX phase to increase the pH of the medium to neutral at around 6–7. As an estimation, for each gram of MXene produced, nearly 1 liter of water is needed for washing out the acid. As a result, a large amount of water is consumed for MXene synthesis and consequently a great amount of acidic wastewater is generated which needs appropriate treatment and disposal procedures.
For the fabrication of some MXene/polymer systems, solvent exchange is required. Thus, water should be replaced with an organic solvent, as many polymers are not water soluble. This process involves the evaporation of water followed by redispersion of solid MXene in an organic solvent by sonication. Sound waves generated during the sonication process can be dangerous to humans.246 The organic solvent added to dissolve the polymer is then removed during the MXene/polymer nanocomposite fabrication process. This removal can be through evaporation, interacting with a non-solvent, etc. Regardless of the solvent removal method, release of an organic solvent into the environment happens. This is detrimental to the environment.
MXene/polymer nanocomposite devices can cause some risks to humans and the environment as well. Wearable MXene/polymer heaters that are worn by a person may cause burning. These devices generate heat by applying a voltage or receiving sunlight. Exceeding the safe voltage may be very dangerous to the person due to the generation of a lot of heat. Wastewater membranes that include a MXene on their structure may release MXene over time. The effect of the leached MXene on marine animals is not understood and needs to be studied. Another possible risk in MXene/polymer nanocomposite devices exists when they are used as electromagnetic interference shields. In this application, the device dissipates the energy of a wave by converting it to heat. Although MXenes have good thermal conductivity and heat stability, a significant accumulation of heat may lead to burning of the device. These are just some examples of the possible risks associated with MXene/polymer nanocomposite devices and should be addressed before introducing these devices to the market.
As MXenes have some similar properties to GO, a risk analysis of GO can give some hints on the possible risks of MXene and MXene/polymer nanocomposite devices. Fadeel et al.247 have recently published a paper on environmental and health risks of graphene-based materials. With respect to health risks, they discussed the interaction of the immune system of a human with graphene-based materials, the effects on reproductivity and pregnant women, biodegradation of graphene-based materials, and dermal effects of graphene-based materials, as well as their effects on the central nervous system. Pulmonary, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal effects are some other health-related risk factors discussed by Fadeel et al.247 With respect to environmental risks, the effect of graphene-based materials on bacteria, photoautotrophs, seed plants, invertebrates, vertebrates, and ecotoxicology are discussed. Occupational exposure to graphene-based materials is also discussed by them. All of these risk assessments may be required for MXene-based materials and should be carried out by researchers in this field.
7 Challenges and future outlook
This review discussed the development, synthesis, and applications of Ti3C2 MXene-based polymer composites. Ti3C2 MXene has diverse yet tailorable surface chemistries, tunable flake size, and high electrical and thermal conductivities. Coupled with its unique surface morphology, high aspect ratio, and solvent stability across a range of solvents, it has huge potential to be incorporated into polymer hybrids and heterostructures for various applications. Furthermore, the ability to modify the surface chemistry during the initial stages of the synthesis process enables its synergistic coupling with polymers via conventional facile synthesis routes such as wet/melt processing and coating. In addition, grafting or impregnation with functionalized nanoparticles has great potential for applications ranging from targeted drug delivery, energy storage, wearable heaters, and self-healing coatings to developing nano-pesticide systems due to their high load carrying capacities (high volume ratios). However, developing robust MXene/polymer nanocomposites requires a better understanding of the impact of the filler material on the polymer chain conformation, mobility, and the degree of chain ordering. Functionalization routes based on covalent and non-covalent interactions may lead to the emergence of hybrids, which are sustainable and scalable for transition to industrial applications. Finding methods to diminish aggregation and clumping inherent to polymer matrix phases to achieve a uniform distribution of the filler is a challenge yet to be addressed. It is anticipated that a uniform distribution of MXenes in the matrix will facilitate isotropic material behavior with improved lifetimes and provide the next generation of functional nanocomposite material along with other two-dimensional material hybrids. Development of responsive polymer matrices with the MXene filler has great potential for implementation in smart technologies such as intelligent membrane separation systems, adaptive sensors, and multi-modal electronic switches. However, some properties of MXenes such as the control of interlayer spacing, surface terminations, and selective chemical activity require further investigation.
List of acronyms

2DTwo-dimensional
AIBI2,2-Azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl)propane]dihydrochloride
BMIBis(4-maleimidophenyl)methane
CCGChemically converted graphene
CNCCellulose nanocrystals
CNFCellulose nanofiber
CTABCetrimonium bromide
CVDChemical vapor deposition
DDABDidodecyldimethylammonium bromide
DGEBADiglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DFTDensity functional theory
DIDeionized water
DMFDimethyl formamide
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DTABDecyltrimethylammonium bromide
EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray
EGEthylene glycol
EMElectromagnetic
EMIElectromagnetic interference
EMWElectromagnetic wave
FAFurfurylamine
GOGraphene oxide
HFHydrofluoric acid
ITOIndium tin oxide
KPSPotassium persulfate
LCSTlower critical solution temperature
LLDPElinear low-density polyethylene
MILDMinimally intensive layer delamination
MQDMXene quantum dot
NMP
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NRNatural rubber
OTABOctadecyl trimethylammonium bromide
PAAPolyacrylic acid
PAAmPolyacrylamide
PADCPolydiallyldimethylammonium chloride
PANPolyacrylonitrile
PANIPolyaniline
PCPropylene carbonate
PCLPolycaprolactone
PDMSPolydimethyl siloxane
PDTDecentralized conjugated polymer
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PIPolyimide
PPPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate)
PPyPolypyrrole
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PVDFPolyvinylidene fluoride
PVPPolyvinyl pyrrolidone
PUpolyurethane
PUFpolyurethane foam
SASodium alginate
SEMScanning electron microscope
SERSSurface enhanced Raman scattering
TPUThermoplastic polyurethane
UHMWPEUltrahigh molecular weight polyethylene
UVUltraviolet
UV-VisUltraviolet-visible
XRDX-ray powder diffraction

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Hossein Riazi was partially supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant No. CBET-1804285. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. H. Riazi and M. Soroush are thankful to Axalta Coating Systems for its financial support. The authors would like to thank Mrs Golnoush Taghizadeh for her help with figures included in this article.
References
A. D. Handoko, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, K. W. Convey, L. R. Johnson, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodic and Z. W. Seh, Tuning the basal plane functionalization of two-dimensional metal carbides (MXenes) to control hydrogen evolution activity, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2017, 1(1), 173–180 CrossRef .
B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Review of MXenes as new nanomaterials for energy storage/delivery and selected environmental applications, Nano Res., 2019, 12(3), 471–487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, The Rise of MXenes, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(8), 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, S. K. Nemani, B. Wyatt, H.-Y. Jiang, J. Tang, B. Anasori and Z. W. Seh, Rational Design of Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Carbide/Nitride (MXene) Hybrids and Nanocomposites for Catalytic Energy Storage and Conversion, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(9), 10834–10864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(37), 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(2), 1–17 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, 25th anniversary article: MXenes: a new family of two-dimensional materials, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(7), 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. Barsoum, Two-dimensional, ordered, double transition metals carbides (MXenes), ACS Nano, 2015, 9(10), 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Intercalation and delamination of layered carbides and carbonitrides, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Amine-assisted delamination of Nb2C MXene for Li-ion energy storage devices, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(23), 3501–3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. s. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov and D. Krishnan, Oxidation stability of colloidal two-dimensional titanium carbides (MXenes), Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(11), 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ravikumar and J. Udayakumar, Preparation and characterisation of green clay-polymer nanocomposite for heavy metals removal, Chem. Ecol., 2020, 36(3), 270–291 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, G. J. Weng, J. Zhang and Y. Li, The effect of temperature and graphene concentration on the electrical conductivity and dielectric permittivity of graphene–polymer nanocomposites, Acta Mech., 2020, 1–16 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Dong, X. Xu, Q. Yuan, Y. Niu, Q. Wang and H. Wang, Significantly improved breakdown strength and energy density of tri-layered polymer nanocomposites with optimized graphene oxide, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 186, 107912 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuilla, S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N. H. Kim, S. Bose and J. H. Lee, Recent advances in graphene based polymer composites, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35(11), 1350–1375 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mukhopadhyay and R. K. Gupta, Trends and frontiers in graphene-based polymer nanocomposites, Plast. Eng., 2011, 67(1), 32–42 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, A hydrophobic surface enabled salt-blocking 2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene membrane for efficient and stable solar desalination, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(33), 16196–16204 RSC .
A. T. Lawal, Recent progress in graphene based polymer nanocomposites, Cogent Chem., 2020, 6(1), 1833476 CrossRef .
J. Potts, D. Dreyer, C. Bielawski and R. Ruoff, Graphene-Based Polymer Nanocomposites, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5–25 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bera and P. Maji, Graphene-based polymer nanocomposites: materials for future revolution, MOJ Polym. Sci., 2017, 1(3), 00013 Search PubMed .
M. Silva, N. M. Alves and M. C. Paiva, Graphene-polymer nanocomposites for biomedical applications, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2018, 29(2), 687–700 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barroso-Bujans, S. Cerveny, R. Verdejo, J. J. del Val, J. M. Alberdi, A. Alegría and J. Colmenero, Permanent adsorption of organic solvents in graphite oxide and its effect on the thermal exfoliation, Carbon, 2010, 48(4), 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Z. Guan, L. Zhao, Y.-J. Wan and L.-C. Tang, Three-dimensional graphene-based polymer nanocomposites: preparation, properties and applications, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(31), 14788–14811 RSC .

          S. Krishnan, R. Tadiboyina, M. Chavali, M. Nikolova, R.-J. Wu, D. Bian, Y.-R. Jeng, P. Rao, P. Palanisamy and S. Reddy, Graphene-Based Polymer Nanocomposites for Sensor Applications, Hybrid Nanocomposites,  2019, ISBN9780429000966 Search PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. Zhao, Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(9), 2520–2531 RSC .

          J. Holmes, J. O’Connell, R. Duffy and B. Long, Surface Functionalization Strategies for Monolayer Doping, Encyclopedia of Interfacial Chemistry,  2018, pp. 829–834 Search PubMed .
A. Achari, S. Sahana and M. Eswaramoorthy, High performance MoS2 membranes: effects of thermally driven phase transition on CO2 separation efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(4), 1224–1228 RSC .
S. Tu, Q. Jiang, J. Zhang, X. He, M. N. Hedhili, X. Zhang and H. N. Alshareef, Enhancement of Dielectric Permittivity of Ti3C2Tx MXene/Polymer Composites by Controlling Flake Size and Surface Termination, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(30), 27358–27362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Mohan, R. Brown, K. Jayaraman and D. Bhattacharyya, Characterisation of reduced graphene oxide: effects of reduction variables on electrical conductivity, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2015, 193, 49–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. Almajid, L. Sorochynska, K. Friedrich and B. Wetzel, Effects of graphene and CNT on mechanical, thermal, electrical and corrosion properties of vinylester based nanocomposites, Plast., Rubber Compos., 2015, 44(2), 50–62 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Mohan, K.-t. Lau, D. Hui and D. Bhattacharyya, Graphene-based materials and their composites: a review on production, applications and product limitations, Composites, Part B, 2018, 142, 200–220 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lipatov, H. Lu, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, A. Gruverman, Y. Gogotsi and A. Sinitskii, Elastic properties of 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene monolayers and bilayers, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(6), eaat0491 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Yorulmaz, A. Özden, N. K. Perkgöz, F. Ay and C. Sevik, Vibrational and mechanical properties of single layer MXene structures: a first-principles investigation, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27(33), 335702 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Huang, H. Huang, L. Mao, M. Liu, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Recent progress and advances in the environmental applications of MXene related materials, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(6), 3574–3592 RSC .
L. Gao, C. Li, W. Huang, S. Mei, H. Lin, Q. Ou, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, F. Zhang and S. Xu, MXene/polymer membranes: synthesis, properties, and emerging applications, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(5), 1703–1747 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, X. Jiang, J. Zhao, W. Liang, Z. Li, W. Huang, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, F. Zhang and S. Lu, MXene-based nonlinear optical information converter for all-optical modulator and switcher, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12(12), 1800215 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Feng, B.-Y. Ding, W.-Y. Liang, F. Zhang, T.-Y. Ning, J. Liu and H. Zhang, MXene Ti3C2T x absorber for a 1.06 μm passively Q-switched ceramic laser, Laser Phys. Lett., 2018, 15(8), 085805 CrossRef .
J. Jimmy and B. Kandasubramanian, MXene Functionalized Polymer Composites: Synthesis and Applications, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 109367 Search PubMed .
P. Simon, Two-dimensional MXene with controlled interlayer spacing for electrochemical energy storage, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(3), 2393–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, Z. W. Seh, Y. Gogotsi and A. Vojvodic, Effects of applied potential and water intercalation on the surface chemistry of Ti2C and Mo2C MXenes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(50), 28432–28440 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Persson, Atomically resolved structural and chemical investigation of single MXene sheets, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(8), 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, T. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, R. Cheng, J. Yang, C. Cui and X. Wang, Surface functional groups and interlayer water determine the electrochemical capacitance of Ti3C2 T x MXene, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(4), 3578–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, Atomic Defects in Monolayer Titanium Carbide (Ti3C2T x) MXene, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(10), 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Y. Wei, J. Deng, L. Ding, Z.-K. Li and H. Wang, Self-Crosslinked MXene (Ti3C2T x) Membranes with Good Antiswelling Property for Monovalent Metal Ion Exclusion, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(9), 10535–10544 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, NMR reveals the surface functionalisation of Ti 3 C 2 MXene, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(7), 5099–5102 RSC .
N. M. Caffrey, Effect of mixed surface terminations on the structural and electrochemical properties of two-dimensional Ti 3 C 2 T 2 and V 2 CT 2 MXenes multilayers, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(28), 13520–13530 RSC .
Z. Fan, Y. Wang, Z. Xie, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, H. Kang, B. Su, Z. Cheng and Y. Liu, Modified MXene/holey graphene films for advanced supercapacitor electrodes with superior energy storage, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(10), 1800750 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, Z.-K. Li, J. Xue, Y. Qian, L.-Z. Zhang, J. Caro and H. Wang, Titanium carbide Ti3C2Tx (MXene) enhanced PAN nanofiber membrane for air purification, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, M. Hu, B. Gao, W. Li and X. Wang, Screening surface structure of MXenes by high-throughput computation and vibrational spectroscopic confirmation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(32), 18501–18509 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zha, K. Luo, Q. Li, Q. Huang, J. He, X. Wen and S. Du, Role of the surface effect on the structural, electronic and mechanical properties of the carbide MXenes, EPL, 2015, 111(2), 26007 CrossRef .
Y. Aierken, C. Sevik, O. Gülseren, F. M. Peeters and D. Çakır, MXenes/graphene heterostructures for Li battery applications: a first principles study, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(5), 2337–2345 RSC .
I. Persson, L.-Å. Näslund, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum, V. Darakchieva, J. Palisaitis, J. Rosen and P. O. Å. Persson, On the organization and thermal behavior of functional groups on Ti3C2 MXene surfaces in vacuum, 2D Mater., 2017, 5(1), 015002 CrossRef .
G. Berdiyorov, Effect of surface functionalization on the electronic transport properties of Ti3C2 MXene, EPL, 2015, 111(6), 67002 CrossRef .
X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, J. Liu, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Probing the electrochemical capacitance of MXene nanosheets for high-performance pseudocapacitors, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(6), 4460–4467 RSC .
M. Ashton, K. Mathew, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, Predicted surface composition and thermodynamic stability of MXenes in solution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(6), 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, X. Wang, Z. Y. Leong, R. Mo, L. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Ar plasma modification of 2D MXene Ti3C2Tx nanosheets for efficient capacitive desalination, FlatChem, 2018, 8, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lai, J. Jeon, S. K. Jang, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J.-H. Park, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Surface group modification and carrier transport properties of layered transition metal carbides (Ti2CTx, T:–OH,–F and–O), Nanoscale, 2015, 7(46), 19390–19396 RSC .
T. Liu, X. Liu, N. Graham, W. Yu and K. Sun, Two-dimensional MXene incorporated graphene oxide composite membrane with enhanced water purification performance, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 593, 117431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, L. Ding, Z. Lu, J. Deng and Y. Wei, Two-dimensional MXene membrane for ethanol dehydration, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 590, 117300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, C. Chen, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, J. Jiang and Y.-J. Xu, Microstructure and surface control of MXene films for water purification, Nat. Sustainability, 2019, 2(9), 856–862 CrossRef .
S. Huang and V. N. Mochalin, Hydrolysis of 2D transition-metal carbides (MXenes) in colloidal solutions, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58(3), 1958–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seyedin, J. Zhang, K. A. S. Usman, S. Qin, A. M. Glushenkov, E. R. S. Yanza, R. T. Jones and J. M. Razal, Facile Solution Processing of Stable MXene Dispersions towards Conductive Composite Fibers, Global Challenges, 2019, 3(10), 1900037 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maleski, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Dispersions
of two-dimensional titanium carbide MXene in organic solvents, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(4), 1632–1640 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, K. Jiang, S. Zaman, J. Xuan, Z. Wang and F. Geng, Ti3C2 sheets with an adjustable surface and feature sizes to regulate the chemical stability, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58(14), 9397–9403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Natu, J. L. Hart, M. Sokol, H. Chiang, M. L. Taheri and M. W. Barsoum, Edge Capping of 2D-MXene Sheets with Polyanionic Salts To Mitigate Oxidation in Aqueous Colloidal Suspensions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(36), 12655–12660 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mathis, M. Maleski, A. Goad, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. C. Foucher, K. Hantanasirisakul, E. Stach and Y. Gogotsi, Modified MAX Phase Synthesis for Environmentally Stable and Highly Conductive Ti3C2 MXene, ChemRxiv, 2020 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.12805280.v1 .
J. Kim, Y. Yoon, S. K. Kim, S. Park, W. Song, S. Myung, H. K. Jung, S. S. Lee, D. H. Yoon and K. S. An, Chemically Stabilized and Functionalized 2D-MXene with Deep Eutectic Solvents as Versatile Dispersion Medium, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2008722 CrossRef CAS .
T. Habib, X. Zhao, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, W. Sun, H. An, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, Oxidation stability of Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene nanosheets in solvents and composite films, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3(1), 1–6 CrossRef .
H. Liao, X. Guo, P. Wan and G. Yu, Conductive MXene Nanocomposite Organohydrogel for Flexible, Healable, Low-Temperature Tolerant Strain Sensors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(39), 1904507 CrossRef .
J. Wen, X. Zhang and H. Gao, Role of the H-containing groups on the structural dynamics of Ti3C2Tx MXene, Phys. B, 2018, 537, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, N. Liu, L. Li, X. Hu, Z. Zou, J. Wang, S. Luo and Y. Gao, A highly flexible and sensitive piezoresistive sensor based on MXene with greatly changed interlayer distances, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1207 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, T. E. Rufford, X. Chen, N. Li, M. Lyu, L. Dai and L. Wang, Nitrogen-doped Ti3C2Tx MXene electrodes for high-performance supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hantanasirisakul, M. Q. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, J. Halim, B. Anasori, S. Kota, C. E. Ren, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene transparent thin films with tunable optoelectronic properties, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2(6), 1600050 CrossRef .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. Raymundo-Pinero, M. Naguib, M. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, The effect of hydrazine intercalation on the structure and capacitance of 2D titanium carbide (MXene), Nanoscale, 2016, 8(17), 9128–9133 RSC .
J. Come, J. M. Black, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Beidaghi, A. J. Rondinone, S. V. Kalinin, D. J. Wesolowski, Y. Gogotsi and N. Balke, Controlling the actuation properties of MXene paper electrodes upon cation intercalation, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Sodium-ion intercalation mechanism in MXene nanosheets, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(3), 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Osti, M. Naguib, A. Ostadhossein, Y. Xie, P. R. Kent, B. Dyatkin, G. Rother, W. T. Heller, A. C. van Duin and Y. Gogotsi, Effect of metal ion intercalation on the structure of MXene and water dynamics on its internal surfaces, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(14), 8859–8863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okubo, A. Sugahara, S. Kajiyama and A. Yamada, MXene as a charge storage host, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51(3), 591–599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, W. Han, H. Li, W. Shi, J. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Li, W. Zhang and W. Zheng, Tent-pitching-inspired high-valence period 3-cation pre-intercalation excels for anode of 2D titanium carbide (MXene) with high Li storage capacity, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 163–168 CrossRef .
C. E. Ren, M. Alhabeb, B. W. Byles, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, E. Pomerantseva, K. A. Mahmoud and Y. Gogotsi, Voltage-Gated Ions Sieving through 2D MXene Ti3C2T x Membranes, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1(7), 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible MXene/graphene films for ultrafast supercapacitors with outstanding volumetric capacitance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(30), 1701264 CrossRef .
H. Riazi, M. Anayee, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. A. Shamsabadi, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and M. Soroush, Surface Modification of a MXene by an Aminosilane Coupling Agent, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 1902008 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Li, Y. Zhuang, G. Liu, W. Xing and W. Jing, Adjustable interlayer spacing of ultrathin MXene-derived membranes for ion rejection, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 591, 117350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lipatov, M. Alhabeb, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. Boson, Y. Gogotsi and A. Sinitskii, Effect of synthesis on quality, electronic properties and environmental stability of individual monolayer Ti3C2 MXene flakes, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2(12), 1600255 CrossRef .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Guidelines for synthesis and processing of two-dimensional titanium carbide (Ti3C2T x MXene), Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(18), 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shekhirev, C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Characterization of MXenes at Every Step, from Their Precursors to Single Flakes and Assembled Films, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 100757 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, M. He, Q. Hu, Q. Wu, G. Sun, L. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhu and A. Zhou, Ti3C2 MXene-based sensors with high selectivity for NH3 detection at room temperature, ACS Sens., 2019, 4(10), 2763–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Verger, C. Xu, V. Natu, H.-M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. W. Barsoum, Overview of the synthesis of MXenes and other ultrathin 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23(3), 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seredych, C. E. Shuck, D. Pinto, M. Alhabeb, E. Precetti, G. Deysher, B. Anasori, N. Kurra and Y. Gogotsi, High-temperature behavior and surface chemistry of carbide MXenes studied by thermal analysis, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(9), 3324–3332 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bian, G. He, W. Zhi, S. Xiang, T. Wang and D. Cai, Ultralight MXene-based aerogels with high electromagnetic interference shielding performance, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(3), 474–478 RSC .
C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. Levitt, Y. Zhu, S. Uzun, V. Balitskiy, V. Zahorodna, O. Gogotsi and Y. Gogotsi, Scalable Synthesis of Ti3C2Tx MXene, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X.-L. Ma, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Large-area high-quality 2D ultrathin Mo 2 C superconducting crystals, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(11), 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, C. H. Chan, N. Y. Chan, X. X. Chen and J.-Y. Dai, Plasma-enhanced pulsed-laser deposition of single-crystalline M o 2 C ultrathin superconducting films, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1(3), 034002 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, H. Yu, H. Jin, M. Wu, Y. Fang, J. Sun, Z. Hu, T. Li, J. Wu and L. Huang, Salt-templated synthesis of 2D metallic MoN and other nitrides, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(2), 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, T. Xiong, L. Zhao, F. Wang, H. Liu, R. Hu, J. Zhou, W. Zhou and S. Chen, Ultrathin N-doped Mo2C nanosheets with exposed active sites as efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reactions, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(12), 12509–12518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Awasthi, B. Maharjan, S. Shrestha, D. P. Bhattarai, D. Yoon, C. H. Park and C. S. Kim, Synthesis, characterizations, and biocompatibility evaluation of polycaprolactone–MXene electrospun fibers, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 586, 124282 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Si, B. Tawiah, W.-L. Sun, B. Lin, C. Wang, A. C. Y. Yuen, B. Yu, A. Li, W. Yang and H.-D. Lu, Functionalization of MXene nanosheets for polystyrene towards high thermal stability and flame retardant properties, Polymers, 2019, 11(6), 976 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, S. Jiang, R. Liang, P. Sun, Y. Hai and L. Zhang, Thermal-triggered insulating fireproof layers: a novel fire-extinguishing MXene composites coating, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 123621 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, Vertically Aligned Janus MXene-Based Aerogels for Solar Desalination with High Efficiency and Salt Resistance, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(11), 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tao, D. Zhang, X. Li, D. Lou, X. Sun, C. Wei, J. Li, J. Yang and Y.-N. Liu, Near-infrared light-responsive hydrogels via peroxide-decorated MXene-initiated polymerization, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10(46), 10765–10771 RSC .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, Structural and electronic properties and stability of MX enes Ti2C and Ti3C2 functionalized by methoxy groups, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(26), 13637–13643 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Lv, T. Zhao, P. Li, Y. Sun and J. Wang, Sulfonated Ti3C2Tx to construct proton transfer pathways in polymer electrolyte membrane for enhanced conduction, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 310, 100–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lim, H. Park, J. Yang, C. Kwak and J. Lee, Stable colloidal dispersion of octylated Ti3C2-MXenes in a nonpolar solvent, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 579, 123648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, CO 2 and temperature dual responsive “Smart” MXene phases, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(2), 314–317 RSC .
X. Sheng, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang and X. Lu, Properties of two-dimensional Ti3C2 MXene/thermoplastic polyurethane nanocomposites with effective reinforcement via melt blending, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 181, 107710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yun, S. Wu, L. Li, L. Yu and K. H. Kim, Architecturally Robust Graphene-Encapsulated MXene Ti2CT x@ Polyaniline Composite for High-Performance Pouch-Type Asymmetric Supercapacitor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(40), 34212–34221 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Pandey, K. Rasool, V. E. Madhavan, B. Aïssa, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, Ultrahigh-flux and fouling-resistant membranes based on layered silver/MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x) nanosheets, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(8), 3522–3533 RSC .
X. Fan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Plasmonic Ti3C2T x MXene Enables Highly Efficient Photothermal Conversion for Healable and Transparent Wearable Device, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(7), 8124–8134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vatankhah-Varnoosfaderani, M. Ina, H. Adelnia, Q. Li, A. P. Zhushma, L. J. Hall and S. S. Sheiko, Well-defined zwitterionic microgels: synthesis and application as acid-resistant microreactors, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(19), 7204–7210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vatankhah-Varnosfaderani, X. Hu, Q. Li, H. Adelnia, M. Ina and S. S. Sheiko, Universal coatings based on zwitterionic–dopamine copolymer microgels, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(24), 20869–20875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Adelnia, I. Blakey, A. Little, J. Peter and H. T. Ta, Hydrogels Based on Poly (aspartic acid): Synthesis and Applications, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, Z. Xhang, Y. Li, G. Han, Y. Feng, B. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Ma and C. Liu, Flexible, Robust and Multifunctional Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Film with Alternating Cellulose Nanofiber and MXene Layers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(4), 4895–4905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, H. Liao, D. Ma, M. Chao, Y. Wang, X. Jia, P. Wan and L. Zhang, A wearable, self-adhesive, long-lastingly moist and healable epidermal sensor assembled from conductive MXene nanocomposites, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1788–1795 RSC .
C. Xing, S. Chen, X. Liang, Q. Liu, M. Qu, Q. Zou, J. Li, H. Tan, L. Liu and D. Fan, Two-dimensional MXene (Ti3C2)-integrated cellulose hydrogels: toward smart three-dimensional network nanoplatforms exhibiting light-induced swelling and bimodal photothermal/chemotherapy anticancer activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(33), 27631–27643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. B. Zhang, R. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, A. Zhou and Z. Z. Yu, Hydrophobic, flexible, and lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference shielding, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(38), 1702367 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, B. Han, H.-B. Zhang, X. Xie, T. Tu, Y. Zhang, Y. Dai, R. Yang and Z.-Z. Yu, Compressible, durable and conductive polydimethylsiloxane-coated MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic interference shielding, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122622 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Lin, D. Hu, P. Jiang and X. Huang, Multifunctional 3D-MXene/PDMS nanocomposites
for electrical, thermal and triboelectric applications, Composites, Part A, 2020, 130, 105754 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, X. Yin, X. Li, M. Li, S. Liang, L. Zhang and L. Cheng, Lightweight Ti2CT x MXene/Poly (vinyl alcohol) Composite Foams for Electromagnetic Wave Shielding with Absorption-Dominated Feature, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(10), 10198–10207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. B. Zhang, X. Xie, R. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. Z. Yu, Multifunctional, superelastic, and lightweight MXene/polyimide aerogels, Small, 2018, 14(45), 1802479 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, X.-J. Yang, P. Li, Y. Zhao and Q. J. Niu, Fabrication of novel MXene (Ti 3 C 2)/polyacrylamide nanocomposite hydrogels with enhanced mechanical and drug release properties, Soft Matter, 2020, 16(1), 162–169 RSC .

          B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, 2D Metal Carbides and Nitrides (MXenes), Springer,  2019 Search PubMed .
F. Aziz and A. Ismail, Spray coating methods for polymer solar cells fabrication: A review, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 39, 416–425 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Fabrication and processing of polymer solar cells: a review of printing and coating techniques, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93(4), 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Mirkhani, A. Shayesteh Zeraati, E. Aliabadian, M. Naguib and U. Sundararaj, High Dielectric Constant and Low Dielectric Loss via Poly (vinyl alcohol)/Ti3C2T x MXene Nanocomposites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(20), 18599–18608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Akuzum, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, N. J. Alvarez, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Rheological characteristics of 2D titanium carbide (MXene) dispersions: a guide for processing MXenes, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(3), 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanvir, P. Sobolčiak, A. Popelka, M. Mrlik, Z. Spitalsky, M. Micusik, J. Prokes and I. Krupa, Electrically conductive, transparent polymeric nanocomposites modified by 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene), Polymers, 2019, 11(8), 1272 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shao, J.-W. Wang, D.-N. Liu, L. Wei, S.-Q. Wu and H. Ren, A novel high permittivity percolative composite with modified MXene, Polymer, 2019, 174, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, J. Wang, L. Dai, X. Liu, L. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Cao, W. Wang, H. Wu and S. Guo, Flame-retardant poly (vinyl alcohol)/MXene multilayered films with outstanding electromagnetic interference shielding and thermal conductive performances, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Electromagnetic interference shielding with 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Science, 2016, 353(6304), 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible and conductive MXene films and nanocomposites with high capacitance, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111(47), 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, R. Wang, T. Jiao, G. Zou, F. Zhan, J. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Zhou and Q. Peng, Facile preparation of hierarchical AgNP-loaded MXene/Fe3O4/polymer nanocomposites by electrospinning with enhanced catalytic performance for wastewater treatment, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(1), 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Cao, F.-F. Chen, Y.-J. Zhu, Y.-G. Zhang, Y.-Y. Jiang, M.-G. Ma and F. Chen, Binary strengthening and toughening of MXene/cellulose nanofiber composite paper with nacre-inspired structure and superior electromagnetic interference shielding properties, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(5), 4583–4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, M. Miao, Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Cao and X. Feng, Ultrathin Biomimetic Polymeric Ti3C2T x MXene Composite Films for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(51), 44787–44795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, All-MXene (2D titanium carbide) solid-state microsupercapacitors for on-chip energy storage, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(9), 2847–2854 RSC .
A. D. Dillon, M. J. Ghidiu, A. L. Krick, J. Griggs, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum and A. T. Fafarman, Highly conductive optical quality solution-processed films of 2D titanium carbide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(23), 4162–4168 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ying, A. D. Dillon, A. T. Fafarman and M. W. Barsoum, Transparent, conductive solution processed spincast 2d ti2ct x (mxene) films, Mater. Res. Lett., 2017, 5(6), 391–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, B. Huang, R. Lv, Q. Wang and Y. Wang, Highly flexible and low capacitance loss supercapacitor electrode based on hybridizing decentralized conjugated polymer chains with MXene, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122246 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mao, C. Gu, S. Yan, Q. Xin, S. Cheng, P. Tan, X. Wang, F. Xiu, X. Liu and J. Liu, MXene Quantum Dot/Polymer Hybrid Structures with Tunable Electrical Conductance and Resistive Switching for Nonvolatile Memory Devices, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1900493 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, A. Sarycheva, S. Buondonno, Z. Zhou, S. Yang and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides (MXenes) in fibers, Mater. Today, 2017, 20(8), 481–482 CrossRef .
Q. W. Wang, H. B. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Zhao, X. Xie, L. Liu, R. Yang, N. Koratkar and Z. Z. Yu, Multifunctional and Water-Resistant MXene-Decorated Polyester Textiles with Outstanding Electromagnetic Interference Shielding and Joule Heating Performances, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(7), 1806819 CrossRef .
L. Li, X. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cao and W. Wang, New application of MXene in polymer composites toward remarkable anti-dripping performance for flame retardancy, Composites, Part A, 2019, 127, 105649 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, T. Habib, S. Shah, H. Gao, A. Patel, I. Echols, X. Zhao, M. Radovic, M. J. Green and J. L. Lutkenhaus, Water sorption in MXene/polyelectrolyte multilayers for ultrafast humidity sensing, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(2), 948–955 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, A. C. Y. Yuen, A. Li, Y. Zhang, T. B. Y. Chen, B. Yu, E. W. M. Lee, S. Peng, W. Yang and H.-D. Lu, MXene/chitosan nanocoating for flexible polyurethane foam towards remarkable fire hazards reductions, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 381, 120952 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uzun, S. Seyedin, A. L. Stoltzfus, A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, M. Anayee, C. J. Strobel, J. M. Razal, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Knittable and Washable Multifunctional MXene-Coated Cellulose Yarns, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(45), 1905015 CrossRef CAS .
H. Adelnia, J. N. Gavgani, H. Riazi and H. C. Bidsorkhi, Transition behavior, surface characteristics and film formation of functionalized poly (methyl methacrylate-co-butyl acrylate) particles, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77(11), 1826–1833 CrossRef CAS .
H. Riazi, A. Jalali-Arani and F. A. Taromi, In situ synthesis of silica/polyacrylate nanocomposite particles simultaneously bearing carboxylate and sulfonate functionalities via soap-free seeded emulsion polymerization, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 207, 470–478 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Q. Luo, S. Zhao, H.-B. Zhang, Z. Deng, L. Li and Z.-Z. Yu, Flexible, stretchable and electrically conductive MXene/natural rubber nanocomposite films for efficient electromagnetic interference shielding, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 182, 107754 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sun, H. B. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Xie, R. Yang, Y. Li, S. Hong and Z. Z. Yu, Highly conductive transition metal carbide/carbonitride (MXene)@ polystyrene nanocomposites fabricated by electrostatic assembly for highly efficient electromagnetic interference shielding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(45), 1702807 CrossRef .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Graphene fiber: a new trend in carbon fibers, Mater. Today, 2015, 18(9), 480–492 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Electrospun MXene/carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(1), 269–277 RSC .
E. A. Mayerberger, O. Urbanek, R. M. McDaniel, R. M. Street, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, Preparation and characterization of polymer-Ti3C2Tx (MXene) composite nanofibers produced via electrospinning, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134(37), 45295 CrossRef .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, Polyester@ MXene nanofibers-based yarn electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sobolčiak, A. Ali, M. K. Hassan, M. I. Helal, A. Tanvir, A. Popelka, M. A. Al-Maadeed, I. Krupa and K. A. Mahmoud, 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene)-reinforced polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanofibers with enhanced mechanical and electrical properties, PLoS One, 2017, 12(8), e0183705 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Chen, P. Li, A. Zhou, X. Cao and Q. Hu, Preparation, mechanical and anti-friction performance of MXene/polymer composites, Mater. Des., 2016, 92, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajavel, S. Luo, Y. Wan, X. Yu, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, R. Sun and C. Wong, 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene/polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) nanocomposites for attenuation of electromagnetic radiation with excellent heat dissipation, Composites, Part A, 2020, 129, 105693 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, M. Wu, A. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. He and L. Wang, Non-isothermal crystallization and thermal degradation kinetics of MXene/linear low-density polyethylene nanocomposites, e-Polym., 2017, 17(5), 373–381 CAS .
L. Samandari-Masouleh, N. Mostoufi, A. Khodadadi, Y. Mortazavi and M. Maghrebi, Modeling the growth of carbon nanotubes in a floating catalyst reactor, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51(3), 1143–1149 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Lei, L. Wang, M. Tian, S. Zhu, H. Xiao, X. Tang and L. Qu, A Flexible MXene-Decorated Fabric with Interwoven Conductive Networks for Integrated Joule Heating, Electromagnetic Interference Shielding and Strain Sensing Performances, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(12), 14459–14467 CrossRef CAS .
L. Samandari-Masouleh, N. Mostoufi, A. Khodadadi, Y. Mortazavi and M. Maghrebi, Kinetic modeling of carbon nanotube production and minimization of amorphous carbon overlayer deposition in floating catalyst method, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2012, 10(1) DOI:10.1515/1542-6580.2972 .
F. Zhang, P. Ju, M. Pan, D. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Li and X. Li, Self-healing mechanisms in smart protective coatings: a review, Corros. Sci., 2018, 144, 74–88 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhai, A. Narkar and K. Ahn, Self-healing polymers with nanomaterials and nanostructures, Nano Today, 2019, 100826 Search PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zhang, K. H. Lee, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, Q. Jiang, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, MXenes stretch hydrogel sensor performance to new limits, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(6), eaat0098 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zou, L. Fang, T. Chen, M. Sun, C. Lu and Z. Xu, Near-infrared light and solar light activated self-healing epoxy coating having enhanced properties using MXene flakes as multifunctional fillers, Polymers, 2018, 10(5), 474 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Luo, K. Wu, H. Guo, Q. Zhao and M. Lu, Simultaneous reduction and surface functionalization of graphene oxide for enhancing flame retardancy and thermal conductivity of mesogenic epoxy composites, Polym. Int., 2017, 66(1), 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, C. Zhi, Y. Lin, H. Bao, G. Wu, P. Jiang and Y.-W. Mai, Thermal conductivity of graphene-based polymer nanocomposites, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 142, 100577 CrossRef .
R. Kang, Z. Zhang, L. Guo, J. Cui, Y. Chen, X. Hou, B. Wang, C.-T. Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Enhanced Thermal Conductivity of Epoxy Composites Filled with 2D Transition Metal Carbides (MXenes) with Ultralow Loading, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 9135 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, N. Kong, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, S. Qin, M. Han, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Scalable Manufacturing of Free-Standing, Strong Ti3C2Tx MXene Films with Outstanding Conductivity, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(23), 2001093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Yan, C. Ji, X. Zeng, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong in Interconnecting the Promising MXenes via Ag Nanowire in Epoxy Nanocomposites for High-Performance Thermal Management Applications, 2018 19th International Conference on Electronic Packaging Technology (ICEPT), IEEE,  2018, pp. 510–512 Search PubMed .
R. Liu and W. Li, High-Thermal-Stability and High-Thermal-Conductivity Ti3C2T x MXene/Poly (vinyl alcohol)(PVA) Composites, ACS Omega, 2018, 3(3), 2609–2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahnazari, Z. Ahmadi and L. Masooleh, Perturbation Analysis of Heat Transfer and a Novel Method for Changing the Third Kind Boundary Condition into the First Kind, J. Porous Media, 2017, 20(5), 449–460 CrossRef .
J. N. Gavgani, H. Adelnia and M. M. Gudarzi, Intumescent flame retardant polyurethane/reduced graphene oxide composites with improved mechanical, thermal, and barrier properties, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49(1), 243–254 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Bidsorkhi, M. Soheilmoghaddam, R. H. Pour, H. Adelnia and Z. Mohamad, Mechanical, thermal and flammability properties of ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA)/sepiolite nanocomposites, Polym. Test., 2014, 37, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Gavgani, H. Adelnia, G. Mir Mohamad Sadeghi and F. Zafari, Intumescent flame retardant polyurethane/starch composites: thermal, mechanical, and rheological properties, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131(23), 41158 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Jow, K. Su and J. Zhang, Dripping behavior of burning polymers under UL94 vertical test conditions, J. Fire Sci., 2012, 30(6), 477–501 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, L. Fu, Q. Zhou, Z. Wen, C. T. Lin, J. Yu, W. Wang and H. Zhao, Flammability, thermal stability and mechanical properties of polyvinyl alcohol nanocomposites reinforced with delaminated Ti3C2Tx (MXene), Polym. Compos., 2020, 41, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, T. Saito, S. Lai, M. S. Rager, T. Aytug, M. P. Paranthaman, M.-Q. Zhao and Y. Gogotsi, Ti 3 C 2 T x (MXene)–polyacrylamide nanocomposite films, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(76), 72069–72073 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Qiu, P. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. Liang, J. Kong, L. Chen and J. Gu, 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/C hybrid foam/epoxy nanocomposites with superior electromagnetic interference shielding performances and robust mechanical properties, Composites, Part A, 2019, 123, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, N. Kong, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, S. Qin, M. Han, W. Yang and J. Liu, Scalable Manufacturing of Free-Standing, Strong Ti3C2Tx MXene Films with Outstanding Conductivity, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2001093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. S. Masooleh, J. E. Arbogast, U. Oktem, W. D. Seider and M. Soroush, in A Method of Community Detection in Complex Weighted Networks, 2020 Virtual AIChE Annual Meeting, AIChE,  2020 Search PubMed .

          L. S. Masooleh, U. Oktem, W. D. Seider, J. E. Arbogast and M. Soroush, in Robust Large-Scale State-Estimate Prediction, 2020 Virtual AIChE Annual Meeting, AIChE,  2020 Search PubMed .
L. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Ma, J. Gao and Y. Jiang, Acetylcholinesterase/chitosan-transition metal carbides nanocomposites-based biosensor for the organophosphate pesticides detection, Biochem. Eng. J., 2017, 128, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, W. Lu, J. Li, Y. Li and H. Zhang, MXene-Enabled Electrochemical Microfluidic Biosensor: Applications toward Multicomponent Continuous Monitoring in Whole Blood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(6), 1807326 CrossRef .
M. Soheilmoghaddam, H. Adelnia, H. C. Bidsorkhi, G. Sharifzadeh, M. U. Wahit, N. I. Akos and A. A. Yussuf, Development of ethylene-vinyl acetate composites reinforced with graphene platelets, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302(2), 1600260 CrossRef .
H. Riazi, A. A. Shamsabadi, M. C. Grady, A. M. Rappe and M. Soroush, Experimental and theoretical study of the self-initiation reaction of methyl acrylate in free-radical polymerization, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(2), 532–539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Riazi, A. A. Shamsabadi, P. Corcoran, M. C. Grady, A. M. Rappe and M. Soroush, On the thermal self-initiation reaction of n-butyl acrylate in free-radical polymerization, Processes, 2018, 6(1), 3 CrossRef .
S. Laki, A. A. Shamsabadi, H. Riazi, M. C. Grady, A. M. Rappe and M. Soroush, Experimental and Mechanistic Modeling Study of Self-Initiated High-Temperature Polymerization of Ethyl Acrylate, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59(6), 2621–2630 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kilikevičius, S. Kvietkaitė, K. Žukienė, M. Omastová, A. Aniskevich and D. Zeleniakienė, Numerical investigation of the mechanical properties of a novel hybrid polymer composite reinforced with graphene and MXene nanosheets, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 174, 109497 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, S. Wang, S. Kota, Q. Pan, M. W. Barsoum and C. Y. Li, Structure and crystallization behavior of poly (ethylene oxide)/Ti3C2Tx
MXene nanocomposites, Polymer, 2016, 102, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, W. Li, H. Li, X. Fan and M. Zhu, Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets toward high-performance corrosion inhibitor for epoxy coating, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 135, 156–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Gavgani, H. Adelnia, D. Zaarei and M. M. Gudarzi, Lightweight flexible polyurethane/reduced ultralarge graphene oxide composite foams for electromagnetic interference shielding, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(33), 27517–27527 RSC .
K. Raagulan, R. Braveenth, B. M. Kim, K. J. Lim, S. B. Lee, M. Kim and K. Y. Chai, An effective utilization of MXene and its effect on electromagnetic interference shielding: flexible, free-standing and thermally conductive composite from MXene–PAT–poly (p-aminophenol)–polyaniline co-polymer, RSC Adv., 2020, 10(3), 1613–1633 RSC .
Y. Qing, W. Zhou, F. Luo and D. Zhu, Titanium carbide (MXene) nanosheets as promising microwave absorbers, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42(14), 16412–16416 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Dai, X. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Wang, L. Wang and F. Wang, Layered PVB/Ba3Co2Fe24O41/Ti3C2 Mxene composite: enhanced electromagnetic wave absorption properties with high impedance match in a wide frequency range, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 200, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Bora, A. G. Anil, P. C. Ramamurthy and D. Q. Tan, MXene interlayered crosslinked conducting polymer film for highly specific absorption and electromagnetic interference shielding, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 177–183 RSC .
H. Wei, J. Dong, X. Fang, W. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Qian, Z. Jiang and Y. Huang, Ti3C2Tx MXene/polyaniline (PANI) sandwich intercalation structure composites constructed for microwave absorption, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 169, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
K. Raagulan, B. M. Kim and K. Y. Chai, Recent Advancement of Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) Shielding of Two Dimensional (2D) MXene and Graphene Aerogel Composites, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(4), 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jan, A. Habib, M. A. Akram, I. Ahmad, A. Shah, M. Sadiq and A. Hussain, Flexible, thin films of graphene–polymer composites for EMI shielding, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4(3), 035605 CrossRef .
A. Iqbal, F. Shahzad, K. Hantanasirisakul, M.-K. Kim, J. Kwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and C. M. Koo, Anomalous absorption of electromagnetic waves by 2D transition metal carbonitride Ti3CNTx (MXene), Science, 2020, 369(6502), 446–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, W. Jin and N. Xu, Two-dimensional-material membranes: a new family of high-performance separation membranes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(43), 13384–13397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, W. Ying, Y. Guo, Y. Ying and X. Peng, Enhanced gas separation through Nanoconfined ionic liquid in laminated MoS2 membrane, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(50), 44251–44257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Moghadam and H. B. Park, Two-dimensional materials: an emerging platform for gas separation membranes, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2018, 20, 28–38 CrossRef .
W. Cheng, X. Lu, M. Kaneda, W. Zhang, R. Bernstein, J. Ma and M. Elimelech, Graphene Oxide-Functionalized Membranes: The Importance of Nanosheet Surface Exposure for Biofouling Resistance, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 54(1), 517–526 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, F. Ming, Y. Shi, R. Li, I. S. Kim, C. Y. Tang, H. N. Alshareef and P. Wang, Two-Dimensional Ti3C2T x MXene Membranes as Nanofluidic Osmotic Power Generators, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(8), 8917–8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Koltonow and J. Huang, Two-dimensional nanofluidics, Science, 2016, 351(6280), 1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Wu, N. Zhang, G. He, Q. Xin, X. Wu, H. Wu, X. Cao, M. D. Guiver and Z. Jiang, A highly permeable graphene oxide membrane with fast and selective transport nanochannels for efficient carbon capture, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(10), 3107–3112 RSC .
N. M. Caffrey, Effect of mixed surface terminations on the structural and electrochemical properties of two-dimensional Ti3C2T2 and V2CT2 MXenes multilayers, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(28), 13520–13530 RSC .
L. Ding, Y. Wei, Y. Wang, H. Chen, J. Caro and H. Wang, A two-dimensional lamellar membrane: MXene nanosheet stacks, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129(7), 1851–1855 CrossRef .
L. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Duan, Y. Wei, C. Dong, L. Ding, Z. Qiao and H. Wang, Selective gas diffusion in two-dimensional MXene lamellar membranes: insights from molecular dynamics simulations, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(25), 11734–11742 RSC .
H. E. Karahan, K. Goh, C. Zhang, E. Yang, C. Yıldırım, C. Y. Chuah, M. G. Ahunbay, J. Lee, Ş. B. Tantekin-Ersolmaz, Y. Chen and T.-H. Bae, MXene Materials for Designing Advanced Separation Membranes, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(29), 1906697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, Y. Wei, L. Li, T. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Xue, L.-X. Ding, S. Wang, J. Caro and Y. Gogotsi, MXene molecular sieving membranes for highly efficient gas separation, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 155 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Tavasoli, M. Sadeghi, H. Riazi, A. A. Shamsabadi and M. Soroush, Gas Separation Polysulfone Membranes Modified by Cadmium-based Nanoparticles, Fibers Polym., 2018, 19(10), 2049–2055 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Shamsabadi, H. Riazi and M. Soroush, Mixed Matrix Membranes for CO2 Separations: Membrane Preparation, Properties, and Separation Performance Evaluation, in Current Trends and Future Developments on (Bio-) Membranes, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 103–153 Search PubMed .
A. A. Shamsabadi, A. P. Isfahani, S. K. Salestan, A. Rahimpour, B. Ghalei, E. Sivaniah and M. Soroush, Pushing Rubbery Polymer Membranes To Be Economic for CO2 Separation: Embedment with Ti3C2Tx MXene Nanosheets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(3), 3984–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Ji, Q. Liu, L. Cheng, K. Guan, M. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and W. Jin, 2D MXene Nanofilms with Tunable Gas Transport Channels, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(31), 1801511 CrossRef .
M. Ghanbari, D. Emadzadeh, W. Lau, H. Riazi, D. Almasi and A. Ismail, Minimizing structural parameter of thin film composite forward osmosis membranes using polysulfone/halloysite nanotubes as membrane substrates, Desalination, 2016, 377, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Bidsorkhi, H. Riazi, D. Emadzadeh, M. Ghanbari, T. Matsuura, W. Lau and A. Ismail, Preparation and characterization of a novel highly hydrophilic and antifouling polysulfone/nanoporous TiO2 nanocomposite membrane, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27(41), 415706 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Han, X. Ma, Y. Xie, D. Teng and S. Zhang, Preparation of a new 2D MXene/PES composite membrane with excellent hydrophilicity and high flux, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(89), 56204–56210 RSC .
Y. Tang, D. Dubbeldam and S. Tanase, Water–Ethanol and Methanol–Ethanol Separations Using in Situ Confined Polymer Chains in a Metal–Organic Framework, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(44), 41383–41393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shin, M. F. N. Taufique, R. Devanathan, E. C. Cutsforth, J. Lee, W. Liu, L. S. Fifield and D. W. Gotthold, Highly selective supported Graphene oxide Membranes for Water-ethanol separation, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–11 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Hao, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Liu, Polymer-Ti3C2Tx composite membranes to overcome the trade-off in solvent resistant nanofiltration for alcohol-based system, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 515, 175–188 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Zha, X. Zhao, J.-H. Pu, L.-S. Tang, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Flexible anti-biofouling MXene/cellulose fibrous membrane for sustainable solar-driven water purification, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(40), 36589–36597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Gund, J. H. Park, R. Harpalsinh, M. Kota, J. H. Shin, T.-i. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H. S. Park, MXene/polymer hybrid materials for flexible AC-filtering electrochemical capacitors, Joule, 2019, 3(1), 164–176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Q. Tao, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, J. Halim, P. O. Persson, J. Rosen and F. Zhang, Polymer-MXene composite films formed by MXene-facilitated electrochemical polymerization for flexible solid-state microsupercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 734–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li and Q. Huang, Highly flexible, freestanding supercapacitor electrode with enhanced performance obtained by hybridizing polypyrrole chains with MXene, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(21), 1600969 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zou, Z. Peng, C. Yu and W. Zhong, Arbitrary deformable and high-strength electroactive polymer/MXene anti-exfoliative composite films assembled into high performance, flexible all-solid-state supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(40), 20797–20810 RSC .
K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, An ultrafast conducting polymer@ MXene positive electrode with high volumetric capacitance for advanced asymmetric supercapacitors, Small, 2020, 16(4), 1906851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, H. Zhang, T. Hu, B. Fan, X. Wang and Z. Li, Emerging 2D MXenes for supercapacitors: status, challenges and prospects, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(18), 6666–6693 RSC .
Y. Zhao and J. Zhao, Functional group-dependent anchoring effect of titanium carbide-based MXenes for lithium-sulfur batteries: a computational study, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 412, 591–598 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Jin, N. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Chu, B. Gu and W. Deng, Scalable, and low-cost treating-cutting-coating manufacture platform for MXene-based on-chip micro-supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, W. Bao, P. Jaumaux, S. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Wang, MXene-Based Composites: Synthesis and Applications in Rechargeable Batteries and Supercapacitors, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6(8), 1802004 CrossRef .
S. Tu, Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and H. N. Alshareef, Large dielectric constant enhancement in MXene percolative polymer composites, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(4), 3369–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Umrao, R. Tabassian, J. Kim, Q. Zhou, S. Nam and I.-K. Oh, MXene artificial muscles based on ionically cross-linked Ti3C2Tx electrode for kinetic soft robotics, Science Robotics, 2019, 4(33), eaaw7797 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, F. Li, T. Guo and Y. Chen, Infrared-triggered actuators from graphene-based nanocomposites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(22), 9921–9927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Cebeci, R. G. De Villoria, J. H. Lin, B. L. Wardle and Q. Zhang, High electromechanical response of ionic polymer actuators with controlled-morphology aligned carbon nanotube/nafion nanocomposite electrodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20(19), 3266–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Soleymaniha, M. A. Shahbazi, A. R. Rafieerad, A. Maleki and A. Amiri, Promoting role of MXene nanosheets in biomedical sciences: therapeutic and biosensing innovations, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8(1), 1801137 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. George and B. Kandasubramanian, Advancements in MXene-Polymer composites for various biomedical applications, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(7), 8522–8535 CrossRef CAS .
A. Golabdar, H. Adelnia, N. Moshtzan, J. Nasrollah Gavgani and H. Izadi-Vasafi, Anti-bacterial poly (vinyl alcohol) nanocomposite hydrogels reinforced with in situ synthesized silver nanoparticles, Polym. Compos., 2019, 40(4), 1322–1328 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie and C. Kang, Emerging two-dimensional monoelemental materials (Xenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(11), 2891–2912 RSC .
N. Rohaizad, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, M. Fojtů, N. M. Latiff and M. Pumera, Two-dimensional materials in biomedical, biosensing and sensing applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 619–657 RSC .
S. Chen, C. Xing, D. Huang, C. Zhou, B. Ding, Z. Guo, Z. Peng, D. Wang, X. Zhu and S. Liu, Eradication of tumor growth by delivering novel photothermal selenium-coated tellurium nanoheterojunctions, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6(15), eaay6825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Saw, W. Li, N. Kong and M. A. Islam, Two-dimensional antimonene-based photonic nanomedicine for cancer theranostics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(38), 1802061 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Rasool, K. A. Mahmoud, D. J. Johnson, M. Helal, G. R. Berdiyorov and Y. Gogotsi, Efficient antibacterial membrane based on two-dimensional Ti3C2Tx (MXene) nanosheets, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zong, H. Wu, H. Lin and Y. Chen, A polyoxometalate-functionalized two-dimensional titanium carbide composite MXene for effective cancer theranostics, Nano Res., 2018, 11(8), 4149–4168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soroush, L. S. Masooleh, W. D. Seider, U. Oktem and J. E. Arbogast, Model-predictive safety optimal actions to detect and handle process operation hazards, AIChE J., 2020, 66(6), e16932 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lakhe, E. M. Prehn, T. Habib, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic, M. S. Mannan and M. J. Green, Process Safety Analysis for Ti3C2T x MXene Synthesis and Processing, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58(4), 1570–1579 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smagowska and M. Pawlaczyk-Łuszczyńska, Effects of ultrasonic noise on the human body—a bibliographic review, Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon., 2013, 19(2), 195–202 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fadeel, C. Bussy, S. Merino, E. Vázquez, E. Flahaut, F. Mouchet, L. Evariste, L. Gauthier, A. J. Koivisto and U. Vogel, Safety assessment of graphene-based materials: focus on human health and the environment, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(11), 10582–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Park, S. Y. Na and I. G. Bae, Uniform two-dimensional crystals of polystyrene nanospheres fabricated by a surfactant-assisted spin-coating method with polyoxyethylene tridecyl ether, Sci. Rep., 2019, 11, 11453 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Hossein Riazi	Hossein Riazi received his B.S. (2010) and M.S. (2012) degrees in polymer engineering from Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and Ph.D. degree in chemical engineering from Drexel University (2020), Philadelphia, U.S.A. He conducted his Ph.D. project under the supervision of Professor Masoud Soroush. His research interests are polymer membranes, polymerization science, surface chemistry, and polymerization modeling.
Srinivasa Kartik Nemani	Kartik Nemani is a second year Ph.D. student and a research assistant in the layered materials and structures lab at the department of mechanical and energy engineering, IUPUI, Indianapolis. He joined Dr Anasori's research group in Fall 2019. He received his M.S. in mechanical engineering from the University of Toledo in 2018. His current scientific interests are in the field of MXenes, composites, and hybrid materials, and he is working on synthesizing MXenes and developing MXene reinforced materials for various applications.
Michael C. Grady	Michael C. Grady is an adjunct professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University and a Technical Fellow with Axalta Coating Solutions in Philadelphia, U.S.A. Mike spent 34 years with DuPont working in Performance Coatings, Central Research, and Industrial Biosciences. He received his B.S. (Chemical Engineering) from Drexel University, M.S. (Chemical Engineering) from the University of Pennsylvania, and a Doctor of Science (Polymer Science) from E.T.H.Z., Switzerland. His research interests include polymer reaction engineering, material and process developments, and process modeling and control. He currently holds over 20 patents and has authored/co-authored over 50 papers.
Babak Anasori	Babak Anasori is an assistant professor in the Purdue School of Engineering and Technology at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis, USA. He received his Ph.D. in materials science and engineering from Drexel University in 2014. He is one of the inventors of ordered double-transition metal MXenes. His current research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of novel MXenes, their composites and mechanical properties. He is among the 2019 and 2020 Global Highly Cited Researchers, recognized by the Web of Science. He is the inaugural chair of the Early Career Professionals Subcommittee of the Materials Research Society.
Masoud Soroush	Masoud Soroush is a professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University, U.S.A. He received his B.S. (Chemical Engineering) from Abadan Institute of Technology, Iran, and M.S.E. (Chemical Engineering), M.S.E. (Electrical Engineering: Systems) and Ph.D. (Chemical Engineering) all from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, U.S.A. His research interests are in polymer membranes, polymer reaction engineering, model-predictive safety, multiscale modeling, probabilistic modeling and inference, and process systems engineering. He has edited/co-edited 6 books and authored/co-authored more than 330 publications including over 200 refereed papers. He is an elected fellow of AIChE and a senior member of IEEE.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Color change of colloidal Ti3C2 due to degradation over time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (B) Hydrogels containing (I) water and (II) ethylene glycol both show good flexibility at 20 °C, but (I) turns into a brittle material at −40 °C due to freezing of the water. (C) (II) Hydrogel containing ethylene glycol does not lose its solvent after 8 days of storage at 20 °C but (I) its water-containing counterpart shrinks due to the evaporation of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (D) Three approaches to stop Ti3C2 degradation: (I) de-aerating with an inert gas, (II) sonication-free solvent exchange from water to an organic solvent, and (III) redispersion into an organic solvent by sonication. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis of a MXene from a MAX phase via etching, and MXene delamination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Expansion of the MXene sediment upon delamination after several centrifugation cycles; the top-right inset shows the obtained MXene film after filtration, and the bottom-right inset displays leftovers of the multilayer MXene and unetched MAX phase in the centrifuge tube. (C) XRD results showing that the peak at 2θ ∼39° of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase disappears after etching and its 002 peak also downshifts from 2θ ∼9° (yellow spectrum) to around 2θ ∼7° (red spectrum). Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) A pilot-scale setup including a reactor to synthesize a large quantity of MXene of ∼50 g. (B) Images showing 1 g and 50 g of the produced MXene as well as colloidal single-layer MXene. (C) XRD results. (D) UV-Vis spectra showing the similarity of the spectra of the large-batch-produced MXene and the small-batch-produced MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Images showing the stability of Ti3C2 flakes in a good and a poor solvent after sonication. (B) The evolution of Ti3C2 colloid stability over time showing that only ethanol, water, DMSO, acetone, NMP, DMF, and PC are good solvents for Ti3C2 dispersion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Grafting of an aminosilane coupling agent on the surface of MXene flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. (B) Grafting of a stimuli responsive polymer brush on the surface of a MXene flake by polymerization of dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate to produce a hybrid material sensitive to heat and CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Attachment of three different cationic surfactants to the surface of MXene flakes by electrostatic attraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2019, MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) In situ synthesis of a MXene-based hydrogel by free-radical polymerization where the MXene plays the role of crosslinking agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis of a MXene-based hydrogel with two polymers as the hydrogel matrix (3) and ethylene glycol (4) as the liquid phase with the ability of hydrogen bond formation and dynamic covalent bonding for self-healing application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library. (C) Synthesis of a foam with oriented MXene flakes (2) by the freeze-drying technique (3) coated with PDMS (4) for EMI shielding (5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Processability chart (frequency versus the storage-modulus-to-loss-modulus ratio) to determine the suitability of electrospraying, spray coating, ink-jet printing, wet spinning, dry spinning, and extrusion printing for an aqueous MXene suspension depending on the applied shear rate: (A) single-layer Ti3C2 and (B) multilayer Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Solution casting method for the fabrication of MXene/polyvinyl alcohol thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Multilayer casting of a polymer solution and MXene suspension. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (C) Alternative vacuum filtration to produce multilayer MXene/polymer thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (D) Spray coating process to make a thin film from a MXene colloid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Wiley Online Library. (E) Spin coating process to make a thin film from a MXene colloid or MXene/polymer mixture consisting of three steps of deposition, spinning and solvent drying. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2019, Scientific Reports. (F) Dip-coating of a foam in a MXene colloid bath. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (G) Layer-by-layer dip-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Layer-by-layer assembly driven by electrostatic attraction between Ti3C2 with negative surface charge and a polymer chain with positive surface charge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) Self-assembly between positively charged polystyrene nanoparticles produced by emulsion polymerization (1) and Ti3C2 (2) leading to a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite (3) through latex blending and filtration (4) followed by molding (5) to get a thin nanocomposite film (6) for EMI shielding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2017, Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Wet spinning setup for the production of MXene-based nanocomposite fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Electrospinning causing the orientation of MXene sheets along the axis of the nanocomposite nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Coating of a cotton fabric with colloidal Ti3C2 and its applications as an EMI shield, a Joule heater and a motion sensor. (B) Joule heating ability of Ti3C2-coated cotton fibers which reaches 150 °C after 1 min under an applied voltage of 6 V (1) and local heating of a body part when the fabric is worn by a person (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) Transparent sunlight-driven Ti3C2-based wearable heater mounted on a human hand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Various dynamic covalent bonds and noncovalent interactions for developing self-healing coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Monomer used for epoxy oligomer synthesis (1), the oligomer mixing with Ti3C2 (2), crosslinking to form a polymer network (3), and dissociation of the polymer network upon temperature increase to develop a Ti3C2/epoxy self-healing coating (4). (C) Temperature increase in an epoxy coating containing different amounts of Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2018, MDPI. (D) Ability of a hydrogel to pass electrical current (i), its inability when it is damaged (ii), and recovering its conductivity to pass electrical current after self-healing (iii). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) The formation of a 3D MXene network via the freeze-drying technique followed by embedding it in a PDMS matrix. (B) Heat transfer pathways generated in a PDMS matrix by a MXene network. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 
Ti3C2Tx → Ti3C2 + Tx
Ti3C2 + 3O2 → 3TiO2 + 2C

 	Fig. 14  (A) Conversion of Ti3C2 to TiO2via combustion in air. (B) Formation of a fire protective layer, made mainly from TiO2, in a Ti3C2/polymer nanocomposite which undergoes combustion in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Ti3C2/polymer sensor is able to detect wrist and abdomen movements (B). The hydrogel sensor detects a finger's movement and transfers the corresponding signal to a smartphone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2020), Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Pressure sensors made from Ti3C2-containing fabric worn by a person (1) and its capacitance sensitivity to a finger touch (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Illustration of Ti3C2/polymer sensors showing that they are sensitive enough to detect a change in humidity during human breathing. (B) Change in the interlayer distance of a Ti3C2/polymer humidity sensor upon water adsorption/desorption and the corresponding electrical circuit in both dry and humid states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Correlation between thickness and EMI shielding efficiency as well as comparison between the ability of Ti3C2 and other materials for this application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2020, Science. (B) Mechanism of internal reflection of an electromagnetic wave between three Ti3C2 flakes to dissipate its energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016, Science.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic diagram of selective permeation of species through MXene–polymer membranes. (B) Flexible Ti3C2–PEBAX membranes exhibiting high functional stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) High CO2 permeance of the membranes. (D) Absorbance rates of Ti3C2–PAN membranes with extended performance and durability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Different knitting patterns: single jersey (a and d), half-gauge (b and e), and interlock (c and f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Pristine Ti3C2 as an electrode does not have enough adhesion to the electrolyte to yield a mechanically stable actuator against bending (1). However, its nanocomposite with PP improves its adhesion and makes it possible to fabricate an actuator with bending ability (2). (B) A Ti3C2-based artificial flower blooms like a real flower upon application of electrical current (1) and can be mounted on a coat for decoration (2). (C) Ion migration is the driving force for the bending of an actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2019, Science.	 
2D	Two-dimensional
AIBI	2,2-Azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl)propane]dihydrochloride
BMI	Bis(4-maleimidophenyl)methane
CCG	Chemically converted graphene
CNC	Cellulose nanocrystals
CNF	Cellulose nanofiber
CTAB	Cetrimonium bromide
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
DDAB	Didodecyldimethylammonium bromide
DGEBA	Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DFT	Density functional theory
DI	Deionized water
DMF	Dimethyl formamide
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DTAB	Decyltrimethylammonium bromide
EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray
EG	Ethylene glycol
EM	Electromagnetic
EMI	Electromagnetic interference
EMW	Electromagnetic wave
FA	Furfurylamine
GO	Graphene oxide
HF	Hydrofluoric acid
ITO	Indium tin oxide
KPS	Potassium persulfate
LCST	lower critical solution temperature
LLDPE	linear low-density polyethylene
MILD	Minimally intensive layer delamination
MQD	MXene quantum dot
NMP	
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NR	Natural rubber
OTAB	Octadecyl trimethylammonium bromide
PAA	Polyacrylic acid
PAAm	Polyacrylamide
PADC	Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
PANI	Polyaniline
PC	Propylene carbonate
PCL	Polycaprolactone
PDMS	Polydimethyl siloxane
PDT	Decentralized conjugated polymer
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PI	Polyimide
PP	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate)
PPy	Polypyrrole
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PVDF	Polyvinylidene fluoride
PVP	Polyvinyl pyrrolidone
PU	polyurethane
PUF	polyurethane foam
SA	Sodium alginate
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SERS	Surface enhanced Raman scattering
TPU	Thermoplastic polyurethane
UHMWPE	Ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene
UV	Ultraviolet
UV-Vis	Ultraviolet-visible
XRD	X-ray powder diffraction

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
