6  Recent developments in photo- and redox-active dendrimers  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B208510K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B208510K
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2003, 99, 177-241Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms6  Recent developments in photo- and redox-active dendrimers

        
          
            Alberto 
            Juris
          
        
      
Dipartimento di Chimica “G. Ciamician”, Università di Bologna, via Selmi 2, I-40126 Bologna, Italia. E-mail: juris@ciam.unibo.it
First published on 5th June 2003AbstractDendrimers constitute a fascinating class of monodisperse, highly branched macromolecules which are the object of continuously increasing interest. The possibility of introducing selected chemical units in predetermined sites of the dendritic structure gives rise to the possibility of performing specific functions at the molecular level. The photophysical and electrochemical properties of dendrimers in fluid solution will be reviewed, covering the years 2001–2002, as photons and electrons constitute the most simple means to induce molecular-level functions and to monitor the occurrence of such functions. It will be shown that photochemical and photophysical properties of dendrimers are particularly interesting since (i) cooperation among the photoactive components can allow the dendrimer to perform useful functions such as light harvesting and frequency converting, (ii) changes in the photophysical properties can be exploited for sensing purposes with signal amplification, and (iii) the presence of luminescence signals can offer a valuable handle to better understand the dendritic structure and superstructure. On the other hand, the electrochemical properties of dendrimers are interesting since (iv) redox active units present at the core of a dendrimer can be “encapsulated” by the surrounding branches, thus modulating the electron transfer rate, (v) the presence of multiple equivalent, non-interacting units gives rise to the simultaneous exchange of a large and predetermined number of electrons, and (vi) electroactive units of the same or different types can be placed in topologically equivalent or non-equivalent sites of a dendrimer to obtain specific redox patterns.
1 Introduction
Dendrimers constitute a new class of monodisperse, highly branched macromolecules that can be built via an iterative sequence of reaction steps. The first example of iterative synthesis leading to dendritic structures was reported in 1978 by Vögtle,1 who named this approach “cascade synthesis”. After the works of Tomalia et al.2 and Newkome et al.3 in 1985, the interest in this research field started to grow exponentially: more than 1000 articles have been published in 2002 concerning the various aspects of dendrimer chemistry. Fig. 1 shows a schematic structure of a dendrimer, illustrating the basic terminology of these compounds. For the construction of such branched structures two main different synthetic approaches are used, as briefly explained in the following.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the structure of a dendrimer with its main components. When referring to a dendron, the core is usually denominated as the focal point. 
In the divergent method, build-up of the dendrimer starts at the core and proceeds towards the periphery. At each growing step a new layer of branching units is added, thus increasing by one the generation number. This approach is conceptually simple, but requires very efficient reactions to avoid flaws in the dendrimer structure, as on increasing generation there is an exponentially increasing number of reactions which must take place simultaneously. Even if the presence of some structural defects is difficult to avoid in high-generation species, the divergent method is nowadays the most common way to prepare high-generation dendrimers. Three structural types have also reached commercial availability: poly(amidoamine) dendrimers (1, commonly called PAMAM), poly(propylene imine) dendrimers (2, commonly called PPI), and phosphorus-based dendrimers (3).
  
  
  
In the convergent method, on the contrary, the synthesis starts at the periphery and proceeds towards the core. A small dendron is initially formed by connecting two peripheral groups to a branching unit. Then, two of these dendrons can again be connected to a branching unit to generate a higher generation dendron, and this coupling process can be repeated doubling each time the dendron size. Finally, a symmetrical dendrimer can be formed by connecting these dendrons to a polyfunctional core through their focal point. In the convergent approach the number of reacting partners does not change on increasing generation, so that structural defects can be more easily avoided. However, the preparation of high-generation dendrons is hampered for steric reasons because coupling must occur at the focal point. Several dendritic structures can be built with convergent methods, the most commonly encountered being the poly(aryl ether) framework (known as Fréchet-type4) shown by structure 4.
  
The interest on dendrimer chemistry has evolved from the simple construction of these intriguing molecules to their characterization, and finally toward their functionalization, in view of potential applications in many different fields, such as chemistry, physics, engineering, biology and medicine. Both organic and inorganic units have been introduced in each of the topologically different positions available within the dendrimer structure, i.e. in the core, in the branches, and on the surface (Fig. 1). As will be seen, multiple functionalization has also been achieved by placing two or more different active units in distinct regions of the same dendrimer. Furthermore, host–guest chemistry can be used to incorporate functional species in the cavities present in the dendrimer's interior. The interaction of different components, modulated by the dendritic structure, may give rise to a molecular-level device,5,6 that is an assembly of a discrete number of molecular components designed to achieve a complex function, resulting from the cooperation of the various units.
This chapter will review the photophysical and electrochemical properties of dendrimers. The rationale for this choice comes from the fact that molecular level devices, like macroscopic devices, need energy to operate and signals to communicate with the operator. Photons and electrons constitute the most viable answer to this dual requirement. Light is indeed used by Nature, where photons are used as energy in the devices involved in the photosynthetic processes and as signals by the devices involved in vision-related processes. Electrical energy is another simple way to induce molecular-level functions, and electrochemistry is a very useful means to monitor the occurrence of such functions. For all these reasons, it is appealing to design and construct dendrimers containing photo- and redox-active units, which could thus play the role of molecular-level photonic and electronic devices.
It is worth emphasizing that the photochemical and photophysical properties of dendrimers are particularly interesting since (i) cooperation among the photoactive components can allow the dendrimer to perform useful functions such as light harvesting and frequency converting, (ii) changes in the photophysical properties can be exploited for sensing purposes with signal amplification, and (iii) the presence of luminescence signals can offer a valuable handle to better understand the dendritic structure and superstructure. On the other hand, the electrochemical properties of dendrimers are interesting since (iv) redox active units present at the core of a dendrimer can be “encapsulated” by the surrounding branches, thus modulating the electron transfer rate, (v) the presence of multiple equivalent, non-interacting units gives rise to the simultaneous exchange of a large and predetermined number of electrons, and (vi) electroactive units of the same or different types can be placed in topologically equivalent or non-equivalent sites of a dendrimer to obtain specific redox patterns. Many new valuable functions can be obtained by introducing photo- and redox-active units in appropriate sites of the dendritic structure. As a consequence, new exciting applications are foreseen in several different fields, ranging from biology and medicine (tissue engineering, diagnostics, artificial proteins, drug-delivery systems) to nanoengineering (photoresponsive molecules, light-emitting diodes, electrochemical sensors, molecular batteries), data processing (information storage, fiber optics), catalysis (multielectron transfer and asymmetric catalysis), and energy harvesting devices, mimics of the natural photosynthetic system.
The interest in dendrimer chemistry is witnessed by the great number of books7–13 and recent review articles14–62 published on this subject. As far as photo- and redox-active dendrimers are concerned, it is impossible to describe here all the systems so far appearing in the literature. For space reasons, only recent results obtained in fluid solution will be considered, covering the years 2001–2002. Synthetic procedures will not be dealt with; the interested reader should refer to the original literature. In the following, the material is arranged on the basis of the active unit introduced (or associated) to the dendritic structure. In several cases, different active units are simultaneously present in the same dendrimer, so that this classification is by necessity somewhat arbitrary.
2 Dendrimers based on organic units
2.1 Azobenzene
Dendrimers containing the azobenzene moiety have received noticeable attention, in view of the possibility to exploit the photoresponsive behaviour of this unit. It is well known that the thermally stable trans-azobenzene form can be photoisomerized to the cis form by UV irradiation, and the back cis
→
trans process can take place both thermally and upon visible light excitation. This photoreaction is very clean and can be easily monitored spectrophotometrically because the absorption spectra of the two isomers are different. The isomerization reaction involves colour changes and large structural rearrangements. On going from the trans to the cis isomer, the distance between the para carbon atoms decreases from 9.0 to 5.5 Å, and the dipole moment increases from 0 to 3.0 D.63 Therefore the incorporation of the azobenzene unit in dendrimers can lead to reversible photoinduced changes in dendrimer properties. The simple isomerization process of the azobenzene unit has been observed in several cases, both in structures containing a single unit as the core,64–66 or in dendrimers involving multiple azobenzene units.67–73 More detailed investigations, however, have been performed only on a limited number of systems, as illustrated in the following.
Compounds 5 and 6 constitute the first example of dendrimers containing an interior shell of azobenzene units.74 Irradiation of 5 or 6 in CHCl3 solution with 350 nm light induces the typical photoisomerization of the azobenzene units, as evidenced by a decrease in absorbance at 349 nm (trans isomer) with a simultaneous increase in absorbance at 442 nm (cis isomer). In principle, ten different isomeric species can be formed upon irradiation, as within a single dendrimer molecule each of the six azobenzene unit can be present in trans or cis configuration. Since cis azobenzene is more polar than the trans isomer, thin layer chromatography experiments were performed to demonstrate the presence of different isomeric species. Indeed, seven different spots could be distinguished on SiO2 plates. As it is unlikely for any of the ten isomers to be absent in the irradiated mixture, it was concluded that only seven differently polar species are formed. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) experiments were also performed. Following sample irradiation, both dendrimers exhibited an increase of the GPC retention volume, indicating a decrease of the hydrodynamic volume of the dendrimer. Thus, the size of these dendrimers can be significantly modulated by irradiation.
  
Three series of phosphorus containing dendrimers were synthesized, containing azobenzene units specifically placed in interior shells and/or at the surface.75 Compound 7 illustrates the largest species of the series having azobenzene units at each generation, excluding the trifunctional core. In all these dendrimers the position of the azobenzene group within the dendrimer has no influence on its absorpion spectrum, and the molar absorption coefficient simply scales up with increasing number of the azobenzene units. Irradiation experiments were performed on several dendrimers with 350 nm light in CH2Cl2 or CHCl3 solution, no difference being observed between the two solvents. The isomerization of the azobenzene units was followed by NMR or UV-Vis spectroscopy, on samples of appropriate concentration. The broadening of the NMR aldehyde signals indicate the presence of isomeric species, as already observed in the previous case of dendrimers 5 or 6. At the photostationary state, conversion to cis azobenzene, evaluated from the absorption spectra, was in the range 12–63%, depending on the number and location of the azobenzene groups. By comparing all these data it could be concluded that azobenzene isomerization is hampered by (1) increasing dendrimer size, (2) increasing the number of azobenzene units in the dendrimer, and (3) progressive burying of azobenzene in the dendrimer interior. The thermal back cis
→
trans isomerization was also investigated by NMR spectroscopy on a more limited number of compounds. In all cases the reaction obeys first order kinetics, again demonstrating that all the azobenzene units are independent. Moreover, the azobenzene units buried in the dendrimer interior feature a considerably slower back-isomerization rate when compared to the peripheral ones. This difference was primarily ascribed to substituent effects, as inner and peripheral azobenzene units are connected to hydrazone and aldehyde groups, respectively.
  
Polyfunctional systems have also been investigated. First-, second- and third-generation Fréchet-type dendrons with up to eight peripheral azobenzene groups were used to construct fullerene-cored dendrimers, which were characterized in CHCl3 solution.76 All these species exhibit the expected photoresponsive behaviour of the azobenzene unit. Irradiation at 365 nm produced a clean trans
→
cis azobenzene isomerization, which could be reversed in the dark or upon sunlight exposure. These results indicate that the photoresponsive behaviour of azobenzene is not perturbed by the presence of the fullerene core, which in principle could quench the photoisomerization reaction.
PPI dendrimers of generation 1–4 have been functionalized with naphthalene and trans-azobenzene peripheral groups.77 Dendrimer 8 illustrates the largest, fourth-generation species. In CH2Cl2 solution, the absorption spectrum is essentially due to the trans-azobenzene bands, with only a small contribution of the naphthalene bands. In all dendrimers only a very weak fluorescence is observed from the naphthalene units, whose emission is almost completely quenched both by the internal tertiary amine groups (via electron transfer) and by the trans-azobenzene units (via Förster78 energy transfer). Upon continuous light excitation at 365 nm, strong changes are observed in the absorption spectrum of all dendrimers, indicating that the expected trans
→
cis photoisomerization of azobenzene is taking place, until a photostationary state is reached. A very detailed photochemical investigation was performed in CH2Cl2 solution on the largest dendrimer 8, measuring the quantum yield values and the composition of the photostationary state on irradiation at four different wavelengths, and the rate constant of the thermal cis
→
trans isomerization. It was found that at each irradiation wavelength the quantum yield of the trans
→
cis photoisomerization is smaller for 8 with respect to separate model azobenzene units, and that the final photostationary state contains a larger fraction of trans azobenzene units in the case of the dendrimer. Moreover, the rate of the thermal cis
→
trans isomerization is faster for the azobenzene units of the dendrimer. All these results indicate that the dendritic structure stabilizes the trans isomer of azobenzene, and that photoisomerization is hampered by steric factors because the cis azobenzene isomers require a larger space. It was also found that the photoexcitation of the naphthalene units in 8 sensitizes the cis
→
trans but not the trans
→
cis isomerization of the azobenzene units.  
Poly(propylene imine) dendrimers of generation 0–5 have been functionalized with methyl orange; these compounds represent the first dendrimers functionalized with a pH indicator that responds to two different external stimuli, pH and light.79 Dendrimer 9 illustrates the fourth-generation species, carrying 32 methyl orange groups. The absorption spectrum of the methyl orange unit is characterized by bands at 305 and 445 nm. The molar absorption coefficient at 445 nm grows proportionally to the number of chromophores for the dendrimers of generation up to three, whereas for higher generation species the ε value is lower than expected. This discrepancy has been ascribed to the locally high concentration of the methyl orange units, which causes deviations in the Lambert–Beer law. The trans
→
cis photoisomerization processes of the methyl orange units was observed upon irradiation into the 445 nm band, and the kinetics of the cis
→
trans back reaction was followed in several solvents. All these isomerization processes are essentially generation independent. On the other hand, protonation of the azo group is generation dependent. These experiments were performed by adding trifluoroacetic acid to CH2Cl2 solutions of the dendrimers. For generation 0 and 1 species, the addition of acid causes the typical colour change of the methyl orange indicator. An isosbestic point is present at 485 nm, indicating that conversion to the protonated form occurs in a clean process. For the higher generation dendrimers, the isosbestic point is found at lower wavelength, and the absorption band of the protonated form becomes increasingly broader, showing that it is no longer possible to protonate all the methyl orange units. Apparently, it is increasingly difficult to accumulate positive charges on the peripheral groups, due to electrostatic repulsions with the charges already present in the dendrimer interior.
Theoretical investigations have also appeared on dendrimers containing an azobenzene core.80–82 These studies try to understand how it is possible to trigger the isomerization of azobenzene by infrared vibrational excitation, as claimed a few years ago by Jiang and Aida.83
2.2 Naphthalene and its derivatives
Various naphthalene derivatives have been used to functionalize dendritic structures, most often focussing on their photophysical properties.
A dendrimer containing a naphthalene core decorated with two PAMAM dendrons has been investigated in various solvents (CHCl3, acetonitrile, methanol).84 The naphthalene unit shows two emission bands, at about 350 and 450 nm, which are due to fluorescence of the monomer and excimer species, respectively. Moreover, in CHCl3 solution the fluorescence intensity of the core unit is quenched more effectively by addition of trifluoroacetic acid with respect to acetic acid.
Dendrimers of generation 1–4 have been obtained by connecting two Fréchet dendrons to a core containing two naphthoate units.85 Compound 10 shows the third-generation species. The luminescence properties of these dendrimers were examined in CH2Cl2 solution. By exciting at 280 nm, where most of the light is absorbed by the outer dendrons, the characteristic fluorescence of the naphthyl core is observed at 400 nm, indicating that an antenna effect is operative. The efficiency of this energy transfer process decreases somewhat in the higher generation species, as evidenced by the comparison in the emission spectra of a weak fluorescence band at 308 nm due to the poly(aryl ether) units. Moreover, a complete quenching of the fluorescence of these dendrimers was observed following a tandem Claisen rearrangement of the core.
  
Fréchet dendrons of generation 1–4 were connected to rigid rods containing alternating dimethoxybenzidine and naphthalene dianhydride (ND) units.86 Dendrimer 11 illustrates the compound with the longest rod and fourth-generation dendrons. Electrochemical reduction in DMF occurs in two steps on each of the ND moieties, giving rise to stable ND− and ND2− species. The size of the dendrons has no influence on the first reduction potential, which is −0.96 V vs. Fc+/Fc for all the compounds, showing that the ND groups are independent and non-interacting. Only the first reduction process was studied in greater detail, determining the diffusion coefficients, which were found to decrease on increasing length of the central rod or dendron generation, as expected. Given the peculiar shape of these dendrimers, the diffusion equation for prolate ellipsoids was used to calculate the expected diffusion coefficients, which were in good agreement with the experimental results. The heterogeneous electron transfer rates were also measured, and were found to decrease on increasing dendron size, as normally observed in compounds where redox centers are connected to poly(aryl ether) dendrons.
  
Different 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives have been used to functionalize the periphery of a generation 0 PAMAM dendrimer.87 These compounds are insoluble in water, but soluble in CH2Cl2 and acetonitrile, where a fluorescence emission is generally observed. Of note is the behaviour of the species bearing four 4-N,N-dimethylaminoethylamino-1,8-naphthalimide chromophores, whose fluorescence is relatively weak (Φem
= 0.011 in acetonitrile) due to electron transfer quenching by the amino groups present in the PAMAM structure and in the appended dimethylamino moieties. In the presence of H+ ions the emission intensity increases strongly because upon protonation the amino groups can no longer play the role of quenchers. A similar fluorescence enhancement is induced also upon addition of Cu2+ cations, which can likewise be coordinated to the various amino groups. This dendrimer is thus a fluorescence sensor for H+ and Cu2+ ions.
The chiral 1,1′-binaphthyl unit can be used as core to build optically pure dendrimers. Generally, a strong fluorescence emission is obtained from the core unit, demonstrating the occurrence of an antenna effect.88–92 Moreover, the chiral character of the binaphthyl unit can be exploited to achieve enantioselective recognition. For example, phenylacetylene dendrons have been connected to a (S)-1,1′-bi-2-naphthyl core obtaining three generations of optically pure dendrimers (12–14).90 Enantioselective fluorescent recognition of amino alcohols was studied. Both enantiomers of the chiral alcohols 2-amino-3-methyl-1-butanol, 2-amino-4-methyl-1-pentanol (in CH2Cl2), and 2-amino-3-phenyl-1-propanol (in benzene–hexane) were found to quench the fluorescence emission of the S enantiomer of dendrimers 12–14. The Stern–Volmer quenching constants increase with increasing dendrimer generation, so that higher-generation dendrimers can be more sensitive fluorescent sensors, giving rise to a “signal amplification” effect. In the quenching of the S dendrimers, the Stern–Volmer quenching constants of each S alcohol, KSV(S), was always greater than that of the enantiomeric R alcohol, KSV(R). The ratio KSV(S)/KSV(R) greater than 1 indicates that enantioselective quenching is taking place (the maximum KSV(S)/KSV(R) ratio observed was 1.27). In the case of 14, it was also observed that the fluorescence lifetime of the dendrimer does not change on addition of the quencher. This indicates that quenching occurs by a static mechanism, presumably via a ground-state hydrogen bond formed between the hydroxyl groups of the dendrimer core and the amino alcohol. Analogous results were achieved with optically active dendrimers similar to 12–14, but without the acetylene units between the phenylene rings.88 Enantioselective quenching processes have been observed also with non-dendritic oligomers of binaphthyl, reaching a maximum enantioselectivity factor of 1.24 with 1,2-diaminocyclohexane.93
  
Two binaphthyl units are contained in the chiral compounds 15–17, which have been used as sensors for the enantioselective recognition of mandelic acid.92 In CH2Cl2 solution, excitation into the benzene dendritic branches of the generation zero (16) and one (17) dendrimers induces a fluorescence emission from the binaphthyl units, giving an indication that an antenna effect is operative. Addition of mandelic acid increases the fluorescence intensity, because a complex is formed where the central nitrogen lone pair is protonated and can no longer quench the binaphthyl fluorescence. In the presence of (R)-mandelic acid in benzene solution, the fluorescence enhancement of 16 was about 14 times that of the model core 15, and the fluorescence enhancement of 17 was about 22 times that of 15. Thus a signal amplification effect of the dendritic branches is observed, making 16 and 17 more sensitive sensors with respect to 15. The enantioselectivity was also evaluated by comparing the enhancement of fluorescence upon addition of (R)- or (S)-mandelic acid. The (R)-acid induces a greater fluorescence enhancement, and the enantioselectivity factor decreases with increasing dendrimer generation, as values of 2.49, 2.05 and 1.49 were obtained for 15, 16 and 17, respectively. By comparing all these results, the dendrimer 16 appears the best choice for the recognition of mandelic acid, because it features a considerable increase of sensitivity with respect to 15, while still maintaining a high enantioselectivity.
  
Binaphthyl units have also been used at the periphery of dendrimers containing ruthenium terpyridine fragments, as illustrated in Section 3.2. Other cases where naphthalene derivatives are present in dendritic structures can be found in Sections 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.6 and 3.5.
2.3 4,4′-Bipyridinium
The 4,4′-bipyridinium unit, often called methylviologen, MV2+, is well known for its electron-accepting properties.94 The electrochemical behaviour is characterized by two reversible reduction waves, corresponding to formation of a cation radical (MV+) and a neutral species (MV), respectively. For example, a core 4,4′-bipyridinium unit was connected to two Fréchet-type dendrons of generation 1, 2 and 3 (18); the electrochemical behaviour of these dendrimers was examined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in acetonitrile solution.95,96 Upon reduction, two almost reversible processes are observed, whose potential shift to less negative values on increasing dendrimer generation, indicate that the charged MV2+ core is increasingly harder to solvate in the hydrophobic dendrimer interior. In the case of the third-generation species partial precipitation gives rise to distortions in the voltammograms. Interestingly, the heterogeneous electron transfer to the electrode surface is fast for all these dendrimers, whereas usually the electron transfer rate to a redox core decreases substantially on increasing dendrimer branching.95,96 In the anodic region,96 two chemically irreversible processes were observed, corresponding to the two one-electron oxidations of each of the 1,3-dimethyleneoxybenzene units. A minor interaction is present among the 1,3-dimethyleneoxybenzene units, as evidenced by the width of the anodic peak, which increases on increasing dendrimer generation. The photophysical behaviour of these dendrimers was also examined.96 No fluorescence emission was observed both in acetonitrile–CH2Cl2 solution at room temperature and in a butyronitrile–acetonitrile–CH2Cl2 matrix at 77 K. This shows that the fluorescence typical of the 1,3-dimethyleneoxybenzene units is completely quenched by the 4,4′-bipyridinium core via a fast electron transfer process, as expected from the negative free energy change (ΔG
≈
−2 eV).
  
Fast heterogeneous electron transfer rates were observed also in unsymmetrical dendrimers of generation 1–3 (19), which were investigated in a variety of organic solvents, namely CH2Cl2, THF and DMSO.97 In the CV experiments the peak-to-peak potential splitting did not go significantly above 60 mV even at scan rates of 2.0 V s−1, indicating that the standard rate constant for both the reduction processes of the 4,4′-bipyridinium unit is larger than ≈0.2 cm s−1. This seems the fastest rate so far obtained for redox-active dendrimers in this size range.
  
First- and second-generation Fréchet-dendrimers with a 4,4′-bipyridinium core (like 18) form charge transfer complexes with anthracene in acetonitrile solution, as evidenced by the comparison of a new band in the absorption spectrum.98 Both the association constant and the electron transfer quenching rate with anthracene decrease with increasing dendrimer generation.
First-, second- and third-generation dendrimers like 18, but with naphthalene (instead of benzene) peripheral groups were the object of a detailed photophysical study in CH2Cl2 solution.99 In these dendrimers both the benzyl ether and naphthalene units can act as electron donors towards the accepting MV2+ core. Indeed, the fluorescence of both the excited naphthyl and benzyl ether groups is strongly quenched by electron transfer to the MV2+ unit. Laser power-dependence studies performed on the fluorescence decay and on the transient absorption spectra suggested the occurrence of double photoinduced electron transfer processes in the second- and third-generation dendrimers. Briefly, the mechanism can be illustrated as follows. Upon excitation of a donor unit (benzyl ether or naphthalene), a first electron transfer quenching forms a monoreduced core (MV+) and an oxidized donor. At high laser pulse intensity, before back electron transfer can occur, a second donor unit can be excited and a second electron transfer quenching gives rise to a dendrimer containing a doubly reduced core (MV). In this way, these dendrimers constitute the first synthetic models where multiple one-photon/one-electron processes have been observed, mimicking natural light-collecting antenna systems.
Dendrimers containing multiple equivalent 4,4′-bipyridinium units have also been investigated. Four MV2+ connectors were used to link a cavitand core to Fréchet dendrons of generations 0–3.100 Compound 20 illustrates the first-generation species. The electrochemical behaviour in acetonitrile or CH2Cl2–acetonitrile solution indicated that in all these dendrimers no significant interaction is present among the four viologen units, which are all reduced at similar potential in a multielectronic wave. Other generation-dependent features such as shift of the reduction potential and precipitation on the electrode were similar to those already illustrated above for dendrimers like 18.
  
PAMAM dendrimers of generation 2, 4 and 6 were partially functionalized at the periphery with 4,4′-bipyridinium units.101 The degree of functionalization of the obtained species varied from 13 to 34%, as evaluated from 1H NMR, MALDI-TOF and UV-vis spectroscopy. Electrochemical studies were performed in aqueous solution, monitoring the typical reduction behaviour of the MV2+ units. Interestingly, the magnitude of the steady-state limiting currents and the calculated diffusion coefficients indicate that fewer than 70% of the 4,4′-bipyridinium units on the dendrimer periphery are electrochemically accessible, even if all the addressable units are equivalent. It was suggested that incomplete sampling of the redox groups is a consequence of some of the MV2+ units tucking into the dendrimer interior. A different explanation has been more recently proposed102 for PAMAM dendrimers functionalized with peripheral ruthenium complexes (see Section 3.2).
2.4 Pyrene
Pyrene has attracted much attention as a fluorescent probe to investigate the polarity of the dendritic microenvironment. Indeed, it is well known that the fluorescence spectrum of pyrene is very sensitive to solvent polarity, as the intensity ratio of the first to the third fluorescence peaks, I1/I3, increases with increasing environmental polarity. Pyrene has been used both as a “free” probe to build host–guest systems, or by covalently linking it to the dendrimer structure.
Host–guest systems can be formed simply by mixing pyrene with appropriate dendritic systems. For example, pyrene in aqueous solution was titrated by adding PPI dendrimers of generation 1–4 terminated with amine groups, while monitoring the photophysical behaviour of pyrene by steady state and time resolved spectroscopic measurements.103 It was found that pyrene solubilization into the dendrimers increases with increasing dendrimer generation. The formation of a host–guest system is demonstrated by the quenching of pyrene fluorescence, which occurs via exciplex formation with the internal tertiary amine groups of the dendrimer. Moreover, on increasing dendrimer generation, the values of the I1/I3 ratio decrease, showing that water molecules are progressively excluded from the hydrophobic dendrimer interior. In another case, pyrene was used as a fluorescent probe to investigate the aggregation processes of fourth-generation PAMAM dendrimers with octyl end groups in the presence of surfactants such as sodium dodecyl sulfate and quaternary ammonium salts.104,105
Alternatively, the pyrene unit can be covalently linked to dendritic structures.106–110 For example, a single Fréchet dendron of generation 0–4 was connected to a pyrene unit, whose fluorescence quenching by dioxygen was examined in THF, acetonitrile and cyclohexane.106 Quenching takes place with a dynamic mechanism with rate constants of the order of 1010 M−1 s−1; the actual values show, in general, a decreasing trend with increasing dendron generation. Comparison of the quenching data with NMR-determined diffusion coefficients was used to obtain a deeper understanding of the solution structure of these dendrimers. The smaller dendrons (generation 0–3 in THF and 0–2 in acetonitrile) possess an open and flexible structure so that the dioxygen molecule has easy access to the pyrene unit. At higher generations the structure becomes more collapsed and dioxygen diffusion is more difficult. The change in structure occurs between the zero- and first-generation species in cyclohexane, which is a very poor solvent for these dendrimers.
Quenching experiments were performed also to test the accessibility of a single pyrene unit located at the focal point of asymmetric poly(amido) dendrimers of generation 1–3 (21).108 Several neutral and ionic species were used as quenchers in buffered (pH = 7) aqueous solution, namely nitromethane, acrylamide, dimethylaniline, methyl iodide, I− and Cu2+. Generally, the bimolecular quenching rates decrease with increasing dendrimer generation, indicating that the pyrene unit is increasingly shielded by the surrounding branches. The effect is particularly evident for the iodide anion, presumably because of the electrostatic repulsion with the carboxylate groups present at the dendrimer's surface, which are largely ionized at pH = 7. In the case of Cu2+, static quenching was observed, due to complexation of the Cu2+ ion with the peripheral carboxylate groups and/or with the inner amine units of the dendrimer.
  
An antenna system has been obtained by placing four pyrene groups at the periphery of dendrimer 22, where a diphenylanthracene core is the energy-collecting unit.109 A Förster78 energy transfer mechanism is operative in this system, because there is a good overlap between the emission spectrum of pyrene and the absorption spectrum of diphenylanthracene. In CH2Cl2 solution, excitation at 337 nm, where most of the light is absorbed by pyrene, results in strong fluorescence only from the core unit. Fluorescence decay measurements indicated that the energy transfer process is complete in a time shorter than 100 ps. An additional antenna system with six peripheral pyrene units110 is detailed in Section 3.2.
  
2.5 Perylene and related chromophores
Dendrimer 23, originally called “nanostar”111 continues to receive attention. This species features a perylene luminophor connected to a dendron where the linear phenylacetylene chains increase in length towards the core. In this way, the energy levels localized on the various chain segments create an energy gradient from the periphery towards the perylene unit, so that excitation into the peripheral phenylacetylene units results in luminescence emission only from the perylene core (antenna effect). Femtosecond laser spectroscopy was used to get a deeper insight into the energy funnelling process in 23.112 When excitation was performed preferentially into the peripheral two-ring units, the decay signal could be fit as a sum of two lifetimes (about 3 and 14 ps). The decay obtained following preferential excitation of the intermediate three-ring units was much faster (two lifetimes, about 270 fs and 1 ps). This behaviour was attributed mainly to interchromophore events (and not to intra-chromophore relaxation); the energy transfer rate from the 2-ring units towards the three-ring units could be interpreted on the basis of the Förster energy transfer model. The energy funnelling process in 23 has been studied also from a theoretical viewpoint by femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy. Non-linear excitation equations were used to simulate the time-resolved absorption spectra, which show energy funnelling towards the core.113–115
  
Unsymmetrical branching structures up to the fourth (24 and 25) generation with or without a perylene core unit have been investigated in CH2Cl2 and isopentane solution.116 The photophysical properties of such compounds are different from those of the corresponding, already known symmetrical species 26. The absorption spectrum of the unsymmetrical species increases in intensity with increasing generation number, as expected, but notably for the higher generation dendrons is significantly broader than that of 26, leading to better energy-collecting properties. For the dendrons without perylene, like 25, the luminescence quantum yields are high (0.32–0.81) and the fluorescence band shifts progressively to the red with increasing generation number, reaching 452 nm for 25. When perylene is present in the core, as in 24, the luminescence of the dendrons is almost completely quenched and the typical fluorescence of perylene is observed (λmax
= 498 nm, Φ
= 0.74–0.78), indicating that energy transfer to this unit is occurring very efficiently (>93%). Picosecond transient spectroscopy showed that this energy transfer process is completed in a time shorter than 100 ps.
  
  
The luminescence efficiency of symmetrical dendrons like 26 was investigated as a function of pressure up to 60 kbar in poly(methyl methacrylate) and poly(vinyl chloride).117 With increasing pressure, the luminescence efficiency of perylene decreases; this effect is more pronounced with increasing dendron generation. Analysis based on the Förster model suggests that the decrease in overlap between donor emission and acceptor absorption is the major reason of the observed effect. Pressure effects have been observed also in dendrons functionalized with dimethoxybenzene instead of perylene at the focal point.118
The potential light-harvesting properties of these phenylacetylene dendrimers has attracted also much theoretical interest. Several papers have thus been published concerning the absorption spectra119,120 and the excitation energy funnelling121–124 which is crucial for the antenna function of these dendrimers.
Much effort has been focussed on the photophysical properties of peryleneimide and other ryleneimide chromophores connected to dendrimers. These chromophores are proposed as interesting candidates for the design of photonic devices and solar cell applications, due to their noticeable thermal, chemical and photochemical stability. In particular, they feature an intense absorption spectrum in the visible region and high emission quantum yield, usually close to unity. Energy transfer processes within the dendrimer structure have been investigated in several cases.125–133 Quenching of the peryleneimide unit by electron transfer has also been reported.134 Moreover, rylene units have been used in the solid state for investigations of fluorescence at the single-molecule level.135–139
Energy transfer processes have been investigated in a series of shape-persistent polyphenylene dendrimers containing rylene chromophoric units.126 The most interesting species is 27, which appears to be the first dendrimer containing three different chromophoric units assembled in order to create an energy gradient from the periphery towards the core. The chromophores used are a terryleneimide (TI) core, four peryleneimide intermediate (PI), and eight naphthaleneimide (NI) peripheral units. The photophysical behaviour was investigated in toluene solution. The absorption spectrum covers the entire visible region and the absorption bands of the three chromophores are well separated, so that each unit can be excited selectively. Excitation of the peripheral NI unit at 370 nm results in weak emission from NI (431 nm) and PI(555 nm), whereas a strong emission occurs at 700 nm from the acceptor TI core unit. Thus, an antenna effect is operative. Spectral considerations indicate that the energy transfer to the core should occur in a stepwise manner across the PI unit through a Förster resonance mechanism.
  
An energy gradient from the periphery towards the core has been obtained also in the flexible dendrimer 28, whose photophysical properties have been studied in CHCl3 solution.140 In this compound, eight Coumarin-2 units are in the most peripheral position, while four fluorol 7GA units are closer to the core, where a single peryleneimide (PI) derivative is the final energy acceptor. Absorption and emission properties of the three chromophores were chosen in order to favour a cascade Förster energy transfer to the core. Indeed, a good overlap exists between coumarin emission and fluorol absorption, and between fluorol emission and PI absorption. Upon excitation into the peripheral units, a strong fluorescence is observed from the PI unit (λem
= 610 nm), with only a residual emission from the coumarin (λem
= 440 nm) and fluorol units (λem
= 520 nm). By examining the photophysical behaviour of several smaller model compounds, it has been evaluated that 98% of the energy absorbed by coumarin is transferred to fluorol, and 97% of this energy is transferred to the PI core. On the other hand, “direct” transfer from coumarin to the PI core occurs with an efficiency lower than 79%, indicating that in dendrimer 28 energy transfer to the core is indeed favoured through the intermediate fluorol chromophore.
  
In another smaller antenna system a perylene derivative core is connected to four Coumarin-2 peripheral units.127 The absorption spectrum in CHCl3 is a superposition of the absorption spectra of the component units. Upon excitation in the coumarin band (345 nm), the emission of coumarin is almost completely quenched, with concomitant sensitisation of the perylene core which fluoresces in the near IR (770 nm). The efficiency of this energy transfer process has been estimated around 99%. It has been noted that such small antenna systems can be considered “frequency converter” devices; specifically, they can convert UV and visible into near-IR radiation. Other frequency converting systems can be found in Section 2.6 and 3.4.
A series of second-generation polyphenyl dendrimers (29–32) containing PI chromophores was investigated by steady state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy in toluene solution.133 Energy hopping among the PI chromophores, revealed by anisotropy decay times, takes place with a rate constant of 0.85 × 109 s−1, a value five times smaller than that measured previously in the first-generation species.128,131 Application of the Förster energy transfer formalism indicates that the decrease in hopping rate with increasing dendrimer generation is in agreement with the different mean distance between the chromophores. Femtosecond fluorescence up-conversion experiments were also performed to investigate the singlet-singlet annihilation processes in the multichromophoric systems. The presence of a dual annihilation process in the case of 32 was attributed to the presence of constitutional isomers featuring different distances between the interacting chromophores.
  
2.6 Dansyl, Eosin and other fluorescent dyes
Dendrimer 33 contains a total of 64 chromophoric units of three different types, namely 8 dansyl-, 24 dimethoxybenzene- and 32 naphthalene-type units.141 In CH2Cl2 solution, 33 features an absorption spectrum which is the sum of the absorption spectra of the component units, and shows a strong fluorescence emission only from the dansyl units (λem
= 514 nm). Energy transfer from the peripheral naphthalene and dimethoxybenzene units to the dansyl units is very efficient (>95%). Notably, CH2Cl2 solutions of 33 can extract Eosin from aqueous solutions, forming a host–guest system where Eosin is most probably located in the amine core of the dendrimer. In the host–guest system the luminescence of the dansyl units is quenched with concomitant sensitization of the Eosin fluorescence (λem
= 555 nm). Quantitative experiments showed that a single encapsulated Eosin molecule can collect light energy from all the chromophoric groups of the host dendrimer (antenna system). All of these energy transfer processes occur through a Förster mechanism because of the strong overlap between the emission and absorption spectra of the relevant donor/acceptor units.
  
PPI dendrimers up to the fifth-generation with fluorescent dansyl peripheral units can similarly extract Eosin molecules from aqueous solution.142 Fluorescence lifetime measurements indicate that the dye molecule can occupy two different sites in the interior of the host. Fluorescein and Rose Bengal show a behaviour qualitatively similar to Eosin, whereas naphthofluorescein is not extracted. Another example of a dansyl-functionalized dendrimer is illustrated in Section 3.4.
Host–guest systems involving dendrimers and dye molecules appear very interesting as “frequency converters” for laser technology. Recently, a dendrimer based on ester branching groups with 64 peripheral hydroxyl units has been used in methanol solution as a host for the conventional laser dye DCM (DCM = 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(4-dimethylaminostyril)-4H-pyrane).143 By exploiting the hosting ability of the dendrimer, it was possible to obtain a dye concentration (up to 9.0 M) much higher than the highest concentration of pure DCM in methanol (1.0 M). As the dye is encapsulated within the dendrimer structure, self-aggregation and intermolecular quenching processes are limited, and the gain of laser emission is increased. By comparison to cases where a dye is covalently linked to the dendrimer core,144 the host–guest system can be quickly prepared, and different wavelength ranges can in principle be achieved by changing the guest dye.
Coumarin dyes have been used to functionalize several dendritic structures.127,140,145–149 For example, Coumarin-2 has been used as donor at the peripheral position in a series of dendrimers of generation 1–4 containing Coumarin-343 as acceptor in the focal point. Compound 34 represents the third-generation species. Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy was used in toluene solution to investigate these dendrimers and the analogous species containing heptathiophene (35) instead of Coumarin-343 in the core.147 Irrespective of the core unit used, efficient energy transfer was observed to occur from the periphery to the core (antenna effect). Fitting of the kinetic data required biexponential functions; this was ascribed to the presence in solution of different dendrimer conformations which give rise to different interchromophoric distances. For the first three dendrimer generations energy transfer occurs in less that 6 ps, whereas about 18 ps are needed for the fourth-generation species. The Förster energy transfer mechanism is operative in these species, as indicated by the good agreement between the measured and the theoretical values of the rate constants.
  
Linear polymers based on polystyrene with pendant Coumarin-2 and Coumarin-343 units have been also prepared and their light-harvesting properties compared with those of the dendrimer analogues. The fluorescence quantum yield was found to be significantly higher in the dendritic species, which thus perform as superior antenna systems.146 Other examples of dendrimers containing coumarin dyes can be found in Sections 2.5 and 3.2.
Interaction of the cyanine dye pinacyanol with a polyphenylene framework similar to that present in dendrimer 29, but with 16 peripheral carboxy-substituted phenyl units, was studied both in aqueous solution and at a single molecule level, by monitoring the luminescence behaviour of the dye.150 At low dye to dendrimer ratio a host–guest system is formed, where a maximum of two non-interacting dye molecules are present within the dendrimer structure. With increasing dye to dendrimer ratio, the dye molecule is associated to the peripheral carboxy units giving rise to non-luminescent ion pairs.
2.7 Styrylbenzene and its oligomers
Different π-conjugated units spanning from stilbene to oligo(phenylenevinylenes) continue to attract noticeable attention. Only a limited number of examples can be detailed.
A stilbene core has been functionalized with polyphenylene dendrons to obtain the dendrimers 36 and 37.151 In chloroform solution, fluorescence is observed at 378 nm from the stilbene core with a quantum yield of 0.69 and 0.64 for 36 and 37, respectively. The excitation spectra match the absorption spectra, indicating that energy transfer from the peripheral dendrons to the core is very efficient. Interestingly, upon irradiation in the stilbene bands at 345 nm a trans–cis photoisomerization reaction of the stilbene double bond takes place in benzene solution, with a quantum yield of 0.14 for both dendrimers. This appears to be the first example of trans–cis isomerization on a CC double bond with highly rigid substituents.151 Stilbenoid components have been used also as energy donors in structures built around an anthracene core.152,153
  
A detailed photophysical investigation has been performed on dendrimers where a stilbene core is connected to two Fréchet dendrons of generation 1–4.154,155 These compounds show fluorescence in THF only from the stilbene unit at 375 nm, with an emission lifetime of about 9.5 ns and a quantum yield of about 0.43, independently on dendrimer generation. Therefore, the size of the dendrons does not influence the photophysical properties of the trans-stilbene core. On the other hand, an effect of generation is present in the dioxygen quenching of the stilbene fluorescence: the determined rate constants decrease on increasing dendrimer generation, indicating an increasing shielding effect. More interesting results were obtained on the trans
→
cis photoisomerization of the stilbene core, which occurs with quantum yields relatively indifferent to compound generation, as values of 0.32, 0.32, 0.29 and 0.24 were determined, respectively, for the dendrimers of generation 1–4. Transient absorption spectra gave no indication of the presence of triplet excited states, indicating that the photoisomerization reaction originates from the singlet excited state. Moreover, the trans
→
cis photoisomerization of the second and fourth generation dendrimers was studied in mixed solvents (mixtures of THF with hexane or liquid paraffin were tested), and only minor effects of solvent viscosity were observed. All of these results show that even the largest stilbene dendrimer undergoes trans
→
cis photoisomerization from the excited singlet within a lifetime shorter that 10 ns, suggesting that the isomerization mechanism cannot be the classical 180° rotation around the CC double bond. The mechanism suggested154,155 is the so called Hula-twist mechanism,156,157 an unusual volume-conserving mechanism originally proposed for cis–trans isomerization in highly condensed media at low temperature or in proteins.
Passing to more complex units, a highly luminescent distyrylbenzene unit has been used as the core to prepare symmetric and asymmetric dendrimers with poly(benzyl ether) dendrons.158–160 Recently, first and second (38–41) generation species were investigated in CHCl3.160 Excitation into the peripheral propoxy or oxadiazole units resulted in strong blue emission from the distyrylbenzene core (antenna effect). In all cases, the efficiency of this energy transfer process decreases on increasing dendrimer generation. For the oxadiazole containing species it was further observed that the efficiency decreases on passing from the asymmetrical species to the symmetrical one. For example, for 39 and 41 the evaluated efficiency values were 61 and 53%, respectively. No such effect was present in the propoxy-functionalized species, such as 38 and 40. On the other hand, the fluorescence lifetime of the emissive core is longer in the symmetrical dendrimers (1.39–1.48 ns) with respect to the asymmetrical ones (0.79–0.94 ns), indicating that two dendrons produce a better shielding of the core. Very similar emission properties were observed in thin films. LED devices were also fabricated; the asymmetric dendrimers were found to perform better than their symmetric counterparts.
  
Several papers report fluid solution studies on a family of dendrimers that contain tert-butyl peripheral groups, stilbene dendrons, and various luminescent cores, namely tris(styrylbenzyl)amine,161–165 tris(styrylbenzyl)benzene,161,166 and also porphyrins.162,163 These dendrimers have been also used in the fabrication of light-emitting diodes,167–174 reaching an electroluminescence quantum yield of 0.17%.173 In these structures the component units behave almost independently, and an efficient energy transfer is generally observed from the dendrons to the core, through a Förster mechanism. The general behaviour is represented by 42–45
(generation 0–3) which contain a tris(styrylbenzyl)amine core with appended stilbene dendrons and tert-butyl peripheral groups.164 Cyclic voltammetry experiments in CH2Cl2 indicated that a first oxidation process involving the core occurs at the same potential (+0.27 V vs. Fc+/Fc) for all these dendrimers, indicating that the meta arrangement of the branching points disrupts delocalization, so that core and dendrons behave as independent electroactive units. A decrease in reversibility is observed for 45, indicating that encapsulation of the amine core becomes significant only for the largest dendrimer. A second core oxidation process (+0.68 V) can be clearly observed exclusively in 42, whereas in the higher generation dendrimers this wave is covered by a chemically irreversible process, assigned to the stilbene dendrons. Reduction processes were also examined, in THF solution. For 42 a first quasi-reversible process present at −2.62 V is followed by overlapping and irreversible waves. The behaviour of 43 and 44 was even more complex, with several overlapping waves and aggregation processes. For the third-generation dendrimer 45 no defined reduction process could be observed.
  
The photophysical behaviour of 42–45 was examined in THF solution.164 The four compounds feature identical emission properties: luminescence maximum (520 nm), monoexponential lifetime (1.8 ns) and emission quantum yield (0.62) are independent of dendrimer generation. In agreement with the electrochemical findings, this indicates that no delocalization exists between the dendrons and the tris(styrylbenzyl)amine core, where the lowest excited state is confined. Identical conclusions were previously deduced from quantum mechanical calculations.161,166 A more complex luminescence behaviour was observed in thin films, where band shapes, multiexponential decay lifetimes, and emission quantum yields were generation-dependent.164 These differences were ascribed to the fact that in thin films the distance between dendrimers is much shorter than in solution. In this condition the luminescent cores of neighbouring dendrimers can give rise to intermolecular interactions, such as excimer formation, whose importance decreases with increasing dendrimer size.
Peripheral oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) units bearing alkoxy substituents have been connected to various generation of poly(propylene imine) dendrimers.175 Compound 46 depicts the third-generation species. Time resolved fluorescence methods in 2-MeTHF evidenced the presence of interchromophoric interactions which induce delocalization of the excitation over more than one chromophoric group. This behaviour is similar to that observed in natural light-harvesting systems.176 A delayed emission component was also observed, which was attributed to the formation of excimer and/or exciplex species within the dendrimer.
  
The fluorescence of the peripheral oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) groups present in dendrimer 46 was exploited to monitor the movement of these molecules when manipulated by means of “optical tweezers”.177 When dispersed in aqueous solution, these dendrimers give rise to vesicles which can be trapped near the focal point of a highly focussed infrared beam, forming structures with a diameter of about 1 µm. When this first beam is switched off, and a second trapping beam is turned on at a distance of a few micrometers, the vesicles “jump” to the focal point of the second beam. Micromanipulation appears thus a new and promising tool to control shape and dimensions of π-conjugated assemblies.177 Dendrimer 46 has been used also as a stabilising agent in the fabrication of CdS nanoparticles, whose conformation was found to be solvent-dependent.178
Phenylenevinylene dendrons have been also connected to a fullerene core.179–182 Generally, in these structures an antenna effect is achieved, as the energy injected into the dendrons is ultimately transferred to the fullerene core. Competition between energy and electron transfer processes can also be observed. For more details, see Section 3.5 on fullerenes.
2.8 Tetrathiafulvalene and other sulfur containing units
Dendrimers of generation 1, 3 (47), 4 and 5 containing respectively 6, 24, 48 and 96 tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) peripheral groups have been prepared, and their electrochemical properties investigated in CH2Cl2–acetonitrile solution.183 All these species feature the two reversible oxidation processes typical of the TTF unit, which can exist in three stable redox states (TTF, TTF+ and TTF2+). Interaction among the various TTF units was studied using spectroelectrochemical measurements, evidencing that in the first oxidation process the radical TTF+ cation is formed, together with the π dimer (TTF)22+ and the mixed valence dimer (TTF)2+. After the second oxidation process all the electroactive units are present as TTF2+ species. These dendrimers were also electrodeposited on a platinum electrode, obtaining very stable films featuring again the two well defined reversible oxidation processes of the TTF unit. Additionally, dendrimer 48 was prepared and deposited on a platinum electrode. The simultaneous presence of TTF/crown ether units can be exploited for the sensing of Ba2+ cations. Indeed, the first anodic process shifts progressively to more positive potentials in the presence of solutions containing an increasing amount of Ba2+ cations (concentration range 1–8 × 10−4 M), indicating progressive coordination to the TTF/crown ether units. At higher Ba2+ concentration a saturation point is reached and the potential remains constant. The “free” TTF/crown ether species exhibits similar sensing properties.184
  
Electrochemistry can be a useful means to trigger a supramolecular interaction, as exemplified in the case of dendrimers 49 and 50, which contain 9 and 21 TTF units, respectively.185 Oxidation of these species occurs cleanly in two reversible multielectronic processes in CH2Cl2–acetonitrile (at +0.55 and +0.86 V vs. Ag/Ag+), indicating that all the TTF units are equivalent. The electrochemical behaviour was examined also after addition of an excess of electron-rich species such as dimethoxybenzene or 51. The changes observed in the cyclic voltammetric pattern suggest that dimethoxybenzene and 51 can establish a supramolecular association with the dendrimers only after complete oxidation of all the TTF units, i.e. only with the 4918+ and 5042+ species.
  
Dendrimers containing 6 or 12 peripheral 9,10-bis(1,3-dithiol-2-ylidene)-9,10-dihydroanthracene redox-active units have been recently characterized.186 Compound 52 illustrates an example of these structures. It is known that this anthracene-bis(dithiole) unit can be oxidized in a single, quasi-reversible two-electron process.187 This electrochemical feature is retained in the dendritic structures, where all the redox units are independently oxidized at the same potential. In THF the process is increasingly irreversible on increasing dendrimer size, as precipitation of the charged species takes place on the electrode surface. Precipitation does not occur in CH2Cl2–acetonitrile, where less pronounced irreversibility issues are nevertheless observed, which have been attributed to the large structural change undergone upon oxidation by the anthracene-bis(dithiole) unit.186 Indeed, it is known that the central anthracenediylidene ring is boat shaped in the neutral unit, and becomes a planar and fully aromatic anthracene system in the oxidized system, with the 1,3-dithiolium cations almost orthogonal to this plane.188 It has been noted that the structural change imposed by the redox process could strongly influence the shape of these dendrimers. Molecular modelling studies suggest that the molecular diameter of 52 should increase from 40 to 46 Å upon oxidation, and even greater changes have been calculated for the higher generation species.186
  
Another well-known sulfur-containing redox active unit is phenothiazine. PPI dendrimers of generations 1, 2, 3 and 4 were functionalized with 4, 8, 16 and 32 phenothiazine peripheral units, respectively.189 The electrochemical behaviour was studied in CH2Cl2, where a model phenothiazine unit exhibits two monoelectronic oxidation processes (+0.293 and +1.05 V vs. Fc+/Fc). Only one oxidation process could be observed in the functionalized dendrimers (≈+0.28 V for all generations). Further oxidation led to degradation presumably because of coulombic repulsion of the oxidized phenothiazine units. Multielectron redox processes are clearly present in these dendrimers, but attempts to establish the number of exchanged electrons in the first oxidation process failed due to substantial absorption on the electrode surface.
Thienylphenylamine units were used to build small dendrimers, where multielectron redox processes have been observed.190
Temperature dependent (180–300 K) luminescence measurements were performed in CH2Cl2 on dendrimers containing oligothiophene chains terminated with third-generation Fréchet dendrons.191 On lowering the temperature, the emission band due to the oligothiophene chains disappears, with concomitant appearance at lower energy of a different, more resolved emission band. This process occurs within a narrow temperature range (≈30 K) and is indicative of a transformation from a molecularly dissolved phase into an aggregate phase.
An eptathiophene core is present in dendrimer 35, detailed in Section 2.6.
2.9 Other organic units
The possibility to perform light-driven catalysis within a dendrimer has been explored preparing first, second and third (53) generation dendrimers containing as core a benzophenone unit, which is a well known photosensitizer for singlet oxygen production. The [4 + 2] cycloaddition reaction of singlet oxygen to cyclopentadiene was tested in methanol solution.192 In principle, the system is based on the amphiphilic structure of the dendrimer and on the large polarity difference between substrate and product. In a polar solvent like methanol these dendrimers can be considered as nanoscale photoreactors: the cyclopentadiene substrate can reach high concentrations near the hydrophobic core, where singlet oxygen is generated upon light excitation of the benzophenone unit. Reaction of cyclopentadiene with singlet oxygen leads to cis-2-cyclopentene-1,4-diol, which is a polar species, and rapidly migrates into the polar solvent. Experiments performed monitoring formation of the diol indicated that higher generation dendrimers lead to faster reactions and higher conversion levels.
  
Polyarylamine units have been used to build small dendrimers such as 54, where a p-phenylenediamine core and four appended diarylamino groups can be distinguished.193 CV experiments, performed in CH2Cl2 solution, show the presence of three oxidation waves at 0.49, 0.87 and 1.05 V vs. SCE, respectively. Comparison with the data obtained for smaller compounds indicate that the first and third wave correspond to successive monoelectronic oxidation of the p-phenylenediamine core, whereas the second two-electron wave is due to simultaneous electron loss from individual remote diarylamino groups. Thus, only a weak coupling is present between the different groups, which maintain a relatively unaffected redox functionality.
  
The photophysical properties of triarylamine dendrimers of generation 1–3 (55) were investigated in THF by ultrafast fluorescence anisotropy measurements.194 For all the dendrimers the decay of the anisotropy was complete within about 100 fs, leaving a residual anisotropy value which was smaller on increasing dendrimer generation. These results suggest that the fast energy delocalization process is promoted by strong interactions between the chromophores over relatively large molecular distances.
The well-known photolabile properties of the o-nitrobenzyl ether unit have been introduced into dendrimers like 56.195 Photolysis of 56 proceeds cleanly in CHCl3 solution with 340 nm light, as shown by the presence of isosbestic points in the absorption spectra. The reaction was followed also by 1H NMR; identification of the degradation products indicates that all three ether links are broken in the photofragmentation. Similar species with only three peripheral –R groups showed identical photodegradation reactivity. It has been remarked that such dendrimers can serve as cores to build dendrimer-based photodegradable materials, as the –R groups can be easily replaced by external dendrons and further functionalities.
  
Gallic acid (3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid) is a polyphenol compound which is known to produce chemiluminescence (CL) in the presence of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide. First-generation dendrimers with peripheral 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoate ester units were prepared, and their CL emission investigated in methanol solution.196 Dendrimer 57 depicts one of these species. The intensity of the CL emission of 57 was about 600-fold stronger with respect to gallic acid alone. Moreover, using 57 the length of the CL period was very long: after addition of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide, the emission intensity reached its maximum value in 60 s, and was then halved only after 5 min. These dendrimers show thus a strong CL emission, and could be proficiently used in a variety of CL assays.
PAMAM dendrimers have been labelled with fluorescein units, and the fluorescence emission of this chromophore was exploited to measure the binding of the dendrimers to the surface of individual fibroblast cells,197 or to determine the self-diffusion coefficients of the dendrimers in aqueous solutions containing the polymers poly(ethylene oxide) or guar galactomannan.198
3 Dendrimers based on inorganic units
3.1 Ferrocene and other sandwich complexes
Ferrocene is characterised by a relatively simple electrochemical behaviour, dominated by a reversible monoelectronic oxidation, which can be easily obtained at very accessible potential. For this reason ferrocene is frequently employed as an electroactive unit in the construction of functionalized dendrimers. From a photophysical viewpoint ferrocene is not luminescent, but can play the role of quencher both in electron- and energy-transfer processes, because it can be easily oxidized and its lowest excited state is at relatively low energy (about 1.8 eV above the ground state).
Ferrocene199–203 or other metallocene species204,205 have been recently used as cores to investigate the encapsulation properties of various dendritic structures. These species continue to receive attention, because they can mimic the behaviour of proteins incorporating a redox active unit into a polypeptide superstructure. For example, generation 0, 1 (58), and 2 dendrimers were investigated by CV in various solvents.203 In CH2Cl2 and acetonitrile the oxidation process remained reversible, but the observed potential shifts to more positive values with increasing dendrimer generation. Thus, oxidation of the core is hindered by the dendritic structure, suggesting that the flexible ether-amide branches create a microenvironment which is less polar than the surrounding electrolyte solution. It was also noted that in CH2Cl2 the concentration of the base electrolyte (Bu4N+BF4−) has a noticeable effect on the potential for oxidation of 58. This result suggests that the overall polarity of the medium is significantly affected by the presence of the electrolyte itself. A different behaviour was observed in MeOH, where the potential for core oxidation is almost independent from dendrimer generation. It has been argued that this polar solvent can give rise to multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions with the ether-amide dendritic branches, forming a solvated structure which is more “open” than in apolar solvents such as CH2Cl2. The possibility to control the actual dendrimer conformation via solvation could be exploited to switch on/off the encapsulation property of dendrimers.203
  
Several ferrocene-cored dendrimers with carbohydrate branches connected to one or both cyclopentadiene rings have been the object of a detailed investigation.200 The mono- and disubstituted species 59–62 represent a few of the studied species. Electrochemical characterisation was performed in aqueous solution, and the following trends were observed: (1) the potential for oxidation of the ferrocene core increases on going from the monosubstituted to the disubstituted species; (2) the potential value increases and the rate of the heterogeneous electron transfer process decreases with increasing branching of the substituents. This behaviour has been accounted for by an increase of ferrocene encapsulation with increasing the number and size of the connected branches. A very unusual behaviour was observed in dendrimer 62, which exhibits two oxidation peaks in differential pulse voltammetry experiments, suggesting that two distinct species are present, where the core experiences a different encapsulation environment. Both oxidation processes are reversible, indicating that interconversion of the two species is slow on the timescale of the electrochemical experiment. It has been argued that the observed results can be explained by the presence of two conformers of 62, one bearing the substituents on the same side of the ferrocene unit, and the other with the substituents on opposite sides. In another series of experiments, it was observed that addition of β-cyclodextrin changes the voltammetric behaviour of the monosubstituted compounds 59 and 60, whose oxidation wave shifts to more positive potential values and decreases in intensity. The behaviour of the disubstituted species 61 and 62, on the contrary, is not affected by addition of β-cyclodextrin. NMR measurements and molecular dynamic calculations indicate that only a unsubstituted cyclopentadienyl ring can fit into the β-cyclodextrin host. Thus, the electrochemical behaviour can be explained by considering that only in 59 and 60, the neutral ferrocene unit is stabilised through inclusion into the host cavity.
  
Interestingly, 59, 60 and 62 were also used in aqueous solution as quenchers of the luminescent excited state of Ru(bpy)32+
(bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine).200 Quenching of the luminescence intensity was always greater than that of the emission lifetime, suggesting the occurrence of static quenching in some preformed Ru(bpy)32+–dendrimer species. The dynamic part of the quenching was attributed to energy transfer through a Dexter mechanism.206 The quenching rate constants decrease with increasing number and size of the connected branches, in agreement with the shielding effect observed in the electrochemical experiments.
Structures containing several topologically equivalent ferrocene units can be obtained by functionalization at the periphery of the dendrimer207–218 or, more rarely, at intermediate positions along the branches.219 Generally, there is no electronic communication among topologically equivalent ferrocene units, which are oxidized in a single reversible multielectron oxidation wave. These species thus appear promising in the field of molecular batteries, multielectron transfer catalysis, and anionic recognition.15,22,220–222 For example, four generations of poly(propylene imine) dendrimers containing 4, 8, 16 and 32 (63) peripheral ferrocenyl–urea groups exhibit in DMSO a single reversible oxidation wave, as expected.213 More interestingly, the association of the redox activity of ferrocene with the anion binding activity of the urea residues confers an anion sensing functionality to these species. Indeed, in DMSO the potential value for the oxidation wave of ferrocene shifts in the presence of small concentration (200 µM) of various anions such as H2PO4−, HSO4− and Cl−, the largest effect being observed for H2PO4−. Titration experiments suggest that each H2PO4− anion is bound to two ferrocenyl–urea branches via hydrogen-bonding interaction. As reflected by the shift of the potential values, a typical dendritic effect is observed, because the degree of interaction with H2PO4− increases on passing from the first to the third-generation species. On the other hand, with the fourth-generation dendrimer (63) the anion interaction decreases, probably because hydrogen bonding is hampered by steric congestion at the periphery.
  
In a few cases,223,224 ferrocene units have been used in multiple layers of the dendritic structure, as illustrated by compound 64.224 Cyclic voltammetry measurements in THF–acetone (2 ∶ 1) evidenced the presence of two different waves at 0.59 and 0.75 V vs. SCE. These were assigned, respectively, to the three inner and to the six peripheral ferrocene units on the basis of the different electronic densities determined by the substituents on the cyclopentadiene rings. This assignment was further confirmed by bulk electrolysis and square wave voltammetry experiments, which established that three and six electrons are exchanged, respectively, in the two processes. Thus, all the topologically equivalent ferrocene units are oxidized simultaneously, and the two different layers behave independently.
  
3.2 Metal–polypyridine complexes
Complexes of the Ru(bpy)32+ family are often used in a variety of dendritic structures due to the unique combination of photophysical and redox properties225 that makes them ideal candidates to build light harvesting antenna systems for solar energy conversion and species suitable for multielectron transfer processes. Several papers102,110,145,226–239 and a number of review articles24,37,42,240,241 have been recently published on dendrimers containing metal–polypyridine units. Representative examples are detailed in the following.
The Ru(bpy)32+ core was used to build a first-generation dendrimer containing 12 Coumarin-450 units in the periphery, 65. In acetonitrile solution, excitation of the Coumarin-450 chromophores resulted in luminescence emission at 625 nm typical of the 3MLCT (metal-to-ligand charge transfer) excited state of the Ru(bpy)32+ core, with only a minor residual fluorescence of the initially excited chromophores. An antenna effect is thus operative, with an estimated intramolecular energy transfer efficiency close to unity.145 Using the same dendrimer 65 and the Ru(dmb)32+
(dmb = 4,4′-methyl-2,2′-bipyridine) complex, which serves as a model for the “naked” dendrimer core, it was possible to investigate the shielding effect of the dendritic structure on the intermolecular energy and electron transfer processes.238 Bimolecular quenching rate constants were measured in acetonitrile solution for dioxygen, 9-methylanthracene (MA), phenothiazine (PTZ) and methyl viologen (MV2+), using three different techniques: intensity and lifetime quenching, and transient absorption spectroscopy. These quenchers were chosen to explore different quenching mechanisms. Whereas in the case of dioxygen the quenching mechanism is still the object of controversy, and should involve both energy and electron transfer, it is known that the Ru(bpy)32+ excited state is quenched by MA, PTZ and MV2+via energy transfer, reductive and oxidative electron transfer mechanisms, respectively. The results obtained with the quenchers MA, PTZ and MV2+ indicated that the first-generation dendritic structure of 65 is unable to shield the core from bimolecular energy and electron transfer reactions. On the contrary, quenching by dioxygen was attenuated in going from Ru(dmb)32+ to 65, suggesting an effect of the dendritic structure. As this effect is not observed with MA, PTZ and MV2+, which are certainly much bulky species, the shielding effect observed in the case of dioxygen was attributed to lower O2 solubility within the dendritic structure.238
  
Chiral hybrid metal–organic dendrimers containing four Ru(tpy)22+
(tpy = 2,2′:6′,2″-terpyridine) units and four enantiopure 1,1′-binaphthyl derivatives have been prepared.236 Dendrimer 66 depicts the generation 1 species; compounds containing appended Fréchet dendrons of generation 0–3 have been investigated. Three different chromophoric units are contained in these compounds, namely the external 3,5-dimethoxybenzyl and binaphthyl fluorophores and the Ru(tpy)22+ units. The absorption spectrum in acetonitrile increases in the UV region with increasing dendrimer generation, due to the greater number of 3,5-dimethoxybenzyl groups, whereas the bands due to the binaphthyl and Ru(tpy)22+ units remain essentially constant. Upon excitation at 330 nm, no significant luminescence is observed, indicating that the fluorescence of the organic peripheral units is very efficiently quenched by energy transfer to the lower energy Ru(tpy)22+ units, which are known to be non-emissive at room temperature. A weak luminescence was recorded around 400 nm only in the case of the third-generation species, and was ascribed to diminished quenching of the 3,5-dimethoxybenzyl groups as a result of greater distance from the Ru(tpy)22+ units. The electrochemical behaviour of these species was also examined. In CH2Cl2, the process corresponding to the RuII,III oxidation was observed as a single reversible wave at 1.27, 1.26, 1.24 and 1.29 V, respectively, for the generation 0–3 species.236 This suggests that the four Ru units behave independently and are oxidized in four simultaneous one-electron processes. Analogous electrochemical behaviour was observed for the species 67–69, where the potentials for RuII,III oxidation are at 1.34, 1.33 and 1.29 V, respectively. These values are consistent with the increasing electron-donating ability of the ethoxy, hydroxy and tert-butyldimethylsiloxy peripheral substituents. No luminescence was observed in 67–69 upon excitation at 320 nm, indicating that again the fluorescence of the binaphthyl groups is efficiently quenched by the Ru(tpy)22+ units.237
  
PAMAM dendrimers of generation 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 decorated at the periphery with 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 pendant Ru(bpy)32+ or Ru(tpy)22+ units were the object of a detailed photophysical characterisation.235 Emission spectra, lifetimes and emission quantum yield were measured both in fluid solution at room temperature and in a rigid glass at 77 K, using nitrile or dimethylacetamide solvents. In general, the behaviour of all the dendrimers was similar to that of the mononuclear parent complexes (Ru(bpy)32+ or Ru(tpy)22+), but especially for the Ru(tpy)22+-based family the excited state lifetime at 77 K clearly decreased with increasing dendrimer generation. By comparing the results obtained in butyronitrile and dimethylacetamide (a solvent which can be considered a mimic of the dendritic backbone) it was suggested that on increasing dendrimer generation the dendritic backbone itself replaces the solvent around the metal complex units, thus affecting their photophysical behaviour.
The presence of the redox-active Ru(bpy)32+ or Ru(tpy)22+ units has been exploited to measure the diffusion coefficient of the same dendrimers.102 The investigation was performed using two conventional electrochemical methods, namely CV and RDE (rotating disk electrode voltammetry), and a particular magnetic resonance technique, denoted as PFGSE-NMR (pulsed field gradient spin–echo nuclear magnetic resonance). In all the experiments, the magnitude of the diffusion coefficient decreased, as expected, on increasing dendrimer size, but the three techniques gave different values for the same dendrimer, the values obtained by PFGSE-NMR being constantly larger, and those obtained by CV always smaller. The Stokes–Einstein equation for particle diffusion was then used to evaluate the radius of each dendrimer from the experimentally obtained diffusion coefficients, and these values were compared with those estimated from molecular modelling studies. The molecular size determined with the electrochemical experiments were too large to be realistic, particularly for the higher generation species, indicating that the measured diffusion coefficients were clearly too small. Reasonable values were instead obtained with PFGSE-NMR. Considerations based on the rotational diffusion of spherical molecules suggest that the electrochemical techniques give unsatisfactory results because dendrimer rotation in close proximity of the electrode is too slow to allow complete sampling of all the peripheral redox centres, and the fraction of sampled redox centres decreases with increasing molecular size. The PFGSE-NMR method, on the other hand, is not based on redox reactions, and thus appears more suitable to measure the diffusion coefficients of redox-active macromolecules.
The fourth-generation PAMAM dendrimer bearing 64 outer Ru(tpy)22+ units was also immobilised on a Pt microelectrode and investigated by ultrafast cyclic voltammetry at scan rates up to 2 MV s−1 in acetonitrile solution.230,231 Using this technique, the thickness of the diffusion layer can be tuned to fit the dimensions of the dendrimer, and information can be obtained on the shape of the absorbed object. It was established that the adsorbed dendrimer assumes a hemispherical shape, in agreement with previous experiments performed with scanning tunnelling microscopy. The self-exchange electron-transfer rate between the Ru(tpy)22+/3+ sites was determined as ≈1.7 × 109 L mol s−1, a value corresponding to that expected for an electron transfer between redox centres in close contact. As the Ru(tpy)22+ units on the dendrimer surface cannot be permanently in close contact, it has been evaluated that the mobility of the Ru(tpy)22+ units on the dendritic shell is at least 106 times greater than that of the free Ru(tpy)22+ complex in solution.
Four Fréchet dendrons of generation 1–4 have been connected to a bis(phenanthroline)copper(I) core, and the resulting compounds have been characterized in CH2Cl2 solution.239 All these species show the luminescence emission typical of the MLCT excited state of the core (λem
= 714 nm, Φem
= 0.0011, τ
= 220 ns), independently of the generation number. The electrochemical behaviour of these dendrimers was also examined, as it is known that the Cu(I) core can be easily oxidized in a monoelectronic process. Classic cyclic voltammetry experiments revealed the presence of a typical encapsulation effect, as the electron transfer rate is attenuated on increasing dendrimer generation, giving rise to a poorly defined signal for the largest dendrimer. All the dendrimers were then investigated using thin layer cyclic voltammetry (TLCV). Under these conditions even the largest dendrimer shows a well-resolved signal typical of a reversible one-electron process. Very similar voltammograms were obtained for all the compounds, which are all oxidized at the same potential (+0.62 V vs. Fc+/Fc). TCLV appears thus an efficient tool to investigate the redox behaviour of species featuring slow electron transfer kinetics.
The bridging ligand 2,3-bis(2′-pyridyl)pyrazine allows the building of dendritic structures connecting Ru(II) and Os(II) centres (and, less frequently, other metals). As the energy of the excited states and the redox levels of each metal–polypyridine unit depend on metal and ligands in a predictable way, the simultaneous presence of different metals in a dendritic structures gives rise to intramolecular energy transfer processes as well to different redox patterns with multielectron processes. For example, dendrimer 70 has been designed in order to achieve an efficient antenna effect, as the presence of three different metals creates an energy gradient from the periphery to the core.228 Indeed, independently on the excitation wavelength, luminescence is observed both in acetonitrile solution at room temperature (875 nm) and in butyronitrile at 77 K (860 nm) from a MLCT state involving Os(II) and the bridging ligand.
  
A different class of light-harvesting antenna systems is represented by dendrimer 71, where the same tetrametallic central structure has been decorated at the periphery with six pyrenyl groups.110 This species constitutes a new class of light-harvesting antenna system where a multinuclear metal dendritic core is surrounded by purely organic chromophores. The properties of 71 have been compared with those of the already known tetranuclear species without the peripheral pyrenyl units, 72. In acetonitrile solution 71 shows better light-harvesting properties than 72; indeed the absorption spectrum of 71 in acetonitrile features not only the bands due to pyrene centred transitions in the 310–350 nm region, but also a broad band in the 400–550 nm region, ascribed to interaction of the pyrenyl units with the tetrametallic core. Photophysical characterisation of 71 in acetonitrile solution shows luminescence properties (λem
= 860 nm, τ
= 16 ns, Φ
= 5 × 10−4) which are practically identical to those of 72. Thus, the appended pyrenyl groups do not affect the properties of the luminescent Os(II) core, that collects all the absorbed energy, irrespective of the excitation wavelength.
  
As far as the electrochemical properties are concerned, a striking example of redox complexity can be observed in the hexametallic dendrimer 73, that was investigated by cyclic voltammetry in highly purified liquid SO2
(at −70 °C) or DMF solution (at −54 °C).227 In these conditions a very extended potential range can be explored, from +4.3 to −3.1 V vs. SCE in SO2 and DMF, respectively. Upon oxidation, five peaks were observed, the first four being electrochemically reversible and corresponding to four-, two-, four and four-electron transfers, respectively. Identification of the various redox sites was based on a comparison with related, lower nuclearity complexes. Thus, metal-based oxidations are involved in the first two processes which occur on the four external (+1.46 V) and on the two internal (+2.11 V) Ru ions, respectively. Oxidation of the bpy ligands takes place at a more positive potential in the third (+3.18 V) and fourth (+3.4 V) peaks, whereas the bridging ligands are presumably involved in the fifth oxidation (+4.2 V). The cathodic region is even more complex, as a total of 26 electrons are exchanged in six multielectron peaks. All these reduction processes are ligand centered. On the basis of the electrochemical behaviour of the free and chelated ligands it was possible to assign the redox site where each of these 26 processes occur: reduction takes place initially on the bridging ligands (5 + 5 electrons) and subsequently on the bpy ligands (8 + 8 electrons). Digital simulation of the voltammetric curves was performed, and the individual redox potential of each redox process was determined. It is worth noting that an extended redox series comprising 40 reversible redox processes (14 oxidations and 26 reductions) can be observed in 73. This appears to be the most extensive redox series so far reported.
  
3.3 Porphyrins
Dendritic structures based on porphyrin units have been extensively investigated in view of their favourable chemical, photophysical and redox properties.162,163,242–259 In particular, their strong light-absorbing properties have been exploited to develop and characterize new light-harvesting systems. Only significative examples will be illustrated.
Dendritic structures where a free-base porphyrin core is joined to 4, 8 and 20 Zn–porphyrin units via diarylethyne linkers have been obtained; the largest structure containing a total of 21 chromophores is 74.256 Electrochemical experiments in benzonitrile solution showed in all cases the presence of two reversible multielectron waves corresponding to the first and second oxidation of the Zn–porphyrin rings. The oxidation potentials observed are essentially independent of the number of porphyrin units present in the various structures. Spectroelectrochemical experiments were also performed on 74 during bulk electrolysis, showing that 21 electron equivalents can be removed (one from each of the porphyrin units) without causing decomposition or precipitation. Such species could thus serve as hole-storage reservoirs. Photophysical characterisation of all the compounds was performed in toluene solution. Absorption spectra evidenced the presence of inter-porphyrin exciton coupling, as with increasing molecular size the Soret band at ≈425 nm broadens, splits and red-shifts while growing in intensity. Differently, the lower intensity Q bands simply scale up with increasing number of porphyrin units. The fluorescence spectra of these multiporphyrin species are dominated by emission of the free-base core, with only residual emission from the peripheral Zn–porphyrin units. An antenna effect is thus operative via a singlet energy transfer mechanism. Using transient absorption spectroscopy measurements, the efficiency of the energy transfer to the core was evaluated as 92 and 96%, respectively, for 74 and for the smaller compound containing 8 Zn–porphyrin units. All these results indicate that the diarylethyne linkers provide only a small but significative electronic coupling between the connected porphyrins, which essentially maintain the redox and photophysical properties. These systems appear thus promising for the build-up of charge-storage and light-harvesting devices.
  
A free-base porphyrin core (P) has been connected also to dendrons (75–77) containing one, three or seven Zn–porphyrin units obtaining star-shaped species, like P(77)4 and conically-shaped species, like P(77)1.247,257 In all of these species the fluorescence emission of the Zn–porphyrin units is partially quenched with sensitisation of the free-base core indicating a clear antenna effect. The efficiency of the energy transfer from the Zn–porphyrin units to the core was evaluated by picosecond time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy in THF solution. For the cone-shaped series the efficiency was 86, 66 and 19% for P(75)1, P(76)1 and P(77)1, respectively, indicating a clear decrease with increasing dendron generation. This effect was much less pronounced in the star-shaped species, where the efficiency values obtained were 87, 80 and 71% for P(75)4, P(76)4 and P(77)4, respectively. These results indicate that the morphology of the dendrimer has indeed a noticeable effect on the energy transfer rate. The energy migration processes among the various porphyrin units were further investigated with steady-state fluorescence depolarisation measurements in a viscous medium (polyethylene glycol–THF) in order to suppress molecular rotation. A fluorescence anisotropy factor of 0.03 was obtained for the star-shaped species P(77)4, whereas a value of 0.10 was obtained for the conical-shaped species P(77)1. These data indicate that energy migration among the Zn–porphyrin units is more efficient in the star-shaped compound, suggesting a possible cooperation effect of the four dendrons in P(77)4 to facilitate the final energy transfer to the free-base core unit.
  
Morphology-dependent properties were also investigated by comparing three series of porphyrin-cored poly(benzyl ether) structures.258 Dendrimers of generation 1–4 were prepared, along with their architectural isomers characterised by four- and eight-arm structures, containing exact linear analogues of the poly(benzyl ether) dendrons. The second-generation species of each of these three families is illustrated, respectively, by compounds 78, 79 and 80. The absorption spectra in THF show only a minor dependence on the different morphology of the three different series. Indeed, no effect is observed in the UV region, where the absorption band due to the benzyl ether units simply double in intensity with each increase of the generation number, as expected. In the visible region, however, the Soret band of the porphyrin core exhibits small bathochromic shifts that are more evident in the dendrimer series (such as 78), suggesting that core encapsulation is greater in this architecture. Luminescence experiments, performed in THF solution, indicate that in all cases emission occurs only from the porphyrin core, irrespective of the excitation wavelength, thus indicating a clear antenna behaviour. Comparison of the excitation spectra were particularly informative, indicating that the energy transfer efficiency is very sensitive to the compound morphology. Indeed, while along each of the three series the energy transfer efficiency decreases with increasing molecular size, this effect is small in the dendrimer series (such as 78), more significant in the eight-arm series (such as 80) and most evident in the four-arm series (such as 79). The reason of this behaviour has been attributed to the fact that the dendritic architecture, particularly at higher generations, features the shortest average distance between the external donor units and the accepting core. Other physical properties, such as hydrodynamic volume, crystallinity, and solubility are also different for the isomeric species, confirming that dendrimers are unique when compared to other architectures.

Host–guest chemistry has also been used to obtain very interesting species. PAMAM dendrimers up to the fourth-generation have been functionalized at the periphery with amphiphilic α-helix peptides.249 All these functionalized dendrimers are able to host Fe3+- and Zn2+-mesoporphyrin complexes: UV-Vis titrations in Tris HCl buffer indicated that one mesoporphyrin complex is bound per two α-helices present in the dendrimer. Multiporphyrin assemblies are thus easily obtained, which could mimic the natural light-harvesting systems of photosynthetic bacteria. The binding constants to the peptide dendrimers increase slightly with increasing generation, being in the range 1–2 × 106 M−1 and 3–5 × 105 M−1 for the Fe and Zn porphyrins, respectively. Electron transfer quenching of the fluorescence band of the hosted Zn–porphyrin was accomplished by addition of MV2+. Stern–Volmer plots indicate that the quenching constant increased with increasing dendrimer generation, presumably because of a facilitated excitation energy delocalization among the porphyrin units, which are more densely packed in the higher generation species. Peptide dendrimers of generation 0 and 4 hosting Zn mesoporphyrin units were also used as photocatalysts in a well-known photoinduced hydrogen evolution system.248
The dioxygen molecule is often used as a quencher to assess core accessibility of luminescent dendrimers. A detailed investigation has been performed in solvents of different polarities on dendrimers containing a Pd porphyrin core.259 Three generations of dendrons of different composition were used to encapsulate the porphyrin, namely poly(aryl ether)s, poly(amide)s and polyglutamates. The second-generation dendrimers are, respectively, 81, 82 and 83
(R = OH in H2O; R = OMe, OEt in THF and DMF). Only a minor decrease in the dioxygen quenching rate was observed in the organic solvents with increasing dendrimer generation for the three different dendron types. Differently, in aqueous solution the poly(aryl ether) structure provides a superior core shielding: a 24 times decrease in quenching rate constant was observed between generation 0 and 2, while the further addition of the next layer had no significant influence. Thus, the most hydrophobic structure provides the greater shielding effect in the more polar solvent.
  
3.4 Other metal units
A variety of other metal units have been introduced in dendrimers, ranging from simple ions like iron or lanthanides to quadruply bonded dimolybdenum moieties. As far as the electrochemical behaviour is concerned, different dendrimers containing a redox active metal-based core were investigated, confirming the expected ability of the dendritic framework to encapsulate the core. A remarkable example is represented by compound 84, where a diiron(III) core is connected to triazacyclononane units bearing six Fréchet dendrons of generation 2. Analogous structures with dendrons of generation from one to four were characterized and studied as models of non-heme iron proteins.260 The electrochemical behaviour of these dendrimers was examined by cyclic voltammetry in acetonitrile solution. Reduction of the two iron(III) centers occurs in a single quasi-reversible wave at −0.32 V vs. SCE in the species with the smallest dendrons (generation 1). On increasing the size of the dendritic substituents, the reduction potentials turned more negative and more irreversible, thus indicating that the iron(III) core is increasingly encapsulated within the dendritic structure. Interestingly, upon irradiation (λ > 350 nm) these compounds loose the μ-O bridge generating the diiron(II) species, which can be reoxidized under O2 to return to the original diiron(III) compounds.
  
Similar progressive encapsulation effects have been observed in dendrimers containing polyaryl ether dendrons surrounding either a Co2+ core,261 or a quadruply bonded Mo24+ unit.262
As far as the photophysical properties are concerned, dendrimers containing lanthanide ions have been investigated. The polylysin dendrimer 85 contains 18 internal amide groups, which can coordinate lanthanide ions, and 24 peripheral dansyl units which feature strong absorption bands in the near UV region and an intense fluorescence band in the visible region (λem
= 514 nm, Φ
= 0.28, τ
= 15 ns).263,264 Addition of lanthanide ions to acetonitrile–CH2Cl2 solutions of 85 causes quenching of the dansyl luminescence. At low metal ion concentrations, each dendrimer molecule can host only one metal ion; in the case of Nd3+ and Eu3+ the fluorescence of the dansyl units is quenched with unitary efficiency (antenna effect). Different quenching mechanisms were observed, depending on the metal ion hosted, in agreement with the spectroscopic and redox levels involved. Thus, at room temperature quenching occurs by Förster energy transfer for Tb3+, Nd3+ and Er3+; sensitized emission in the NIR region was also observed from the last two metal ions at 1064 and 1525 nm, respectively. Also in the case of the Yb3+ complex a sensitized NIR emission was observed, but the mechanism is more complex, involving the intermediate formation of an electron-transfer excited state. Quenching by Eu3+ occurs via electron transfer owing to the low reduction potential of this ion; however, in a rigid matrix at 77 K, where the electron transfer processes are disfavoured, quenching of the dansyl units takes place by energy transfer, and the sensitized emission of Eu3+ is observed. Finally, in the case of Gd3+, where neither energy or electron transfer are allowed, the small quenching effect observed has been attributed to charge perturbation of the emitting state of the dansyl units. It should be noted that species such as 85–Ln3+ can be considered as frequency converter systems: the energy absorbed as UV radiation is converted into lower-energy photons, and different emissions can be obtained by selecting different metal ions.
  
The typical emission of the Nd3+ ion was observed also in CH2Cl2 solution from a dendrimer based on 2,2-bis(methylol)propionic acid with peripheral chiral (−)-menthoxyacetic groups.265
3.5 Fullerene
The fullerene (C60) molecule is very interesting.266 It can be easily reduced in solution, and six successive and reversible monoelectronic processes are observed in the range from −1 to −3 V vs. Fc+/Fc. Oxidation, on the other hand, is more difficult (+1.26 V vs. Fc+/Fc). From a photophysical viewpoint, fullerene features low lying singlet and triplet excited states. The lowest singlet shows a fluorescence band around 720 nm, and the lowest triplet is a well known sensitizer for singlet oxygen production. The fullerene unit is thus often used as quencher in energy and electron transfer reactions. Its peculiarities as a versatile building block in functionalized dendrimers have recently been underlined.267 Recently, it has been used as a core in a variety of dendritic structures.76,179–182,252,268–273
A fullerene core has been linked for the first time through an acetylene unit to Fréchet dendrons of generation from 1 to 4 (86-H).271 These species are very soluble in common organic solvents. The proton directly connected to the fullerene cage is very acidic and can be easily abstracted by treating with ButOK. The resulting anionic species (like 86−) were investigated by cyclic voltammetry in o-dichlorobenzene solution. Upon reduction, three processes were observed, whose potential did not change significantly with increasing dendrimer generation, whereas the redox current gradually decreased. This was ascribed to a decrease of the diffusion coefficients with increasing dendrimer size. More interestingly, independently from the generation of the dendrimer anion, the first reduction process featured a very large separation (about 0.70 V) between the cathodic and anodic peak, whereas the second and third reduction processes were nearly reversible. The anomalous behaviour of the first reduction step was attributed to chemical processes leading to dimer species like 86–86, where a single bond is formed between the two fullerene units. Synthesis of such dimeric species was also obtained by chemical one-electron oxidation of the anionic dendrimers using iodine. Thus, even the fourth-generation dendron cannot prevent dimerization at the fullerene units, presumably because of the great flexibility of the poly(aryl ether) structure. Molecular dynamics calculations were in agreement with this conclusion.
  
A detailed photophysical investigation was also performed on the same dendrimers of generations 2, 3 and 4.270 The photophysical properties of these dendrimers and their quenching via energy transfer (using dioxygen and β-carotene) and via electron transfer (using four different amines) were investigated in o-dichlorobenzene solution. Upon excitation of the fullerene unit, the lifetimes of the singlet and triplet excited states are essentially the same independent of dendrimer generation, indicating that intramolecular processes are not affected by the size of the dendrons. Differently, the rate constants of the intermolecular processes (triplet-triplet annihilation, triplet energy transfer, and triplet electron transfer) decrease with increasing dendrimer generation, underlining the importance of the steric hindrance of the dendron groups.
Phenylenevinylene dendrons have been also connected to a fullerene core.179–182 Generally, in these structures an antenna effect is observed, as the energy absorbed by the dendrons is ultimately transferred to the fullerene core. Additionally, competition between energy and electron transfer processes has been observed. For example, a redox and photophysical characterisation has been performed on dendrimers 87 and 88, containing dibutylaniline and dodecyloxynaphthalene peripheral units, respectively.180,182 Cyclic voltammetry experiments in toluene–acetonitrile evidenced a single oxidation process, due to the dendrons, and three quasi-reversible reduction processes due to the fullerene core, indicating a lack of significant interaction among the various units. This is further confirmed by the absorption spectra (in CH2Cl2) which are essentially a superposition of the spectra of the individual chromophores. Photophysical experiments were performed in toluene, THF and benzonitrile, showing that excitation of the dendrons is followed by a fast (0.6–25 × 1011 s−1) and nearly quantitative energy transfer to the core, generating the fullerene singlet excited state. Transient absorption spectroscopy experiments revealed also the presence of a charge-separated state containing the fullerene anion and an oxidized dendron. Interestingly, modulation of the energy gap between the fullerene singlet excited state and the charge-separated state gives rise to different decay pathways in the two dendrimers. In 87 the charge separated state is about 1 eV below the singlet excited state of fullerene; the excited state initially localised into the dendritic branches decays through two sequential processes, as energy transfer to the fullerene-centred singlet is followed by an electron transfer process to the charge-separated state. Differently, in 88 the charge separated state is very close to the singlet excited state of fullerene; in this case the excited state initially formed is quenched through simultaneous and competing energy and electron transfer processes.
  
Dendrimer 89 can be obtained by irradiating (λ > 300 nm) fullerene and the anthracene-cored dendron in o-dichlorobenzene.272 Notably, this fullerodendrimer is water soluble. Transient absorption experiments in water revealed that the triplet excited state of the fullerene unit is quenched by dioxygen producing singlet oxygen, as witnessed by the observation of the typical emission of singlet oxygen at 1280 nm. The rate constant of the energy transfer from the triplet of 89 to dioxygen was evaluated as 1.3 × 109 M−1s−1 and the quantum yield of formation of singlet oxygen was about 0.45. This fullerodendrimer can thus be used to generate singlet oxygen in aqueous solution.
  
Poly(aryl ether) dendrons of various generations with peripheral triethyleneglycol chains have been connected to a fullerene core, and the photophysical properties of the resulting dendrimers have been investigated in toluene, CH2Cl2 and acetonitrile.273 Compound 90 shows the largest structure obtained. In all solvents, on increasing dendrimer size the maximum of the fluorescence band of fullerene is red-shifted and its emission lifetime increases slightly. These trends have been ascribed to an increasing interaction of the dendritic branches with the fullerene core on enlarging dendrimer size. Energy transfer quenching of the fullerene triplet state by dioxygen was also examined by monitoring the luminescence band of the singlet oxygen produced. On increasing dendrimer size the relative yields of singlet oxygen formation decrease in all solvents, showing that dendritic branches progressively shield the ferrocene unit from contact with external molecules. Even if the largest dendron cannot provide a complete shielding, these results show that the singlet oxygen sensitizing character of the fullerene unit can be tuned with an appropriate choice of the dendron size.
The fullerene molecule has been also used as a guest to quench the fluorescence of porphyrin-cored dendrimers. The three reduction waves of the hosted fullerene are shifted to more negative potential with respect to those typical of the free fullerene unit.252
Another fullerene-cored dendrimer76 is detailed in Section 2.1.
3.6 Other inorganic units
The photophysical behaviour of first- and second- (91) generation polysilane dendrimers was investigated in 3-methylpentane matrix at 77 K.274 The time-resolved emission spectra indicate the presence of two emission bands, whose relative importance changes with the delay after excitation. The higher and lower energy bands were attributed to excited states localized at linear and at branching points of the Si–Si chain, respectively. Intramolecular energy transfer between these two states was held responsible of the temporal evolution of the emission spectra. From the temperature dependence (77–300 K) of the lifetime of the two emission bands, the energy barrier between the two excited states was evaluated as 0.92 and 0.53 kcal mol−1 for the first- and second-generation dendrimer, respectively.
  
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by MIUR (PNA-based nanotechnologies and microsystems for food diagnostics) and University of Bologna (Funds for selected topics).
4 References
E. W. Buhleier, W. Wehner and F. Vögtle, Synthesis, 1978, 155 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Tomalia, H. Baker, J. R. Dewald, M. Hall, G. Kallos, S. Martin, J. Roeck, J. Ryder and P. Smith, Polym. J., 1985, 17, 117 Search PubMed .
G. R. Newkome, Z.-Q. Yao, G. R. Baker and K. Gupta, J. Org. Chem., 1985, 50, 2003 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hawker and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7638 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, in Stimulating Concepts in Chemistry, ed. M. Shibasaki, J. F. Stoddart and F. Vögtle, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2000, p. 255 Search PubMed .

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines – A Journey into the Nano World, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

          G. R. Newkome, C. N. Moorefield and F. VögtleDendritic Macromolecules: Concepts, Syntheses, Perspectives, VCH, Weinheim,  1996 Search PubMed .

          G. R. Newkome, C. N. Moorefield and F. Vögtle, Dendrimers and Dendrons. Concepts, Syntheses, Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .

Advances in Dendritic Macromolecules, ed. G. R. Newkome, JAI Press, Greenwich,  1994–1998, vol. 1–5 Search PubMed .
Dendrimers I, Top. Curr. Chem., ed. F. Vögtle, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1998, vol. 197 Search PubMed .
Dendrimers II – Architecture, Nanostructure and Supramolecular Chemistry, Top. Curr. Chem., ed. F. Vögtle, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2000, vol. 210 Search PubMed .
Dendrimers III – Design, Dimension, Function, Top. Curr. Chem., ed. F. Vögtle, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2000, vol. 211 Search PubMed .
Dendrimers IV – Metal Coordination, Self Assembly, Catalysis, Top. Curr. Chem., ed. F. Vögtle and C. A. Schalley, Springer-Verlag,Berlin,  2001, vol. 217 Search PubMed .
A. Adronov and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1701 RSC .
D. Astruc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 287 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cardona, S. Mendoza and A. E. Kaifer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 37 RSC .
C. Z. S. Chen and S. L. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 843 CrossRef CAS .
P. Froehling and J. Brackman, Macromol. Symp., 2000, 151, 581 CAS .
K. Inoue, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 453 CrossRef CAS .
U. Luning, Nachr. Chem., 2000, 48, 134 Search PubMed .
F. Vögtle, S. Gestermann, R. Hesse, H. Schwierz and B. Windisch, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 987 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alonso, D. Astruc, J. C. Blais, S. Nlate, S. Rigaut, J. Ruiz, V. Sartor and C. Valerio, C. R. Acad. Sci., Ser. IIc: Chim., 2001, 4, 173 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc and F. Chardac, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2991 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, P. Ceroni, A. Juris, M. Venturi, S. Campagna, F. Puntoriero and S. Serroni, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 219, 545 CrossRef .
D. Demus, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2001, 364, 25 Search PubMed .
G. M. Dykes, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2001, 76, 903 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Florence and N. Hussain, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., 2001, 50, S69 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Froehling, Dyes Pigm., 2001, 48, 187 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Gorman and J. C. Smith, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 60 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Grayson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hecht and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 74 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, M. Venturi, P. Ceroni, V. Balzani, S. Campagna and S. Serroni, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2001, 66, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Juris, in Electron Transfer in Chemistry, vol. 3, ed. V. Balzani, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001, p. 655 Search PubMed .
H. Lang and B. Luhmann, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1201 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Oosterom, J. N. H. Reek, P. C. J. Kamer and P. van Leeuwen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
S. Serroni, S. Campagna, F. Puntoriero, C. Di Pietro, N. D. McClenaghan and F. Loiseau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 367 RSC .
D. C. Tully and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1229 RSC .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 995 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Cameron and C. B. Gorman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 17 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Caminade, V. Maraval, R. Laurent and J. P. Majoral, Curr. Org. Chem., 2002, 6, 739 Search PubMed .
S. Campagna, C. Di Pietro, F. Loiseau, B. Maubert, N. McClenaghan, R. Passalacqua, F. Puntoriero, V. Ricevuto and S. Serroni, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 229, 67 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Cloninger, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dasgupta, M. B. Peori and A. K. Kakkar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 233, 223 CrossRef .
C. Gorman, Nature, 2002, 415, 487 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Grinstaff, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 2838 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Hou, Q. Z. Zhang, G. Y. Li and M. G. Zhu, Prog. Chem., 2002, 14, 469 Search PubMed .
E. Lukevics, P. Arsenyan and O. Pudova, Main Group Met. Chem., 2002, 25, 135 Search PubMed .
H. Ma, S. Liu, J. D. Luo, S. Suresh, L. Liu, S. H. Kang, M. Haller, T. Sassa, L. R. Dalton and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 565 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Majoral, A. M. Caminade, R. Laurent and P. Sutra, Heteroat. Chem., 2002, 13, 474 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Majoral, A. M. Caminade and V. Maraval, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2929 RSC .
A. K. Patri, I. J. Majoros and J. R. Baker, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 466 CrossRef CAS .
B. Romagnoli and W. Hayes, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 767 RSC .
M. Seiler, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2002, 25, 237 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Simanek and S. O. Gonzalez, J. Chem. Educ., 2002, 79, 1222 CAS .
S. E. Stiriba, H. Frey and R. Haag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thelakkat, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2002, 287, 442 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Tomalia and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Chem., 2002, 40, 2719 Search PubMed .
L. J. Twyman, A. S. H. King and I. K. Martin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 69 RSC .
R. van Heerbeek, P. C. J. Kamer, P. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3717 CrossRef .
V. Balzani, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri, C. Saudan and V. Vicinelli, Top. Curr. Chem., in press Search PubMed .

          P. Ceroni and A. Juris in Handbook of Photochemistry and Photobiology, ed. H. Nalwa, American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles, CA, in press Search PubMed .

          V. Balzani and F. Scandola, Supramolecular Photochemistry, Horwood, Chichester,  1991 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh and A. K. Banthia, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 501 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sidorenko, C. Houphouet-Boigny, O. Villavicencio, D. V. McGrath and V. V. Tsukruk, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 410, 147 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peleshanko, A. Sidorenko, K. Larson, O. Villavicencio, M. Ornatska, D. V. McGrath and V. V. Tsukruk, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 406, 233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Bobrovsky, A. A. Pakhomov, X. M. Zhu, N. I. Boiko and V. P. Shibaev, Polym. Sci. Ser. A, 2001, 43, 431 Search PubMed .
A. Cattani-Scholz, C. Renner, D. Oesterhelt and L. Moroder, Chembiochem, 2001, 2, 542 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shimura, T. Manaka, M. Nakamoto, W. Zhao, Y. Majima, M. Iwamoto, S. Yokoyama, T. Kubota and S. Mashiko, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1 – Regul. Pap. Short Notes Rev. Pap., 2001, 40, 7085 Search PubMed .
H. K. Shin, E. Park, C. Kim and Y. S. Kwon, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1 – Regul. Pap. Short Notes Rev. Pap., 2002, 41, 2759 Search PubMed .
D. Patton, M. K. Park, S. X. Wang and R. C. Advincula, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Bobrovsky, A. A. Pakhomov, X. M. Zhu, N. I. Boiko, V. P. Shibaev and J. Stumpe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 540 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bobrovsky, S. Ponomarenko, N. Boiko, V. Shibaev, E. Rebrov, A. Muzafarov and J. Stumpe, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2002, 203, 1539 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Liao, D. M. Junge and D. V. McGrath, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 319 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Sebastian, J. C. Blais, A. M. Caminade and J. P. Majoral, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 2172 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Kay, K. J. Han, Y. J. Yu and Y. D. Park, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 5053 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vögtle, M. Gorka, R. Hesse, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 45 RSC .
T. H. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7 RSC .
A. Dirksen, E. Zuidema, R. M. Williams, L. De Cola, C. Kauffmann, F. Vögtle, A. Roque and F. Pina, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, S. Itoh and N. Kurita, Chem. Phys., 2001, 272, 171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, S. Itoh and N. Kurita, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 362, 467 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nishioka and M. Suzuki, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 7793 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jiang and T. Aida, Nature, 1997, 388, 454 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh and A. K. Banthia, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 6457 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tokuhisa, E. Koyama, Y. Nagawa and K. Hiratani, Chem. Commun., 2001, 595 RSC .
L. L. Miller, J. S. Schlechte, B. Zinger and C. J. Burrell, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5081 CrossRef CAS .
I. Grabchev, X. H. Qian, V. Bojinov, Y. Xiao and W. Zhang, Polymer, 2002, 43, 5731 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Gong, Q. S. Hu and L. Pu, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 2358 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Gong and L. Pu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 7337 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Pugh, Q. S. Hu, X. B. Zuo, F. D. Lewis and L. Pu, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 6136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. J. Lee and W. B. Lin, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 6178 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Xu, J. Lin, Q. S. Hu and L. Pu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14239 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, P. S. White and W. B. Lin, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 7577 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. S. Monk, The Viologens, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  1998 Search PubMed .
R. Toba, J. M. Quintela, C. Peinador, E. Roman and A. E. Kaifer, Chem. Commun., 2001, 857 RSC .
P. Ceroni, V. Vicinelli, M. Maestri, V. Balzani, W. M. Müller, U. Müller, U. Hahn, F. Osswald and F. Vögtle, New J. Chem., 2001, 25, 989 RSC .
W. Ong and A. E. Kaifer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alvaro, B. Ferrer and H. Garcia, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 351, 374 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Ghaddar, J. F. Wishart, D. W. Thompson, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8285 CrossRef CAS .
R. Toba, J. M. Quintela, C. Peinador, E. Roman and A. E. Kaifer, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1768 RSC .
W. S. Baker, B. I. Lemon and R. M. Crooks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8885 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Goldsmith, K. Takada and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8504 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pistolis and A. Malliaris, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 246 CrossRef CAS .
K. Esumi, K. Kuwabara, T. Chiba, F. Kobayashi, H. Mizutani and K. Torigoe, Colloid Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 2002, 197, 141 Search PubMed .
H. Mizutani, K. Torigoe and K. Esumi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 248, 493 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Riley, S. Alkan, A. D. Chen, M. Shapiro, W. A. Khan, W. R. Murphy and J. E. Hanson, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 1797 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brauge, A. M. Caminade, J. P. Majoral, S. Slomkowski and M. Wolszczak, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5599 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cardona, T. Wilkes, W. Ong, A. E. Kaifer, T. D. McCarley, S. Pandey, G. A. Baker, M. N. Kane, S. N. Baker and F. V. Bright, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8649 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kobayashi, S. Machida, S. Takahashi, K. Horie, H. Yoshikawa and H. Masuhara, Chem. Lett., 2002, 394 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. McClenaghan, F. Loiseau, F. Puntoriero, S. Serroni and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2634 RSC .
M. R. Shortreed, S. F. Swallen, Z. Y. Shi, W. H. Tan, Z. F. Xu, C. Devadoss, J. S. Moore and R. Kopelman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 6318 CrossRef .
V. D. Kleiman, J. S. Melinger and D. McMorrow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5595 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Kirkwood, C. Scheurer, V. Chernyak and S. Mukamel, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 2419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tortschanoff, A. Piryatinski and S. Mukamel, J. Lumin., 2001, 94, 569 CrossRef .
A. Tortschanoff and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 7521 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Melinger, Y. C. Pan, V. D. Kleiman, Z. H. Peng, B. L. Davis, D. McMorrow and M. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12002 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhu, P. Bharathi, J. O. White, H. G. Drickamer and J. S. Moore, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4606 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhu, P. Bharathi, H. G. Drickamer and J. S. Moore, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 2859 Search PubMed .
P. Reineker, A. Engelmann and V. I. Yudson, J. Lumin., 2001, 94, 203 CrossRef .
J. Schütze, B. Brüggemann, T. Renger and V. May, Chem. Phys., 2002, 275, 333 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rana and G. Gangopadhyay, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 334, 314 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahata, M. Nakano, H. Fujita, S. Kiribayashi and K. Yamaguchi, Mol. Cryst. Liq, Cryst., 2001, 371, 345 Search PubMed .
M. Takahata, M. Nakano, H. Fujita and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 363, 422 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raychaudhuri, Y. Shapir and S. Mukamel, Phys. Rev. E, 2002, 65, 21803 CrossRef .
T. Weil, U. M. Wiesler, A. Herrmann, R. Bauer, J. Hofkens, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8101 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weil, E. Reuther and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Serin, D. W. Brousmiche and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11848 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Belder, S. Jordens, M. Lor, G. Schweitzer, R. De, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, U. K. Wiesler, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem., 2001, 145, 61 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Belder, G. Schweitzer, S. Jordens, M. Lor, S. Mitra, J. Hofkens, S. De Feyter, M. van der Auweraer, A. Herrmann, T. Weil, K. Müllen and F. De Schryver, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 49 CrossRef CAS .
A. Herrmann, T. Weil, V. Sinigersky, U. M. Wiesler, T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4844 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maus, R. De, M. Lor, T. Weil, S. Mitra, U. M. Wiesler, A. Herrmann, J. Hofkens, T. Vosch, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maus, S. Mitra, M. Lor, J. Hofkens, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 3961 CAS .
M. Lor, R. De, S. Jordens, G. De Belder, G. Schweitzer, M. Cotlet, J. Hofkens, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen, M. Van Der Auweraer and F. C. De Schryver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 2083 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lor, J. Thielemans, L. Viaene, M. Cotlet, J. Hofkens, T. Weil, C. Hampel, K. Müllen, J. W. Verhoeven, M. Van der Auweraer and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9918 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, M. Cotlet, F. Köhn, H. Fujiwara, R. Gronheid, K. Van Der Biest, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen, S. Mukamel, M. Van der Auweraer and F. C. De Schryver, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4643 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hofkens, W. Schroeyers, D. Loos, M. Cotlet, F. Köhn, T. Vosch, M. Maus, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen, T. Gensch and F. C. De Schryver, Spectroc. Acta Pt. A-Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 2001, 57, 2093 Search PubMed .
J. Hofkens, T. Vosch, S. De Feyter and F. C. De Schryver, Macromol. Symp., 2002, 178, 1 CAS .
R. Gronheid, J. Hofkens, F. Köhn, T. Weil, E. Reuther, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2418 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tinnefeld, K. D. Weston, T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, T. Weil, J. Hofkens, K. Müllen, F. C. De Schryver and M. Sauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14310 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Serin, D. W. Brousmiche and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2605 RSC .
U. Hahn, M. Gorka, F. Vögtle, V. Vicinelli, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3595 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, P. Ceroni, S. Gestermann, M. Gorka, C. Kauffmann and F. Vögtle, Tetrahedron, 2002, 58, 629 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yokoyama, A. Otomo and S. Mashiko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yokoyama, A. Otomo, T. Nakahama and S. Mashiko, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 393, 124 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhou, D. S. Tyson and F. N. Castellano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adronov, D. R. Robello and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Polym. Sci. Pol. Chem., 2001, 39, 1366 Search PubMed .
F. V. R. Neuwahl, R. Righini, A. Adronov, P. R. L. Malenfant and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1307 CrossRef CAS .
J. Serin, X. Schultze, A. Adronov and J. M. J. Fréchet, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 5396 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cardona, S. H. Jannach, H. Huang, Y. Itojima, R. M. Leblanc and R. E. Gawley, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2002, 85, 3532 CrossRef CAS .
F. Köhn, J. Hofkens, U. M. Wiesler, M. Cotlet, M. van der Auweraer, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Imai and T. Arai, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 5265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengupta and N. Pal, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 3517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengupta, S. K. Sadhukhan, R. S. Singh and N. Pal, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 1117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizutani, M. Ikegami, R. Nagahata and T. Arai, Chem. Lett., 2001, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uda, T. Mizutani, J. Hayakawa, A. Momotake, M. Ikegami, R. Nagahata and T. Arai, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 76, 596 CAS .
R. S. H. Liu and G. S. Hammond, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4536 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. H. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 555 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Kwok and M. S. Wong, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6821 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Kwok and M. S. Wong, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 417, 136 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Kwok and M. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3158 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, P. L. Burn and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7647 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Burn, R. Beavington, M. J. Frampton, J. N. G. Pillow, M. Halim, J. M. Lupton and I. D. W. Samuel, Mater. Sci. Eng. B: Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2001, 85, 190 Search PubMed .
M. J. Frampton, R. Beavington, J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel and P. L. Burn, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1671 CrossRef CAS .
L. O. Pålsson, R. Beavington, M. J. Frampton, J. M. Lupton, S. W. Magennis, J. P. J. Markham, J. N. G. Pillow, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 7891 CrossRef .
O. Varnavski, I. D. W. Samuel, L. O. Palsson, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and T. Goodson, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 8893 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, P. L. Burn and S. Mukamel, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 455 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and H. Bassler, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and H. Bassler, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 258 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and H. Bassler, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 357 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, R. Beavington, M. J. Frampton, P. L. Burn and H. Bassler, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 6315, 155206 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, M. J. Frampton, R. Beavington and P. L. Burn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 287 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. M. Lupton, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, 520 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, S. C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 2285 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Ma, J. M. Lupton, R. Beavington, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 507 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. J. Meskers, M. Bender, J. Hubner, Y. V. Romanovskii, M. Oestreich, A. Schenning, E. W. Meijer and H. Bassler, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 10220 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pullerits and V. Sundström, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 381 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schenning, P. Jonkheijm, J. Hofkens, S. De Feyter, T. Asavei, M. Cotlet, F. C. De Schryver and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1264 RSC .
J. Donners, R. Hoogenboom, A. Schenning, P. A. van Hal, R. J. M. Nolte, E. W. Meijer and N. Sommerdijk, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 2571 CrossRef CAS .
F. Langa, M. J. Gomez-Escalonilla, E. Diez-Barra, J. C. Garcia-Martinez, A. de la Hoz, J. Rodriguez-Lopez, A. Gonzalez-Cortes and V. Lopez-Arza, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 3435 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Segura, R. Gomez, N. Martin, C. P. Luo, A. Swartz and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2001, 707 RSC .
G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, J. F. Eckert and J. F. Nierengarten, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 65 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, A. Swartz, C. P. Luo, R. Gomez, J. L. Segura and N. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10875 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Derf, E. Levillain, G. Trippe, A. Gorgues, M. Salle, R. M. Sebastian, A. M. Caminade and J. P. Majoral, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 224 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Derf, M. Mazari, N. Mercier, E. Levillain, G. Trippé, A. Riou, P. Richomme, J. Becher, J. Garìn, J. Orduna, N. Gallego-Planas, A. Gorgues and M. Sallé, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 447 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beeby, M. R. Bryce, C. A. Christensen, G. Cooke, F. M. A. Duclairoir and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2950 RSC .
N. Godbert and M. R. Bryce, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 27 RSC .
A. J. Moore and M. R. Bryce, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1991, 157 RSC .
M. R. Bryce, T. Finn, A. S. Batsanov, R. Kataky, J. A. K. Howard and S. B. Lyubchik, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2000, 1199 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Christensen, M. F. Nielsen, J. van Haare, M. Baars, R. A. J. Janssen and E. W. Meijer, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2001, 2123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, M. Higuchi, K. Uchida and Y. Kojima, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 5782 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Apperloo, P. R. L. Malenfant, J. M. J. Fréchet and R. A. J. Janssen, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hecht and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6959 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Selby, K. Y. Kim and S. C. Blackstock, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1685 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Ranasinghe, O. P. Varnavski, J. Pawlas, S. I. Hauck, J. Louie, J. F. Hartwig and T. Goodson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6520 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Kevwitch and D. V. McGrath, Synthesis, 2002, 1171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakazono, L. Ma and K. Zaitsu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 8185 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lai, C. L. Yuan and J. L. Thomas, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2002, 30, 409 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, R. K. Prud'homme and J. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chi, J. S. Wu, X. H. Wang, X. J. Zhao, J. Li and F. S. Wang, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 3812 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ashton, V. Balzani, M. Clemente-Leon, B. Colonna, A. Credi, N. Jayaraman, F. M. Raymo, J. F. Stoddart and M. Venturi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 673 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liebau, H. M. Janssen, K. Inoue, S. Shinkai, J. Huskens, R. P. Sijbesma, E. W. Meijer and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 674 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nlate, Y. Nieto, J. C. Blais, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 171 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Stone, D. K. Smith and P. T. McGrail, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 856 CrossRef CAS .
R. Andres, E. de Jesus, F. J. de la Mata, J. C. Flores and R. Gomez, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2002, 2281 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Waybright, K. McAlpine, M. Laskoski, M. D. Smith and U. H. F. Bunz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8661 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alonso, B. Gonzalez, B. Garcia, E. Ramirez-Oliva, M. Zamora, C. M. Casado and I. Cuadrado, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 637, 642 CrossRef .
J. Alvarez, T. Ren and A. E. Kaifer, Organometallics, 2001, 20, 3543 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, E. Park, C. K. Song and B. W. Koo, Synth. Met., 2001, 123, 493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salmon and P. Jutzi, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 637, 595 CrossRef .
S. Sengupta and S. K. Sadhukhan, Organometallics, 2001, 20, 1889 CAS .
S. Sengupta and S. K. Sadhukhan, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 3659 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alonso, C. M. Casado, I. Cuadrado, M. Moran and A. E. Kaifer, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1778 RSC .
S. K. Oh, L. A. Baker and R. M. Crooks, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6981 CrossRef CAS .
J. Palomero, J. A. Mata, F. Gonzalez and E. Peris, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 291 RSC .
H. C. Yoon, D. Lee and H. S. Kim, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 456, 209 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, Actual. Chim., 2001, 3 Search PubMed .
C. O. Turrin, J. Chiffre, J. C. Daran, D. de Montauzon, A. M. Caminade, E. Manoury, G. Balavoine and J. P. Majoral, Tetrahedron, 2001, 57, 2521 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Turrin, J. Chiffre, D. de Montauzon, G. Balavoine, E. Manoury, A. M. Caminade and J. P. Majoral, Organometallics, 2002, 21, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nlate, J. Ruiz, V. Sartor, R. Navarro, J. C. Blais and D. Astruc, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 2544 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, J. C. Blais, E. Cloutet, L. Djakovitch, S. Rigaut, J. Ruiz, V. Sartor and C. Valerio, Top. Curr. Chem., 2000, 210, 229 CAS .
J. Ruiz, C. Pradet, F. Varret and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1108 RSC .
A. Peruga, J. A. Mata, D. Sainz and E. Peris, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 637, 191 CrossRef .
C. O. Turrin, J. Chiffre, J. C. Daran, D. de Montauzon, G. Balavoine, E. Manoury, A. M. Caminade and J. P. Majoral, C. R. Chim., 2002, 5, 309 Search PubMed .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. Belser and A. von Zelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 84, 85 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Ghaddar, J. F. Wishart, J. P. Kirby, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12832 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carano, P. Ceroni, C. Fontanesi, M. Marcaccio, F. Paolucci, C. Paradisi and S. Roffia, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3199 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommovigo, G. Denti, S. Serroni, S. Campagna, C. Mingazzini, C. Mariotti and A. Juris, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 3318 CrossRef CAS .
F. Puntoriero, S. Serroni, A. Licciardello, M. Venturi, A. Juris, V. Ricevuto and S. Campagna, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2001, 1035 RSC .
C. Amatore, Y. Bouret, E. Maisonhaute, J. I. Goldsmith and H. D. Abruna, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, Y. Bouret, E. Maisonhaute, J. I. Goldsmith and H. D. Abruna, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 2, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Börje, O. Köthe and A. Juris, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 843 RSC .
S. Campagna, S. Serroni, F. Puntoriero, F. Loiseau, L. De Cola, C. J. Kleverlaan, J. Becher, A. P. Sørensen, P. Hascoat and N. Thorup, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 4461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Serroni, S. Campagna, F. Puntoriero, A. Juris, G. Denti, V. Balzani and M. Venturi, Inorg. Synth., 2002, 33, 10 CAS .
S. Glazier, J. A. Barron, P. L. Houston and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9993 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, S. J. Lee and W. B. Lin, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 2149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, S. J. Lee and W. B. Lin, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 3429 RSC .
D. S. Tyson, C. R. Luman and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rio, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, D. Felder, E. Levillain and J. F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2830 RSC .
V. Balzani, S. Campagna, G. Denti, A. Juris, S. Serroni and M. Venturi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 26 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. van Manen, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and D. N. Reinhoudt, Top. Curr. Chem., 2001, 217, 121 CAS .
G. J. Capitosti, S. J. Cramer, C. S. Rajesh and D. A. Modarelli, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 1645 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hackbarth, V. Horneffer, A. Wiehe, F. Hillenkamp and B. Roder, Chem. Phys., 2001, 269, 339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kimata and T. Aida, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 4187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, T. Shiba, M. Yamazaki, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5636 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Rajesh, G. J. Capitosti, S. J. Cramer and D. A. Modarelli, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10175 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Choi, T. Aida, T. Yamazaki and I. Yamazaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sakamoto, T. Kamachi, I. Okura, A. Ueno and H. Mihara, Biopolymers, 2001, 59, 103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sakamoto, A. Ueno and H. Mihara, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 2449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fermeglia, M. Ferrone and S. Pricl, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2002, 10, 2471 Search PubMed .
C. M. Geer, B. J. Behnke, P. McDonough and D. C. Poole, J. Appl. Physiol., 2002, 93, 227 Search PubMed .
M. Kimura, Y. Saito, K. Ohta, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 5274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, H. Narikawa, K. Ohta, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2711 CrossRef CAS .
K. Onitsuka, H. Kitajima, M. Fujimoto, A. Iuchi, F. Takei and S. Takahashi, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2576 RSC .
P. Weyermann, F. Diederich, J. P. Gisselbrecht, C. Boudon and M. Gross, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2002, 85, 571 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Benites, T. E. Johnson, S. Weghorn, L. H. Yu, P. D. Rao, J. R. Diers, S. I. Yang, C. Kirmaier, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 65 RSC .
M. S. Choi, T. Aida, T. Yamazaki and I. Yamazaki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 2668 CrossRef .
E. M. Harth, S. Hecht, B. Helms, E. E. Malmstrom, J. M. J. Fréchet and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3926 CrossRef CAS .
V. Rozhkov, D. Wilson and S. Vinogradov, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
M. Enomoto and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6099 CrossRef .
T. R. Krishna and N. Jayaraman, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 2002, 746 RSC .
T. Liwporncharoenvong and R. L. Luck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3615 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vögtle, M. Gorka, V. Vicinelli, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 2, 769 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vicinelli, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri, V. Balzani, M. Gorka and F. Vögtle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rodlert, R. Vestberg, E. Malmström, M. Persson and M. Lindgren, Synth. Met., 2002, 127, 37 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Fukuzumi and D. M. Guldi, in Electron Transfer in Chemistry, ed. V. Balzani, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001, vol. 2, p. 270 Search PubMed .
J. F. Nierengarten, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3667 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwell, N. K. Wachter, J. H. Rice, J. P. Galaup, S. Leach, R. Taylor and R. V. Bensasson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 339, 29 CrossRef CAS .
I. Texier, M. N. Berberan-Santos, A. Fedorov, M. Brettreich, H. Schonberger, A. Hirsch, S. Leach and R. V. Bensasson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 10278 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kunieda, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito, M. Ito, Y. Murata and K. Komatsu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murata, M. Ito and K. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2009 RSC .
Y. Takaguchi, T. Tajima, K. Ohta, J. Motoyoshiya, H. Aoyama, T. Wakahara, T. Akasaka, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 817 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rio, G. Accorsi, H. Nierengarten, J. L. Rehspringer, B. Honerlage, G. Kopitkovas, A. Chugreev, A. Van Dorsselaer, N. Armaroli and J. F. Nierengarten, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1146 RSC .
A. Watanabe, M. Nanjo, T. Sunaga and A. Sekiguchi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 6436 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the structure of a dendrimer with its main components. When referring to a dendron, the core is usually denominated as the focal point.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
