Recent advances in the application of total scattering methods to functional materials  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CC07429K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CC07429K
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16592-16604Recent advances in the application of total scattering methods to functional materials

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Mancini
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lorenzo 
            Malavasi
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and INSTM, Viale Taramelli 16, 27100 Pavia, Italy. E-mail: Lorenzo.malavasi@unipv.it
Received 
      4th September 2015
    , Accepted 29th September 2015First published on 29th September 2015AbstractIn this Feature Article we provide a description of some of the most recent results obtained in the field of materials science by means of total scattering methods and PDF analysis. Particular attention is devoted to the application of PDF to functional materials and to examples showing the combination of PDF with other solid state chemistry techniques.
Alessandro Mancini
Alessandro Mancini obtained his PhD in Chemistry at the University of Pavia in 2015 in the group of Prof. Malavasi. He is currently working as PostDoc in the same group. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of materials for clean energy application with particular emphasis on the X-rays & Neutron diffraction and PDF analysis.
Lorenzo Malavasi
Lorenzo Malavasi is Associate Professor in the Chemistry Department of the University of Pavia. He received the Young Scientist Award for outstanding work in the field of perovskites at the International Conference on Perovskites, Zürich, and the “Alfredo di Braccio” Prize for Chemistry 2008 of Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei awarded to distinguished under 35-year-old chemists. He has contributed to the “Emerging Investigator” issues of the Journal of Materials Chemistry and Chemical Communications in 2010 and 2011. He is working in several areas of solid state chemistry with particular interest in the investigation of structure–properties correlation in different kinds of functional materials, especially electrolytes and cathodes for clean energy, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, and high-temperature superconductors. He is editor of the journal Novel Superconducting Materials and author of more than 120 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.
1. Introduction
Understanding the correlation between structural and mechanistic properties represents the core problem of modern materials chemistry. Fundamental advances in this research field have been made thanks to countless crystallographic studies in the past decades and the continuous development of the structural analysis carried out by traditional methods, i.e. X-ray and neutron diffraction. In more recent times, however, there has been a growing realization of the limits provided by the traditional crystallographic approaches, which are based on the assumption of lattice periodicity. In fact, the appearance of new functional materials, increasingly more advanced and complex, such as, for example, nanocrystalline compounds or highly defective oxides, clearly showed how diffraction alone cannot provide a careful description of material structures. In these new materials, the correlation between physical properties and structural, electronic or magnetic inhomogeneity has become evident, with their functional properties strongly connected to the deviations from the average structure. Due to this reason, new experimental approaches, which are based on local structure details, have gained growing importance in the crystallographic investigation.1–3
Traditionally, the local structure analysis of crystalline materials has been afforded by means of EXAFS and solid state NMR, which have different targets and sensitivities in comparison with crystallography methods. The dominant contribution to these probes is given by the structural correlations between nearest neighbours; thus they can provide very useful information on the coordination environment with respect to a reference atom but, on the other hand, they basically do not provide any information coming from longer distances. As a matter of fact, this difference in target information sometimes generates structural results which seem to be apparently in contradiction between EXAFS/NMR and crystallography.1 In this context, the need of a probe which can act as a bridge between the two domains of the average and local structures, i.e. that can provide an effective description of the structure of a material on different length scales, considering both the long range order and the possible deviation from it at the local level is evident. In order to meet this need, new experimental approaches have been developed in recent times. In particular, the total scattering methods coupled with the pair distribution function analysis (PDF) has gained progressively a central role in the understanding of the structure–property correlation starting from its extensive application to solid state problems in the late 90s.4 This is witnessed by the number of materials chemistry studies which take advantage of this technique and by the number of dedicated instruments present, or planned to be built, in international facilities.
In this feature article, after a concise description of the PDF technique, we are going to summarize the more recent advances in the application of total scattering methods to the investigation of crystalline and nanocrystalline functional materials. Attention will be also paid on recent experiments carried out under in situ or operando conditions in order to show the great applicative potential of these methods. Similarly, studies carried out by coupling PDF analysis with other experimental or theoretical techniques will be discussed to emphasize how a multi-technique approach can be a powerful tool to solve challenging problems in materials chemistry. Great prominence will also be given to the wide range of application fields where PDF has provided significant contributions in recent times, showing how this technique is powerful in providing information at the atomic scale level.
2. Atomic pair distribution function technique
In this section, we provide the basic mathematical and physical information regarding the PDF technique. However, we invite the reader to refer to ref. 4 for a more detailed discussion. As can be guessed, the total scattering approach uses both the Bragg and diffuse scattering on an equal basis. The analysis of the Bragg peaks provide information about the average structure of the investigated material, such as cell parameters, atomic positions and thermal displacements, while the diffuse scattering accounts for static or dynamical disorder, i.e. local deviations from the long range order. From an experimental point of view, the data are measured as in a regular powder diffraction experiment. The experimental intensity measured, I(Q), is expressed as: I(Q) = PA[N(Icoh + Iinc + Imul)](1)where P is the polarization factor, A is the absorption coefficient, N is a normalization constant to the incident flux and Icoh, Iinc, and Imul, are the coherent, incoherent and multiple scattering intensities, respectively. In addition, the background intensity arising from the effects such as the scattering from air and the sample environment also has to be considered (i.e. measured and then subtracted from the total experimental intensity measured, I(Q)). Let us note that I(Q) is a continuous function of Q, the magnitude of the scattering vector, which is defined as: (2)where θ is half of the scattering angle. The total scattering structure function, S(Q), is obtained by dividing I(Q) by the number of scatterers so that S(Q) is in an absolute unit of scattering-per-atom.4 In the case of an X-ray experiment it can be defined as: (3)where 〈f〉2 and 〈f2〉 are the square of the mean and the mean square scattering factors of the sample, respectively. In the case of neutron experiments, the Q-independent neutron scattering lengths (b) are used. In order to obtain the S(Q) function, I(Q) data have to be suitably corrected before for absorption, polarization factor, multiple scattering, incoherent scattering, background, and have to be properly normalized.5–7S(Q) is a dimensionless quantity and, due to the normalization used, its average value is 1, i.e. 〈S(Q)〉 = 1. This average is performed over the Q-range probed. It should be stressed that the total scattering factor is nothing other than the powder diffraction pattern that has been corrected for experimental artefacts and suitably normalized. In the PDF analysis we are interested in obtaining the reduced pair distribution function, G(r), which is defined as: G(r) = 4πr[ρ(r) − ρ0](4)where ρ(r) is the microscopic pair density and ρ0 is the average number density. The direct Fourier transform of the S(Q) function generates the experimental G(r):8 (5) The G(r) can be calculated from a structural model using: (6)where fν and fμ and are the scattering factors for atoms ν and μ and 〈f〉2 has the same meaning as in eqn (3). The sum is performed over all pairs of atoms ν and μ separated by rνμ. Again, in the case of a neutron experiment the f are replaced by Q-independent neutron scattering lengths (b). G(r) oscillates around 0 and, in the case of an X-ray experiment, a peak in the G(r) pattern indicates a r-range where the probability of finding inter-atomic vectors is greater than that determined by the number density (ρ(r) > ρ0); conversely, the same probability is lower (ρ0 > ρ(r)) in correspondence with a negative peaks in the G(r). G(r) reduces to −4πρ0r when r → 0, due to the lack of physical inter-atomic distances, while G(r) → 0 when r → ∞.4 One important “practical” aspect of collecting PDF data relates to the Q-range probed. As can be appreciated from eqn (5) the S(Q) is measured only over a finite range of Q. In practice, the real-space resolution of the PDF is directly related to the range of Q over which data are measured; roughly speaking δr = π/Qmax where Qmax is the maximum Q-value.4 As a matter of fact, in order to increase the Qmax it is necessary to decrease the λ used in the experiment according to eqn (2). This can be obtained by using spallation neutron sources with a high flux of epithermal neutrons with short wavelengths or by collecting X-ray diffraction data at high-energy synchrotron facilities using short wavelengths. For X-rays experiments there is an additional challenge related to the drop-off of the X-ray form factor with Q, resulting in a weak signal at high diffracting angles. However, suitable high-energy synchrotrons allow us to get sufficient statistics to yield accurate data up to at least 45 Å−1. The importance of collecting the data at high Qmax values is also related to the spurious oscillations, called “termination ripples”, that are present due to the finite Q range of the experiment (ripples with a wavelength ∼2π/Qmax).4 However, the coherent intensity (features) in the S(Q) dies out with the increasing Q due to the Debye–Waller factor so that suitable PDFs are obtained by terminating the data at Qmax ∼ 3/〈〈u2〉〉1/2, where 〈〈u2〉〉1/2 is the root mean square of lattice vibrations.9 Overall, at a Q-value of 30–50 Å−1 (depending on temperature and stiffness of the bonding) there are no more features in the S(Q) and there is no need to measure to a higher-Q. As briefly mentioned above, the PDF reflects both the long-range atomic structure, manifested in the sharp Bragg peaks, and the local structural imperfections, manifested in the diffuse components of the diffraction pattern. This is because the total scattering contributes to the PDF. The analysis of the data does not presume periodicity. Some information can be directly extracted from the PDF because of its definition as the atom-pair correlation function.4 For example, from the peak-position it is possible to extract information about the bond length because the presence of a peak in the PDF indicates the existence of a pair of atoms with that separation. The peak integrated intensities instead give information about the coordination number because it is influenced by the number of neighbours in that coordination shell around an origin atom. Finally, the measurement of the peak width may allow to extract information about the thermal or static disorder since it gives rise to a distribution of atom–atom distances.10
Modelling the data, however, reveals much more information than the model-independent analysis. The most popular approach is the real-space modelling with the use of a full-profile fitting method analogous to the Rietveld method but where the function fitted is the PDF. This is implemented in the PDFgui program11 which is the most recent version of the PDFfit software.12 In this method, parameters of the structural calculated model (lattice constants, atomic position and atomic displacement parameters) and other experiment-dependent parameters are allowed to vary with a least-square approach until they reach the best-fit with respect to the experimental functions. In comparison with a Rietveld refinement, however, it is possible to model the short range G(r) by using unit cells with different sizes (i.e., supercells), reduce the symmetry of the structure and introduce disorder. In other words, is possible to model the function without any periodicity assumption. For a more detailed description of this topic we suggest the reader to ref. 4. The PDF can be also modelled in the reciprocal space using methods that generally involve larger models of thousands of atoms that are usually refined using Monte Carlo simulated annealing or some other global optimization schemes. A quite popular approach is the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) approach where the quantity to be minimized is the difference between a calculated and an experimental diffraction pattern. For more detailed information on this topic, which is not the aim of this review, see ref. 13–15. An updated review on the advances in total scattering analysis can be also found in ref. 18. After the brief introduction to the PDF technique, we will present recent examples of the application of PDF analysis to functional materials.
3. PDF studies of functional materials
3.1 Oxide ion conductors
Acceptor doped ZrO2 was the first oxide ion conductor investigated by means of X-ray PDF by Gateshki et al. in 200516 with the aim of correlating the average and local structures of nanocrystalline samples. More recently, doped CeO2 was the subject of total scattering investigation. Doped CeO2 (Ce1−xRExO2−x/2) is a fluorite type conductor which is typically doped with rare earth elements, with the best electrochemical performances obtained with ions which minimize the size difference with respect to Ce4+ (Sm, Gd and Y). However, doping levels above x ca. 0.20 usually lead to a dramatic reduction of the ionic conductivity. Different explanations for this behaviour were proposed. Among these, the most commonly accepted are the possible formation of complex defects, the oxygen vacancy ordering and the phase separation at the nanoscale. Great efforts were made in order to elucidate such a behaviour at the microscopic level and doped ceria has been extensively studied by means of several experimental and computational techniques such as EXAFS, HRTEM, X-ray and neutron diffraction and atomistic modelling. In spite of this, the possible presence of extended defect clusters as well as their nature and dimensions as a function of the dopants was far from being clarified. In this context, a relevant PDF study was carried out in 2012 by Scavini et al.17 in order to investigate the nature and the correlation length of defects clustering in the Ce1−xGdxO2−x/2 solid solution. Experimental pair distribution functions of samples with different compositions were fitted starting from their average crystallographic structure, i.e. the fluorite type structure for samples with x < 0.50 and the C-type structure for samples with x > 0.50. A good fit agreement between experimental data and model structures was obtained, for all the samples, only for r > 10 Å; for r values shorter than 10 Å a clear worsening of the fit quality was evident, as can be seen in Fig. 1.17 The introduction, in the structural model, of defect clusters following the indication coming from molecular dynamic simulations did not lead to any improvement of the fit quality. A significant improvement in the description of the experimental PDFs was obtained by a two-phase refinement with both CeO2 and Gd2O3 structures (see Fig. 2).17
 Fig. 1  (a–e) G(r) refinements using the real space Rietveld method over different r ranges for xGd = 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 0.875 samples, respectively. Experimental (black), calculated (red) and residual profiles (blue) are shown. Reprinted with permission from M. Scavini et al., Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1338–1345. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 2  Experimental (black), calculated (red) and residual profiles are shown. (a–e) Panels: refinements obtained using the biphasic model with reference to the xGd = 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 0.875 samples, respectively. (f–l) Panels: the results obtained using the monophasic model with reference to the same samples. Reprinted with permission from M. Scavini et al., Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1338–1345. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The resulting improvement is particularly evident for samples with similar Ce and Gd contents. All these findings, coupled with a detailed analysis of the bond distance maps of the CGO solid solution, lead the authors to conclude that, in this system, Ce4+ and Gd3+ show the tendency to retain the local environment they have in the end members with coherent domains in the r < 10 Å range thus indicating in this way the presence of extended defects at the local scale in the system. Similar results were also obtained by the same authors for the CeO2/Y2O3 solid solution,18 which shows a local structure substantially different from the average and mesoscopic structures. On the other hand, ceria doped with Pr and Tb was found to behave differently, particularly with the retention of the cerium oxide structure but with different oxidation states for the two dopants.19
Another appealing conventional oxide ion conductor structure investigated was the brownmillerite structure which is an anion vacancy ordered variant of the perovskite structure. In particular, the system investigated was doped Ba2In2O520 with particular emphasis on the effect of oxyanionic doping on the structure. Pure barium indate is orthorhombic (s.g. Icmm) up to 1173 K, tetragonal from 1173 to 1313 K, and cubic above 1313 K. It becomes a suitable oxide ion conductor slightly above 1200 K when the oxygen vacancies start to disorder and the oxygen migration is favoured. Due to this reason many doping strategies have been proposed in the literature in order to stabilize the tetragonal and cubic structures of barium indate, among which one of the most interesting is the oxyanionic doping with PO43− and SO42− ions.21 Moreover, computational studies reported a distribution of the oxygen vacancies for this system far from being random even at highest temperatures suggesting some discrepancy between the short range order and the average crystallographic structure.22 In this context, an X-ray total scattering investigation at room temperature of orthorhombic pure barium indate and the doped samples Ba2In1.70P0.30O5.30 and Ba2In1.70S0.30O5.45 (which are cubic at room temperature), was carried out with the aim of looking at their local structure and testing the available theoretical models which suggested a similar local order for the different average structures. The results of this work indicated that the two doped samples, which clearly show a cubic symmetry in the medium to long range, in agreement with X-ray and neutron diffraction patterns, show, on the other hand, a distorted orthorhombic symmetry at the local scale. This can be seen for the sulphate ion doping from the fits reported in Fig. 3.20 This more distorted atomic arrangement at the local scale, once the defects become mobile, allows an easier mobility of the oxide ions and can be considered as the reason making the cubic phase more conductive than the orthorhombic one.
 Fig. 3  (a) PDF fit of Ba2In1.70S0.30O5.45 up to 10 Å with the Pmm cubic space group and (b) with the Icmm orthorhombic space group. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; horizontal green line: residual. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Non-conventional oxide ion conductors recently discovered were also the object of intense total scattering investigations. Neutron PDF analysis was performed on a gallium melilite family compound, La1+xSr1−xGa3O7+x/2 with x = 0.50.23 This compound was found to have a notable high purely ionic conductivity due to interstitial oxygen, which is accommodated in the melilite structure in order to balance the La/Sr doping.24 The PDF study aimed at providing a deeper comprehension of the actual structure of this oxide and in particular to give an experimental evidence of the actual localization of interstitial oxygen in the melilite structure which is a basic requisite in order to understand the ion migration path.
Various structures, ranging from Rietveld derived models to computational models, were tested against the experimental data. The main results indicated that interstitial oxygen lies in the pentagonal ring cavity formed by the gallium coordination polyhedra and the best fit of the experimental neutron PDF was obtained for the structural model in which the defects are placed off-centred in such a cavity. This result was recently confirmed by Xu et al.23 by the comparison with Ce-substituted melilites.
A further development of the application of PDF analysis to challenging ion conductors is the coupling between experimental data and DFT analysis, which seems to be a required approach for systems where a description of the average structure of the anion sub-lattice becomes very complex. A recent example is the work by Kalland et al.25 where a neutron and X-ray total scattering study has been coupled with extensive molecular dynamic simulation. In particular, the object of such a work was to shed light on the actual structure of the most recently discovered oxide ion conductor, lanthanum tungstate, which was initially described in the literature with the chemical formula La6WO12, similar to other rare earth tungstates. First studies found that the material can exist in a stable phase only for La/W atomic ratios between 5.3 and 5.7, and the structure was described as a complex fluorite type cubic structure (s.g. F3m) in which both lanthanum and tungsten are cubically coordinated by oxygen atoms.26 More detailed structural studies, carried out by means of high resolution X-ray diffraction, detected a significant distortion from the cubic symmetry and an octahedral coordination of the tungsten atoms.27
As a consequence, the structure was refined with a tetragonal unit cell (s.g. I4/mmm) that reduced the maximum number of available oxygen sites from 64 to 56. In spite of all these experimental efforts, the lanthanum tungstate structure still showed to be quite elusive, in particular concerning the oxygen ions distribution. Neutron and X-rays total scattering experiments were carried out and initially compared to the (average) structural models available in the literature leading to the evidence of a significant grade of disorder in the oxygen sublattice, which is also evident from the marked background modulation in the neutron diffraction patterns. In addition, the fit of the experimental PDFs in the short range leads to unsatisfactory results, as can be seen in Fig. 4,25 showing a strong discrepancy between the average crystallographic structure and the local range order. Following these results, and the extremely complex oxygen distribution, several different structural configurations of varying total energy obtained by molecular dynamic simulations, were fitted against the experimental X-ray and neutron PDFs. The interplay between molecular dynamics simulation results and PDF fitting allowed identification of the most plausible oxygen distribution as demonstrated by both X-ray and neutron PDF fitting agreement reported in Fig. 5.25 The use of DFT calculations in order to derive energetically stable structural starting models has led to a good description of the experimental PDFs of this complex oxide. The combination of DFT and PDF can provide a very powerful method to understand structural details that cannot be simply accessed or verified. The coupling of PDF analysis with computational modelling represents an approach which is expected to play a central role in the structural characterization of new advanced functional materials in the next future.
 Fig. 4  X-ray (panel A) and neutron (panel B) PDF refinements of lanthanum tungstate by means of the average tetragonal space group reported in ref. 12; agreement factors for the fits are Rwp = 0.188 and 0.327, respectively. Inset of panel A: detailed view of a selected region around the peak located at ∼4 Å. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; and horizontal green line: residual (shifted by −3 for ease of visualization). Reprinted with permission from L. E. Kalland et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2378–2384. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  Neutron (panel A) and X-ray (panel B) PDF refinements by means of DFT calculated local structure for the lanthanum tungstate; agreement factor values are Rwp = 0.168 and 0.098, respectively. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; and horizontal green line: residual (shifted by −3 for ease of visualization). Adapted with permission from L. E. Kalland et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2378–2384. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Li-ion battery materials
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become, in the past decade, the most important rechargeable energy storage devices and nowadays they are used for a bunch of different mobile equipment as power tools like cellphones and laptops, and are also promising candidates for automotive applications. Although in these years their performance has impressively improved, many materials science issues still remain to be solved for a wider diffusion and cost reduction of this technology. Several total scattering works, dealing with both anode and cathode materials, have recently appeared in the literature. The reason for the popularity of PDF analysis in the LIB field can be explained by considering the following aspects: (i) the common presence of components that have poor crystallinity (or that are amorphous); (ii) the marked presence of static and/or dynamic disorder; and (iii) the fact that the processes and the reactions occurring are often affected by nano- and meso-scale effects and domains. Positive electrode (or cathodic) materials have been extensively studied essentially in order to improve their energy density. Layered oxides, polyanionic compounds and 3D transition metal binary compounds represent a sort of timeline of the materials discovery in this research field which couples with the increase in the complexity of the systems and the electrochemical processes involved. Total scattering studies were carried out for all these classes of materials in order to unveil new structural details of relevance for the applications of LIBs.
Among others, relevant examples are a study by Idemoto et al.28 where the correlation between the synthesis and the local structure of the xLi(Li1/3Mn2/3)O2–(1 − x)Li(Mn1/3Ni1/3Co1/3)O2 solid solution is reported; a study by Adipranoto et al.29 where the crystal and local effects of the Ni doping in LiCo1−xNixO2 system is carefully examined, leading to the conclusion that the distance of diffusion pathways of oxide ions around Co atoms does not change when they are substituted with Ni; the work by Moriya and coworkers30 which reported a study of the charged/discharged structures of carbon hybridized Li2MnSiO4 nanoparticles in which the repetitive disappearance/appearance of the long range order of the lithium manganese orthosilicate is evident during the charge/discharge processes, respectively, with the consumption of the long range order due to distortions of the [MnO4] octahedra; and the neutron PDF investigation of the rich polymorphism showed by the Li2MSiO4 family (with M = Fe, Mn), reported in ref. 31, showing that all the polymorphs investigated have the same monoclinic distortion in the short range, thus suggesting a possible explanation for the similar electrochemical behavior of the different average crystallographic structures.
More articulated studies have been carried out on transition metals binary compounds, in particular by coupling the PDF technique with in situ or operando solid state NMR. A very elegant example of such a powerful multi-combined investigation was performed by Wiaderek et al.,32 where the authors provided a very detailed description of the structural and electrochemical processes which take place in the mixed anion cathode FeOF during cycling. This work can be considered an evolution of the investigation reported by Yamakawa and coworkers33 in 2009, where the same combination of total scattering analysis (in this case ex situ measurements) and solid state NMR was used to describe the conversion mechanism of the FeF3 composite cathodic materials.
As previously outlined, PDF analysis plays a central role in this kind of studies because the general characterization challenge for conversion based cathodes comes from the alternate consumption/renovation of the long range order during charge–discharge cycles. In the work by Wiaderek et al.,32 the PDF technique was strengthened by coupling with the solid state NMR technique, that provides further structural and chemical information on active species (i.e. lithium ions and fluorine). However the coupled PDF-NMR approach can be extremely powerful by performing in situ measurements. It is worth to point out that this work represents, in particular, the first example of such a kind of in situ PDF measurement.
From an experimental point of view, the authors measured several in situ PDFs during electrochemical discharge–charge cycles whose curves are reported in Fig. 6;32 in parallel, Fig. 7,32 shows selected PDFs obtained during the first cycle. Similar features and trends can be appreciated and the structural transitions observed during the charge and discharge processes were largely reversible. The discharge product was identified as metallic Fe nanoparticles, characterized by the short Fe–Fe correlations at 2.5 Å. An additional intermediate phase, observed both during charge and discharge processes, is identified by peaks at 3.2 and 5.0 Å which are absent in the charged (pristine) or discharged states. The product at the end of the charge shows atomic correlations below 5 Å, similar to the pristine starting structure of the electrode, although the peaks at longer distances are attenuated, suggesting a reduction in crystallinity or in the particle size. Experimental PDFs were fitted with structural models in order to identify the evolution of the phases in the system and their particle sizes. The analysis reports a progressive disorder in the pristine phase during the initial discharge with the formation of several crystalline, distorted and amorphous rutile-type FeOxF2−x phases with no evidence of local O/F ordering. In addition, the intermediate outlined above (which starts to form after about 0.4Li, i.e. just before the plateau in the electrochemistry reported in Fig. 632) was identified as a non stoichiometric rock salt type α-LiFeO2 phase, with a coherent particle size of 50 Å. During discharge, Fe nanoparticles are formed with a particle size of about 25 Å. Upon charging, these nanoparticles are consumed, forming a poorly ordered, or “amorphous”, rutile phase which shows partially ordered features only below 6–10 Å. Finally, the rock salt phase does not react until all the Fe nanoparticles have been completely transformed in “amorphous” rutile. The authors also provide bond valence sum analysis where the weighting of Fe–O to Fe–F bond valence parameters provides a measure of the ratio between Fe–F and Fe–O bonds throughout the entire process. For example, it was clearly shown that Fe–F bonds decrease linearly between 0.6Li and 1.4Li with exclusively Fe–O remaining in the oxidized Fe phase at the end of the discharge; this suggested that the rock salt phase is primarily an oxide. Parallel to this, during discharge, F-coordinated Fe was also clearly shown to be preferentially reduced to Fe nanoparticles and LiF. Thanks to the data collected, the authors could give a very detailed and precise description of the full discharge–charge process at the microscopic level. Moreover, a further important conclusion is that the active cathode, which delivers enhanced performance, is actually a two-phase composite mixture of oxide-rich and fluorine-rich materials instead of a single oxyfluoride phase. This suggests that synthesis efforts made in order to obtain the single-phase mixed-anion compound are unnecessary and that similar enhanced performances in conversion systems could be obtained using composite cathodes which simply are physical mixtures of oxides and fluorides.
 Fig. 6  Discharge–charge curves obtained for FeII(1−x)FeIIIxOxF2−x within the AMPIX cell presented in ref. 32 during PDF measurements, at a cycling current of 30 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from K. M. Wiaderek et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4070–4078. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  Selected PDFs obtained during the first discharge–charge cycle (for x = 0.60, 50 °C, C/30, ∼35 h, 4.5–1.5–4.5 V). The arrows indicate distances characteristic of the rock salt intermediate. The colors reflect relative peak intensities. Reprinted with permission from K. M. Wiaderek et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4070–4078. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
A similar investigation on the carbon coated CuF2 conversion cathode, was reported by Hua et al.34 As shown in ref. 32, here the authors carried out an in situ PDF analysis coupled with solid state NMR in order to elucidate the entire lithiation mechanism over a full cycle. All the experimental evidence collected lead the authors to a number of interesting conclusions not reported before: (i) CuF2 is found to participate only in the first discharge cycle, while very little or no copper fluoride formation is detected upon charging; (ii) the amount of small Cu nanoparticles formed on discharging grows at the beginning of the CuF2 conversion enhancing the electronic conductivity and helping to compensate for insulating effects due to the LiF phase; (iii) formed Cu nanoparticles are largely covered by an insulating LiF layer, helping to prevent their sintering; (iv) SEI formation on the Cu surfaces enlarges the overpotential causing a continuous potential reduction; (v) the CuF2 conversion mechanism is essentially different from most of the other conversion materials: due to the close potential for the Cu dissolution in the organic electrolyte to that for the reconversion reaction, Cu therefore dissolves in the electrolyte and consumes LiF thus preventing transformation of Cu to CuF2. Finally, another combined experimental approach was presented in Wiaderek et al.,35 where PDF analysis was coupled with small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) to study a series of different nano-composite cathodes of iron fluorides, oxyfluorides and oxides in order to probe the atomic and nanoscale structures in Fe formed through the electrochemical conversion in different anion environments.
Although less diffusely explored by means of PDF, negative electrodic (anodic) materials were also the subject of total scattering investigations. The first work of this kind on silicon anodes was conducted in 2011 by Key and co-workers36 reporting an ex situ PDF study in combination with the solid state NMR technique. In particular, electrochemical phenomena at the anode during first discharge and subsequent charge cycles were modeled through a four-process mechanism. Much work was done on the germanium based anodes, for example in the paper by Liu et al.37 where experimental PDFs from the GeO2–SnCoC composite anode were collected and analyzed in order to describe the entire lithiation/delithiation process. PDF analysis was here particularly useful to reveal the reversible conversion reaction of GeO2 and SnO2 and attribute this reversibility to the catalytic effect of a germanium–cobalt alloy formed during cycles. Also the simple germanium anode was tested and studied by means of the PDF technique and solid state NMR by Jung et al.38 In this work, the authors found that the lithiation process occurring in Ge anodes starts the formation of the Li7Ge3 phase instead of the previously reported Li9Ge4; the mechanism continues with the conversion of Li7Ge3 to Li7Ge2 through several disordered phases containing columns of Li and Ge, and finally it ends with the nucleation and the growth of the crystalline Li15Ge4 phase, which can be further lithiated to Li15+δGe4.
We would like to highlight that most of the results presented in this section were possible thanks to PDF measurements carried out at the 11-ID-C and 11-ID-B beamlines at the Advanced Photon Source synchrotron, which greatly contributed, in the last few years, to the evolution of the X-ray total scattering technique in order to solve the most challenging and actual problems in materials science.
3.3 Hydrogen storage materials
The application of total scattering methods to the hydrogen storage materials field shows how the PDF analysis could be fundamental in order to understand mechanistic properties and processes.
For example, Kim et al.39 investigated the structural changes of the V1−xTix alloy in the early hydrogen absorption and desorption cycles. Vanadium is a very suitable material for hydrogen storage but its high cost represents an important drawback for real applications. However, it is well known that alloying V with inexpensive elements such as, for example, Ti, usually leads to a significant reduction in hydrogen storage properties due to the possible increase of defects and lattice strains. Although this is general awareness, the mechanism behind the degradation in the reversible hydrogen storage capacity in vanadium based alloys during hydrogen cycling was not fully elucidated. The authors of ref. 39 observed an unusually rapid profile damping in the collected experimental PDFs during first hydrogen absorption and desorption cycles for the pure vanadium sample with such a phenomenon becoming faster by increasing the Ti concentration in the alloy. The absence of any extra peak appearing in the low r-range region during cycles ruled out the possibility of secondary phase formation as the reason for the degradation in reversible hydrogen uptake.
The broadening of PDF peaks during absorption/desorption cycles can be appreciated in Fig. 839 showing the increasing Qdamp values versus the number of cycles. This continuous broadening and the fast function damping were therefore correlated to lattice defects or disorder which could disturb the mid to long range structural order and play an evident role in the worsening of the storage performance of the V1−xTix alloy. As a consequence, various defects between stacking faults, twin boundaries, dislocations and vacancies were tested with the help of MD simulations in order to understand the origin of this effect. Fits with a structural model containing dislocations gave so far the best results as reported in Fig. 939 indicating that the increase in the concentration of such defects is the reason for the reduction in the reversible hydrogen storage capacity of the vanadium–titanium alloy system. A similar approach was then adopted by the same research group of Sakaki et al.40 to solve the structure–properties correlation problem for a different material for hydrogen storage, i.e. the Mg2−xPrxNi4 system. In this case also, it was found that the reduction of hydrogen storage capacity is caused by the accumulation of dislocations introduced during hydrogenation in the early stages of the cycling process. Both the studies presented in this paragraph were possible thanks to the high quality total scattering data obtained on the BL22XU beamline at the Spring-8 synchrotron.
 Fig. 8  (a) Qbroad values obtained from the PDF refinements of V0.8Ti0.2H2 data and (b) the reversible hydrogen storage capacity of V0.8Ti0.2 at 413 K is plotted as a function of the cycle number. The reversible hydrogen storage capacity was normalized by the initial value. Red dashed lines are for guidance. Reprinted with permission from H. Kim et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26543–26550. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  Calculated PDFs using (a) the VH2 stacking fault model and (b) V dislocation model were fitted using the defect-free models without refining the Qbroad parameter. Blue open circles, red lines, and green lines represent calculated PDFs using the defect models, fits using the defect-free models, and difference curves, respectively. The difference curves are offset for sake of clarity. (c) and (d) Refinement of the same PDFs as (a) and (b) with Qbroad parameter, respectively. Qbroad parameter did not help explain the effect of stacking faults (c) but reproduced the effect of dislocations on the PDF very well (d). Reprinted with permission from H. Kim et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26543–26550. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Porous materials
Several classes of materials characterized by high and diffuse porosity, which have attracted great interest in recent times, have been the object of relevant PDF studies. Among them, huge interest is nowadays devoted to metal organic frameworks (MOFs), consisting of metal ion networks linked in a three-dimensional framework by organic electron-rich ligands. MOFs are characterized by an impressive chemical and structural versatility due to the wide range of possible components and substituents, and due to this reason they also show a wide range of potential applications ranging from gas sorption and separation to catalysis, proton conduction and photoluminescence. In particular, the interaction between the flexible MOF structures with guest molecules represents an ideal field of investigation for the PDF analysis.
Exemplary studies were carried out by Sava et al.41 and Chapman et al.,42 diffusely discussing the capture of the volatile iodine fission product by zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 is. In these papers, the total scattering technique has a fundamental role in the comprehension of the host–guest interactions through the analysis of the difference between the PDFs of the unloaded and loaded samples. The same study was extended two years later in another paper by Sava et al.43 where the subject of the investigation is the Cu–BTC metal organic framework, also known as HKUST-1, an hydrophilic open pore MOF containing coordinatively unsaturated metal centers. In this work, the differential PDFs approach is adopted in order to isolate the correlations involving the sorbed species, i.e. the host–guest correlations. Furthermore, the intensity of the PDF peaks is correlated to the relative abundance of a given atom–atom pair: thus the intensity of the peaks due to Cu–O and I–I bonds (at about 2 and 2.7 Å, respectively) provides an estimation of the Cu/I ratio which is monitored during the room temperature isotherm for iodine sorption, as reported in Fig. 10.43
 Fig. 10  (a) The local and intermediate range structural information in the pair distribution functions (PDFs) confirms that the crystalline Cu–BTC lattice is retained at all I2 loadings. The intensity of the peaks associated with the Cu–O and I–I correlations in the low-r regions of the (b) PDFs and (c) differential-PDFs, respectively, provide an estimate of the (d) I/Cu ratio, which matches that determined gravimetrically. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from D. F. Sava et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2591–2596. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The total scattering approach was recently also applied to a new sub-family of metal organic frameworks which show non-crystalline structures and due to this reason are termed as amorphous MOFs (aMOFs).44–47 The absence of Bragg diffraction peaks in these materials precludes the determination of the atomic positions and of the long range structure. In spite of this, the disordered nature of aMOFs generates diffuse scattering, which contains important information on the atom–atom interactions and can be used to describe the short range order of these frameworks. Indeed, PDF analysis represents, by far, the fundamental tool to characterize the structure of these amorphous systems. Usually, Reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) modeling on PDF data can be used to obtain structural models which can be refined against experimental data in order to obtain characteristic structural parameters. Readers are referred to ref. 48 in which an exhaustive summary of the PDF characterization on the aMOFs systems can be found. Nevertheless, we would like to point out that, essentially, all the work made on such a class of MOFs was possible thanks to the collection of the neutron pair distribution function on the GEM diffractometer at ISIS at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratories, which can be easily considered one of the most experienced instruments for the characterization of amorphous materials.
Mesoporous silica-based systems are another class of materials that has been recently studied with the help of the total scattering approach and that will be presented briefly in the following section. Similar to the case of the metal organic frameworks, the interaction between the host species and guest structures provides the substrate on which PDF analysis can show all its power as a tool to derive structure–properties correlations. In 2013, Hsieh and coworkers reported a study49 where a detailed description of the structural organization of a mononitrosyl complex host in a mesoporous silica matrix is given using a multiscale approach and combining PDF analysis with solid state NMR. One year later, the same group published a new study50 on porous silica that incorporates crystalline nanoparticles of sodium nitroprusside with an average diameter of 6 nm filling almost completely the matrix pores in order to shed light on the stability of the host species as a function of the external parameters. All of these studies demonstrate the increasing interest in using PDF analysis to characterize host–guest interactions inside solid networks. Due to the feasibility and the effectiveness of the total scattering approach in solving this kind of structural problems, it is not utopian to foresee in the future a standardization of the PDF analysis as a structural probe for various categories of porous materials, also at an industrial level.
3.5 Materials for catalysis
Nanomaterials for catalysts are among the most interesting and studied systems in materials science due to their extraordinary versatility, high performances and a wide range of possible applicative areas. Such characteristics come from the significant difference in the structural properties with respect to the corresponding bulk materials. In addition, most of these nanomaterials for catalysts are characterized by nanoscale structural features such as nano-domains and/or local segregation or high distortions at the surfaces, which cannot be easily detected and described by traditional crystallographic analysis. The pair distribution function can overcome these limitations and provide very useful insights through both the simple analysis of the distances distribution in the experimental functions and/or model based analysis. Both approaches can easily discriminate between different atomic environments and take into account the local structural properties that determine the key aspects in the definition of the functional properties in such nanomaterials. Due to these reasons, PDF analysis has been extensively used to characterize this kind of systems and several studies have been reported in the current literature with detailed structural characterization and process description. For example, a number of papers deal with the structural characterization of nanoalloys for catalytic purposes. Loukrakpam et al.51 reported an interesting study on binary and ternary Pt-nanoalloys for the oxygen reduction reaction catalysis. The authors of this paper determined the atomic scale structures of different nanoalloy catalysts and correlated different atomic orderings to differences in the electrocatalytic activities. In particular, the ternary nanoalloy PtIrCo was found to have a higher electrocatalytic activity in comparison with the binary counterparts and this behaviour was correlated with an increased shrunk metal–metal bond distribution as can be seen in Fig. 11.51
 Fig. 11  First peaks in the experimental atomic PDFs for different Pt-nanoalloys thermally treated at 400 and 800 °C. Positions of the peaks are estimated by Gaussian fits to the experimental data and are marked with arrows. Shorter distances were found for ternary alloy. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from R. Loukrakpam et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20715–20721. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Other studies on Pt nanoparticles and monolayers/sub-monolayers supported on Au nanoparticles are reported in ref. 52 and 53. Ref. 52 is a combined in situ PDF and XAS study which reports interesting structural changes, i.e. contraction and relaxation, in 1–3 nm Pt nanoparticles induced by adsorption/desorption processes. Ref. 53 reports complete dehydrogenation of ethanol induced by Au nanoparticles on Pt monolayers and sub-monolayers with better electrocatalytic activity for the former one: in this work the PDF analysis was essential in order to reveal the 3D atomic ordering of the Au nanoparticles on the Pt layers. Pd–Ni nanoalloys were investigated by Shan and coworkers54 in order to understand how exactly Pd and Ni atoms cooperate for the effective activation of CO species on the surface. Petkov et al.55 resolved atomic ordering of nanosized metals and binary alloys of eleventh group elements by coupling PDF analysis with reverse Monte Carlo modeling. Further, Petkov and co-workers56 reported different catalytic activities for TiO2 and SiO2 supported gold nanoparticles which can be ascribed to different atomic scale structure of the nanoparticles.
3.6 Other functional materials
Several other interesting functional materials and phenomena have been recently investigated with success by means of the PDF analysis which are concisely reviewed in this section for the sake of brevity. Nevertheless, we would include them in this review in order to give the idea of the wide range of present applications of the PDF analysis and future developments.
Hybrid perovskites are among the materials that have attracted great interest in recent times for their performances and possible application as active materials in solar cells. Choi et al.57 carried out X-ray PDF analysis in order to describe the structural behaviour of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) within a mesoporous TiO2 layer by performing a quantitative modeling process. Approximately 70% of the active material was found in a highly disordered phase, important for the device efficiency, with the local perovskite structure extending over a range of only 14 Å, which cannot be detected by conventional XRD measurements.
Negative thermal expansion (NTE) and zero thermal expansion (ZTE) materials have been fully characterized in typical systems thanks to the total scattering approach. For example, Bridges and co-workers58 reported a combined PDF and EXAFS experiment on the ZrW2O8 compound, which is one archetype NTE material, finding correlated translational–rotational motions in the polyhedra network much more complicated than simple rotations that are previously used to account for its negative thermal expansion. Hu et al.59 reported an isotropic ZTE over a wide temperature range in the ScF3 system using chemical substitution on scandium sites: this causes local rhombohedral distortion in the cubic average structure which is the reason of the ZTE, and the distortion is evident looking at the differences in the short range of r-distances of the PDFs of pure and doped compounds.
The local structure and piezoelectric instability are correlated in the BaTiO3 system by Maurya and co-workers,60 where the role of A and B site substitution towards local structural changes and its correlation with the piezoelectric response were studied combining PDF analysis and Raman spectroscopy. The same approach, i.e. the combination with Raman spectroscopy, has been used for the same system by Buscaglia et al.,61 thereby reporting an extensive description of the atomic ordering of the BaTi1−xZrxO3 series (with x = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4).
Pressure induced amorphization (PIA) is an interesting phenomenon which can be nicely investigated by means of total scattering methods. For example, studies by Wilkinson et al.62 and Lu et al.63 on ZrMo2O8 and Ta2O5 nanowires, respectively. Notably, these papers witness both the evolution of the sample environments available for PDF experiments and the great engineering and scientific work done in order to overcome all the problems strictly correlated to the narrow angular window due to the utilization of pressure cells.
Another pretty rare and extremely interesting phenomenon recently addressed by means of PDF analysis is the emphanisis, i.e. the appearance of a low symmetry state from a high symmetry state on warming due to a well-defined displacement of atoms from their centrosymmetric positions. Knox et al.64 provided a detailed X-ray and neutron PDF study of the SnTe structural changes as a function of temperature, pointing out a crossover to an emphanitic phase above 300 K with a relatively wide temperature range of about 100 K. Moreover, the emphanitic behaviour was found not to be related to the ferroelectric state of this compound, as previously suggested in the literature, but to a completely distinct phenomenon.
The application of the PDF analysis has also been proposed in order to solve some relevant pharmaceutical problems, such as the identification and quantification of phase fractions in mixed phase samples containing amorphous, nanocrystalline and crystalline components. Davis and co-workers65 demonstrated the efficiency of the total scattering approach for this kind of applicative problems for the sulfamerazine antibiotic drug, describing significant different phase compositions under different sample preparation conditions, opening in this way the route to a new application which could find important industrial implications.
Finally, we want to conclude this review by citing the brand-new combined computed tomography (TC) – PDF approach reported in Jacques et al.66 for an Al2O3 catalytic system. The authors of this work push a step further on the way to the identification and characterization of materials which are lacking in the long-range order. Combining computed tomography with PDF analysis under operando conditions gives the possibility to solve, both as a function of time and space, a working system which eventually can contain even amorphous or highly disordered phases, which is often the case of real material systems for catalysis or clean energy applications like batteries and fuel cells. The spatial resolution can lead to unprecedented insight into reaction pathways, unequal reaction kinetics in different parts of the systems and influence of the SEI formation. Furthermore, tomography can provide unique information, for example, on the response during the working operation; of particular interest is the possibility to image the continuous mechanical degradation of the active materials or composites due to volume expansion or poisoning, which can cause a range of detrimental phenomena from mechanical cracking and deformation to irreversible deactivations. All the features arising from computed tomography are expected to further potentiate the total scattering analysis in order to fully describe and understand intercalation/deintercalation mechanisms, migration and catalytic processes. Similar to the previous case, relevant industrial application could also be imagined and considered in order to highlight once more the importance of such a combined approach of structural characterization.
4. Conclusions
In this feature article, we reported a number of recent studies concerning the application of total scattering methods and pair distribution function analysis to materials chemistry problems with particular emphasis to functional materials. The growing number of related published research studies and dedicated instruments at international facilities all over the world demonstrates the growing interest of the materials science community in adopting the total scattering approach as a core structural characterization tool. PDF analysis takes into account the structural deviations from the long range order thus being an ideal tool in order to unveil structural details otherwise not detectable using traditional crystallographic methods. Due to this reason, the PDF analysis is particularly suitable in systems which are made of materials with a high degree of disorder, nanocrystalline compounds or amorphous phases, which may be the case of the new generation of advanced functional materials. The combination of the total scattering approach with other solid state analysis techniques, such as solid state NMR, IR, and Raman spectroscopy, could significantly expand the range of the obtainable information. As discussed in this review, the synergy between PDF analysis and other such techniques has recently been shown to be extremely useful in order to fully characterize and describe processes (and related mechanisms) of central relevance for modern materials chemistry such as Li intercalation/deintercalation or degradation in hydrogen storage systems. Brand-new experimental approaches and methodologies which have just appeared in the field of total scattering, such as pharmaceutical-related studies and the combination with computed tomography, have already shown an enormous potential to solve still inaccessible structural-related problems.
To conclude, the increasing number of PDF-dedicated beamlines at synchrotrons around the world, together with the continuous development of user-friendly softwares by several groups67–75 and the interest shown by several companies in developing laboratory-scale PDF instruments, are going to make the PDF analysis the structural characterization technique of choice in modern materials science.
Acknowledgements
The Authors acknowledge the financial support for their research work provided by Cariplo Foundation (project 2013-0632) and the provision of beam time at ORNL, ESRF, and APS facilities.
Notes and references
C. A. Young and A. Goodwin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6464–6476 RSC .
S. J. L. Billinge, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1695–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Malavasi, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3777 RSC .

          T. Egami and S. J. L. Billinge, Underneath the Bragg peaks: structural analysis of complex materials, Pergamon, Amsterdam, Boston,  2003 Search PubMed .
C. N. J. Wagner, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1978, 31, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Waseda, The structure of non-crystalline materials, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
I. K. Jeong, F. Mohiuddin-Jacobs, V. Petkov, S. J. L. Billinge and S. Kycia, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 205202 CrossRef .
S. Bruhne, E. Uhring, K. D. Luther, W. Assmus, M. Brnelli, A. S. Masadeh and S. J. L. Billinge, Z. Kristallogr., 2005, 220, 962 Search PubMed .
B. H. Toby and T. Egami, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 1992, 48, 336 CrossRef .
I. K. Jeong, R. H. Heffner, M. J. Graf and S. J. L. Billinge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 104301 CrossRef .
C. L. Farrow, P. Juhas, J. W. Liu, D. Bryndin, E. S. Boin, J. Bloch, T. Proffen and S. J. L. Billinge, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 335219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Proffen and S. J. L. Billinge, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1999, 32, 572–575 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Keen, M. G. Tucker and M. T. Dove, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, S15–S22 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Keen, A. L. Goodwin, M. G. Tucker, M. T. Dove, J. S. O. Evans, W. A. Crichton and M. Brunelli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98 Search PubMed .
A. L. Goodwin, M. G. Tucker, M. T. Dove and D. A. Keen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 119901 CrossRef .
M. Gateshki, V. Petkov, G. Williams, S. K. Pradhan and Y. Ren, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 224107 CrossRef .
M. Scavini, M. Coduri, M. Allieta, M. Brunelli and C. Ferrero, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1338–1345 CrossRef CAS .
M. Coduri, M. Scavini, M. Allieta, M. Brunelli and C. Ferrero, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4278–4289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Coduri, M. Scavini, M. Brunelli, E. Pedrazzin and P. Masala, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 150–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mancini, J. F. Shin, A. Orera, P. R. Slater, C. Tealdi, Y. Ren, K. L. Page and L. Malavasi, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 50–53 RSC .
J. F. Shin, A. Orera, D. C. Apperley and P. R. Slater, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 874 RSC .
C. E. Mohn, N. L. Allan, C. L. Freeman, P. Ravindran and S. Stølen, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mancini, C. Tealdi and L. Malavasi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8073–8080 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; J. Xu, X. Kuang, E. Véron, M. Allix, M. R. Suchomel, F. Porcher, C. Liang, F. Pan and M. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 11589–11597 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kuang, M. A. Green, H. Niu, P. Zajdel, C. Dickinson, J. B. Claridge, L. Jantsky and M. J. Rosseinsky, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Kalland, A. Magrasò, A. Mancini, C. Tealdi and L. Malavasi, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2378–2384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magrasò, C. Frontera, D. Marrero-Lopez and P. Nunez, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10273–10283 RSC .
A. Magrasò, J. M. Polfus, C. Frontera, J. Canales-Vasquez, L. E. Kalland, C. H. Hervoches, S. Erdal, R. Hancke, M. S. Islam, T. Norby and R. Haugsrud, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1762–1764 RSC .
Y. Idemoto, M. Inoue and N. Kitamura, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 195–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Adipranoto, T. Ishigaki, A. Hosikawa, K. Iwase, M. Yonemura, K. Mori, T. Kamiyama, Y. Morii and M. Hayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 92–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moriya, M. Miyahara, M. Hokazono, H. Sasaki, A. Nemoto, S. Katayama, S. Hirano and Y. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mancini, V. R. Barbieri, J. C. Neuefeind, K. Page and L. Malavasi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17867–17874 CAS .
K. M. Wiaderek, O. J. Borkiewicz, E. Castillo-Martinez, R. Robert, N. Pereira, G. G. Amatucci, C. P. Grey, P. J. Chupas and K. W. Chapman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4070–4078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yamakawa, M. Jiang, B. Key and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10525–10536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hua, R. Robert, L. S. Du, K. M. Wiaderek, M. Leskes, K. W. Chapman and P. J. Chupas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15169–15184 CAS .
K. M. Weiderek, O. J. Borkiewicz, N. Pereira, J. Ilavsky, G. G. Amatucci, P. J. Chupas and K. W. Chapman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6211–6214 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Key, M. Morcrette, J. M. Terascon and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 503–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, A. Abouimrane, M. Balasubramanian, Y. Ren and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3960–3967 CAS .
H. Jung, P. K. Allan, Y. Y. Hu, O. J. Borkiewicz, X. L. Wang, W. Q. Han, L. S. Du, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Chupas, K. W. Chapman, A. J. Morris and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1031–1041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. Sakaki, H. Ogawa, Y. Nakamura, J. Nakamura, E. Akiba, A. Machida, T. Watanuki and T. Proffen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26543–26550 CAS .
K. Sakaki, N. Terashita, H. Kim, E. H. Majzoub, A. Machida, T. watanuki, S. Tsunokake, Y. Nakamura and E. Akiba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6697–6705 CAS .
D. F. Sava, M. A. Rodriguez, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas, J. A. Greathouse, P. S. Crozier and T. M. Nenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Chapman, D. F. Sava, G. J. Halder, P. J. Chupas and T. M. Nenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Sava, K. W. Chapman, M. A. Rodriguez, J. A. Greathouse, P. S. Crozier, H. Zhao, P. J. Chupas and T. M. Nenoff, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2591–2596 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Bennett, S. Cao, J. C. Tan, D. A. Keen, E. G. Bithell, P. J. Beldon, T. Friscic and A. K. Cheetham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14546–14549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett, D. A. Keen, J. C. Tan, E. R. Barney, A. L. Goodwin and A. K. Cheetham, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3067–3071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, T. D. Bennett, D. A. Keen, A. L. Goodwin and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7805–7807 RSC .
E. O. R. Beake, M. T. Dove, A. E. Phillips, D. A. Keen, M. G. Tucker, A. L. Goodwin, T. D. Bennett and A. K. Cheetham, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2013, 25, 395403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett and A. K. Cheetham, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1555–1562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Hsieh, E. E. Bendeif, A. Gansmuller, S. Pillet, T. Woike and D. Schaniel, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 26132–26141 RSC .
E. E. Bendeif, A. Gansmuller, K. Y. Hsieh, S. Pillet, T. Woike, M. Zobel, R. B. Neder, M. Bouazaoui and D. Schaniel, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8895–8902 RSC .
R. Loukrakpam, S. Shan, V. Petkov, L. Yang, J. Luo and C. J. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20715–20721 CAS .
Y. Lei, H. Zhao, R. D. Rivas, S. Lee, B. Liu, J. Lu, E. Stach, R. E. Winans, K. W. Chapman, J. P. Greeley, J. T. Miller, P. J. Chupas and J. W. Elam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9320–9326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Loukrakpam, Q. Yuan, V. Petkov, L. Gan, S. Rudi, R. Yang, Y. Huang, S. R. Brankovic and P. Srasser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18866–18876 RSC .
S. Shan, V. Petkov, L. Yang, J. Luo, P. Joseph, D. Mayzel, B. Prasai, L. Wang, M. Engelhard and C. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7140–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Petkov, S. Shastri, S. Shan, P. Joseph, J. Luo, C. J. Zhong, T. Nakamura, Y. Herbani and S. Sato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22131–22141 CAS .
V. Petkov, Y. Ren, S. Shan, J. Luo and C. J. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 532–538 RSC .
J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bridges, T. Keiber, P. Juhas, S. J. L. Billinge, L. Sutton, J. Wilde and G. R. Kowach, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 045505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. Chen, L. Fan, Y. Ren, Y. Rong, Z. Pan, J. Deng, R. Yu and X. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13566–13569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Maurya, A. Kumar, V. Petkov, J. E. Mahaney, R. S. atiyar and S. Priya, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1283–1292 RSC .
V. Buscaglia, S. Tripathi, V. Petkov, M. Dappiaggi, M. Deluca, A. Gajovic and Y. Ren, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 055901 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Wilkinson, B. K. Greve, C. J. Ruschman, K. W. Chapman and P. J. Chupas, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 023511 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lu, Q. Hu, W. Yang, L. Bai, H. Sheng, L. Wang, F. Huang, J. Wen, D. J. Miller and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13947–13953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Knox, E. S. Bozin, C. D. Malliakas, M. G. Kanatzidis and S. J. L. Billinge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 01410 CrossRef .
T. Davis, M. Johnson and S. J. L. Billinge, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 4239–4244 CAS .
S. D. M. Jacques, M. Di Michiel, S. A. J. Kimber, X. Yang, R. J. Cernik, A. M. Beale and S. J. L. Billinge, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2536 Search PubMed .
C. L. Farrow, P. Juhas, J. W. Liu, D. Bryndin, E. S. Bozin, J. Bloch, T. Proffen and S. J. L. Billinge, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 335219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Yang, P. Juhas, C. L. Farrow, S. J. L. Billinge, 2014, ArXiv:1402.3163. V2.
L. Grandlund, S. J. L. Billinge and P. M. Duxbury, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Adv., 2015, 71, 392–409 Search PubMed .
S. J. L. Billinge and C. L. Farrow, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 25, 45 Search PubMed .
M. G. Tucker, D. A. Keen, M. T. Dove, A. L. Goodwin and Q. Hui, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 335218 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Norberg, M. G. Tucker and S. Hull, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2009, 42, 179–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Soper, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 104204 CrossRef .
T. Proffen and R. B. Neder, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1997, 30, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Simonov, T. Weber and W. Steurer, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2014, 47, 1146–1152 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Alessandro Mancini
	Alessandro Mancini obtained his PhD in Chemistry at the University of Pavia in 2015 in the group of Prof. Malavasi. He is currently working as PostDoc in the same group. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of materials for clean energy application with particular emphasis on the X-rays & Neutron diffraction and PDF analysis.

Lorenzo Malavasi
	Lorenzo Malavasi is Associate Professor in the Chemistry Department of the University of Pavia. He received the Young Scientist Award for outstanding work in the field of perovskites at the International Conference on Perovskites, Zürich, and the “Alfredo di Braccio” Prize for Chemistry 2008 of Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei awarded to distinguished under 35-year-old chemists. He has contributed to the “Emerging Investigator” issues of the Journal of Materials Chemistry and Chemical Communications in 2010 and 2011. He is working in several areas of solid state chemistry with particular interest in the investigation of structure–properties correlation in different kinds of functional materials, especially electrolytes and cathodes for clean energy, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, and high-temperature superconductors. He is editor of the journal Novel Superconducting Materials and author of more than 120 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.
I(Q) = PA[N(Icoh + Iinc + Imul)]	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
G(r) = 4πr[ρ(r) − ρ0]	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 1  (a–e) G(r) refinements using the real space Rietveld method over different r ranges for xGd = 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 0.875 samples, respectively. Experimental (black), calculated (red) and residual profiles (blue) are shown. Reprinted with permission from M. Scavini et al., Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1338–1345. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Experimental (black), calculated (red) and residual profiles are shown. (a–e) Panels: refinements obtained using the biphasic model with reference to the xGd = 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 0.875 samples, respectively. (f–l) Panels: the results obtained using the monophasic model with reference to the same samples. Reprinted with permission from M. Scavini et al., Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1338–1345. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PDF fit of Ba2In1.70S0.30O5.45 up to 10 Å with the Pmm cubic space group and (b) with the Icmm orthorhombic space group. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; horizontal green line: residual. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  X-ray (panel A) and neutron (panel B) PDF refinements of lanthanum tungstate by means of the average tetragonal space group reported in ref. 12; agreement factors for the fits are Rwp = 0.188 and 0.327, respectively. Inset of panel A: detailed view of a selected region around the peak located at ∼4 Å. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; and horizontal green line: residual (shifted by −3 for ease of visualization). Reprinted with permission from L. E. Kalland et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2378–2384. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Neutron (panel A) and X-ray (panel B) PDF refinements by means of DFT calculated local structure for the lanthanum tungstate; agreement factor values are Rwp = 0.168 and 0.098, respectively. Blue circles: experimental data; red line: calculated PDF; and horizontal green line: residual (shifted by −3 for ease of visualization). Adapted with permission from L. E. Kalland et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2378–2384. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Discharge–charge curves obtained for FeII(1−x)FeIIIxOxF2−x within the AMPIX cell presented in ref. 32 during PDF measurements, at a cycling current of 30 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from K. M. Wiaderek et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4070–4078. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Selected PDFs obtained during the first discharge–charge cycle (for x = 0.60, 50 °C, C/30, ∼35 h, 4.5–1.5–4.5 V). The arrows indicate distances characteristic of the rock salt intermediate. The colors reflect relative peak intensities. Reprinted with permission from K. M. Wiaderek et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4070–4078. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Qbroad values obtained from the PDF refinements of V0.8Ti0.2H2 data and (b) the reversible hydrogen storage capacity of V0.8Ti0.2 at 413 K is plotted as a function of the cycle number. The reversible hydrogen storage capacity was normalized by the initial value. Red dashed lines are for guidance. Reprinted with permission from H. Kim et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26543–26550. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Calculated PDFs using (a) the VH2 stacking fault model and (b) V dislocation model were fitted using the defect-free models without refining the Qbroad parameter. Blue open circles, red lines, and green lines represent calculated PDFs using the defect models, fits using the defect-free models, and difference curves, respectively. The difference curves are offset for sake of clarity. (c) and (d) Refinement of the same PDFs as (a) and (b) with Qbroad parameter, respectively. Qbroad parameter did not help explain the effect of stacking faults (c) but reproduced the effect of dislocations on the PDF very well (d). Reprinted with permission from H. Kim et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26543–26550. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The local and intermediate range structural information in the pair distribution functions (PDFs) confirms that the crystalline Cu–BTC lattice is retained at all I2 loadings. The intensity of the peaks associated with the Cu–O and I–I correlations in the low-r regions of the (b) PDFs and (c) differential-PDFs, respectively, provide an estimate of the (d) I/Cu ratio, which matches that determined gravimetrically. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from D. F. Sava et al., Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2591–2596. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  First peaks in the experimental atomic PDFs for different Pt-nanoalloys thermally treated at 400 and 800 °C. Positions of the peaks are estimated by Gaussian fits to the experimental data and are marked with arrows. Shorter distances were found for ternary alloy. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from R. Loukrakpam et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20715–20721. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
