Multi-enzyme mimics – cracking the code of subcellular cascade reactions and their potential biological applications  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2QM01373H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2QM01373H
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 3037-3072Multi-enzyme mimics – cracking the code of subcellular cascade reactions and their potential biological applications

        
          
            Shafaq 
            Sahar
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Shichao 
            Sun
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Akif 
            Zeb
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Lulu 
            Jin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liangfei 
            Tian
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            An-Wu 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Zhengwei 
            Mao
          
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Rd, Hangzhou 310058, China. E-mail: wwgfz@zju.edu.cn
bMOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecular Synthesis and Functionalization, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Rd, Hangzhou 310058, China. E-mail: zwmao@zju.edu.cn
cDivision of Nanomaterials and Chemistry Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: anwuxu@ustc.edu.cn
dCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan Joint International Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Technology for Clean Energy, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
eKey Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardio-Cerebral Vascular Detection Technology and Medicinal Effectiveness Appraisal, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China
Received 
      30th December 2022
    , Accepted 13th March 2023First published on 4th April 2023AbstractIn this review, we discuss the emerging new field of multi-enzyme mimics or multi-nanozymes from a critical perspective portraying the unique characteristics and design strategies that endow a nanomaterial with its multi-enzymatic properties. In order to provide a comprehensive review, distinct and widely used nanomaterials such as metals/metal oxides, low dimensional carbons, Prussian blue analogues (PBAs), metal organic frameworks (MOFs), single-atom catalysts (SACs) and smart assemblies/nanohybrids have been selected as the basis for the discussion on transformation of these materials into multi-nanozymes. Studies reported so far on this fascinating new field have been glanced through with a critical perspective and a debate on the limitations, gaps and general misconceptions that can be found related to these nanomaterials and their properties has been initiated. A thorough discussion on the often-confused cascade mechanisms of redox reactions driven by these multi-nanozymes has been brought into the limelight for the first time and the examples of various multi-nanozymes that have been employed in biological applications have been evaluated categorically.
Shafaq Sahar
Shafaq Sahar is a postdoctoral fellow at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the guidance of Prof. Zhengwei Mao and Prof. Wei Wang. She has received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. An-Wu Xu. Her work is focused on the design and engineering of advanced materials such as hydrogels, MOFs and SACs for advanced oxidation processes and their applications in heterogenous catalysis and biomedical, biomimetic and diagnostic applications.
Shichao Sun
Shichao Sun is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhengwei Mao in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University. His research work mainly focuses on the development of metal-based antibacterial nanomaterials and medical devices.
Akif Zeb
Akif Zeb is an Assistant Research Fellow in the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University, China, with Prof. Shiguo Zhang. He received his PhD in 2018 in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China and worked in South China Normal University from 2019 to 2022 as Guangdong Talent Postdoc Fellow. His research is focused on the design and development of new materials for energy storage and conversion, heterogeneous catalysis and biomimetics.
Wei Wang
Wei Wang is a Professor at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University. He has obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Changyou Gao at Zhejiang University, China. He worked in Tianjin University from 2010 to 2020. His research is focused on injectable hydrogels and biomaterials for regenerative medicine.
An-Wu Xu
An-Wu Xu is a Professor at the Division of Nanomaterials and Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He is a Humboldt Research Fellow and worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany, from 2002 to 2003. His research interests include novel nanostructured materials, biomimetic synthesis and meso-crystal assembly of nanomaterials for various applications including sustained drug and gene delivery, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, energy conversion, solar cells and photocatalysis.
Zhengwei Mao
Zhengwei Mao is currently a Professor and Deputy Director at the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University. He obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2007 from Zhejiang University, China. He worked as a Postdoc under the guidance of Prof. Helmuth Moehwald at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany. His research is focused on polymeric nanomaterials and seeks to control the microstructure of biomaterials for the purpose of manipulating the cell and tissue response, with the application for cancer therapy, inflammation treatment and tissue regeneration. He also serves as the editor of Acta Biomaterialia.
1. Introduction
Material chemists are always fascinated by mother nature and frequently take inspiration from the beauty in a natural phenomenon that could be mimicked artificially. Nature provides us with many marvelous phenomena everywhere through which one process drives the other and the cascade continues. From the ecosystems and food chains to the water cycle and climate change and to the unlimited chain reactions occurring in the micro-organelle of cells like mitochondria and peroxisomes, continuous cascades are occurring infinitely to keep the natural cycle of life going on. If one entity in these natural cycles of multiple cascades becomes missing or becomes dysfunctional, multiple chains of reactions are affected, resulting in the disruption and disturbance of whole processes and systems. Researchers tried to study such multiple cascades in living cells by developing artificial peroxisomes, where multiple enzymes are combined over a biofriendly scaffold to mimic the peroxisome present in cells.1–3 Such a system, although completely consisting of biological entities, could not be sustained for a very long time, because it had issues with stability, poor substrate versatility and diversity, low adaptability to non-biological reactions, low tolerance to extreme environmental conditions, denaturation at high temperatures, and storage, recovery and cost issues.4,5 Therefore, researchers diverted their attention towards the individual smaller entities that are responsible for driving these cascade reactions, i.e., enzymes, and termed the artificial materials that could mimic the natural enzymes as artificial enzymes. This term was first used in the late 1990s, which initially meant the synthetic molecules and ions that could imitate natural enzymes.6,7 Besides mimicking their natural counterparts, the idea of developing these alternative materials was to deliver the catalysis at better rates and with higher selectivity compared to their natural counterparts. Artificial enzymes offered a solution to many of the above-mentioned problems. It was not until 2004 that the term “nanozyme” was coined by Paolo Scrimin and co-workers for gold nanoparticles, while later in 2007, Fe3O4 NPs were discovered to possess intrinsic POD mimicking activity by Gao et al.8–10 Since then, nanozymes have fascinated scientists and have opened-up many innovative and interesting potential research arenas in the field that were never explored before. These nanozymes are being recently evaluated and utilized for their enormous list of potential applications, for example, in the recognition and sensing of biomolecules such as cells, DNA, proteins, and other smaller molecules like glucose, NADH, dopamine, luminol, etc. among other applications.11–13 In the past decade, nanozymes have been extensively explored and the research work on this field has grown exponentially. However, most of the focus of these publications has remained on peroxidase mimics.14,15
In biological environments, the natural enzymes work together, where the product generated by one enzyme is consumed by another enzyme in a cascade-like manner. These collaborating enzymes are widely present in cellular organelles such as microsomes, peroxisomes and mitochondria.16,17 Mitochondria and peroxisomes usually contain oxidases which are crucial oxidant enzymes sustaining all the metabolic and catabolic functions in the body in a series of chain-like reactions. In 1930s, Haber and Weiss initiated a fundamental discussion on the chain reactions that are initiated by oxidase enzymes upon their interaction with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).18,19 In order to establish the model known today as the Haber–Weiss cycle, they used a simple metal ion, i.e. ferrous ion (Fe2+), instead of complex oxidase enzymes, due to the fact that some of these enzymes have a hematin group attached to the colloidal carrier as their active catalytic center.20 Although Haber and Weiss established the key mechanisms of chain reactions that are still used today for explaining the catalytic mechanisms of the enzymes like oxidases, the enzyme mimicking activity could not be attributed to metal ions due to their continuous depletion during the homogenous catalytic reaction among various other factors. Haber and Weiss might not have realized at that time that their work would later be used to study the cascade-like mechanisms of artificial enzymes and would be of central importance to a new field of nanozymes called multi-enzyme mimics. This new field of nanozymes deals with nanozymes that can mimic multiple enzymes simultaneously, in turn imitating the natural cascade reactions occurring at subcellular levels. The term multi-enzyme mimics came into the limelight in 2016 when Zhang and coworkers discovered that Prussian blue nanoparticles (PBNPs) show triple enzyme-like activities, including peroxidase (POD), catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD), at the same time.21 Since then, cascade reactions driven by multi-nanozymes, making up at least two successive processes without the segregation of products, have gained considerable attention from materials scientists because of their potential applications in the environmentally friendly production of chemicals and materials.22 In contrast to the typical step-by-step production, multi-nanozyme cascade reactions are one-pot reactions exhibiting unprecedented positive traits, such as excluding the tedious isolation and purification of reaction products.23,24 Moreover, unfavorable reaction equilibria and unstable reaction intermediates can be tuned in the cascade reactions. Henceforth, multi-nanozyme cascade reactions offer remarkable advantages, such as less waste generation, enhanced space-time yields, reduced reactor volumes, rapid cycle times and less unit operations.25,26
Although some of the review papers published very recently discussed multi-nanozymes, they were limited to their biological applications in either the terms of different kinds of therapies or the toxicity studies.27 For example, in one review, authors discussed metals and metal oxides extensively, but the focus still remained on the in vitro applications of these materials instead of the design and development strategies of multi-nanozymes.28 Therefore, a comprehensive review was needed that can specifically focus on the characteristics of different nanomaterials, which impart them to the characteristics of multi-enzymes and discuss the precise material design strategies via which these properties could be bestowed to the nanomaterials.
In addition and more importantly, there is a lack of extensive discussion on the understanding of the mechanisms driving these multi-nanozymes. The majority of the studies reported on multi-nanozyme overlooks the discussion on the insights into mechanisms or lag behind in explaining elaborately the science behind the reported material behaving like a multi-nanozyme. The aim of this review is, therefore, to discuss these critical points and the key research gaps or contradictions that are found in various reported studies on multi-nanozymes. Furthermore, we will also discuss the crucial design strategies and key points that could render a nanomaterial into a multi-nanozyme and some of the key mechanisms associated with the generation of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) by multi-nanozymes (Table 1). In the end, the current and future potential biological applications of multi-nanozymes and the challenges that are still faced in this emerging field will be discussed. Before going further into the details of multi-enzymes or multi-nanozymes, it is important that the major oxidoreductases that are involved in cascade-like reactions in the cellular environment are discussed and a familiarity with their interconnected mechanisms along with the roles they play in driving cascade reactions may be achieved.
Table 1 Some of the widely explored nanomaterial classes and key strategies for their transformation into multi-nanozymes











2. Enzymes involved in cascade cellular reactions
2.1. Oxidases (OXDs)
As mentioned earlier, oxidases are the most crucial enzymes involved in cascade mechanisms because they regulate redox processes that sustain the metabolic and catabolic activities in the cells. Oxidases are crucial enzymes in biology and their role is to catalyze the redox reactions that involve dioxygen (O2) as an electron acceptor. Oxidases have the ability to capture O2 efficiently and generally the superoxide radical (˙O2−) generation is the end product of this reaction except for those reactions in which the donation of hydrogen in involved, whereas the reduction of molecular oxygen results in the production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or water (H2O).29,30 Oxidases catalyze numerous oxidation reactions during metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation in plants and animals. Some of the common examples of oxidases include glucose oxidase, laccase, monoamine oxidase, cytochrome P450 oxidase and xanthine oxidase.31–33 Glucose oxidase is the most widely used enzyme in enzyme mimicking reactions and biosensing. It catalyzes the oxidation of glucose into gluconic acid in the presence of O2, while H2O2 is generated as the end product of this reaction as shown in eqn (1) (Scheme 1).34 (1)
 Scheme 1  The interconnected cycle of cellular cascade reactions, the multiple oxidoreductases involved in deriving these reactions and their catalytic mechanisms. 
This reaction finds its application in the detection of glucose in the blood and urine samples as well as the indirect detection and estimation of H2O2 in the biological samples using 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) as a colorimetric agent in an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) like setup.35
2.2. Peroxidases (PODs)
Peroxidase enzymes are the enzymes with a heme position that break down peroxide compounds into hydroxyl functionalities containing products, where the heme position acts as a catalytically active site.36 ROOR’ + 2 e− + 2 H+ + (POD) → ROH + R’OH(2)PODs are a large family of isozymes that can catalyze the oxidation of products in cells. These biological reactions involve hydrogen peroxide or organic hydroperoxides and an electron donor substrate. The peroxide groups reduce at the completion of the reaction, whereas the substrates are oxidized as shown in eqn (2) (Scheme 1). The mechanism of this reaction undergoing a double displacement is also called the “ping-pong mechanism.”37 The initial substrate is released as a product from the binding site of the POD enzyme before another substrate binds to it in order to start the reaction. Common examples of these peroxidases include horseradish peroxidase (HRP), which can utilize a wide variety of substrates and cytochrome C peroxidase, which can only catalyze a few substrates being highly specific. HRP has numerous applications in bio-diagnostics, such as its conversion of some organic substrates into colored products, which are used in the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and degradation of organic contaminants.
Some other peroxidases are also part of the cells whose cofactor does not involve a heme group. These include glutathione peroxidase (GSH) with a thiol functionality, which regulates the antioxidative process in the cells and prevents the cells from aging, vanadium halo peroxidases, which mediate the halogen group oxidation and conversion into halogen radicals by H2O2, and Mn(II):hydrogen-peroxide oxidoreductase (MnP) that works in association with the Fe-cofactor in a ping-pong-like mechanism and plays a major role in the degradation of lignin.38 Another important peroxidase is nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), which is present in all living cells and plays a crucial role in both redox metabolic and non-redox reactions while acting as both a reducing agent and an oxidizing agent depending on the reaction conditions.
2.3. Glutathione (GSH)
Glutathione (GSH) enzymes are capable of preventing the cells from oxidative damage induced by ROS such as free radicals, lipid peroxides and peroxides as well as heavy metals. GSH enzymes are the most abundant thiols present in the living organisms and are found abundantly in the cytoplasm and other cell organelles.39,40 GSH shields the cells from undergoing oxidative damage through the following reaction:41 2 GSH + R2O2 → GSSG + 2 ROH (R = H, alkyl)(3)or in the case of H2O2 as 2 GSH + H2O2 → GS − SG + 2 H2O(4)while the reaction with free radicals proceeds as follows: GSH + ˙R → 1/2 GS − SG + RH(5)Besides deactivating reactive oxidants and radicals, GSH participates in the redox regulation of thiol proteins and thiol protection itself in the cells under extreme oxidative stress conditions that are induced by a post-translational redox-regulated thiol protein, S-glutathionylation. A typical reaction involves the generation of disulfide that is unsymmetrical by the GSH and a protectable protein (RSH):42 GSH + RSH + [O] → GSSR + H2O(6)Glutathione enzymes are also utilized in the detoxification of formaldehyde and methylglyoxal, which are some of the harmful metabolites generated under cellular oxidative stress. It also plays a major role in maintaining antioxidants such as vitamins E and C in their active state, i.e., reduced states. GPx mainly plays a role in converting H2O2 into water and minimizing the lipid peroxidation in the cells by preventing them from converting into alcohols.43 A deficiency of the glutathione enzyme results in multiple sclerosis, celiac disease, type 2 diabetes associated with macroalbuminuria and an increased risk of coronary heart disease in women.43,44
2.4. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is an essential coenzyme for the metabolism and is involved in carrying out redox reactions transporting electrons between one reaction to another.45 It, therefore, exists in two forms within the cells, i.e., NAD+ and NADH, which are the oxidized and reduced forms of this coenzyme, respectively. NAD+ has the ability to oxidize other molecules by accepting electrons and in turn convert into a reduced form (NADH) by accepting one proton in the end and later acting as a reducing agent. These reactions proceed by the removal of two hydrogens from a reactant (R): in the form of a proton (H+) and a hydride ion (H−). During this reaction, H+ is released into solution, while the reduced molecule (RH2) is oxidized, whereas NAD+ gets reduced to NADH. One electron is transferred to the nitrogen atom that has a positive charge, while one hydrogen atom gets attached to the carbon atom C4 alternative to the nitrogen atom. This is an easy reversible reaction, which means that NAD+/NADH can endlessly cycle between the NADH and NAD+ states without ever being consumed.46 RH2 + NAD+ → NADH+ + H+ + R(7)The redox potential of the NAD+/NADH pair is around −0.32 V, which indicates that NADH is a mild reducing agent. Besides electron transfer, NADH also has some other cellular functions: in particular, it acts as a substrate of enzymes by adding chemical groups from proteins or removing them. Due to the importance of these properties, the enzymes that participate in the NAD+ metabolism are being studied for drug discovery. NAD+ and NADH have different fluorescence responses as well, where when excited at a wavelength of ∼335 nm, NADH in solution emits fluorescence at around 440–460 nm with a lifetime of 0.4 nanoseconds, whereas NAD+ does not emit any fluorescence. The fluorescence signal changes of NADH specifically for different proteins render it to possess a vital role in the study of enzyme kinetics as well as determine the redox state of the living cells using fluorescence microscopy.47
2.5. Superoxide dismutases (SOD)
SOD is an antioxidant enzyme that produces a superoxide anion. ˙O2− radicals can be generated by numerous pathways, which include inflammatory cells and endothelial cells, during the metabolism of arachidonic acid and cellular respiration. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) alternately catalyzes ˙O2− radicals produced as a result of metabolism, through its dismutation and conversion into molecular oxygen (O2) and H2O2 through the following reaction (Scheme 1):15 M(n+1)+-SOD + ˙O2− → Mn+-SOD + O2(8) Mn+-SOD + ˙O2− + 2H+ → M(n+1)+-SOD + H2O2(9)Here, M represents the cofactor of the SOD enzyme and n is the oxidation number. Depending on the location of SOD in the cellular environment, the SOD present in mammalian cells has been classified into three categories: SOD1, SOD2 and SOD3.48 SOD1 is a homodimer protein soluble in the cytoplasm and is assumed to be present on the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM), where superoxide radicals are generated as a result of metabolism and serve as an immediate antioxidant.15,49 SOD2 exists within mitochondria and depending on the oxidation state of Mn and the protonation of the active site, the recurring proton-coupled electron transfer reactions occur, thus converting superoxide radicals (˙O2−) into either hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or oxygen (O2). Since mitochondria are the energy production organelles of the cell, SOD2 prevents cells from undergoing apoptosis and cell death by reducing the oxidative stress in the mitochondria.49 Studies suggest that mice that lack the SOD2 enzyme die within a few days due to extreme oxidative stress, which indicates the importance of this enzyme in the survival of the mammalian bodies. SOD3 is an extracellular antioxidant enzyme and is thought to prevent lungs, brain and some other tissues from oxidative stress.49 SOD3 is found in higher amounts in the queen ants, which increases their lifespan multitude of times than the other ants and offers a possibility of increasing the longevity of the brain cells. The most common cofactors of SOD enzymes are copper and zinc (Cu–Zn-SOD), usually present in the eukaryotic cells, while some cellular organelles like mitochondria and prokaryotes use Mn and Fe or Ni as the cofactor.50 Some valuable and shielding effects of SOD have been found in many diseases. SOD enzymes offer a protective and healing effect during ischemia–reperfusion injury (brain, heart, kidneys, and liver) in mammals and plays a constructive role in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, AIDS, cancer, and many pulmonary disorders such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections.15
2.6. Catalase (CAT)
Catalase is also one of the antioxidant enzymes and can be found in all the aerobic living organisms. Its role is to decompose H2O2 present at the major cell organelle sites, such as mitochondria, peroxisomes, lysosomes and chloroplast, and to convert it into non-toxic molecules, i.e., H2O and O2, thereby protecting the cells from oxidative stress. The following reaction pathway is widely believed to be the mechanism through which CAT catalyzes this reaction:51 H2O2 + M3+-L → H2O + OM4+-L+(10) H2O2 + OM4+-L+ → H2O + M3+-L + O2(11)Here, M represents the metal while L represents the ligand of the enzyme. Generally, the catalase enzyme uses Fe as the active catalytic site whereas Fe(IV)–L(+) represents the mesomer of Fe(V)–L, which means that there is a partial oxidation of Fe to the +V state and then it stabilizes into a radical cation OM(IV)–L(+) by receiving some of the stabilizing electron density from the pi-bond electron density transfer from the organic ligand part of the enzyme. It is crucial that the excess H2O2 present in the cytoplasm can be transformed into molecular O2 and H2O by CAT. In the dysfunction of the CAT enzyme, the excess presence of H2O2 gives rise to numerous diseases, such as vitiligo, diabetes, acatalasemia and greying of hair.52 CAT not only catalyzes H2O2 but is also known to transform some other toxins and metabolites like phenols, formaldehyde, formic acid, alcohols and acetaldehydes into their oxidized products and thus plays an important role in the industry as well. Moreover, it is widely used in some major clinical applications such as in the catalase test for bacterial identification, bacterial virulence determination and H2O2 detection.53
3. Nanomaterial mimicking multi-nanozymes
3.1. Metals and metal oxides
The first nanoparticles reported to have intrinsic peroxidase-like activity were Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), which were used as horseradish peroxidase (HRP) mimics in 2007 by Yan's group.9 This was an obvious finding since Fe in Fe3O4 is present in both Fe2+/Fe3+ oxidation states, which drive the POD-like reaction and are being used widely as Fenton's reagent in advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for long. Moreover, the HRP enzyme also contains heme centers, which interconvert Fe2+ to Fe3+ and vice versa and drive the POD reactions in the biological environments. Gu's group studied the enzyme mimics of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) by synthesizing and comparing the activities of Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 and discovered that Fe3O4 NPs in fact have dual enzyme like activity and these NPs could mimic POD as well as CAT at the same time depending on the pH of the reaction medium, while Fe2O3 exhibits insignificant CAT activity and its POD-like activity is also lower than that of Fe3O4 NPs.54 The CAT-like activity of Fe2O3 NPs mentioned in various other studies was also found to be almost negligible due to the fact that iron is present in the single oxidation state of 2+ in the Fe2O3 NPs, as revealed by XPS studies.55–57 This oxidation state of iron can only catalyze the production of hydroxyl radicals in the presence of H2O2. The reason for the lower POD-like activity of Fe2O3 as compared to that of Fe3O4 is also the same, as shown in Gu's work as well. The basic driving force behind these dual enzyme-like activities of Fe3O4 remains the same, which is the mixed valence states of Fe. However, this study did not point out, let alone emphasizes on this aspect of the catalysis of Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 NPs. The oxidation state-dependent catalysis of iron oxide could also be seen from Chen's group work, where they incorporated an additional metal (M) in the spinel ferrite MFe2O4 NPs through a reduction method during hydrothermal synthesis, where the synthesized spinel ferrite NPs showed dual POD and CAT mimics due to the presence of two metals.58 The spinel ferrites with a general formula of AFe2O4 are formed by the combination of a trivalent cation (Fe3+) and another divalent cation of either a transition or post-transition metal, arranged at two different crystallographic sites, hence possessing the advantages of two different metals and two different oxidation states. Chen's group used spinel ferrites with other metal salts (M = Mg, Ni, Cu) and showed that the final MFe2O4 NPs possessed significant POD/CAT-like activities with the highest POD/CAT-like activity observed for NiFe2O3. This study, however, did not compare the activities of the spinel ferrite NPs with Fe3O4 or Fe2O3, which is essential to determine the extent of the usefulness of the metal-ion replacement and the rate of catalysis. Later on, many other studies reported the presence of this dual enzyme-like behavior by the Fe3O4 NPs synthesized through various methods and with different morphologies,59 where the kinetic rates of these nanozyme reactions were either augmented by decreasing the nanoparticles size, which exposes more active sites on the surface, exposing certain crystallographic facets, or by altering the morphologies through different synthesis methods.60,61 Mixed metal oxides with multiple oxidation states of the metal atom can also offer multi-enzyme-like activities. In 2016, our group synthesized mixed-phase VOx nanoflake-based metal oxide with coexisting V5+, V4+ and V3+ metal ions and their three different crystal phases, i.e., V2O5, V2O3 and VO2, respectively, which showed extraordinarily high POD and CAT-like activities.62 Adjusting the ratios of oxidation states in mixed valence metal oxides can also help in achieving the desired or preferable enzymatic activity as depicted in the case of CeOx NPs, where a higher Ce4+/Ce3+ ratio proved to be advantageous in achieving better CAT-like behavior of the catalyst, while a higher Ce3+/Ce4+ provided better SOD and POD-like activities in addition to the support of the GSH/GSSG redox reactions.63–65
Besides incorporating a different metal atom in metal oxide NPs, a cluster of two or three different metal atoms can also be combined to obtain multi-catalytic enzyme-like properties. Gharib et al. used this strategy to synthesize bimetallic Ag/Pt NPs, which showed switchable POD and CAT-like activities through the galvanic replacement of the metal ions.66 The POD-like activity could be attributed to the Ag part while Pt has been known to be an effective and efficient material in the breakdown and conversion of H2O2 to H2O and O2, thus mimicking the CAT-like activity in this material depending on the pH of the medium.67 This phenomenon can also be observed in a similar study conducted on AgM bimetallic NPs (M = Au, Pd and Pt) with inherent peroxidase-like activity, where only POD-like activities of these three bimetallic NPs were studied and the lowest TMB oxidation results were obtained in the following order (excluding the metal-to-metal optimization ratios): AgPt < AgPd < AgAu (Fig. 1C).68 Although this study has not explored the CAT-like or other enzymatic properties of these bimetallic NPs, the lower POD-like activity of Pt and Pd incorporated AgM is again due to the fact that Pd and Pt have higher affinity towards H2O2 and prefer its conversion into O2 rather than into ˙OH radicals, which is necessary for POD-like activity. Shirahata's group has reported that Pt NPs show SOD and CAT-based activities where instead of producing the toxic reactive oxygen species they scavenge the superoxide anion radical (˙O2−) and hydroxyl radical (˙OH) and instead of inducing any kind of toxicity, they scavenged all the ROS generated within the HeLa cells even at very high concentrations.69 In a similar strategy, Bhagat et al. synthesized a multi-nanozyme that could mimic POD and CAT by combining the Au core–shell and CeO2 NPs by using the reducing agent, where the CeO2 NP part mimicked CAT-like and the Au core–shell exhibited POD-like activity, in turn making the material dual-nanozyme.70 Some of the benefits that these bimetallic or trimetallic metal oxides and alloys offer in terms of catalysis are their higher catalytic efficiency and stability in solutions through the prevention of the oxidative dissolution of metal ions during catalysis and thus lesser toxicity than monometallic NPs. The turnover rate of each nanozyme in these multi-nanozymes could easily be adjusted by tuning the ratios of metal atoms in the bimetallic or trimetallic systems.71 Similarly, the leaching effects of metal ions can be prevented by tuning the amounts of metals in these alloys. He et al. finely tuned these ratios in the AgPt alloy and observed that the presence of dual metal atoms and altering the ratios of metal atoms significantly in turn change the electrochemical properties of the alloy, where the Ag and Pt ratios were finely tuned in between Ag0.56Pt0.44 and Ag0.38Pt0.62 ratios and the best optimization ratio was observed to be Pt0.62Ag0.38.72 At this ratio, the catalytic efficiency enhanced significantly when Pt prevented the continuous leaching of Ag ions during the reaction, which hinders and reduces the catalytic activity of the NPs dramatically. This is presumably due to the high interfacial energy and the formation of internal electron–hole traps within the bimetallic NPs, which, in turn, indicates the higher chemical stability of AgPt NPs over the monometallic Ag NPs, which restricts the release of ions into the solution during the reaction.73 Dong's group reported that NiPd showed multienzyme activity and is employed for the colorimetric detection of glucose. NiPd hNPs had a hollow nanostructure, which provided an enhanced surface area with exposed active sites for the catalytic reaction of the nanozyme for the active adsorption and trapping of substrate molecules including TMB and H2O2 in the hollow NPs that lead to a high catalytic efficiency of NiPd hNPs as well.74 The key strategies through which metal and metal oxide-based nanomaterials could be transformed into multi-nanozymes and their mechanisms of mimicking multiple enzymes are enlisted in Tables 1 and 2 along with other nanomaterials that we will discuss in the next sections.
 Fig. 1  Various synthesis strategies of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles to impart multi-nanozyme properties. (A) The two different crystal facets of CeO2 and their respective crystal facet-dependent nanozyme activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyrights 2016, Nature. (B) Step-by-step copper pyrovanadate multi-nanozyme synthesis process by tuning the molar ratios of Cu and V by 1:1, 2:1, 1:2 and 1:1 (NaOH) to obtain nanowires, spheres, nanoflowers and split nanorod-like structures to mimic POD, OXD and laccase (LAC)-like activities. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (C) AgM (M = Au, Pd, Pt) bimetallic alloy based nanozymes with a tunable morphology. Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyrights 2010, ACS. 
Table 2 Multi-nanozymes, their mechanisms of multi-enzyme mimics and applications




Nanomaterial
Multi-nanozyme
Mimics
Mechanism of multi-nanozyme-like behaviour
Application
Ref.




Metals/metal oxides
CeO2@chitosan
SOD CAT
Negative surface charge, Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio adjustment
Ulcerative colitis therapy

79



Cu3V2O7(OH)2
LAC POD OXD
Variable valence states of the metal, synergistic effect, exposed active sites
Biosensing

78



AgPd0.38
Peroxygenase POD
Careful adjustment of the metal-to-metal atomic ratio
Anti-bacterial effect

80



Cr/CeO2
SOD CAT GPx
Cr3+ doping increased high ratio of Ce3+/Ce4+, mixed valence states of metals
Brain trauma therapy

81



VOx QDs
POD OXD SOD
Mixed valence states and oxygen vacancies
Biosensing

82



Fe3O4 NPs
POD CAT
Mixed oxidation states Fe2+/Fe3+, Fenton reactions
Biosensing

83



MnO2
POD CAT
Mixed valence states Mn2+/Mn3+
Cancer therapy

84



FeCo@PDA
POD SOD
Reduced states Fe2+/Co2+, Fenton reaction
Anti-bacterial effect

85



Ir NPs
POD OXD CAT
Electron transfer from the high-index facets of IrNPs to O2
Alcohol oxidation

86



GA-Pt/Fe NPs
POD SOD
Fenton reaction due to the reduced states of Fe and Pt, photogenerated holes and electrons
Oncotherapy

87



Pd@Ir NSs
OXD POD CAT
Higher O2 adsorption on the Pd@Ir surface, adjustment of crystal facets, electronic interaction between Pd and Ir
Anti-bacterial effect

88



Pd@HA-Aloperine
SOD CAT
Crystal facets, photogenerated holes
Anti-inflammatory effect for atherosclerosis

89



MoS2–Cu2WS4
OXD POD
Redox exchange and charge transfer between metals, photogenerated electrons transfer
Anti-bacterial effect

90



Mn3O4
SOD CAT GPx
Size, morphology, surface area, and the redox properties of the metal ions
Cytoprotection

91



Au–CeO2 JNPs
SOD CAT
CeO2 provided SOD like while Au had CAT-like synergistic effect
Anti-inflammatory effect for nasal polyps

92



Se@Me@MnO2
SOD CAT GPx
Unpaired electrons, synergism between the multi-ROS scavenging properties of Se, MnO2 and melanin
Anti-inflammatory therapy

93







Nano-carbons
Au/TiO2@CDs
POD GOx
Oxygen vacancy (Ov), mixed Ti3+/Ti4+ oxidation states, band gap adjustment
Cancer therapy

94



g-C3N4 (MGCN)
POD SOD GOx
Functional groups
Biosensing

95



Au@BSA/GO
POD GOx
Au provided GOx through electron transfer while GO provided POD due to holes and functional groups
Biosensing

96



CDs@Cu4O3
POD OXD
Enhanced electron transfer between Cu2+/Cu+ redox couples due to amine functionalities and light induced hole generation
Biosensing

97



Pollutants degradation




N-PCNSs
POD OXD SOD CAT
Nitrogen doping
Tumor therapy

98



Pt@C-Ce6
POD OXD
Higher interaction of Pt loaded on outside with the substrates, Ce6 enhanced the generation of ROS in light
Tumor therapy

99



Cu@COF
POD SOD GPx
Fenton-like ionization process, change in the bandgap structure, fast electron transfer, large pi-conjugation
Tumor therapy

100



Fe/N-HCNs
POD OXD SOD CAT
Mixed Fe2+/Fe3+ states and Nx sites
Anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy

101







PBAs/MOFs
Pt@PCN222-Mn
SOD CAT
Pt contributed to CAT while Mn contributed to SOD activity
Anti-inflammatory therapy

102



FePCN
POD OXD POP
Fe contributed to POD and OXD through the Fenton reaction while ZrO clusters displayed POP like activity
1,4-Dihydropyridine metabolism

103



Hollow Prussian blue (mGPB)
POD OXD SOD CAT
Light driven generation of holes, the electron transfer properties of Fe2+/Fe3+ in PB
Chemotherapy

104



Se-diamine linked Mn-Porphyrin
SOD GPx
Se contributed to GPx while Mn had SOD like activity
Anti-inflammatory therapy

105



PB NPs
POD SOD CAT
Fe2+/Fe3+ electron transfer by the –CN ligand
Anti-inflammatory therapy

21



MPPBZs
SOD CAT
Variable valence states of Mn and Fe
Anti-inflammatory therapy for bowel disease

106



VOxBG
POD SOD CAT
Mixed valence states of VOx and Fe, defects in the PB structure due to large VOx ions
Biosensing

107



MIL-101(Fe)
POD OXD
Octahedral geometry, Fe2+/Fe3+ Fenton reaction
Biosensing

108



AuNPs/Cu-TCPP(Fe)
POD GOx
Au contributed to GOx, Fe contributed to POD through the Fenton reaction in light
Bioanalysis

109



SACs
FeSA-HNCSB
POD OXD CAT
pH and light dependent ROS generation by Fe-SA, direct cleavage of bonds
Tumor therapy

110



Co/PMCS
SOD CAT GPx
Dual activity of Co-SAs and GPx activity of ZnO, direct cleavage of bonds
Anti-inflammatory therapy

111



Fe2NC-Se-MOF
SOD OXD CAT
Double radical adsorption, electron transfer, higher reduction capabilities of the Fe–Fe dual atom
Cerebral Injury

112



FeSA@CQDs
POD SOD CAT
Fine tuning of Fe-SA oxidation states with the aid of the graphene matrix of carbon quantum dots
Biosensing

97



Pd@CeO2
POD SOD CAT
High Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, the CAT like properties of Pd
Anti-inflammatory

113



Nanohybrids
Fe-@CMC–DOX
POD OXD
Release of Fe ions due to the disintegration of DOX under magnetic hyperthermia conditions
Thermo/chemotherapy of brain cancer

114



MIONzyme
POD GOx
Fe2+/Fe3+ Fenton-like reactions and the Fe2+/Fe3+ driven conversion of glucose to gluconic acid
Cancer therapy

115



Pt-CuS-P-TAPP
OXD, CAT
Pt generates O2 in the presence of H2O2 while CuS converts O2 into 1O2 using a laser due to the photothermal responsive TAPP
Cancer therapy

116



DOX@HMSN/Mn3O4(R)
OXD, CAT
Mn3+/Mn2+ transition in situ triggered by the tumour microenvironment (TME) and reaction with GSH to suppress ROS levels
Chemotherapy

117



Rh/SPX-HSA
POD, CAT
Sonosensitizer spafloxacin (SPX) results in activation of rhodium (Rh) under SDT generating H2O2 and ˙OH
Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) of rheumatoid arthritis

118



V2O5@pDA@MnO2
SOD, GPx, CAT
Synergistic antioxidative effect through in situ generation of H2O2 and O2 under the oxidative stress while dopamine served as a linker and a scaffold of two nanozymes
Inflammation therapy

119





Another strategy to obtain a tunable multi-nanozyme-like activity of metal oxides is via adjusting their morphology via the crystal facets that are exposed on the surface of the material. For instance, Ghosh et al. synthesized four different morphologies of V2O5 nanoparticles including nanowires (VNW), nanosheets (VSh), nanoflowers (VNf), and nanospheres (VSp) having three different crystal facets and compared the reactivity of H2O2 over these crystal faces to study the nano-isozyme-like behavior of V2O5.75 They discovered that the glutathione reductase (GR), GSH and NAD/NADH activities of V2O5 not only depend on the crystal size and morphology of the nanoparticles but also on the crystal facets that are exposed on the surface within the same crystal system of V2O5 and thus the crystal structure of the metal oxides can be fine-tuned to adjust their redox properties and obtain nano-isozymes. In another interesting study, two different Pd-nanocrystal facets with cube [100] and octahedron [111] morphologies were discovered to have different catalytic activities. Pd cubes displayed higher POD-like behavior while Pd octahedrons showed the generation of ˙O2− mimicking OXD-like behavior and a lower generation of ˙OH.76 CeO2 nanocube (100) and CeO2 nanorod (110) facets were also discovered to have different catalytic activities where the nanocubes displayed higher POD-like behavior and nanorods exhibited higher SOD-like activity while the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio and oxygen vacancy content remained the same in the nanozyme (Fig. 1A).77 In a similar study, copper pyrovanadate (Cu3V2O7(OH)2·2H2O) was synthesized by adjusting the molar ratios of Cu and V by 1:1, 2:1, 1:2 and 1:1 (NaOH) to obtain nanowires, spheres, nanoflowers and split nanorod-like structures in order to mimic POD, OXD and laccase (LAC)-like activities (Fig. 1B).78 However, the detailed analysis and comparison of these different morphologies have not been further explored nor the selection of nanowires instead of other morphologies of Cu3V2O7(OH)2 in this study has been discussed, which might have explained the possible mechanisms through which this material can mimic the multi-nanozymes. It should be mentioned here that in these nano-isozymes, one enzyme like activity could not overtake the other kind of enzyme mimicking activity completely; rather, it is a steady transition of one kind of catalytic activity into another. Further in-depth studies are required that could discuss the role of different crystal phases and morphologies of metallic nanoparticles and metal oxides in determining the different nanozyme-like activities of these nanomaterials.
3.2. Low dimensional self-standing carbon-based materials
Carbon-based materials serve as the cheapest, most stable and relatively less toxic nanozymes for biological applications. The pure carbon framework itself is electrically neutral and offers no catalytic reactivity. However, the structural modification of the framework in terms of heteroatom doping delocalizes and alters the electronic density of the carbon framework making it favorable for nanozyme like activities. N, O, S, P, B and F heteroatoms are generally incorporated into the carbon framework to create the defect sites and in order to delocalize the electron density, make it water soluble and increase or decrease the band gap depending on the p-type or n-type carriers.120–122 Generally, N and O are the n-type carriers and are electron-donating due to their lone pairs of electrons, which put a strain on the sp2 hybridized bonds in the carbon framework and displace the electron density by breaking the CC bonds. Nitrogen doping in a typical hexagonal graphitic carbon framework is of four different types including pyridinic, pyrrolic, quaternary and graphitic as shown in Fig. 2A.123 Graphitic nitrogen is bound to three carbon atoms so it cannot share the p-orbital electrons while the pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen atoms donate one and two p-orbital electrons to the π system and delocalized the π system of the carbon network, respectively. The insertion of P atoms has been found to alter the polarization of the carbon framework and the introduction of the defect sites that could swindle the framework due to the huge atomic radius of P atoms, which results in the disturbance of the pi-orbital axis vector (POAV) and the creation of large protrusions, thus changing its reactivity with the substrates as well as enhancing the electronic properties of the carbon nanomaterials.121 Oxygen doping enhances the activity of carbon based nanozymes by enhancing the electron transfer rates within the carbon framework so much so that its reactivity increases three-fold than g-C3N4.124 Sulfur doping in the carbon framework assists in the capping of electrons, thereby reducing the activation energy for the catalytic conversion of substrates into the products.125 Boron with an electronegativity value of 2.04 compared to N and C with electronegativities of 3.04 and 2.55 make it an active catalytic center by reducing the energy barrier thus contributing to the nanozyme-like activity.126
 Fig. 2  Representative carbon-based materials with multi-nanozyme-like activities. (A) Various N doping configurations in the graphene framework and the summary of general host engineering strategies in the carbon framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) Morphology of N-PCNSs and N doping in the graphene framework of N-PCNSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyrights 2018, Nature. (C) Colorimetric detection of glucose using a synthetic bifunctional nanozyme: photocatalytic aerobic oxidation of glucose with the in situ production of H2O2 on AKCN (modified GCN). Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyrights 2019, Nature. (D) Various strategies that can be adapted to modify the surface of the graphene framework with different functional groups that can impart carbon nanozyme multiple ROS generation or scavenging properties. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyrights 2019, Springer. 
Gao's group proposed a methodical and systematic strategy to transform nitrogen doped carbon nanomaterials (N-CNMs) into multinanozymes (Fig. 2B).98 The authors in this study used a simple approach of pyrolysis using the F127 soft template with melamine and phenol/formalin as the carbon and nitrogen sources in order to synthesize N-doped porous carbon nanospheres (N-PCNSs) with a size of 10 ± 100 nm. The synthesized N-PCNSs could mimic POD, OXD, SOD and CAT at the same time and they further explored the role of pyridinic, pyrrolic, quaternary, oxidized and graphitic nitrogen in determining the catalytic of this multi-nanozyme material by comparing the activities of one kind of N doping in PCNs and propose that the POD and OXD activities are attributed to quaternary nitrogen while SOD and CAT are related to the pyridinic nitrogen content in the material, whereas the graphitic nitrogen content enhances the catalytic efficiency of the carbon based nanozyme.127,128
Pristine nanocarbon materials like carbon nanotubes (CNTs), fullerenes, CNOs and nanodiamonds are highly inert and are completely insoluble in water and need to be functionalized to make them catalytically active. Various functional groups can be grafted onto these inert nanocarbon materials like OH, –COOH, –CO, –COONa, –NH2, –SO2, –SO3, and –PO4 (Fig. 2D).122 Qu's group investigated the effect of incorporating different functional groups including hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxylic groups on the graphene carbon quantum dot (GCQD) based nanozymes.129 They discovered that the blockage of –OH, and –CO resulted in the deactivation of POD-like activity while the obstruction of –COOH groups had no effect on the generation of ROS by the nanozyme. The selective removal of oxygen functional groups enhances the photostability and reduces the toxicity of the carbon-based nanozymes. The introduction of the –COOH group on the other hand enhances the interaction with the substrate during the reaction, while the –OH groups can have an inhibiting effect on the catalytic activity of nanocarbon nanozymes. It has also been seen in some other studies that the –COOH groups have a significant contribution in the SOD-like activity of carbon based nanozymes because of their high affinity towards superoxide radicals via hydrogen bonding.130 With the availability of another ˙O2− radical, the –COOH–˙O2− adduct results in the conversion of an ˙O2− anion into O2, H2O2 or ˙OH by accepting the protons from either H2O molecules or carboxyl groups or from the acidic medium. However, the POD-like activity of the GCQDs can be enhanced by increasing the density of functional groups through reducing the size of the GCQDs.131 Song et al. synthesized graphene oxide (GO) modified with –COOH groups, where –C–O acted as a catalytically active site, while –CO acted as the binding site for POD-like activity.132 Besides Gao's work on non-metal-based carbon multi-nanozymes, Zhang et al. recently reported their work on modified g-C3N4 with dual POD and GOx-like activities (Fig. 2C).133 The GOx-like activity was observed under light irradiation due to the efficient charge separation, which resulted in the two electron reduction of O2 and its conversion of glucose into H2O2 and gluconic acid, while the POD-like activity was observed without light due to the consumption of H2O2 generated as the byproduct during glucose oxidation by GOx, thus mimicking a self-sustaining cascade reaction. Sarkar's group modified metal-free g-C3N4 (MGCN) with chitin and acetic acid (AcOH) to impart the multienzyme-like properties to g-C3N4.95 The MGCN part of the material behaved like the GOx enzyme, while the chitin and AcOH groups mimicked the POD-like activity in the nanozyme, which was further confirmed via 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) oxidation reactions with chitin–AcOH.
Besides doping carbon nanomaterials with non-metals, several metal atoms like Fe, Ti, Co, Ni, Mn, etc. have been co-doped in the modified carbon matrix like g-C3N4, r-GO, PCNs, etc. to boost their electronic properties and enhance the catalysis by reducing the band gap. Xi et al. developed Cu modified hollow carbon spheres (Cu/HCSs) through pulverizing dopamine coated on silicone (SiO2@PDA), where PDA acted as the carbon source.134 SiO2 was removed through etching with NaOH resulting in hollow carbon spheres and then CuO and Cu were adhered on the surface of the HCS by thermal decomposition and immersion of the HCS in Cu(OAc)2, respectively, followed by etching and treatment with ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid (EDTA). The pulverization of Cu(OAc)2 and immersion resulted in different oxidation states of Cu on the HCS, which eventually gave rise to the multi-nanozyme properties to Cu@HCS and CuO@HCS.
Moreover, carbon nanomaterials are often used as a stable support for metals and metal oxide nanoparticles to increase the surface area of the nanozyme and offer a synergistic effect during catalysis. For example, Zhang et al. synthesized N-doped porous graphene oxide (PdNPs/N-PC-rGO) functionalized with Pd nanoparticles with a sandwich-like structure that showed POD, SOD, CAT and OXD like properties, thus behaving like a mini peroxisome due to the synergistic effect between the N-PC-rGO bi-support and Pd NPs as well as the enhancement of the surface area of Pd NPs dispersed over N-PC and rGO.135
Apart from using carbon for enhancing the surface area of the loaded nanoparticles, it is also considered a perfect non-reactive source for stabilizing other molecules including nanocarriers and drugs that could impart synergistic effects in combination with the carbon-based nanozyme. One such nanozyme has been reported by Xu et al., which was synthesized from Pt loaded on carbon (Pt/C) which in turn was used as a nanocarrier for loading a Ce6-chlorin molecule as a photosensitizer.99 The Pt/C nanozyme was used as the source to generate O2 and H2O2 mimicking POD and OXD simultaneously at the tumor sites. Furthermore, they designed the nanozyme by loading Pt outside and inside of the carbon hollow spheres (Pt@HCS and HCS@Pt) and compared their enzyme-like activities. Evidently, the Pt@CHS nanozyme displayed better POD and OXD-like activities than HCS@Pt due to a higher interaction of Pt-loaded on outside with the substrates, while chlorine enhanced the generation of ROS in the presence of an external light source.
Although several studies have reported the doping of metals and metalloids on the nanocarbons, research on the multi-nanozyme-like properties of the pristine carbon materials like MWCNTs, g-C3N4, CQDs, etc. is deficient. The reason could be the lack of the understanding of the mechanisms and the kind of properties that different functional groups and non-metal doped atoms impart to the carbon matrix. There is a lot of contradiction, unreliability and ambiguousness in the studies that have discussed the properties of various functional groups and their specific roles in ROS generation and consumption or other enzyme like functionalities. More mechanistic studies and DFT studies are required to completely understand the structures and catalytic sites of these complex functionalized low dimensional carbon materials. Another misconception about nanocarbon materials is that they could not possess multi-nanozyme properties without some active catalytic centers that should be metal based, which has been disapproved by Zhang's and Gao's work in which they systematically designed and modified g-C3N4 and N-CNMs transforming these materials into multi-nanozymes. The extent of the addition and grafting of functional groups on the carbon framework and the generation of holes in the structure could be controlled to impart desired properties to the nanocarbons. Yeh et al. attempted to control the hole generation in graphene using a weak acid, H3PO4, during the synthesis procedure, which improved the selectivity of oxidative unzipping by protecting the vicinal diols formed on the graphene during its oxidation. This procedure subsequently prevented the over-oxidation and formation of holes in the graphene framework.137 The functional groups can be specifically removed through various processes reported in the literature such as the reaction of GQDs with 2-bromo-1-phenylethanone (BrPE), benzoic anhydride (BA), and phenylhydrazine (PH), which remove carboxylic, hydroxyl and ketonic groups, respectively.129,138 Similarly, non-metal doping in the carbon framework can be controlled as Cai et al. first imparted and then controlled the SOD-like activity of GO by specifically controlling its modification with various amounts of phytic acid (PAGF) loading which altered the degree of disorder in the GO structure.139 Another interesting strategy adopted by Liu et al. was to control the POD and OXD activities of CDs by treating them under light at different wavelengths (365 and 650 nm). The UV treated CDs showed OXD-like activity in the absence of H2O2 while the visible-light treated CDs showed POD like activity in the presence of H2O2, therefore behaving like a specific light dependent multinanozyme.140 Carbon-based materials have been explored widely in multiple catalysis applications, yet their enzyme-like properties have not been explored and the focus of current studies remains on the high catalytic turnover of the nanozyme. Future work must be focused on precisely controlling the multi-nanozyme like properties through various strategies discussed above as well as comprehensive mechanistic experimental and theoretical studies to fully understand these peculiar materials and maximize their potential to the full extent in the field of nanozymes. Some other well-known nanocarbon materials with multienzyme like properties include MOFs and SACs which are discussed separately in the next sections due to their specific characteristics and properties that differ from the materials discussed above.
3.3. Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) and metal organic frameworks (MOFs)
The most fascinating and basic material that is considered a basic MOF is Prussian blue (PB). PB is also known as a multivalent or mixed valence coordination nanomaterial with a distinct cubic shape like structure connected through flexible cyanide bridges (–CN) owing to their vibrational and stretching modes with Fe2+/Fe3+ atoms on alternative ends and has a general formula of AMa[Mb(CN)6]2/3·xH2O, where A = alkali ion and Ma and Mb = transition metal ions.141 Fe is at its central position in this coordination complex, while six monodentate ligands (–CN) surround Fe, in which C atoms of the –CN ligand are bound to Fe atoms and N atoms can freely coordinate with other cations to give a repeating 3D network of “M–NC–Fe2+–CN–M–” units (Fig. 3A).142 The cyanide acts as the bridge for the transfer of charges from one Fe atom to another, which defines the electronic and catalytic properties of PB.141 The catalytic properties can also be modified by changing the counter cation or the inner Fe atom in the coordination complex simply through mixing various metal salts with K3[Fe(CN)6] or K4[Fe(CN)6] or altering the M in K4[M(CN)6]. Zhang's group first reported the multi-nanozyme behavior of PB and discovered for the first time that instead of generating ROS, PB can efficiently scavenge ROS from any medium.21 Depending on the type of redox reactions occurring as shown from eqn (12)–(14), PB transforms into Prussian white (PW), Prussian yellow (PY) or Berlin green (BG) (Fig. 3C), clearly showing the colorimetric display of the multiple redox reaction occurring within its cage like structure.21 [Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) + e− → [Fe(II)Fe(II)(CN)6]2− (PW)(12) 3[Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) → 3 {Fe(III)3[Fe(III)(CN)6]2 [Fe(II)(CN)6]}− (BG) + 2 e−(13) [Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) → [Fe(III)Fe(III)(CN)6] (PY) + e−(14)The displacement of the outer counter cation in PB NPs can be achieved through two approaches: (i) partial substitution, also known as doping of the counter cation with another similar atom having nearly similar atomic sizes and (ii) complete substitution of the counter cation with a new substituent atom.142 The new products obtained as a result of these substitutions are called Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) and they have different or enhanced properties than PB. Such a PBA has been reported by Zhao et al., where they mixed the Mn2+ salt with K4[Fe(CN)6] in order to obtain Mn-doped PB nanozymes. The variable valence states of Mn and Fe in the MPPBZs allowed the multi-nanozyme to have multiple ROS scavenging properties.106 Our group attempted the incorporation of mixed vanadium metal oxide (VOx) instead of a simple metal substituent in the PB framework to see the effect of larger atomic sizes of metals and mixed valence metal oxides.107 To our surprise the whole cubic PB framework was distorted, and a hybrid hydrogel-like material was obtained with the Berlin green (BG) formula of V1.6O[Fe3+(CN)6]0.1·[Fe2+(CN)6]·xH2O (VOxBG) (Fig. 3B). The incorporation of larger metal ions leads to the formation of defects and distortion of the crystal structure of PB which assisted in enhanced multi-nanozyme like activities of VOxBG under light irradiation due to the generation of holes and enhanced POD and SOD-like activities. In the absence of light, the VOxBG changed its colour from green to blue and dark purple, which indicated the transfer of electrons between the Fe in the coordination complex and VOx counter cations. After the reaction was completed, the VOxBG's colour changed back to green indicating the completion of reaction, thus showing CAT-like activity only in the absence of light besides the generation of ˙OH and ˙O2− in a Fenton-like reaction and the catalytic/enzyme nature of the material.
 Fig. 3  The flexible structures of PB, PBAs and MOFs for potential multi-nanozyme synthesis. (A) Unit cell of the original PB/PBA and arrangement of atoms. (B) Morphology of the VOxBG hydrogel showing the complete distortion of the cubic PB structure due to the incorporation of large sized VOx ions and water molecules and the chemical formula VOxBG with the schematic illustration of the proposed linkage of VOx ions in Fe(CN)6 in the structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (C) Schematic mechanism of the multienzyme-like activity of PBNPs based on standard redox potentials of different compounds in the reaction systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyrights 2016, ACS. (D) One-pot synthesis of microcrystalline MOF-74 [M2(DOT); DOT = dioxidoterephthalate] with 2 (Mg and Co), 4 (Mg, Co, Ni, and Zn), 6 (Mg, Sr, Mn, Co, Ni, and Zn), 8 (Mg, Ca, Sr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Zn), and 10 (Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, and Cd) different kinds of divalent metals as a potential candidate design for the MOF-based multi-nanozyme synthesis. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyrights 2014, ACS. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are highly porous materials with low density that are self-assembled from the metal nodes (clusters or ions) in the presence of organic linkers. They have some very peculiar characteristics such as tunable porosity, high specific surface area, plenty of unsaturated metal sites for coordination, and substitutable components. These properties make MOFs very attractive in a variety of applications in industry, energy storage, medical applications, photocatalysis, sensing and separation technology.144 Numerous works have reported the nanozyme like properties of MOFs which are generally imparted to these materials due to the metal nodes present in their structure. The mixed oxidation states of metals and metals like Ag, Ce, Zn, Co, and Cu have been reported to have better and more than one kind of ROS generation abilities, which impart multi-nanozyme like properties to the MOFs while the organic linkers act as binding sites providing a large surface area for substrates to get adsorbed and act as the bridges for charge transfer during the redox reactions.145–147 Sharmouk's group used this strategy and obtained a mixed valence Ce3+/4+ Ce-MOF with 4,4′,4′′-nitrilotribenzoic acid (H3NTB) as an organic linker.148 Due to the mixed valence states of Ce, the synthesized MOF showed POD, SOD and CAT like activities. However, the study fails to elaborate how this multi-nanozyme is able to mimic POD, because Ce is generally known for its SOD and CAT-like activities. Since, even after synthesis, a lot of bipodal or multipodal organic linker sites are still available, MOFs can be combined or coated with other heteroatoms or molecules such as metals and metal oxides that could enhance their catalytic efficiencies and convert them into multi-nanozymes.149 Wei's group synthesized a dual metal atom nanozyme by combining [5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrinato]–Mn(III) chloride (TCPP-Mn MOF) with a TCPP-Mn containing nanoscale MOF (PCN222-Mn) and lastly combining it with PVP coated Pt NPs.102 The Mn part of the multi-nanozyme contributed to the SOD like activity, whereas the Pt part imparted CAT like characteristics to the MOF while the metal free porphyrin (TCPP) displayed no SOD like activity. The nano-MOF PCN222-Mn displayed higher activity than TCPP-Mn due to its small morphology and higher dispersibility. Liu et al. coated Au NPs with ZIF-8 doped with Cu2+ and loaded it with doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX). The slowly released Cu2+ ions generated OH radicals with the assistance of the production of higher levels of H2O2 by DOX, while Au behaved like the OXD nanozyme in the presence of an external light source, thus instantaneously mimicking a cascade-like reaction.150
Although MOFs are widely synthesized and have become a well-known and most researched area in the field of nanomaterials science, the work on MOF-based nanozymes and multi-nanozymes is still in its infancy due to various reasons among which one is their stability and recyclability. The complex and multi-step synthesis-based modification of MOFs has generally been used in most of the reported works, where MOFs are loaded with multiple NPs, polymer coatings, drugs and various biomolecules to convert them into multi-nanozymes.151–154 Such kinds of modifications make it harder to understand the true mechanisms that are involved during catalysis and further aggravate the issue of the stability of the as-synthesized materials. Furthermore, due to unfamiliarity with the complex chemistry of MOFs and the lack of interdisciplinary collaborations, the unlimited strategies that could be employed in the field of multi-nanozyme synthesis remain unexplored. One attractive strategy, which can be considered for multi-nanozyme synthesis, is the addition of more than one kind of metal salt precursor during the synthesis of MOFs to obtain a mixed-metal MOF (MM-MOF) with dual or triple nanozyme like activities. However, such an approach is likely to deform the morphology of the MOF or generate mixed crystalline phases of the MOF. This approach requires the careful selection of an organic linker. Yaghi's group reported this strategy, where they linked 8 different metal atom nodes (Ca, Mg, Mn, Sr, Fe, Co, Ni and Zn) and dioxidoterephthalate (DOT) as an organic linker in a one-pot synthesis having ten various kinds of divalent metal atoms: 2 (Co and Mg), 4 (Mg, Ni, Co, and Zn), 6 (Mg, Sr, Mn, Co, Ni, and Zn), 8 (Ca, Mg, Mn, Fe, Co, Sr, Ni, and Zn), and 10 (Ba, Mg, Ca, Sr, Mn, Ni, Fe, Co, Zn, and Cd) (Fig. 3D). Surprisingly, the XRD patterns and SEM images of the synthesized MM-MOF-74 showed no amorphous phases; instead, they were identical to those of MOF-74.143 Yang et al. selected Fe(III) meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphine (FeTCP) and synthesized the dual metal MOF using the one-pot hydrothermal synthesis by adding the Zr4+ salt. The synthesized Fe porous coordination network (FePCN) displayed triple enzyme-like activity including POD, intrinsic OXD and phosphatase (POP).155
Since MOFs are not just metal nodes that are working on their own, but the organic linkers present in them also play a critical role in their chemistry and morphology, which raises the question about the role an organic linker has in determining the catalytic properties of a nanozyme. As mentioned before, the organic linker could play a role in the adsorption and binding of the substrates, which is a crucial and the initial determining step that a reaction will occur or not. Modern computational tools and online libraries of the organic linker database of MOFs developed by Farha's group are one of the easiest ways from which a material scientist can get great assistance in selecting a suitable linker and compatible metal nodes and determine the feasibility of the proposed MOF's structure and the possibilities of the reactions and kinetics of the nanozyme before one spends enormous effort and time in synthesizing and characterizing it.156,157 Besides changing the oxidation states of metal centers, the redox activity of MOFs can be tuned and modified by altering the functionalization of the organic linkers such as replacing oxido with sulfido donors and through the anion exchange of the bridging organic ligands bearing in mind μ-Cl–, μ-F–, μ-Br–, μ-OH– or μ-SH– groups.158 These alterations could lead to the desired tunability of the open metal sites or the organic linker binding sites for the substrate; for example, Snurr, Farha and co-workers have reported the selective affinity and adsorption of O2 at the open metal sites of the Co2(OH)2(BBTA) MOF.157 This kind of strategy could be explored to capture O2 and generate in situ ROS for intrinsic multi-nanozyme like activities in combination with other metals that could convert O2 into superoxo species. Most of the literature on MOFs with nanozymes or multi-nanozyme-like activities has been reported after modification of MOFs through pyrolysis and conversion into single atom catalysts, as discussed in the following section.
3.4. Single atom catalysts (SACs)
Single atom catalysts are nanomaterials which possess active sites in the form of isolated single atoms that are stabilized on some kinds of support materials or are alloyed with other metals.159 Single atom catalysts have attracted wider attention of the materials scientists due to their eye-catching characteristics that other complex nanomaterials discussed above do not offer. As we discussed earlier that sometimes designing a complex nanomaterial makes it quite hard to understand the characteristics of the nanozyme and makes it nearly impossible to predict the active catalytic sites of the catalyst when generally the nanozyme like activity is depending on multiple factors such as composition, crystal plane, size, surface coatings, heteroatom doping, hybridization and so on. The most attractive feature of SACs is that their catalytically active sites are predictable, and we can control them in terms of increasing or decreasing efficiency as well as achieving desired catalysis results. Moreover, the SACs offer higher and better conversion rates when compared to other complex nanomaterials because they have a maximum number of active catalytic sites exposed on the surface area of a supporting material. Furthermore, by altering their loading amounts or type of single atoms, the surface chemistry of the support can be altered by creating defects and electronic structures, which have an enormous effect on the catalysis rates and enhances the utilization efficiency of the single atom site.160 In addition, SACs offer both heterogenous and homogenous catalyses with higher selectivity. Lin and coauthors have described SACs as the limit in the precise design of nanomaterials at the atomic level.161 Zhang and co-workers first used the term SACs in 2011 for Pt atoms dispersed on FeOx.162 Since then, tremendous amounts of research studies have reported single atom catalysts for various catalytic purposes, especially those that require the higher selectivity of a product. In materials chemistry, SACs are considered as the closest kin to the natural enzymes and metalloproteases due to their chemical and morphological similarities.161 In order to successfully achieve the formation of single atoms, it is crucial that metal-to-metal bonds are not formed. The absence of metal-to-metal bonds in the SACs completely differentiate their catalytic mechanisms from the rest of the nanomaterials.
Typical supports for SACs include: (i) metal oxides in which the anchoring strategy of single atoms is through creating defects by oxygen and metal vacancies to form single atom alloy (SAA), (ii) carbon supports by utilizing heteroatom dopants including N, S, P and halogens and (iii) porous materials such as MOFs, zeolites or COFs through creating confinements in them.136 Techniques that are generally used for their synthesis include reinforcing the support–metal interactions and limiting the atom aggregation. Common synthesis techniques for SACs include pyrolysis, coprecipitation, galvanic replacement, impregnation, and atomic layer deposition. The characterization procedures to detect single atoms differ from other materials due to the precision of the methods and techniques required at an atomic level. The concept of SACs did not come into limelight until 2011 because of the lack of the advanced characterization techniques that could accurately detect single atoms. Some highly advanced techniques including aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-HAADF-STEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EDX/EELS), XANES, EXAFS, XPS, NMR and Mössbauer spectroscopy are used to detect the presence and accurate formation of single atoms. Ming and other researchers anchored Pt and Pd single atoms on the CeO2 support, where Pt was preferably distributed on the (111) facets of CeO2 because the CeO2(111) facets can offer ideal sites to firmly trap isolated single metal atoms (Fig. 4B).164–166 The Pt–O–Ce bond was verified by Raman spectroscopy which showed the formation of atomic Pt single atoms in the CeO2 structure. The high Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio in the Pt/CeO2 multi-nanozyme was observed compared to that of CeO2 nanoclusters, which resulted in its superior catalytic activity and multi-nanozyme like activity including SOD, POD, CAT and GSH due to better electronic donating efficiency of the SAC. In this case, apart from the Pt single atoms, the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio and oxygen defects also played a crucial role in determining the multi-nanozyme like properties. Numerous studies have reported the synthesis of Fe–N–C SACs; however, generally, the only enzyme-like activity that is reported by Fe–N–C SACs is POD mimetics. Another very similar strategy has been reported by Ruan et al., where they incorporated Pd single atoms on CeO2 by adjusting the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, where the resulting single atom nanomaterial mimicked POD, SOD and CAT along with the production of reactive nitrogen species.113 Lu et al. prepared Fe–N/C SACs by pyrolysis of Fe-TPP ⊂ ZIF at 950 °C for 3 h under a N2 atmosphere and reported POD, SOD, OXD, and CAT mimics simultaneously.167 The authors claim that these multi-nanozyme like activities are due to better dispersion and the large surface area of the Fe–N–C SAC. However, Zhou et al., Xie et al., and Jiao et al., have reported similar Fe–N–C nanozymes with only POD-like activity with a possibility that these materials could exhibit other enzyme mimicking activities, which were not studied.168–170 Xiaogang and co-workers used a similar approach like Lu et al., where they used the ZIF-8 bimetallic MOF with Zn doping and incorporated Co single-atoms through pyrolysis. The resultant Co-porphyrin (Co/PMCS) could display SOD, CAT and GPx-like activities and ˙OH and ˙NO-scavenging abilities.111 Another strategy to impart multi-nanozyme like activity to SACs is through the incorporation of dual or triple single atoms or the incorporation of transition metal single atoms (M-SAs) along with metal atom nanoclusters (M-SA-MNCs) as reported by Xiang et al. (Fig. 4D).171 Liu's et al. followed this strategy, where instead of single atoms, they incorporated dual Fe atoms in the ZIF-8 MOF through pyrolysis using nonacarbonyldiiron (Fe2(CO)9) as the precursor of dual-atoms where Fe bonds were connected through carbonyl (Fig. 4F).112 Due to the high pyrolysis temperature (800 °C), (Fe2(CO)9) molecules, which were separated due to the carbonyl bonds in the ZIF-8 cavity, were broken down to form Fe–Fe dual atoms and the Fe2NC nanozyme showed SOD, CAT and OXD-like activities due to the double radical adsorption and electron transfer and higher reduction capabilities of Fe–Fe dual atom sites. A similar strategy with dual but different single atoms in the carbon matrix without having a metal-to-metal bond can also be adopted to impart multi-nanozyme-like activities such as those reported by Bin Liu's group (Fig. 4C).163 They used the Co-PBA framework as the source of N-doped graphene and pyrolyzed it at various temperatures. The removal of metallic cores was performed by etching with H2SO4 to obtain dual atoms of Fe and Co in the nitrogen doped graphene structure (FeCo-NC). This kind of strategy using different specific metal atoms for the specific kind of nanozyme like activity can be utilized to design single-atom multi-nanozymes, for example, using the Fe single atom site as POD mimics and Mn or Ce single atom sites as SOD or CAT mimics, simultaneously. Moreover, instead of pyrolyzing the metal atoms with MOFs, the simple covalent attachment of single metal atoms to the defect sites of the metal oxide nodes in the MOFs, as reported by Yaghi's group, can also be explored through the coprecipitation or impregnation process, so that the pyrolysis does not change the mixed oxidation states of metal atoms into a stabilized and unreactive one, which is necessary for multiple catalytic activities of a nanozyme.172 Our group also utilized the power of oxidation states of single-atoms by the careful fine-tuning of the oxidation states of Fe single atoms by using Fe2+ and Fe3+ salts of the ethylenediamine structure and subsequently pyrolyzing it at low temperatures so that the electronic rich graphene network and surface functional groups of carbon dots optimize the oxidation states of the Fe single atoms in FeSA@CQDs in situ (Fig. 4E). The obtained FeSA@CQDs-1 (with Fe3+ precursor) and FeSA@CQDs-2 (with Fe2+ precursor) showed alternative catalytic activities, where FeSA@CQDs-1 mimicked, POD whereas FeSA@CQDs-2 exhibited POD, SOD and CAT-like activities. To eliminate the factor that CQDs might have some contribution in these activities, we also checked the performance of CQDs and found that CQDs in itself do not show any multi-nanozyme like activity except a very low POD-like activity.123
 Fig. 4  Mimicking multi-enzymes through SACs. (A) Different possible coordination environments for single metal atom attachment in the N or O doped graphene framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) Structure of single atom doping on metal oxides. (C) Possible strategy to synthesize dual single atoms in the N doped graphene framework to impart multi-nanozyme like properties to a SAC. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (D) Graphical presentation and detection of Fe single atoms (Fe-SA) and Fe-SA with Fe nanoclusters (Fe-SA/NC) with HAADF-STEM. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (E) Fe single atom nanozymes with triple nanozyme like activities due to the tuning of oxidation states of FeSA in the carbon quantum dot (FeSA@CQDs-2) framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyrights 2022, Wiley. (F) Possible selection of transition metal atoms for dual single atoms and its structure. 
Furthermore, the coordination environment also contributes in defining the catalytic properties of a nanozyme. The sites such as MX2, MX3, and MX4 (M = metal and X = N, O, S, halogen), as shown in Fig. 4A, are sometimes explored through DFT to optimize and define the catalytic activity of a SAC. In fact, these are the most important sites that were reported in earlier studies, including the heteroatom-doped sites, which can bind early transition metal atoms. The reason for the attachment of single atoms on these sites is the presence of defects or the intrinsic propensity (higher electronegativity, Lewis base nature, lone paired electrons, etc.) of these atoms, which can tether the metal atoms quickly. Moreover, the presence of these sites indicates the presence of the defective structure and charge separation, thereby the possibility of various and/or alternative catalytic activities, besides the catalytic activity of the active metal site. The most preferred heteroatom doping sites for selective nanozymes are 4-fold nitrogen-cavities (N4-M), which are stable and have square-planar geometries. However, quite recently, N3, N5, N1C3, and N1C2 configurations have also been proposed as potential sites by XAS and DFT.173,174 The variable coordination number of N can be achieved through controlling the specific conditions during the synthesis of SACs such as the atmosphere of pyrolysis (Ar, N2, N2/NH3, air, Ar/H2, etc.) as well as the temperature, time and ramp rate during pyrolysis. Ma et al. reported the tuning of coordination sites in UiO-66-NH2 with Ni as single atoms (Ni1–X/MOF) by using the following combinations: Ni1–S, Ni1–O, Ni1–Sox; ox = oxidation. The alteration of the coordination environment in the MOF significantly enhanced the charge separation and facilitated efficient electron-transfer, which are necessary for multiple redox activities.175 Ni1–Sox also showed better performance because of the presence of the uncoordinated metal atoms at the exposed surfaces, which are expected to show higher-energy d states, thereby approximating the highest Fermi energy occupied states, in turn forming antibonding states. This results in a stronger interaction between metal atoms and their adsorbates.176
3.5. Smart assemblies and nanohybrid systems
Apart from the basic nanomaterial categories discussed above, mixed synthesis strategies for multi-nanozymes, which include the self-assembly of organic polymers, linkers or coatings with inorganic nanomaterials as well as the combination of multiple nanomaterials and organic moieties to create nanohybrid systems are also common.177 Hybrid nanomaterials are composed of two or more than two different components, which generally include the ‘hard matter’ consisting of inorganic components (such as metal ions, metal particles or clusters, metal oxides, salts, metal sulfides, metalloids and their derivatives, etc.) and the ‘soft matter’ made of organic components (organic molecules, linkers, functionalities, ligands, pharmaceutical substances, biomolecules, polymers, etc.), which are assembled together through specific interactions, thereby resulting in the enhancement of their functional properties through synergism.178 A series of interactions are sometimes involved in the fabrication of hybrid materials, from the configuration of molecules (π-complexation, covalent bonds, etc.) to nanoscale binding and self-assembly (hydrogen bonding, dispersion interactions, certain types of intermolecular interactions, electrostatic interactions, etc.) and micro-structuring such as coordinative interactions in multiple modes.179 The amalgamation of different constituents and structural layouts and blueprints with unique types of interactions results in an essentially infinite variety of distinctive task-specific materials. The soft matter part also attribute towards the biological functionalization of the nanohybrid system, which serves in the affinity recognition of inflammatory tissues, cancerous cells, proteins or other biological molecules in the body.177 Polymer-based hybrid nano-assemblies, such as biopolymers, are ideal soft materials for developing hybrid supramolecular nanoarchitectures that have the ability to endure reversible changes in the shape, charge distribution and configuration, which display dynamic functions in response to external environmental stimuli such as changes in ionic strength, pH or charge potentials and thus can be used for a variety of applications in nanomedicine and therapy.115,177,180
Numerous self-assembled nanohybrid and nanoarchitecture systems have been reported as multi-nanozymes in recent years that are not in the scope of this review. However, we will focus on some representative studies that have used these strategies in order to develop multi-nanozymes. A very simple and general synthesis strategy of such a self-assembled nanohybrid system is the reduction of noble metal salts to form metal clusters or nanoparticles. Kim et al. used an environmentally friendly strategy to synthesize biogenic gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) that could mimic POD and GOx-like activities using a gallnut extract (GNE) as a capping and reducing agent. The GNE is rich in tannic acid and gallic acid while egallic acid, digallic acid and pentagalloyl glucose are also present in minor amounts.181 The –OH moieties present in galloyl act as electron donor groups and result in the reduction of Au3+ ions and with the progression of the reaction the saturation of the Au0 results in the nucleation and crystallization with the eventual formation of nanoclusters or aggregates. The quinone carbonyl groups in the end assist in the capping of AuNPs by π electrons and intra-carbonyl groups. The multi-nanozyme oxidizes glucose through the molecular activation approach, where the electron rich AuNPs activate the molecular oxygen by a nucleophilic attack. The POD-like activity on the other hand is assisted by the GNE, which helps in the adsorption of H2O2 on the surface of the AuNPs, in turn allowing the AuNPs to cleave the OH–OH bonds and then the stabilization of ˙OH radicals on the surface of the AuNPs due to the partial electron exchange between the radicals and conduction bands of the GNE-AuNPs. In a more complex synthesis strategy of hybrid colloidal nanostructures for dual enzyme mimics, Mansur et al. proposed a systematic fabrication of AuNPs stabilized by trisodium citrate (AuNP@TSC) and Co-doped superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs stabilized by a biopolymer organic shell of carboxymethylcellulose (Co-MION@CMC), also acting as a ligand (Fig. 5A).182 The amalgamation of AuNP@TSC and Co-MION@CMC components in the nanohybrid system results in dual nanozyme-like activities, where the former component behaves as OXD, while the later exhibits POD-like properties. Due to these properties, this nanohybrid system was used in the cascade-like magnetothermal therapy of brain tumor. In order to specifically target the brain cancer cells, the nanohybrid was further biofunctionalized with RGD-based peptides having a triple amino acid sequence (Arg-Gly-Asp) for the precise targeting of those cell membrane receptors that are overexpressed in cancerous tumors including brain tumor cells. Yang et al. developed bacteria-like hybrid nanoarchitectures using Bi2S3 nanorods (NRs) as a hard template and the cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) as a soft template in an oil–water biphase reaction system, which was then loaded with ultrasmall CeO2 into the mesopores of Bi2S3@DMSN in order to avoid the aggregation of CeO2 NPs and finally coated with polyethylene glycol (PEG) for higher biocompatibility and solubility (Fig. 5B).65 The Bi2S3 NRs assisted in the high absorption of light in the second near-infrared (NIR-II) region, where a significant enhancement of the photothermal effect of the nanoarchitecture was observed, while a high Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio of 1.94:1 resulted in a cascade-like reaction mimicking POD and CAT and depleting GSH at the same time for their usage in hyperthermia-enhanced tumor therapy. In another interesting study, Wang et al. developed a crosslinked polymeric nanogel based multi-nanozyme system using metal coordination and the biocatalytic ATRPase technique (Fig. 5C).183 In order to synthesize the metal crosslinked polymeric nanogels (MPGs), they used Fe2+ coordination with a biocompatible acryloyl-lysine polymer obtained from the biocatalytic polymerization of amino-acid (N-acryloyl-l-lysine) monomers by a natural enzyme-based atomic transfer radical polymerization (ATRPase) reaction. The coordination network in the nanogel resulted in the high dispersibility of Fe catalytic sites and better exposure in the crosslinked polymer, thus enhancing the synergistic effect of the dual nanozyme (POD and SOD) like activities of the nanogel, which was successfully utilized in the biofluorescence responsive imaging of the tumor tissues.
 Fig. 5  Some representative nanohybrid systems developed as multi-nanozymes. (A) Schematic representation of tumor cell death pathways/mechanisms (apoptosis and ferroptosis) provoked by AuNP/Co-MION@CMC-iRGD nanozyme cascade reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyrights 2022, MDPI. (B) Schematic illustration of the successive synthetic procedures of the PEG/Ce-Bi@DMSN nanozymes with hyperthermia-enhanced dual enzyme-mimic catalytic activities and GSH depletion for in vivo synergistic photothermal-enhanced nano-catalytic cancer therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyrights 2020, Wiley. (C) Schematic depiction of the Fe-MPGs nanogel synthesized by ATRPase for ROS responsive biofluorescence imaging in vivo and their preparation and mechanism illustration of ROS responsive fluorescence imaging by tandem catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyrights 2020, Wiley. 
4. Challenging aspects of multi-nanozymes
4.1. Multiple characterization
Generally, there are three steps of characterization before a nanomaterial could be attributed as a multi-nanozyme: (i) physical and chemical analyses of a nanomaterial through multiple characterization studies, (ii) analyzing the enzyme kinetics of a nanomaterial, and (iii) exploring and deciphering the catalytic mechanisms of multi-nanozymes.
Simple nanomaterials such as metals, alloys, metal oxides and sulfides without any modifications can be simply characterized through some commonly used materials science techniques such as X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) for crystal facet analysis, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) as well as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) for elemental analysis and a thorough analysis of the oxidation states of the metal atoms present in the material, while the presence of metal or oxygen vacancies in the material can be determined with the help of electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) or electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy and high-resolution tunneling electron microscopy (HRTEM). Morphological characteristics including the analysis, size, shape and elemental distribution in the nanomaterial could be analyzed through techniques like scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) microanalysis, atomic force microscopy (AFM) or scanning force microscopy (SFM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), etc. UV-visible and fluorescence spectroscopies can also provide a broad range of information on the chemical and physical properties of nanomaterials. As we go towards more complex materials such as carbon-based materials with functional groups and coordination spheres, including graphene, MOFs or PBAs, techniques like Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Raman spectroscopy and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis and pore analysis become necessary for the detailed analysis of the kind of bonds and electronic states and to determine the surface area and porosity of these materials. Low-dimensional materials such as SACs need advanced techniques including aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-HAADF-STEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EDX/EELS), operando X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES), extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and Mössbauer spectroscopy to understand the structure and physical properties of these low-dimensional materials. When it comes to nanohybrid materials, things become trickier because they have multiple inorganic and organic components, which might need to be analyzed separately and as one entity.
Sometimes, the above-mentioned characterization studies are rendered not enough due to the complex nature of a nanomaterial, in which case, the material might need special treatment. For instance, the overlapping of crystal phases in XRD or the alteration of oxidation states of metals due to exposure to air or water, and sometimes a variation or degradation of the organic component of the nanomaterial during handling, synthesis or environmental exposure, etc. demand the careful characterization of such materials. Depending on the specific case, a nanomaterial might need meticulous handling and characterization procedures in order to establish the most precise and accurate understanding of it. Some specific scenarios of characterization through which different nanozyme like activities in a multi-nanozyme-like material are identified and discussed in detail with relevant examples from recent studies in Section 4.3 under the heading “deciphering the mechanisms of cascade reactions.”
4.2. Nanozyme kinetics
In order to make a relative comparison between nanozymes and the corresponding natural enzymes, it is necessary to measure the kinetic parameters of nanomaterials for the evaluation of the catalytic efficiency of the synthesized material in comparison to its natural counterpart. For this purpose, the established model of enzyme kinetics known as the Michaelis–Menten equation is used, which depicts the relationship between the substrate concentration and the maximum velocity or the rate achieved by the nanozyme during the substrate conversion to its ultimate products. Meanwhile, the enzyme follows the ‘ping-pong mechanism,’ in which an intermediary substrate–enzyme complex is formed and the generation of the product results in the return of the enzyme into its initial free state. The Michaelis constant (Km) corresponds to the substrate's concentration at which the enzymatic reaction reaches half of the maximum rate or velocity (Vmax). The Michaelis–Menten equation is denoted as follows:  Here, [S] is the concentration of the substrate, Vmax is the maximum velocity of the reaction, Km is the Michaelis constant, and V is the rate of substrate conversion. The Km value also depicts the affinity of a specific enzyme towards its substrate, where the lower Km value represents a higher affinity of the enzyme towards a substrate. Generally, these kinetic parameters are observed by using the UV-visible absorbance or fluorescence of some chromogenic or fluorescent substrate such as o-phenylenediamine (OPD), 3, 3′, 5, 5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), and 2,2′-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonate) (ABTS) in the case of POD-like and GOx-like activities, TiSO4 colorimetric titration in the case of CAT-like activity and the nitro-blue tetrazolium (NBT) substrate in the case of SOD-like activity.179 Certain ready-to-use commercial kits are also available that can directly measure these enzymatic activities of nanomaterials. The Km values of the substrates should be lower than those of the corresponding natural enzymes, which is one indication that the synthesized nanozyme is better than its natural counterpart. In certain cases, the Km and Vmax values of a nanomaterial gives an indication of how that material could be categorized as a multi-nanozyme. For instance, while measuring the POD-like activity of Fe-based SACs by Zeb et al., the affinity for H2O2 as a substrate was very low and the Vmax value was high while that of TMB as a substrate showed a lower Vmax value which led to the conclusion that the higher affinity of H2O2 is an indication of the CAT-like activity of the nanozyme.123
4.3. Deciphering the mechanisms of cascade reactions

4.3.1. Oxidation states and charge transfer. 
As we have discussed earlier, oxidation states of metal atoms in alloys, metal oxides, PB/PBAs and MOFs determine the kind of nanozyme mimicking properties a nanomaterial could have. Different transition elements across the periodic table show valence states between 0 and 7 (Fig. 6A). Depending on various factors including the valence states of transition metal atoms, a nanozyme could generate or scavenge ˙OH, ˙O2−, H2O2, 1O2, O2 and some other ROS, which either eliminate or produce the oxidative stress in the cellular environment. ˙OH, ˙O2−, and 1O2 are the most reactive radicals, and the human body produces around 5 g of ROS in a day.184 Therefore, their check and control are extremely necessary, which is done by SOD, CAT, GSH and NADH. As we have mentioned earlier in the Introduction section that Haber and Weiss discussed the chain reactions that occur in the presence of Fe2+ salts and H2O2 and compared these cascade reactions with POD and CAT-based enzymatic reactions. The cycle was later named the Haber–Weiss cycle, where it involves the oxidation–reduction reactions of metal salts, metals and their oxides in the presence of H2O2. Before discussing the Haber–Weiss mechanism, another important reaction that is necessary to mention here is the Fenton reaction which is carried out by the reduced states of metals or metal oxides in the presence of H2O2 as a substrate thus mimicking POD:185 M2+ + H2O2 → M3+ + ˙OH + OH−(15)This reaction sometimes requires the presence of light to jump start the transfer of electrons from the metals and in that case, it is called the photo-Fenton reaction. Since a catalyst itself is not consumed in the reaction, therefore, M3+ reacts with another H2O2 molecule to complete the Fenton reaction by generating highly unstable peroxo species in the end:185 M3+ + H2O2 → M2+ + ˙OOH + H+(16)This radical could release ˙O2− or can be further oxidized to release O2, which will be discussed in detail later. If H2O2 reacts with another ˙OH, it will generate a superoxide radical: H2O2 + ˙OH → ˙O2− + H+ + H2O(17)This reaction also depends on the generation of ˙OH, which is formed directly from the H2O2 reaction with metals/metal oxides and the generation of these radicals depends on the rate constant of these reactions. Depending on the rate of the reaction, the ˙O2− generated in eqn (18) might also react with H2O2 in order to generate ˙OH again along with O2 and these series of cascade reactions are called the Haber–Weiss cycle (Fig. 6C).18 Generally, in metals and metal oxides such as Fe, Cu, Co, Ni, etc. and their oxides, these reactions go hand in hand, with one reaction preceding the other depending on the reaction rates and kinetics as well as the amounts of substrates and reaction conditions.18 H2O2 + ˙O2− → ˙OH + O2 + OH−(18)These multi-step reactions occurring like a cascade mimic the multi-enzymatic reactions of POD and SOD, simultaneously. SOD and CAT mimics also follow the following pathways where the superoxide radical undergoes two-step oxidation and generates O2 and H2O2. The generation of H2O2 is typically considered as SOD mimetics, while the generation of O2 is considered as CAT mimetics.186 M3+ + ˙O2− → M2+ + O2(19) ˙O2− → O2 + H2O2(20) M2+ + H2O2 → M3+ + OH−(21)In the case of zero-valent metals, O2 is adsorbed on the metal surface and a series of redox reactions initiate which mimic OXD, POD, SOD and CAT simultaneously as shown below:187 O2 + Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O2(22) H2O2 + Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O(23) H2O2 + Fe2+ → Fe3+ + ˙OH + OH− (pH < 5)(24) H2O2 + Fe2+ → Fe4+ = O2+ + H2O (pH > 5)(25) Fe2+ + O2 → Fe3+ + ˙O2− (pH ∼ 7)(26)With simple nanomaterials such as nanoceria, the generation of H2O2 could simply be observed by the colorimetric oxidation of TMB without the addition of H2O2 while the generation of O2 could be observed visually or through a dissolved oxygen meter (DOM). However, in some materials that follow the cascade reactions, the ROS generation is initiated by the addition of H2O2 in the reaction medium and it gets tricky to find out whether the material is behaving like OXD and SOD or not. In that case, simple titration reactions of H2O2 consumption with Ti(SO4)2 colorimetric titration or DFT calculations can help in determining the generation and consumption of H2O2 by the nanomaterial.62 For instance, in another work, we observed that FeSA@CQDs-2 showed O2 generation, which meant that the material had either CAT or SOD like activity, but the yellow-colored Ti(IV)–H2O2 complex showed an increasing absorbance with time instead of a decreasing trend at 430 nm, which indicated that the H2O2 concentration in the reaction medium was gradually increasing.123 Therefore, the SOD-like activity was attributed to the material instead of the CAT-like activity, which was also confirmed via DFT calculations. Another easy solution to differentiate CAT and SOD is by using enzyme specific test kits, which can provide effective measurements on the rate of consumption, degradation or generation of H2O2.
 Fig. 6  Mechanisms of cascade-like reactions in multi-nanozymes. (A) The elements with the highest and lowest valence states across the periodic table which can be used in designing nanozymes with multicatalytic activities. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyrights 2021, ACS. (B) The defect engineering using Fe doping in MoO (Fe-MoOv) to create an oxygen vacancy results in the synergistic effect in ROS generation due to multi-active sites and the instantaneous generation and cleavage of H2O2 through O2 adsorption. Adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyrights 2021, ACS. (C) The light dependent Fenton reactions on the VOxBG hydrogel where the generation of trapped holes (htr) in light promote the generation of multiple ROS and the switchable Haber–Weiss reactions in the absence of light with high CAT-like activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (D) The hydrolytic cleavage of H2O2 to generate O2 over the active metal site of single atom catalysts (SACs) to mimic CAT-like activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyrights 2022, Wiley. (D) pH dependences of one-electron redox of H2O, H2O2, and O2. The dotted line shows the two-electron (2e−) process. Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyrights 2017, ACS. 
Among materials with multiple oxidation states such as V, Mn and Cr, these reactions are aggravated exponentially and sometimes it gets quite difficult to differentiate experimentally the kind of reactions that are occurring and the type of ROS being produced. Some materials like PB and PBAs and some metal oxides like VOx, MnOx, etc. display a contrasting color change during these redox reactions, which is visible and can be monitored by UV-visible absorbance spectroscopy. This reaction is generally characterized by a distinct and high peak in the 250–350 nm wavelength range in UV-vis spectroscopy and is termed as the ‘metal-to-metal charge-transfer complex’, which disappears on the completion of the redox reaction. Similarly, the cascade reactions and simultaneous generation of multiple ROS and their consumption makes it impossible to determine what kind of ROS is being generated during electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR), where a spin trapping agent is used to trap the ROS and a specific signal is observed from the generation of each species. Our group faced this issue when due to the higher generation rate of ˙OH radicals, the generation of ˙O2− radicals was overshadowed and the signal for ˙O2− could not be observed using a 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (BMPO) spin trap agent.107 Under such conditions, one kind of activity of a nanozyme can be blocked using ROS scavengers, so that the hidden and less dominant species could be observed. Some scavengers that are used to block ˙OH, ˙O2−, electrons and holes include isopropanol (IPA), benzoquinone (BQ), potassium iodide (KI) and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid disodium salt (EDTA-2Na).188 However, care should be taken and supporting evidence must be obtained because ROS scavenger chemistry is complex and does not work reliably when carried out standalone.


4.3.2. Generation of ROS through holes and defects in photocatalysis. 
Another kind of ROS generation is due to the presence of defects or photogenerated holes and electrons, which occurs in those nanomaterials that require light as a source for the generation of ROS species in the presence of water, O2 or H2O2. Before discussing the chemistry of ROS generation via the defects and holes, it is necessary to understand the redox chemistry of the major oxidation states of O2 that are generated during catalysis. Four major oxidation states of O2 that have been extensively studied are peroxide dianion, ˙O22−, superoxide ion, ˙O2−; dioxygen cation, O2+ and dioxygen, O2.193,194 Among these species, O2 is a relatively stable molecule and has 16 electrons, among which only those electrons determine the reactivity of O2 which have the highest energy. Two unpaired electrons are present in the triplet state (3Σg−) of O2 in πx* and πy* of the antibonding orbitals having the same energy, but the reactivity of O2 is not low enough even at its ground state.195,196 Among the key ROS, H2O2 and ˙O2− are generated in a cascade like manner either by filling of two π* orbitals, which is succeeded by the protonation of each orbital, or through the reduction of O2. Moreover, H2O2 reduction results in the breakdown of the O–O bond, which is also known as O–O cleavage, to generate ˙OH radicals.191 Depending on the crystal faces of a metal alloy or oxide or the surface defects in the case of carbon materials, the molecular O2 gets dissociated instantly because the energetic and special overlap between the antibonding orbitals of O2 and the electrons from the catalyst surface is quite favorable.197 Depending on the frequency and wavelength of light, a nanomaterial forms photogenerated holes, when electrons in the valence band adsorb that specific energy from the light source, and jump to a higher orbital leaving an empty space behind, known as valence band holes (hvb+).198 These photogenerated holes act as the efficient catalytic sites for the dissociation of molecules, including O2 and H2O2. The doping of metals in alloys, incorporation of mixed valence species (MOx), doping and functionalization of the graphene framework, doping of various metal ions in the PB structure, all generate the defective sites in the crystal lattices of these materials, which are responsible for the formation of hvb+ in the presence of light (Fig. 6B).107,190,199 Besides these holes and defects, some superficial holes are also generated on the surfaces of nanomaterials during the redox reactions which assist in the ROS generation, which are termed as trapped holes (htr+). Trapped holes are generated when the one step reduction of H2O2 by hvb+ results in the adsorption and trapping of ˙OH radicals by the photogenerated hvb+.107,200,201 These htr+ are oxidative species on the surface of the catalyst which extract the electrons from their substrates directly and oxidize them. MO + hv → hvb+ + e−(27) e− + H2O2 → ˙OH + OH−(28) hvb+ + ˙OH → ˙OH(ads) or (htr+)(29) (htr+) + substrate → ox-substrate(30)These trapped holes cannot be easily detected through general ˙OH radical detection techniques, such as the determination of the fluorescence intensity of terephthalic acid (TA) in the presence of nanozymes and H2O2, through ESR using the ˙OH radical spin trapping agent like DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide) or chemiluminescent molecules like luminol so their scavenging using hole scavenging agents such as EDTA could be performed to evaluate their effect on the catalytic activity of the nanomaterial.192 Similarly, in some metal oxides such as Ce, the valence and coordination structure of the metal shift after the addition of H2O2 and results in the change of the coordination number of metal atoms on the upper surface of the nanomaterial, which is often termed as the formation of temporary oxygen vacancies (Vo) which could be detected through a red shift observed in the X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) of nanomaterials before and after the addition of H2O2.202 H2O2(ads) + 2 Ce4+ → 2H+ + O2 + 2Ce3+ + Vo(31) 2Ce3+ + Vo + O2 → 2Ce4+(32) H2O2(ads) + Vo + 2H+ + 2Ce3+ → 2Ce4+ + 2H2O(33)The trapped holes that we have discussed earlier also have the potential to generate peroxo species that are bridged through M–O–O–M bonds on the surface of the catalyst as a result of adsorbed H2O2.186,200 This M–O–O–M bond then follows two pathways: (i) by the direct cleavage of the O–O bridge (Fig. 6D) succeeding to its original structure by releasing ˙OH on the surface of the catalyst (eqn (35)) and (ii) if there are abundant holes on the catalyst surface, then it undergoes further oxidation and cleavage of the M–O bond to generate M–OO˙ (eqn (36)). The ultimate fate of this radical also known as the ˙OOH radical is to produce ˙O2−, which in turn contributes to the SOD-like activity of a nanozyme.192 htr+ + H2O2ads + M → M–O–O–M(34) M–O–O–M → ˙OHads(35) M–O–O–M + hvb+ → M–OO˙ → ˙O2−(36)


4.3.3. Redox potentials and pH dependence. 
Another crucial factor in determining the ROS generation properties and catalytic properties of a nanozyme is its redox potential. The redox potential could be obtained by measuring the potential difference of a nanozyme against the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Since nanozymes are active redox agents, the high or low redox potential value of a nanozyme in a certain medium determines which reaction is favorable. For instance, Zhang and co-workers initially hypothesized that PB should mimic the Fenton reaction since it has an Fe2+/Fe3+ couple, which could behave like a Fenton redox couple in the presence of H2O2 but they were surprised to see the opposite results, where, instead of generating ˙OH radicals, PB NPs scavenged the ˙OH radicals in the solution.21 This is because PB has a reducing ability and a low redox potential of 0.9 V, while the generation of ˙OH is usually observed at higher potentials, i.e. around 2.8 V via Fenton reactions.21 Similarly, H2O2 undergoes instant cleavage and generates H2O2(ads), such as in the case of doped graphene or single-atom catalysts because these catalysts have very high redox potential which can instantly oxidize H2O2 into ˙OH in an acidic medium.123,191 H2O2 → H2O2(ads)(37) H2O2(ads) → 2 ˙OH(ads)(38) 2 ˙OH(ads) + H+ → H2O(ads) + ˙OH (E0 = +2.01 V)(39)Redox potentials can provide insights into the processes where a material is expected to take part in certain kinds of reactions, but it does not. A look at its redox potential might explain whether the reaction is feasible or not and what kind of redox reactions are possible for a certain nanozyme. Similarly, in nanozymes where the reactions are light driven, the characterisation of their valence bands and conduction bands could provide a lot of information about the possibilities of certain reactions. Since both oxidation and reduction are occurring simultaneously in these light driven reactions, there is a possibility of ROS being generated sequentially from both H2O and O2 (Fig. 6C) in the following order: ˙OH ⇒ H2O2 ⇒ ˙O2− ⇒ 1O2, if the initial reactant in H2O.192 On the other hand, if the initial reactant is O2, a step-by-step reduction of O2 produces ˙O2−, then H2O2, and ˙OH by the end.192
In addition, whether a reaction is light dependent or not, the pH of the reaction also plays a critical role in determining the kind of ROS that will be generated by nanozymes, where the pH not only alters the redox potentials of the nanozymes but also the rate at which these ROS are generated and consumed. For instance, looking at Fig. 6E, following the Nernst equation, there is a change of −0.059 pH in the redox potentials along with the pH change due to the release of a proton.203 But in the case of the reduction of ˙O2− in the SOD-like reaction (E0 = +1.72, ˙O2−, 2H+/H2O2), the slope of the reduction potential change is sharper by two-folds from PH 4.8 to 11.7, due to the consumption of two protons in one electron reduction of ˙O2− in order to generate H2O2. ˙O2− + 2H+ + e− → H2O2(40)It should also be remembered here that although the SOD nanozyme generates both H2O2 and O2, the kind of the product it generates in larger amounts is highly pH-dependent. Xu and co-workers observed this phenomenon where the FeSA@CQDs-2 nanozyme generated H2O2 at lower pH values while produced O2 at higher pH values.123 Similarly, a nanozyme could behave as POD at lower pH values, while it acts as CAT at pH 6.5 or at higher pH. Fe-based nanozymes such as Fe3O4 along with many other materials such as PB, PBAs and SACs show this typical phenomenon due to the alteration of their redox potentials by changing the pH of the reaction medium. Likewise, one kind of activity of a nanozyme might stop if the required pH does not exist in the reaction medium, which occurs in many cases in nanozymes.123 This kind of activity of multi-nanozymes is intriguing in some cases where we can control and switch off certain kinds of activity on demand by altering the pH while in some cases like in biological mediums and cells this activity might hinder a multi-nanozyme to work as some cells have an optimum pH between 6.5 and 7. However, the tuning of pH-dependence can switch these multi-nanozymes on and off as required.107

4.4. Sensitivity and selectivity issues
Substrate selectivity and catalytic activity are the two other main challenging properties that are required to be imparted to multi-nanozymes before they could reach to their full maturity and potential. Although some of the thoroughly studied nanozymes exhibit superior or sometimes comparable sensitivity and selectivity compared to their natural counterparts, many nanozymes including multi-nanozymes lack these vital characteristics.180 The complex scaffolds of proteins that make up a natural enzyme are responsible for the precise sensitivity and selectivity of the enzymes.180 Since nanozymes and multi-nanozymes are different in their structures, they are expected to intrinsically lack behind in the finesse of enzyme-like catalysis, which in turn limit their clinical applications. Besides, the biosafety and biocompatibility of multi-nanozymes in living organisms need to be addressed appropriately before they could be tested on humans for their targetability towards specific tissues in the body; hence, their specific nature vis-a-vis biological systems is required to be enhanced. These factors require the thorough and tremendous amount of research on already discovered multi-nanozymes. Although SACs do mimic the natural enzymes to a greater extent in the sense that their catalytic sites are simple and identifiable like that of porphyrin rings in FeN4 sites, other nanomaterials with unpredictable catalytic sites like those in PBAs, metal oxides and graphene oxide need to be studied carefully through experimental and computational studies.204 A change in pH, temperature or light intensity and wavelength alteration could offer a lot of assistance in tuning or obtaining desirable and selective activities in multi-nanozymes that could be switched on and off when desired.179 Certain promotors or inhibitors like nucleoside triphosphates, gold or fluorides and Ag+ or Hg+ ions have also been found to be promoting or inhibiting towards the activity of nanozymes such as POD and SOD nanozymes, which is further needed to be explored carefully.179,205
5. Biological applications of multi-nanozymes
Depending on the enzyme mimicking properties, size, shape and stability of a nanomaterial, its biological application can be determined. For instance, POD, GOx and OXD are generally used in biosensing, tumor therapy and biofilm elimination due to their higher OH and ˙O2− generation abilities and toxicity. Meanwhile, SOD, CAT and GSH find their applications in these biological environments that are affected by higher oxidative stress due to the generation of higher amounts of ROS. Although cells generate ROS internally, a certain balance in ROS generation and consumption is maintained by the enzymes present in the cells. If this balance is disturbed, it will lead to different diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, kidney infections, diabetic wounds, etc.39 Multi-nanozymes can, henceforth, play a therapeutic role in maintaining this delicate balance and the multienzyme-like activity in this case might prove better than single-enzyme like activity, which could aggravate the condition by disturbing the balance of ROS in one direction.
5.1. Biosensing
Multi-enzyme-based biosensors are those in which the sensing system is composed of two or more than two enzymes and the sensing of various substrates is dependent on the cascade-like activity of multiple enzymatic reactions.206–208 A range of advantages are offered using multi-nanozyme sensors. For instance, they help in increased sensitivity and selectivity, as well as the analysis of numerous analytes at the same time. The cascade reactions in multi-nanozyme-based biosensors offer significant benefits over biosensor systems that use only a single nanozyme in terms of multi-analyte detection with cost-effectiveness, portable structure and miniaturization, higher activity and sensitivity and all-in-one system. Multi-nanozyme based biosensing is used in clinical diagnostics, food analysis, environmental monitoring, pharmacology and forensics in combination with electrochemical or piezoelectric sensors sometimes for the accurate and precise quantification of the detected concentrations of metabolites. Early diagnosis of diseases in the current medical industry has resolved many issues in the case of diseases such as diabetes, ulcer, Alzheimer's, Parkison's, Covid-19 and cancer cell detection, which has helped in efficient and timely treatment of these diseases. For instance, H2O2 plays a central role in regulating the health of cells and tissues and an imbalance in its optimal concentrations trigger the onset of oxidative stress, which leads to multiple neurogenerative diseases as well as untreatable ulcers like those in diabetes and formation of cancerous tissues.209 Therefore, H2O2 plays an important role as a biomarker in defining the health of tissues or cells in the human body and its detection with high sensitivity and selectivity is vital in in vitro bioassays for the efficient detection of, for instance, cancer cells in biopsy. Xu et al. developed a mixed vanadium oxide quantum dot (VOxQD) multi-nanozyme sensor for the accurate and precise detection of H2O2 over a broad range using a 3D-coordination method (Fig. 7C).82 Depending on the three-grade color system of TMB oxidation due to the difference in the mechanism of TMB oxidation by POD, OXD and SOD mimics in VOxQDs, the multi-nanozyme could accurately detect H2O2 in the surface waters of Dagu River in Qingdao.82 Multi-nanozymes not only find their potential in ROS detection but their various enzyme mimicking activities can also be utilized to detect various cell metabolites. Liu and co-workers developed a simple Cu NP based biosensor that could mimic ascorbic acid oxidase (AAO) as well as POD, SOD and CAT at the same time. The POD and SOD-like activities were used to detect glutathione, while the AAO-like activity was employed to develop a fluorometric ascorbic acid (AA) sensor, where AA gets oxidized into dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA), which is then reacted with o-phenylenediamine (OPDA) to yield a quinoxaline (DFQ) derivative with high fluorescence in a cascade-like reaction.210 Wang and co-workers reported the hollow Mn/Fe-PBA MOF, which was pyrolyzed to form hollow MnFeO oxides that showed GOx and POD mimics.211 The OXD like activity of the multi-nanozyme was inhibited using L-cysteine (Cys), while the specific binding ability of mercury ions (Hg2+) with Cys restored the OXD like activity and a novel kind of Hg2+ and Cys colorimetric detection platform was established using this technique with the help of TMB as the colorimetric agent.
 Fig. 7  Various multi-nanozymes used in therapeutic and sensing applications. (A) The oxygen vacancy in titania (TiO1+x) assists in the sonodynamic generation of 1O2 and ˙OH radicals simultaneously which assist in tumor therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) The nanoceria functionalized Ti implants behave as multi-nanozymes and prevent the peri-implantitis due to bacterial infection through SOD and CAT mimics. Adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyrights 2019, Elsevier. (C) VOxQDs with multi-nanozymes were used in developing a 3D coordinate system for the precise colorimetric sensing of H2O2 over a broad concentration range. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (D) CoO NPs were co-doped with Au and Pt (CoO@AuPt) to impart triple enzyme like activity for augmented chemodynamic therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 215. Copyrights 2020, Elsevier. 
Another multi-nanozyme combination that has been very useful for the detection of blood glucose levels is POD and GOx, where a nanozyme mimics GOx to capture O2 and convert it into H2O2 depending on the glucose concentration. Afterwards, POD indirectly detects the concentration of glucose present in the solution by determining the H2O2 produced and its colorimetric reaction with TMB. Choi and co-workers, for instance, developed a metal free g-C3N4 and demonstrated its GOx and POD-like activities along with OXD mimics that assisted in O2 reduction and photo-assisted glucose oxidation. The in situ H2O2 generated was consumed in POD-like activity to oxidize chromogenic TMB, thus detecting glucose and H2O2 in a cascade like reaction.133 Our group developed a color-based photolithography and glucose oxidation detection system that showed different colors with the alteration of pH of the medium.107 The system followed cascades of reactions where the VOxBG hybrid (inorganic/organic) hydrogel was used to breakdown starch into glucose molecules under photo-irradiation, and the generated glucose was oxidized to produce H2O2 as a byproduct, which was detected due to the POD-like activity of the multi-nanozyme.
5.2. Therapeutic applications of multi-nanozymes
Depending on the therapy and an oxidant or antioxidant, nanozymes are employed in various kinds of therapies. For instance, tumor therapy, especially in the case of surface tumors, such as breast cancer, requires the killing and elimination of the tumor cells that can be achieved through two to three ways: (i) killing the cells through the generation of toxic ˙OH or ˙O2− radicals (POD and OXD), (ii) depriving the tumor cells of H2O2 utilizing CAT and SOD nanozymes or (iii) depriving the cells of their food and fuel, i.e., glucose and some other biomolecules.212–214 Nanozymes with one kind of specific activity have proven to be inefficient in tumor therapy due to their slow generation of ROS and very specific working conditions that might get inactivated in the complex cell environment. Lin et al. combined the augmenting effect of Bi2S3 nanorods (NRs) coated on dendritic mesoporous silica (Bi2S3@DMSN) and then its combination with ceria nanoparticles. The multi-nanozyme could mimic POD and CAT simultaneously at acidic PH and relieve the tumor microenvironment of the oxidative stress conditions and hypoxia instantaneously.65 Guo et al. prepared the Pt/C nanozyme with Ce6 loading with intrinsic POD and OXD-like properties for breast cancer tumor therapy, which could generate ROS synergistically to kill the tumor cells efficiently in combination with photodynamic therapy (PDT).99
A combination of oxidant and antioxidant nanozymes has also been employed to have a synergistic tumor therapy by first killing the cells and then reducing the oxidative stress generated as a result of ROS generation by an oxidant enzyme through the antioxidant properties of the multi-nanozyme. Xue's group developed CoO@AuPt by the self-assembly of Pt and Au NPs on the surface of CoO hollow nano-capsules (Fig. 7D).215 CoO@AuPt had high stability and could undergo disintegration in the microenvironment of tumor cells to exhibit POD, OXD and CAT with the continuous supply of H2O2 and relief of hypoxia and GSH depletion, which resulted in specific and fast tumor therapy, both in vitro and in vivo.
Besides cancer therapy, multi-nanozymes have also been proven to be useful in the anti-inflammatory therapy of other body tissues such as brain, kidneys, heart and liver that could result in Parkinson's disease (PD), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Alzheimer's, traumatic tissue injury, etc.216–219 Tissue inflammation is generally characterized by high ROS levels, which needs to be eliminated and therefore nanozymes with antioxidant abilities such as GSH, SOD and CAT are utilized for anti-inflammatory therapy. Generally, chemical drugs are used for the anti-inflammatory therapy, but they have certain issues. For example, they lack the specific targeting of tissues and cross the blood–brain barrier, thereby proving toxic to other parts of tissues in the body as well. Nanozymes can overcome these issues because they can be injected into or applied specifically to the target inflammatory tissues and blood–brain barrier issues can be resolved by adjusting the size of the nanoparticles. Cao et al. developed the cobalt porphyrin based (Co/PMCS) SAC with excellent SOD, GSH and CAT-like ROS scavenging properties that could efficiently remove the ˙OH and ˙O2− radicals through cascade-like oxidative-reductive cycles and thus could reduce proinflammatory cytokine levels in multiple organs with high inflammation, eventually increasing the survival rate of mice with sepsis infections.111 Fan et al. used one-pot Fe/N single-atom hollow carbon nanospheres (Fe/N-HCNS) that could mimic POD, OXD, SOD and CAT at the same time.101 These multi-nanozymes could simultaneously treat bacteria infected tissues and inflammatory bowel disease in mice. Cheng et al. developed titanium monoxide (TiO1+x) nanorods with oxygen vacancy and modified them with PEG (PEG-TiO1+x NRs) for biocompatibility. The PEG-TiO1+x multi-nanozyme facilitated higher tumor eradication in synergistic chemotherapy and sonodynamic therapy (SDT). PEG–PEG–TiO1+x had the ability to generate dual ROS including 1O2 and ˙OH simultaneously and through H2O2 decomposition due to the oxygen vacancies within TiO structures (Fig. 7A).220
5.3. Antibacterial applications and biofilm elimination
Antibacterial treatment and biofilm elimination currently rely on the antibiotics, which, apart from their environmental pollution problems, create antibiotic and drug resistances in bacteria, thereby aggravating the problem of bacterial related diseases in the long-run instead of solving it. Nanozymes resolve this issue by releasing toxic ROS, which are harmful to the bacterial cell walls and lipoproteins, while some nanozymes could release toxic ions that could penetrate inside the cell walls of bacteria and cause permanent mRNA and protein damage. Many nanozymes have been developed for the antibacterial applications along with their application in diabetic wound healing as the diabetic wounds are persistent and have higher chances of getting bacterial and fungal infections. Yang and co-workers developed a Cu based single-atom catalyst (Cu–N–C) with intrinsic OXD and POD like multi-nanozyme activities with ˙OH and ˙O2− generation. They compared the antibacterial effect of Cu–N–C SAC with a commonly used antibiotic, vancomycin, and established that the Cu–N–C SAC outperformed vancomycin with an MIC of 16 μg mL−1 rather than 1500 μg mL−1 for that of vancomycin.222 The multi-nanozyme was used to eliminate drug resistant S. aureus and P. aeruginosa. Further in vitro studies were performed on mice for wound healing and the single atom nanozyme eliminated the bacteria and the infection with a complete wound closure within 10 days of treatment with the nanozyme. Xu et al. developed an interesting strategy to eliminate the peri-implantitis, which is one of the reasons for titanium dental implant failure, where an inflammatory lesion is formed within the bones due to bacterial biofilm formation that results in inflammation of the bones and the mucosal membrane in the mouth near the dental implant site.221 Nanoceria was modified into nanocubes, nanorods and nanooctahedron shapes and was coated on the surface of Ti implants (Fig. 7B). All the three nanozymes exhibited SOD and CAT activities. However, the nanorod ceria was selected for further in vivo and in vitro studies due to its better attachment with the bacterial surface. The nanoceria with the nanorod morphology could efficiently eliminate the S. sanguinis bacteria that is the major cause of biofilm formation and infection in the peri-implantitis while the nanocubes and nanooctahedron had better ROS scavenging abilities and showed the highest anti-inflammatory response in all of the treatment groups due to the synergistic effects of the SOD and CAT like activities of this multi-nanozyme. In another study, the multi-enzyme like activity of MoS2 was enhanced through combination with carbon nanotubes and NIR. The hydrogel exhibited enhanced antibacterial activity attributed to the POD by catalyzing H2O2 in acidic mediums, glutathione loss, and photothermal therapy. Moreover, the multi-nanozyme showed SOD-like activity with H2O2 and O2 generation, while H2O2 was further depleted into O2 through catalase-like activity, due to which the hydrogel showed the excellent scavenging ability of radicals in the neutral environment and supplied abundant O2 for wound healing.223 Li et al. evaluated the photocatalytic disinfection properties of five different MOFs including NH2-MIL-125, MIL-100, NH2-UiO-66, ZIF-8 and ZIF-11 and selected ZIF-8 with the best light-dependent disinfection properties in order to fabricate MOF-filter masks for pollution control. ZIF-8, synthesized with Zn2+ and Hmim, exhibited the exceptional inactivation of E. coli (>99.9999%) under simulated natural light irradiation for 2 h, which were attributed to the generation of ˙O2− and H2O2 by ZIF-8. Multiple experimental results indicated that the antibacterial properties of the ZIF-8-based filter mask were superior to commercial masks, which opened up the potential applications for the fabrication of porous materials in public health protection.224
6. Conclusions and perspectives
The nanozyme field has progressed astonishingly in the last decade making it possible to use them in numerous biological and real-world applications practically and it is one of the emerging research frontiers with a huge potential in the medicine industry. Multi-enzyme catalysis has recently attracted the attention of nanomaterials scientists due to the fact that it can replace the need of using fragile and difficult to synthesize biological enzymes. Generally, mimicking the multi-biocatalyst system like those of peroxisomes and mitochondria requires the usage of multiple enzymes and their attachment on a suitable support or a scaffold. This kind of system is not self-supporting and has non-feasibility issues due to the specific working conditions of each nanozyme being different from each other that results in their inactivation, stability problems, high synthesis costs and long-term storage issues. Multi-nanozymes have offered researchers a potential attractive solution to all of these problems and this field has just started emerging. Based on the previous 3–4 years of research in this newly developed field of multi-nanozymes, we have collected some of the most notable works performed in this field so far in this mini review. Most of the focus of this review is on the nanomaterial design for imparting multi-nanozyme characteristics to a material, especially some of the commonly used nanomaterials and a brief exploration of their complex mechanisms. Although quite a few studies have been published on this novel field, there is still a long way to go before these fascinating materials could be further used or enter the medical industry. Some critical issues are seen in studies that have been reported so far and the multi-nanozyme field is still in its infancy, facing many unresolved challenges.
(1) Generally, it is observed that, with materials involving metals and metal oxides, multi-enzyme like activities are disordered and cannot be controlled systematically. Careful considerations on the rational design of these materials could resolve this issue. It can be achieved by either the methodically designing specific crystal facets of a material or the systematic selection of atomic ratios of each metal in the case of nanoalloys that could control their oxidation states. Irrational, multiple and complex coatings of biomolecules that are widely used during nanozyme synthesis often have enormous effects on the properties of the multi-nanozymes in terms of activity blockage, enhanced or alternative catalytic activity and these effects are often ignored. For better control of multicatalytic activity, alloys are the best options as each metal could impart one kind of activity which vary from the catalytic activity and efficiency of the other metals. However, non-noble metal-based alloys, in this case, have toxicity concerns if they include metals such as Fe, Ni, Co, Zr, and Cu due to slow leaching of metal ions in the biological systems which can be mitigated through organic ligand-based biocompatible coatings that prevent the leaching through chelation. If one kind of activity is required to be enhanced, a simple adjustment in their atomic or weight ratios might do the trick. Moreover, the specific activities could be controlled through the alteration of pH and redox potentials. Depending on the design, a nanomaterial could act a multi-nanozyme and show alteration in its activity by altering the pH of the medium, a change in buffer solutions, and by the addition of substrates that have high or low redox potentials than the nanozyme itself. The precise controlling of the functional groups, oxygen and nitrogen vacancies, doping non-metal atoms and creating defects in carbon-based materials can be explored for the specific kind of metal-free multi-nanozyme like activities. MOFs with different kinds of metal atoms as nodes offer a huge potential that needs investigation and has long been overlooked. It can offer many unimaginable properties for multi-nanozymes with high surface areas, substrate adsorption rates and catalysis. Single-atom catalysts offer higher stability and the precise control of activity of a multienzyme because of the fact that the arrangement and geometry of these materials closely resembles to that of natural enzymes. A careful control of the oxidation states of the metal in the SAC, designing SACs with an alternative kind of single atoms, dual atoms and a combination of nanoclusters and single atoms could be explored in the future.
(2) New nanomaterial designs are often not explored in multi-nanozymes, which might resolve many issues with biological compatibility and problems with higher and controllable activities. For example, many studies have reported similar kinds of materials like CeO2, ZIF-8, Fe-SACs, etc. multiple times using similar synthesis strategies and modifications. A huge research gap can be seen in the advancement of nanomaterials design for catalysis in chemistry and in their applications in biology due to the lack of collaborations among materials chemists and biochemists or biologists as well as the lack of the basic understanding of materials design principles and methods.
(3) Although the field of nanozymes has advanced to biological applications in in vivo studies and trials on higher mammals, an extremely concerning fact remains overlooked, which is the understanding of the catalytic mechanisms of these nanozymes or multi-nanozymes. Hundreds of nanomaterials have been developed as nanozymes and multi-nanozymes, but a few studies have explored and established a systematic study on the in-depth understanding of the catalytic mechanisms of their reported nanozymes. Since, the multi-nanozyme field is developing fast, serious attention is required to understand the mechanisms and reasons why a multi-nanozyme behaves in a certain way, via advanced experimental and theoretical studies such as XPS, EXAFS/XANES, EPR/ESR, redox potentials, photochemical characterizations and DFT, etc. The practical applications of nanozymes or multi-nanozymes cannot be achieved unless and until we have a complete understanding of the mechanisms and properties of these materials. Not only these catalytic mechanisms are crucial while considering the applications of multi-nanozymes, but also in-depth studies on their toxicology, fate and metabolism in biological environments are also necessary for the advancement in this field.
Materials chemists and biologists need to unite on these frontiers of interdisciplinary research on nanozymes as the forces of chemistry and biology are united together in the nature doing remarkable wonders since the beginning of life on our home planet.
Author contributions
Shafaq Sahar: conceptualization, writing, and images; Shichao Sun: arrangement of figures; Akif Zeb: reviewing, revising, proof-reading, and editing; Lulu Jin: data collection for tables; Yong Gao: formatting; Liangfei Tiane: reference compilation; Wei Wang: acquiring project funds and supervision; An-Wu Xu: expert suggestion; Zhengwei Mao: supervision, expert suggestion and acquiring project funds.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22161132027, 52273152, 22271266, 21771171, and 82102905), the Zhejiang High-Level Young Talent Special Support Plan, National Key Research and Development Program (Grant No. 2021YFE0105400), the Scientific Research Grant of the Hefei National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (UN2017LHJJ), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (YD2340002001).
References
P. Tanner, V. Balasubramanian and C. G. Palivan, Aiding nature's organelles: artificial peroxisomes play their role, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2875–2883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iwasaki and M. Yoshimoto, Confinement of metalloenzymes in PEGylated liposomes to formulate colloidal catalysts for antioxidant cascade, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 10624–10635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Dubey and B. P. Tripathi, Nature inspired multienzyme immobilization: strategies and concepts, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 1077–1114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Yan and K. Fan, Nanozymes inspired by natural enzymes, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 534–547 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, D. Ni, Z. T. Rosenkrans, P. Huang, X. Yan and W. Cai, Nanozyme: new horizons for responsive biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3683–3704 RSC .
L. L. Dugan, J. K. Gabrielsen, P. Y. Shan, T.-S. Lin and D. W. Choi, Buckminsterfullerenol free radical scavengers reduce excitotoxic and apoptotic death of cultured cortical neurons, Neurobiol. Dis., 1996, 3, 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Dugan, D. M. Turetsky, C. Du, D. Lobner, M. Wheeler, C. R. Almli, C. K. F. Shen, T. Y. Luh, D. W. Choi and T. S. Lin, Carboxyfullerenes as neuroprotective agents, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 1997, 94, 9434–9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Manea, F. B. Houillon, L. Pasquato and P. Scrimin, Nanozymes: gold-nanoparticle-based transphosphorylation catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6165–6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, S. Perrett and X. Yan, Intrinsic peroxidase-like activity of ferromagnetic nanoparticles, Nat. Nanotech., 2007, 2, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Röthlisberger, O. Khersonsky, A. M. Wollacott, L. Jiang, J. DeChancie, J. Betker, J. L. Gallaher, E. A. Althoff, A. Zanghellini and O. Dym, Kemp elimination catalysts by computational enzyme design, Nature, 2008, 453, 190–195 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Das, J. L. Franco, N. Logan, P. Balasubramanian, M. I. Kim and C. Cao, Nanozymes in point-of-care diagnosis: an emerging futuristic approach for biosensing, Nanomicro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–51 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Dong and H. Wei, Recent Advances on nanozyme-based electrochemical biosensors, Electroanalysis, 2022, 35, e202100684 Search PubMed .
R. Baretta, V. Gabrielli and M. Frasconi, Nanozyme–cellulose hydrogel composites enabling cascade catalysis for the colorimetric detection of glucose, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 13845–13853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, C. Wu, Z. Ye and Y. Ying, Designed inorganic nanomaterials for intrinsic peroxidase mimics: a review, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 283, 18–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, R. Zhang, X. Yan and K. Fan, Superoxide dismutase nanozymes: an emerging star for anti-oxidation, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 6939–6957 RSC .
P. P. Van Veldhoven, Redox interplay between mitochondria and peroxisomes, Front. Cell Dev. Biol., 2015, 3, 35 Search PubMed .
X. Qin, C. Wu, D. Niu, L. Qin, X. Wang, Q. Wang and Y. Li, Peroxisome inspired hybrid enzyme nanogels for chemodynamic and photodynamic therapy, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Weiss, Reaction mechanism of the enzymes catalase and peroxidase in the light of the theory of chain reactions, J. Phys. Chem., 1937, 41, 1107–1116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haber and J. Weiss, Über die katalyse des hydroperoxydes, Naturwissenschaften, 1932, 20, 948–950 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang and P. K. Dasgupta, Hematin as a peroxidase substitute in hydrogen peroxide determinations, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 517–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Hu, J.-J. Yin, W. He, W. Lu, M. Ma, N. Gu and Y. Zhang, Prussian blue nanoparticles as multienzyme mimetics and reactive oxygen species scavengers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5860–5865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Muschiol, C. Peters, N. Oberleitner, M. D. Mihovilovic, U. T. Bornscheuer and F. Rudroff, Cascade catalysis–strategies and challenges en route to preparative synthetic biology, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5798–5811 RSC .
J. H. Schrittwieser, S. Velikogne, M. L. Hall and W. Kroutil, Artificial biocatalytic linear cascades for preparation of organic molecules, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 270–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Sperl and V. Sieber, Multienzyme cascade reactions status and recent advances, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Ngo, E. Nakata, M. Saimura and T. Morii, Spatially organized enzymes drive cofactor-coupled cascade reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3012–3021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Singh, R. Singh, D. Sivakumar, S. Kondaveeti, T. Kim, J. Li, B. H. Sung, B. K. Cho, D. R. Kim and S. C. Kim, Insights into cell-free conversion of CO2 to chemicals by a multienzyme cascade reaction, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11085–11093 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, D. Dai, G. Xiong, S. Lan and C. Zhang, Metal-based nanozymes with multienzyme-like activities as therapeutic candidates: applications, mechanisms, and optimization strategy, Small, 2022, 2205870 Search PubMed .
N. Alizadeh and A. Salimi, Multienzymes activity of metals and metal oxide nanomaterials: applications from biotechnology to medicine and environmental engineering, J. Nanobiotechnology, 2021, 19, 1–31 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ferreira, N. M. F. S. A. Cerqueira, P. A. Fernandes, M. J. Romão and M. J. Ramos, The catalytic mechanism of human aldehyde oxidase, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9276–9286 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Birmingham and N. J. Turner, A single enzyme oxidative “cascade” via a dual-functional galactose oxidase, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4025–4032 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bauer, M. Zámocká, J. Majtán and V. Bauerová-Hlinková, Glucose oxidase, an enzyme “Ferrari”: its structure, function, production and properties in the light of various industrial and biotechnological applications, Biomolecules, 2022, 12, 472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wikström, K. Krab and V. Sharma, Oxygen activation and energy conservation by cytochrome c oxidase, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2469–2490 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhao, D. Masci, S. Ferla, C. Varricchio, A. Brancale, S. Colonna, G. W. Black, N. J. Turner and D. Castagnolo, Monoamine oxidase (MAO-N) biocatalyzed synthesis of indoles from indolines prepared via photocatalytic cyclization/arylative dearomatization, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6414–6421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Mao, Preparation of gluconic acid by oxidation of glucose with hydrogen peroxide, J. Food Process. Preserv., 2017, 41, e12742 CrossRef .
M. Li, H. Su, Y. Tu, Y. Shang, Y. Liu, C. Peng and H. Liu, Development and application of an efficient medium for chromogenic catalysis of tetramethylbenzidine with horseradish peroxidase, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 5459–5470 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Rodríguez-López, D. J. Lowe, J. Hernández-Ruiz, A. N. P. Hiner, F. García-Cánovas and R. N. F. Thorneley, Mechanism of reaction of hydrogen peroxide with horseradish peroxidase: identification of intermediates in the catalytic cycle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11838–11847 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bhakta, A. Nayek, B. Roy and A. Dey, Induction of enzyme-like peroxidase activity in an iron porphyrin complex using second sphere interactions, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 2954–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sarıkaya and S. Doğan, Glutathione peroxidase in health and diseases, Glutathione system and oxidative stress in health and disease, IntechOpen, 2020, 49, 91009 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Song and K. Zhang, Breakthroughs in nanozyme-inspired application diversity, Mater. Chem. Front, 2023, 7, 44–64 RSC .
Y. Ding, Z. Tong, L. Jin, B. Ye, J. Zhou, Z. Sun, H. Yang, L. Hong, F. Huang and W. Wang, An NIR discrete metallacycle constructed from perylene bisimide and tetraphenylethylene fluorophores for imaging-guided-cancer-radio-chemotherapy, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Bhabak and G. Mugesh, Functional mimics of glutathione peroxidase: bioinspired synthetic antioxidants, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1408–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, J. D. Uys, K. D. Tew and D. M. Townsend, S-glutathionylation: from molecular mechanisms to health outcomes, Antioxid. Redox Signal, 2011, 15, 233–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Raj Rai, C. Bhattacharyya, A. Sarkar, S. Chakraborty, E. Sircar, S. Dutta and R. Sengupta, Glutathione: role in oxidative/nitrosative stress, antioxidant defense, and treatments, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 4566–4590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dardić, N. Böhringer, A. Plaza, F. Zubeil, J. Pohl, S. Sommer, L. Padva, J. Becker, M. A. Patras and M.-K. Bill, Antidiabetic profiling of veramycins, polyketides accessible by biosynthesis, chemical synthesis and precursor-directed modification, Org. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 1604–1615 RSC .
C. O. Schmakel, K. S. V. Santhanam and P. J. Elving, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and related compounds. Electrochemical redox pattern and allied chemical behavior, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 5083–5092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Ding, S. Tian, S.-M. Lu, C. Feng, D. Tu, Y. Liu, W. Wang and C. Li, Electrocatalytic NAD+ reduction via hydrogen atom-coupled electron transfer, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 13361–13367 RSC .
J. Tornmalm, E. Sandberg, M. Rabasovic and J. Widengren, Local redox conditionin cells imaged via non-fluorescent transient states of NAD(P)H, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. H. Lee, B. H. Lee, H. J. Yoon, D. H. Shin, S. S. Park, S. B. Jang, J. S. Park and Y. K. Jee, Superoxide dismutase gene (SOD1, SOD2, and SOD3) polymorphisms and antituberculosis drug-induced hepatitis, Allergy, Asthma Immunol. Res., 2015, 7, 88–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Zelko, T. J. Mariani and R. J. Folz, Superoxide dismutase multigene family: a comparison of the CuZn-SOD (SOD1), Mn-SOD (SOD2), and EC-SOD (SOD3) gene structures, evolution, and expression, Free Radic. Biol. Med., 2002, 33, 337–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mondola, S. Damiano, A. Sasso and M. Santillo, The Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase: not only a dismutase enzyme, Front. Phys., 2016, 7, 594 Search PubMed .
M. Alfonso-Prieto, X. Biarnés, P. Vidossich and C. Rovira, The molecular mechanism of the catalase reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11751–11761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zai, L. Kang, T. Dong, H. Wang, L. Yin, S. Gan, W. Lai, Y. Ding, Y. Hu and J. Wu, 
            E. coli membrane vesicles as a catalase carrier for long-term tumor hypoxia relief to enhance radiotherapy, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 15381–15394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, C. Jiao, B. Yu, H. Cong and Y. Shen, Preparation and biomedical application of injectable hydrogels, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4912–4936 RSC .
Z. Chen, J. J. Yin, Y. T. Zhou, Y. Zhang, L. Song, M. Song, S. Hu and N. Gu, Dual enzyme-like activities of iron oxide nanoparticles and their implication for diminishing cytotoxicity, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4001–4012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Castellanos-Rubio, O. Arriortua, D. Iglesias-Rojas, A. Barón, I. Rodrigo, L. Marcano, J. S. Garitaonandia, I. Orue, M. L. Fdez-Gubieda and M. Insausti, A Milestone in the chemical synthesis of Fe3O4 nanoparticles: unreported bulklike properties lead to a remarkable magnetic hyperthermia, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 8693–8704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rajan, M. Sharma and N. K. Sahu, Assessing magnetic and inductive thermal properties of various surfactants functionalised Fe3O4 nanoparticles for hyperthermia, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 15045 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-C. Wang, J. Ren, H.-C. Yao, L. Zhang, J.-S. Wang, S.-Q. Zang, L.-F. Han and Z.-J. Li, Synergistic photocatalysis of Cr(VI) reduction and 4-Chlorophenol degradation over hydroxylated α-Fe2O3 under visible light irradiation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 311, 11–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, W. Qin, H. Zhang, Z. U. Rahman, C. Ren, S. Ma and X. Chen, The peroxidase/catalase-like activities of MFe2O4 (M = Mg, Ni, Cu) MNPs and their application in colorimetric biosensing of glucose, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 384–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, J. Lin, L. Xu and J. Guan, Self-adaptive flask-like nanomotors based on Fe3O4 nanoparticles to a physiological pH, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, H. Zhao and K. Fan, Nanozymes: design, synthesis, and applications, ACS, 2022, 1422(1), 1–35 CAS .
H. Quan, Y. Gao and W. Wang, Tungsten oxide-based visible light-driven photocatalysts: crystal and electronic structures and strategies for photocatalytic efficiency enhancement, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 817–838 RSC .
A. Zeb, X. Xie, A. B. Yousaf, M. Imran, T. Wen, Z. Wang, H.-L. Guo, Y.-F. Jiang, I. A. Qazi and A.-W. Xu, Highly efficient Fenton and enzyme-mimetic activities of mixed-phase VOx nanoflakes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30126–30132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ahn, M. I. Ali, J. H. Lim, Y. Park, I. K. Park, D. Duchesne, L. Chen, J. Kim and C. H. Lee, Highly dispersed CeOx hybrid nanoparticles for perfluorinated sulfonic acid ionomer–poly(tetrafluoethylene) reinforced membranes with improved service life, Membranes, 2021, 11, 143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Qiu, B. Yan, L. Liu, D. Chen and X. Liu, Regulation of Ce(III)/Ce(IV) ratio of cerium oxide for antibacterial application, iScience, 2021, 24, 102226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, Y. Dong, T. Jia, S. Liu, J. Liu, D. Yang, F. He, S. Gai, P. Yang and J. Lin, GSH-depleted nanozymes with hyperthermia-enhanced dual enzyme-mimic activities for tumor nanocatalytic therapy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gharib, A. Kornowski, H. Noei, W. J. Parak and I. Chakraborty, Protein-protected porous bimetallic AgPt nanoparticles with pH-switchable peroxidase/catalase-mimicking activity, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
R. Serra-Maia, M. Bellier, S. Chastka, K. Tranhuu, A. Subowo, J. D. Rimstidt, P. M. Usov, A. J. Morris and F. M. Michel, Mechanism and kinetics of hydrogen peroxide decomposition on platinum nanocatalysts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21224–21234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, X. Wu, J. Liu, X. Hu, K. Zhang, S. Hou, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Design of AgM bimetallic alloy nanostructures (M = Au, Pd, Pt) with tunable morphology and peroxidase-like activity, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2988–2994 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hamasaki, T. Kashiwagi, T. Imada, N. Nakamichi, S. Aramaki, K. Toh, S. Morisawa, H. Shimakoshi, Y. Hisaeda and S. Shirahata, kinetic analysis of superoxide anion radical-scavenging and hydroxyl radical-scavenging activities of platinum nanoparticles, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7354–7364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhagat, N. V. Srikanth Vallabani, V. Shutthanandan, M. Bowden, A. S. Karakoti and S. Singh, Gold core/ceria shell-based redox active nanozyme mimicking the biological multienzyme complex phenomenon, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 831–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, X. Hu, J. Liu, J. J. Yin, S. Hou, T. Wen, W. He, Y. Ji, Y. Guo, Q. Wang and X. Wu, Formation of PdPt Alloy nanodots on gold nanorods: tuning oxidase-like activities via composition, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2796–2803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, X. Wu, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Chu, L. Feng, X. Hu, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Formation of AgPt alloy nanoislands via chemical etching with tunable optical and catalytic properties, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4443–4448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Konstantinou, S. R. Elliott and J. Akola, Inherent electron and hole trapping in amorphous phase-change memory materials: Ge2Sb2Te5, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6744–6753 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Shang, Z. Zhang and S. Dong, Triple-enzyme mimetic activity of nickel–palladium hollow nanoparticles and their application in colorimetric biosensing of glucose, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5410–5413 RSC .
S. Ghosh, P. Roy, N. Karmodak, E. D. Jemmis and G. Mugesh, Nanoisozymes: crystal-facet-dependent enzyme-mimetic activity of V2O5 nanomaterials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4510–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fang, W. Li, X. Shen, J. M. Perez-Aguilar, Y. Chong, X. Gao, Z. Chai, C. Chen, C. Ge and R. Zhou, Differential Pd-nanocrystal facets demonstrate distinct antibacterial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 129 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Mao, W. Huang, L. Liu, J. Li, J. Li and Q. Wu, Redox enzyme-mimicking activities of CeO2 nanostructures: Intrinsic influence of exposed facets, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jain, B. Sharma, N. Thakur, S. Mishra and T. K. Sarma, Copper pyrovanadate nanoribbons as efficient multienzyme mimicking nanozyme for biosensing applications, ACS App. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7917–7929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, Q. Wang, S. Li, X. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wei, Multifunctional nanozyme hydrogel with mucosal healing activity for single-dose ulcerative colitis therapy, Bioconjug. Chem., 2021, 33, 248–259 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gao, T. Shao, Y. Yu, Y. Xiong and L. Yang, Surface-bound reactive oxygen species generating nanozymes for selective antibacterial action, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–18 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Li, R. Yan, Y. Gao, H. Liu, S. Liu and W. Hao, Catalytic patch with redox Cr/CeO2 nanozyme of noninvasive intervention for brain trauma, Theranostics, 2021, 11, 2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Niu, R. Li, H. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Xu, Y. Li and Y. Xu, VOx quantum dots with multienzyme-mimic activities and the application in constructing a three-dimensional (3D) coordinate system for accurate discrimination of the hydrogen peroxide over a broad concentration range, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Majeed and R. T. Rasheed, Preparation, characterization and mimetic activities of Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanoparticles as catalase and peroxidase, J. Appl. Sci. Nanotech., 2022, 2, 166–181 Search PubMed .
H. Veroniaina, Z. Wu and X. Qi, Innate tumor-targeted nanozyme overcoming tumor hypoxia for cancer theranostic use, J. Adv. Res., 2021, 33, 201–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kuang, Y. Chen, W. Shan, Y. Li, X. Bao, X. Gao, D. An and M. Qiu, Biomimetic FeCo@PDA nanozyme platform with Fenton catalytic activity as efficient antibacterial agent, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2022, 10, 5582–5593 RSC .
G. Jin, J. Liu, C. Wang, W. Gu, G. Ran, B. Liu and Q. Song, Ir nanoparticles with multi-enzyme activities and its application in the selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols, Appal. Catal. B Environ., 2020, 267, 118725 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, T. Zhang, C. Cao, G. Mao, J. Shao, X. Song, W. Wang, X. Mou and X. Dong, BSA stabilized photothermal-Fenton reactor with cisplatin for chemo/chemodynamic cascade oncotherapy, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 2235–2243 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ye, Y. Fan, T. Zhu, D. Cao, X. Hu, S. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Guo, X. Chen and K. Tan, Preparation of two-dimensional Pd@Ir nanosheets and application in bacterial infection treatment by the generation of reactive oxygen Species, ACS App. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 23194–23205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, C. Ren, Y. Zhou, Z. Heger, X. Liang, V. Adam and N. Li, Enhanced macrophage polarization induced by COX-2 inhibitor-loaded Pd octahedral nanozymes for treatment of atherosclerosis, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2023, 34, 107585 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, W. Xiu, Y. Li, D. Wang, Q. Wen, L. Yuwen, X. Li, Z. Yin, B. Liang and L. Wang, NIR-responsive MoS2–Cu2WS4 nanosheets for catalytic/photothermal therapy of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 9796–9805 RSC .
N. Singh, M. Geethika, S. M. Eswarappa and G. Mugesh, Manganese-based nanozymes: multienzyme redox activity and effect on the nitric oxide produced by endothelial nitric oxide synthase, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8393–8403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, Q. Xiu, L. Zhang, Y. Gao, S. Li, L. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Li and C. Wang, Janus nanozyme–drug nanosystems for synergistic anti-inflammatory treatment of nasal polyps, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 7800–7807 RSC .
Y. Ai, J. You, J. Gao, J. Wang, H. B. Sun, M. Ding and Q. Liang, Multi-shell nanocomposites based multienzyme mimetics for efficient intracellular antioxidation, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 2644–2653 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tao, H. Li, L. Deng, S. Zhao, J. Ouyang, M. Wen, W. Chen, K. Zeng, C. Wei and Y.-N. Liu, A Cascade nanozyme with amplified sonodynamic therapeutic effects through comodulation of hypoxia and immunosuppression against cancer, ACS Nano, 2021, 16, 485–501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sengupta, K. Pramanik, P. Datta and P. Sarkar, Chemically modified carbon nitride-chitin-acetic acid hybrid as a metal-free bifunctional nanozyme cascade of glucose oxidase-peroxidase for “click off” colorimetric detection of peroxide and glucose, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 154, 112072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Liang, L. Han and F. Li, “Non-naked” gold with glucose oxidase-like activity: a nanozyme for tandem catalysis, Small, 2018, 14, 1803256 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, Q. Chang, N. Li, C. Xue, H. Liu, J. Yang, S. Hu and H. Wang, Carbon dots-stabilized Cu4O3 for a multi-responsive nanozyme with exceptionally high activity, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 125045 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, J. Xi, L. Fan, P. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Tang, X. Xu, M. Liang, B. Jiang, X. Yan and L. Gao, In vivo guiding nitrogen-doped carbon nanozyme for tumor catalytic therapy, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1440 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, P. Sun, J. Zhang, X. Lu, L. Fan, J. Xi, J. Han and R. Guo, High-efficiency platinum–carbon nanozyme for photodynamic and catalytic synergistic tumor therapy, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125797 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. C. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. C. Wan, H. Deng and Z. J. Sun, Engineering multienzyme-mimicking covalent organic frameworks as pyroptosis inducers for boosting antitumor immunity, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, P. Sun, Y. Huang, Z. Xu, X. Lu, J. Xi, J. Han and R. Guo, One-pot synthesis of Fe/N-doped hollow carbon nanospheres with multienzyme mimic activities against inflammation, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 1147–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Yu, S. Lin, B. Jiang, X. Zhao, L. Miao and C. W. Wei, Integrated cascade nanozyme catalyzes in vivo ROS scavenging for anti-inflammatory therapy, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb2695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, Z. Jiang, Q. Wu, C. Hu, C. Huang, Y. Li and S. Zhen, One-component nano-metal-organic frameworks with superior multienzyme-mimic activities for 1, 4-dihydropyridine metabolism, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 605, 214–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z.-H. Li, J.-J. Hu, S.-Y. Peng, L. Rong, Y. Sun and X.-Z. Zhang, Remote-controlled multi-enzyme system for enhanced tumor therapy via dark/light relay catalysis, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 283–293 RSC .
R. Tian, X. Fan, S. Liu, Y. Xue, F. Yang, F. Li, Q. Luo, J. Xu and J. Liu, Covalently assembled ultrathin polymer nanocapsules to mimic a multienzyme-cascade antioxidative system, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2797–2804 RSC .
J. Zhao, W. Gao, X. Cai, J. Xu, D. Zou, Z. Li, B. Hu and Y. Zheng, Nanozyme-mediated catalytic nanotherapy for inflammatory bowel disease, Theranostics, 2019, 9, 2843–2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sahar, A. Zeb, C. Ling, A. Raja, G. Wang, N. Ullah, X. M. Lin and A. W. Xu, A hybrid VOx incorporated hexacyanoferrate nanostructured hydrogel as a multienzyme mimetic via cascade reactions, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3017–3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, S. Wu, Y. Wang and M. Zhao, A label-free fluorescence biosensor based on a bifunctional MIL-101(Fe) nanozyme for sensitive detection of choline and acetylcholine at nanomolar level, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 312, 128021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Wu, X. Guo, Y. Ying, Y. Wen and H. Yang, Enzyme-free tandem reaction strategy for surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection of glucose by using the composite of Au nanoparticles and porphyrin-based metal–organic framework, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55324–55330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Niu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, An Fe-based single-atom nanozyme with multi-enzyme activity for parallel catalytic therapy via a cascade reaction, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7924–7927 RSC .
F. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. You, L. Zheng, J. Ren and X. Qu, An enzyme-mimicking single-atom catalyst as an efficient multiple reactive oxygen and nitrogen species scavenger for sepsis management, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5108–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tian, H. Ma, W. Ye, Y. Li, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, M. Zang, J. Hou, J. Xu, Q. Luo, H. Sun, F. Bai, Y. Yang and J. Liu, Se-containing MOF coated dual-Fe-atom nanozymes with multi-enzyme cascade activities protect against cerebral ischemic reperfusion injury, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2204025 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ruan, S. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Pei, R. Zhao, X. Mu, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Single-atom Pd/CeO2 nanostructures for mimicking multienzyme activities, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 6564–6574 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Carvalho, A. G. Leonel, A. A. Mansur, I. C. Carvalho, K. Krambrock and H. S. Mansur, Bifunctional magnetopolymersomes of iron oxide nanoparticles and carboxymethylcellulose conjugated with doxorubicin for hyperthermo-chemotherapy of brain cancer cells, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2102–2122 RSC .
A. A. Mansur, H. S. Mansur and S. M. J. C. T. Carvalho, Engineered hybrid nanozyme catalyst cascade based on polysaccharide-enzyme-magnetic iron oxide nanostructures for potential application in cancer therapy, Catal. Today, 2022, 388, 187–198 CrossRef .
S. Liang, X. Deng, Y. Chang, C. Sun, S. Shao, Z. Xie, X. Xiao, P. A. Ma, H. Zhang and Z. J. N. L. Cheng, Intelligent hollow Pt-CuS janus architecture for synergistic catalysis-enhanced sonodynamic and photothermal cancer therapy, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4134–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, X. Liu, J. Ling, G. Huang, J. Huang, X. Zhu, L. He and T. J. B. Chen, In situ-transition nanozyme triggered by tumor microenvironment boosts synergistic cancer radio-/chemotherapy through disrupting redox homeostasis, Biomaterials, 2022, 287, 121620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Song, X. Liang, Y. Zhou, M. Xu, Q. Lu, X. Wang and N. J. B. Li, Mutual-reinforcing sonodynamic therapy against Rheumatoid Arthritis based on sparfloxacin sonosensitizer doped concave-cubic rhodium nanozyme, Biomaterials, 2021, 276, 121063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Liu, E. Ju, Y. Zhang, J. Ren and X. J. A. C. Qu, Self-assembly of multi-nanozymes to mimic an intracellular antioxidant defense system, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6758–6762 CrossRef .
S. Luo, M. Sha, F. Tian, X. Li, L. Fu, Y. Gu, L.-L. Qu, G.-H. Yang and C. Zhu, Nitrogen and boron co-doped graphene nanoribbons as peroxidase-mimicking nanozymes for enhanced biosensing, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 344–348 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dhiman, D. Pradhan and P. Mohanty, Heteroatom (N and P) enriched nanoporous carbon as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrazine oxidation reaction, Fuel, 2022, 314, 122722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, L. Ding and W. Xu, Influence of group modification at the edges of carbon quantum dots on fluorescent emission, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zeb, S. Sahar, S.-Y. Lv, A. B. Yousaf, P. Kasak, X. Lin, Z. Tang, Y. Wu, G. Li and A. W. Xu, Engineering at subatomic scale: achieving selective catalytic pathways via tuning of the oxidation states in functionalized single-atom quantum catalysts, Small, 2022, 18, 2202522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, N. Hao, J. Lu, Z. Dai, J. Qian, X. Yang and K. Wang, Highly active metal-free peroxidase mimics based on oxygen-doped carbon nitride by promoting electron transfer capacity, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1409–1412 RSC .
K. Wu, Y. Feng, Y. Li, L. Li, R. Liu and L. Zhu, S-doped reduced graphene oxide: a novel peroxidase mimetic and its application in sensitive detection of hydrogen peroxide and glucose, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2020, 412, 5477–5487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, W. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Gu, X. Ge, B. Chen, C. Zhu and S. Guo, Boron-doped Fe-N-C single-atom nanozymes specifically boost peroxidase-like activity, Nano Today, 2020, 35, 100971 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Identification of catalytic sites for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution in N-doped graphene materials: development of highly efficient metal-free bifunctional electrocatalyst, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Active sites of nitrogen-doped carbon materials for oxygen reduction reaction clarified using model catalysts, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, A. Zhao, N. Gao, K. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Deciphering a nanocarbon-based artificial peroxidase: chemical identification of the catalytically active and substrate-binding sites on graphene quantum dots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dhiman, S. Ghosh, Y. K. Mishra and K. M. Tripathi, Prospects of nano-carbons as emerging catalysts for enzyme-mimetic applications, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 3101–3122 RSC .
A.-X. Zheng, Z.-X. Cong, J.-R. Wang, J. Li, H.-H. Yang and G.-N. Chen, Highly-efficient peroxidase-like catalytic activity of graphene dots for biosensing, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 519–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, K. Qu, C. Zhao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Graphene Oxide: Intrinsic peroxidase catalytic activity and its application to glucose detection, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2206–2210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, D. Sun, A. Cho, S. Weon, S. Lee, J. Lee, J. W. Han, D.-P. Kim and W. Choi, Modified carbon nitride nanozyme as bifunctional glucose oxidase-peroxidase for metal-free bioinspired cascade photocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 940 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xi, G. Wei, L. An, Z. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Fan and L. Gao, Copper/carbon hybrid nanozyme: tuning catalytic activity by the copper state for antibacterial therapy, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7645–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Pi, N. Lu, R. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Zhang and D. Xing, A novel artificial peroxisome candidate based on nanozyme with excellent catalytic performance for biosensing, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 196, 113686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. Faust Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Single-atom catalysts across the periodic table, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Yeh, L. Y. Lin, C. L. Sun, Y. A. Leu, J. T. Tsai, C. Y. Yeh, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, Multiwalled carbon nanotube@reduced graphene oxide nanoribbon as the counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16626–16634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, H. Sun, F. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, How functional groups influence the ROS generation and cytotoxicity of graphene quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10588–10591 RSC .
X. Cai, H. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Sun, L. Shi, H. Zhao and M. Lan, 3D graphene-based foam induced by phytic acid: an effective enzyme-mimic catalyst for electrochemical detection of cell-released superoxide anion, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 123, 101–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Lin, S. Wu, X. Hou, C. Zheng, P. Wu and J. Liu, Self-photo-oxidation for extending visible light absorption of carbon dots and oxidase-like activity, Carbon, 2021, 182, 537–544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paolella, C. Faure, V. Timoshevskii, S. Marras, G. Bertoni, A. Guerfi, A. Vijh, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, A review on hexacyanoferrate-based materials for energy storage and smart windows: challenges and perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18919–18932 RSC .
Y. Gao, G. Yu, K. Xing, D. Gorin, Y. Kotelevtsev, W. Tong and Z. Mao, Finely tuned Prussian blue-based nanoparticles and their application in disease treatment, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7121–7134 RSC .
L. J. Wang, H. Deng, H. Furukawa, F. Gándara, K. E. Cordova, D. Peri and O. M. Yaghi, Synthesis and characterization of metal–organic framework-74 containing 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 different metals, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5881–5883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour, E. Nikkhoo and C. M. Hussain, Application of MOF materials as drug delivery systems for cancer therapy and dermal treatment, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214262 CrossRef CAS .
P.-h Ling, X.-n Zang, C.-h Qian and F. Gao, A metal–organic framework with multienzyme activity as a biosensing platform for real-time electrochemical detection of nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide, Analyst, 2021, 146, 2609–2616 RSC .
M. Jiang, Y. G. Weng, Z. Y. Zhou, C. Y. Ge, Q. Y. Zhu and J. Dai, Cobalt metal–organic frameworks incorporating redox-active tetrathiafulvalene ligand: structures and effect of LLCT within the MOF on photoelectrochemical properties, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 10727–10735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Calbo, M. J. Golomb and A. Walsh, Redox-active metal–organic frameworks for energy conversion and storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16571–16597 RSC .
H. N. Abdelhamid, G. A. E. Mahmoud and W. Sharmouk, A cerium-based MOFzyme with multi-enzyme-like activity for the disruption and inhibition of fungal recolonization, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7548–7556 RSC .
L. Su, Q. Wu, L. Tan, Z. Huang, C. Fu, X. Ren, N. Xia, Z. Chen, X. Ma, X. Lan, Q. Zhang and X. Meng, High biocompatible ZIF-8 Coated by ZrO2 for chemo-microwave thermal tumor synergistic therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10520–10531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Zhao, C.-Q. Li, X.-L. Hou, X.-T. Xie, B. Zhang, G.-Y. Wu, F. Jin, Y.-D. Zhao and B. Liu, Tumor microenvironment-activated theranostics nanozymes for fluorescence imaging and enhanced chemo-chemodynamic therapy of tumors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 55780–55789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Li, L. Alhalhooly, Y. Li, B. Chen, Y. Choi and Z. Yang, Size-tunable metal–organic framework-coated magnetic nanoparticles for enzyme encapsulation and large-substrate biocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interafaces, 2020, 12, 41794–41801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, H. Xu, C. Xu, Z. Tong, S. Zhang, Y. Bai, Y. Chen, Q. Xu, L. Zhou, H. Ding, Z. Sun, S. Yan, Z. Mao and W. Wang, A nanomedicine fabricated from gold nanoparticles-decorated metal–organic framework for cascade chemo/chemodynamic cancer therapy, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Moradi, A. M. Haji Shabani, S. Dadfarnia and S. Emami, Sulfonated metal organic framework loaded on iron oxide nanoparticles as a new sorbent for the magnetic solid phase extraction of cadmium from environmental water samples, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 6337–6346 RSC .
M. Chai, A. Razmjou and V. Chen, Metal-organic-framework protected multi-enzyme thin-film for the cascade reduction of CO2 in a gas-liquid membrane contactor, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 623, 118986 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Jiang, Q. Wu, C. Hu, C. Huang, Y. Li and S. Zhen, One-component nano-metal-organic frameworks with superior multienzyme-mimic activities for 1,4-dihydropyridine metabolism, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 605, 214–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Moghadam, A. Li, S. B. Wiggin, A. Tao, A. G. P. Maloney, P. A. Wood, S. C. Ward and D. Fairen-Jimenez, Development of a cambridge structural database subset: a collection of metal–organic frameworks for past, present, and future, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2618–2625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Chung, J. Camp, M. Haranczyk, B. J. Sikora, W. Bury, V. Krungleviciute, T. Yildirim, O. K. Farha, D. S. Sholl and R. Q. Snurr, Computation-ready, experimental metal–organic frameworks: A tool to enable high-throughput screening of nanoporous crystals, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6185–6192 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Rosen, M. R. Mian, T. Islamoglu, H. Chen, O. K. Farha, J. M. Notestein and R. Q. Snurr, Tuning the redox activity of metal–organic frameworks for enhanced, selective O2 binding: design rules and ambient temperature O2 chemisorption in a cobalt–triazolate framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4317–4328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Ren, W. Liu, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalyst: A rising star for green synthesis of fine chemicals, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 653–672 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and F. G. Wu, Emerging single-atom catalysts/nanozymes
for catalytic biomedical applications, Adv. Health Mater., 2022, 11, 2101682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Wu, W. Gu, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, When nanozymes meet single-atom catalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2565–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysis of CO oxidation using Pt1/FeOx, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Huang, S. Xi, S. Miao, J. Ding, W. Cai, S. Liu, X. Yang, H. Yang, J. Gao, J. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Single cobalt atoms anchored on porous N-doped graphene with dual reaction sites for efficient Fenton-like catalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, S. Sun, J. Yang, W. Long, J. Wang, X. Mu, Q. Li, W. Hao, S. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Gao, L. Ouyang, J. Chen, S. Liu, X.-D. Zhang and D. Ming, Nanozyme-based bandage with single-atom catalysis for brain trauma, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11552–11560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nie, D. Mei, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Kovarik, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Activation of surface lattice oxygen in single-atom Pt/CeO2 for low-temperature CO oxidation, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, Q. Wan, H. Xiong, S. Zhou, X. Chen, X. I. Pereira Hernandez, Y. Wang, S. Lin, A. K. Datye and H. Guo, Correlating DFT calculations with CO oxidation reactivity on Ga-doped Pt/CeO2 single-atom catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22460–22468 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Ding, M. Peng, W. Zhang, K. Li, W. Wei and Y. Lin, Fe–N/C single-atom catalysts exhibiting multienzyme activity and ROS scavenging ability in cells, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14534–14537 RSC .
X. Xie, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, J. Chen, M. Wang and X. Su, Fe–N–C single-atom nanozymes with peroxidase-like activity for the detection of alkaline phosphatase, Analyst, 2021, 146, 896–903 RSC .
X. Zhou, M. Wang, J. Chen, X. Xie and X. Su, Peroxidase-like activity of Fe–N–C single-atom nanozyme based colorimetric detection of galactose, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1128, 72–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, J. Wu, H. Zhong, Y. Zhang, W. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Yan, Q. Zhang, W. Gu, L. Gu, S. P. Beckman, L. Huang and C. Zhu, Densely isolated FeN4 sites for peroxidase mimicking, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6422–6429 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ao, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J.-G. Li, L. Soule, X. Huang, W.-H. Chiang, H. M. Chen, C. Wang, M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, Markedly enhanced oxygen reduction activity of single-atom Fe catalysts via integration with Fe nanoclusters, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11853–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Abdel-Mageed, B. Rungtaweevoranit, M. Parlinska-Wojtan, X. Pei, O. M. Yaghi and R. J. Behm, Highly active and stable single-atom Cu catalysts supported by a metal–organic framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5201–5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Rational design of single molybdenum atoms anchored on N-doped carbon for effective hydrogen evolution reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. C. Huang, C. L. Dong, C. J. Chen, R. S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, Tuning the coordination environment in single-atom catalysts to achieve highly efficient oxygen reduction reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, H. Liu, W. Yang, G. Mao, L. Zheng and H. L. Jiang, Modulating coordination environment of single-atom catalysts and their proximity to photosensitive units for boosting MOF photocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 12220–12229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, F. Tao, Y. Tang, Y. Li and J. Yu, Size- and shape-dependent catalytic performances of oxidation and reduction reactions on nanocatalysts, Chemi. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4747–4765 RSC .
Z. Ma, B. Li and R. J. Tang, Biomineralization: Biomimetic synthesis of materials and biomimetic regulation of organisms, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 2071–2082 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. J. N. Ananikov, Organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, Nanomater., 2019, 9, 1197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Lou, S. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Qin and H. J. Wei, Nanomaterials with enzyme-like characteristics (nanozymes): Next-generation artificial enzymes (II), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1004–1076 RSC .
H. Wei, L. Gao, K. Fan, J. Liu, J. He, X. Qu, S. Dong, E. Wang and X. J. Yan, Nanozymes: A clear definition with fuzzy edges, Nano Today, 2021, 40, 1016 CrossRef .
A. R. Deshmukh, H. Aloui and B. S. Kim, Novel biogenic gold nanoparticles catalyzing multienzyme cascade reaction: Glucose oxidase and peroxidase mimicking activity, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 127859 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mansur, S. M. Carvalho, L. C. A. Oliveira, E. M. Souza-Fagundes, Z. I. Lobato, M. F. Leite and H. S. Mansur, Bioengineered carboxymethylcellulose–peptide hybrid nanozyme cascade for targeted intracellular biocatalytic–magnetothermal therapy of brain cancer cells, Pharmaceutics, 2022, 14, 2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qi, H. Pan, H. Shen, X. Xia, C. Wu, X. Han, X. He, W. Tong, X. Wang and Q. J. A. C. Wang, Nanogel multienzyme mimics synthesized by biocatalytic ATRP and metal coordination for bioresponsive fluorescence imaging, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 11846–11851 CrossRef .
T. P. Stein, Space flight and oxidative stress, Nutrition, 2002, 18, 867–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, P. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. Huo, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, H. Zhang, B. Lai and Y. Zhang, Graphene oxide mediated Fe (III) reduction for enhancing Fe(III)/H2O2 Fenton and photo-Fenton oxidation toward chloramphenicol degradation, Sci. Total
Environ, 2021, 797, 149097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, Molecular mechanism of water oxidation reaction at photo-irradiated TiO2 and related metal oxide surfaces, Solid State Phenom., 2010, 162, 1–27 CAS .
D. He, J. Ma, R. N. Collins and T. D. Waite, Effect of structural transformation of nanoparticulate zero-valent iron on generation of reactive oxygen species, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3820–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, X. Han, X. Li, S. Wang, P. K. Chu and Y. Zhang, Fabrication of multiple heterojunctions with tunable visible-light-active photocatalytic reactivity in BiOBr–BiOI full-range composites based on microstructure modulation and band structures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 482–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stanley-Gray, Z. Zhang and D. Venkataraman, Updated coordination geometry table of the d-block elements and their ions, J. Chem. Educ., 2021, 98, 2476–2481 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, W. Wang, W. Sun, C. Jiang and L. Lu, Defect engineering enables synergistic action of enzyme-mimicking active centers for high-efficiency tumor therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8855–8865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Wang, J. Wang, D. Wang, M. Liu, Q. Wu and H. Hu, Single-atom catalysts with ultrahigh catalase-like activity through electron filling and orbital energy regulation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 33, 2209560 CrossRef .
Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Generation and Detection of Reactive Oxygen Species in Photocatalysis, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. W. Atkins and R. S. Friedman, Molecular quantum chemistry, Oxford University Press, 3rd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. Hayyan, M. A. Hashim and I. M. AlNashef, Superoxide ion: Generation and chemical implications, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3029–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Molecular orbital principles of oxygen-redox battery electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36463–36472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Solovyev, Z. V. Pchelkina and V. V. Mazurenko, Magnetism of sodium superoxide, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 522–531 RSC .
C. C. Leon, J.-G. Lee and S. T. Ceyer, Oxygen adsorption on Au–Ni(111) surface alloys, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29043–29057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, D. Schlom, S. Datta and K. Cho, Interlayer engineering of band gap and hole mobility in p-type oxide SnO, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 25670–25679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, P. Xue, Z. Jin, S. Yang, L. Ma and R. Li, Removal of nitrogenous heterocycles by a CoMoS3/NH2-MIL-53(Fe)-catalyzed photo-Fenton-like process: effect, mechanism and toxicity evaluation, Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 1499–1514 RSC .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Understanding TiO2 Photocatalysis: Mechanisms and Materials, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Salvador, On the nature of photogenerated radical species active in the oxidative degradation of dissolved pollutants with TiO2 aqueous suspensions: a revision in the light of the electronic structure of adsorbed water, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17038–17043 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, H. Dong, G. M. Lyu, H. Y. Zhang, J. Ke, L. Q. Kang, J. L. Teng, L. D. Sun, R. Si, J. Zhang, Y. J. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, Y. H. Huang and C. H. Yan, Engineering the defect state and reducibility of ceria based nanoparticles for improved anti-oxidation performance, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13981–13990 RSC .

          A. Bard, Standard potentials in aqueous solution, Routledge,  2017 Search PubMed .
B. Jiang and M. J. C. J. o C. Liang, Advances in single-atom nanozymes research, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, Y. Ruan, Q. Chen, S. Yan and W. J. C. E. J. Huang, Biocatalytic cascade in tumor microenvironment with a Fe2O3/Au hybrid nanozyme for synergistic treatment of triple negative breast cancer, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 138422 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gahlaut, V. Hooda, A. Gothwal and V. Hooda, Enzyme-based ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensors for rapid assessment of nitrite toxicity: recent advances and perspectives, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 49, 32–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Monteiro and M. G. Almeida, Electrochemical enzyme biosensors revisited: old solutions for new problems, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 49, 44–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Ibadullaeva, N. O. Appazov, Y. S. Tarahovsky, E. A. Zamyatina, M. G. Fomkina and Y. A. Kim, Amperometric multi-enzyme biosensors: development and application, a short review, Biophysics, 2019, 64, 696–707 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, E. Archibong, F. S. Ligler and Z. Gu, Leveraging H2O2 levels for biomedical applications, Adv. Biosyst., 2017, 1, 1700084 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Cai, J. Wang, X. Liu, H. Ren, L. Yan, Y. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Guo and A. Liu, Facile preparation of homogeneous copper nanoclusters exhibiting excellent tetraenzyme mimetic activities for colorimetric glutathione sensing and fluorimetric ascorbic acid sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42521–42530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Y. Dang, C. Dai, Y. Zhang, P. Zou, H. Du, Y. Zhang, M. Sun, H. Rao and Y. Wang, Hollow MnFeO oxide derived from MOF@MOF with multiple enzyme-like activities for multifunction colorimetric assay of biomolecules and Hg2+, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tong, Y. Gao, H. Yang, W. Wang and Z. Mao, Nanomaterials for cascade promoted catalytic cancer therapy, View, 2021, 2, 20200133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, S. Sun, R. Sun, G. Cui, L. Hong, B. Rao, A. Li, Z. Yu, Q. Kan and Z. Mao, A metal–polyphenol-coordinated nanomedicine for synergistic cascade cancer chemotherapy and chemodynamic therapy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, N. Agnihotri and S. Kumar, Targeting fuel pocket of cancer cell metabolism: A focus on glutaminolysis, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2022, 198, 114943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fu, R. Yang, L. Zhang, W. Liu, G. Du, Y. Cao, Z. Xu, H. Cui, Y. Kang and P. Xue, Biomimetic CoO@AuPt nanozyme responsive to multiple tumor microenvironmental clues for augmenting chemodynamic therapy, Biomaterials, 2020, 257, 120279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, S. Qin, Z. Xie, L. Wang, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, D. Li and H. Zhang, Multi-enzyme activity nanozymes for biosensing and disease treatment, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 473, 214784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Z. Sun, Y. Gao, S. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Qian, L. Jin, J. Zhang, C. Zeng and Z. Mao, Plasmon-driven catalytic chemotherapy augments cancer immunotherapy through induction of immunogenic cell death and blockage of IDO pathway, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, Z. Zhu, L. Hong, Z. Qian, F. Wang and Z. Mao, ROS-responsive 18β-glycyrrhetic acid-conjugated polymeric nanoparticles mediate neuroprotection in ischemic stroke through
HMGB1 inhibition and microglia polarization regulation, Bioact. Mater., 2023, 19, 38–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Tong, X. Qian, H. Xu, F. Lin, G. Sheng, L. Hong, W. Wang and Z. Mao, pH-responsive hybrid platelet membrane-coated nanobomb with deep tumor penetration ability and enhanced cancer thermal/chemodynamic therapy, Theranostics, 2022, 12, 4250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhong, L. Bai, J. Xu, F. Gong, Z. Dong, Z. Yang, Z. Zeng, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, Ultrafine titanium monoxide (TiO1+x) nanorods for enhanced sonodynamic therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6527–6537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, M. Qi, X. Sun, M. D. Weir, F. R. Tay, T. W. Oates, B. Dong, Y. Zhou, L. Wang and H. H. K. Xu, Surface treatments on titanium implants via nanostructured ceria for antibacterial and anti-inflammatory capabilities, Acta Biomater., 2019, 94, 627–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Q. Li, X. Li, X. Wu, T. Yuan and Y. Yang, Simulated enzyme activity and efficient antibacterial activity of copper-doped single-atom nanozymes, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 6860–6870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. Fu, Z. Duan, C. Zhu and D. Fan, Adaptive hydrogels based on nanozyme with dual-enhanced triple enzyme-like activities for wound disinfection and mimicking antioxidant defense system, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2022, 11, 2101849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, T. Chen and X. Pan, Metal–organic-framework-based materials for antimicrobial applications, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3808–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

Shafaq Sahar
	Shafaq Sahar is a postdoctoral fellow at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the guidance of Prof. Zhengwei Mao and Prof. Wei Wang. She has received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. An-Wu Xu. Her work is focused on the design and engineering of advanced materials such as hydrogels, MOFs and SACs for advanced oxidation processes and their applications in heterogenous catalysis and biomedical, biomimetic and diagnostic applications.

Shichao Sun
	Shichao Sun is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhengwei Mao in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University. His research work mainly focuses on the development of metal-based antibacterial nanomaterials and medical devices.

Akif Zeb
	Akif Zeb is an Assistant Research Fellow in the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University, China, with Prof. Shiguo Zhang. He received his PhD in 2018 in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China and worked in South China Normal University from 2019 to 2022 as Guangdong Talent Postdoc Fellow. His research is focused on the design and development of new materials for energy storage and conversion, heterogeneous catalysis and biomimetics.

Wei Wang
	Wei Wang is a Professor at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University. He has obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Changyou Gao at Zhejiang University, China. He worked in Tianjin University from 2010 to 2020. His research is focused on injectable hydrogels and biomaterials for regenerative medicine.

An-Wu Xu
	An-Wu Xu is a Professor at the Division of Nanomaterials and Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He is a Humboldt Research Fellow and worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany, from 2002 to 2003. His research interests include novel nanostructured materials, biomimetic synthesis and meso-crystal assembly of nanomaterials for various applications including sustained drug and gene delivery, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, energy conversion, solar cells and photocatalysis.

Zhengwei Mao
	Zhengwei Mao is currently a Professor and Deputy Director at the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University. He obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2007 from Zhejiang University, China. He worked as a Postdoc under the guidance of Prof. Helmuth Moehwald at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany. His research is focused on polymeric nanomaterials and seeks to control the microstructure of biomaterials for the purpose of manipulating the cell and tissue response, with the application for cancer therapy, inflammation treatment and tissue regeneration. He also serves as the editor of Acta Biomaterialia.



	(1)

 	Scheme 1  The interconnected cycle of cellular cascade reactions, the multiple oxidoreductases involved in deriving these reactions and their catalytic mechanisms.	 
ROOR’ + 2 e− + 2 H+ + (POD) → ROH + R’OH	(2)
2 GSH + R2O2 → GSSG + 2 ROH (R = H, alkyl)	(3)
2 GSH + H2O2 → GS − SG + 2 H2O	(4)
GSH + ˙R → 1/2 GS − SG + RH	(5)
GSH + RSH + [O] → GSSR + H2O	(6)
RH2 + NAD+ → NADH+ + H+ + R	(7)
M(n+1)+-SOD + ˙O2− → Mn+-SOD + O2	(8)
Mn+-SOD + ˙O2− + 2H+ → M(n+1)+-SOD + H2O2	(9)
H2O2 + M3+-L → H2O + OM4+-L+	(10)
H2O2 + OM4+-L+ → H2O + M3+-L + O2	(11)

 	Fig. 1  Various synthesis strategies of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles to impart multi-nanozyme properties. (A) The two different crystal facets of CeO2 and their respective crystal facet-dependent nanozyme activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyrights 2016, Nature. (B) Step-by-step copper pyrovanadate multi-nanozyme synthesis process by tuning the molar ratios of Cu and V by 1:1, 2:1, 1:2 and 1:1 (NaOH) to obtain nanowires, spheres, nanoflowers and split nanorod-like structures to mimic POD, OXD and laccase (LAC)-like activities. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (C) AgM (M = Au, Pd, Pt) bimetallic alloy based nanozymes with a tunable morphology. Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyrights 2010, ACS.	 

Metals/metal oxides	CeO2@chitosan	SOD CAT	Negative surface charge, Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio adjustment	Ulcerative colitis therapy	
79

Cu3V2O7(OH)2	LAC POD OXD	Variable valence states of the metal, synergistic effect, exposed active sites	Biosensing	
78

AgPd0.38	Peroxygenase POD	Careful adjustment of the metal-to-metal atomic ratio	Anti-bacterial effect	
80

Cr/CeO2	SOD CAT GPx	Cr3+ doping increased high ratio of Ce3+/Ce4+, mixed valence states of metals	Brain trauma therapy	
81

VOx QDs	POD OXD SOD	Mixed valence states and oxygen vacancies	Biosensing	
82

Fe3O4 NPs	POD CAT	Mixed oxidation states Fe2+/Fe3+, Fenton reactions	Biosensing	
83

MnO2	POD CAT	Mixed valence states Mn2+/Mn3+	Cancer therapy	
84

FeCo@PDA	POD SOD	Reduced states Fe2+/Co2+, Fenton reaction	Anti-bacterial effect	
85

Ir NPs	POD OXD CAT	Electron transfer from the high-index facets of IrNPs to O2	Alcohol oxidation	
86

GA-Pt/Fe NPs	POD SOD	Fenton reaction due to the reduced states of Fe and Pt, photogenerated holes and electrons	Oncotherapy	
87

Pd@Ir NSs	OXD POD CAT	Higher O2 adsorption on the Pd@Ir surface, adjustment of crystal facets, electronic interaction between Pd and Ir	Anti-bacterial effect	
88

Pd@HA-Aloperine	SOD CAT	Crystal facets, photogenerated holes	Anti-inflammatory effect for atherosclerosis	
89

MoS2–Cu2WS4	OXD POD	Redox exchange and charge transfer between metals, photogenerated electrons transfer	Anti-bacterial effect	
90

Mn3O4	SOD CAT GPx	Size, morphology, surface area, and the redox properties of the metal ions	Cytoprotection	
91

Au–CeO2 JNPs	SOD CAT	CeO2 provided SOD like while Au had CAT-like synergistic effect	Anti-inflammatory effect for nasal polyps	
92

Se@Me@MnO2	SOD CAT GPx	Unpaired electrons, synergism between the multi-ROS scavenging properties of Se, MnO2 and melanin	Anti-inflammatory therapy	
93



Nano-carbons	Au/TiO2@CDs	POD GOx	Oxygen vacancy (Ov), mixed Ti3+/Ti4+ oxidation states, band gap adjustment	Cancer therapy	
94

g-C3N4 (MGCN)	POD SOD GOx	Functional groups	Biosensing	
95

Au@BSA/GO	POD GOx	Au provided GOx through electron transfer while GO provided POD due to holes and functional groups	Biosensing	
96

CDs@Cu4O3	POD OXD	Enhanced electron transfer between Cu2+/Cu+ redox couples due to amine functionalities and light induced hole generation	Biosensing	
97

Pollutants degradation	

N-PCNSs	POD OXD SOD CAT	Nitrogen doping	Tumor therapy	
98

Pt@C-Ce6	POD OXD	Higher interaction of Pt loaded on outside with the substrates, Ce6 enhanced the generation of ROS in light	Tumor therapy	
99

Cu@COF	POD SOD GPx	Fenton-like ionization process, change in the bandgap structure, fast electron transfer, large pi-conjugation	Tumor therapy	
100

Fe/N-HCNs	POD OXD SOD CAT	Mixed Fe2+/Fe3+ states and Nx sites	Anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy	
101



PBAs/MOFs	Pt@PCN222-Mn	SOD CAT	Pt contributed to CAT while Mn contributed to SOD activity	Anti-inflammatory therapy	
102

FePCN	POD OXD POP	Fe contributed to POD and OXD through the Fenton reaction while ZrO clusters displayed POP like activity	1,4-Dihydropyridine metabolism	
103

Hollow Prussian blue (mGPB)	POD OXD SOD CAT	Light driven generation of holes, the electron transfer properties of Fe2+/Fe3+ in PB	Chemotherapy	
104

Se-diamine linked Mn-Porphyrin	SOD GPx	Se contributed to GPx while Mn had SOD like activity	Anti-inflammatory therapy	
105

PB NPs	POD SOD CAT	Fe2+/Fe3+ electron transfer by the –CN ligand	Anti-inflammatory therapy	
21

MPPBZs	SOD CAT	Variable valence states of Mn and Fe	Anti-inflammatory therapy for bowel disease	
106

VOxBG	POD SOD CAT	Mixed valence states of VOx and Fe, defects in the PB structure due to large VOx ions	Biosensing	
107

MIL-101(Fe)	POD OXD	Octahedral geometry, Fe2+/Fe3+ Fenton reaction	Biosensing	
108

AuNPs/Cu-TCPP(Fe)	POD GOx	Au contributed to GOx, Fe contributed to POD through the Fenton reaction in light	Bioanalysis	
109

SACs	FeSA-HNCSB	POD OXD CAT	pH and light dependent ROS generation by Fe-SA, direct cleavage of bonds	Tumor therapy	
110

Co/PMCS	SOD CAT GPx	Dual activity of Co-SAs and GPx activity of ZnO, direct cleavage of bonds	Anti-inflammatory therapy	
111

Fe2NC-Se-MOF	SOD OXD CAT	Double radical adsorption, electron transfer, higher reduction capabilities of the Fe–Fe dual atom	Cerebral Injury	
112

FeSA@CQDs	POD SOD CAT	Fine tuning of Fe-SA oxidation states with the aid of the graphene matrix of carbon quantum dots	Biosensing	
97

Pd@CeO2	POD SOD CAT	High Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, the CAT like properties of Pd	Anti-inflammatory	
113

Nanohybrids	Fe-@CMC–DOX	POD OXD	Release of Fe ions due to the disintegration of DOX under magnetic hyperthermia conditions	Thermo/chemotherapy of brain cancer	
114

MIONzyme	POD GOx	Fe2+/Fe3+ Fenton-like reactions and the Fe2+/Fe3+ driven conversion of glucose to gluconic acid	Cancer therapy	
115

Pt-CuS-P-TAPP	OXD, CAT	Pt generates O2 in the presence of H2O2 while CuS converts O2 into 1O2 using a laser due to the photothermal responsive TAPP	Cancer therapy	
116

DOX@HMSN/Mn3O4(R)	OXD, CAT	Mn3+/Mn2+ transition in situ triggered by the tumour microenvironment (TME) and reaction with GSH to suppress ROS levels	Chemotherapy	
117

Rh/SPX-HSA	POD, CAT	Sonosensitizer spafloxacin (SPX) results in activation of rhodium (Rh) under SDT generating H2O2 and ˙OH	Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) of rheumatoid arthritis	
118

V2O5@pDA@MnO2	SOD, GPx, CAT	Synergistic antioxidative effect through in situ generation of H2O2 and O2 under the oxidative stress while dopamine served as a linker and a scaffold of two nanozymes	Inflammation therapy	
119


 	Fig. 2  Representative carbon-based materials with multi-nanozyme-like activities. (A) Various N doping configurations in the graphene framework and the summary of general host engineering strategies in the carbon framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) Morphology of N-PCNSs and N doping in the graphene framework of N-PCNSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyrights 2018, Nature. (C) Colorimetric detection of glucose using a synthetic bifunctional nanozyme: photocatalytic aerobic oxidation of glucose with the in situ production of H2O2 on AKCN (modified GCN). Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyrights 2019, Nature. (D) Various strategies that can be adapted to modify the surface of the graphene framework with different functional groups that can impart carbon nanozyme multiple ROS generation or scavenging properties. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyrights 2019, Springer.	 
[Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) + e− → [Fe(II)Fe(II)(CN)6]2− (PW)	(12)
3[Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) → 3 {Fe(III)3[Fe(III)(CN)6]2 [Fe(II)(CN)6]}− (BG) + 2 e−	(13)
[Fe(III)Fe(II)(CN)6]− (PB) → [Fe(III)Fe(III)(CN)6] (PY) + e−	(14)

 	Fig. 3  The flexible structures of PB, PBAs and MOFs for potential multi-nanozyme synthesis. (A) Unit cell of the original PB/PBA and arrangement of atoms. (B) Morphology of the VOxBG hydrogel showing the complete distortion of the cubic PB structure due to the incorporation of large sized VOx ions and water molecules and the chemical formula VOxBG with the schematic illustration of the proposed linkage of VOx ions in Fe(CN)6 in the structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (C) Schematic mechanism of the multienzyme-like activity of PBNPs based on standard redox potentials of different compounds in the reaction systems. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyrights 2016, ACS. (D) One-pot synthesis of microcrystalline MOF-74 [M2(DOT); DOT = dioxidoterephthalate] with 2 (Mg and Co), 4 (Mg, Co, Ni, and Zn), 6 (Mg, Sr, Mn, Co, Ni, and Zn), 8 (Mg, Ca, Sr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Zn), and 10 (Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, and Cd) different kinds of divalent metals as a potential candidate design for the MOF-based multi-nanozyme synthesis. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyrights 2014, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 4  Mimicking multi-enzymes through SACs. (A) Different possible coordination environments for single metal atom attachment in the N or O doped graphene framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) Structure of single atom doping on metal oxides. (C) Possible strategy to synthesize dual single atoms in the N doped graphene framework to impart multi-nanozyme like properties to a SAC. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (D) Graphical presentation and detection of Fe single atoms (Fe-SA) and Fe-SA with Fe nanoclusters (Fe-SA/NC) with HAADF-STEM. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (E) Fe single atom nanozymes with triple nanozyme like activities due to the tuning of oxidation states of FeSA in the carbon quantum dot (FeSA@CQDs-2) framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyrights 2022, Wiley. (F) Possible selection of transition metal atoms for dual single atoms and its structure.	 

 	Fig. 5  Some representative nanohybrid systems developed as multi-nanozymes. (A) Schematic representation of tumor cell death pathways/mechanisms (apoptosis and ferroptosis) provoked by AuNP/Co-MION@CMC-iRGD nanozyme cascade reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyrights 2022, MDPI. (B) Schematic illustration of the successive synthetic procedures of the PEG/Ce-Bi@DMSN nanozymes with hyperthermia-enhanced dual enzyme-mimic catalytic activities and GSH depletion for in vivo synergistic photothermal-enhanced nano-catalytic cancer therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyrights 2020, Wiley. (C) Schematic depiction of the Fe-MPGs nanogel synthesized by ATRPase for ROS responsive biofluorescence imaging in vivo and their preparation and mechanism illustration of ROS responsive fluorescence imaging by tandem catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyrights 2020, Wiley.	 

 		 
M2+ + H2O2 → M3+ + ˙OH + OH−	(15)
M3+ + H2O2 → M2+ + ˙OOH + H+	(16)
H2O2 + ˙OH → ˙O2− + H+ + H2O	(17)
H2O2 + ˙O2− → ˙OH + O2 + OH−	(18)
M3+ + ˙O2− → M2+ + O2	(19)
˙O2− → O2 + H2O2	(20)
M2+ + H2O2 → M3+ + OH−	(21)
O2 + Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O2	(22)
H2O2 + Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O	(23)
H2O2 + Fe2+ → Fe3+ + ˙OH + OH− (pH < 5)	(24)
H2O2 + Fe2+ → Fe4+ = O2+ + H2O (pH > 5)	(25)
Fe2+ + O2 → Fe3+ + ˙O2− (pH ∼ 7)	(26)

 	Fig. 6  Mechanisms of cascade-like reactions in multi-nanozymes. (A) The elements with the highest and lowest valence states across the periodic table which can be used in designing nanozymes with multicatalytic activities. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyrights 2021, ACS. (B) The defect engineering using Fe doping in MoO (Fe-MoOv) to create an oxygen vacancy results in the synergistic effect in ROS generation due to multi-active sites and the instantaneous generation and cleavage of H2O2 through O2 adsorption. Adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyrights 2021, ACS. (C) The light dependent Fenton reactions on the VOxBG hydrogel where the generation of trapped holes (htr) in light promote the generation of multiple ROS and the switchable Haber–Weiss reactions in the absence of light with high CAT-like activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (D) The hydrolytic cleavage of H2O2 to generate O2 over the active metal site of single atom catalysts (SACs) to mimic CAT-like activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyrights 2022, Wiley. (D) pH dependences of one-electron redox of H2O, H2O2, and O2. The dotted line shows the two-electron (2e−) process. Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyrights 2017, ACS.	 
MO + hv → hvb+ + e−	(27)
e− + H2O2 → ˙OH + OH−	(28)
hvb+ + ˙OH → ˙OH(ads) or (htr+)	(29)
(htr+) + substrate → ox-substrate	(30)
H2O2(ads) + 2 Ce4+ → 2H+ + O2 + 2Ce3+ + Vo	(31)
2Ce3+ + Vo + O2 → 2Ce4+	(32)
H2O2(ads) + Vo + 2H+ + 2Ce3+ → 2Ce4+ + 2H2O	(33)
htr+ + H2O2ads + M → M–O–O–M	(34)
M–O–O–M → ˙OHads	(35)
M–O–O–M + hvb+ → M–OO˙ → ˙O2−	(36)
H2O2 → H2O2(ads)	(37)
H2O2(ads) → 2 ˙OH(ads)	(38)
2 ˙OH(ads) + H+ → H2O(ads) + ˙OH (E0 = +2.01 V)	(39)
˙O2− + 2H+ + e− → H2O2	(40)

 	Fig. 7  Various multi-nanozymes used in therapeutic and sensing applications. (A) The oxygen vacancy in titania (TiO1+x) assists in the sonodynamic generation of 1O2 and ˙OH radicals simultaneously which assist in tumor therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyrights 2020, ACS. (B) The nanoceria functionalized Ti implants behave as multi-nanozymes and prevent the peri-implantitis due to bacterial infection through SOD and CAT mimics. Adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyrights 2019, Elsevier. (C) VOxQDs with multi-nanozymes were used in developing a 3D coordinate system for the precise colorimetric sensing of H2O2 over a broad concentration range. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyrights 2019, ACS. (D) CoO NPs were co-doped with Au and Pt (CoO@AuPt) to impart triple enzyme like activity for augmented chemodynamic therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 215. Copyrights 2020, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
