Towards highly efficient photoanodes: boosting sunlight-driven semiconductor nanomaterials for water oxidation  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR01181C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR01181C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7142-7164Towards highly efficient photoanodes: boosting sunlight-driven semiconductor nanomaterials for water oxidation

        
          
            Jiayong 
            Gan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xihong 
            Lu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yexiang 
            Tong
          
          
        
      *
      KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, MOE of the Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Optoelectronic and Functional Composite Materials, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. E-mail: luxh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chedhx@mail.sysu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 20 84112245;   Tel: +86 20 84110071
Received 
      4th March 2014
    , Accepted 30th April 2014First published on 5th May 2014AbstractHarvesting energy directly from sunlight is a very attractive and desirable way to solve the rising energy demand. In the past few decades, considerable efforts have been focused on identifying appropriate materials and devices that can utilize solar energy to produce chemical fuels. Among these, one of the most promising options is the construction of a photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell that can produce hydrogen fuel or oxygen from water. Significant advancement in the understanding and construction of efficient photoanodes to improve performance has been accomplished within a short period of time owing to various newly developed ideas and approaches, including facilitating charge transportation in narrow band gap semiconductors or doping in wide band gap semiconductors for enhancing visible-light absorption; electrocatalysts for decreasing overpotentials; controlling the morphology of the materials for enhancing light absorption and shortening the transfer distance of minority carriers; and other methods such as using heterojunction structures for band-structure engineering, sensitization, and passivating layers. In this review, we focus on the recent developments of some promising visible-light active photoanode materials with high PEC performance, such as BiVO4, α-Fe2O3, WO3, TaON, and Ta3N5.Jiayong GanJiayong Gan earned his B.S. degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2010. He was a graduate student under the guidance of Prof. Yexiang Tong in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University. Currently, he is a joint graduate student in the lab of Prof. C. Buddie Mullins at the University of Texas, Austin. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, metallic nanocrystals and semiconductor nanomaterials for photoelectrochemical water splitting.Xihong LuDr Xihong Lu earned his B.S. degree in applied chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008, and then earned his doctoral degree in 2013 under the guidance of Prof. Yexiang Tong at Sun Yat-Sen University. During 2011–2013, he was a visiting graduate student in Prof. Yat Li's lab at University of California, Santa Cruz. He is now a lecturer in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research interests are the development of functionally nanostructured materials for photoelectrochemical/photocatalytic water splitting, supercapacitors, and Li-ion batteries.Yexiang TongProf. Ye-Xiang Tong earned his B.S. in General Chemistry in 1985, his M.S. in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and his Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He joined Sun Yat-Sen University as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 1988. His current research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal-oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications for energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
Decrease in the stock of conventional fossil fuels is insufficient to meet the energy requirements of an increasing population, which causes an intense strain on human existence and socially sustainable development. Thus, it is extremely urgent to identify, produce and employ alternative renewable energy sources. Modern society has been searching for newer forms of energy that are clean, renewable, low cost, and a viable alternative to fossil fuels in order to address the depletion of coal, oil, or petrol, and the serious environmental problems caused by the combustion of fossil fuels. Renewable energy resources include solar, wind, geothermal, tidal, wave, hydropower, and biomass, in which solar energy possesses a theoretical potential of 1.2 × 105 TW,1 far more than other form of energy sources. An hour of solar radiation on Earth can provide 6.12 × 1017 kJ of energy, which can easily meet the world's total annual energy consumption.2 Solar energy, which can be captured and converted into other useful forms of energy, including heat, electricity, and chemical fuels like hydrogen, has been extensively researched and widely used in many fields.
In future, hydrogen is expected to play an important role because it is a clean energy resource and can be used in fuel cells. Over the past four decades, photocatalytic overall water splitting using solar energy has been studied as a potential method of hydrogen production, and more recently, considerable effort has been focused on developing hydrogen as a new-generation energy carrier. In 1972, research on such catalysts was triggered by the work of Honda and Fujishima, who demonstrated that overall water splitting can be achieved using a photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell consisting of a single crystalline TiO2 (rutile) anode and a Pt cathode under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation and an external bias.3 After their work, considerable efforts have been devoted to developing highly efficient anodes for PEC water splitting, and significant achievements have been made. Most of the developed photoanodes for water splitting are metal oxides with wide band gaps such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2. These photoanodes are capable of capturing only ultraviolet irradiation (about 4% of solar energy), which severely limits their practical applications in PEC water splitting.4 Therefore, the search for efficient materials for splitting water into H2 and O2 under visible-light irradiation is highly desirable and challenging.
It should be pointed out that this review will emphasize the optimization of useful systems under sunlight-type excitation; moreover, operation under visible-light excitations is also considered in this review. The photovoltaic effect used in solar cells, discussed in this article, generally refers to the creation of photoexcited electrons and holes due to electron transfer between the valence and conduction band within the materials when exposed to visible light whose energy matches or exceeds the band gap.5 Moreover, under visible-light irradiation with the same energy conditions as solar cells, photocatalysis for splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen usually employs electron–hole pairs from electronic transitions within the catalyst and the redox reactions of water caused by these pairs.6 Although the purposes of excited electrons are different for solar cells and photocatalysts, actually both of them involve light harvesting, charge separation and electron transfer. Thus, in our discussion, enhancing the visible-light harvesting efficiency to generate more electron–hole pairs is a significant factor for improving the performance in PEC cells and catalysis. As recently evidenced in the study of anion-doped anatase, a significant number of systems can display enhanced activity under sunlight with respect to well-defined photocatalytic reference such as Evonic P25 or Millennium PC500.4 Although not all of them involve PEC water splitting, they generally give an idea about the dependence of photoactivity on doping. To the best of our knowledge, anion-doping generally lowers the quantum efficiency under UV light, whereas it can increase the quantum efficiency under visible light. Note that the number of successful systems utilizing new types of semiconductors for solar excitation is still limited. In this article, we will focus on the progress of the study about five important visible light sensitive nanostructured materials, such as BiVO4, α-Fe2O3, WO3, TaON and Ta3N5 for PEC water oxidation into O2, which demonstrate useful activity under solar excitation in fields concerned with solar oxygen production. There are already a significant number of reviews covering such subjects,7–10 but in this review, the emphasis will be on analyzing photoactive materials from a solid-state point of view. Our emphasis will be on the important factors affecting PEC performances of the abovementioned materials and strategies for addressing their shortages for breaking through their limitation. We will summarize some strategies, including doping, surface treatment, electrocatalysts, and morphology control to optimize PEC efficiency. Furthermore, methods to improve PEC stability and durability of photoelectrode materials will also be described.
2. PEC water splitting system
The photoelectrochemical method for water splitting, as displayed in Fig. 1, involves two electrodes, the anode and the cathode. The anode is the photoactive material (or semiconducting material)-based electrode, which is irradiated by a light beam during water splitting. The cathode is the counter electrode—also called an auxiliary electrode—although it is not irradiated by light. In order to drive this reaction forward, the photoactive material on the photoanode must absorb radiant light to make its electrode potential higher than 1.23 V (the change in free energy (ΔG) associated with the conversion of one molecule of H2O into H2 and 1/2O2 is 237.2 kJ mol−1, which corresponds to an electrolysis cell voltage (ΔE°) of 1.23 V per electron transferred). Thus, the water molecule can be oxidized to form O2 and protons (H+), and protons can be simultaneously reduced to form H2 at the cathode. If the photoanode is irradiated by light that has energy greater than the band gap of the photoactive material, then the electrons of the valence band will be excited into the conduction band, whereas the holes remain in the valence band. A photoinduced process must generate four electron–hole pairs for generating O2 on the photoanode.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the basic principles of water splitting for a PEC cell with an n-type semiconductor photoanode (where oxygen is evolved) and cathode (where hydrogen is evolved). 
It is crucial that the band levels, which are another factor that commonly influence the ability of water splitting, are considered because splitting water requires that the bottom level of the conduction band must be located at a more negative potential than the reduction potential of H+/H2, or the top of the valence band is more positive than the oxidation potential of H2O/O2. Based on electrochemical principles, the water-splitting reaction can only be driven when the irradiation energy exceeds 1.23 eV, indicating that the energy of the light must be larger than the band gap to separate the electrons and holes. In practical operations, the minimum thermodynamic energy requirements and the overpotential loss require at least 1.7–1.9 eV for the PEC splitting of water. Furthermore, the intensity of the solar spectrum dramatically falls off below 400 nm, imposing an upper limit of 3.1 eV on the band gap; therefore, the optimum value of the semiconductor band gap should ideally be somewhere between 1.9 and 3.1 eV, which is within the visible range of the solar spectrum. Note that the band gap of 3.1 eV is too large for solar energy conversion, if one calculates the theoretical energy conversion efficiency at the apparent quantum efficiency or the incident photon-to-current efficiency of 100%. Taking into consideration ohmic losses and a kinetic loss due to the overpotentials for oxygen or hydrogen production, Murphy et al. suggested an optimum band gap of 2.03 eV, which would lead to a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 16.8%.11
Another critical factor, which may limit the usefulness of several photocatalytic materials, is resistance to photocorrosion or electrochemical stability. Many nonoxide semiconductor materials may either dissolve or form a thin oxide film upon their surfaces, preventing electron transfer through the interface between the semiconductor/electrolyte interface because the photogenerated holes may sometimes oxidize the material themselves rather than water (photocorrosion and/or anodic photodecomposition). These undesired photodecompositions in various photoactive materials commonly depend on the pH value of the electrolyte and frequently limit their utilization under certain conditions. On the other hand, oxide semiconductors are usually more stable, and they show stable performance in various reaction conditions. TiO2 and SnO2 are highly stable over a wide range of pH values in aqueous environments upon illumination, whereas the stability of CdSe strongly depends on the pH value and the type of electrolyte present. It should be noted that photocorrosion and/or anodic decomposition will be markedly inhibited if the transfer of carriers for water oxidation through the interface is faster than any competing reaction. Therefore, the development of semiconductor materials with excellent stability against photocorrosion/anodic decomposition is a critical issue for future applications.
Important factors, other than band gap energy, such as the charge separation, charge mobility and the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which also critically affect the photoactivity of semiconductor materials, must be considered for improving the water-splitting reaction.
In terms of evaluating photoactive materials, PEC performance or photocurrent response vs. potential curve is a basic parameter of evaluation. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of materials is used to specify the photoresponse as a function of the wavelength of incident light. Using eqn (1) we can calculate the yields of the IPCE at a desired bias voltage. (1)where J represents the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), λ is the wavelength of incident light (nm), and I is the intensity of the incident light (mW cm−2). Another important factor for a photoanode is the solar energy conversion efficiency. The overall efficiency of solar energy conversion can be determined from the following expression: η = 100% × J(E°rex − E)/Ilight(2)E in this equation should be the bias voltage applied against a counter electrode (or reference electrode in a three-electrode configuration). In the case of photoanodes, the potential of the counter electrode is regarded as 0 V vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode). Note that the overpotential loss should also be taken into consideration. J is the photocurrent density at the bias. The term E°rex is usually taken to be 1.229 V (pH = 0) for the water-splitting reaction, and Ilight is the irradiance intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (if AM 1.5 G). For the three-electrode configuration, when Ag/AgCl acts as a reference electrode, the measured potentials versus Ag/AgCl were converted to the RHE scale according to the Nernst equation: ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059pH + E°Ag/AgCl (E°Ag/AgCl = +0.199 V)(3)
One should emphasize that the potential photocurrent properties obtained by two- and three-electrode configuration methods with the RHE correction are similar. The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency for a PEC system constructed by photoelectrodes, in which the only inputs are sunlight and water, can be expressed as: STH = 100% × J × 1.229/Ilight(4)
In the case of practical measurement, the band edge position for many kinds of semiconductor materials cannot simultaneously straddle the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Therefore, sacrificial reagents, which act as electron donors, or hole scavengers, such as alcohol, sulfide ions, and silver ions, are often employed to evaluate the photocatalytic activity for water splitting. Thus, the abovementioned equation cannot correctly evaluate energy conversion efficiency when sacrificial reagents are utilized to estimate the photoactivity because photogenerated electrons–holes would react with electron donors or hole scavengers rather than water. Consequently, the evaluation of photoactivity in a PEC cell commonly uses photocurrent rather than conversion efficiency.
3. Overview of visible-light-driven photoelectrodes
With regard to solar energy utilization, the development of a photocatalyst that splits water efficiently under visible light (λ > 400 nm) is indispensable. Until the first half of the 1990s, only a few chalcogenides and metal oxides (e.g., CdS and WO3)12–16 were known to be photocatalytically active under visible light. Some metal chalcogenides such as CdS and CdSe have sufficiently small band gap energies to allow for absorption of visible light and conduction and valence bands at potentials appropriate for water reduction and oxidation; therefore, they appear to be suitable photocatalysts for overall water splitting. However, in the water oxidation reaction, these metal chalcogenides are not able to form O2 because the S2− and Se2− anions are more susceptible to oxidation than water, causing the CdS and CdSe catalyst itself to be oxidized and degraded.17,18 Although WO3 functions as a suitable candidate for O2 evolution under visible light in the presence of an appropriate electron acceptor, the bottom of the conduction band of this material is located at a more positive potential than the potential of water reduction. As a result, WO3 does not have the ability to directly reduce H+ to H2. Fig. 2, which presents the above-mentioned dilemma, shows a schematic illustration of band gap positions of some semiconductors. Until very recently, reproducible photocatalytic systems for visible-light-driven overall water splitting had not been realized, although several reports claimed to demonstrate the decomposition of water under visible light. Therefore, overall water splitting by visible light had been once described as one of the “holy grail” of chemistry.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of bandgap positions of several semiconductor photocatalysts. 
The difficulty in developing a suitable photocatalyst can be attributed to the lack of known materials that meet all three requirements: (1) band edge potentials suitable for overall water splitting, (2) band gap energy smaller than 3 eV, and (3) stability in the PEC process. To date, numerous attempts have been made to prepare a photoactive material that efficiently works under visible light.19–23 For the development of such an appropriate candidate, it is primarily important to control the band structure. In UV-active metal-oxide semiconductors, the bottoms of the conduction bands, which consist mainly of empty transition-metal d orbitals, are located at a potential slightly more negative than 0 V vs. NHE at pH 0, and the tops of the valence bands, consisting of O2p atomic orbitals, are close to 3 V.24 As mentioned above, this situation causes the band gap of the material to become too large to harvest visible light; nevertheless, metal-oxide photocatalysts have enough potential to oxidize water, as per the difference between the oxidation potential of H2O into O2 (1.23 V vs. NHE) and the valence band-edge potential (ca. 3 V vs. NHE). Therefore, when other elements (e.g., N2p and S3p) having atomic orbitals, with potential energies higher than O2p atomic orbitals, are introduced into a metal oxide, new valence bands can be formed instead of pure O2p atomic orbitals. This results in decreasing the band gap energy without affecting the conduction band level, thus producing a visible-light-driven photocatalyst or photoanode with band-edge potentials suitable for overall water splitting.
4. Current state of promising visible-light-driven photoelectrodes
As visible-light-driven photoelectrode materials, more importance has been attached to the development of oxides, especially BiVO4, WO3 and hematite, because they are generally inexpensive, stable, and easily prepared on a large scale. Moreover, (oxy)nitrides, TaON and Ta3N5, in particular, have attracted considerable attention because of their high theoretical STH.
4.1 Monoclinic BiVO4
Among oxide photoelectrode candidates, monoclinic BiVO4 has attracted considerable interest as a water-oxidation and organic-degradation photocatalyst under visible-light illumination.25–27 As is well known, BiVO4 exists in three polymorphs having monoclinic scheelite-like, tetragonal scheelite-like, and tetragonal zircon-like structures with band gaps of 2.40, 2.34, and 2.90 eV, respectively. It is an attractive and nontoxic yellow pigment as a substitute for lead- and cadmium-based yellow pigments. In 1998, monoclinic scheelite-like BiVO4 was developed by Kudo's group, which exhibited very high activities for water oxidation under visible-light illumination.25 The conduction-band minimum and valence-band maximum of BiVO4 consists of V-3d and the hybridization between the O-2p and Bi-6s orbitals, respectively.28–30 The visible-light absorption is relative to the Bi 6s and V 3d electron lone pairs being located at relatively positive potentials.25 The density functional theory (DFT) calculation results indicate that monoclinic BiVO4 is a direct-gap semiconductor. In theory, monoclinic BiVO4 is a promising photoelectrode material with high PEC performances.30,31 In 2003, Sayama et al. reported that the nanocrystalline BiVO4 photoelectrode showed an incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 29% at 420 nm and 1.9 V vs. RHE for PEC water splitting.32 Subsequently, a lot of new modification methods have been proposed, which open up a new develop orientation for a multi-metal oxide photoanode.
However, the pure BiVO4 photoelectrode is confronted with two major difficulties. One is that its IPCE at lower potentials is very low, about 10% at 1.0 V vs. RHE, which is one of the main problems that hinder its application in solar oxygen production. Note that a very high voltage must be applied to obtain a fairly high IPCE in BiVO4 photoelectrodes, which may be related to the high surface recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. Another problem is that the photocurrent stability of BiVO4 is quite poor; only 25% of the initial photocurrent remained after half an hour of illumination.32 The photocurrent decrease comes from the V5+ dissolution into solution and the oxidation products on the surface of the photoelectrode, such as H2O2 or O2, which play a role as recombination centers.
Based on Sayama's report, monoclinic BiVO4 has attracted increasing interest owing to their high theoretical STH of 9.1%. Here, we will mainly focus on the use of BiVO4 as a photoanode and the major limitations of BiVO4 for solar water oxidation, and recent efforts to address one or more of these limitations will be critically analyzed. Kudo's group33 has developed a facile method to prepare BiVO4 thin-film photoanodes by dipping an F-doped SnO2 glass (FTO) substrate electrode into the aqueous nitric acid solution of Bi(NO3)3 and NH4VO3 onto. They found that the anodic photocurrent of the BiVO4 thin-film electrode depended on the concentration of the precursor solution and calcination temperature. The BiVO4 thin-film electrode prepared at 673–723 K using 200–300 mmol L−1 of the precursor solution gave an excellent anodic photocurrent with IPCE of 73% at 420 nm at 1.6 V vs. RHE. A large photocurrent was obtained for the CoO-modified BiVO4 thin film even when a smaller external bias (0.6 V vs. counter electrode) was applied. To reduce overpotential of BiVO4 photoanode, Zhou et al.34 proposed a rational design that involves a combination of BiVO4 and surface modification (by depositing Co-Pi onto BiVO4). Thus, a superior absorbed photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (40% at 1.6 V vs. RHE) and a remarkable cathodic shift (320 mV) of the onset potential were achieved. Surface modification with Co-Pi completely eliminates surface recombination owing to improved interfacial charge-transfer, water-oxidation kinetics, and the passivation of surface defects. Hence, the efficiency of photon use is increased, which benefits the water-oxidation reaction.
Morphological details of the electrode such as size, shape and connectivity of the particles have a significant impact on the interfacial energetics, kinetics and charge-transport properties. For example, the PEC properties of single-crystal semiconductors vary significantly depending on which crystal plane is exposed at the interface. The types of exposed facets of metal-oxide semiconductors affect the photoconversion efficiency greatly since they influence both the thermodynamic (e.g. flat-band potential, band bending) and kinetic factors (e.g. catalytic ability) of the photoelectrode reactions.35 Therefore, designing the electrode morphology to maximize the area of the desired atomic plane has the potential to improve the photoconversion efficiency of BiVO4. One interesting study by Xi et al. reports the synthesis of BiVO4 nanoplates having a monoclinic scheelite-like structure with well-defined {001} facets (with the cell choice in the I2/b space group) exposed at the surface using a hydrothermal method.36 The dimensions of these plates are 400–600 nm in width and 20–30 nm in thickness. The PEC properties of these plates were tested with BiVO4 photoanodes with different morphologies using a 300 W Xe lamp as the visible-light source. When compared with a nanorod-shaped sample, the nanoplates (21.4 m2 g−1) showed a higher photoactivity, although the nanorod sample had three times greater specific surface area value (67.5 m2 g−1; Fig. 3); the rods were grown along the [100] direction but the facets exposed at the surface were not identified. These results suggest that the enhanced photoactivity should be mainly attributable to the highly active surface structures of the BiVO4 nanoplates. The high photocatalytic activity of (001) planes might result from their higher surface energies. This study shows that designing nanostructures with appropriate surface facets may be a feasible approach for the improvement of the photoconversion efficiency. The preparation of samples composed of BiVO4 crystals having comparable dimensions and surface areas while varying only the types of atomic planes exposed on the surface will be highly beneficial for understanding the atomic plane-dependent PEC properties better.
 Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of the BiVO4 nanoplates. (b) HRTEM image of the BiVO4 nanoplate with the SAED pattern (inset) recorded from the white-framed area indicated in (a). (c) TEM image of one single BiVO4 nanorod. (d) HRTEM image and SAED pattern (inset) taken from the white frame area indicated in (c). (e) Potentiodynamic scans under chopped illumination for BiVO4 nanoplates and nanorods. Electrolyte: 0.1 M Na2SO4, a 300 W Xe lamp. Reproduced from ref. 36. 
Another means of increasing the absorbance of the photoanode for the visible-light region is the use of semiconductor nanocrystals, known as quantum dots (QDs), which have various important advantages. Their absorption spectrum can be matched to the solar spectrum by changing the size of the material particles. Moreover, QDs were recently shown to be able to generate multiple electron–hole pairs per photon, which could improve the efficiency of the device. Some methods for increasing the harvesting of visible light in quantum dot-sensitized photochemical cells have also been demonstrated. With respect to increasing absorbance in the visible-light regions through QDs, Tang et al.37 prepared monoclinic BiVO4 nanospheres and nanoplates combined with carbon quantum dots (CQDs). The UV-vis absorption spectra of the as-prepared BiVO4 nanoparticles and their nanocomposites show that the CQDs/BiVO4 nanospheres and CQDs/BiVO4 nanoplates display continuous strong absorption in the range of 520–800 nm compared with pure BiVO4 nanoparticles. This suggests that the CQDs have the ability to enhance the visible-light photoresponse of monoclinic BiVO4. Thus, these two nanocomposites exhibit a higher photovoltaic activity than that of the pure BiVO4 nanoparticles for target reactions under visible light. Tang et al. proposed that CQDs play two important roles in the CQDs/BiVO4 composites during the photocatalytic process. Firstly, CQDs can function as electron collectors and transporters to trap and transfer electrons generated from BiVO4 nanoparticles because of irradiation by visible light, thus hindering the electron–hole pairs' recombination probability and lengthen the lifetime of the charge carriers, which results in improved charge separation and photovoltaic activity in the CQDs/BiVO4 complex photocatalysts.38 Secondly, the CQDs possess upconversion photoluminescence (PL) properties;39i.e., they can absorb longer wavelength light and then emit shorter wavelength light (300 to 530 nm) as a result of upconversion, which can excite the BiVO4 to form electron–hole pairs. Thus, the CQDs/BiVO4 nanosphere and CQDs/m-BiVO4 nanoplate composites can effectively harness the broad solar spectrum to strengthen the photovoltaic activities.
The presence of the porous nanostructure in the photoelectrodes provides an increased interfacial area between the electrolyte and the film. This important characteristic feature of the porous photoelectrode helps to improve the water-splitting efficiency as the photogenerated hole will have to traverse less bulk material to be collected at the solution interface; therefore, it has a lower chance of recombining before participating in the electrochemical reaction. Pilli et al.40 deposited a cobalt phosphate-based oxygen evolution catalyst (Co-Pi OEC) onto the surface of a porous bismuth vanadate electrode doped with 2 atom% Mo (BiV0.98Mo0.02O4). The mechanism and function of the Co-Pi OEC can be described as follows. The mesostructured BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes have been prepared by surfactant-assisted metal–organic decomposition. The Co-Pi OEC-modified porous BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes were prepared by photo-assisted electrodeposition methods. The comparison of the photocurrent–voltage characteristics of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes with and without the presence of a Co-Pi catalyst demonstrated that the Co-Pi catalyst enhanced the anodic photocurrent of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode with its effect more pronounced at lower potentials. A stable photocurrent density of 1.0 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.22 V vs. RHE) was achieved under standard AM 1.5 G illumination using 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution in a phosphate buffer at pH = 7 (Fig. 4). Relative to the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode, a sustained enhancement, over trebled photocurrent density was observed at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.22 V vs. RHE) for the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 composite photoelectrode. Significant performance gains are obtained on BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes upon modification with Co-Pi water-oxidation catalysts. The high activities under photoassisted deposition of Co-Pi onto the semiconductor surface was attributed to selective and uniform deposition of Co-Pi. It was observed that the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode was stable over 24 h of illumination, which was indicative of its good stability. A slight decrease in the photocurrent, 4%, was observed at a 1.0 V bias after 24 h of continuous illumination (Fig. 4c). On the other hand, a significant decrease in the photocurrent, 60%, was observed at the same potential for the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode (Fig. 4d). To understand the changes in the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 and BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes after 24 h of durability testing, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was performed to verify the changes in the morphologies of both of the electrodes. The SEM image of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode exhibited multiple cracks all over the film compared with few cracks on the film of the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode (data not shown). This indicates a significant change in the film morphology of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode due to a loss of material via dissolution, which causes the reduction in the photoactivity of the unmodified BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode. This shows that the presence of the Co-Pi OEC played a dual role and acted as the catalyst and protective layer, resulting in stable Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes under the photolysis conditions. Therefore, the presence of the Co-Pi catalyst directed photogenerated holes on the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode towards the desired water-splitting reaction by improving the interfacial charge transfer and favoring their pathway over others, which potentially led to photoanode degradation and deactivation.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) SEM images of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes and Co-Pi OEC nanoparticles electrodeposited on the porous BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode for 10 min; (c) chopped light photocurrent–potential characteristics of the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 and (d) BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes performed at 1 h (black-above) and 24 h (red-below) of continuous illumination (100 mW cm−2) in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH 7, phosphate buffer). Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. 
To date, stable photoelectrodes with high IPCE in seawater splitting under irradiation by visible light has attracted considerable attention. Significantly, Luo et al.41 reported an efficient and stable system for seawater splitting based on a multi-metal oxide BiVO4 after modification. The Mo doping can significantly improve the photocurrent due to the enhanced conductivity and a possible increased hole diffusion length. Loading with a RhO2 co-catalyst can further improve the photocurrent of the Mo-doped BiVO4 photoelectrode and the photostability in seawater. The results indicated that modified BiVO4 had a photocurrent density of 2.16 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE (Fig. 5a) in natural seawater under AM 1.5 G sunlight and exhibited the highest IPCE at 1.0 V vs. RHE in the visible-light region of 440–480 nm among all known oxide photoanodes (Fig. 5b). High conductivity can promote the transfer of photo-generated electrons from the thin film onto the substrate. Moreover, the Mo doping evidently leads to a red shift in the edge of the action spectra. For the undoped BiVO4, the IPCE is negligible at 490 nm, whereas at the same wavelength, it is still about 10% for the Mo-doped BiVO4 (Fig. 5c). The photocurrent response edge of Mo-doped BiVO4 can reach 510 nm, which is close to the light absorption edge of BiVO4 (520 nm). Compared with H2O, chloride ions can be oxidized by photo-generated holes more quickly; therefore, the photocurrent decay is less in natural seawater. RhO2 is considered to accelerate the photogenerated hole transfer rate and further improve the photocurrent stability. It protects the dissolution of BiVO4 from the electrolyte.
 Fig. 5  Performance of Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification illuminated from the front side in natural seawater and 0.5 M K2SO4 aqueous solution. (a) Photocurrent–potential curves in AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight, (b) IPCE spectra collected for Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification at 1 V vs. RHE. Light source: a xenon lamp (full-arc, λ > 300 nm). (c) IPCE spectra collected for BiVO4, Mo-doped BiVO4, and Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification with the same test conditions as (b) electrolyte: natural seawater. (d) Photocurrent–potential curves illuminated from the back side and the front side with the same condition as (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. 
In an attempt to modify the water-oxidation kinetics of the BiVO4 photoelectrodes, a layer of FeOOH was placed on the BiVO4 surface as an oxygen-evolution catalyst.42 The IPCE of bare BiVO4 photoelectrodes reaches a maximum of 9% at 350 nm and 1.2 V vs. RHE, whereas that of the BiVO4/FeOOH achieves 44% at this wavelength.42 The BiVO4/FeOOH films are capable of utilizing a substantially greater number of holes that reached the semiconductor–liquid junction for the photo-oxidation of water.
McDonald et al.43 adopted a new cathodic electrodeposition method to prepare crystalline BiOI electrodes using p-benzoquinone reduction. The polycrystalline BiOI electrode, composed of extremely thin 2D plates, allowed for the preparation of porous BiVO4 photoanodes using a simple chemical and thermal treatment. The resulting porous BiVO4 electrodes showed outstanding PEC performance for sulfite oxidation reaching 1.25 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH = 7) containing 0.1 M sodium sulfite. When a ca. 100 nm-thick FeOOH layer was deposited on the surface of BiVO4 as an oxygen evolution catalyst, the kinetics of water oxidation were improved to the level of sulfite oxidation and the maximum power point for solar water oxidation was achieved at a bias as low as 0.55 V vs. RHE with a photocurrent density of 1.17 mA cm−2. The performance of BiVO4/FeOOH demonstrated in their study was possible owing to the combination of the very negative flatband potential of BiVO4, the porous nanostructure of BiVO4 minimizing the electron–hole recombination, and FeOOH being able to considerably improve the water-oxidation kinetics. The outstanding and stable solar water oxidation performance achieved by the BiVO4/FeOOH system composed of only non-precious elements prepared by simple synthesis procedures warrants further optimization studies on morphologies and compositions of the BiVO4-based photoanodes.
The IPCE of BiVO4 is increased remarkably from 1.6% to 6.2% at 350 nm and 1.6 V vs. RHE when an SnO2 film is layered between the BiVO4 layer and the FTO substrate (FTO/SnO2/BiVO4) because the SnO2 inner (or buffer) layer can assist the efficient electron–hole separation via the electron transfer from BiVO4 to SnO2 and the blocking of the hole transfer from BiVO4 to the FTO surface.44 Similar to SnO2, WO3 also acts as a buffer layer for the BiVO4 photoelectrodes.45 Chatchai et al. reported that the IPCE of the BiVO4 composite photoelectrodes increases from ca. 7.8% (FTO/BiVO4) to 82% (FTO/WO3/BiVO4) at 350 nm and 1.6 V vs. RHE by using the WO3 buffer layer when illuminated from the front side. In this case, the WO3 buffer layer can enlarge the electron–hole separation and suppress the recombination effect to enable the high PEC performances of the composite photoelectrode.45 Significant enhancement in IPCE of the WO3–BiVO4 heterojunction photoelectrodes (FTO/WO3/BiVO4) has also been found by Hong et al. because the composite photoelectrode combines the merits of the two semiconductors, i.e. the excellent charge-transport characteristics of WO3 and the good light-absorption capability of BiVO4.46
In the last two years, the PEC performance of BiVO4 has been significantly improved largely due to the development of novel water-oxidation catalyst materials. As a result, the best-performing BiVO4 photoanodes are no longer limited by slow water-oxidation kinetics, but by poor carrier separation due to slow electron transport in BiVO4. Although the introduction of a donor-type dopant such as W or Mo can increase the conductivity of BiVO4, this is by itself insufficient because of the low intrinsic mobility of BiVO4. Krol's group47 demonstrated a solar water splitting device based on the combination of a W-doped BiVO4 photoanode and a double-junction amorphous silicon (2-jn a-Si) solar cell. By introducing a gradient in the dopant profile, it is possible to create a distributed n+–n homojunction in BiVO4 that greatly enhances the charge-separation efficiency, thereby effectively removing its main performance bottleneck. In combination with an efficient Co-Pi water-oxidation catalyst and an a-Si solar cell connected in tandem, this provides a new and very highly efficient BiVO4-based metal-oxide photoanode. Under AM 1.5 illumination, the gradient-doped W:BiVO4 shows a photocurrent of ∼1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE. To improve the oxygen-evolution kinetics, they electrodeposited a 30 nm-thick Co-Pi catalyst layer. This thickness gives an optimum catalytic improvement for BiVO4 and ensures that >90% of the incident light reaches the BiVO4. This results in a photocurrent of up to 3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE, which is an approximately three-fold improvement of the AM 1.5 photocurrent. This work has shown that the poor carrier-separation efficiency in the BiVO4 photoanode can be overcome by implementing a multistep gradient in the tungsten-dopant concentration, resulting in the formation of a series of homojunctions in the bulk of the material. The combination of the electrode with a double-junction amorphous silicon (2-jn a-Si) solar cell results in a water-splitting device with a ∼4.9% STH efficiency. The distributed n+–n homojunction concept represents a generally applicable strategy for improving carrier separation in any high donor density photoelectrode material.
4.2 Hematite (α-Fe2O3)
Hematite is considered as one of the most promising photoelectrodes for solar oxygen production because of its good photochemical stability, abundance, non-toxicity, and narrow bandgap (Eg = 2.2 eV) with a maximum theoretical STH conversion efficiency of 15%.48–52 However, the performance of the α-Fe2O3 electrode is limited due to its poor electrical conductivity, low absorption coefficient,53 short diffusion length for holes (2–4 nm),48 short excited-state lifetime (<10 ps),54 poor surface oxygen-evolution kinetics,55 and low-lying conduction band.56
The conduction-band minimum of hematite consists of Fe-3d eg, whereas the valence-band maximum is composed of Fe-3d t2g (the main part) and O-2p.57 Specifically, the source of the photogenerated holes can be divided into two parts: one is from the direct O2− 2p → Fe3+ 3d transitions (for wavelengths λ < 400 nm), and the other comes from the indirect Fe3+ 3d → 3d transitions (λ < 620 nm).58 The direct transition results in a larger absorption coefficient compared with the indirect transitions; therefore, the action spectrum of hematite displays a precipitous decline over wavelength, and it is a challenge to make the shape of the action spectrum flat in the visible region.
Morphological control and impurity doping have been successful in overcoming some of the above-mentioned problems. To counter the short hole-diffusion length, several groups have prepared mesostructured α-Fe2O3 photoanodes such that holes have only short distances to travel before encountering surfaces. Compared with other methods, such as film preparation from colloidal nanoparticles,59 the preparation of nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 photoanodes by spray pyrolysis (SP) shows improved photoresponse.60–64 Recently, ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP) was used to prepare platelet-like α-Fe2O3 photoanodes, which showed significantly enhanced photoresponse compared with those prepared by the conventional SP method.64 The photoresponse enhancement was attributed to the small thickness (<10 nm) of the platelets, which is commensurate with the hole-diffusion length in α-Fe2O3.
One important work was carried out by Xi et al.65 They reported a strategy to perform in situ incorporation of an oxygen-evolution catalyst, Co3O4, during hydrothermal growth of Fe2O3 nanorod arrays. It was found that 5% Co2+ addition shows the highest photocurrent increase and onset potential shift. With this level of added Co, the photocurrent density increased from 0.72 for the pristine Fe2O3 nanorods to 1.20 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (around 67% improvement), and the onset potential shifted by ∼40 mV, and concomitantly improvements in IPCE and oxygen evolution were also observed. It was also found that hematite photoanodes with in situ deposition of Co3O4 nanoparticles showed better performance than those prepared by other ex situ growth procedures. It seems that the in situ growth of Co3O4 particles on hematite is beneficial to the generation of nanosized Co3O4 particles, high surface roughness and a larger Co3O4/hematite interfacial area, which results in improved photocatalytic properties.
The kinetic competition between electron–hole recombination and water oxidation is a key consideration for the development of efficient nanostructured hematite thin-film photoanodes for solar-driven water splitting. By employing three complementary techniques, i.e., transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS), transient photocurrent (TPC) spectroscopy, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), a very recent study conducted by Durrant's group66 assigns the recombination phase to recombination of bulk hematite electrons with long-lived holes accumulated at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. Their results suggest two distinct roles for the space-charge layer developed at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface under anodic bias because under modest anodic bias, this space-charge layer enables the spatial separation of initially generated electrons and holes following photon absorption, generating relatively long-lived holes (milliseconds) at the semiconductor surface. However, under such modest bias conditions, the energetic barrier generated by the space-charge layer field is insufficient to prevent the subsequent recombination of these holes with electrons in the semiconductor bulk on a time scale faster than water oxidation. Preventing this back electron–hole recombination requires the application of stronger anodic bias, and this explains why the onset potential for photocurrent generation in the hematite photoanode is typically ∼500 mV anodic of the flat band.
To enhance the water-splitting efficiency of the hematite photoanode, Schmuki's group67 first obtained the oxide nanoflake structures by conventional thermal oxidation of Fe sheets, and then doped them with Sn and flame-annealed them to activate the Sn4+ dopant. In these hematite nanostructures, a high water-splitting performance is obtained; thus, flame annealing turns out to be clearly more effective than classic furnace annealing. Optimizing the annealing time (10 s at about 1000 °C) leads to an enhanced PEC performance of the Sn-doped hematite nanoflakes of 1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE with a maximum photocurrent of 1.6 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) conditions. The improvement in the photocurrent can be attributed to the rapid direct heating that maintains the nanoscale morphology, leads to optimized Sn decoration and minimizes detrimental substrate oxidation effects.
Significantly, recent studies by Li's group68,69 showed that the performance of the α-Fe2O3 nanowire-arrayed electrode can be boosted by simply modifying the oxygen content during the thermal-annealing process or by doping Ti, Sn. The α-Fe2O3 nanowires were synthesized by a hydrothermal method. However, a pristine α-Fe2O3 electrode (without doping) created at 550 °C typically shows poor PEC performance and the material needs to be activated at a higher temperature such as at 800 °C. However, high-temperature annealing is an energy-intensive process, which is not favorable for the fabrication of PEC electrodes. It is presumed that without high-temperature activation, improving the photoactivity of the α-Fe2O3 electrode is not impossible. The thermal decomposition of these β-FeOOH nanowires in an oxygen-deficient atmosphere can create oxygen vacancies. Moreover, the presence of Fe2+ sites (oxygen vacancies) in α-Fe2O3 can significantly increase its electrical conductivity via a polaron-hopping mechanism.70 To further investigate this presumption,71 they prepared α-Fe2O3 nanowire samples prepared via thermal decomposition of hydrothermally grown β-FeOOH nanowires at 550 °C in air (denoted as A-hematite) and an oxygen-deficient atmosphere (mixture of N2 and air, denoted as N-hematite), respectively, and compared their physical properties and PEC performance. The existence of Fe2+ sites in the N-hematite sample was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis (Fig. 6a). Mott–Schottky studies (Fig. 6b) showed that the donor density of N-hematite is an order of magnitude higher that of A-hematite. As shown in Fig. 6c, N-hematite nanowires exhibited a significantly enhanced photocurrent, compared with the A-hematite sample. N-hematite also yielded higher IPCE values than A-hematite in the entire wavelength range between 320 and 610 nm (Fig. 6d). Moreover, the IPCE value decreases to zero at 610 nm, which is consistent with the optical band gap of hematite, suggesting that the incorporation of oxygen vacancies did not narrow the band gap. Furthermore, they found that the presence of chloride ions (from FeCl3 precursor solution) plays an important role in the creation of Fe2+ sites in hematite under an oxygen-deficient environment. Note that β-FeOOH has a three-dimensional tunnel structure, which typically contains chloride ions and protons in the inner space of the tunnels; thus, the captured chloride ions can be released in the form of hydrogen chloride by reaction with the water molecules produced by dehydroxylation upon thermal treatment. This reaction produces oxygen as a by-product and releases four electrons, which can reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+. The amount of Fe2+ is related to the oxygen content during the annealing process. Thus, their experiment confirmed that an oxygen-deficient environment and the presence of chloride ions are essential for the creation of Fe2+ sites. Moreover, the method offered an effective strategy for addressing the poor conducting issue and boosted the visible-light response of α-Fe2O3 for PEC water splitting.
 Fig. 6  (a) Overlay of Fe 2p XPS spectra of A-hematite (black dashed curve) and N-hematite (solid red curve) films together with their difference spectrum (“N-hematite” minus “A-hematite”). The dashed lines highlight the satellite peaks for Fe3+ and Fe2+. (b) Mott–Schottky plots measured for A-hematite (squares) and N-hematite (circles) nanowire films. The x-intercepts of the linear fitting best-fit lines were used to estimate the flatband potential (VFB). Inset: magnified Mott–Schottky plot of N-hematite. (c) Linear sweep voltammograms collected for A-hematite (black lines) and N-hematite (red lines), at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, in a NaOH electrolyte solution (1 M, pH = 13.6) under illumination by simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 (solid lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). (d) The corresponding IPCE spectra for A-hematite (dot/line) and N-hematite (square/line), collected at potentials of 1.23 and 1.50 V vs. RHE (red and orange, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. 
Except oxygen vacancies, morphology can also have a great impact on the PEC performance of hematite. Recently, the preparation of micron-long α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays via electrochemical anodization of Fe foils were reported.72 The nanotube wall thicknesses were typically <20 nm, and their pore diameters were <100 nm (Fig. 7). Photocurrent densities of 1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE were achieved with these nanotube arrays using AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight and basic electrolytes.73,74
 Fig. 7  Top-view (a) and side-view (b) SEM images of α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays prepared by anodization of Fe foil at a potential of 50 V in ethylene glycol (adopted from ref. 72). 
Because pure hematite is an insulator, poor conductivity of hematite limits its PEC properties. Owing to the precursor used in the deposition process, such as Fe(acac)3 or FeCl3, carbon or chlorine residues may remain in the hematite films and act as electron donors, thus yielding hematite films unintentionally doped with ions and their resulting appreciable photocurrents.75 In most cases, doping is intentionally performed to improve hematite conductivity and photoresponses. For example, in Wang's work,68 Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films were prepared by hydrolysis of FeCl3 precursors method with titanium butoxide added as the Ti precursor. Impedance measurements show that the Ti-dopant serves as an electron donor and increases the donor density by two orders of magnitude. Compared with the undoped sample, the photocurrent onset potential of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 is shifted about 0.1–0.2 V to lower potential, thus improving the photocurrent and IPCE at lower bias voltages. Significantly, the optimized Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 film achieved a photocurrent density of 1.83 mA cm−2 and IPCE values of 15% at 400 nm at 1.02 V vs. RHE for α-Fe2O3 photoanode. The enhanced photocurrent is attributed to the improved donor density and reduced electron–hole recombination at the time scale beyond a few picoseconds because of Ti doping.
Similarly, Ling et al.69 synthesized Sn-doped hematite nanowires and nanocorals, which possess improved PEC performance. The hematite nanowires were prepared by the hydrothermal method, followed by high-temperature sintering in air to incorporate Sn, diffused from the FTO substrate. XPS analysis confirms the Sn4+ substitution at Fe3+ sites in hematite, and Sn-dopant levels increase with sintering temperature. The Sn dopant serves as an electron donor and increases the carrier density of hematite nanostructures. The hematite nanowires sintered at 800 °C yielded a pronounced photocurrent density of 1.24 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (see Fig. 8). In comparison to nanowires, Sn-doped hematite nanocorals exhibit smaller feature sizes and increased surface areas. Significantly, they showed a remarkable photocurrent density of 1.86 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, which is approximately 1.5 times higher than that of the nanowires. Moreover, ultrafast laser spectroscopy studies revealed that there is significant electron–hole recombination within the first few picoseconds, likely caused by a high density of bandgap states due to surface or internal defects. Moreover, there is a smaller-sized, longer-lived component that is likely responsible for the photocurrent observed in PEC measurement. Sn doping and surface morphology have an insignificant effect on early time dynamics of the photoexcited charge carriers, but they have an important influence on the PEC results, indicating that their effects are important mainly on a longer time scale. The enhanced photoactivity in Sn-doped hematite nanostructures could be due to the improved electrical conductivity and increased surface area.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of hematite nanowires and Sn-doped hematite nanocorals sintered at 650 °C and comparison of J–V scans collected for hematite nanocorals (solid lines) and nanowires (dashed lines) sintered at 650 and 800 °C with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 1 M NaOH electrolyte (pH = 13.6) with the AM 1.5 G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2 (adopted from ref. 69). 
However, it is still debated as to whether the increase in conductivity of Ti-doped hematite is a result of the dopant acting as a donor or small-polaron hopping (Fe3+ + Ti4+ → Fe2+ + Ti3+).76 Apart from Si4+ and Ti4+, other tetravalent cations, such as Sn4+, Zr4+, and Ge4+, have also been incorporated into hematite. Carter et al. concluded that zirconium, silicon, or germanium doping is superior to titanium doping as the former dopants do not act as electron-trapping sites because of the higher instability of Zr3+(III) compared with Ti3+(III) and the more covalent interactions between silicon (germanium) and oxygen.77 However, the results of Glasscock et al.78 have indicated that titanium is a better dopant than silicon for improving hematite photoresponses.
In addition to nonisovalent substitutional doping, isovalent substitutional doping, such as Al3+, In3+, and Cr3+ doping, have also been investigated,61,79–81 including adding small quantities of dopants that could, in principle, form oxides that are isostructural with hematite, thereby directing the crystallinity of the hematite photoelectrode.61 Unlike nonisovalent substitutional doping that creates excess electron–hole pairs in the conduction process, Al3+ isovalent substitutional doping causes a contraction of the crystal lattice due to the smaller ion radius of Al3+ compared with Fe3+, which benefits the small polaron migration and results in improved hematite conductivity and photoresponse.80
Recently, composite Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 photoanodes were explored for PEC solar water splitting.82,83 Co-Pi was electrodeposited onto the surfaces of atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD)-grown α-Fe2O3 mesostructured thin films. Zhang et al. emphasized that a high degree of interfacial contact between the α-Fe2O3 and the catalyst layer is essential for rapid hole transfer from the oxide to the catalyst. The current–voltage characteristics of one such Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 photoanode compared with data from the bare α-Fe2O3 photoanode, both under frontside illumination in pH 13.6 and 1 M NaOH, shows a 180 mV cathodic shift in the PEC onset potential (at 0.68 V vs. RHE). The photocurrent can reach up to 1.4 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE. Thus, the modification of α-Fe2O3 surfaces with Co-Pi significantly reduces the external bias required for solar water splitting in a PEC cell, illustrating the advantage of effectively separating photons. Sustained solar water oxidation by Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 composite photoanodes was also demonstrated at lower pH levels. They performed a similar photocurrent–potential test with the same photoanodes measured instead in 0.1 M potassium phosphate (KPi) buffered at pH 8, which is the average pH of seawater, and a similar cathodic shift is observed (ca. 200 mV). Remarkably, J–V curves with the addition of 0.1 M NaCl are essentially indistinguishable from those without NaCl, demonstrating that PEC water oxidation with Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 composite photoanodes can be performed equally well in the presence of chloride (still has 1.4 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE). Oxygen-detection experiments show enhanced oxygen production even after several hours of illumination with enhancement factors comparable with those of the photocurrent, confirming sustained solar water oxidation by Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 composite photoanodes. The IPCE measurements of the composite Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 photoanode at 1.0 V vs. RHE showed that the photoresponse is exclusively due to α-Fe2O3 photoexcitation, indicating that Co-Pi functions solely as a surface electrocatalyst.82 Thus, the composite photoanode relies on efficient transfer of photogenerated holes from α-Fe2O3 to the Co-Pi catalyst layer. Therefore, appending Co-Pi to the α-Fe2O3 surface is a way to introduce well-defined surface hole traps instead of the poorly defined native surface states. This modification should enhance irreversible electron–hole separation and reduce unwanted carrier recombination processes. Overall, the composite Co-Pi/semiconductor photoanodes allow photon absorption, carrier separation, and redox surface catalysis to be effectively decoupled, yielding improved performance.
For quantum dot-assisted hematite photomaterials, a very successful example of adding a catalyst to hematite is when APCVD hematite electrodes were coated with IrO2 QDs.56 These electrodes were able to achieve an unsurpassed photocurrent density of 3 mA cm−2 at an applied potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE. Briefly, IrO2 nanoparticles (ca. 2 nm diameter) were deposited by electrophoresis onto the hematite photoanode. The surface concentration of iridium is about 1.0 at%. The IPCE was found to be more than 50% at λ = 320 nm and maintained a value of 21.4% closer to the band edge (λ = 500 nm). The proportionally larger increase at the longer wavelengths indicates that the improved nanostructure is better at harvesting longer wavelength photons and separating the electrons and holes to afford the water-splitting reaction before charge-carrier recombination occurs. It should be noted that the role of the IrO2 is assumed to be that of a catalyst, which accelerated water-oxidation kinetics of hematite. IrO2 QDs are one of the best-performing water-oxidation catalysts, and the most likely effect of the IrO2 QDs is catalysis. Future efforts should focus on the mechanism and kinetics of how IrO2 QDs accelerated the water-oxidation process of hematite.
4.3 WO3
N-type semiconducting tungsten trioxide, WO3, has been investigated since the mid-1970s for its application in PEC devices as a possible alternative to TiO2 photoanodes, which are sensitive only to light in the near-UV range. Due to its band gap energy of 2.5–2.7 eV, WO3 can capture approximately 12% of the solar spectrum and can absorb light in the visible spectrum up to 500 nm, which is the region of blue portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Given its band gap, WO3 is a more suitable material for PEC water splitting than TiO2 (Eg = 3.0–3.2 eV). In addition, WO3 has a moderate hole-diffusion length (∼150 nm) and good electron transport properties. WO3 exhibits high resistance against photocorrosion and good chemical stability in acidic aqueous solutions (pH < 4) under solar illumination. These features make it very promising as a photoanode material for PEC water oxidation. Considerable effort has been focused on developing various WO3 films as photoanodes for water oxidation. The valence-band edge of WO3 is located at approximately 3.44 eV (vs. NHE) and is sufficiently positive for the oxidation of water. However, the energy level of its conduction band is not sufficiently negative for the reduction of water. The more challenging factor is that WO3 is an indirect band gap semiconductor that requires a relatively thick film for absorbing a significant portion of light. A thick layer of active electrode material usually causes significant electron–hole recombination loss and decreased photoactivity. Moreover, WO3 is known to be thermodynamically unstable in an electrolyte solution with pH > 4 due to OH−-induced chemical dissolution, and it also suffers from photocorrosion induced by the peroxo-species created during water oxidation.84–86 In recent years, many strategies, such as morphological manipulation, elemental doping, and forming composite structures or heterojunctions, have been proposed to address one or more of these aforementioned limitations. One effective way for improving the photostability of WO3 is depositing a layer of an oxygen-evolution catalyst, such as cobalt- and manganese-based catalysts on the WO3 surface.86,87 The oxygen-evolution catalysts not only suppress the formation of the peroxide species on the electrode surface, but also reduce the overpotential of the WO3 photoelectrode for water oxidation.86 Nevertheless, the catalyst coating could block light penetrating into the WO3 electrode and cause a reduction in its photoactivity.
The most commonly used OEC for improving water-oxidation kinetics has been cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi).88–90 The structure and the mechanism of Co-Pi has been investigated elsewhere.91–93 Co-Pi is prepared by oxidizing Co2+ ions to Co3+ ions in a phosphate buffer (pH 7).91 The oxidation of Co2+ can be achieved either electrochemically by applying an appropriate bias or photochemically by utilizing photogenerated holes in a semiconductor having a VB edge at a more positive potential than the redox potential of Co2+/Co3+, which was first demonstrated by Steinmiller et al.94
For example, Seabold et al.86 studied the photo-oxidation reactions and photostability of electrochemically prepared WO3 and WO3/Co-Pi OEC photoanodes in a neutral 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (Fig. 9a and b). Compared to the bare WO3 photoanode, a significant portion of the photogenerated holes (ca. 39%) were used to form peroxo species, which accumulated on the WO3 surface resulting in a gradual loss of photoactivity. As a result of the pH of the electrolyte, the formation of tungsten peroxo species also resulted in the dissolution and structural disintegration of the WO3 electrode. However, when a thick Co-Pi OEC layer (>1.5 μm) was deposited on the WO3 electrode, all photon-generated holes were used for O2 production, indicating that the Co-Pi OEC can selectively enhance the O2 evolution reaction. The complete suppression of the peroxide species not only increased O2 production but also provided WO3 with long-term photostability. The micrometer-thick OEC layer also prohibited the chemical dissolution of the WO3 electrode in the neutral medium. The photocurrent–potential characteristics (Fig. 9c and d) showed that the Co-Pi OEC layer increased the photocurrent near the flat-band potential by reducing electron–hole recombination, which shifted the photocurrent onset potential by 170 mV to the negative direction. However, as the applied bias became more positive (>0.35 V), the WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode began to produce less photocurrent than the WO3 electrode, and the photocurrent difference became more pronounced as the applied potential was further increased. This phenomenon is due to Co ions at the planar WO3/Co-Pi OEC junction, which create interfacial states95 that shift the flat-band potential to the negative direction when occupied and to the positive direction when emptied, as confirmed by the Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. 9e and f). As a result, the WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode suffers less from electron–hole recombination than the WO3 electrode when the Fermi level is above the interfacial states and more when the Fermi level is below the interfacial states. Their study revealed the various effects that the Co-Pi OEC can have on a WO3 photoanode for solar O2 production, which can guide us to better design of photoanode/OEC systems. It is expected that with the use of more efficient WO3 anodes and proper interfacial optimization to control the interface states, a more efficient WO3/Co-Pi OEC system can be built.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images revealing the layers of a WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode deposited on an FTO substrate. (c) LSVs of a WO3 electrode (black) and a WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode (gray) in the dark and (d) the same electrodes under chopped illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) measured in 0.1 M KH2PO4 buffer (pH = 7) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The arrow in (d) indicates the onset potential of photocurrent. The slight cathodic dark current observed in (d) for the WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode between 0.4 and 0.8 V is due to the electrochemical reduction of Co3+ in the Co-Pi OEC layer to CO2+. The Mott–Schottky plots of (e) WO3 and (f) WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrodes at 1 kHz (○) and 5 kHz (●). The flat-band potential, VFB, was consistent, regardless of the changes in frequency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. 
Apart from the Co-Pi OEC, Mn was chosen as an effective OEC for WO3 in solar water splitting. The solid Mn-containing material is not manganese dioxide, according to elemental analysis and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, and atomic absorption spectroscopy.96 Although further study is needed to understand the exact structure of this catalyst and the nature of its working mechanism, its thermal stability, ease of fabrication, and unequivocal evidence for its catalytic properties compelled us to explore it in the heteronanostructure design. Deposition of the Mn catalyst is preferred for at least three reasons: (1) deposition is straightforward, (2) the coating does not compete with WO3 in light absorption, and (3) the catalyst facilitates hole transfer from the semiconductor to the solution.
For example, Liu et al.87 coated the surface of WO3 with the catalyst by thermal treatment of a solution of the abovementioned Mn complex at 75 °C. No measurable differences were observed in the absorption spectra of WO3 before and after deposition; i.e., solvation of the WO3 surface was insignificant. This observation also suggests that the catalyst poses no appreciable competition to WO3 in light absorption, which is an extremely important feature, because light absorbed by the catalyst would be wasted. Note that WO3 can be protected in non-acidic solutions by depositing other materials such as TiO2. Fig. 10a illustrates the proposed working mechanism of the semiconductor/catalyst system. Light is absorbed by WO3 to generate electrons and holes. The built-in field in WO3 helps concentrate electrons away from the solid/liquid interface to be collected by the supporting substrate, which is indium tin oxide (ITO). Holes are driven by the built-in field toward the solid/liquid interface, where they transfer to the solution to oxidize H2O. The oxidation process is mediated by the catalyst, which suggests that it works in a fashion similar to the oxo-bridged Mn2 catalyst; i.e., mixed-valent MnIII and MnIV are oxidized by the photogenerated holes from the semiconductor, and the product of the oxidation process is reduced by H2O to produce O2. A distinguishing feature of the WO3/Mn catalyst system is that no sacrificial oxidants are present for O2 generation. H2O oxidation by the Mn catalyst is effective and has fast kinetics. When measured in an electrolyte at pH 4, electrodes with and without the Mn catalyst coating exhibited significant differences in the PEC performance (Fig. 10b and c). This suggests that the presence of the catalyst facilitates charge transfer from the semiconductor to the solution, and the effect is more obvious when the charge density is high. As shown in Fig. 10d, the amount of O2 and H2 generated by the WO3/Mn catalyst electrode was also quantified. A large difference is observed for the electrodes with and without the Mn catalyst. Without the Mn catalyst, the amount of O2 measured was only approximately 50% of that with the Mn catalyst after 3 h. The protecting effect of the Mn catalyst was more pronounced when the electrodes were tested in less-acidic solutions. At pH 7, WO3 without the Mn catalyst decayed more quickly than at pH 4 (60% after 1 h), whereas an approximately 4% performance degradation was observed when the Mn catalyst was present (Fig. 10e) for up to 2 h.
 Fig. 10  (a) Proposed working mechanism of the WO3/Mn catalyst system. WO3 absorbs photons to create electrons and holes, the separation of which is assisted by the built-in field within the semiconductor. Electrons are collected and holes transferred to the catalyst to oxidize H2O. (b) PEC properties of ALD-grown WO3 and the WO3/Mn catalyst combination (illumination: Hg lamp, 100 mW cm−2) for brief I–V scans. □: WO3 with coating; Δ: WO3 only; ─ in the dark. (c) The differences between the absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (APCE) (○ and Δ) and the IPCE (□ and ◇). (d) Protecting effect of the Mn catalyst. With (gray ○) and without (black ○) the Mn catalyst are drastically different. (e) The difference between the performance of the electrode with the Mn catalyst (gray line) and without the catalyst (black line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. 
Most excitingly, Li's group demonstrated that the creation of oxygen vacancies in WO3 not only improves its photoactivity for water oxidation, but also helps to stabilize the WO3 electrode materials without the need for an oxygen-evolving catalyst coating.97 The WO3 nanoflakes were grown on a FTO glass substrate using a seed-mediated solvothermal method, followed by hydrogen treatment at different temperatures. During the hydrogenation process, low valency W components, such as W5+ and W4+, as well as oxygen vacancies that serve as shallow donors are created. Powder X-ray diffraction studies showed that oxygen vacancies were created by annealing WO3 nanoflakes in a hydrogen atmosphere. When the annealing temperature increased from 300 to 500 °C, the WO3 nanoflakes were converted into substoichiometric tungsten oxides, WO2.9 and WO2.92 (Fig. 11a). XPS studies confirmed the presence of lower oxidation states, such as W5+ (oxygen vacancies), in hydrogen-treated WO3 samples. Fig. 11b shows that the WO3 sample hydrogen treated at 350 °C achieved a maximum value of 0.50 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.22 V vs. RHE), which is about an order of magnitude enhancement compared with pristine WO3 at the same potential. The enhanced donor density is attributed to the introduction of oxygen vacancies, which serve as shallow electron donors,98 and therefore improves the charge transport in WO3−x and at the interface between FTO and WO3−x. The photocurrent densities of WO3 increase gradually with the increase of hydrogen-treatment temperature from 250 to 350 °C and decrease gradually with increasing temperatures when the annealing temperature is 400 °C or more. There are two possible explanations: first, WO3 transforms into WO2.9 during hydrogen treatment, and WO2.9 is known to be photoelectrochemically inactive for water oxidation;99 second, the resistance of the FTO substrate increased from 13 to 760 Ω as a result of degradation of the FTO layer (Sn-metal formation as confirmed by XRD results), which increases the voltage drop at the interface of WO3 and the substrate. IPCE studies revealed that the increased photocurrent is due to the improved photoactivity at wavelengths below 480 nm. This indicates that the optical band gap of WO3 remained unchanged, and the photocurrent enhancement was ascribed to the improved efficiency of the charge collection. The Mott–Schottky studies showed that the hydrogen-treated samples have much higher donor densities than pristine WO3 (Fig. 11c). The donor densities of WO3 and hydrogen-treated WO3 prepared at 350 °C are calculated to be 1.0 × 1019 and 5.0 × 1022 cm−3, respectively. More importantly, hydrogen-treated WO3 exhibited excellent stability without obvious photoactivity loss for at least 7 hours, while untreated WO3 retained only 20% of its initial photoactivity after 2 hours (Fig. 11d). The slight increase in the photocurrent with time could be due to self-activation and increase in the trap filling of the WO3−x sample.100,101 These I–t data are direct evidence of the fact that hydrogen treatment can stabilize the photoactivity of WO3 for water oxidation. This was attributed to the formed WO3−x, which is chemically stable in the presence of peroxide species and difficult to re-oxidize at ambient temperature.102
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD spectra of pristine WO3 and hydrogen-treated WO3 samples prepared at 350 and 500 °C. The diffraction peaks of WO3, FTO, WO2.9, WO2.92 and Sn metal are highlighted by red lines, black lines, *, + and #, respectively. (b) Representative I–V curves measured under 100 mW cm−2-simulated solar light generated by a 100 W xenon lamp coupled with an AM 1.5 G filter. (c) Mott–Schottky plots collected for WO3 and the hydrogen-treated WO3 sample prepared at 350 °C with a frequency of 10 kHz in the dark. Inset: magnified Mott–Schottky plot of the hydrogen-treated WO3. (d) I–t curves collected at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.60 V vs. RHE); insets: I–t curves for the first 200 seconds of irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. 
Increasing the light absorbance and improving the charge-carrier transportation are two of the main approaches in the recent development of solar water splitting; therefore, nanomaterials and their 3D nano-architecture designs are particularly promising in achieving these goals. It is important to note that material morphology plays an important role in determining PEC performance of WO3. For example, Su et al. recently reported a solvothermal method for fabricating WO3 nanowire and nanoflake arrays, and their implementation as photoanodes for PEC water oxidation.103 Recently, a novel 3D nanostructure was constructed by our group.104 We fabricated the 3D WO3 nanobranches on carbon paper via a one-step, high-temperature evaporation process by using tungsten powder as the source material in the presence of oxygen. Fig. 12a and b show the SEM images of carbon paper before and after the growth of WO3 nanostructures, respectively. It can be seen that the carbon paper was woven by carbon fibers with a diameter of 10 mm. The carbon fibers were uniformly covered by the 3D WO3 nanostructures after the growth process. The high yield of the product can be observed from the low-magnification SEM image in Fig. 12c. The high-magnification SEM image in Fig. 12d clearly demonstrates the shape of the 3D nanostructure, which is constructed by intercrossed nanowires with the orientation of three perpendicular directions. Fig. 12e shows that the UV-visible absorption spectrum of the 3D WO3 nanostructures. The Eg of 3D WO3 nanostructures can be calculated from the equation, (αhν)1/2 = A(hν − Eg). (Note that 1/2 here is for an indirect transition.) The estimated Eg for the 3D WO3 nanostructures is 2.62 eV, which indicates its ability to facilitate the visible light absorption. Fig. 12f shows that the 3D WO3 nanostructures exhibited a significant photocurrent density under visible-light irradiation. The large photocurrent density of 0.45 mA cm−2 is observed with +0.58 V vs. SCE (1.23 V vs. RHE). The good photocurrent stability under visible-light irradiation was proven by the steady and prompt photocurrent generation observed in the photocurrent vs. time curve (data not shown). We found that single-crystalline 3D WO3 nanorods can give an effective path for electron transport and thus effectively suppress electron–hole recombination. Furthermore, the 3D net structures grown directly on carbon paper can not only provide more active sites for the photoreaction, but also can facilitate the species transport and electron collection.
 Fig. 12  (a) and (b) are SEM images of the carbon paper before and after the growth of 3D WO3 nanostructures, respectively. (c) Low- and (d) high-magnification SEM images of the 3D WO3 nanostructures, respectively. (e) UV-vis absorption spectrum of 3D WO3 nanostructures. (f) Current density versus potential (J–V) curve of 3D WO3 nanostructures in the dark and under visible-light irradiation (>420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. 
For other modifications of WO3 photoanode material, Amal's group105 studied annealing temperature and crystallinity of the anodized WO3 materials and found them to be critical factors for PEC water splitting. Briefly, despite the film being annealed at 600 °C having the highest crystallinity among all the films, the one at 400 °C exhibited the highest PEC water-splitting performance. Its generated photocurrent of 0.05 mA cm−2 is highest among all the samples, and the current can be maintained for more than 3 h under visible-light irradiation (≥420 nm) in a two-electrode setup with Pt as the counter electrode and 0.1 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte solution. This is due to the difference in particle shapes and the sintering effect at high-calcination temperatures that decreases the effective surface area of the films and worsens the contact between WO3 and the charge-collecting electrode. Hence, the relatively good crystallinity of the sample at 400 °C and the preservation of morphology and highly effective surface area contributed to its highest performance in PEC water-splitting application.
Interestingly, Dr Bard's group106 used a rapid screening technique utilizing a modified scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) to screen photocatalysts and determine how metal doping affects the PEC properties of WO3. They characterized spot arrays of WO3 photocatalysts modified with various additives in compositions ranging from 0 to 15 atomic%. By examining a variety of ZnWO4/WO3 composites, a 9% Zn/W ratio produced the highest photocurrent over pristine WO3 with both UV and visible irradiation on a spot array electrode. With bulk films formed by a drop-casting technique of mixed precursors and a one-step annealing process, according to the SECM result, the 9 atomic% ZnWO4/WO3 resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in the photocurrent compared with pristine WO3 for both sulfite and water oxidation at 1.23 V vs. RHE (from 0.25 mA cm−2 to 0.67 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M Na2SO4, pH = 7). From the PEC data, ZnWO4 is only active in the UV portion of the spectrum and considerably less photoactive than WO3. However, when formed into a composite with WO3, electrons excited into the conduction band of ZnWO4 can transfer into the conduction band of the WO3. Any light not absorbed by the ZnWO4 will then pass into and be absorbed by the WO3. Similarly, the valence-band edge of the ZnWO4 is at a higher energy than the valence-band edge of the WO3; therefore, holes move from WO3 into the ZnWO4, thus promoting electron–hole separation. It should be noted that the rapid-screening SECM technique has attracted considerable attention among researchers in the last two years.
4.4 TaON and Ta3N5
In addition to BiVO4, WO3 and hematite-oxide photoelectrodes, some (oxy) nitrides, especially TaON and Ta3N5 semiconductors, possess both the narrow bandgap allowing visible-light absorption and the sufficiently negative level of conduction band for H2 production. Thus, they are considered as promising photoelectrode candidates for PEC water splitting. Specifically, Ta3N5, with an absorption edge at 600 nm, corresponding to a band gap energy of 2.07 eV, has been given much attention in recent years because it can collect more than 45% of the solar energy.107 It has favourable band-edges that straddle the redox potential of water photoelectrolysis,108 which, in principle, are required for PEC water splitting without external bias. In addition, the discrepancies between the conduction-band minimum and hydrogen-redox potential, as well as the valence-band maximum and oxygen-redox potential, provide an additional potential to compensate the required overpotential, which drives their respective half-reactions (water-reduction and water-oxidation reactions).109 Of the two half-reactions, water-oxidation reaction is more complex and challenging.109 TaON and Ta3N5 exhibit exciting water-oxidation quantum yields of 34% and 10%, respectively,110 which make them highly efficient unassisted photoelectrode candidates working under visible-light irradiation.111 Moreover, their maximum theoretical photoconversion (AM 1.5 G solar illumination; STH) can reach up to 15.9%.112
Although there have been reports about the fabrication of n-type photoanodes based on TaON or Ta3N5, their efficiencies were still low. Especially, the PEC performance of Ta3N5 has been far below expectations because insufficient crystallization upon thermal nitridation of the oxide precursors enhances undesirable charge recombination, which limits the quantum efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction; moreover, they also suffer from poor electrical conductivity and stability. For instance, during the PEC water-splitting process, Ta3N5 and TaON photoelectrodes have exhibited poor efficiencies (maximum IPCE 5.3% at 450 nm, 0.5 V vs. Pt in 1 M KOH)113 and highly discouraging photochemical stabilities (persisting only for several minutes) until Abe and coworkers made a substantial contribution to the highly efficient Ta3N5 (ca. 31% at 500 nm, 1.15 V vs. RHE) and TaON (ca. 76% at 400 nm, 1.15 V vs. RHE) photoelectrodes by using the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) method.114,115 They highlighted the importance of efficient contacts among the particles because efficient electron transport in the porous electrodes will be ensured by these bridge-like contacts.114,116 The rigid surfaces formed at high temperatures and the refractory characteristics of Ta3N5 or TaON materials need high-energy input to promote the sintering and necking of Ta3N5 or TaON particles. However, owing to the temperature limit of conducting glass substrates and the bad antioxygenic properties of Ta3N5 or TaON, effective contacts among Ta3N5 or TaON particles cannot be successfully formed by a simple heat treatment. The isolated particles significantly block electron transport, which results in low PEC efficiencies. The EPD method could be an alternative procedure, which is widely used for the fabrication of oxide or organic thin-film electrodes, and does not require any heat treatment. However, even with the application of the EPD method, some heat treatment is necessary to form effective contacts between semiconductor particles for electron transport, but at temperatures lower than the limit for the substrate. Recently, Higashi114 used this method to deposit TaON particles on an FTO substrate, and then applied a necking treatment to form effective contacts between the TaON particles with relatively low temperatures at less than 500 °C, resulting in significant increase of photocurrent. The effect of the post-necking treatment on the photocurrent of the TaON electrode was examined in detail. After the necking treatment under NH3 atmosphere, TaON bridges formed between TaON or Ta3N5 particles by nitriding the amorphous Ta2O5 bridges from TaCl5, producing a considerable increase in the photocurrent of the TaON (up to 1.3 mA cm−2 at 1.15 V vs. RHE) or Ta3N5 (up to 0.8 mA cm−2 at 1.15 V vs. RHE) photoelectrodes. For TaON photoelectrodes, the transformation of bridges from Ta2O5 to TaON enables better electron-transport pathways by forming more conductive TaON bridges and interconnected single-phase TaON film. Compared with TaON photoanodes, the inferior performance on Ta3N5 photoanodes may be associated with TaON bridges, in which relatively low electron transport may occur across the hetero-interfaces originating from the crystal-structure discrepancy between TaON and Ta3N5. Their work also found that the Ta3N5 surface has suffered more oxidation effect than the TaON surface.
The doping of Ta3N5 and TaON with appropriate ions may be a good way to obtain Ta3N5 and TaON materials with suitable conductivities and carrier densities. Because the concentration and lifetime of carriers also play vital roles in PEC performance, by increasing the carrier densities and conductivities of Ta3N5 and TaON, the separation and transfer of charge carriers will be improved. Recently, Ma et al.117 successfully modified the surface of the starting Ta2O5 with a small amount of alkaline metal (AM) salts. Compared with conventional Ta3N5, Ta3N5 nitrided from AM salt-modified Ta2O5 had better crystallinity and smaller particles with smoother surfaces and, most importantly, demonstrated a six-fold improvement in photocatalytic activity for O2 evolution under visible light. AM salt modification was compatible with the loading of an O2 evolution co-catalyst, such as CoOx, yielding an apparent quantum efficiency of 5.2% at 500–600 nm. This indicates that the effects of AM modification were attributable to the changes in the crystallinity and the morphology of Ta3N5 rather than to the catalytic effects. Detailed characterization of the Na2CO3-modified Ta3N5 suggested the partial dissolution of Ta2O5 and nucleation of NaTaO3 in the early stages of nitridation, which gave rise to the characteristic particle morphologies and improved the crystallinity of the nitridation products. Their study demonstrated that a facile pretreatment of the precursor can improve the physical and photochemical properties of photocatalysts drastically, enabling the development of advanced materials for solar water splitting.
Apart from meliorating the electronic properties of TaON and Ta3N5, the heterojunction of Ta3N5 and TaON by nanostructures may greatly benefit the separation of electron–hole pairs and promote hole consumption by water. Wang et al.118 prepared the TaON hollow spheres coupled with the surface-enriched Ta3N5 QDs by an in situ chemical reduction route in an ammonia solution at −45 °C. The composites containing 4 mol% Ta3N5 QDs showed a high rate of O2 production at 208.2 μmol h−1 (Fig. 13a) with an apparent quantum efficiency of 67% under 420 nm light. The rate of oxygen formation of the Ta3N5–TaON heterojunction was 3.3 times higher than that of the pristine TaON hollow spheres. The resulting 4 mol% Ta3N5–TaON heterojunction films exhibited a photocurrent of ca. 1.2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13b) under visible-light irradiation at 0.5 V vs. SCE (1.15 V vs. RHE) in a Na2SO4 solution. This excellent photocatalytic activity is ascribed to the Ta3N5 QDs that alter the energy levels of the conduction and valence bands in the coupled semiconductor system and the slow recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Moreover, the Ta3N5–TaON composite exhibited strong durability, which could be attributed to the inhibition of Ta3N5 QDs leaching, owing to its strong interaction with TaON.
 Fig. 13  (a) O2 evolution from aqueous AgNO3 solutions under visible-light illumination (λ > 420 nm) using nine Ta3N5–TaON composites with different molar ratios of Ta3N5 QDs. a: 2%, b: 4%, c: 6%, d: 8%, e: 10%, f: 20%, g: 60%, h: 0%, and i: 100%. (b) Photocurrent–potential curves for T0 (Ta3N5, 0%) and T4 (Ta3N5, 4%). Electrolyte: 0.5 M Na2SO4; a xenon lamp (λ > 400 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. 
Most importantly, the introduction of N 2p orbitals in the valence band generates a new problem in stability that needs to be solved. Most oxynitrides (e.g., TaON) undergo self-oxidative deactivation to some degree. In this reaction, photogenerated holes oxidize nitrogen anions (N3−) to N2 (2N3− + 6h+ → N2).119 Because self-oxidative deactivation proceeds competitively with water oxidation, the photocurrent of oxynitride photoanodes decreases rapidly on photoirradiation. Domen and co-workers demonstrated that the problem can be solved to a certain extent by loading an effective co-catalyst IrOx, which scavenges photogenerated holes and catalyzes water oxidation, on TaON photoanodes.114 However, loading the IrOx co-catalyst will result in the loose adhesion and poor distribution of IrO2 on TaON and Ta3N5 photoelectrode surfaces. Because holes in the bulk n-type semiconductors generally have short diffusion lengths, it is essential to achieve a good dispersion of the water oxidation co-catalyst in order to efficiently scavenge holes and suppress self-oxidative decomposition. The most challenging area is the fabrication of a highly stable TaON photoanode with novel, high-performance co-catalyst nanoparticles dispersed homogeneously on the surfaces of TaON particles, which can efficiently generate O2 under visible-light irradiation at a relatively low applied potential. In this regard, Higashi's120 group prepared a highly stable photoanode for PEC water splitting. Highly dispersed CoOx nanoparticles on the TaON photoanode efficiently scavenge photogenerated holes and effectively suppress self-oxidative deactivation of the TaON surface, resulting in a stable photocurrent. They also emphasized that a slightly basic sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 8) is indispensable for high PEC stability of TaON photoelectrodes; i.e., the use of highly dispersed CoOx co-catalysts on TaON together with phosphate solutions significantly increased the photocurrent and split water into H2 and O2 under visible-light irradiation at a relatively low applied bias (0.6 V vs. Pt counter electrode), due to the formation of a cobalt/phosphate phase (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a) Time courses of the photocurrent of CoOx/TaON electrode in aqueous (i) sodium phosphate buffer and (ii) Na2SO4 solutions (pH 8) at 1.07 V vs. RHE under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (b) Current–potential curves under chopped visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) for (i) unloaded TaON in aqueous Na2SO4 (pH 8), (ii) CoOx/TaON in aqueous Na2SO4 (pH 8), and (iii) CoOx/TaON in aqueous sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 8). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. 
To summarize, accelerating the kinetics of water oxidation by the application of robust OECs, melioration of material properties and the nanostructuring of semiconductors will substantially boost the practical application of unassisted, solar-driven H2 production by TaON and Ta3N5 photoelectrodes.
A comparative table summarizing the presented performance for the five selected materials has been prepared to help the reader better understand the presented data (Table 1).
Table 1 PEC performances of BiVO4, α-Fe2O3, WO3, TaON and Ta3N5 photoanodes




Photoanode
Preparation
Catalyst
Electrolyte
Photoresponsea
Ref.





a Compare at 1.23 V vs. RHE, AM 1.5. For Ta3N5–TaON, they are compared in the visible-light range.





Mo-doped BiVO4
Electrodeposition
Co-Pi
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.0 mA cm−2

40



Mo-doped BiVO4
Modified metal–organic decomposition method
RhO2
0.5 M K2SO4 (pH 7)
3.9 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 46% at 440 nm

41



BiVO4
Electrodeposition/photodeposition
FeOOH
0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)
IPCE ca.44% at 350 nm

42



BiVO4
Electrodeposition
FeOOH
0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)
1.75 mA cm−2

43



FTO/SnO2/BiVO4
Modified metal–organic decomposition method
—
0.5 M Na2SO4
IPCE 6.2% at 350 nm at 1.6 V vs. RHE

44



Gradient W-doped BiVO4
Spray pyrolysis
Co-Pi
0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)
3.6 mA cm−2

47



α-Fe2O3 nanorods
Hydrothermal
Co3O4
1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)
1.2 mA cm−2

65



Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes
Flame annealing
—
1 M KOH (pH 13.6)
1.1 mA cm−2

67



α-Fe2O3 nanowire
Hydrothermal
—
1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)
1.85 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 40% At 440 nm at 1.5 V vs. RHE

71



α-Fe2O3 nanotube
Electrochemical anodization
—
1 M KOH (pH 13.6)
1 mA cm−2

72



Ti-doped α-Fe2O3
Hydrolysis
—
1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)
2.83 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 12% at 420 nm

68



Sn-doped α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal
—
1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)
1.86 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 14% at 420 nm

69



α-Fe2O3
APCVD
Co-Pi
0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 8)
1.4 mA cm−2

83



α-Fe2O3
APCVD
IrO2 QDs
1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)
3.01 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 35% at 420 nm

56



WO3
Electrodeposition
Co-Pi
0.1 M KH2PO4 buffer (pH 7)
0.26 mA cm−2

86



WO3
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
Mn
1 M KCl with HCl (pH 4)
2.2 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 18% at 400 nm

87



WO3
Solvothermal method
—
0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH 6.8)
0.53 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 35% at 400 nm at 1.60 V vs. RHE

97



3D-WO3
High-temperature thermal evaporation
—
0.1 M Na2SO4
0.45 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm, 45 mW cm−2)

104



TaON
Electrophoretic deposition (EPD)
—
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 6)
1.4 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm)

114



Ta3N5
EPD
—
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 6)
0.9 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm)

114



Ta3N5–TaON composites

In situ chemical reduction method
—
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.25 mA cm−2 (λ > 400 nm)

118



TaON
EPD
CoOx
Sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 8)
2.5 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm) and IPCE ca. 42% at 400 nm

120





5. Strategies
Based on the previous discussion, we have reported the most recent progress in using novel photoanode materials for harvesting visible-light energy and the material designs for solar water splitting. Various nanoarchitectures, such as nanoparticles, including nanotubes, nanowires, nanofibers and nanorods, in addition to nanocorals, were introduced with reference to their application in constructing photoanodes for PEC water splitting. Therefore, various methods for effectively converting solar energy into hydrogen can be summarized in several points, including band structure modification, morphology manipulation, quantum dot sensitization, the formation of heterostructures, and co-catalyst modification. Fig. 15 presents these strategies for efficiently harvesting visible-light energy that were summarized in this section. The strategies 1–3 are used to harness solar light by increasing absorbance in the visible light regions, while strategies 4–5 improve the charge-carrier transportation by utilizing assistant materials, such as WO3/BiVO4, highly conducting Si nanowires and co-catalysts (Co-Pi, Mn).
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the different approaches to the improvement of photoactivity for visible-light-driven water splitting. 
(1) To modify a photoelectrode's band structure via inhomogeneous or homogeneous doping is a powerful strategy not only for modifying the electronic structure but also for tailoring the surface structure. If the foreign dopants in a semiconductor material have the proper configuration and distribution, they will optimize its electronic structures for efficiently harvesting sunlight.
(2) Manipulating the morphology of a photoelectro-material is a direct way to improve its PEC performance. For example, in our previous work,104 single-crystalline 3D WO3 nanorods can provide an effective path for electron transport and effectively suppress electron–hole recombination. Moreover, the 3D net structures can not only provide more active sites for the photoreaction, but also can facilitate the species transport and electron collection.
(3) Quantum dot sensitization in wide band gap semiconductor materials can effectively capture the visible region of the solar spectrum for the photoanode. The absorption spectra of QDs can easily match the solar spectrum because the absorption can be controlled by changing the size of the QDs. First and foremost, the size-quantization effect allows one to tune the visible response and vary the band energies to modulate the charge transfer across different-sized particles. Secondly, size quantization drives the energy to more favorable levels to initiate charge injection from the excited QDs into semiconductor particles. In addition, these QDs open up new ways to utilize hot electrons121 or generate multiple charge carriers with a single photon.122 These are the specific advantages in using QDs as light-harvesting assemblies in PEC cells, improving the solar-energy absorption efficiency.
(4) In the hetero-structural approach, usually a hetero-nanostructure consisting of two or three different kinds of semiconductor/conducting material is formed. The second material in this structure may improve the collection efficiency of photogenerated electrons from the excited semiconductor.
(5) Lastly, it is reported that some metals and other compounds (Mn, Co-Pi) can serve as co-catalysts for the evolution of either hydrogen or oxygen because they can provide an energetically favorable position for charge carriers (electrons–holes) and active sites for the evolution of gas. Therefore, further research in this area should focus more attention on improving the efficiency and practicality of the visible-light-driven PEC water-splitting system, especially the development of high-efficiency and cost-effective materials.
6. PEC/DSSC tandem cells
There is a weak point in the photoelectrochemical approach of solar hydrogen production. Electricity for applied potential is often needed for some semiconductors whose conduction-band level is more positive than hydrogen-evolution potential. In order to compensate for this weak point, a combination process of a photovoltaic cell and PEC water-splitting system is a practical path to solar hydrogen production.47,123 The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is an example of this class of photovoltaic devices and thus has attracted significant attention for use in solar water splitting tandem cells with a stable photoanode.124,125 This is based on two photosystems connected in series as shown in the electron-flow diagram in Fig. 16a. A thin film of nanocrystalline such as WO3 or Fe2O3 serves as the top electrode absorbing light from the blue region of the solar spectrum. The valence-band holes (h+), created by the band gap excitation of the film oxidize water to oxygen, and the conduction-band electrons are fed into the second photosystem consisting of the dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 cell (DSSC). The latter is placed directly under the WO3 film, capturing the green and red region of the solar spectrum that is transmitted through the top electrode. The photovoltage generated by the DSSC enables hydrogen to be generated by the conduction-band electrons. The overall reaction corresponds to the splitting of water by visible light. There is a close analogy to the ‘Z-scheme’ (named for the shape of the flow diagram) that operates in photosynthesis as illustrated in Fig. 16b.
 Fig. 16  (a) Structure of tandem cell system composed of oxide semiconductor photoelectrode and DSSC. (b) The Z-scheme of photocatalytic water splitting by a tandem cell. (c) Three current–potential curves of WO3 photoelectrode systems, i.e., a mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode (red), a tandem cell system composed of the abovementioned WO3 photoelectrode and a single DSSC (blue) and a tandem cell system composed of two-series-connected DSSC (green), under simulated solar-light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Electrolyte: 0.1 M H2SO4 aqueous solution. Reproduced from ref. 116. 
In practice, tandem devices with WO3 have been constructed by Park and Bard126 and Arakawa et al.127 However, similar to the a-Si-based devices, two DSSCs connected in series to the photoanode were necessary to afford overall water splitting. This was accomplished by positioning these two DSSCs side by side behind the WO3 photoanode. Fig. 16c shows I–V curves of three different systems under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 one sun). The red curve shows the I–V characteristic of mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode with the film thickness of ca. 1.5 μm. The onset of the photocurrent of this system was about 0.7 V vs. RHE. The steady-state photocurrent of 2.25 mA cm−2 reached at 1.2 V vs. RHE in this system. Blue curve shows I–V characteristic of a tandem cell system composed of a mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode and a single cell of DSSC. The onset of the photocurrent of this system shifted negatively about 0.7 V, which is almost the same value of the photovoltage of a single cell of DSSC (about 0.2 mA cm−2 and 0.05 V without any applied potential in this system). Note that the improvement of the photocurrent was not significant, which indicates that a single-cell tandem system is not useful for a WO3 photoelectrode system. The green I–V curve shows the other tandem cell system composed of a mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode and a two-series connected cell of DSSC, which has a photovoltage of 1.4 V. The onset of the photocurrent of this system shifted about 0.7 V again negatively down to −0.7 V. In this case, the photocurrent at 0 V applied potential was 2.1 mA cm−2. The STH efficiency of this tandem cell system using a two-series connected cell of DSSC was 2.58%, which was about six times higher than that of the mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode (0.44%) at the applied potential of 0.9 V vs. RHE. Thus, a significant improvement of STH efficiency was observed by a tandem cell system composed of a mesoporous WO3 and a two-series connected cell of DSSC. As illustrated from their optical and electronic characteristics, it is important to note that reduced light harvesting caused by scattering and reflection strongly affected the overall conversion efficiency; moreover, they attenuated the light transmitted to the middle and back cells and caused the DSSC photocurrent to limit the overall performance of the tandem cell. Future device engineering should focus on improving performance by reducing reflection, scattering, and resistive losses.
7. Summary and outlook
In this contribution, some recent promising photoresponsive nanostructured materials in the visible-light range, such as BiVO4, α-Fe2O3, WO3, TaON and Ta3N5, which can have applications in the field of solar-driven water splitting have been reported. Although all of the photoelectrodes mentioned above have some characteristics in common, such as narrow band gaps and visible-light activity, their performance in PEC water splitting is different due to their unique nature. BiVO4, α-Fe2O3 and WO3 are composed of inexpensive elements with the valence-band (VB) edge located over 1.23 V vs. NHE, providing sufficient overpotential for holes to photo-oxidize water, whereas the conduction-band (CB) edge is located at a slightly more positive than the thermodynamic level for H2. In this case, an external bias voltage is usually needed for the hydrogen evolution. Therefore, tandem PEC/DSSC systems become very promising for unassisted solar water splitting for them. The band gaps of BiVO4, α-Fe2O3 and WO3 are slightly larger than that desired for a photoanode (ca. 2.0 eV); however, for efficiently utilizing visible light, the CB position may compensate for this disadvantage. As for TaON and Ta3N5, they are potential candidates for solar-induced overall water splitting, because they possess both the narrow band gap allowing visible-light absorption and the sufficiently negative level of conduction band for H2 production. The CB edges of these oxynitrides consist predominantly of empty orbitals of the metal, resulting in high-energy levels similar to those of corresponding metal oxides. On the other hand, the valence bands of the oxynitrides are more negative than those of oxides due to the hybridization of N 2p with O 2p orbitals. Consequently, oxynitride materials possess appropriate band levels for water splitting, which drives their respective half-reactions (water-reduction and water-oxidation reactions), as well as a narrow band gap allowing visible-light absorption. This indicates that a TaON photoelectrode has the potential to produce H2 and O2 from water under visible light, even without an externally applied bias, which is the main difference from the other three visible-light-sensitive oxide semiconductor electrodes previously discussed that require a considerable applied bias to produce H2 because the CB levels of the three electrodes are low for the water-reduction reaction. Specifically, TaON and Ta3N5, with the ability to collect nearly 45% of the solar energy,97 exhibit exciting water-oxidation quantum yields of 34% and 10%, respectively.100 This confirms their high efficiency in working under visible-light irradiation without assistance.101
We also summarize a brief list of the factors that influence the PEC performances of a visible-light-responsed photoelectrode. To develop more efficient photoanode materials, it is necessary to narrow the band gaps to harvest visible light in the longer wavelength regions and enhance the photogenerated charge separation in photocatalysis. Thus, all of the factors such as electronic properties, chemical composition, structure and crystallinity, surface states, and morphology will determine the photocatalytic activity of such materials, and they need to be further elucidated in great detail. Firstly, a photoelectrode's electronic structure is the most important factor in determining its PEC properties. Bandgap engineering for the modification of the band structure of semiconductor photocatalysts using ion doping, semiconductor sensitization, or solid solutions present significant opportunities to strengthen the activity of such materials in the visible-light region. For example, doping with elements is often used to improve the PEC performances of photoelectrodes, for enhancing visible-light absorption in wide band gap photoelectrodes or promoting carrier transport in narrow band gap photoelectrodes, respectively. The crystallinity and crystal structure, surface structure, and morphology of photocatalysts on nanoscales need to be investigated systematically and modified to optimize the preparation process and refine the materials for maximizing efficiency. These are the factors that have a major impact on charge separation, mobility, and the lifetime of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Especially, photoelectrodes with nanostructures (such as nanorods, nanotubes, and mesoporous and hierarchical structure) and hierarchical structures exhibit some advantages such as shortening the transfer distance, which increases the surface area and enhances light absorption. The crystallinity of the photoelectrode favors charge transport, thus improving the PEC performances. The loading of cocatalysts on the surface of the host photocatalysts has been shown to be rather effective in inhibiting charge recombination. Surface treatments and electrocatalysts are highly effective ways not only to enhance IPCE and STH but also improve the photochemical stability. Alternatively, more economical co-catalysts, such as the non-noble metals (Mn)79 and other derived metal-based compounds (Co-Pi),80 also need to be further studied as possible substitutes for some frequently used noble metals such as Pt, which is very expensive but efficient. Finally, identifying the solar water splitting mechanism, particularly the identification of any thermodynamic and kinetic bottlenecks, is a subject for future research. Moreover, new insights would facilitate the design of the most effective PEC cells for water splitting.
Presently, the available efficiency for overall water-splitting systems for simultaneous hydrogen and oxygen production under visible-light irradiation is still low due to fast charge recombination and backward reactions. Moreover, the CB level of some semiconductors is located at more positive than the hydrogen-evolution potential. To achieve enhanced and sustainable hydrogen production, the continual addition of electricity is required to make up half of the water-splitting reaction to reduce H2O to H2. In this regard, a combination process of a DSSC and PEC tandem cell is a practical path to solar hydrogen production. The excited electrons at the CB of a photoanode can be effectively and irreversibly fed into the DSSC, thus prohibiting an undesirable charge recombination. The DSSC can also provide sufficient electricity to reduce hydrogen, which is very promising for unassisted solar water splitting. Further consideration and study should focus on the mechanisms and reaction kinetics of such a PEC tandem cell. The goal for the practical application is interesting in light of worldwide energy and environmental concerns.
Indeed, there is a bright future for the practical use of PEC cells. Hence, although many impressive results have been achieved, innovations and developments in new photoelectrode materials, structures and conceptions are still required. We hope that this article will provide some inspirations for researchers to follow up the progress of improving novel sunlight-driven narrow band gap semiconductor strategies and to design and develop new potential materials for solar water splitting with higher efficiency.
Acknowledgements
The authors are sincerely thankful to Dr C. B. Mullins for his suggestions in modifying our manuscript. We acknowledge the financial support of this work by the Natural Science Foundations of China (21273290, 91323101 and J1103305), the Integration of Production and Research Projects of the Ministry and Guangdong Province (2011B090400618), and the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20120171110043).
Notes and references

          N. S. Lewis and G. Crabtree, US Department of Energy Report, Washington, DC,  2005 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel, J. Mason and V. Fthenakis, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 64 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Glass, D. Von der Linde and T. Negran, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Joshi, A. Palasyuk, D. Arney and P. A. Maggard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2719 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Chen and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5085 Search PubMed .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Matsumura, Y. Saho and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 3807 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Reber and M. Rusek, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumura, S. Furukawa, Y. Saho and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1327 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Darwent and A. Mills, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1982, 78, 359 RSC .
W. Erbs, J. Desilvestro, E. Borgarello and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4001 CrossRef CAS .
R. Williams, J. Chem. Phys., 1960, 32, 1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Ellis, S. W. Kaiser, J. M. Bolts and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 2839 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Kim, D. W. Hwang and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kato, M. Hori, R. Konta, Y. Shimodaira and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Hwang, H. G. Kim, J. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. Li and S. H. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, K. Sayama and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, D. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3983 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saison, N. Chemin, C. Chaneac, O. Durupthy, V. Ruaux, L. Mariey, F. Mauge, P. Beaunier and J.-P. Jolivet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5657 CAS .
Z. Y. Zhao, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4746 RSC .
A. Walsh, Y. Yan, M. N. Huda, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 547 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, S. H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. A. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 155102 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhao, W. J. Luo, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Phys. Lett. A, 2010, 374, 4919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, Z. Zou, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2908 RSC .
Q. Jia, K. Iwashinaa and A. Kudo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 11564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, W. Bi, Y. Zeng, R. Zhu, M. Tao and Y. Xie, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893 RSC .
D. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Huang, R. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Liu, C. Tong and Z. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 6285 RSC .
H. C. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Ming, H. T. Li, L. L. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10501 RSC .
H. T. Li, X. D. He, Z. H. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, S. Y. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. B. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028 CAS .
W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046 CAS .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8553 CAS .
P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S. Y. Kishioka, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, H160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S. Kishioka1, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781 CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 Search PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Eggleston, Science, 2008, 320, 184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van de Krol, Y. Q. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311 RSC .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772 CAS .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. M. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dareedwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027 RSC .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Wang, T. Yu, X. Y. Chen, H. T. Zhang, S. X. Ouyang, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 3925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, J. Solid State Chem., 1996, 126, 227 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bjoerksten, J. Moser and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 858 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Sartoretti, M. Ulmann, B. D. Alexander, J. Augustynski and A. Weidenkaff, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 194 CrossRef .
V. R. Satsangi, S. Kumari, A. P. Singh, R. Shrivastav and S. Dass, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Duret and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xi, P. D. Tran, S. Y. Chiam, P. S. Bassi, W. F. Mak, H. K. Mulmudi, S. K. Batabyal, J. Barber, J. S. C. Loo and L. H. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13884 CAS .
F. L. Formal, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Cornuz, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, C.-Y. Lee, A. Mazare, K. Lee, J. Muller, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Ling, G. M. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. A. Moiz, S. M. Imran, A. M. Nahhas, F. Rehman, M. M. Ahmed, H.-T. Kim and J.-H. Lee, 2012 International Conference on Emerging Technologies (ICET),  2012, p. 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, J. Reddy, C. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. LaTempa, X. Feng, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16293 CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Rangaraju, A. Panday, K. S. Raja and M. Misra, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 135303 CrossRef .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Augustynski, B. D. Alexander and R. Solarska, Top. Curr. Chem., 2011, 303, 1 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477 CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y.-S. Hu, A. J. Forman, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15900 CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. F. Yan, G. D. Stucky, Y. S. Hu, M. M. Al-Jassim and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 510 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Schumacher, N. S. McIntyre, S. Mamiche-Afara and M. J. Dignam, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 277, 121 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Lillard, G. S. Kanner and D. P. Butt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anik and T. Cansizoglu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Y. J. Lin, L. Y. Chou, S. W. Sheehan, W. S. He, F. Zhang, H. J. M. Hou and D. W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028 CAS .
F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398 CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109 RSC .
Y. Surendranath, D. A. Lutterman, Y. Liu and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Margaritondo, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1999, 62, 765 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, C. Cady, G. W. Brudvig and H. J. M. Hou, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2011, 366, 128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180 CAS .
S. K. Deb, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1977, 16, 1020 CrossRef CAS .
S. O'Neill, I. P. Parkin, R. J. H. Clark, A. Mills and N. Elliott, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2004, 10, 136 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. M. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Wakim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1970, 1, 479 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tamboli, S. Seal, V. Desai and A. Maury, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1999, 17, 1168 CAS .
J. Z. Su, X. J. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. J. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Zhang, X. H. Lu, Y. Q. Shen, J. B. Han, L. Y. Yuan, L. Gong, Z. Xu, X. D. Bai, M. Wei, Y. X. Tong, Y. H. Gao, J. Chen, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5804 RSC .
C. Ng, Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5269 CAS .
K. C. Leonard, K. M. Nam, H. C. Lee, S. H. Kang, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15901 CAS .
H. X. Dang, N. T. Hahn, H. S. Park, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19225 CAS .
W. J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Betley, Q. Wu, T. V. Voorhis and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 736 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Catal. Today, 2003, 78, 555 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, T. J. LaTempa, J. I. Basham and G. K. Mor, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Higashi, R. Abe and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4138 CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. K. Ma, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda, Y. Moriya and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Hou, S. Jiao, K. Huang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21972 RSC .
G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1698 RSC .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Ross and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, CATTECH, 1999, 3, 3 Search PubMed .
J. H. Park and A. J. Bard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, E5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Arakawa, C. Shiraishi, M. Tatemoto, H. Kishida, D. Usui, A. Suma, A. Takamisawa and T. Yamaguchi, Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology II,  2007, vol. 6650, p. 65003 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Jiayong Gan	Jiayong Gan earned his B.S. degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2010. He was a graduate student under the guidance of Prof. Yexiang Tong in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University. Currently, he is a joint graduate student in the lab of Prof. C. Buddie Mullins at the University of Texas, Austin. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, metallic nanocrystals and semiconductor nanomaterials for photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Xihong Lu	Dr Xihong Lu earned his B.S. degree in applied chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008, and then earned his doctoral degree in 2013 under the guidance of Prof. Yexiang Tong at Sun Yat-Sen University. During 2011–2013, he was a visiting graduate student in Prof. Yat Li's lab at University of California, Santa Cruz. He is now a lecturer in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research interests are the development of functionally nanostructured materials for photoelectrochemical/photocatalytic water splitting, supercapacitors, and Li-ion batteries.
Yexiang Tong	Prof. Ye-Xiang Tong earned his B.S. in General Chemistry in 1985, his M.S. in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and his Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He joined Sun Yat-Sen University as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 1988. His current research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal-oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications for energy conversion and storage.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the basic principles of water splitting for a PEC cell with an n-type semiconductor photoanode (where oxygen is evolved) and cathode (where hydrogen is evolved).	 
	(1)
η = 100% × J(E°rex − E)/Ilight	(2)
ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059pH + E°Ag/AgCl (E°Ag/AgCl = +0.199 V)	(3)
STH = 100% × J × 1.229/Ilight	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of bandgap positions of several semiconductor photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of the BiVO4 nanoplates. (b) HRTEM image of the BiVO4 nanoplate with the SAED pattern (inset) recorded from the white-framed area indicated in (a). (c) TEM image of one single BiVO4 nanorod. (d) HRTEM image and SAED pattern (inset) taken from the white frame area indicated in (c). (e) Potentiodynamic scans under chopped illumination for BiVO4 nanoplates and nanorods. Electrolyte: 0.1 M Na2SO4, a 300 W Xe lamp. Reproduced from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) SEM images of the BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes and Co-Pi OEC nanoparticles electrodeposited on the porous BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrode for 10 min; (c) chopped light photocurrent–potential characteristics of the Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 and (d) BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 electrodes performed at 1 h (black-above) and 24 h (red-below) of continuous illumination (100 mW cm−2) in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH 7, phosphate buffer). Reproduced with permission from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 5  Performance of Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification illuminated from the front side in natural seawater and 0.5 M K2SO4 aqueous solution. (a) Photocurrent–potential curves in AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight, (b) IPCE spectra collected for Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification at 1 V vs. RHE. Light source: a xenon lamp (full-arc, λ > 300 nm). (c) IPCE spectra collected for BiVO4, Mo-doped BiVO4, and Mo-doped BiVO4 with RhO2 surface modification with the same test conditions as (b) electrolyte: natural seawater. (d) Photocurrent–potential curves illuminated from the back side and the front side with the same condition as (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Overlay of Fe 2p XPS spectra of A-hematite (black dashed curve) and N-hematite (solid red curve) films together with their difference spectrum (“N-hematite” minus “A-hematite”). The dashed lines highlight the satellite peaks for Fe3+ and Fe2+. (b) Mott–Schottky plots measured for A-hematite (squares) and N-hematite (circles) nanowire films. The x-intercepts of the linear fitting best-fit lines were used to estimate the flatband potential (VFB). Inset: magnified Mott–Schottky plot of N-hematite. (c) Linear sweep voltammograms collected for A-hematite (black lines) and N-hematite (red lines), at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, in a NaOH electrolyte solution (1 M, pH = 13.6) under illumination by simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 (solid lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). (d) The corresponding IPCE spectra for A-hematite (dot/line) and N-hematite (square/line), collected at potentials of 1.23 and 1.50 V vs. RHE (red and orange, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 7  Top-view (a) and side-view (b) SEM images of α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays prepared by anodization of Fe foil at a potential of 50 V in ethylene glycol (adopted from ref. 72).	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of hematite nanowires and Sn-doped hematite nanocorals sintered at 650 °C and comparison of J–V scans collected for hematite nanocorals (solid lines) and nanowires (dashed lines) sintered at 650 and 800 °C with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 1 M NaOH electrolyte (pH = 13.6) with the AM 1.5 G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2 (adopted from ref. 69).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images revealing the layers of a WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode deposited on an FTO substrate. (c) LSVs of a WO3 electrode (black) and a WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode (gray) in the dark and (d) the same electrodes under chopped illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) measured in 0.1 M KH2PO4 buffer (pH = 7) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The arrow in (d) indicates the onset potential of photocurrent. The slight cathodic dark current observed in (d) for the WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrode between 0.4 and 0.8 V is due to the electrochemical reduction of Co3+ in the Co-Pi OEC layer to CO2+. The Mott–Schottky plots of (e) WO3 and (f) WO3/Co-Pi OEC electrodes at 1 kHz (○) and 5 kHz (●). The flat-band potential, VFB, was consistent, regardless of the changes in frequency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Proposed working mechanism of the WO3/Mn catalyst system. WO3 absorbs photons to create electrons and holes, the separation of which is assisted by the built-in field within the semiconductor. Electrons are collected and holes transferred to the catalyst to oxidize H2O. (b) PEC properties of ALD-grown WO3 and the WO3/Mn catalyst combination (illumination: Hg lamp, 100 mW cm−2) for brief I–V scans. □: WO3 with coating; Δ: WO3 only; ─ in the dark. (c) The differences between the absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (APCE) (○ and Δ) and the IPCE (□ and ◇). (d) Protecting effect of the Mn catalyst. With (gray ○) and without (black ○) the Mn catalyst are drastically different. (e) The difference between the performance of the electrode with the Mn catalyst (gray line) and without the catalyst (black line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD spectra of pristine WO3 and hydrogen-treated WO3 samples prepared at 350 and 500 °C. The diffraction peaks of WO3, FTO, WO2.9, WO2.92 and Sn metal are highlighted by red lines, black lines, *, + and #, respectively. (b) Representative I–V curves measured under 100 mW cm−2-simulated solar light generated by a 100 W xenon lamp coupled with an AM 1.5 G filter. (c) Mott–Schottky plots collected for WO3 and the hydrogen-treated WO3 sample prepared at 350 °C with a frequency of 10 kHz in the dark. Inset: magnified Mott–Schottky plot of the hydrogen-treated WO3. (d) I–t curves collected at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.60 V vs. RHE); insets: I–t curves for the first 200 seconds of irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) and (b) are SEM images of the carbon paper before and after the growth of 3D WO3 nanostructures, respectively. (c) Low- and (d) high-magnification SEM images of the 3D WO3 nanostructures, respectively. (e) UV-vis absorption spectrum of 3D WO3 nanostructures. (f) Current density versus potential (J–V) curve of 3D WO3 nanostructures in the dark and under visible-light irradiation (>420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) O2 evolution from aqueous AgNO3 solutions under visible-light illumination (λ > 420 nm) using nine Ta3N5–TaON composites with different molar ratios of Ta3N5 QDs. a: 2%, b: 4%, c: 6%, d: 8%, e: 10%, f: 20%, g: 60%, h: 0%, and i: 100%. (b) Photocurrent–potential curves for T0 (Ta3N5, 0%) and T4 (Ta3N5, 4%). Electrolyte: 0.5 M Na2SO4; a xenon lamp (λ > 400 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Time courses of the photocurrent of CoOx/TaON electrode in aqueous (i) sodium phosphate buffer and (ii) Na2SO4 solutions (pH 8) at 1.07 V vs. RHE under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (b) Current–potential curves under chopped visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) for (i) unloaded TaON in aqueous Na2SO4 (pH 8), (ii) CoOx/TaON in aqueous Na2SO4 (pH 8), and (iii) CoOx/TaON in aqueous sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 8). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120.	 


Mo-doped BiVO4	Electrodeposition	Co-Pi	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.0 mA cm−2	
40

Mo-doped BiVO4	Modified metal–organic decomposition method	RhO2	0.5 M K2SO4 (pH 7)	3.9 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 46% at 440 nm	
41

BiVO4	Electrodeposition/photodeposition	FeOOH	0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)	IPCE ca.44% at 350 nm	
42

BiVO4	Electrodeposition	FeOOH	0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)	1.75 mA cm−2	
43

FTO/SnO2/BiVO4	Modified metal–organic decomposition method	—	0.5 M Na2SO4	IPCE 6.2% at 350 nm at 1.6 V vs. RHE	
44

Gradient W-doped BiVO4	Spray pyrolysis	Co-Pi	0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7)	3.6 mA cm−2	
47

α-Fe2O3 nanorods	Hydrothermal	Co3O4	1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)	1.2 mA cm−2	
65

Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes	Flame annealing	—	1 M KOH (pH 13.6)	1.1 mA cm−2	
67

α-Fe2O3 nanowire	Hydrothermal	—	1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)	1.85 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 40% At 440 nm at 1.5 V vs. RHE	
71

α-Fe2O3 nanotube	Electrochemical anodization	—	1 M KOH (pH 13.6)	1 mA cm−2	
72

Ti-doped α-Fe2O3	Hydrolysis	—	1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)	2.83 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 12% at 420 nm	
68

Sn-doped α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal	—	1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)	1.86 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 14% at 420 nm	
69

α-Fe2O3	APCVD	Co-Pi	0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 8)	1.4 mA cm−2	
83

α-Fe2O3	APCVD	IrO2 QDs	1 M NaOH (pH 13.6)	3.01 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 35% at 420 nm	
56

WO3	Electrodeposition	Co-Pi	0.1 M KH2PO4 buffer (pH 7)	0.26 mA cm−2	
86

WO3	Atomic layer deposition (ALD)	Mn	1 M KCl with HCl (pH 4)	2.2 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 18% at 400 nm	
87

WO3	Solvothermal method	—	0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH 6.8)	0.53 mA cm−2 and IPCE ca. 35% at 400 nm at 1.60 V vs. RHE	
97

3D-WO3	High-temperature thermal evaporation	—	0.1 M Na2SO4	0.45 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm, 45 mW cm−2)	
104

TaON	Electrophoretic deposition (EPD)	—	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 6)	1.4 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm)	
114

Ta3N5	EPD	—	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 6)	0.9 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm)	
114

Ta3N5–TaON composites	
In situ chemical reduction method	—	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.25 mA cm−2 (λ > 400 nm)	
118

TaON	EPD	CoOx	Sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 8)	2.5 mA cm−2 (λ > 420 nm) and IPCE ca. 42% at 400 nm	
120


 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the different approaches to the improvement of photoactivity for visible-light-driven water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Structure of tandem cell system composed of oxide semiconductor photoelectrode and DSSC. (b) The Z-scheme of photocatalytic water splitting by a tandem cell. (c) Three current–potential curves of WO3 photoelectrode systems, i.e., a mesoporous WO3 photoelectrode (red), a tandem cell system composed of the abovementioned WO3 photoelectrode and a single DSSC (blue) and a tandem cell system composed of two-series-connected DSSC (green), under simulated solar-light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Electrolyte: 0.1 M H2SO4 aqueous solution. Reproduced from ref. 116.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
