A progressive journey into 2D-chalcogenide/carbide/nitride-based broadband photodetectors: recent developments and future perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02820K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02820K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14532-14572A progressive journey into 2D-chalcogenide/carbide/nitride-based broadband photodetectors: recent developments and future perspectives

        
          
            Sukhendu 
            Maity
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Krishnendu 
            Sarkar
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Praveen 
            Kumar
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, 700032, India. E-mail: praveen.kumar@iacs.res.in
Received 
      17th June 2021
    , Accepted 14th September 2021First published on 22nd September 2021AbstractPhotodetection is one of the important technologies discussed in current scientific and technological circles because of its undeniable and widespread applications in industry and research. The application of conventional bulk semiconductors (GaN, Si, CdS, and InGaAs) to photodetection in industry is being gradually minimized due to poor mechanical firmness (rigidity) and flexibility, the need for expensive substrates, and low charge-carrier mobility. However, 2D materials other than graphene, including transition-metal chalcogenides, nitrides, and carbides, are paving the way towards obtaining more advanced outcomes and overcoming the bottleneck conditions imposed by conventional semiconductors due to their extraordinary electronic and mechanical properties, including flexibility, tunable bandgaps, high mobilities, and abundant potential for heterojunction construction. Due to the recent boom in 2D photodetection research, the area has become so broad and versatile that an organized account of relevant scientific information has become necessary. A categorized review is essentially required to cover topics including 2D material synthesis schemes, assembly techniques, device integration, spectral characteristics, the scope for heterojunctions, and future research directions. This review focuses on the application of 2D materials to photodetection, including comprehensive coverage of synthesis/assembly techniques, heterojunctions, and performance in different spectral regions, including solar-blind, visible, near-infrared, and broadband detectors. We further extend our discussion to hybridized van der Waals heterojunctions (vdWHs) with conventional semiconductors and the application of these materials as photodetectors. Finally, we give a comparative illustration of photodetector performance parameters, providing a clear picture of the acceptability of these materials for use in the development of next-generation photodetectors.
1. Introduction
A photodetector (PD) converts an input optical signal into a desired electrical output, and its applications are important in different fields, including healthcare, security, environmental monitoring, communications, manufacturing, space exploration, and many more.1–4 Commercial PDs are made using inorganic semiconductors (like Si and Ge), compound semiconductors (III–V and II–VI compounds), and alloys (e.g., AlGaN and InGaAs). Depending on the wavelength, these semiconductors can be used in three different spectral ranges, for example, GaN in the UV region; Si in the visible-to-NIR region; and InGaAs in the IR region.5,6 However, the main disadvantages of these materials when used in PDs are (i) their rigid crystalline structures, which create a lack of mechanical flexibility, (ii) limited bandgap variations, (iii) complexity in processing, which results in high production costs, (iv) the need for expensive substrates, and (v) the use of high operating biases, potentially limiting their application in cost-effective and energy-efficient photodetection. Interestingly, these shortcomings can be effectively resolved due to the emergence of 2D materials (2DMs) in the fields of electronics and optoelectronics. The strong intralayer covalent bonds and weak van der Waals (vdWs) interlayer bonding in 2D materials are responsible for their distinguishable two-dimensional morphologies. These 2D materials have certain advantages over bulk materials when it comes to photodetection, specifically (i) large surface to volume ratios, which give higher efficiencies; (ii) tunable bandgaps due to quantum confinement, which are suitable for obtaining a wide spectral response; (iii) good mechanical flexibility, which is essential for wearable devices; and (iv) high carrier mobilities, which allow high-speed optoelectronic devices. Although ultrahigh carrier mobility and flexibility can be readily achieved in graphene, its intrinsically low optical absorption is not favourable for efficient photodetection. Graphene needs to be integrated as a channel material with other photoactive materials, e.g., perovskites, fluorescent quantum structures, conventional semiconductors, etc. While the importance of graphene as an effective channel material for photodetection cannot be denied,7–9 its intrinsic zero bandgap results in short carrier lifetimes, limiting its reliability for use in optoelectronics, including PDs and solar cells.10 Materials scientists are more interested in introducing 2DMs, including transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), and emerging transition-metal carbides/nitrides (Mxenes), for PD applications. Furthermore, their applications in different scientific areas are rapidly growing, as available reports on the number of published documents over the past two decades show an almost exponential increase in several interdisciplinary directions, as indicated in Fig. 1(a) and (b).
 Fig. 1  Progress relating to 2D-material-based PDs. (a) The number of published reports in each year from 2000 to 2020 and (b) a pie chart showing the versatile applications of 2D-material-based PDs in different scientific areas. Data collected from a Scopus search; criteria: “2D material photodetector”. 
Available reviews on 2D-material-based PDs have considered limited aspects of 2DMs, focusing on some associated applications. Yao et al. presented detailed discussion relating to the application of 2D chalcogenide semiconductors in PDs focusing only on the broadband range. They described 2D chalcogenide-based heterojunctions briefly with 0D and 3D materials.11 Similarly, Qiao et al., in their review, limited their discussion to 2DM-based p–n junctions, Schottky junctions, and PEC-type PDs with a self-powered mode.12 In addition, Dong et al., in their impressive review, described only flexible PDs based on 2DMs (graphene, TMDCs, van der Waals heterostructures).13 Zhang et al. presented a brief discussion of 2D hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) for different optoelectronics applications, exploring photodetection in a limited way.14 Recently, Wang et al. elaboratively covered 2DMs for photodetection in the case of MXenes only.15 Zhang et al., in their recent review on transition-metal carbides and nitrides, covered optoelectronics applications in general and barely emphasized photodetection.16 On a similar topic, Xu et al., in their progress report, demonstrated recent advances in 2D-MXene-based photodetection.17 Wang et al., in their impressive review, focused only on infrared photodetection using 2DMs, and their van der Waals heterojunctions with other nanostructures (0D, 1D, and 2D).18 Qiu and Huang, in their review, covered the application of 2DMs in the region spanning from UV to terahertz; however, their discussion was limited only to graphene, black phosphorous, TMDCs, and associated methods to improve photodetection through the use of defect engineering, heterojunctions, and hybrid structures.19 2D materials have been reviewed recently for photodetection in limited spectral regions without emphasizing device architectures and synthesis/assembly aspects.20,21 Given the available literature, the necessity for a comprehensive review covering all functional aspects of 2DMs for PD applications, including synthesis and assembly schemes, heterojunction possibilities, and hybrid structures, is perceived. In order to fill the gaps between the available narrow-focus reviews, we have progressively discussed a wide range of 2D chalcogenide, h-BN, g-C3N4, and MXene materials for PD applications in different spectral ranges, including solar-blind, UV, visible, NIR, and broadband detectors. Furthermore, we have discussed the advantages of using 2DMs in self-powered, flexible, and transparent PDs. Finally, we broadly collate performance data from efficient heterojunctions with Si, III–V, oxide, and perovskite semiconductors, followed by assessing future perspectives.
2. Materials for photodetection
Fast in-plane carrier mobilities and large active surface areas make 2D TMDCs suitable candidates for photodetection compared to other bulk materials. Beyond graphene, at present, available 2D photoactive materials like chalcogenides, nitrides (h-BN and g-C3N4), and MXenes are getting significant attention in the optoelectronics field. This section deals with the different properties of 2DMs, including their bandgap tunability and carrier mobility, that are relevant to photodetection. Fig. 2 shows schematic diagrams of various 2D materials with their bandgaps and representative crystal structures.
 Fig. 2  A schematic diagram of different 2D materials with their optical bandgaps and representative crystal structures. 
2.1 2D chalcogenides
Layered chalcogenides offer high absorption and bandgap tunability over a broad spectral range upon varying their thicknesses. 2D chalcogenides are constructed from transition-metal (Mo and W) or post-transition-metal (Ga, Ge, In, and Se) elements with group-16 elements (S, Se, and Te), and they exhibit different configurations such as MX, MX2, and M2X3 (M and X represent the metal element and chalcogen element, respectively). Table 1 demonstrates the bandgap variations for 2D chalcogenides in both bulk and monolayer forms.
Table 1 The bandgaps of 2D chalcogenide in both bulk and monolayer forms




Type of 2D chalcogenide
Material
Monolayer bandgap (eV)
Bulk bandgap (eV)
Ref.




TMDC
MoS2
1.8
1.23

23 and 24



MoSe2
1.66
1.1

29



WS2
2.1
1.3

34



WSe2
1.67
1.21

246



Group III–VI monochalcogenide
GaS
2.59
1.61

247



GaSe
2.35
0.99

49



InSe
2.11
1.26

51



Group IV–VI monochalcogenide
GeS
1.69
1.21

54



GeSe
1.7
1.08

59



SnS
1.96
1.24

248



SnSe
1.33
1.00

248



A2B3-Type chalcogenide
Bi2S3
1.7
1.3

67 and 69



Bi2Se3
—
0.3

249



In2S3
2.7
2.0

250



In2Se3
2.8
1.45

251






2.1.1 Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) [MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2]. 
The shortcomings associated with graphene, like its low optical absorption (2.3%) of incident radiation, which gives low responsivity, and the absence of an electronic bandgap, which does not allow spectral selectivity, can be overcome by the use of two-dimensional atomic layered transition-metal dichalcogenides, for example, MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, with their direct and finite tunable bandgaps.22 It is possible to tune the bandgaps of these 2D TMDCs via varying the number of layers in the crystal. MoS2 in bulk form is an indirect-gap semiconductor with a bandgap of 1.2 eV,23 whereas the single-layer example shows a wider direct band gap of 1.8 eV due to the quantum confinement effect.24 Further, MoS2 offers a high carrier mobility of about 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an excellent current on/off ratio of ∼108 in monolayer form when integrated with a top-gated field-effect transistor.25 However, due to the high density of states present in multilayer form compared to monolayer MoS2, the multilayer form is more convenient for obtaining a broader spectrum response, from the ultraviolet (UV) to the near-infrared (NIR) range.26 A schematic diagram of the MoS2 crystal structure is shown in Fig. 3(b). In spintronics, monolayer molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2) is more desirable compared to MoS2 due to its more considerable spin-splitting energy of 180 meV at the top of the valence band.27 It has been experimentally proven by low-temperature photoluminescence studies that MoSe2 monolayer shows much faster response (25 ms) compared to CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer (30 s). This has been attributed to the comparably weaker bond-exciton energy, and, as a result, PDs made with MoSe2 work much faster.28 MoSe2 offers an indirect bandgap of 1.1 eV in bulk form, which changes to a direct bandgap of 1.66 eV when the number of layers is reduced to a monolayer.29
 Fig. 3  The crystal structures of 2D chalcogenides. (a) A schematic diagram of GaS as a representative monochalcogenide (taken from ref. 240 with permission). (b) A schematic diagram of MoS2 as a representative TMDC (taken from ref. 241 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of In2Se3 as a representative A2B3-type chalcogenide (taken from ref. 181 with permission). 
Tungsten disulfide (WS2), another typical TMDC group member, has demonstrated a more comprehensive working temperature range than other TMDC materials, suggesting superior thermal stability for comprehensive applications.30 Among different semiconducting TMDCs, WS2 is one of the more remarkable materials for optoelectronics, due to its strong light emission properties,31 the existence of the spin–valley coupling phenomenon,32 and a predicted carrier mobility that is higher than those of the above-mentioned TMDCs, such as MoS2 and MoSe2.33 It also exhibits the potential for bandgap tuning from an indirect value of 1.4 eV (bulk) to a direct value of 2.0 eV (monolayer) due to the quantum confinement effect.34 As well as MoS2, MoSe2, and WS2, tungsten diselenide (WSe2) can also be used as a photon-sensing material for PDs. WSe2 is a layered semiconductor with a bulk indirect bandgap of ∼1.2 eV,35 while its monolayer shows a bandgap of 2.02 eV with an exciton binding energy of 0.37 eV.36 It is possible to achieve higher mobility of 50 cm2 V−1 s−1 during the p-type operation of a WSe2 monolayer top-gated field-effect transistor with a very high on–off ratio of 106.37 Das et al. found that Ni contacts are desirable for electron injection; in contrast, Pd contacts are better suited for hole injection into the WSe2 channel, proving the ambipolar behaviour of this material.38 Depending on the bias voltage, an ambipolar phototransistor can efficiently transport both electrons and holes. Bartolomeo et al. found that, by controlling the air pressure, the ambipolar conduction in WSe2 in a back-gated configuration can be tuned.39 The authors demonstrated a notable change in the p-type channel conductivity intrinsic to WSe2 to n-type conductivity as the vacuum increased, with a gradual decrease in the subthreshold swing. This is attributed to the desorption of adsorbed moisture and oxygen from the WSe2 surface and the possible pinning of the Fermi level to the minimum conduction band.
Some noble-metal-based (Pd and Pt) TMDCs have gained significant attention in the past few years. These noble TMDCs show strong layer-dependent properties, and interlayer interactions arise as a result of the nearly fully occupied d orbitals and the highly hybridized PZ orbitals of the interlayer chalcogen atoms. Palladium diselenide (PdSe2) is an isolated material with a pentagonal structure. It shows n-type conduction caused by Se vacancies, and monolayer PdSe2 shows puckered morphology where each Pd atom is coordinated with four Se atoms.40,41 As another noble TMDC, platinum diselenide (PtSe2) is a p-type gapless semi-metal in its bulk form, while it shows a bandgap of 1.2 eV in layer form. It shows certain advantages, like high carrier mobility, weak chemical reactivity with oxygen, and low-temperature formation. Both positive and negative photoconductivity can be achieved via varying the environmental pressure.42,43


2.1.2 Monochalcogenides: group III–VI [GaS, GaSe, and InSe]. 
One typical example of a layered 2D semiconductor from group III–VI is gallium sulfide (GaS). With layers consisting of S–Ga–Ga–S repeating units stacked along the c-axis and built from six-membered Ga2S3 rings,44 it shows two different stoichiometries, i.e., GaS and Ga2S3. Schematic diagrams of the GaS crystal structure are shown in Fig. 3(a). It has wide indirect and direct bandgaps, with energy values of 2.59 and 3.04 eV, respectively, at 300 K.45 In addition, gallium selenide (GaSe), which belongs to the same group as GaS and generally displays p-type semiconducting properties, shows an indirect bandgap of 2.11 eV, which is only 25 meV lower than its direct bandgap.46 Several different types of crystal structures have been reported for GaSe, like β-GaSe, ε-GaSe, γ-GaSe, and δ-GaSe. Among them, ε-GaSe is the most stable phase, showing AB stacking sequences.47 In ε-GaSe, the intralayer interatomic distances between Se–Ga, Ga–Ga, and Se–Se bonds are 2.485 Å, 2.383 Å, and 4.766 Å, respectively, whereas the interlayer distance between Se–Se bonds is reported to be 3.840 Å.48 One primary advantage of GaSe is its direct bandgap in the bulk phase and indirect bandgap in monolayer form. This transition is opposite to that seen in TMDCs, which show a crossover from an indirect-gap to a direct-gap semiconducting nature in single monolayer form, making it a good potential material for optoelectronics and terahertz (THz) based applications.49 Bulk indium selenide (InSe) has a confined direct bandgap of 1.3 eV, which is significantly lower than GaS (2.59 eV) and GaSe (2.1 eV). The response can extend over a broad range of the solar spectrum, giving a broader spectral response than GaS and GaSe.50 It also shows crossover from a direct to an indirect bandgap as the layer thickness is reduced to a monolayer. InSe is found to be a direct bandgap semiconductor in multilayer form, and it can be tuned from 1.26 eV in bulk form to 2.11 eV in monolayer form at room temperature.51 Further, InSe exhibits higher carrier mobility (104 cm2 V−1 s−1) and higher responsivity than GaS and GaSe under similar experimental conditions (incident wavelength, excitation intensity, and driving bias), rendering InSe as a more desirable material in optoelectronics, including PDs and solar cells.52


2.1.3 Monochalcogenides: group (IV–VI) [GeS, GeSe, SnS, and SnSe]. 
Germanium sulfide (GeS) displays p-type semiconducting properties due to Ge vacancies, and it is a layered semiconductor with a distorted rock-salt orthorhombic structure.53 It also exhibits strong optical absorption across a wide spectral range (from the visible to the near-infrared region), which is useful for broadband optoelectronics. 2D layered GeS has a relatively long carrier lifetime of <600 ps,54 and the existence of many trapping states also positively affects the photoresponsivity.55 The bandgap of GeS decreases from 1.69 eV to 1.21 eV as the layer number increases from monolayer to bulk form.54 Orthorhombic structures of GeS display very low toxicity and, notably, the higher stability than black phosphorous (BP) under normal or steady-state conditions brands GeS as a promising material for optoelectronics.56 Further, due to the direct bandgap of 1.7 eV observed for monolayer germanium selenide (GeSe), out of all the materials in the IV–VI group, it is considered as having some of the best photoresponsive properties in the NIR region.57 Its high absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1 is comparable with black phosphorous. Further, GeSe also shows p-type semiconducting properties, with a hole mobility and concentration of 120 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.31 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, at room temperature.58 The bandgap of GeSe can be varied between an indirect gap of 1.08 eV (bulk) and a direct gap of 1.7 eV (monolayer).59
Tin sulfide (SnS) is another example from the same group; it displays p-type semiconducting behaviour, has a layered orthorhombic crystal structure, and exhibits direct and indirect bandgaps of 1.5 eV and 1.2 eV in its monolayer and bulk forms, respectively.60 Its optical absorption range extends widely from the visible to the near-infrared region, making it an important material for photovoltaics61 and broadband PD62 applications. It is possible to achieve intrinsic p-type conductive SnS with a high absorption coefficient and ultra-high carrier mobility of 5 × 104 cm−1 and 10000–38000 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.63 Tin selenide (SnSe), also from the same group as SnS, is a promising binary p-type semiconductor material with a wide range of potential applications, being suitable for use in areas such as memory switching devices, infrared optoelectronic devices, and anode materials with improved lithium-ion diffusivity.64 The energy conversion efficiency of SnSe (10.4%) is larger than GeSe (7.2%) in bilayer form, making it superior for solar cell applications.65 The bandgap of monolayer SnSe is 0.89 eV, which lies between semi-metallic graphene (0–0.3 eV) and TMDCs (1.2–2.1 eV).66


2.1.4 A2B3-Type chalcogenides [Bi2S3, Bi2Se3, In2S3, and In2Se3]. 
Bismuth sulfide (Bi2S3) is an ideal candidate for use in scalable broadband PDs due to its bulk direct bandgap of 1.3 eV and significant absorption coefficient over a wide spectral range from the visible to the near-infrared region.67 It has a typical lamella-type structure, and its mobility and absorption can be as high as 105 cm−1 and 200 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.68 Its bandgap can be tuned from 1.3 eV to 1.7 eV via varying the thickness and/or grain size.69 One basic advantage of Bi2S3 is the abundant availability of sulfide and bismuth in the earth's crust; therefore, it is one of the most cost-effective materials for the optoelectronics industry.70 Comparably, bismuth selenide (Bi2Se3) displays a very narrow bandgap of 0.3 eV with high carrier mobility, and it has topological insulation properties.70 It has a rhombohedral crystal structure of five atoms per unit cell, and the atomic arrangement can be considered as involving repeating units. Each consists of five atomic Se–Bi–Se–Bi–Se layers, called a quintuple layer, which are weakly bound by van der Waals forces with a slightly covalent nature.71 Indium sulfide (In2S3) is a non-layered semiconductor whose bandgap varies between 1.9 and 2.2 eV, and it shows spontaneous n-type semiconducting properties due to the natural sulfur vacancies.72 It exists in three different phases, namely, α-In2S3 (defective cubic), β-In2S3 (defective spinel), and γ-In2S3 (layered structure). The formation of these phases depends on the synthesis temperature.73 It can be sensitive to near-infrared radiation because natural vacancy defects cause multiple defect states near the band edge.74 The most stable structure is β-In2S3 (tetragonal) at room temperature, and this is used as a photoconducting buffer layer.75 Another group member is indium selenide (In2Se3), which shows a narrow bandgap of 1.3 eV with a layered crystal orientation, and it is a material of interest for the optoelectronics community, including for solar cell and photodetector applications.76,77 It exhibits the distinguishable property of retaining its direct bandgap nature regardless of its thickness, unlike common TMDCs.78 One of the main problems relating to In2Se3 is the existence of multiple phases (α, β, γ, δ, and k) in a single film. Because of the coexistence of different phases, most of the results become contradictory and even confusing.79 A schematic diagram of the In2Se3 crystal structure is shown in Fig. 3(c). Its use has been reported for multiple applications, including solar energy harvesting, non-volatile phase-change memory, etc.80,81

2.2 Special 2D nitrides [h-BN and g-C3N4]
Boron nitride (BN) is isoelectronic to a carbon lattice, and it consists of an equal number of boron and carbon atoms. It has three main types of configuration: graphite-like hexagonal BN (h-BN), diamond-like cubic BN (c-BN), and wurtzite BN (w-BN).82 Among them, h-BN is the most stable BN phase under standard conditions and it consists of a hexagonal grid composed of B and N atoms arranged in ABAB form along the c-axis.83 A schematic diagram of the h-BN crystal structure is shown in Fig. 4(a). As an insulating 2D material, h-BN has attracted research interest due to its atomically flat surfaces, high breakdown field, low dielectric constant, and exceptional mechanical strength.84,85 Two-dimensional h-BN has lattice mismatch with graphene of less than 1.7%. Therefore, it is very much used in graphene electronics, and single layer h-BN is even called “white graphene”.86 It is possible to achieve thermal conductivity of 400 W m−1 K−1 using bulk h-BN, while a value of 100–270 W m−1 K−1 can be obtained for few-layer 2D h-BN at room temperature, which is promising for optoelectronic devices operating at high temperature.87 h-BN has a wide bandgap, suitable for deep ultraviolet photodetection. The bandgap properties of h-BN have been investigated experimentally and theoretically, and reports have argued both for the direct and indirect nature of the bandgap. According to the literature, the bandgap energies of h-BN range from 3.6 to 7.1 eV.88 Another 2D layered material is carbon nitride (C3N4), which is suitable for photocatalytic water-splitting applications due to its catalytic activity. C3N4 can exist in various configurations, including the cubic phase, semi-cubic phase, α-phase, β-phase, and graphitic phase (g-C3N4). Fig. 4(b) presents schematic diagrams of tg-C3N4 and hg-C3N4. 2D g-C3N4 is the most useful material, being a typical n-type semiconductor with good electrical conductivity and a large surface area.89 The major building blocks of g-C3N4 are tri-s-triazine rings, which are made of C6N7, connected through planar tertiary N bridges.90 g-C3N4 exhibits high levels of blue photoluminescence and good photocatalytic properties under visible excitation; these properties can be utilized well for photodetection purposes through the use of suitable heterojunctions and channel materials.
 Fig. 4  The crystal structures of 2D nitrides and carbides. (a) A schematic diagram of h-BN (taken from ref. 242 with permission). (b) Schematic diagrams of tg-C3N4 and hg-C3N4 (taken from ref. 243 with permission). (c) Schematic diagrams of Ti2CTx and Ti3C2Tx (taken from ref. 244 with permission). 
2.3 2D transition-metal carbides and nitrides (Mxenes)
Mxenes are a new class of materials, generally referred to as 2D transition-metal carbides, carbonitrides, and nitrides, used in a wide range of applications, including electrochemical storage, electromagnetic interference shielding, catalysis, and water splitting.91,92 Mxenes have the typical general formula Mn+1Xn or Mn+1XnTz (n = 1–3), where M represents a transition metal such as Sc, Mo, or Ti, X represents carbon or nitrogen, and Tz represents active functional groups such as fluoride ions (F−), oxygen ions (O2−), or hydroxyl groups (OH−) that are connected to the surface of the Mxene.93 According to the value of n, Mxenes can be divided into three types: M2X, M3X2, and M4X3. The first MXene, Ti3C2, was obtained in 2011 by Naguib et al., introducing a new type of material to the 2D family.94 According to their findings, the same Mxene can be semiconducting (Ti3C2(OH)2 and Ti3C2F2, with bandgaps of 0.05 eV and 0.1 eV, respectively) or metallic (Ti3C2), depending on the existence of surface functional groups. Interestingly, the transparency of Mxenes (Ti3C2Tz) can be varied depending on the thickness (up to 91.2% for a 5 nm-thick sample), making them eligible to act as transparent electrodes.95 Schematic diagrams of both Ti3C2TX and Ti2CTX are given in Fig. 4(c). Another attractive aspect of Mxenes is their adjustable work functions, with a broad range from below 2.14 eV (the lowest work function of all metals, that of cesium) to over 5.65 eV (the highest work function of all metals, that of platinum).96 Several Mxenes, like Ti3C2 and Mo2C, have been used for photodetection applications in conjunction with conventional semiconductors, and further investigations are underway aimed at integrating Mxenes with photosensitive materials.97,98
3. Photodetection mechanisms and figures of merit
Photocurrent generation mechanisms
A photodetector is an optoelectronic device that can convert absorbed radiation into an electrical signal, such as photocurrent or photovoltage. Several photocurrent generation mechanisms have been reported; in the following discussion, we introduce three main methods of photocurrent generation.
The photoconductive effect
A photoconductor consists simply of a slab of semiconductor as a channel with ohmic contacts affixed to the opposite ends. When incident light falls on the surface of a photoconductor, photons with energies larger than the bandgap of the semiconductor can create electron–hole pairs (excitons), either via band-to-band transitions (an intrinsic semiconductor) or via forbidden energy-gap transitions (an extrinsic semiconductor), increasing the conductivity. With the help of an applied bias, these photoexcited electron–hole pairs are separated and drift in opposite directions towards the electrodes; as a result, an increase in photocurrent is observed. As electrons have much higher mobilities compared to holes, they have much shorter transit times compared to holes; under such conditions, electrons are swept out of the electrode quickly, but as holes demand charge neutrality, more electrons are supplied from the other electrode, and electrons go through many loops during their lifetime. Therefore, the gain of the photoconductor is given by the ratio of the electron transit time to the hole lifetime. The response time of a photoconductor depends on the hole lifetime, so there is always a trade-off between photoconductive gain and the response speed.
The photogating effect
The photogating effect is a particular example of the photoconductive effect. Under illumination, photogenerated electron–hole pairs are generated, and if any one type of carrier is trapped in trap states within the bandgap of the semiconductor, the charged trap states can function as localized floating gates, which can influence the channel conductance. A slow de-trapping process effectively prolongs the lifetime of trapped carriers due to multiple carriers being generated per single photon. Through this effect, the gain of the detector can be enhanced, although it gives a slower response time.
The photovoltaic effect
In photovoltaic mode, electron–hole pairs are generated upon photon incidence at the depletion region, and they are separated by a built-in potential in a p–n junction (a photodiode) or a Schottky junction (a metal-semiconductor junction). For high-speed operation, the thickness of the depletion region is kept thin, which reduces the transit times of carriers. Again, to obtain an increased number of electron–hole pairs per incident photon, the thickness of the depletion layer must be kept thick. Therefore, there is always a trade-off between the response speed and quantum efficiency. The depletion layer width for a p–n photodiode is in general 1–2 μm; the smaller active area promotes the generation of lower numbers of electron–hole pairs, resulting in poor quantum efficiency. To overcome this issue, an additional intrinsic semiconductor is sandwiched between the p- and n-type materials to increase the width of the depletion layer; this is called a p–i–n photodiode. Avalanche photodiodes are another special p–n photodiode case, in which a high reverse bias is applied and the device is operated via an avalanche regime. When the incident photon generates the primary electron–hole pair, under an adequate reverse bias, the primary electron can gain enough kinetic energy to break a covalent bond, creating a secondary electron–hole pair. The primary and secondary carriers are accelerated by the depletion field and may again create tertiary electron–hole pairs. The multiplication process gives rise to an increased photocurrent. A primary hole can also initiate an ionization process. In this process, one initial electron or hole may generate extra electron–hole pairs, giving carrier multiplication.
In general, photon detectors can be classified into two main groups: (i) photo-emissive detectors, in which the excited electrons are emitted from a photosensitive electrode into the surrounding medium, which may be either a vacuum or a gas; and (ii) solid-state detectors. The basic operations involved in photodetection in a solid-state detector are (a) carrier generation upon incident illumination; (b) carrier transport and/or multiplication via a current gain mechanism, if present; and (c) the extraction of carriers as a terminal current to provide the output signal. The main concept behind photodetection involves the primary photoelectric effect, i.e., the relationship between the photon energy (hν), energy transition (ΔE), and wavelength (λ):  To specify the performance of a PD, some important parameters are used.
Responsivity (R)
This is the ratio between the photocurrent generated in the detector and the incident optical power: (1)where Iph is the photocurrent and Pin is incident optical power.
External quantum efficiency (EQE)
This is equal to the number of electron–hole pairs collected to generate the photocurrent per unit time divided by the number of incident photons per unit time: EQE = (Iph/e)/(Pin/hν)(2)
Noise equivalent power (NEP)
This is the minimum detectable optical power at which the electrical signal-to-noise ratio of the detector is equal to unity at a bandwidth of 1 Hz: (3)where Inoise is the current noise.
Detectivity (D)
This is the inverse of the NEP, which implies the minimum detectable power of the device. When D is normalized to the detector optical area and bandwidth (Δf), the resulting parameter is the specific detectivity (D*): (4)
Gain (G)
This describes the ratio of recirculated carriers in the circuit to the incident photons. If Γlife and Γtransit are the carrier lifetime and carrier transit time, respectively, then:  
Rise time (Γrise) and fall time (Γfall)
The electronic response time is the response speed of the device based on two terms: rise time and fall time. They are critical parameters for describing the performance of a PD. The rise time is the time taken to go from 10% to 90% of the maximum photocurrent and the decay time is the reverse.
Linear dynamic range (LDR)
this is used to characterize the light intensity range in which the PD has constant responsivity: (5)
4. Synthesis and assembly methods
4.1 2D chalcogenides
There are various methods for synthesizing 2D chalcogenides for photodetection applications and, in general, they can be divided into two broad types: top-down and bottom-up. We will discuss these one-by-one.

4.1.1 Top-down methods. 
Top-down techniques mainly focus on separating individual or few layers from bulk crystals. Because in layered van der Waals materials, individual layers are stacked via weak van der Waals forces, it is easy to separate them via physical exfoliation. This mainly involves mechanical exfoliation or liquid exfoliation.
4.1.1.1 Mechanical exfoliation. 
Mechanical exfoliation is one of the simplest ways to produce individual 2D layers from the bulk via applying mechanical force. Graphene was the first material derived from graphite through a micromechanical cleavage technique, as reported by Geim and Novoselov.99 In a typical micromechanical exfoliation process, thin-layered crystals are first scraped off from the bulk crystal using adhesive Scotch tape. The freshly cleaved thin crystals on the Scotch tape are then brought into contact with the target substrate and rubbed to cleave them further. After the Scotch tape is removed, single-layer and multilayer nanosheets are left on the substrate. Fig. 5(a) shows the different steps involved in the mechanical exfoliation of a 2DM. Following this approach, Yin et al., for the very first time, fabricated a single-layer MoS2 channel-based phototransistor with a thickness of 0.8 nm using low-cost cellophane tape. However, the estimated mobility of the device was very poor (0.11 cm2 V−1 s−1).100 Pradhan et al. presented a few-layered WSe2 transistor with mobility of up to 350 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an average thickness of 2.3 nm for the WSe2 channel using a similar technique.101 Hou et al. reported few-layered Bi2S3 as a high-sensitivity short-wave infrared PD, using PDMS adhesive tape, with an average thickness of 58 nm.102 By using the same method, many few-layer or multilayer 2DMs have been reported, like MoS2,103 GaS,104 WS2,105 InSe,106 In2Se3,107 GaSe,108 GeS,55 GeSe,109etc. The intrinsic crystal structures and properties are well maintained in these mechanically exfoliated layers. However, this approach does not allow for the systematic control of flake thickness and size. Therefore, this method is not suitable for large-scale industrial production.
 Fig. 5  Different top-down approaches for the synthesis of 2D materials. (a) A mechanical exfoliation technique. (b) The complete liquid-phase exfoliation process and the role of good and bad solvents in the synthesis process. 
4.1.1.2 Liquid phase exfoliation. 
Liquid phase exfoliation is another approach for obtaining ultrathin 2D nanosheets from the bulk phase. In this process, bulk (powder) material is immersed into a suitable solvent or aqueous surfactant, such as N-vinylpyrrolidone (NVP), dimethylformamide (DMF), or N-methyl formamide (NMF), and subjected to ultrasonication using a bath or tip sonicator or a shear force mixer. After that, the resultant dispersion is centrifuged to separate unexfoliated material. Two critical parameters for controlling this method are the sonication time and the use of a suitable solvent, because using a solvent with higher surface tension than the layered material can increase the exfoliation efficiency and stabilize the exfoliated nanosheets. In “good” solvents, the exfoliated nanosheets are stabilized against reaggregation. Otherwise, in “bad” solvents, reaggregation and sedimentation will occur. Fig. 5(b) portrays the different steps of liquid exfoliation, along with the effects of both good and bad solvents. Hwang et al. made a p–n junction diode with n-type MoSe2 film using the above-discussed method for flexible PDs.110 To get the MoSe2 film, they used bulk MoSe2 powder with a suitable solvent (a mixed solution of amine-terminated polystyrene (PS-NH2) and toluene). After sonicating and centrifuging properly, they obtained the desired film on the water surface. It is possible to get ultrathin (only three-layer) GeSe nanosheets using this method, with a thickness of 4.3 nm, for high-performance UV-visible PDs, as studied by Dingtao Ma et al.111 They also thoroughly examined the dependence of the film thickness on the centrifugation speed. Several works have reported using this conventional method to obtain materials like GeS,54 Bi2S3,112 and MoSe2113 for various optoelectronic devices, including PDs and solar cells. Although this method has many advantages over mechanical exfoliation, such as the capability for large-scale production and its low cost, it is hard to get high-purity single-layer 2D materials with desired lateral size distributions, which is a primary requirement for consistent electronic applications. Table 2 shows thickness, layer number, conductivity, and carrier mobility data from different 2D chalcogenides produced via mechanical and liquid exfoliation techniques.
Table 2 Thickness, layer number, conductivity, and mobility data from different chalcogenides obtained via mechanical and liquid exfoliation techniques




Exfoliation type
Material
Thickness (nm)
Number of layers
Conductivity
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Ref.




Mechanical exfoliation
MoS2
0.8
Single layer
n-Type
0.11

100



MoS2
0.65
Single layer
n-Type
4

103



WS2
42
Multi-layer
n-Type
12

105



WSe2
2.3
Three layers
—
350

101



GaS
5
Five layers
—
—

104



GaSe
30
Multi-layer
p-Type
5 × 10−3

108



InSe
30
Multi-layer
n-Type
32

106



GeS
28
Multi-layer
p-Type
1.5 × 10−3

55



GeSe
40
Multi-layer
p-Type
5.02

109



Bi2S3
58
Multi-layer
n-Type
14.2

102



In2Se3
3.9
Five layers
—
—

107



Liquid phase exfoliation
MoSe2
35
Multi-layer
n-Type
—

113



MoSe2
5
Few layer
n-Type
—

110



GeS
3.9
Eight layers
PEC
1558

54



Bi2S3
10
Multi-layer
—
—

112



GeSe
4.5
Few layer
PEC
—

111







4.1.2 Bottom-up methods. 
Bottom-up methods involve the build-up of material from the bottom, atom-by-atom, molecule-by-molecule, or cluster-by-cluster. They consist of both liquid-phase and vapor-phase synthesis approaches. Liquid-phase methods include hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis, while vapor-phase synthesis includes pulsed laser deposition, magnetron sputtering, chemical vapor deposition, and electron beam evaporation.
4.1.2.1 Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods. 
The term “hydrothermal reaction” generally refers to a homogeneous or heterogeneous chemical reaction in the presence of solvent (water) at high temperature and pressure in a closed system called an autoclave. If the solvent is non-aqueous, then this is a solvothermal reaction. The main parameters that control the size and shape of the material obtained via this process are the reaction temperature, reaction time, concentrations of precursors, and the solvent. Fig. 6(a) shows a complete hydrothermal unit with different components. Nitin T. Shelke et al. used a hydrothermal method to make WS2/rGO heterojunctions for photodetection in the UV region.114 For synthesizing few-layer WS2 film, 3 mM WCl6 and 15 mM thioacetamide were dissolved in 40 mL of DI water; this mixture was stirred for 1 h at room temperature, then transferred to a 50 mL stainless-steel autoclave, and maintained at 265 °C for 24 h. Finally, the product was centrifuged and repeatedly washed with DI and ethanol several times and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h. For the first time, Chen et al. reduced the thickness of Bi2S3 nanosheets down to 2.2 nm using this method.115 Due to the highly anisotropic nature of Bi2S3 nanosheets, their formation is very difficult. Following the above-discussed mechanism, Kumar et al. fabricated flexible PDs using SnS nanoflakes with graphene electrodes. Navas et al. synthesized WS2 nanosheets via a solvothermal method for thermal solar energy collection and achieved an efficiency of 34%.116 By the same method, using different solvents and bulk (powder) materials, many 2DM synthesis approaches have already been reported, obtaining, for example, MoS2,117 SnS,62 WSe2,118 MoSe2,119 and GeSe.58 The basic advantages that we can exploit through working with these methods are (i) the low working temperature, (ii) the one-step method, (iii) the use of low-cost instrumentation, and (iv) the existence of environmentally friendly reactions. However, it is difficult to obtain suitable sizes and shapes via these methods, limiting their application in large-scale material production.
 Fig. 6  Different bottom-up techniques. (a) The equipment for a hydrothermal or solvothermal process. (b) The complete setup for physical vapour deposition. (c) A schematic diagram for pulsed laser deposition. (d) The complete setup for magnetron sputtering. (e) A schematic diagram of chemical vapour deposition. 
4.1.2.2 Physical vapor deposition. 
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) always gives more accurate results than standard hydrothermal or solvothermal methods. The deposition mechanism mainly involves the physical transport of the adsorbate material by an inert gas in vapor form to the target/substrate, which is kept at a specific temperature for deposition. Fig. 6(b) shows a schematic diagram of the PVD mechanism involved in the synthesis of 2DMs. Zhang et al. reported few-layer Bi2Se3 topological insulator deposition with a thickness of 50 nm using a PVD technique for a broadband PD.120 To get the layered structure, pure Bi2Se3 powder was placed inside a quartz tube in a tube furnace at a temperature of 660 °C, under 30 sccm Ar flow and 20 torr pressure. Continuous Ar flow was maintained in the quartz tube to create an inert atmosphere to reduce the probability of contamination. Via a similar method, Zhao et al. reported few-layer β-In2Se3 with thicknesses ranging from 2 nm to 44 nm and discussed the thickness-dependent optical properties thoroughly.121 In addition, Lu et al. presented two-dimensional In2S3 with a thickness of about 19 nm for PD applications.122 There are several other works on similar methods for the synthesis of In2Se3,123 GaS,104 SnSe,124 MoS2,125 In2S3,74etc. Although this is a widely used process for 2D material deposition, difficulties in obtaining well-defined monolayers limit its use for a wide range of commercial applications.
4.1.2.3 Pulsed laser deposition. 
In this technique, a high-power pulsed laser beam is focused inside a vacuum chamber to strike a target made of the desired material. With the help of a laser beam, the target material is vaporized and deposited on the substrate. In general, deposition occurs under ultra-high vacuum conditions (10−6 to 10−8 torr); however, in a few cases, neutral gases like argon are used to control the deposition rate. In contrast, some reactive gases like oxygen and nitrogen are used to deposit oxide and nitride materials. A common pulsed laser deposition method takes place via four different steps: (i) the laser ablation of the target material and creation of plasma; (ii) the occurrence of plasma dynamics; (iii) the deposition of the ablation material on the substrate; and (iv) the nucleation and growth of film on the substrate surface. During the process, as shown in Fig. 6(c), the substrate temperature, chamber pressure, laser energy density, and target distance are the controlling parameters that have to be very carefully optimized to obtain the desired growth. Yao et al. fabricated few-layer (thickness: 60 nm) WS2 as the channel material for broadband photodetection based on this method.126 To get suitable film thickness, they took W and S at an atomic ratio of 1:2 under a 10−4 Pa base pressure. The substrate temperature was 500 °C and the working pressure was set to 50 Pa with flowing Ar as the working gas at a rate of 50 sccm. Similarly, Zheng et al. reported large-area 2D WSe2 films with an average thickness of 48 nm for flexible and transparent broadband PDs.127 Bharat et al. achieved bilayer and large-area 2D MoS2 film using the above-discussed technique and briefly studied the photoluminescence spectra.128 Various 2D TMDC reports have been submitted based on this method, obtaining materials like Bi2Se3,129 GaSe,130 InSe,131 In2Se3,132 MoS2,133 and SnSe.134
4.1.2.4 Magnetron sputtering. 
Sputtering is a special kind of physical vapor deposition, where atoms in the solid target material are ejected into the gas phase upon bombardment by energetic ions and deposited on the substrate. In sputtering, glow discharge from non-reactive ions is created due to the potential difference applied between the target and substrate inside a vacuum chamber. Actually, there is momentum exchange between the target atoms and ions and, as a result, secondary electrons are generated, which maintain the plasma. The energetic ions generated in glow discharge plasma are accelerated towards the target by means of an AC or a DC potential. When an applied magnetic field is parallel to the target, this increases the probability of collisions between target and energetic ions, and this process is called magnetron sputtering. As a result, a higher sputtering rate or higher deposition rate at the substrate can be achieved. Fig. 6(d) shows a schematic diagram of magnetron sputtering. Wang et al. submitted a report on a variable thickness transport channel from Bi2Se3, varying the thickness between 6 nm and 108 nm based on magnetron sputtering on a SrTiO3(111) substrate.135 For the synthesis, bulk Bi2Se3 was used as a sputtering source, and the base pressure was 9 × 10−5 Pa. Sputtering deposition was carried out under an argon atmosphere (99.999%) at 0.3 Pa. During sputtering, the substrate temperature was kept at 425 °C. Patel et al. presented 2D SnS with thickness variations between 11 and 28 nm via the above-discussed method. A similar kind of work was done by Rigi et al., where they successfully formed bilayer and trilayer MoS2via varying the sputtering time.136 Other works on the same method were also reported for MoS2,137 WS2,138 WSe2,139 SnS,63 and SnSe.140
4.1.2.5 Chemical vapor deposition. 
In the CVD process, precursors in the vapor phase chemically react at the substrate surface to form a non-volatile product coating. This process comprises two main parts: (i) the transport of gas-phase material to the reaction zone and reactions involving the material; and (ii) the deposition of film on the substrate. In the transport of gas-phase materials, convection can occur due to the existence of a pressure gradient and the diffusion of gaseous reactants to the substrate. Deposition occurs via the adsorption of the reactant at the substrate through surface chemical reactions. According to the operating pressure, CVD can be divided into atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD), low-pressure CVD (LPCVD), and ultrahigh-vacuum CVD (UHVCD), and based on the source energy, it can be divided into plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD), hot-filament CVD (HFCVD), and rapid thermal CVD (RTCVD). Fig. 6(e) shows a schematic diagram of a conventional CVD method for material synthesis. Zhang et al. achieved monolayer WSe2 with a thickness of 0.97 nm based on conventional CVD treatment, and they reported the role of different metal contacts on the performance of WSe2-based transistors. To synthesize monolayer WSe2, WO3 powder (0.3 g) and Se powder were placed in two different ceramic boats in the heating zone and on the upstream side, respectively. The sapphire substrate was kept on the downstream side, where WO3 and Se vapor were brought to the target substrate by Ar (80 sccm) and H2 (20 sccm) under a chamber pressure 1 torr. The temperatures of Se powder and sapphire were fixed at 270 °C and 750–850 °C, respectively, throughout the synthesis process, and the centre of the heating zone was kept at 925 °C using a ramp rate of 25 °C min−1. Feng et al. synthesized few-layer In2Se3via this CVD technique, with a thickness of ∼6 nm, for flexible PDs.141 Based on this approach and varying the precursors and parameters, different single- and few-layer 2D materials have been synthesized, such as MoSe2,28,142 MoS2,143,144 WS2,145 In2Se3,146 In2S3,147 Bi2Se3,148 and GeSe.149

4.2 Special 2D nitrides (h-BN and g-C3N4)
h-BN nanosheets can be obtained via a liquid-phase exfoliation technique, breaking the van der Waals forces between h-BN layers.150 A facile hydrothermal method was applied to exfoliate 2D h-BN with a large yield of 55% by Wang et al. in 2018.151 Another approach to synthesize 2D h-BN is ion beam sputtering deposition (IBSD), which was reported by different groups.152 In 2019, Gao et al. reported the synthesis of h-BN, in which sapphire substrates were dipped into 10% aqueous fluoric acid solution for 40 s, followed by annealing in air at 1100 °C for 1 h to obtain a smooth and clear surface with atom terraces.153 Prior to the deposition of h-BN, the sapphire substrate was nitridated at 1000 °C for 10 min via irradiating with a 200 eV N+ ion beam from an assisting ion source. For the growth of h-BN, a pure h-BN target was sputtered under a constant pressure of 3 × 10−2 Pa using a 1.0 keV Ar+ or N+ ion beam from the primary ion source. Zhou et al. reported the synthesis of h-BN with the help of a short-pulse laser plasma deposition technique to fabricate vertical metal-semiconductor–metal deep-UV PDs.154 The CVD approach has some advantages over other approaches, like having high throughput, good productivity, and scalability for obtaining wafer-scale h-BN films.155
Metal-free graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) with a bandgap of 2.7 eV was reported by the Wang group in 2009, with an average thickness of 3.5 nm, via the one-step heating of thiourea.156 In addition, Zhang et al. prepared ultrathin graphitic-phase carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets via a green liquid exfoliation route from the bulk, with a size distribution ranging from 70 to 160 nm and height of ∼2.5 nm.157 Liu et al. synthesized bulk h-BN via a bottom-up method, i.e., a facile thermal polymerization process. After exfoliation, 2D h-BN was prepared for the fabrication of air-stable PDs.158Via applying a simple low-cost spin-coating method, Fang et al. synthesized g-C3N4 nanosheets in 2020.159
4.3 2D transition-metal carbides and nitrides (Mxenes)
MAX phases are the precursors of Mxenes, where A represents group IIIB, IVB, VB, and VIB elements, such as Al, Ga, Si, Ge, and P. The force between M–A bonds in the MAX phase is weaker than M–X bonds. Therefore, the A-layer atoms can be etched via chemical methods to obtain Mxenes. The first MXene, Ti3C2, was isolated from MAX powder (Ti3AlC2) via soaking in hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution, and the following reactions occurred during the synthesis of the Mxene:94Ti3AlC2 + 3HF = AlF3 + 3/2H2 + Ti3C2Ti3C2 + 2H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2Ti3C2 + 2HF = Ti3C2F2 + H2HF is the most commonly used MAX-phase etchant to obtain Mxenes.160–163 However, due to certain risks, scientists have developed other etchants for preparing MXenes, like NH4HF2164,165 and a mixed solution of LiF and HCl, where LiF reacts with HCl to form HF to etch the material:166,167LiF + HCl = HF + LiClThe M–A bond is strong enough that it cannot be broken via superficial mechanical exfoliation. Using the hydrothermal technique, Li et al. successfully synthesized high-purity (92%) Ti3C2TZ.168 For this process, they made a solution of Ti3AlC2 and NaOH and put this in a hydrothermal unit at a temperature of 270 °C. The first work on Mxenes via CVD was published in 2015 by Xu et al. They produced large-area (100 μm) high-quality 2D ultrathin α-Mo2C orthorhombic crystals, synthesized at a high growth-temperature of 1085 °C and using methane as the carbon source.169
5. The classification of 2D photodetectors
It is desirable for efficient photodetection that a material exhibits high optical absorption. Further, the device structure must ensure efficient photocarrier generation, good transport, high responsivity, high detectivity, and a fast response speed over a broad spectral range. Focusing on different spectral windows, we discuss multiple applications of 2D PDs, including solar-blind, UV, visible, NIR, and broadband photodetection using 2DMs. Also, two different types of applications, self-powered and flexible, are thoroughly discussed below.
5.1 Solar-blind photodetectors
Solar-blind PDs have attracted tremendous attention due to their essential applications in areas such as (i) high-temperature monitoring for anti-terrorism and security purposes, (ii) ozone layer damage detection, (iii) jet engine monitoring, and (iv) flame detection.170–172 This type of PD works in the deep ultraviolet region (UVC), with a cut-off wavelength of 280 nm, and it is not interfered with by visible light. The primary requirement for such a device is the use of a wide-bandgap material with a bandgap higher than 4.42 eV (280 nm). One typical example of this type of material is hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), which has a bandgap favourable for solar-blind photodetection.173 Vertical metal-semiconductor–metal (MSM) Schottky junctions were fabricated using h-BN by Zhou et al. for deep-ultraviolet PDs with a cut-off wavelength of 250 nm.154 The device comprised a Mo substrate, BN nanosheets as the active material, and an Al electrode, and it demonstrated responsivity of 1.5 mA W−1 (at −5 V and an incident intensity of 1.0 mW cm−2) and durability up to a high temperature of 100 °C. Via a different approach, Liu et al. fabricated a PD with a 2D h-BN layer (3 nm thick) in a vertical MSM configuration with a good on/off current ratio of 103.152 This MSM PD, comprising two Schottky contacts (in-plane) joined back-to-back, exhibited a rise time and fall time of 0.32 s and 0.63 s, respectively. Li et al., in their work, synthesized 2D BN with excellent thermal conductivity of 146 W m−1 K−1 for use in a flexible and solar-blind PD with detectivity of 8.05 × 1010 Jones under 185 nm illumination with a fast response time of 0.267 s.174 In their work, the authors used Pt as the electrode and boron nitride paper as the flexible substrate, and the device was able to maintain its performance, even after 200 bending cycles. The authors observed that the developed junction between h-BN nanosheets plays a vital role in photocurrent generation. They suggested the following mechanism: (i) under dark conditions, the barrier width in the homojunction suppress carrier transport in the device and produces a very low dark current (∼10−11 A); (ii) under DUV illumination, large numbers of electron–hole pairs were generated with a consequent increase in the carrier density, reducing the junction barrier height and enhancing carrier transport. Fig. 7(a) illustrates the homojunction between two h-BN nanosheets, where surface defects give rise to a depletion region at the junction. Fig. 7(b) clarifies that the device responsivity decreases with increasing illumination intensity, which is attributed to enhanced recombination probability as a result of an increased number of photogenerated carriers. Fig. 7(c) provides experimental evidence for the solar-blind nature of the PD, in which the device does not show any response above deep UVC wavelengths. In recent work, Wang et al. synthesized h-BN atomic layers with different carbon concentrations, varying from 0 to 12.2%, creating a DUV PD with an excellent current on–off ratio of 104 and detectivity of 3.09 × 1011 Jones.175Fig. 7(d) shows a schematic diagram of the device and Fig. 7(e) shows responsivity and detectivity curves at different carbon concentrations. Fig. 7(f) shows the transient response of the device at a carbon doping level of 7.5%, with rise and decay times of 0.5 ms. The thermal stability of 2D materials is an added advantage for performing this particular application because commercially available GaN PDs almost entirely lose their response abilities at higher temperatures (200 °C). As a wide bandgap is a primary requirement for solar-blind radiation detection, therefore, high-bandgap 2DMs are suitable for this specific application. Table 3 presents an evaluation of solar-blind PDs, including their device architectures and performance parameters.
 Fig. 7  Performance parameters of solar-blind PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of the junction barrier between 2D h-BN sheets in DUV on and off conditions. (b) The responsivity of the device under varying intensities with a constant bias of 20 V. (c) The responsivity of the device in the spectral region from 300–1000 nm, clearly showing the solar bind nature of the device (from ref. 174 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of a h-BN-based PD. (e) The responsivity and detectivity variations with different carbon concentrations under bias of 20 V. (f) The transient curve of the device at a carbon concentration of 7.5% (taken from ref. 175 with permission). 
Table 3 A summary of the critical parameters of 2DM-based solar-blind PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (mA W−1)
Detectivity (Jones)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




1
Al:BN nanosheet:Al (MSM)
254
−5
1.0
1.5
—
—
—

154



2
Ti/Au:h-BN:Ti/Au (MSM)
212
20
1.59
0.1
2.4 × 1010
0.32
103

152



0.63


3
Pt:h-BN/h-BN:Pt (homojunction)
185
10
15.28
0.05
8.05 × 1010
0.267
—

174



0.393


4
Ti/Au:h-BN:Ti/Au
226
20
15.9
9.2
3.09 × 1011
5 × 10−4
104

175



5 × 10−4




5.2 UV photodetectors
UV detectors are widely used in medicine/healthcare, space science, the military, spectroscopy, etc. Group III–VI chalcogenides and h-BN are the most suitable candidates for this wavelength range due to their suitable bandgaps. Hu et al., in their work, used ultrathin GaS nanosheets (direct bandgap: 3.05 eV) with both rigid and flexible substrates for photodetection.104 In these devices, photons with an energy higher than the bandgap of 2D GaS (∼3.05 eV) can produce electron–hole pairs, and increasing the photon energy provides a higher photocurrent. Devices exhibited responsivity, EQE, and detectivity values of 4.2 A W−1, 2050%, and 1013–1014 Jones, respectively, under UV illumination of 254 nm and under a 2 V bias using a rigid Si/SiO2 substrate. Jacobs Gedrim et al. studied the photoresponse of In2Se3; they used Pt as electrodes in their work.176 To preclude the photovoltaic effect and get a fixed photoconductive effect, they used deposited Pt with a high amorphous carbon content (up to 60%), which lowers the metal work function so that it is similar to the Fermi level of In2Se3 (∼4.35 eV) in the bulk. Using this electrode type, they recorded high responsivity, detectivity, and EQE values of 395 A W−1, 2.26 × 1012 Jones, and 1.63 × 105%, respectively. Fig. 8(a) shows a schematic diagram of the α-In2Se3-nanosheet-based device, and Fig. 8(b) shows the device photocurrents in response to different bias voltages. A similar type of work has been performed by Zeng et al. to obtain a highly responsive PD made of 2D WS2 (thickness: 25.2 nm) with a responsivity of 53.3 A W−1.177 In this work, the authors have used ohmic contact between Ti/Au electrodes and the WS2 channel, and they observed that under low light intensity a higher number of photogenerated electrons is captured by the trap states, thus reducing the carrier recombination probability. However, under higher intensity radiation, very few trap states are available for capturing electrons. Fig. 8(c) presents a schematic diagram of the device, whereas Fig. 8(d) presents the device responsivity at different bias voltages in response to varying intensities of illumination. Fig. 8(e) portrays the detectivity and responsivity of the device vs. the wavelength at a fixed bias of 5 V. Kumar et al. fabricated MSM PDs using Al interdigitated electrodes on indium sulphide (In2S3) with multiple thicknesses via a different method.178 For an n-type semiconductor, to obtain Schottky nature the contact metal must have a higher work function than the semiconductor; otherwise, the formed contact will be ohmic. The responsivity variations could be attributed to improved carrier concentrations as a result of increased film thickness, causing better light absorption. One major drawback of MSM PDs is their slower response speeds (as much as several seconds). In an attempt to solve this issue, Aldalbhai et al. introduced a boron nitride (BN) and tungsten nitride (WN) nanocomposite (bandgap: 3.5 eV) instead of BN alone. Using this nanocomposite, the response time can be successfully reduced to 2 ms because the improved crystalline quality of the BN-WN nanocomposite reduces carrier recombination.179 Zhou et al. recently synthesized 2D carbon-deficient scandium carbide (ScC) (bandgap: 2.5 eV) via the selective etching of Al3C2 sublayers from a parent ScAl3C3 compound in aqueous organic base solution and used it in a PD.180 This MXene PD shows good responsivity and on/off current ratio values of 0.125 A W−1 and 100, respectively. Fig. 8(f) shows the atomic configurations of the MAX phase before etching and the MXene phase after etching with TMAOH (tetramethylammonium hydroxide). Fig. 8(g) illustrates the device photocurrent at different wavelengths under biases of 2, 5, and 10 V, showing that the device is operational in the UV region. Fig. 8(h) shows the I–V characteristics of the device, both in the dark and under illumination at different intensities, and it shows that the maximum photocurrent of the device is obtained under 360 nm illumination at an incident intensity of 160 μW cm−2. Table 4 presents an evaluation of UV PDs based on their device architectures and performance parameters.
 Fig. 8  The performance parameters of UV PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a UV PD based on α-In2Se3 nanosheets and (b) I–V curves of the device in response to light and dark conditions (taken from ref. 176 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a PD consisting of WS2 film and Ti/Au contacts, (d) the responsivity as a function of the bias voltage at different intensities, and (e) the spectral dependence of the responsivity and detectivity of the device at a fixed bias of 5 V (taken from ref. 177 with permission). (f) The atomic configuration of ScC material before and after etching, (g) the photocurrent of the device as a function of wavelength under different biases, and (h) the I–V characteristics of the device both under dark conditions and under illumination of varying intensities (taken from ref. 180 with permission). 
Table 4 A summary of the key parameters of 2DM-based UV PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/EQE (%)
Detectivity (Jones)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Ti/Au:WS2:Ti/Au (photoconductor)
365
5
12 × 10−3
53.3
1.22 × 1011
—
—

177



02
ITO:WS2:ITO
365
—
200
80 × 10−6
—
—
—

114



03
Cr/Au:GaS:Cr/Au (photoconductor)
254
2
0.5
4.2/2050
1013–1014
30 × 10−3
2.94 × 104

104



30 × 10−3


04
Au:GaSe:Au (MSM)
254
5
1
2.8/1367
—
0.02
8

252



0.037


05
ITO:GeSe:ITO (PEC)
350
0.3
2.17
2340 × 10−6/816
2.1 × 1012
0.2
—

253



06
Al:In2S3:Al (MSM)
365
5
4
93 × 10−5
11.96 × 108
1.50
—

178



1.48


07
Pt:In2Se3:Pt (photoconductor)
300
5
4.7 × 10−2
395/1.63 × 105
2.26 × 1012
0.018
—

176



0.073


08
Au:h-BN:Au
210
5
10.5
5.45 × 10−3
8.62 × 109
0.376
45

254



0.198


09
Cu:BN/WN:Cu (MSM)
350
2
1
1.17
—
2 × 10−3
—

179



2 × 10−3


10
Au:h-BN:Au
uv
10
83.3
0.0265
3 × 1011


105

255



11
Au/Ti:ScCzOH:Au/Ti
360
10
0.160
0.125/43
—
—
100

180





5.3 Visible photodetectors
Due to their appropriate wavelength sensitivity, group VI transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are the most suitable candidates for the visible range. Cao et al. presented a new concept regarding the enhancement of the responsivity of a visible PD via introducing the effect of lateral electrode spacing in a GaSe-based MSM PD with Ti/Au electrodes.108 The authors exploited the idea that, because the dark current solely depends on the Schottky barrier height of the PD, upon reducing the electrode spacing the dark current can be reduced, and the corresponding responsivity can be improved. They observed a photoresponsivity enhancement from 200 to 5000 A W−1 upon reducing the electrode spacing from 8 μm to 290 nm under 410 nm illumination and a bias of 8 V. However, one should ensure that the spacing between the two electrodes is not too small because then there will be a chance of direct tunneling, thus reducing the device performance via inducing an additional tunneling current. Island et al., in their work, reported the working mechanism of an In2Se3-based phototransistor and briefly described the responsivity dependence upon the gate voltage.181 They also demonstrated a way to control photoconduction between the source and gate via the photogating effect. With a gate bias of 40 V, the reported phototransistor achieved high responsivity and detectivity values of 98000 A W−1 and 3 × 1013 Jones, respectively, at a very low drain-to-source bias of 0.05 V. Wang et al., in an unusual approach, created a PD with NO2 gas-sensing applications based on SnS thin crystals with a very high external quantum efficiency of 4.75 × 104% and a detection limit of 100 ppb.62 To synthesize the large-area thin crystal, they used a two-dimensional oriented attachment technique and achieved lateral and vertical dimensions of 20–30 μm and 10 nm, respectively. In addition, Lu et al. reported a heterostructure between graphene and n-type 2D nonlayered In2S3 for use in high-performance gate-tunable PDs.144 This van der Waals heterostructure shows responsivity as high as 8570 A W−1 and an EQE of 26200% at a gate bias of 60 V under 405 nm illumination (3.57 mW cm−2). This high responsivity and EQE can be attributed to a strong photogating effect on graphene channels due to localized defect states of the In2S3 flakes. Fig. 9(a)–(c) shows energy band diagrams of the heterojunctions under different gate and source-to-drain biases. From these figures, it is clear that depending on the gate bias, the barrier height of the junction can be modulated. When a positive gate bias is applied, the barrier height decreases, whereas for a negative bias, it increases; consequently, the rectification performance of the device can be controlled. Velusamy et al. reported Mo2CTX PDs operational in the visible spectral region.182 Although the recorded responsivity and detectivity of 9 A W−1 and 5 × 1011 Jones, respectively, were not good compared to reported 2DM-based PDs, the flexible nature of the Mo2CTX thin films certainly shows the importance of the reported approach. It was observed that the photoresponsivity prominently depends on intrinsic plasmonic effects relating to the Mxene. Therefore, there is no need for additional foreign metallic plasmonic materials to improve the device performance. Fig. 9(d) shows a schematic diagram of a two-terminal device array as a flexible device. According to the authors, plasmon-assisted hot electrons are generated when the MXene film is illuminated with an exact bandgap-equivalent wavelength. Fig. 9(e) shows the transfer process of plasmon-assisted hot electrons to the gold electrodes. The device offers excellent ambient stability and can hold an almost unchanged on/off current ratio for one month in a laboratory testing environment. Fig. 9(f) presents the on/off current ratios of the device with time.
 Fig. 9  The performance parameters of visible PDs. (a–c) Energy band diagrams of graphene/In2S3 heterojunctions under different bias conditions (taken from ref. 144 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of two-terminal Mo2CTX-based device arrays for flexible PDs, (e) the transfer mechanism plasma-assisted hot electrons towards the gold electrodes, and (f) the current on–off ratio of the device with time over a number of days (taken from ref. 182 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of a multi-layered InSe nanosheet based field-effect transistor, (h) the transfer characteristics curves both for superlattice and pristine InSe devices, and (i) the spectral responsivity for both devices at a fixed bias of 1 V (taken from ref. 183 with permission). 
It is possible to achieve a high external quantum efficiency of 1.7 × 107% under 490 nm illumination at a very low bias of 1 V in a superlattice multilayer InSe PD, as demonstrated by Feng et al.183 In their work, they observed the photoresponsivity, mobility, and on–off current ratio for both multilayer pristine and superlattice InSe based PDs. The results indicate that the photoresponsivity and EQE are enhanced 8.5- and 23.94-fold, respectively, when pristine InSe is annealed to superlattice form, since the effective carrier density increases due to annealing, which lowers the contact resistance with the electrodes. However, they observed a decrease in the on–off current ratio from 107 to only 2.9, and an increase in carrier mobility from 63.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 299.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which they attributed to the metallic behaviour of superlattice InSe. Fig. 9(g) shows a schematic diagram of the device, and Fig. 9(h) exhibits the transfer curves both for superlattice and pristine InSe transistors with a fixed Vds bias of 1 V. Fig. 9(i) shows spectral responsivity data from both transistors at a fixed bias of 1 V, indicating that superlattice InSe is better than pristine InSe for photodetection. Table 5 presents an evaluation of visible PDs based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
Table 5 A summary of key parameters of 2DM-based visible PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Au:MoS2:Au
532
10
2.0 × 103
0.57/13.3
1010
70 × 10−6
—

256



11 × 10−5


02
Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au
532

V
d = 1 (Vg–Vt) = 100
0.13
2200/5000
—
—
105

231



03
Au:MoS2:Au
561

V
ds = 8
24 × 10−3
880
—
4
10

103




V
g = −70
9


04
Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au
532

V
ds = 1
2
342.6
—
—
103

257




V
g = 8


05
Gr:MoS2:Gr
514

V
ds = 3
3
1.7 × 107
—
—
—

232




V
g = 0
1.2 × 108


06
Au:MoS2:Au
633

V
ds = 5
1
8.02 × 103
2.7 × 1014
—
2 × 103

233



Gr:MoS2:Gr
532

V
g = 30
10.24 × 103
8.7 × 1014
—
105


07
Ag:MoSe2:ITO
450
5
0.754
0.566
3.69 × 1011/155
0.763



113



0.858


08
Au:MoSe2:Au
532
10
0.01
13 × 10−3
—
0.06
20

258



0.06


09
Ti:MoSe2:Ti
532

V
ds = 20
25.86 × 103
97.1
—/22266
0.015
3 × 104

259




V
g = 0
0.030


10
ITO:MoSe2:ITO
650
1
40
0.803
109
0.04
—

260



0.048


11
Au:WS2:Au
633

V
ds = 1
50 × 10−3
884
—
0.02
25

105




V
g = 0
0.02


12
Pd/Au:WSe2:Pd/Au
650

V
ds = 2
0.38
1.8 × 105/3.5 × 105
1014
5
109

234




V
g = −60
5


13
Ti:WSe2:Au
White light

V
ds = 2
10
7
—/40
40 × 10−6
—

101




V
g = −12
40 × 10−6


14
Au:GaS:Au
633
1
0.189
64.43
—/12621
13 × 10−3
24

247



10−2


15
Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au
410
8
0.01
5000
—
10−2



108



2 × 10−2


16
Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au
700

V
ds = 1
0.29
1.7 × 104
—
2 × 10−2
750

183




V
g = 0
2 × 10−2


17
Gr:InSe/WS2: Gr
532

V
ds = −3
0.16
83
1.55 × 1012/1.93 × 104
36 × 10−3
103

261




V
g = 0
18 × 10−3


18
Ti/Au:GeS:Ti/Au
405
3
1.98
173
1.74 × 1013/5.32 × 104
0.11



262



0.68


19
Ti/Au:GeSe:Ti/Au
405
3
1.98
870
1.12 × 1013
0.15



184



2.67 × 105
0.27


20
Ti/Au:GeSe:Ti/Au
633


210.8
7.05
3.04 × 108
1
500

263



2321


21
Cr/Au:SnS:Cr/Au
532
2
50
2.04 × 103
3 × 109
9 × 10−2



62



4.75 × 105
9 × 10−2


22
Au:SnS:Au
405
1
324
156
2.94 × 1010
5.1 × 10−3
8.2

264



4.77 × 104
8.8 × 10−3


23
Si/Gr/In2S3
405

V
ds = 2
3.57
8570/1.4 × 105
2.99 × 1012/26200
—
118

144




V
g = 60


24
Ti/Au:In2Se3:Ag
640

V
ds = 0.05


98000
3 × 1013
9



181




V
g = 40
0.03


25
Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au
532
—
26 × 10−3
340
—
6 × 10−3
—

235



12 × 10−3


26
Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au
700
5
0.29
578
6 × 1012
2 × 10−2
—

141



4 × 10−2


27
Au:MLHP/g-C3N4:Au
White light
5
1
2.4
7.4 × 1012
6.1 × 10−3
—

158



2.2 × 10−3


28
Au:Mo2CTX:Au
660
−1
390
9
5 × 1011
0.5
200

182



0.5




5.4 NIR photodetectors
Infrared detection is essential in thermal imaging (used in night surveillance for security purposes), optical communications, environmental monitoring, etc. The NIR spectral range starts at 750 nm, and the corresponding required material bandgap should be less than 1.65 eV. Due to the group having suitable bandgaps, IV–VI monochalcogenides are the most useful candidates for this type of photodetection. Mukherjee et al. reported a GeSe-nanosheet-based Schottky junction PD for NIR wavelengths.184 They fabricated two uneven Schottky barriers between GeSe and Au electrodes via choosing different nanosheet widths at the contacts, which was the main contributing factor to the photoresponse. The PD shows good responsivity, photoconductive gain, and a fast response, with values of 3.5 A W−1, 530, and 100 ms, respectively, at a wavelength of 808 nm and a bias of 4 V. Wang et al. presented a back-gated FET with submillimetre-size 2D Bi2Se3 flakes for infrared detection at optical communication wavelengths.185 Using a silicon p++ substrate as the back gate, the device offers an outstanding on/off current ratio of 106 and mobility of 39.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 in response to 1465 nm excitation. The device can achieve responsivity and EQE values of 23.8 A W−1 and 2035%, respectively, at a low temperature of 80 K. Fig. 10(a) shows a schematic diagram of the device, and Fig. 10(b) presents the time-dependent photocurrent of the device as the intensity varies from 17.45 to 142.93 mW cm−2 at 300 K. Fig. 10(c) shows the responsivity and detectivity variations with temperature. From this plot, it is clear that at low temperature the device shows better performance. As soon as the temperature is increased, its performance degrades due to Coulombic scattering at high temperature. As a topological insulator, Bi2Se3 has some advantages, like having simple surface-state structure with a well-defined single Dirac cone and a very narrow bandgap of 0.3 eV, making it suitable for terahertz to infrared applications.186
 Fig. 10  The performance parameters of NIR PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a back-gated FET made with 2D Bi2Se3 flakes, (b) the time-dependent photocurrent at different optical powers, and (c) the temperature-dependent responsivity and detectivity of the device (taken from ref. 185 with permission). (d) The complete fabrication process of a MoS2 PD with Ag nanoparticles, (e) a schematic diagram of the plasmonic-tape-attached MoS2-based PD, and (f) photocurrent vs. optical power under illumination at 1550 nm (taken from ref. 190 with permission). 
Park et al. achieved near-infrared photodetection up to 1550 nm using chemically exfoliated multi-layered MoS2 flakes.187 As the bandgap of MoS2 varies from 1.2 to 1.8 eV, it is not possible to carry out well-defined NIR detection using pristine MoS2. Therefore, the authors introduced Li-ion impurities during the chemical exfoliation of defective MoS2 layers, and these are the main contributors to detecting NIR wavelengths. They used plasmonic Ag nanoparticles and recorded responsivity and detectivity values of 0.539 mA W−1 and 0.94 × 109 Jones, respectively, at 1550 nm and 2 V, showing the enhanced device activity. Alloying is one of the accepted methods by which bandgaps can be tuned to allow the same material to be used in different wavelength regimes via composition modification. Du et al. utilized the ternary alloy SnS1.26Se0.76 with Au/Cr electrodes on a PET substrate as a wearable PD. It can operate in the NIR region with responsivity of 120 mA W−1 under 808 nm light.188 Selamneni et al. deposited large-area MoSe2 on paper and used a Ag electrode as the Schottky contacts for photodetection, achieving responsivity and EQE values of 7.93 mA W−1 and 0.015%, respectively, under 780 nm illumination.138 Recently, via simple liquid exfoliation, 2D Bi2Se3 nanosheets for NIR detection, with pencil-drawn graphite electrodes as ohmic contacts, were reported by Liu et al.189 The device exhibits responsivity of 26.69 μA W−1 at a wavelength of 1064 nm. Very recently, Park et al. reported multilayer MoS2 film with attached plasmonic tape as a near-infrared PD.190 Plasmonic tape refers to a composite film of transparent Scotch tape and metal nanoparticles which serves as a passivation layer that can both protect the device from moisture penetration and also improve the device performance during NIR detection. The device shows responsivity and detectivity values of 0.008 A W−1 and 1.2 × 106 Jones, respectively, at an optical communication wavelength of 1550 nm. Fig. 10(d) and (e) show the fabrication process of the plasmonic-Ag-nanoparticle-decorated MoS2 PD and a schematic diagram of the device, respectively. Fig. 10(f) shows the photocurrent dependence on the optical power under illumination at 1550 nm. Table 6 presents an evaluation of NIR PDs based on their device architecture and performance parameters.
Table 6 A summary of the key parameters of 2DM-based NIR PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Au:GeSe:Au
808
4
283
3.5/537
—/530
0.1
—

184



02
Cr/Au: Bi2Se3: Cr/Au
1465
1
142.93
23.8/2035
8.0 × 1010
0.54
972.5

185



0.52


03
Au/Cr:MoS2/Ag:Au/Cr
980
2
3300
881 × 10−4
1.28 × 109
—
∼100

187



04
Pt:SnS:Pt
750
5
38
—
—
0.55
16.35

265



0.53


05
Cr/Au:SnS1.2Se0.76:Cr/Au
808
2
59.9
0.120
—
2
—

188



2.5


06
Pt:SnS:Pt
750
−5
38
58.4 × 10−3
1.35 × 1010
0.18
37.68

266



0.16


07
Cr/Au:Bi2S3:Cr/Au
735
0.1
26.7
10.1 × 10−3
4.63 × 108
0.037
—

267



0.062


08
Ag:SnS:Ag
850
5
55
—
3.9 × 107
0.11
—

268



0.15


09
Gr:Bi2Se3:Gr
1064
5
1065
26.69 × 10−6
—
—
—

189



10
Ag:MoSe2:Ag
780
—
0.4
9.73 × 10−3
—
6
—

119



0.015
6


07
Au/Cr:MoS2/Ag:Au/Cr
1550
1
—
8 × 10−3
1.2 × 106
—
—

190



08
Cr/Au:β-In2Se3:Cr/Au
800
2
34.4 × 10−3
8.8 × 104
2.9 × 1013
1
—

269



5


09
Ti:MoSe2:Ti
785

V
sd = 20
—
238/37745
7.6 × 1011
—
—

270




V
g = −22


10
Au:Bi2S3:Au
800
3
3.5
201/31140
2.7 × 1010
5 × 10−5
100

271



2 × 10−4


11
Ti3C2:GaAs: Ti3C2
830
8
—
0.278/42
11.6 × 1010
—
—

236



12
Au:SnS:Au
850
5
12.11
0.33/101
1.85 × 108
1.1 × 10−3



63



1.3 × 10−3




5.5 Broadband photodetectors
The term broadband refers to a spectral range covering successive spectral regimes, e.g., from the UV to the IR region, and so on. Broadband PDs are essential for optical communication and spectroscopic detectors. Tan et al. demonstrated a broadband photoresponse from the UV to the NIR wavelength range (300–800 nm) using a multilayer GeS PD with Pd/Au electrodes. They recorded high responsivity and detectivity of 6.8 × 103 A W−1 and 5.6 × 1014 Jones, respectively, under a wavelength of 500 nm.191 The device performs at elevated temperatures of up to 423 K and displays polarization sensitivity, which is verified based on the anisotropic absorption properties of GeS along the zigzag and armchair directions. Wang et al., in their work, made an impressive attempt to engineer the bandgap energy of triple-layer MoS2 to obtain a broadband photoresponse. The authors attempted to modulate the energy gap of the triple-layer MoS2 channel with the help of top-gated ferroelectric polymer film (P(VDF-TrFE)).192Via introducing this ferroelectric polymer, ultrahigh local electrostatic fields are generated at the interface between P(VDF-TrFE) and the MoS2 channel. As a result, the bandgap can be varied from 1.09 to 0.71 eV. For the first time, the photoresponse wavelength of MoS2 PD can be extended to 1500 nm with this sort of energy-gap engineering. The device exhibits rise and decay times of 1.8 ms and 2 ms, respectively, which are relatively fast for 2D PDs.
It has become a widely accepted approach to use high-mobility graphene electrodes to enhance the switching characteristics of 2D PDs. However, conventional graphene electrodes have certain disadvantages, e.g., their conductivity decreases considerably due to surface oxidization and adsorbents, and, as a result, poor device performance results in bottleneck conditions. In an attempt to overcome the issues relating to graphene electrodes, Yao et al. investigated a SnSe-based PD with a Bi2Te3 topological insulator (TI) electrode with a broad spectral response from 370 nm to 808 nm. They achieved a high external quantum efficiency of 1833%.134 One primary advantage of using a TI as an electrode is its insulating nature in bulk form. However, the presence of metallic surface states gives low barrier contact between the TI and the semiconducting channel, resulting in the efficient extraction of electrons and holes to the external circuit. Fig. 11(a) shows a schematic diagram of the device, while Fig. 11(b) and (c) present the power-dependent responsivity and detectivity of the device at different wavelengths. A gapless graphene PD gives a speedy response, however, due to low absorption and rapid electron–hole recombination, its responsivity is desperately low (in the order of mA W−1);193 therefore, to obtain a high-performance PD, a material with high photon absorption, like a perovskite or TMDC, must be interfaced with graphene. To overcome these types of issues, Xiong et al. introduced graphene-MoS2–WS2 heterostructures using layer-by-layer transfer methods. The built-in electric field at the interface of the constituent layers increases the rate of electron–hole separation. Consequently, the PD shows a fast response of 7 ms and a broad spectral response from 400–1640 nm with good EQE and responsivity values of 2.06 × 108 and 6.6 × 107 A W−1, respectively, under excitation at 400 nm.194 The device exhibits a negative photocurrent at a wavelength of 1550 nm when the photocurrent generated by MoS2–WS2 is less than that of graphene. The negative photoconductivity is attributed to the trap states being filled upon an increase in the incident optical power at 1550 nm. Recently, a photo-bolometric effect during broadband photodetection up to 10.6 μm was reported by Xu et al.195 They observed that the temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) for SnSe thin film is –4.4% K−1 at 80–250 K and –2.3% K−1 at 250–400 K, which confirms the strong bolometric effect associated with this film. From 1550 nm to 10.6 μm, the device shows a sub-bandgap photoresponse. Due to this strong bolometric effect, increasing responsivity is exhibited with an increase in the laser density. This broadband PD shows responsivity and detectivity values of 0.16 A W−1 and 3.9 × 107 Jones, respectively, at 10.6 μm. Fig. 11(d) presents a schematic diagram of the reported device. The device operates in the following two working modes: (i) photoconductive mode (when the incident radiation has higher energy compared to the bandgap energy), in which electron–hole pairs are produced via photon absorption and further separated under an externally applied bias; and (ii) photobolometric mode, in which photothermally induced hole-type carriers are generated in the valence band. Fig. 11(e) and (f) describe the photoconductive and photobolometric mechanisms, respectively. In addition, Jeon et al. reported surface plasmon effects in the case of broadband photodetection when using metallic Mo2C grating and MoS2 heterojunctions, where the Mo2C grating generates surface plasmon resonance and consequently produces hot electrons.196 Due to a strong coupling effect, the barrier height at the Mo2C/MoS2 interface is very low (∼70 meV), which helps transfer the hot electrons from metallic Mo2C to the semiconductor MoS2, the primary source of photocurrent in this configuration. This broadband PD shows responsivity and detectivity values of 5 × 103 A W−1 and 3 × 102, respectively, with a wide spectral wavelength from 400 nm to 1310 nm. Fig. 11(g) gives a schematic diagram of the device, and Fig. 11(h) shows the responsivity and light-to-dark current ratios for samples without and with Mo2C, demonstrating that the device with Mo2C performs in a superior fashion. Das et al. have taken an exciting yet straightforward approach to improving broadband performance using a few-layered MoS2 field-effect transistor. The authors investigated the intrinsic carrier transport with a four-terminal measurement scheme to minimize unwanted contact resistance, which is unavoidable when using traditional two-terminal methods. When measured in four-terminal configuration, the responsivity value was enhanced from 1× 103 A W−1 to 3.5 × 103 A W−1 under white illumination. Interestingly, under monochromatic light of 400 nm, the EQE becomes 10 times higher when recorded using the four-terminal method. This approach can easily be adapted to other 2D materials to avoid unnecessary contact resistance in photodetection measurements to utilize the intrinsic photoconductivity of 2D PDs.197Table 7 presents an evaluation of broadband PDs based on their device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 11  The performance parameters of broadband PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a Bi2Te3–SnSe–Bi2Te3 PD and (b and c) the power-dependent responsivity and detectivity of the device at a source–drain bias of 20 V (taken from ref. 134 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of the SnSe/PET-based device and (e and f) the photoconductive and photobolometric device mechanisms (taken from ref. 195 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of a MoS2/p-Mo2C hybrid PD and (h) the impact of Mo2C on the responsivity and light-to-dark current ratio (taken from ref. 196 with permission). 
Table 7 A summary of the key parameters of 2DM-based broadband PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device/spectral response (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Au/Ti:MoS2:Au/Ti
455–633
1
50
(50–120) × 10−3
1010–1011
—
106

272



455–850
850
2300
0.09
5 × 107


02
Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au
254

V
ds = 5
0.29
5.6 × 104
2 × 1013
5 × 10−3
107

273



254–850

V
g = 40
8 × 10−3


03
Cr/Au:GeS:Cr/Au
500

V
ds = 4
130
6.8 × 103
5.6 × 1014
0.2
104

191



300–800

V
g = 0
0.21


04
Au:GaSe:Au
240
−30
2 × 105
1.4/600
—
—
104

130



240–700


05
Pt:WS2:Pt
635
9
18
0.51/137
2.7 × 109
9.9
—

126



370–1064
8.7


06
Cr:MoS2/PVDF:Cr
635

V
ds = 5


2750
2.2 × 1012
1.8 × 10−3
—

192



500–900

V
g = 0
2.0 × 10−3


07
Ti/Au:SnSe/WS2:Ti/Au
457

V
ds = 5
440
0.099
—
8.2 × 10−3



274



457–1064

V
g = 0
8.4 × 10−3


08
Ti:MoS2:Ti
532

V
d = 1.2
1.69
—/13800
—
42 × 10−6
—

275




V
g = 0
42 × 10−6


09
Bi2Te3:SnSe:Bi2Te3


20
—
5.5/1833
6 × 1010
—
—

134



370–808


10
Cr/Au:β-In2S3:Cr/Au
450
1
—
137/3.78 × 104
4.74 × 1010
6 × 10−3
1.5 × 103

147



400–1000
8 × 10−3


11
Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au
532
0.5
51 × 10−3
0.0084/2
1.74 × 1010





276



375–808


12
Ag:GeSe:Ag



V
ds = 2
0.15
63 × 10−3/8.9
8 × 108
—
—

149



400–900

V
g = 0


13
Gr:SnSe:Gr
400
1
0.4
38 × 10−3
—
0.18
—

277



400–1050


14
Au:WS2/MoS2/Gr:Au
400
−3
6.35 × 10−6
6.6 × 107/2.06 × 108
—
7 × 10−3



194



400–1640
0.02186


15
Ti/Au:Bi2S3:Ti/Au
635

V
ds = 1
10−6
107
4 × 1014
0.02
—

102




V
g = 0
0.5


16
Au/Ge:GeSe:Au/Ge
532

V
d = 1
—
0.06
—
13 × 10−6



278



532–1400

V
g = 0
19 × 10−6


17
Ag:SnSe:Ag
404
15
15.5
277.3/8.5 × 104
7.6 × 1011
0.35
—

140



404–980
1.83


18
Cu:WS2:Cu
532
5
59.09
4.04 × 10−3
2.55 × 109
11
—

279



532–1064
7.9


19
Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au
380
5
0.07
2.6
1.0 × 1012
0.7
—

280



1.2


20
Pd:SnSe:Pd
404
20
—
1745.5
4.2 × 1011
1.7
—

195



410–10600
4.7


21
Au:GeSe:Au
532
9
106.2
5562
3.01 × 1012
0.027



58



532–980
0.029


22
Ti/Au:In2S3:Ti/Au
405
2
31.4
1810
2.09 × 1015/5555
41 × 10−5
—

122



350–700
85 × 10−5


23
Ti/Au:Mo2C/MoS2:Ti/Au
1310


—
5 × 103
—
0.13
300

196



400–1310
0.95




5.6 Self-powered photodetectors
The use of self-powered optoelectronic devices, where no additional power supply is required for functioning, is rapidly rising in areas such as space science and medical instrumentation.198 Self-powered PDs are a promising choice for use in integrated electronics due to their light weight, small size, and energy-efficient operation. According to the construction features and carrier-transport mechanism involved, self-powered PDs can be categorized into three basic groups: p–n junction type; Schottky junction type; and photoelectrochemical type. These three kinds of self-driven PDs utilize the photovoltaic effect, where photoexcited charge carriers are transported under the influence of a developed built-in potential at the junction or an energy barrier between the electrode material and electrolyte. Another special kind of self-powered PD has been developed via combining an energy-harvesting unit with a light detector. The energy-harvesting unit can be a nanogenerator, solar cell, or supercapacitor. Interestingly, researchers have integrated the piezotronic properties of asymmetric semiconducting materials with their photodetection characteristics to enable self-driven photodetection, which is popularly known as piezophototronic photodetection.199,200 2D TMDCs exhibit potential piezotronic properties, and there is enormous scope for developing TMDC-based piezophototronic PDs for next-generation optoelectronics. Gong et al. fabricated Au-, MoS2-, and ITO-based vertical heterojunctions, where the junction between Au and MoS2 operated like a Schottky barrier and the junction between MoS2 and ITO behaved in an ohmic manner.201 The device exhibits a shallow dark current (10−12 A), and under zero bias, a good on–off ratio of up to 106 was observed. Similar work has been reported by Dai et al., with additional Au nanoparticles as a source of surface plasmons.202 Upon the insertion of plasmonic nanoparticles into multilayer InSe, the resultant device performs not only in a dual-band manner, but it also shows 1200% enhancement in responsivity at 685 nm. Fig. 12(a) shows a schematic diagram of the device, where InSe nanosheets are decorated with Au nanoparticles. The dual-band detection abilities of the device result in responsivities of 365 mA W−1 and 244 mA W−1 at 365 nm and 685 nm, respectively, under zero bias due to the effect of the hybridized quadruple plasmon resonance of Au nanoparticles; this is further enhanced due to Schottky barrier differences formed as a result of asymmetric contacts. Fig. 12(b) shows the responsivity vs. wavelength curve, which confirms the dual-band nature of the PD. Upon incorporating Au nanoparticles, the resultant device performs much faster than a bare InSe nanosheet-based PD due to surface plasmon exciton coupling involving Au nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 12(c). Recently piezophototronic-based detectors are drawing attention in the field of 2D optoelectronics. This approach basically involves using piezoelectricity and photonics simultaneously to improve the performance of an optoelectronic device. Dai et al. reported an enhancement in device performance upon the application of the piezoelectric effect. Their device used asymmetric Schottky contact between Au and multilayer γ-InSe and achieved responsivity of up to 824 mA W−1 under zero bias and with illumination at a wavelength of 400 nm.199 Further, the performance of the PD was investigated under 0.62% uniaxial tensile strain, and it demonstrated enhancements of 696% and 1010% in responsivity and response speed, respectively. Fig. 12(d) and (e) show that the device shows a positive current output upon applying stretching strain along the armchair direction while negative current output is seen after strain release, which apparently proves the impact of the piezophototronic effect. Fig. 12(f) describes the responsivity and detectivity as functions of the wavelength both with and without 0.62% tensile strain. Based on the combination of the two above-discussed effects (surface plasmon and piezoelectric effects), Bayan et al. reported the use of Ag-nanoparticle-loaded g-C3N4 nanosheets and a PVDF hybrid in a self-powered PD, where the role of the Ag nanoparticles is related to plasmonics and PVDF is a source of piezoelectricity. The authors recorded responsivity of 17 μA W−1 under illumination of 405 nm.203 Tan et al. presented a lateral WSe2–WSe2 homojunction for self-powered photodetection.204 A lateral junction has certain drawbacks, like the passivation of effective nucleation during growth and, as a result, it is difficult to get a clean junction at the interface. However, in a homojunction there is no lattice mismatch and very few defects are available, which reduces the dark current of the device. As the electrical conductivity of WSe2 can be easily transformed from p- to n-type, or vice versa, via selecting suitable electrodes, the rectification ratio of this WSe2–WSe2 homojunction can be varied between 1 and 1.2 × 104. Fig. 12(g) shows a schematic diagram of the device. Two interesting events are observed when the incident illumination falls on the thin and thick WSe2 sides of the device, as shown by the energy band diagrams in Fig. 12(h) and (i), respectively. When the thin side is illuminated, significant photocurrent was generated due to the effect of the large built-in potential. Photoinduced holes can easily move to the thick region and electrons can move to the thin sides; however, upon illuminating the thick region, there is no movement of photoinduced carriers due to a relatively high potential barrier. Table 8 presents an evaluation of self-powered PDs based on their device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 12  The performance parameters of self-powered PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a InSe/Au-based surface-plasmon-enhanced PD, (b) the spectral response of the device showing the dual-band nature of detection at 0 V, and (c) the temporal response of PDs with and without Au nanoparticles under 685 nm illumination at 0 V (taken from ref. 245 with permission). (d) Schematic diagrams of the polarization direction in multilayer γ-InSe nanosheets, (e) the piezoelectric current in response to stretching and releasing, and (f) the spectral responsivity and detectivity of the device without and with 0.31% strain (taken from ref. 199 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of the WSe2–WSe2 lateral homojunction device and (h and i) energy band diagrams upon illuminating the thin and thick sides of WSe2, respectively (taken from ref. 204 with permission). 
Table 8 A summary of the key parameters of 2DM-based self-powered PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/EQE (%)
Detectivity (Jones)
Rise time (s)
Fall time (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.




01
Au:BN:Au
250
1
0.296
—
1.6
17
—

281



02
Au:MoS2:ITO
637
338
1
1010
64 × 10−6
64 × 10−6
106

237



03
Au:WSe2:ITO
637
56.7
0.1
—
50 × 10−6
20 × 10−6
104

238



033
Cr/Au:MoS2/WS2:Cr/Au
532
28.64
4.36 × 10−3
4.36 × 1013
4 × 10−3
4 × 10−3



239



04
Au:InSe/Au:In
685
—
0.244
∼1012
0.023
0.025
103

245



05
Au/Ni:WSe2:Au/Ni
650
541
2.31
9.16 × 1011
—
—
—

282



06
Pd:HfO2/MoS2:Cr/Au
532
—
0.538
—
0.969
0.875
—

283



07
Gr:MoSe2:Au
650
—
89.5 × 10−3
2.24 × 1010
9.6 × 10−3
12.8 × 10−3



284



08
Au:γ-InSe:Au
650
0.368
198.2 × 10−3
3.91 × 1011
20.3 × 10−6
10.8 × 10−6



199



09
Ti/Au:GeSe/MoS2:Ti/Au
532
—
105 × 10−3
1.03 × 1010
110 × 10−3
750 × 10−3



285



10
Ti/Au:WSe2/WSe2:Ti/Au
532
19
11.2 × 10−3
4.4 × 1010
0.18 × 10−3
0.22 × 10−3



204



11
Pd/Au:WSe2/WS2:In/Au
532
1186
216 × 10−3
—
80 × 10−6
90 × 10−6



286



12
Ag:SnS:Ag
395
5
4.71 × 10−4
8.67 × 108
0.43
1.93



287



13
Au/Cr:InSe/InSe0.82Te0.18:Au/Cr
900
3.33
0.0141
—
0.120
0.120
10

288



14
Cr/Au:GeSe:Pd/Au
850
132
0.280
4.1 × 109
0.069
0.092
103

289



15
Al:g-C3N4/PVDF:ITO
405
0.5
1.7 × 10−6
—
6.2
12.9
—

203





5.7 Flexible and transparent photodetectors
In wearable optoelectronics, it is necessary that the materials involved are compatible with flexibility and transparency requirements. Hu et al. reported ultrathin GaS nanosheets for photodetection in the UV region using both rigid (Si/SiO2) and flexible (PET) substrates, and they observed that the responsivity and EQE were four times higher when a flexible PET substrate was used.104 This is due to the presence of hydroxyl groups or other structural defects at the SiO2 interface, which can trap photoexcited carriers. Upon bending the device to 60°, the effective light irradiance is reduced by 2% and, as a result, the responsivity and photocurrent fall by a factor of 2%. Fig. 13(a) shows an optical image of GaS nanosheets on a PET substrate as a flexible PD. It is desirable that device performance is maintained over several bending cycles in the case of durable flexible optoelectronics. Fig. 13(b) shows that the device is very much capable of maintaining a response time of less than 30 ms and an on/off switching ratio of 1.5 × 104 even after 20 bending cycles. This PD with a flexible PET substrate can achieve responsivity and detectivity values of 19.2 A W−1 and 1014 Jones, respectively, under illumination of 254 nm with a very low intensity of 0.5 mW cm−2, as shown in Fig. 13(c). Zheng et al. fabricated a PD that was both flexible and transparent for wearable-device-use based on WSe2 film, a flexible polyimide (PI) substrate, and ITO transparent electrodes.127 The PD shows 80% transparency in the visible region, and when the detector is bent to a radius of 5 mm, the responsivity is reduced by less than 5%. It has already been experimentally proven that electrical contacts are a key issue limiting the performance of 2D materials. In a traditional PD, either metal electrodes or gate dielectrics are employed as electrical contacts; these are usually opaque, negating the benefits of transparency, and brittle in nature. In order to improve the performances of these flexible devices, both the substrate and electrodes should be flexible and transparent. Aji et al., in their work, reported the use of multilayer graphene as a semi-transparent and flexible electrode and parylene-C as a flexible substrate to improve the performance of a WS2 transistor.145 This flexible PD achieved high responsivity (4500 A W−1) and a fast response speed (>2 ms). Similarly, Velusamy et al. reported a very low-cost flexible PD based on a paper substrate via simple solution-based processing with 2D organic (g-C3N4) and inorganic (MoS2) hybrid thin films.205 The authors observed fast and efficient charge transfer between g-C3N4 (donor) and MoS2 (acceptor) using femtosecond absorption spectroscopy. The device still works effectively after 400 bending cycles at a bending radius of 4 mm without performance degradation. Using the synergistic effects arising from SnS as a channel material and the TI Bi2Te3 as an electrode, Yao et al. achieved high responsivity, EQE, and detectivity values of 115 A W−1, 3.9 × 104%, and 4.1 × 1011 Jones, respectively.206 To make the device flexible for use in wearable devices, they used PI as a substrate and observed no changes in device performance, even after 100 bending cycles. A similar kind of work was performed by Deng et al. with a conductive Ti3C2 electrode and 2D CsPbBr3 as the channel material on a paper substrate.207 They achieved a fast response speed of 18 ms and an excellent on–off ratio of 2.3 × 103. There was no transfer of charge carriers in the absence of illumination due to the high Schottky barrier. While under illumination at 450 nm, the height of the barrier reduces; as a result, large numbers of electrons and holes take part in photoconduction. Fig. 13(d) and (e) show the photogenerated electron–hole migration under dark and light illumination. Then, to examine the flexibility and stability of the device, it was bent by 1600, and after 1500 bending cycles, the photocurrent of the device was 85% of its initial value. Fig. 13(f) and (g) show the temporal photoresponses of the device to varying bending angles and after different numbers of bending cycles, respectively. Based on this PD, they made a 1665-pixel image sensor with a large area of 72 cm2. Table 9 presents an evaluation of flexible and transparent PDs based on their device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 13  The performance parameters of flexible PDs. (a) An optical image of GaS nanosheets on a PET substrate, (b) the temporal photoresponse of the device before and after 20 bending cycles, and (c) the spectral responsivity and detectivity of the device under irradiance of 0.5 mW cm−2 and a bias of 2 V (taken from ref. 104 with permission). (d and e) The migration of photocarriers under no illumination and under illumination in CsPbBr3 nanosheets with MXene electrodes and (f and g) the photocurrent over time in response to various bending angles and after different numbers of bending cycles, respectively (taken from ref. 207 with permission). 
Table 9 A summary of the key parameters of 2DM-based flexible and transparent PDs, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)/intensity (mW cm−2)
Bias (V)
Responsivity (A W−1)/detectivity (Jones)

T
Rise (s)
Mechanical properties tested
Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Cr/Au:GaS:Cr/Au
254
2
19.2
3 × 10−2
A decrease in the photoresponsivity by a factor of 2 upon bending the device to 60°.

104



0.5
1014
3 × 10−2


02
Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au
White light
10
30 × 10−3
—
—

290



—


03
Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au
633

V
ds = 10
3.9
1
—

106



0.28

V
g = 0
5.47 × 1010
1


04
ITO:WSe2:ITO
635
10
0.92
0.9
Bent to a small radius of curvature of 5 mm, with transparency of up to 80%.

127



6.7 × 10−3
—
2.0


05
Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au
700
5
363
80 × 10−3
Bending the device to a radius of curvature of 10 nm does not change the photocurrent, and the device shows transmittance of 63%.

78



0.29
6.4 × 1012
70 × 10−3


06
Gr:WS2:Gr
532

V
ds = 5
4500
2 × 10−3
The device can be bent to a 2.3 mm radius of curvature.

145



0.03

V
g = 60
—
2 × 10−3


07
Gr:SnS:Gr
—
3
1.7 × 104
0.3
After 25 bending cycles, the PD does not show any change in current.

291



1.2 × 10−4
—
0.4


08
Au:g-C3N4/MoS2:Au
532
−9
0.7
—
The excellent performance is retained even after the film is severely deformed to a bending radius of ∼2 mm for hundreds of cycles.

205



225
8 × 1010


09
Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au
700
5
363
80 × 10−3
Mechanical durability and photoresponse stability after 10 bending cycles.

141



0.29
6.4 × 1012
70 × 10−3


10
Bi2Te3:SnS:Bi2Te3
370
5
115
1
Excellent durability after 100 bending cycles.

206



10
4.1 × 1011
2


11
Cr/Au:Bi2Se3:Cr/Au
735
0.1
10.1 × 10−3
37 × 10−3
The device shows excellent stability even after 200 bending cycles at a radius of 6 mm.

292



26.7
4.63 × 108
62 × 10−3


12
ITO/Au:In2Se:Ti/Au
660
1
5.6
140 × 10−3
The device shows excellent performance at a radius of 4 mm over 400 bending cycles.

123



10.2 × 10−3
7 × 1010
25 × 10−3


13
Ti3C2:CsPbBr3:Ti3C2
450
10
44.9 × 10−3
48 × 10−3
The device can retain 85% of the initial photocurrent even after 1500 bending cycles at a bending angle of 160°.

207



6.4 × 108
18 × 10−3


14
Au:SnS:Au
365
1
1.28 × 103
44 × 10−3
—

293



—
3.02 × 1011
53 × 10−3


15
Ni:MoS2:Ni
White light

V
ds = 2
150
0.5
The device shows no change in photocurrent after 100 bending cycles at a 25 mm bending radius.

294



1

V
g = −2
∼1012
1.15




6. Heterostructured 2D materials for efficient PDs
Designing 2D/3D heterojunctions is an efficient way of integrating the novel optical properties of 2D materials with the proven merits of 3D semiconductors. Bulk semiconductors can offer high optical absorption and provide freedom in terms of interface engineering with dissimilar materials. In addition, mature 3D crystal growth techniques can ensure defect-free crystal structures, easing the optimization process. Interestingly, 2DMs can be conveniently assembled on 3D semiconductors via facile approaches, like spray coating, spin coating, solvothermal treatment, etc. The optical absorption characteristics of 3D semiconductors, especially for photodetection applications, can be modified via surface nanostructuring through chemical etching or plasma etching. This provides ample opportunities to explore novel heterostructures for stable optoelectronics applications. To evaluate the performances of 2DMs, including chalcogenides, nitrides (h-BN and g-C3N4), and carbides, integrated with commercially available semiconductors (like Si and group III–V materials), we comprehensively discuss their heterostructures below. We also thoroughly address available van der Waals heterostructures between these 2DMs and other 2D semiconductors.
6.1 With Si
Commercially available PDs are made with silicon, although this creates disadvantages like poor responsivity (∼mA W−1) and transparency at wavelengths above 1.1 μm. Although its mechanical firmness limits its application in flexible optoelectronics, it has a few advantages, like stability under ambient conditions and a defect-free surface. Graphene has largely been explored as an efficient photodiode in Schottky contact208 with Si due to processing compatibility with conventional semiconductor technology. However, the low density of states in graphene and limited bandgap tunability compared to TMDCs has opened up the possibility of TMDC-based photodetection in conjunction with Si. Therefore, researchers are interested in fabricating heterojunctions between Si and 2D chalcogenides, carbides, and nitrides to obtain efficient and stable photodetection. The advantages of topological insulators (TIs) for photodetection have been mentioned already. They have insulating bulk bandgaps and metallic Dirac surface states. Zhang et al. investigated the photodetection mechanism of Bi2Se3 and silicon heterostructures grown via van der Waals epitaxy, and they achieved high on/off ratio, responsivity, and detectivity values of 1.55 × 105, 24.28 A W−1, and 4.39 × 1012 Jones, respectively, under illumination of 808 nm.120 They observed that Bi2Se3 retains its TI properties even after heterostructuring with silicon, and its internal and top surfaces act as electron and hole transport layers, respectively, facilitating the photodetection mechanism. Fig. 14(a) shows a schematic diagram of the migration of photogenerated charge carriers with the help of surface states in Bi2Se3 films. Fig. 14(b) shows the responsivity as a function of the light intensity under two different biases of 0 and 1 V. Under high light intensity, the responsivity of the device decreases due to an increase in carrier recombination. Kang et al. fabricated Ti3C2TX and Si heterostructures for photodetection in self-powered mode. A schematic diagram of this heterostructure is shown in Fig. 14(c).98 Recently, MXenes have been employed in photodetection as promising materials due to their excellent transmittance and adjustable work functions (depending on the surface functional groups), making them useful not only as transparent electrodes but also in optoelectronics (involved in photon-based charge separation). A Schottky junction developed between a metallic MXene and the semiconductor Si delivered a well-defined on/off ratio of 105 and switching operation times of 0.84 s (rise time) and 1.67 s (decay time). Fig. 14(d) shows an energy band diagram of this heterostructure under illumination. Upon decreasing the thickness of the MXene layer, the transmittance increases, causing a more significant number of photons to be transferred to Si. Consequently, a more significant number of photoinduced carriers is generated in Si. Fig. 14(e) and (f) present schematic diagrams of these heterostructures with thin MXene and thick MXene layers, respectively.
 Fig. 14  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and silicon. (a) The carrier migration process of heterojunctions with the aid of surface states of Bi2Se3 film and (b) the responsivity of the device at various illumination intensities under two different bias voltages (taken from ref. 120 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of carrier migration in a Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure, (d) an energy band diagram of the heterostructure under illumination, (e) the carrier migration in the heterostructure with a thin MXene layer and (f) the carrier migration in the heterostructure with a thick MXene layer (taken from ref. 98 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of the polarization sensitivity of a device consisting of WS2/Si heterostructures and (h) the normalized photocurrent of the device with varying polarization angles (taken from ref. 209 with permission). 
Prakash et al. reported the binary optical switching of a g-C3N4 and Si heterostructure realized through a Si-processing-compatible route in self-powered mode over an ultra-broadband (250–1350 nm) range.90 The Frenkel excitons formed due to the absorption of photons in the depletion region are further separated by the built-in potential developed in the heterojunction. Accordingly, electrons and holes are transported through g-C3N4 and silicon, giving rise to a measurable photocurrent at zero bias. This reported PD achieved high detectivity and on/off ratio values of 4.5 × 1013 Jones and 1.2 × 105, respectively, under illumination of 950 nm at 0.049 mW cm−2 and zero bias. To achieve photovoltaic and photogating effects together over a broad spectral wavelength range of 400–1200 nm, Lu et al. have shown a double heterojunction PD using 2D In2S3, graphene, and Si heterostructures, and it demonstrated high responsivity, detectivity, and photoconductive gain values of 4.53 × 104 A W−1, 3.02 × 1011 Jones, and 1.4 × 105, respectively, under irradiance of 26 μW cm−2.72Via the insertion of In2S3, the dark current of the device is reduced substantially; this enhanced the rectification ratio from 18.7 to 118 and accelerated charge separation via introducing an additional built-in potential. The device shows promising stability in air for one month without performance degradation. This double heterojunction achieved fast rise and decay times of × 33 μs and 40 μs, respectively. Further, Wu et al. fabricated a type-II heterostructure between WS2 and Si for use in a self-powered broadband PD that was responsive up to 3043 nm.209 The device shows polarization sensitivity, a good on-/off ratio (106), and a fast response speed (microseconds). In addition, they investigated the polarization sensitivity of the heterostructure. Fig. 14(g) shows a schematic diagram of polarization sensitivity measurements of the heterostructure, and the normalized photocurrent plot is shown in Fig. 14(h). Table 10 presents an evaluation of PDs containing heterostructures of 2D TMDCs and silicon based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
Table 10 A summary of the crucial parameters of PDs involving heterojunctions between 2DMs and Si, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Au:MoS2/Si:Au
550
1
0.4
0.210
—
3 × 10−4
—

295



3 × 10−4


02
Au:Si/MoS2:Ag
808
0
30
0.3
∼1013
3 × 10−6
8 × 103

296



4 × 10−5


03
Gr:MoSe2/Si:Ag
650
—
15
0.270
7.13 × 1010
27 × 10−8
—

297



35 × 10−8


04
Cu:Si/MoS2:Ti/Au
650
−2
90
11.9
2.1 × 1010
3 × 10−6
59.9

298



4 × 10−5


05
Au:Bi2Se3/Si:Au
808
−1
0.06
24.28
4.39 × 1012
25 × 10−7
1.55 × 105

120



37.4
55 × 10−6


06
Al:Si/SnS:ITO
760
0
7
0.013
3 × 1014
12 × 10−6
—

299



55 × 10−6


07
Al:Si/SnS:ITO
850
−1
20
0.25
1.3 × 1011
41 × 10−6
462.8

63



40.7 × 10−6


08
Ti/Au:Ti3C2/Si:Ti/Au
465
0
15.17
0.02695
—
0.84 × 10−3
105

98



1.67 × 10−3


09
Au:MoSe2/PFO/Si:Au
835
5
—
2.5
2.34 × 1014
0.1
104

110



0.1


10
Ag:g-C3N4/Si:Ag
950
0
0.049
0.16
4.5 × 1013
13 × 10−5
1.2 × 105

90



43 × 10−5


11
Au:Gr/In2S3/Si:Ag
405
−2
0.026
4.53 × 104
3.02 × 1011
33 × 10−6
666

72



4 × 10−5


12
Ti/Au:In2S3/Si:Ag
700
−2
9.35 × 10−3
579.6
2 × 1011
9 × 10−3
—

74



13.1 × 10−5


13
Ag:Si/WS2:Gr
650
−2
1.55 × 10−3
1.5
2 × 1012
2 × 10−6
—

300



7.2 × 10−6


14
Ag:Gr/In2Se3/Si:In/Ga
808
0
5.43 × 10−3
0.57
2.6 × 1012
35 × 10−6
1.6 × 104

301



115 × 10−6


15
Ag:Si/WS2:Ag
785
—
11.696
10.46 × 10−3
1.17 × 109
—
—

302



16
Au:WS2/Si:Au
980
0
0.03 × 10−3
0.224
1.5 × 1012
16 × 10−6
106

209



29 × 10−6


17
Au:SnS0.25Se0.75/Si:Ag
635
0
44.88
0.377
∼1012
4.7 × 10−3
4.5 × 102

303



3.9 × 10−3


18
In:Si/SiO2/SnSe:Pd
900
0
—
39.2
4.2 × 1016
29 × 10−6
106

304



19
Ti/Au:In2S3/Si:Ti/Au
405
0
0.026
0.74
1.56 × 1010
9 × 10−3
—

305



10−2


20
Ag:Si/Bi2Se3:Ag
900
—
14.6
0.168
1.85 × 1011
4 × 10−3
113

148



4 × 10−3




6.2 III–V semiconductors
III–V semiconductors have several advantages over commercial silicon when it comes to device applications, e.g., higher carrier mobility, a low exciton binding energy, optical absorption in the visible regime, and a direct bandgap. One significant advantage of III–V semiconductors is their stability against oxidation compared to Si. Therefore, heterojunctions with these semiconductor alloys show comparatively improved performance and stability over Si. Zhou et al. reported GaN/MoS2-based p–n heterojunctions for self-powered PDs in the DUV region.210Fig. 15(a) shows a schematic diagram of the photodetection measurements. Regardless of the lattice mismatch between GaN and MoS2, the heterojunction is well-formed due to the presence of free dangling bonds at the surface of MoS2. The difference in Fermi energies at the heterojunction leads to a strong enough built-in potential after junction formation, making this device work even under zero bias. Fig. 15(b) shows the energy band diagram of the heterojunction under UV illumination. Upon UV radiation at the heterojunction, electron–hole pairs are produced, and these are further separated due to the built-in potential at the interface. This PD shows high detectivity (2.34 × 1013 Jones), a fast response (in μs), and a high on/off ratio (105) under illumination at 265 nm. Similar work was undertaken by Zhao et al., where they replaced MoS2 with WS2 and achieved an order-of-magnitude enhancement in detectivity (4 × 1014 Jones) in self-powered mode.211 The PD was also used to demonstrate the UV imaging of the letters ZZU with a voltage contrast ratio of 8 × 103 at 375 nm. Kang et al. reported a γ-In2Se3 and GaAs heterostructure-based PD composed of a linear array of image sensing devices in self-powered mode that responded to very low intensity illumination.212 The presented device achieved a high on/off ratio of 104 and a fast response speed (μs) with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short circuit current (ISC) of 0.52 V and 0.49 μA, respectively, under 660 nm illumination with an intensity of 2.504 mW cm−2. The device exhibited excellent stability under ambient conditions, and no considerable performance degradation was observed for up to 7 months in relation to the capability to record images produced under visible light illumination. Fig. 15(c) shows a schematic diagram of the setup for tracking the trajectory of a moving visible-light spot. This unique feature of the device gives a new direction for tracking high-speed targets. Fig. 15(d) demonstrates the change in photocurrent when the light spot passes through different pixels. Fig. 15(e) shows an image of the letter “E” produced by the PD array under visible illumination. Recently, Jia et al. fabricated WS2/GaAs type-II heterojunctions for self-powered photodetection with a broad spectral response range from 200 nm to 1550 nm.213Fig. 15(f) shows a schematic diagram of the device. Interestingly this heterojunction exhibits Zener tunnelling behaviour, with a threshold voltage of 4 V. Fig. 15(g) shows the I–V characteristics of the device under both dark conditions and 808 nm illumination, with Zener breakdown. The device is capable of achieving a high on/off switching ratio of 107 under illumination at 808 nm with an intensity of 55.2 mW cm−2. Table 11 presents an evaluation of PDs consisting of heterostructures of 2D TMDCs and III–V semiconductors based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 15  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and III–V semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of MoS2/GaN heterostructures along with the photodetection measurement process and (b) an energy band diagram of the heterojunction under UV illumination (taken from ref. 210 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a γ-In2Se3/GaAs PD array along with the setup for tracking the trajectory of a moving visible light spot, (d) changes in photocurrent when the light spot passes thorough different pixels, and (e) an image of the letter “E” produced by the PD under visible illumination (taken from ref. 212 with permission). (f) A schematic diagram of a WS2/GaAs heterostructure device and (g) the I–V characteristics of the devices under both dark conditions and 808 nm illumination (taken from ref. 213 with permission). 
Table 11 A summary of the key parameters of PDs including heterojunctions between 2DMs and III–V semiconductors, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Au:MoS2/GaAs:Au
635
0
—
0.321
3.5 × 1013
17 × 10−6
—

306



31 × 10−6


02
Au:MoS2/GaN:Ni/Au
265
0
10−3
0.187
2.34 × 1013
46.4 × 10−6
105

210



114.1 × 10−6


03
Au/Cr:MoS2/GaN:Al
365
1
12
∼103
∼1011
5.4 × 10−3
—

307



5.6 × 10−3


04
Au:WS2/GaN:Ni/Au
375
0
10−3
0.226
4 × 1014
7.3 × 10−6
3 × 105

211



4.2 × 10−4


05
Ti/Au:MoS2/InAlAs/InGaAs:Ti/Au
1550
—
5
8 × 105
2 × 1012
14 × 10−3
—

308



70 × 10−3


06
Au:In2Se3/GaAs:Au
660
0
3.06 × 10−3
0.25
7.34 × 1012
23.6 × 1012
1.29 × 104

212



146.7 × 1012


07
Ag/Au:MoS2/GaN:Ag/Au
405
5
0.076
444
—
0.15
—

309



0.10


08
Au:WS2/GaAs:Au
365
1
0.012
65.58
4.47 × 1012
30 × 10−3
1.15 × 103

310



10−2


09
Au:WS2/GaAs:Au
808
0
17 × 10−6
0.527
1.03 × 1014
21.8 × 10−6
107

213



49.6 × 10−6


10
g-C3N4/microporous GaN
360–635
3
10−3
3
1014
—
—

311



103




6.3 With oxide semiconductors
Oxide semiconductors, with their high direct bandgaps and well-defined optical absorption, can allow efficient photodetection. In addition, their stability under ambient conditions enhances their scope when it comes to device applications. In bulk and nanostructured forms, oxide semiconductors have been occasionally utilized with group IV elements, III–V compounds, and 2D chalcogenides for optoelectronics applications. Kumar et al. presented MoS2 and rGO heterojunctions for use in a high-performance PD with a good on/off ratio of 100.214 Compared with pristine-MoS2-based devices, the incorporation of crumpled rGO nanoparticles increases the photocurrent and reduces the dark current considerably, which improves the device performance via forming multiple numbers of nano-p–n-junctions. Fig. 16(a) shows a schematic diagram of the PD and Fig. 16(b) shows the energy band diagram of the device after forming heterojunctions. Due to the built-in potential at the junction of rGO and MoS2 under illumination, the photoexcited electrons move to the MoS2 side and holes move to rGO. As a result of a strong photogating effect, holes are confined to rGO, improving the device performance. Kallatt et al. reported a vertical heterojunction between ITO, MoS2, and Cu2O for use in a high-sensitivity PD, where ITO and Cu2O are heavily doped n- and p-type semiconductors, respectively.215 The incorporation of a metal oxide (Cu2O) layer protects MoS2 from the ambient environment and the substrate. The transparency of the top ITO layer improves the device performance considerably because an increase in transparency leads to an enhancement in the photon absorption of the device. Another way to improve the photoresponsivity of a device is via the efficient collection of photogenerated carriers. Fig. 16(c) shows how the SiO2 layer of the Si substrate traps photogenerated holes. To reduce this effect, they prepared vertical heterostructures of ITO, MoS2, and Cu2O, in which photogenerated carriers are completely isolated from the trap states of the substrate, as shown in Fig. 16(d). The device can achieve responsivity and detectivity values as high as 5.77 × 104 A W−1 and 3.2 × 1014 Jones, respectively, under illumination of 532 nm and a very low bias of –1 V.
 Fig. 16  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and oxide semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of a crumped r-GO particle decorated MoS2-based photodiode and (b) the energy band diagram after forming the heterojunction (taken from ref. 214 with permission). (c) Carrier collection by a bare MoS2 device and (d) carrier collection by a vertical heterostructure between ITO, MoS2, and Cu2O (taken from ref. 215 with permission). (e) An energy band diagram of a MoS2/MnO QD heterostructure device and (f) the current–voltage characteristics of both bare MoS2 and MnO QDs/MoS2 devices (taken from ref. 217 with permission). 
The most favourable structures for efficient photodetection are type-II heterostructures because of efficient charge separation; however, their use has the certain drawback of a slow photoresponse. A different approach involves type-I heterojunctions, in which charge carriers are injected from a wide bandgap material to a narrow bandgap material; the charge carriers are then confined in the narrow bandgap material, which leads to a faster device response. Zhou et al. fabricated a type-I heterostructure between ZnO quantum dots and monolayer MoS2 for UV and visible PDs with responsivity and detectivity values of 0.084 A W−1 and 1.05 × 1011 Jones, respectively, under illumination of 405 nm.216 Although there are several techniques through which dark currents can be modulated like (i) gate biasing, (ii) surface modification by plasmons, and (iii) plasmonic hot-electron doping, these techniques have certain disadvantages as well, e.g., gate biasing needs extra terminals, and in surface modification, the injection of hot electrons leads to unstable device states. Recently, Pak et al. introduced MnO quantum dots as an electron blocking layer in MoS2 and MnO heterostructures for photodetection. Due to the electron blocking layer, the dark current is reduced and the photocurrent increases considerably.217Fig. 16(e) presents the band diagram of a MoS2 and MnO quantum dot heterojunction. Fig. 16(f) demonstrates the I–V characteristics of bare MoS2 and MoS2–MnO quantum dot heterojunctions, demonstrating the role of MnO quantum dots as an electron blocking layer. Table 12 presents an evaluation of PDs based on heterostructures of 2D TMDCs and oxide semiconductors based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
Table 12 A summary of the key parameters of PDs involving heterojunctions between 2DMs and oxide semiconductors, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
ITO:MoS2/Cu2O:Au
532
−0.5
0.026
5.77 × 104
3.2 × 1014
70 × 10−3
36

215



02
Au:MoSe2/MoOX:Cr2
254
5
0.29
3.4
0.85 × 108
0.4
—

312



0.5


03
Au/Cr:rGO/MoS2:Au/Cr
460
4
8
2.10
5 × 1011
18 × 10−3
102

214



18 × 10−3


04
ITO:WS2/ZNO:FTO
365
−1
0.5
2.7
5.8 × 1012
0.8 × 10−3
—

313



2.2 × 10−3


05
Au/Ti:MoS2/ZnO:Au/Ti
405
1
—
0.084
1.05 × 1011
1.5
—

216



1.1


06
Ti/Au:MoS2/MnO QD:Ti/Au
260
—
100
20
5 × 1011
0.5
—

217



0.5


07
Au/Ti:MoSe2/MoO2:Ti/Au
532
3
3.38
0.10086
23.4 × 109
0.43
∼800

314



1.2


08
Au:MoS2/TiO2:Au


VGS = 0
2.32
1099
1.7 × 1013
—
106

315



VDS = 1


09
Au:WSe2/rGO:Au
540
5
0.2 × 10−3
105
—
0.001
—

316



0.002


10
Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au
365
—
—
24.36
—
0.9
—

317



8.28 × 103
1.04


11
WS2/ZnO/Si
670
−2
0.2
9.48
6.39 × 1011
125 × 10−3
—

318



150 × 10−3


12
Cr/Au:WSe2/ZnO:Cr/Au
405
—
1
4.83 × 103
1.56 × 1013
10 × 10−6
—

319



1.48 × 104
10 × 10−6




6.4 van der Waals heterojunctions
Layered 2DMs are stacked layer by layer due to weak interlayer van der Waals (vdW) forces. This has certain advantages, like a dangling-bond-free surface that produces a number of vdW heterojunctions. It is possible to make a wide variety of vdW junctions without worrying about lattice mismatching. Very recently, Alamri et al. reported graphene and WS2 nanodisc vdW junctions with plasmonic Ag nanoparticles for photodetection and observed a 5-fold enhancement of the photocurrent when using plasmonic Ag nanoparticles.218Fig. 17(a) shows a schematic diagram of the device configuration and the inset shows a cross-section view. This TMDC/Gr vdW junction combines the advantages of graphene (high carrier mobility and a broad spectral response) and WS2 (a tunable bandgap depending on thickness and high absorption). It delivers high responsivity, EQE, and detectivity values of 11.7 A W−1, 2390%, and 4.3 × 1010 Jones, respectively, under 450 nm illumination. Upon incident light illumination, photons are absorbed by WS2, generating electron–hole pairs, and these are further separated by the built-in potential at the junction of WS2 and graphene. Ag nanoparticles, via a localized surface plasmon effect, induce an enhancement in the photon absorption over a broad wavelength range (400–700 nm), consequently improving the device performance. Fig. 17(b) and (c) demonstrates the evolution of photocurrent and photoresponsivity over time for devices with and without Ag nanoparticles. The presence of Ag nanoparticles enhances the photoresponsivity of the device 5-fold and 2.7-fold at wavelengths of 450 nm and 650 nm, respectively, compared to the device without Ag nanoparticles. However, the response speed of the device is comparably low in the presence of Ag nanoparticles. The device with plasmonic nanoparticles shows a rise time and fall time of 0.3 s and 1.0 s, respectively, at a light intensity of 0.15 mW cm−2 at 0.8 V. Xu et al. reported 1D CsPbBr3 and 2D WS2 planar vdW heterojunctions for use in high-performance PDs with a piezophototronic effect.219 The vdW heterojunction can achieve a high on/off ratio of 109 and detectivity as high as 1.36 × 1014 Jones under illumination at 450 nm and a bias of 2 V. Fig. 17(d) and (e) shows schematic diagrams of WS2/CSPbBr3 PDs under compressive and tensile strain, respectively. This vdW heterojunction shows positive and negative polarization charge under compressive and tensile strain, respectively. Further, under tensile strain, the device offers improved performance due to the reduced barrier height. Energy band diagrams under compressive and tensile strain are presented in Fig. 17(f) and (g), respectively. Lateral vdW heterojunctions have drawbacks, like large contact resistance arising from the high Schottky barrier at the interfaces between the metal electrodes and the 2D semiconducting material. Recently, vertical vdW heterojunctions have attracted much more attention in optoelectronics due to their low power consumption. Li et al. reported a vertical vdW heterojunction between MoS2 and MoSe2 for use in high-performance PDs, and they achieved high responsivity, on/off ratio, and detectivity values of 36 A W−1, 107, 4.8 × 1011 Jones, respectively, under 520 nm illumination.220Fig. 16(h) shows a schematic diagram of the device. The built-in potential at the junction helps to separate the photogenerated carriers. A schematic diagram of carrier migration under illumination is shown in Fig. 17(i). The recorded electron mobility of the vdW heterojunction-based device was 28.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is six times and three times higher than those of pristine MoS2 and MoSe2, respectively. Fig. 17(j) shows the dependence of the responsivity and detectivity of the device on the illumination intensity. Table 13 presents an evaluation of PDs based on van der Waals heterostructures involving 2D TMDC semiconductors based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 17  The performance parameters of PDs involving van der Waals heterostructures between different 2DMs. (a) A schematic diagram of a graphene/WS2 nanodisc/Ag nanoparticle based device and a zoomed-in cross-section image, (b) the temporal photocurrent of devices both with and without Ag nanoparticles, and (c) the spectral photoresponsivity of devices both with and without Ag nanoparticles (taken from ref. 218 with permission). (d and e) Schematic diagrams of a WS2/CSPbBr3 vdWH under compressive and tensile strain, respectively and (f and g) energy band diagrams under compressive and tensile strain, respectively (taken from ref. 219 with permission). (h) A schematic diagram of a vertical heterostructure between MoS2 and MoSe2 under illumination, (i) a schematic diagram of carrier migration under illumination, and (j) the dependence of responsivity and detectivity on the intensity (taken from ref. 220 with permission). 
Table 13 A summary of the key parameters of PDs involving van der Waals heterojunctions with 2DM semiconductors, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Cr/Au:WS2/CsPbBr3:Cr/Au
450
2
38.2 × 103
57.2
1.36 × 1014
2 × 10−3
109

219



2 × 10−3


02
Ag:Gr/WS2:Si
800
−0.3
0.32
54.5
4.1 × 1012
45 × 10−6
—

320



21 × 10−5


03
Au/In:InSe/Se:Au/In
460
0
1
32 × 10−3
1.7 × 1011
3 × 10−2
500

321



37 × 10−3


04
Au/Cr:MoS2/MoSe2:Au/Cr
520
0.6
1
36
4.8 × 1011
1.5 × 10−3
107

220



3.5 × 10−3


05
Cr/Au:WSe2/MoTe2:Cr/Au
633
0
—
1.8 × 10−3
—
72 × 10−6
104

322



48 × 10−6


06
Cr/Au:In2S3/Gr:Cr/Au
808
5
13.02
0.49 × 10−3
3.05 × 107
—
——

323



07
Ti/Au:MoS2/NbS2:Ti/Au
520
1
0.425
1.27
——
30 × 10−3
107

324



70 × 10−3


08
Au/Cr:InSe/Te:Au/Cr
400
−2
—
0.45
1.1 × 1013
——
104

325



09
Au:Gr/WS2/Ag NP:Au
450
0.8
0.15
11.7/2390
4.3 × 1010
0.3
—

218



1.0




6.5 With perovskites
The term “perovskite” generally refers a crystal structure of the form ABX3, where A, B, and X denote an organic cation, inorganic cation, and halide anion, respectively. Perovskites exhibit several advantages, like high photoluminescence, low exciton binding energies, high mobilities, big electron–hole transport lengths, etc. Cheng et al. reported a van der Waals assembly process for the integration of a perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) with a 2D material (WS2). The device shows excellent stability in air for up to 7 months without performance degradation, with a high on/off ratio of 106. They observed both the photoconducting and photovoltaic operation of this device and recorded high responsivity and gain values of 950 A W−1 and 2200, respectively.221 Peng et al. incorporated rGO with a MoS2 and perovskite (MAPbI3) heterojunction to improve the device performance, where the role of rGO is to act as a transport channel. The MoS2 and perovskite heterojunction works as a photon absorption and electron–hole-generating material.222 The device shows ultrahigh responsivity, detectivity, and EQE values of 1.08 × 104 A W−1, 4.28 × 1013 Jones, and 2.0 × 106%, respectively, with VGS = 0 V and VDS = 2 V under illumination of 660 nm. Fig. 18(a) shows a schematic diagram of a flexible PD composed of MAPbI3 and MoS2 heterojunctions with solution-processed rGO and a flexible PEN substrate. The device can almost maintain its initial values of responsivity and detectivity even after 2000 bending cycles, as shown in Fig. 18(b). One major drawback of 2D/2D heterostructures is their low optical absorption due to their atomically-thin structures. This issue can be resolved using 2D/0D heterojunctions. Recently, Wu et al. fabricated a heterojunction between MoS2 (2D) and CsPbI3-XBrx (0D) and achieved responsivity and EQE values of 7.7 × 104 A W−1 and 107%, respectively.223Fig. 18(c) shows a schematic diagram of the device and a TEM image of the perovskite quantum dots. Electron–hole pairs are generated at the perovskite quantum dots, and then electrons are transported to the MoS2 monolayer while holes are stacked in the perovskite quantum dots via a photogating effect. When the gate bias is less than the threshold voltage (OFF state), the Schottky barrier height increased sufficiently. In comparison, the Schottky barrier height reduces under a gate bias that is higher than the threshold bias (ON state). Fig. 18(d) and (e) show carrier migration in the device in OFF and ON states, respectively. Although metal halide perovskites are potential optoelectronic materials due to their excellent optical properties, their inferior ambient stability is a major drawback. Liu et al. reported a heterostructure between a metal halide perovskite (MLHP) and phosphorus-doped graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and successfully achieved good on/off ratio, responsivity, and detectivity values of 105, 14 A W−1, and ∼1013 Jones, respectively, under a white light source.224 The stability of a MLHP is always a critical issue; therefore, via incorporating graphitic carbon nitride, the device shows a considerable photocurrent, even after 7 days. Recently, Wang et al. reported a 2D halide perovskite (PEA)2PbI4 (as a p-type semiconductor) and multilayer MoS2 heterojunction for photodetection with an extremely low dark current (10−11 A) and a broad detection range from 200 to 900 nm. This device used a halide perovskite as an electron reservoir to reduce the dark current from 10−5 to 10−11 A. The photocurrent switching ratio increased from 10 to 105via interlayer charge transfer from MoS2 to (PEA)2PbI4. Fig. 18(f) and (g) shows comparisons of the dark currents and on/off switching ratios for both MoS2 and MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 devices. These PDs exhibit responsivity, EQE, and detectivity values of 16.8 A W−1, 3.3 × 103, and 1.06 × 1013 Jones, respectively, under illumination of 637 nm and a bias of 1 V.225Table 14 presents an evaluation of PDs utilizing heterostructures of 2D TMDCs and perovskite semiconductors based on the device architecture and performance parameters.
 Fig. 18  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and perovskite semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of a flexible device with a perovskite/MoS2 bulk heterostructure and hybrid r-GO on a flexible PEN substrate and (b) responsivity and detectivity vs. the number of bending cycles (taken from ref. 222 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a device containing a heterojunction between MoS2 (2D) and CsPbI3-XBrx (0D) with a TEM image of the perovskite quantum dots and (d and e) carrier migration in the off and on states of the device, respectively (taken from ref. 223 with permission). (f) A comparison of the dark currents of MoS2 and MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 devices; the inset shows a schematic diagram of the MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 hybrid PD, and (g) the variations of the on–off switching ratios of both MoS2 and MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 devices at different intensities (taken from ref. 225 with permission). 
Table 14 A summary of the key parameters of PDs involving heterojunctions between 2DMs and perovskite semiconductors, including device architecture, wavelength, bias, responsivity, detectivity, rise time, fall time, and on–off current ratio




S. no.
Device
Wavelength (nm)
Bias (V)
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Responsivity (A W−1)/gain
Detectivity (Jones)/EQE (%)

T
Rise (s)

I
ON/OFF

Ref.



T
Fall (s)




01
Gr:WS2/MAPbI3:Gr
532
1
—
950
—/2200
22 × 10−3
106

221



37 × 10−3


02
Ti/Au:MoS2/MAPbI3/APTES:Ti/Au
520
—
6
1.94 × 106
1.29 × 1012
6.17
—

326



4.5


03
Cr/Au:MoS2/CsPbBr3:Cr/Au
442
10
0.02
4.4/302
2.5 × 1010
0.72 × 10−3
104

327



1.01 × 10−3


04
Au:CH3NH3PbI3:Au
White light
5
0.7
68.11
—
0.205
1522

328



0.206


05
Au:MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3/rGO:Au
660

V
GS = 0
53 × 10−5
1.08 × 104
4.28 × 1013
45 × 10−3
—

222




V
DS = 2
45 × 10−3


06
Au:MoS2/CsPI3-XBrx:Au
532

V
G = 60
—
7.7 × 104
5.6 × 1011
0.59
—

223



107
0.32


07
Gr:MoS2/(PEA)2SnI4:Gr
660
0
—
0.121
8.09 × 109
34 × 10−3
500

329



38 × 10−3


08
Au:rGO/CH3NH3PbI3/WS2:Au
660

V
GS = 0
33.2 × 10−3
678.8
4.99 × 1011
—
—

330




V
DS = 2


09
Au/Cr:MoS2/CsPbBr3:Au/Cr
532
1
4.86
640
3.38 × 1011
—
—

331



10
Au:g-C3N4/MLHP:Au
White light
5
0.5 × 10−3
14
∼1013
6.1 × 10−3
105

224



2.2 × 10−3


11
Gr:MoS2/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP:Al
700
0
0.407
0.41
7.99 × 1010
—
—

332



12
Cr/Au:(PEA)2PbI4/MoS2:Cr/Au
637
1
—
16.8
1.06 × 1013
4 × 10−3
105

225



6 × 10−3




7. Performance evaluation
The characteristic optical bandgap in the DUV region and the absorption coefficient determine the performance of solar-blind PDs. 2D materials with favourable bandgaps for DUV detection are believed to be better than 3D-material-based PDs due to the higher surface-to-volume ratios of 2D materials. Ga2O3 has been widely used for solar-blind DUV PDs due to its characteristic high bandgap. When Ga2O3 PDs are integrated into arrays, they exhibit a noticeable responsivity of 1.2 A W−1 at 256 nm with a high bias of 10 V.226 In fact, in this case, the responsivity is achieved at the price of a high driving bias, which is detrimental to the overall efficacy since present technology is aimed towards self-powered detectors that require considerably lower power consumption. Although self-powered operation has been demonstrated using a Ga2O3/2D MoS2 heterojunction, the reported responsivity value (2.05 mA W−1) was unsatisfactory.227 On the other hand, 2D oxide perovskites, 2D oxyhalides, and 2D metal oxides have been found to exhibit ultrahigh responsivity in the DUV region with high detectivity and an ultrahigh EQE. No specific metal chalcogenides have been reported for solar-blind photodetection since their optical bandgaps do not cover the DUV region. Interestingly, 2D Sr2Nb3O10 nanosheets in a MSM configuration exhibit responsivity of 1214 A W−1, detectivity of 1.4 × 1014 Jones, and an EQE of 5.6 × 105% at only 1 V bias under 270 nm excitation.228 2D BiOCl PDs also exhibit responsivity of 35.7 A W−1 under 250 nm excitation and 2060 A W−1 at 450 K under solar-blind illumination.229 A 2D orthorhombic MoO3-based PD under solar-blind UV light of 254 nm exhibited responsivity of 67.9 A W−1 and an EQE of 3.3 × 104%.230 Indeed, the performance parameters of 2D perovskites and oxyhalide-based PDs outweigh those of widely used h-BN-based DUV detectors.
2D TMDCs have been successfully utilized for UVA detection since their monolayer characteristic bandgaps are adequate for detection. The device configuration, type of electrode material used, and heterojunction properties heavily impact the detector performance. Under 365 nm excitation, WS2 with an ITO electrode exhibits negligible responsivity. Simultaneously, WS2 with a Ti/Au electrode in MSM configuration shows noticeable responsivity of 53.3 A W−1. GaSe monolayers in MSM contact with Au electrodes have demonstrated ample responsivity and an ultrahigh EQE, with values of 2.8 A W−1 and 1367%, respectively. In a similar configuration with Pt electrodes, an In2Se3 monolayer PD exhibits high responsivity of 395 A W−1 and an ultrahigh EQE of 1.63 × 105%. Interestingly, GeS2 and GeSe2, having direct wide bandgaps (∼3 eV), are suitable for UV detection under polarized UV light due to their polarization sensitivity arising from their structural, vibrational, and optical anisotropies.
Further, in the case of visible photodetection, the electrode configuration can influence the photoresponsivity and switching speed. 2D TMDCs are mainly integrated into devices with MSM configurations and suitable electrode spacings, creating a reasonable barrier height for carrier extraction and transport. A MoS2 PD, when fabricated with Ti/Au electrodes in a MSM design, can deliver responsivity of 2200 A W−1 and a gain of 5 × 103.231 A similar device design using graphene electrodes showed ultrahigh responsivity of 1.7 × 107 A W−1 and a gain of 1.2 × 108.232 The responsivity is reduced to 8.02 × 103 when MoS2 is used with Au electrodes in a similar MSM configuration.233 The impact of the electrodes was further ascertained by examining the literature on WSe2-based MSM PDs. Pd/Au electrodes were found to yield ultrahigh responsivity of 1.8 × 105 A W−1, whereas asymmetric electrode structures with Ti and Au delivered responsivity of 7 A W−1.101,234 A similar trend relating to enhancements in responsivity has been demonstrated for In2Se3-based PDs.141,181,235Tables 4–9 demonstrate the dependence of the performance parameters of 2D sulphide- and selenide-based PDs on the electrode materials. B-In2Se3 under NIR excitation (800 nm) demonstrates ultrahigh responsivity of 8.8 × 104 A W−1 and detectivity of 2.9 × 1013 Jones, which have not been observed for other metal chalcogenides, e.g., MoS2, MoSe2, and Bi2Se3. Different heterojunction combinations are being investigated with 2D TMDCs to achieve desirable NIR photoresponses. Recently, 2D metal carbides have been examined in heterojunctions with conventional semiconductors and TMDCs for NIR detection, and the results are promising.196,236 In fact, heterojunction-based PDs are more reliable options for broadband photodetection, where the constituents of the heterojunction act in different consecutive spectral regions, resulting in broadband detection. For example, the broadband spectral range and responsivity are enhanced for MoS2 when it is fabricated in a heterojunction with Mo2C.196 This specific heterostructure is photoresponsive in the range from 400–1310 nm and delivers ultrahigh responsivity of 5 × 103 A W−1 under 1310 nm excitation. A far better responsivity range has been demonstrated for a MoS2/WS2/graphene heterojunction.194 The heterojunction is operational from 400 nm to 1640 nm and exhibits a highest responsivity of 6.6 × 107 A W−1 at 400 nm. It is interesting to note that materials that exhibit bolometric sensitivity can be utilized to achieve photoresponsivity over a large spectral range.195 Also, self-powered operation can be obtained in the UV-NIR range via the use of suitable heterojunctions or asymmetric electrode configurations.237–239
8. Summary and outlook
This review comprehensively discusses 2D layered materials beyond the graphene family, like chalcogenides, h-BN, g-C3N4, and MXenes, with their specific bandgaps and carrier mobilities, followed by their applications in the field of photodetection, which have been developed over the past few decades. We have also thoroughly examined different synthesis approaches, including top-down (mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation) and bottom-up (hydrothermal/solvothermal, physical vapour deposition, pulsed laser deposition, magnetron sputtering, and chemical vapour deposition) approaches, for these materials, including their specific advantages and drawbacks. Along with the different spectral characteristics of photodetectors, like solar-blind, UV, visible, NIR, and broadband examples, self-powered, transparent, and flexible photodetectors are also systematically discussed, and various device configurations and performance effects are critically evaluated. Further, we have thoroughly shed light on different heterojunctions between these 2DMs and Si, III–V materials, oxides, and perovskite materials in connection with photodetection, followed by overall performance evaluation.
However, to improve the performances of 2D-material-based photodetectors, many fundamental and technical obstacles still need to be overcome. The synthesis of high-quality defect-free 2DMs is challenging due to process complexities (CVD) and high costs. It is also challenging to get large-area 2D sheets via conventional mechanical exfoliation techniques. Available convenient and cost-effective synthesis procedures (hydrothermal and solvothermal methods) cannot provide impurity-free materials. Impurities or defects in 2DMs (like deep-level traps) drastically reduce the photodetection performance. The synthesis of large-area 2D sheets via a commercially viable strategy has not been achieved to date. Assembly techniques, especially transfer-printing methods, have to be developed to achieve high throughput, which can advance industrial-scale use. 2D morphologies are suitable for assembly with other 2D materials, 3D bulk semiconductors, nanoparticles, and quantum dots, providing huge prospects for the synthesis and application of novel heterojunctions in optoelectronics. To obtain desired photodetector performance, the contact resistance between the photoactive material (semiconductor) and electrode (metal) should be minimal. The lower the contact resistance, the higher the carrier injection rate from the semiconductor to the metal electrode. The application of silver or gold as the metal contact raises issues relating to cost-effectiveness; however, it is expected that with further advancements in semiconductor technology, the issue of costly contact materials will be resolved. Highly conducting Mxenes have already been demonstrated as efficient electrode materials for photodetectors, and they have performed better than gold-contact-based devices. Besides, as contact resistance arises between 2D semiconductors and 3D metals due to a lack of chemical bonding, a large energy offset is introduced at the interface. To avoid this issue, graphene can be used as an electrode. Due to the finite density of states and chemical inertness of graphene, it can be an ideal electrode in the case of 2D-material-based photodetectors. The main characteristic performance parameters, responsivity and detectivity, closely depend on the device dark current. In vertical heterojunctions, while there are sufficient ways to engineer a built-in potential field to control the dark current, in the case of lateral heterojunctions formed via surface chemical doping, elemental doping, and electrostatic gating, the carrier mobility is restricted and devices exhibit slower responses. For reliability, therefore, vertical heterojunction configurations are preferred. With this vertical heterojunction design, the transport distance of photogenerated charge carriers can be shortened to achieve faster responses.
The global market for photodetectors is expected to boom to $1.8 billion by 2024, and 2D photodetectors are expected to acquire a recognizable position in the future as their spectral selectivity becomes a commercial necessity. The intrinsic compatibility of 2DMs with flexible substrates has made them commercial favourites. These flexible platforms can be efficiently utilized to exploit one of the striking features of TMDCs: piezo-sensitivity. The piezoelectric properties of TMDCs when integrated with their photodetection properties can be used to obtain a piezophototronic effect, which is promising for the development of self-driven photodetection. The combined influence of flexibility and self-driving capabilities can adequately support future developments in the consumer electronics market. Moreover, the further integration of 2D photodetectors with triboelectric nanogenerators to achieve self-powered operation can be undertaken to obtain sustainable technology solutions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Director of IACS-Kolkata for his constant encouragement and support. SM acknowledges CSIR for its financial support in the form of a JRF Fellowship (09/080(1145)/2020-EMR-I). PK acknowledges DST SERB Project “ECR/2018/001491” for financial support. KS acknowledges DST SERB (NPDF Project: PDF/2019/003226) for financial assistance.
References
L. Lu, P. Gutruf, L. Xia, D. L. Bhatti, X. Wang, A. Vazquez-Guardado, X. Ning, X. Shen, T. Sang, R. Ma, G. Pakeltis, G. Sobczak, H. Zhang, D. Oh Seo, M. Xue, L. Yin, D. Chanda, X. Sheng, M. R. Bruchas and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E1374–E1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Chen, S. Cai, Z. Long, Y. Zhang, L. Su, S. He, C. Tang, P. Liu, H. Peng and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803165 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, C. Zheng, L. Wu, Y. Li, J. Cai, M. Hu, X. Fang, R. Ma, Q. Wang and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809013 CrossRef .
D. Tyagi, H. Wang, W. Huang, L. Hu, Y. Tang, Z. Guo, Z. Ouyang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3535–3559 RSC .
A. Dubey, R. Mishra, Y. Hsieh, C. Cheng, B. Wu, L. Chen, S. Gwo and T. Yen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2002274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Xia, Q. Li, F. Wang, L. Zhang, T. Li, P. Martyniuk, A. Rogalski and W. Hu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sarkar, P. Devi, A. Lata, V. K. Lokku and P. Kumar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2000228 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sarkar, P. Devi, A. Lata, R. Ghosh and P. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13182–13191 RSC .
K. Sarkar, M. Hossain, P. Devi, K. D. M. Rao and P. Kumar, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900923 CrossRef CAS .
T. Limmer, J. Feldmann and E. Da Como, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 217406 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yao and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 454–476 RSC .
H. Qiao, Z. Huang, X. Ren, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Qi and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1900765 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dong, J. Simões and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901657 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
B. Wang, S. Zhong, P. Xu and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Shao, C. Yan, R. Qin, Z. Lu, H. Geng, T. Xu and L. Ju, Mater. Des., 2021, 200, 109452 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Hao Xu, A. Ren and J. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000907 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. Li, D. Li, P. Chen, L. Pi, X. Zhou and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qiu and Z. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guan, X. Yu, D. Periyanagounder, M. R. Benzigar, J. K. Huang, C. H. Lin, J. Kim, S. Singh, L. Hu, G. Liu, D. Li, J. H. He, F. Yan, Q. J. Wang and T. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001708 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaushik and R. Singh, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2002214 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Li, S. Q. Wu and Z. Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9403–9411 RSC .
K. K. Kam and B. A. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, M. Y. Cho, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G. B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena, J. Joo and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y. T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H. T. Jeng, S. K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J. K. Chang, W. T. Hsu, J. K. Huang, C. L. Hsu, M. H. Chiu, T. Takenobu, H. Li, C. I. Wu, W. H. Chang, A. T. S. Wee and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Das, S. K. Pandey and P. Mahadevan, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 15169–15176 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. A. Brainard, The thermal stability and friction of the disulfides, diselenides and ditellurides of molybdenum and tungsten in vacuum 10−9 torr to 10−6 torr, NASA TN D-5141,  1969 Search PubMed .
H. R. Gutiérrez, N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, B. Wang, R. Lv, F. López-Urías, V. H. Crespi, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3447–3454 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kormányos, V. Zólyomi, N. D. Drummond and G. Burkard, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 011034 Search PubMed .
A. Rawat, N. Jena, D. Sharma and A. De Sarkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8693–8704 RSC .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
L. C. Upadhyayula, J. J. Loferski, A. Wold, W. Giriat and R. Kershaw, J. Appl. Phys., 1968, 39, 4736–4740 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 026803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Huang, J. Pu, C. L. Hsu, M. H. Chiu, Z. Y. Juang, Y. H. Chang, W. H. Chang, Y. Iwasa, T. Takenobu and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das and J. Appenzeller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 103501 CrossRef .
F. Urban, N. Martucciello, L. Peters, N. McEvoy and A. Di Bartolomeo, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 901–913 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Di Bartolomeo, F. Urban, A. Pelella, A. Grillo, M. Passacantando, X. Liu and F. Giubileo, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 375204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Di Bartolomeo, A. Pelella, F. Urban, A. Grillo, L. Iemmo, M. Passacantando, X. Liu and F. Giubileo, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. Grillo, E. Faella, A. Pelella, F. Giubileo, L. Ansari, F. Gity, P. K. Hurley, N. McEvoy and A. DiBartolomeo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2105722 CrossRef .
A. Di Bartolomeo, F. Urban, E. Faella, A. Grillo, A. Pelella, F. Giubileo, N. McEvoy, F. Gity and P. K. Hurley, Mater. Proc., 2020, 4, 28 CrossRef .
C. H. Ho and S. L. Lin, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 083508 CrossRef .
B. Erdinc, H. Akkus and K. Goksen, Gazi Univ. J. Sci., 2010, 23, 413–422 Search PubMed .
V. Capozzi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 3182–3190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, J. U. Lee, J. H. Kim, L. Liang, X. Kong, T. T. H. Nguyen, Z. Lee, S. Cho and H. Cheong, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8563–8573 RSC .
A. Kuhn, A. Chevy and R. Chevalier, Phys. Status Solidi, 1975, 31, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, L. Yu and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7098–7105 RSC .
J. F. Sánchez-Royo, A. Segura, O. Lang, E. Schaar, C. Pettenkofer, W. Jaegermann, R. Roa and A. Chevy, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 2818–2823 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Qiao, Z. Guo, X. Ren, Z. Huang, X. Qi, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, D. Zhang, J. Li, J. Zhao, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705237 CrossRef .
D. A. Bandurin, A. V. Tyurnina, G. L. Yu, A. Mishchenko, V. Zólyomi, S. V. Morozov, R. K. Kumar, R. V. Gorbachev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, S. Pezzini, Z. D. Kovalyuk, U. Zeitler, K. S. Novoselov, A. Patanè, L. Eaves, I. V. Grigorieva, V. I. Fal’Ko, A. K. Geim and Y. Cao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 223–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Makinistian and E. A. Albanesi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 045206 CrossRef .
X. Fan, L. Su, F. Zhang, D. Huang, D. K. Sang, Y. Chen, Y. Li, F. Liu, J. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47197–47206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Ulaganathan, Y. Y. Lu, C. J. Kuo, S. R. Tamalampudi, R. Sankar, K. M. Boopathi, A. Anand, K. Yadav, R. J. Mathew, C. R. Liu, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2284–2292 RSC .
C. E. P. Villegas, A. R. Rocha and A. Marini, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 134306 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, S. Zhang, S. Sun, M. Xie, B. Cai and H. Zeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 122107 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Luo, L. Liu, J. Lv, X. Fan, X. Qiao, Y. Xu, L. Kienle, X. Zhang and G. Qian, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2020, 21, 397–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Yap, Z. Yang, M. Mehboudi, J. A. Yan, S. Barraza-Lopez and W. Zhu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 420–430 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Johnson, H. Jones, B. S. Latham, J. D. Parker, R. D. Engelken and C. Barber, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1999, 14, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ghosh, M. Das, P. Banerjee and S. Das, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1099–1104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Lian, Z. Xu, C. Fu, Z. Lin, L. Li, Q. Wang, D. Cui and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9545–9551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Patel, H. S. Kim and J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15804–15812 RSC .
C. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Han, Z. Dai, H. Pang, Y. Zheng, Y. Q. Lan, J. Bao and J. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3761–3770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shi and E. Kioupakis, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6926–6931 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Franzman, C. W. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4060–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, L. Levina, J. Tang and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4002–4006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, C. Hu, S. Wang, Y. Xi and K. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5515–5520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernechea, Y. Cao and G. Konstantatos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20642–20648 RSC .
B. G. Kumar, B. Srinivas and K. Muralidharan, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 89, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, W. Dang, J. J. Cha, H. Li, S. Meister, H. Peng, Z. Liu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2245–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Z. Zheng, J. Yao, W. Gao, Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao and J. Li, Small, 2019, 15, 1904912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiong, Q. Zhang, L. Gan, X. Zhou, X. Xing, H. Li and T. Zhai, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3848–3857 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Zheng, W. Gao, J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao, B. Wang and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12104–12113 RSC .
F. Saadallah, N. Jebbari, N. Kammoun and N. Yacoubi, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2011, 2011, 734574 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, T. Xie, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Chen, W. Jiang, S. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Jing, Y. Wu, G. Chen, Y. Guo, J. Yin, S. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Z. Liu and H. Pang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6972–6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Yu, C. Hou and J. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900428 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Zheng, J. D. Yao and G. W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8094–8103 RSC .
R. Sreekumar, R. Jayakrishnan, C. Sudha Kartha, K. P. Vijayakumar, S. A. Khan and D. K. Avasthi, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 023709 CrossRef .
E. F. Procopio, R. N. Pedrosa, F. A. L. De Souza, W. S. Paz and W. L. Scopel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 3520–3526 RSC .
E. Mafi, A. Soudi and Y. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22539–22544 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3989–4012 RSC .
J. Wang, F. Ma, W. Liang and M. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2017, 2, 6–34 CrossRef .
K. K. Kim, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6342–6369 RSC .
J. Sun, C. Lu, Y. Song, Q. Ji, X. Song, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Kong and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4242–4257 RSC .
L. Song, L. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Alam, M. S. Bresnehan, J. A. Robinson and M. A. Haque, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 013113 CrossRef .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 404–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, X. Hu, W. Yang, Q. Qian, X. Fang and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl.
Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1803–1811 CrossRef CAS .
N. Prakash, G. Kumar, M. Singh, A. Barvat, P. Pal, S. P. Singh, H. K. Singh and S. P. Khanna, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800191 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C. Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hantanasirisakul, M. Q. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, J. Halim, B. Anasori, S. Kota, C. E. Ren, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600050 CrossRef .
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4729–4733 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeon, H. Choi, S. Choi, J. H. Park, B. H. Lee, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, Y. Ma, X. Tan, M. Zhu, Z. Zheng, N. Liu, L. Li, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700165 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. GriGorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Pradhan, J. Ludwig, Z. Lu, D. Rhodes, M. M. Bishop, K. Thirunavukkuarasu, S. A. McGill, D. Smirnov and L. Balicas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12080–12088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo, A. Figueroba, Y. Yang, S. Christodoulou, A. Stavrinadis, C. Magén and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900258 CrossRef .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Hu, L. Wang, M. Yoon, J. Zhang, W. Feng, X. Wang, Z. Wen, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Miyamoto, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1649–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo, S. Yang, Z. Wei, S. S. Li, J. B. Xia and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5209–5217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y. Y. Lu, R. Kumar U, R. Sankar, C. Da Liao, K. Moorthy B, C. H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Jacobs-gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain and C. A. Durcan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, K. Cai, P. Hu, L. Zhao, T. Yan, W. Luo, X. Zhang, X. Wu, K. Wang and H. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8130–8136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hussain, S. Aftab, S. H. A. Jaffery, A. Ali, S. Hussain, D. N. Cong, R. Akhtar, Y. Seo, J. Eom, P. Gautam, H. Noh and J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 9374–9381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hwang, J. S. Kim, B. Jeong, S. H. Cho and C. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34543–34552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, J. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Huang, X. Jiang, Z. Guo, Z. Luo, Y. Li, J. Li, S. Luo, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4278–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, C. Xing, Y. Wang, Z. Li, L. Wu, D. Ma, X. Dai, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2404–2412 RSC .
A. B. Patel, P. Chauhan, H. K. Machhi, S. Narayan, C. K. Sumesh, K. D. Patel, S. S. Soni, P. K. Jha, G. K. Solanki and V. M. Pathak, Phys. E, 2020, 119, 114019 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. K. Nitin and T. Shelke, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 653, 298–303 CrossRef .
G. Chen, Y. Yu, K. Zheng, T. Ding, W. Wang, Y. Jiang and Q. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 2848–2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Martínez-Merino, E. Sani, L. Mercatelli, R. Alcántara and J. Navas, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1627–1636 CrossRef .
K. J. Huang, J. Z. Zhang, G. W. Shi and Y. M. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 397–403 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wen, A. Wei, L. Tao, D. Luo, J. Liu, Y. Yang, Z. Xiao, Z. Liu and Y. Zhao, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124, 634–641 CrossRef .
V. Selamneni, N. Nerurkar and P. Sahatiya, IEEE Sensors Lett., 2020, 4(5), 3500704 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Liu, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5113–5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Yu, J. Lu, L. Tao, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, A. Wei, L. Tao, J. Liu, Z. Zheng, M. Hao and J. Bin Xu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901085 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. Yao, J. Yan, W. Gao, L. Huang, Z. Zheng, M. Zhang and J. Li, Mater. Horizons, 2020, 7, 1427–1435 RSC .
L. Tang, C. Teng, Y. Luo, U. Khan, H. Pan, Z. Cai, Y. Zhao, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Research, 2019, 2019, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Jiang, X. Yang, G. Chen, M. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ni, A. De Luna Bugallo, X. Yang, V. M. Arellano Arreola, M. Flores Salazar, E. Strupiechonski, B. Alloing, C. Shan and P. Genevet, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 374001 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yao, Z. Q. Zheng, J. M. Shao and G. W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14974–14981 RSC .
Z. Zheng, T. Zhang, J. Yao, Y. Zhang, J. Xu and G. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 225501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Barvat, N. Prakash, B. Satpati, S. S. Singha, G. Kumar, D. K. Singh, A. Dogra, S. P. Khanna, A. Singha and P. Pal, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 015304 CrossRef .
P. H. Le, K. H. Wu, C. W. Luo and J. Leu, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 534, 659–665 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, R. Gresback, M. Tian, K. Wang, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, G. Eres, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. A. McGuire, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, W. Jie, C. H. Mak, S. Lin, H. Lin, X. Yang, F. Yan, S. P. Lau and J. Hao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4225–4236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Zheng, J. D. Yao and G. W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8094–8103 RSC .
G. Siegel, Y. P. Venkata Subbaiah, M. C. Prestgard and A. Tiwari, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 056103 CrossRef .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701823 CrossRef .
W. J. Wang, K. H. Gao and Z. Q. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25291–25299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. C. Rigi, M. K. Jayaraj and K. J. Saji, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147158 CrossRef CAS .
H. Samassekou, A. Alkabsh, M. Wasala, M. Eaton, A. Walber, A. Walker, O. Pitkänen, K. Kordas, S. Talapatra, T. Jayasekera and D. Mazumdar, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 021002 CrossRef .
L. Zeng, L. Tao, C. Tang, B. Zhou, H. Long, Y. Chai, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20343–20350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, D. Gao, S. Xie and J. Zou, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36451–36459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hao, Y. Du, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, H. Xu, S. Dong, H. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Xue, Z. Han, K. Yan and M. Dong, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7358–7365 RSC .
W. Feng, F. Gao, Y. Hu, M. Dai, H. Li, L. Wang and P. Hu, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 445205 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lu, M. I. B. Utama, J. Lin, X. Gong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. T. Pantelides, J. Wang, Z. Dong, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2419–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Yore, K. K. H. Smithe, S. Jha, K. Ray, E. Pop and A. K. M. Newaz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 043110 CrossRef .
J. Lu, A. Wei, Y. Zhao, L. Tao, Y. Yang, Z. Zheng, H. Wang, D. Luo, J. Liu, L. Tao, H. Li, J. Li and J. Bin Xu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4912–4919 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aji, P. Solís-Fernández, H. G. Ji, K. Fukuda and H. Ago, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703448 CrossRef .
W. Li, M. Dai, Y. Hu, H. Chen, X. Zhu, Q. Yang and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47098–47105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, L. Gan, H. Yang, N. Zhou, R. Wang, W. Wu, H. Li, Y. Ma, H. Zeng and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702448 CrossRef .
M. Li, Z. Wang, X. P. A. Gao and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10135–10142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Li, X. P. A. Gao and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 2236–2243 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, H.-C. Fu, B. Cheng, M.-L. Tsai, W. Luo, L. Zhou, S.-H. Jang, L. Hu and J.-H. He, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 23–28 CrossRef .
N. Wang, G. Yang, H. Wang, C. Yan, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Meng, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Wang, J. You, M. Gao and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5559–5565 RSC .
M. Gao, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Ding, Z. Yin, X. Zeng, J. You, P. Jin, X. Zhang, M. Gao, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zeng, J. You, P. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Meng, S. Ye and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14999–15006 RSC .
A. F. Zhou, A. Aldalbahi and P. Feng, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 3286–3292 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Kim, A. Hsu, X. Jia, S. M. Kim, Y. Shi, M. Hofmann, D. Nezich, J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva, M. Dresselhaus, T. Palacios and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 161–166 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Yuanzhi Hong, E. Liu, J. Shi, X. Lin, L. Sheng, M. Zhang and L. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 7194–7204 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. K. El-Demellawi, D. B. Velusamy, A. M. El-Zohry, O. M. Bakr, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2315–2322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, H. Ma, C. Zheng, S. Lennon, W. Wu, L. Wu and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Tran, T. Schäfer, A. Shahraei, M. Dürrschnabel, L. Molina-Luna, U. I. Kramm and C. S. Birkel, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3908–3914 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, X. Zhou, F. Chen, G. Gao, S. Wang, C. Shen, T. Chen, C. Zhi, P. Eklund, S. Du, J. Xue, W. Shi, Z. Chai and Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3841–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L. Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Å. Persson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ying, A. D. Dillon, A. T. Fafarman and M. W. Barsoum, Mater. Res. Lett., 2017, 5, 391–398 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, H. Tang, L. Pan, T. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and C. (John) Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Li, L. Yao, Q. Liu, J. Gu, R. Luo, J. Li, X. Yan, W. Wang, P. Liu, B. Chen, W. Zhang, W. Abbas, R. Naz and D. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 6115–6119 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X. L. Ma, H. M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Tsai, W. C. Lien, D. H. Lien, K. M. Chen, M. L. Tsai, D. G. Senesky, Y. C. Yu, A. P. Pisano and J. H. He, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2628–2632 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Jiao, X. Wang, D. Guo, W. Li, L. Li, F. Huang and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8688–8693 RSC .
S. Y. Lu, Y. Tian and C. Shan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2557–2562 RSC .
K. H. Lee, H. J. Shin, J. Lee, I. Y. Lee, G. H. Kim, J. Y. Choi and S. W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 714–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lin, H. C. Fu, B. Cheng, M. L. Tsai, W. Luo, L. Zhou, S. H. Jang, L. Hu and J. H. He, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 23–28 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Meng, Y. Tian, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, G. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Yin, Z. Yin, P. Jin, P. Jin, J. You, J. You, J. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27361–27367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain, C. A. Durcan, M. T. Murphy, T. M. Murray, R. J. Matyi, R. L. Moore and B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, L. Tao, C. Tang, B. Zhou, H. Long, Y. Chai, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20343–20350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Kumar and M. C. S. Kumar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 299, 111643 CrossRef .
A. Aldalbahi, R. Velázquez, A. F. Zhou, M. Rahaman and P. X. Feng, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1433–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. H. Zha, M. Yildizhan, P. Eklund, J. Xue, M. Liao, P. O. Å. Persson, S. Du and Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1195–1203 CAS .
J. O. Island, S. I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H. S. J. Van Der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7853–7858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Velusamy, J. K. El-Demellawi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Giugni, S. Lopatin, M. N. Hedhili, A. E. Mansour, E. Di Fabrizio, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807658 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Feng, F. Qin, M. Yu, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, L. Wang, J. Hou, B. Li and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18511–18516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mukherjee, Y. Cai, H. R. Tan, Y. P. Feng, E. S. Tok and C. H. Sow, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9594–9604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, L. Li, W. Huang, L. Li, B. Jin, H. Li and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802707 CrossRef .
P. Di Pietro, N. Adhlakha, F. Piccirilli, A. Di Gaspare, J. Moon, S. Oh, S. Di Mitri, S. Spampinati, A. Perucchi and S. Lupi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 124, 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Park, K. Park and H. Ko, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, C. Wang, J. Fang, B. Wei, W. Xiong, X. Wang, L. Ma, X. Wang, Z. Wei and C. Xia, RSC Adv., 2019, 2, 14352–14359 RSC .
S. Liu, Z. Huang, H. Qiao, R. Hu, Q. Ma, K. Huang, H. Li and X. Qi, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 906–912 RSC .
M. Park, G. Kang and H. Ko, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tan, W. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Koirala, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12425–12431 RSC .
X. Wang, P. Wang, J. Wang, W. Hu, X. Zhou, N. Guo, H. Huang, S. Sun, H. Shen, T. Lin, M. Tang, L. Liao, A. Jiang, J. Sun, X. Meng, X. Chen, W. Lu and J. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6575–6581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Xiong, J. H. Chen, Y. Q. Lu and F. Xu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800562 CrossRef .
H. Xu, L. Hao, H. Liu, S. Dong, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, B. Cao, Z. Wang, C. Ling, S. Li, Z. Xu, Q. Xue and K. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35250–35258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeon, H. Choi, S. Choi, J. H. Park, B. H. Lee, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905384 CrossRef CAS .
P. Das, J. Nash, M. Webb, R. Burns, V. N. Mapara, G. Ghimire, D. Rosenmann, R. Divan, D. Karaiskaj, S. A. McGill, A. V. Sumant, Q. Dai, P. C. Ray, B. Tawade, D. Raghavan, A. Karim and N. R. Pradhan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22904–22916 RSC .
J. Madhusoodanan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 17605–17607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, H. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Hu, S. Wei, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, T. Zhai and P. A. Hu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7291–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Guo, R. Ding, W. F. Io, S. Y. Pang, W. Wu and J. Hao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 2100864 CrossRef .
F. Gong, H. Fang, P. Wang, M. Su, Q. Li, J. C. Ho, X. Chen, W. Lu, L. Liao, J. Wang and W. Hu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 484002 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dai, H. Chen, R. Feng, W. Feng, Y. Hu, H. Yang, G. Liu, X. Chen, J. Zhang, C.-Y. Xu and P. Hu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8739–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bayan, D. Bhattacharya, R. K. Mitra and S. K. Ray, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 365401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, H. Wang, X. Zhu, W. Gao, H. Li, J. Chen, G. Li, L. Chen, J. Xu, X. Hu, L. Li and T. Zhai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44934–44942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Velusamy, M. A. Haque, M. R. Parida, F. Zhang, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605554 CrossRef .
J. Yao and G. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704524 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, H. Huang, H. Jin, W. Li, X. Chu, D. Xiong, W. Yan, F. Chun, M. Xie, C. Luo, L. Jin, C. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Deng and W. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801521 CrossRef .
G. Luongo, A. Di Bartolomeo, F. Giubileo, C. A. Chavarin and C. Wenger, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 255305 CrossRef .
E. Wu, D. Wu, C. Jia, Y. Wang, H. Yuan, L. Zeng, T. Xu, Z. Shi, Y. Tian and X. Li, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 565–572 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhuo, Y. Wang, D. Wu, Z. Lou, Z. Shi, T. Xu, J. Xu, Y. Tian and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 299–303 RSC .
Z. Zhao, D. Wu, J. Guo, E. Wu, C. Jia, Z. Shi, Y. Tian, X. Li and Y. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12121–12126 RSC .
J. W. Kang, C. Zhang, K. J. Cao, Y. Lu, C. Y. Wu, S. R. Chen, D. Wu, C. Xie and L. B. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13762–13769 RSC .
C. Jia, X. Huang, D. Wu, Y. Tian, J. Guo, Z. Zhao, Z. Shi, Y. Tian, J. Jie and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4435–4444 RSC .
R. Kumar, N. Goel, R. Raliya, P. Biswas and M. Kumar, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 404001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kallatt, S. Nair and K. Majumdar, Small, 2018, 14, 1702066 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Zhou, Z. Bin Zhang, P. Xu, H. Zhang and B. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 364–373 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pak, S. Mitra, N. Alaal, B. Xin, S. Lopatin, D. Almalawi, J.-W. Min, H. Kim, W. Kim, G.-Y. Jung and I. S. Roqan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 112102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alamri, B. Liu, S. M. Sadeghi, D. Ewing, A. Wilson, J. L. Doolin, C. L. Berrie and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7858–7868 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Z. Yang, D. Peng, J. Xi, P. Lin, Y. Cheng, K. Liu and C. Pan, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104001 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, B. Xu, W. Yang, Z. Qi, C. Ma, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. Liang, D. Li, Z. Li and A. Pan, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Cheng, G. Wang, D. Li, Q. He, A. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Ding, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, J. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Gao and S. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800505 CrossRef .
H. Wu, H. Si, Z. Zhang, Z. Kang, P. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801219 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. K. El-Demellawi, D. B. Velusamy, A. M. El-Zohry, O. M. Bakr, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2315–2322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Jiang, X. Zhang, J. Qin, J. Wang, X. Li, Y. Pan, F. Liu, Z. Shi, H. Zhang, L. Tu, H. Wang, H. Long, D. Li, T. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Zhan, H. Shen, X. Meng and J. Chu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, Y. J. Lu, Q. Liu, C. N. Lin, J. Guo, J. H. Zang, Y. Z. Tian and C. X. Shan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2557–2562 RSC .
R. Zhuo, D. Wu, Y. Wang, E. Wu, C. Jia, Z. Shi, T. Xu, Y. Tian and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10982–10986 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, H. Liu and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W. Han, C. Li, S. Yang, P. Luo, F. Wang, X. Feng, K. Liu, K. Pei, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Li, Y. Gao and T. Zhai, Small, 2020, 16, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Zhong, K. Zhou, Z. Wei, Y. Li, T. Li, H. Dong, L. Jiang, J. Li and W. Hu, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, aac65e CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. Huang, C. Chen, Y. Chang, Y.-J. Cheng and L.-J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, K. Chen, Z. Chen, F. Xie, X. Zeng, W. Xie, J. Chen and J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603998 CrossRef .
P. Han, L. S. Marie, Q. X. Wang, N. Quirk, A. El Fatimy, M. Ishigami and P. Barbara, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 20LT01–20LT08 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. H. Chiu, C. H. Chen, W. Chen, L. J. Li and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8653–8661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Q. Zeng, D. Lv, L. Sun, L. Niu, W. Fu, F. Liu, Z. Shen, C. Jin and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6400–6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Montazeri, M. Currie, L. Verger, P. Dianat, M. W. Barsoum and B. Nabet, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Fang, P. Wang, M. Su, Q. Li, J. C. Ho, X. Chen, W. Lu, L. Liao, J. Wang and W. Hu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 484002 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luo, F. Wu, M. Long and X. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 444001 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Watson, A. J. Cockbain, J. Spencer, A. Race, M. Volpato, P. Loadman, G. Toogood and M. A. Hull, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 45–53 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Sheng, R. J. Chang, J. K. Lee, Y. Zhou, S. Li, T. Chen, H. Huang, B. F. Porter, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 7897–7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, V. P. Dravid and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5635–5641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majety, X. K. Cao, R. Dahal, B. N. Pantha, J. Li, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Quantum Sens. Nanophotonic Devices IX, 2012, 8268, 82682R Search PubMed .
M. Makaremi, S. Grixti, K. T. Butler, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11143–11151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang and V. N. Mochalin, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 1958–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, H. Chen, R. Feng, W. Feng, Y. Hu, H. Yang, G. Liu, X. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Y. Xu and P. Hu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8739–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gusakova, X. Wang, L. L. Shiau, A. Krivosheeva, V. Shaposhnikov, V. Borisenko, V. Gusakov and B. K. Tay, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700218 CrossRef .
S. Yang, Y. Li, X. Wang, N. Huo, J. B. Xia, S. S. Li and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2582–2587 RSC .
L. V. Titova, B. M. Fregoso and R. L. Chalcogenides Grimm, Group-IV monochalcogenides GeS, GeSe, SnS, SnSe 119-151, Woodhead Publishing Series in Electronics and Optical Materials, 2020 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, C. X. Liu, X. L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang and S. C. Zhang, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 438–442 Search PubMed .
B. H. Kumar and M. C. S. Kumar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 299, 111643 CrossRef .
J. Quereda, R. Biele, G. Rubio-Bollinger, N. Agraït, R. D’Agosta and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1939–1943 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, Z. Wen, L. Wang, P. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, J. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Huang, X. Jiang, Z. Guo, Z. Luo, Y. Li, J. Li, S. Luo, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4278–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, L. Wang, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, H. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Qiu, D. C. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. Hu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 245706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Meng, X. Zhang, G. Guo, Z. Yin, H. Liu, L. Cheng, M. Gao, J. You and R. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3819–3826 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsai, K. Liu, D. Lien, M. Tsai, C. Kang and C. Lin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, Y. K. Hong, G. Han, I. Omkaram, W. Choi, S. Kim and Y. Yoon, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2224–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, X. Huang, L. Z. Liu, M. Wang, L. Wang, B. Huang, D. D. Zhu, J. J. Li, C. Z. Gu and X. M. Meng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8949–8955 RSC .
A. Abderrahmane, P. J. Ko, T. V. Thu, S. Ishizawa, T. Takamura and A. Sandhu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 365202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Shelke and D. J. Late, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 295, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12509–12517 RSC .
J.-S. Lee, D. Parthiban Ramasamy, D. Kwak, D.-H. Lim and H.-S. Ra, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 479–485 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Lin, M. Li, H. Cai, Y. Liang, M. Liu, Z. Huang, F. Lai, F. Huang and W. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4123–4130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Li, B. Li, H. Tian, C. Fan, Y. Zhang, Z. Hua, M. Wang, H. Zheng and E. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10036–10041 RSC .
M. S. Mahdi, N. M. Ahmed, A. Hmood, K. Ibrahim and M. Bououdina, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 100, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mahdi, H. S. Al-arab, H. S. Al-salman and K. Ibrahim, Mater. Lett., 2020, 273, 5–8 CrossRef .
J. L. Liu, H. Chen, X. Li, H. Wang, Z. K. Zhang, W. W. Pan, G. Yuan, C. L. Yuan, Y. L. Ren and W. Lei, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 818, 152819 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mahdi, K. H. Latif, A. A. Jabor, K. Ibrahim, N. M. Ahmed, A. Hmood and F. I. Mustafa, J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc., 2020, 49, 5824–5830 CAS .
W. Feng, F. Gao, Y. Hu, M. Dai, H. Liu, L. Wang and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27584–27588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Ko, A. Abderrahmane and N. H. Kim, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 065015 CrossRef .
J. Xu, H. Li, S. Fang, K. Jiang, H. Yao, F. Fang, F. Chen, Y. Wang and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2102–2108 RSC .
W. Choi, M. Y. Cho, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G. B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena, J. Joo and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, J. Bin Wu, X. Li, W. Zheng, X. Zhou, K. Xiao, W. Cao, B. Yang, J. C. Idrobo, L. Basile, W. Tian, P. H. Tan and P. A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2012, 3, 7022–7028 RSC .
Z. Jia, J. Xiang, F. Wen, R. Yang, C. Hao and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4781–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, C. Liu, L. Wang, X. Chen, M. Luo, W. Guo, S. W. Wang and W. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 153502 CrossRef .
T. Wei, H. Zong, S. Jiang, Y. Yang, H. Liao, Y. Xie, W. Wang, J. Li, J. Tang, X. Hu, H. Zong, S. Jiang, Y. Yang, H. Liao, Y. Xie, W. Wang, J. Li, J. Tang and X. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 237, 298–302 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, M. Sun, M. Wang, W. Chen, S. Lin, D. Xie and H. Zhu, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 418–425 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Wang, D. Zhou, X. Shi, Y. Li and Y. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38031–38038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Han, H. Li, X. Fan and K. Huang, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 107, 104804 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sorifi, M. Moun, S. Kaushik and R. Singh, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 670–676 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aldalbahi, M. Rivera, M. Rahaman, A. F. Zhou, W. M. Alzuraiqi and P. Feng, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 454–470 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, S. Raju, B. Li, M. Chan, Y. Chai and C. Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802954 CrossRef .
X. Liu, F. Li, M. Xu and J. Qi, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 28041–28047 RSC .
B. Liu, C. Zhao, X. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Yan and Y. Zhang, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 130, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, X. Wang, Z. Chen, D. Weller, Y. Wang, L. Shi, X. Ma, C. Ding, W. Li, S. Guo and R. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15406–15413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lin and J. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 842, 155890 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Jethwa, K. Patel, N. Som, V. M. Pathak, K. D. Patel, G. K. Solanki and P. K. Jha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 531, 147406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, F. Gao, Y. Hu, L. Wang, P. A. Hu and W. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 565, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hussain, S. Aftab, S. H. A. Jaffery, A. Ali, S. Hussain, D. N. Cong, R. Akhtar, Y. Seo, J. Eom, P. Gautam, H. Noh and J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 9374–9381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Y. Nie, Y. Liu, K. Yan, J. Hong, C. Jin, J. Yin, Z. Liu and H. Peng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mohan Kumar, X. Fu, P. Ilanchezhiyan, S. U. Yuldashev, D. J. Lee, H. D. Cho and T. W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32142–32150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Liu, H. Chen, X. Li, H. Wang, Z. K. Zhang, W. W. Pan, G. Yuan, C. L. Yuan, Y. L. Ren and W. Lei, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 818, 152819 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dong, T. Tian, H. Zhao, S. Li, S. Deng, X. Song, Y. Yan, C. Xia and J. Li, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2020, 35, 115016 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Schneider, D. S. Schneider, A. Grundmann, A. Bablich, V. Passi, V. Passi, S. Kataria, H. Kalisch, M. Heuken, M. Heuken, A. Vescan, D. Neumaier, D. Neumaier, M. C. Lemme and M. C. Lemme, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 1388–1395 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Esmaeili-Rad and S. Salahuddin, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2345–2350 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Jie, Z. Shao, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Sun and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2910–2919 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, Y. Yu, L. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Shao and J. Jie, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600018 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, L. Mi, H. Wang, Z. Zhu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang and Y. Jiang, Small, 2016, 12, 1062–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, M. Patel, J. Kim and D. Lim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19201–19208 RSC .
J. Xu, X. Cheng, T. Liu, Y. Yu, L. Song, Y. You, T. Wang and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6810–6816 RSC .
C. Y. Wu, J. W. Kang, B. Wang, H. N. Zhu, Z. J. Li, S. R. Chen, L. Wang, W. H. Yang, C. Xie and L. B. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11532–11539 RSC .
H. Ahmad, H. Rashid, M. F. Ismail and K. Thambiratnam, Optik, 2019, 185, 819–826 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, Z. Zheng, L. Huang, J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40222–40231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, T. Guo, L. Zhao, Z. Hou and T. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 13275–13282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Zheng, J. Yao, W. Gao, Y. Xiao, M. Zhang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7196–7205 RSC .
Z. Xu, S. Lin, X. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Wu, W. Xu, Y. Lu and S. Xu, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
N. Goel, R. Kumar, B. Roul, M. Kumar and S. B. Krupanidhi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 374003 CrossRef .
J. Deng, L. Zong, W. Bao, M. Zhu, F. Liao, Z. Guo, Y. Xie, B. Lu, J. Wan, J. Zhu, R. Peng and Y. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901039 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moun and R. Singh, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 135702 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, W. Wang, J. Li, W. Jiang, M. Feng and Y. He, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, 1368–1374 CrossRef .
K. Sarkar and P. Kumar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 566, 150695 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Hu, W. Cao, P. Hu and W. Hu, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 045202 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. Nguyen, M. Patel, D. K. Ban and J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 768, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wazir, R. Liu, C. Ding, X. Wang, X. Ye, X. Lingling, T. Lu, L. Wei and B. Zou, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7543–7553 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, K. Liu, H. Ye, F. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and R. Wang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 982–991 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. He, Z. He and Q. Shen, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 107, 104851 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Ma, J. Li, C. Zhang, A. Shaikenova, B. Renat and B. Liu, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 3438–3444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Patel, P. M. Pataniya, V. Patel, C. K. Sumesh and D. J. Late, Sol. Energy, 2020, 206, 974–982 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guo, L. Xiao, F. Gong, M. Luo, F. Wang, Y. Jia, H. Chang, J. Liu, Q. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, C. Shan, Y. Xu, P. Zhou and W. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiao, C. Lan, Y. Li, C. Zeng, T. He, S. Wang, C. Li, Y. Yin and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 19011304 Search PubMed .
H. Shang, H. Chen, M. Dai, Y. Hu, F. Gao, H. Yang, B. Xu, S. Zhang, B. Tan, X. Zhang and P. Hu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 564–572 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Shan, Q. Wang, J. Zhu and R. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 295201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. Li and C. Yan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23662–23667 RSC .
P. Zhang, C. Bian, J. Ye, N. Cheng, X. Wang, H. Jiang, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y. Du, L. Bao, W. Hu and Y. Gong, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 1548–1559 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Fanglu Qin, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, M. Yu, L. Wang, W. Feng and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37313–37319 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kang, S. R. Pae, J. Shim, G. Yoo, J. Jeon, J. W. Leem, J. S. Yu, S. Lee, B. Shin and J. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7799–7806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, X. Liu, D. Yu, C. Huo, J. Ji, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, A. Xie and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2801–2809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bai, J. Qi, F. Li, Y. Fang, W. Han, H. Wu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701275 CrossRef .
C. Fang, H. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Shen, S. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8419–8427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang and R. Yu, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Shen, M. Li, L. Li, J. Zhang, L. Fan, F. Cheng, C. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Kang, J. Su, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801744 CrossRef .
D. H. Shin, S. H. Shin and S. Choi, Appl. Surf., 2020, 514, 145880 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Progress relating to 2D-material-based PDs. (a) The number of published reports in each year from 2000 to 2020 and (b) a pie chart showing the versatile applications of 2D-material-based PDs in different scientific areas. Data collected from a Scopus search; criteria: “2D material photodetector”.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic diagram of different 2D materials with their optical bandgaps and representative crystal structures.	 

TMDC	MoS2	1.8	1.23	
23 and 24

MoSe2	1.66	1.1	
29

WS2	2.1	1.3	
34

WSe2	1.67	1.21	
246

Group III–VI monochalcogenide	GaS	2.59	1.61	
247

GaSe	2.35	0.99	
49

InSe	2.11	1.26	
51

Group IV–VI monochalcogenide	GeS	1.69	1.21	
54

GeSe	1.7	1.08	
59

SnS	1.96	1.24	
248

SnSe	1.33	1.00	
248

A2B3-Type chalcogenide	Bi2S3	1.7	1.3	
67 and 69

Bi2Se3	—	0.3	
249

In2S3	2.7	2.0	
250

In2Se3	2.8	1.45	
251


 	Fig. 3  The crystal structures of 2D chalcogenides. (a) A schematic diagram of GaS as a representative monochalcogenide (taken from ref. 240 with permission). (b) A schematic diagram of MoS2 as a representative TMDC (taken from ref. 241 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of In2Se3 as a representative A2B3-type chalcogenide (taken from ref. 181 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 4  The crystal structures of 2D nitrides and carbides. (a) A schematic diagram of h-BN (taken from ref. 242 with permission). (b) Schematic diagrams of tg-C3N4 and hg-C3N4 (taken from ref. 243 with permission). (c) Schematic diagrams of Ti2CTx and Ti3C2Tx (taken from ref. 244 with permission).	 

 		 
	(1)
EQE = (Iph/e)/(Pin/hν)	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 		 
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  Different top-down approaches for the synthesis of 2D materials. (a) A mechanical exfoliation technique. (b) The complete liquid-phase exfoliation process and the role of good and bad solvents in the synthesis process.	 

Mechanical exfoliation	MoS2	0.8	Single layer	n-Type	0.11	
100

MoS2	0.65	Single layer	n-Type	4	
103

WS2	42	Multi-layer	n-Type	12	
105

WSe2	2.3	Three layers	—	350	
101

GaS	5	Five layers	—	—	
104

GaSe	30	Multi-layer	p-Type	5 × 10−3	
108

InSe	30	Multi-layer	n-Type	32	
106

GeS	28	Multi-layer	p-Type	1.5 × 10−3	
55

GeSe	40	Multi-layer	p-Type	5.02	
109

Bi2S3	58	Multi-layer	n-Type	14.2	
102

In2Se3	3.9	Five layers	—	—	
107

Liquid phase exfoliation	MoSe2	35	Multi-layer	n-Type	—	
113

MoSe2	5	Few layer	n-Type	—	
110

GeS	3.9	Eight layers	PEC	1558	
54

Bi2S3	10	Multi-layer	—	—	
112

GeSe	4.5	Few layer	PEC	—	
111


 	Fig. 6  Different bottom-up techniques. (a) The equipment for a hydrothermal or solvothermal process. (b) The complete setup for physical vapour deposition. (c) A schematic diagram for pulsed laser deposition. (d) The complete setup for magnetron sputtering. (e) A schematic diagram of chemical vapour deposition.	 
Ti3AlC2 + 3HF = AlF3 + 3/2H2 + Ti3C2
Ti3C2 + 2H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2
Ti3C2 + 2HF = Ti3C2F2 + H2
LiF + HCl = HF + LiCl

 	Fig. 7  Performance parameters of solar-blind PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of the junction barrier between 2D h-BN sheets in DUV on and off conditions. (b) The responsivity of the device under varying intensities with a constant bias of 20 V. (c) The responsivity of the device in the spectral region from 300–1000 nm, clearly showing the solar bind nature of the device (from ref. 174 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of a h-BN-based PD. (e) The responsivity and detectivity variations with different carbon concentrations under bias of 20 V. (f) The transient curve of the device at a carbon concentration of 7.5% (taken from ref. 175 with permission).	 


1	Al:BN nanosheet:Al (MSM)	254	−5	1.0	1.5	—	—	—	
154

2	Ti/Au:h-BN:Ti/Au (MSM)	212	20	1.59	0.1	2.4 × 1010	0.32	103	
152

0.63
3	Pt:h-BN/h-BN:Pt (homojunction)	185	10	15.28	0.05	8.05 × 1010	0.267	—	
174

0.393
4	Ti/Au:h-BN:Ti/Au	226	20	15.9	9.2	3.09 × 1011	5 × 10−4	104	
175

5 × 10−4

 	Fig. 8  The performance parameters of UV PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a UV PD based on α-In2Se3 nanosheets and (b) I–V curves of the device in response to light and dark conditions (taken from ref. 176 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a PD consisting of WS2 film and Ti/Au contacts, (d) the responsivity as a function of the bias voltage at different intensities, and (e) the spectral dependence of the responsivity and detectivity of the device at a fixed bias of 5 V (taken from ref. 177 with permission). (f) The atomic configuration of ScC material before and after etching, (g) the photocurrent of the device as a function of wavelength under different biases, and (h) the I–V characteristics of the device both under dark conditions and under illumination of varying intensities (taken from ref. 180 with permission).	 


01	Ti/Au:WS2:Ti/Au (photoconductor)	365	5	12 × 10−3	53.3	1.22 × 1011	—	—	
177

02	ITO:WS2:ITO	365	—	200	80 × 10−6	—	—	—	
114

03	Cr/Au:GaS:Cr/Au (photoconductor)	254	2	0.5	4.2/2050	1013–1014	30 × 10−3	2.94 × 104	
104

30 × 10−3
04	Au:GaSe:Au (MSM)	254	5	1	2.8/1367	—	0.02	8	
252

0.037
05	ITO:GeSe:ITO (PEC)	350	0.3	2.17	2340 × 10−6/816	2.1 × 1012	0.2	—	
253

06	Al:In2S3:Al (MSM)	365	5	4	93 × 10−5	11.96 × 108	1.50	—	
178

1.48
07	Pt:In2Se3:Pt (photoconductor)	300	5	4.7 × 10−2	395/1.63 × 105	2.26 × 1012	0.018	—	
176

0.073
08	Au:h-BN:Au	210	5	10.5	5.45 × 10−3	8.62 × 109	0.376	45	
254

0.198
09	Cu:BN/WN:Cu (MSM)	350	2	1	1.17	—	2 × 10−3	—	
179

2 × 10−3
10	Au:h-BN:Au	uv	10	83.3	0.0265	3 × 1011	
	105	
255

11	Au/Ti:ScCzOH:Au/Ti	360	10	0.160	0.125/43	—	—	100	
180


 	Fig. 9  The performance parameters of visible PDs. (a–c) Energy band diagrams of graphene/In2S3 heterojunctions under different bias conditions (taken from ref. 144 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of two-terminal Mo2CTX-based device arrays for flexible PDs, (e) the transfer mechanism plasma-assisted hot electrons towards the gold electrodes, and (f) the current on–off ratio of the device with time over a number of days (taken from ref. 182 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of a multi-layered InSe nanosheet based field-effect transistor, (h) the transfer characteristics curves both for superlattice and pristine InSe devices, and (i) the spectral responsivity for both devices at a fixed bias of 1 V (taken from ref. 183 with permission).	 


01	Au:MoS2:Au	532	10	2.0 × 103	0.57/13.3	1010	70 × 10−6	—	
256

11 × 10−5
02	Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au	532	
V
d = 1 (Vg–Vt) = 100	0.13	2200/5000	—	—	105	
231

03	Au:MoS2:Au	561	
V
ds = 8	24 × 10−3	880	—	4	10	
103


V
g = −70	9
04	Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au	532	
V
ds = 1	2	342.6	—	—	103	
257


V
g = 8
05	Gr:MoS2:Gr	514	
V
ds = 3	3	1.7 × 107	—	—	—	
232


V
g = 0	1.2 × 108
06	Au:MoS2:Au	633	
V
ds = 5	1	8.02 × 103	2.7 × 1014	—	2 × 103	
233

Gr:MoS2:Gr	532	
V
g = 30	10.24 × 103	8.7 × 1014	—	105
07	Ag:MoSe2:ITO	450	5	0.754	0.566	3.69 × 1011/155	0.763	
	
113

0.858
08	Au:MoSe2:Au	532	10	0.01	13 × 10−3	—	0.06	20	
258

0.06
09	Ti:MoSe2:Ti	532	
V
ds = 20	25.86 × 103	97.1	—/22266	0.015	3 × 104	
259


V
g = 0	0.030
10	ITO:MoSe2:ITO	650	1	40	0.803	109	0.04	—	
260

0.048
11	Au:WS2:Au	633	
V
ds = 1	50 × 10−3	884	—	0.02	25	
105


V
g = 0	0.02
12	Pd/Au:WSe2:Pd/Au	650	
V
ds = 2	0.38	1.8 × 105/3.5 × 105	1014	5	109	
234


V
g = −60	5
13	Ti:WSe2:Au	White light	
V
ds = 2	10	7	—/40	40 × 10−6	—	
101


V
g = −12	40 × 10−6
14	Au:GaS:Au	633	1	0.189	64.43	—/12621	13 × 10−3	24	
247

10−2
15	Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au	410	8	0.01	5000	—	10−2	
	
108

2 × 10−2
16	Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au	700	
V
ds = 1	0.29	1.7 × 104	—	2 × 10−2	750	
183


V
g = 0	2 × 10−2
17	Gr:InSe/WS2: Gr	532	
V
ds = −3	0.16	83	1.55 × 1012/1.93 × 104	36 × 10−3	103	
261


V
g = 0	18 × 10−3
18	Ti/Au:GeS:Ti/Au	405	3	1.98	173	1.74 × 1013/5.32 × 104	0.11	
	
262

0.68
19	Ti/Au:GeSe:Ti/Au	405	3	1.98	870	1.12 × 1013	0.15	
	
184

2.67 × 105	0.27
20	Ti/Au:GeSe:Ti/Au	633	
	210.8	7.05	3.04 × 108	1	500	
263

2321
21	Cr/Au:SnS:Cr/Au	532	2	50	2.04 × 103	3 × 109	9 × 10−2	
	
62

4.75 × 105	9 × 10−2
22	Au:SnS:Au	405	1	324	156	2.94 × 1010	5.1 × 10−3	8.2	
264

4.77 × 104	8.8 × 10−3
23	Si/Gr/In2S3	405	
V
ds = 2	3.57	8570/1.4 × 105	2.99 × 1012/26200	—	118	
144


V
g = 60
24	Ti/Au:In2Se3:Ag	640	
V
ds = 0.05	
	98000	3 × 1013	9	
	
181


V
g = 40	0.03
25	Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au	532	—	26 × 10−3	340	—	6 × 10−3	—	
235

12 × 10−3
26	Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au	700	5	0.29	578	6 × 1012	2 × 10−2	—	
141

4 × 10−2
27	Au:MLHP/g-C3N4:Au	White light	5	1	2.4	7.4 × 1012	6.1 × 10−3	—	
158

2.2 × 10−3
28	Au:Mo2CTX:Au	660	−1	390	9	5 × 1011	0.5	200	
182

0.5

 	Fig. 10  The performance parameters of NIR PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a back-gated FET made with 2D Bi2Se3 flakes, (b) the time-dependent photocurrent at different optical powers, and (c) the temperature-dependent responsivity and detectivity of the device (taken from ref. 185 with permission). (d) The complete fabrication process of a MoS2 PD with Ag nanoparticles, (e) a schematic diagram of the plasmonic-tape-attached MoS2-based PD, and (f) photocurrent vs. optical power under illumination at 1550 nm (taken from ref. 190 with permission).	 


01	Au:GeSe:Au	808	4	283	3.5/537	—/530	0.1	—	
184

02	Cr/Au: Bi2Se3: Cr/Au	1465	1	142.93	23.8/2035	8.0 × 1010	0.54	972.5	
185

0.52
03	Au/Cr:MoS2/Ag:Au/Cr	980	2	3300	881 × 10−4	1.28 × 109	—	∼100	
187

04	Pt:SnS:Pt	750	5	38	—	—	0.55	16.35	
265

0.53
05	Cr/Au:SnS1.2Se0.76:Cr/Au	808	2	59.9	0.120	—	2	—	
188

2.5
06	Pt:SnS:Pt	750	−5	38	58.4 × 10−3	1.35 × 1010	0.18	37.68	
266

0.16
07	Cr/Au:Bi2S3:Cr/Au	735	0.1	26.7	10.1 × 10−3	4.63 × 108	0.037	—	
267

0.062
08	Ag:SnS:Ag	850	5	55	—	3.9 × 107	0.11	—	
268

0.15
09	Gr:Bi2Se3:Gr	1064	5	1065	26.69 × 10−6	—	—	—	
189

10	Ag:MoSe2:Ag	780	—	0.4	9.73 × 10−3	—	6	—	
119

0.015	6
07	Au/Cr:MoS2/Ag:Au/Cr	1550	1	—	8 × 10−3	1.2 × 106	—	—	
190

08	Cr/Au:β-In2Se3:Cr/Au	800	2	34.4 × 10−3	8.8 × 104	2.9 × 1013	1	—	
269

5
09	Ti:MoSe2:Ti	785	
V
sd = 20	—	238/37745	7.6 × 1011	—	—	
270


V
g = −22
10	Au:Bi2S3:Au	800	3	3.5	201/31140	2.7 × 1010	5 × 10−5	100	
271

2 × 10−4
11	Ti3C2:GaAs: Ti3C2	830	8	—	0.278/42	11.6 × 1010	—	—	
236

12	Au:SnS:Au	850	5	12.11	0.33/101	1.85 × 108	1.1 × 10−3	
	
63

1.3 × 10−3

 	Fig. 11  The performance parameters of broadband PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a Bi2Te3–SnSe–Bi2Te3 PD and (b and c) the power-dependent responsivity and detectivity of the device at a source–drain bias of 20 V (taken from ref. 134 with permission). (d) A schematic diagram of the SnSe/PET-based device and (e and f) the photoconductive and photobolometric device mechanisms (taken from ref. 195 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of a MoS2/p-Mo2C hybrid PD and (h) the impact of Mo2C on the responsivity and light-to-dark current ratio (taken from ref. 196 with permission).	 


01	Au/Ti:MoS2:Au/Ti	455–633	1	50	(50–120) × 10−3	1010–1011	—	106	
272

455–850	850	2300	0.09	5 × 107
02	Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au	254	
V
ds = 5	0.29	5.6 × 104	2 × 1013	5 × 10−3	107	
273

254–850	
V
g = 40	8 × 10−3
03	Cr/Au:GeS:Cr/Au	500	
V
ds = 4	130	6.8 × 103	5.6 × 1014	0.2	104	
191

300–800	
V
g = 0	0.21
04	Au:GaSe:Au	240	−30	2 × 105	1.4/600	—	—	104	
130

240–700
05	Pt:WS2:Pt	635	9	18	0.51/137	2.7 × 109	9.9	—	
126

370–1064	8.7
06	Cr:MoS2/PVDF:Cr	635	
V
ds = 5	
	2750	2.2 × 1012	1.8 × 10−3	—	
192

500–900	
V
g = 0	2.0 × 10−3
07	Ti/Au:SnSe/WS2:Ti/Au	457	
V
ds = 5	440	0.099	—	8.2 × 10−3	
	
274

457–1064	
V
g = 0	8.4 × 10−3
08	Ti:MoS2:Ti	532	
V
d = 1.2	1.69	—/13800	—	42 × 10−6	—	
275


V
g = 0	42 × 10−6
09	Bi2Te3:SnSe:Bi2Te3	
	20	—	5.5/1833	6 × 1010	—	—	
134

370–808
10	Cr/Au:β-In2S3:Cr/Au	450	1	—	137/3.78 × 104	4.74 × 1010	6 × 10−3	1.5 × 103	
147

400–1000	8 × 10−3
11	Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au	532	0.5	51 × 10−3	0.0084/2	1.74 × 1010	
	
	
276

375–808
12	Ag:GeSe:Ag	
	
V
ds = 2	0.15	63 × 10−3/8.9	8 × 108	—	—	
149

400–900	
V
g = 0
13	Gr:SnSe:Gr	400	1	0.4	38 × 10−3	—	0.18	—	
277

400–1050
14	Au:WS2/MoS2/Gr:Au	400	−3	6.35 × 10−6	6.6 × 107/2.06 × 108	—	7 × 10−3	
	
194

400–1640	0.02186
15	Ti/Au:Bi2S3:Ti/Au	635	
V
ds = 1	10−6	107	4 × 1014	0.02	—	
102


V
g = 0	0.5
16	Au/Ge:GeSe:Au/Ge	532	
V
d = 1	—	0.06	—	13 × 10−6	
	
278

532–1400	
V
g = 0	19 × 10−6
17	Ag:SnSe:Ag	404	15	15.5	277.3/8.5 × 104	7.6 × 1011	0.35	—	
140

404–980	1.83
18	Cu:WS2:Cu	532	5	59.09	4.04 × 10−3	2.55 × 109	11	—	
279

532–1064	7.9
19	Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au	380	5	0.07	2.6	1.0 × 1012	0.7	—	
280

1.2
20	Pd:SnSe:Pd	404	20	—	1745.5	4.2 × 1011	1.7	—	
195

410–10600	4.7
21	Au:GeSe:Au	532	9	106.2	5562	3.01 × 1012	0.027	
	
58

532–980	0.029
22	Ti/Au:In2S3:Ti/Au	405	2	31.4	1810	2.09 × 1015/5555	41 × 10−5	—	
122

350–700	85 × 10−5
23	Ti/Au:Mo2C/MoS2:Ti/Au	1310	
	—	5 × 103	—	0.13	300	
196

400–1310	0.95

 	Fig. 12  The performance parameters of self-powered PDs. (a) A schematic diagram of a InSe/Au-based surface-plasmon-enhanced PD, (b) the spectral response of the device showing the dual-band nature of detection at 0 V, and (c) the temporal response of PDs with and without Au nanoparticles under 685 nm illumination at 0 V (taken from ref. 245 with permission). (d) Schematic diagrams of the polarization direction in multilayer γ-InSe nanosheets, (e) the piezoelectric current in response to stretching and releasing, and (f) the spectral responsivity and detectivity of the device without and with 0.31% strain (taken from ref. 199 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of the WSe2–WSe2 lateral homojunction device and (h and i) energy band diagrams upon illuminating the thin and thick sides of WSe2, respectively (taken from ref. 204 with permission).	 

01	Au:BN:Au	250	1	0.296	—	1.6	17	—	
281

02	Au:MoS2:ITO	637	338	1	1010	64 × 10−6	64 × 10−6	106	
237

03	Au:WSe2:ITO	637	56.7	0.1	—	50 × 10−6	20 × 10−6	104	
238

033	Cr/Au:MoS2/WS2:Cr/Au	532	28.64	4.36 × 10−3	4.36 × 1013	4 × 10−3	4 × 10−3	
	
239

04	Au:InSe/Au:In	685	—	0.244	∼1012	0.023	0.025	103	
245

05	Au/Ni:WSe2:Au/Ni	650	541	2.31	9.16 × 1011	—	—	—	
282

06	Pd:HfO2/MoS2:Cr/Au	532	—	0.538	—	0.969	0.875	—	
283

07	Gr:MoSe2:Au	650	—	89.5 × 10−3	2.24 × 1010	9.6 × 10−3	12.8 × 10−3	
	
284

08	Au:γ-InSe:Au	650	0.368	198.2 × 10−3	3.91 × 1011	20.3 × 10−6	10.8 × 10−6	
	
199

09	Ti/Au:GeSe/MoS2:Ti/Au	532	—	105 × 10−3	1.03 × 1010	110 × 10−3	750 × 10−3	
	
285

10	Ti/Au:WSe2/WSe2:Ti/Au	532	19	11.2 × 10−3	4.4 × 1010	0.18 × 10−3	0.22 × 10−3	
	
204

11	Pd/Au:WSe2/WS2:In/Au	532	1186	216 × 10−3	—	80 × 10−6	90 × 10−6	
	
286

12	Ag:SnS:Ag	395	5	4.71 × 10−4	8.67 × 108	0.43	1.93	
	
287

13	Au/Cr:InSe/InSe0.82Te0.18:Au/Cr	900	3.33	0.0141	—	0.120	0.120	10	
288

14	Cr/Au:GeSe:Pd/Au	850	132	0.280	4.1 × 109	0.069	0.092	103	
289

15	Al:g-C3N4/PVDF:ITO	405	0.5	1.7 × 10−6	—	6.2	12.9	—	
203


 	Fig. 13  The performance parameters of flexible PDs. (a) An optical image of GaS nanosheets on a PET substrate, (b) the temporal photoresponse of the device before and after 20 bending cycles, and (c) the spectral responsivity and detectivity of the device under irradiance of 0.5 mW cm−2 and a bias of 2 V (taken from ref. 104 with permission). (d and e) The migration of photocarriers under no illumination and under illumination in CsPbBr3 nanosheets with MXene electrodes and (f and g) the photocurrent over time in response to various bending angles and after different numbers of bending cycles, respectively (taken from ref. 207 with permission).	 


01	Cr/Au:GaS:Cr/Au	254	2	19.2	3 × 10−2	A decrease in the photoresponsivity by a factor of 2 upon bending the device to 60°.	
104

0.5	1014	3 × 10−2
02	Ti/Au:GaSe:Ti/Au	White light	10	30 × 10−3	—	—	
290

—
03	Cr/Au:InSe:Cr/Au	633	
V
ds = 10	3.9	1	—	
106

0.28	
V
g = 0	5.47 × 1010	1
04	ITO:WSe2:ITO	635	10	0.92	0.9	Bent to a small radius of curvature of 5 mm, with transparency of up to 80%.	
127

6.7 × 10−3	—	2.0
05	Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au	700	5	363	80 × 10−3	Bending the device to a radius of curvature of 10 nm does not change the photocurrent, and the device shows transmittance of 63%.	
78

0.29	6.4 × 1012	70 × 10−3
06	Gr:WS2:Gr	532	
V
ds = 5	4500	2 × 10−3	The device can be bent to a 2.3 mm radius of curvature.	
145

0.03	
V
g = 60	—	2 × 10−3
07	Gr:SnS:Gr	—	3	1.7 × 104	0.3	After 25 bending cycles, the PD does not show any change in current.	
291

1.2 × 10−4	—	0.4
08	Au:g-C3N4/MoS2:Au	532	−9	0.7	—	The excellent performance is retained even after the film is severely deformed to a bending radius of ∼2 mm for hundreds of cycles.	
205

225	8 × 1010
09	Cr/Au:In2Se3:Cr/Au	700	5	363	80 × 10−3	Mechanical durability and photoresponse stability after 10 bending cycles.	
141

0.29	6.4 × 1012	70 × 10−3
10	Bi2Te3:SnS:Bi2Te3	370	5	115	1	Excellent durability after 100 bending cycles.	
206

10	4.1 × 1011	2
11	Cr/Au:Bi2Se3:Cr/Au	735	0.1	10.1 × 10−3	37 × 10−3	The device shows excellent stability even after 200 bending cycles at a radius of 6 mm.	
292

26.7	4.63 × 108	62 × 10−3
12	ITO/Au:In2Se:Ti/Au	660	1	5.6	140 × 10−3	The device shows excellent performance at a radius of 4 mm over 400 bending cycles.	
123

10.2 × 10−3	7 × 1010	25 × 10−3
13	Ti3C2:CsPbBr3:Ti3C2	450	10	44.9 × 10−3	48 × 10−3	The device can retain 85% of the initial photocurrent even after 1500 bending cycles at a bending angle of 160°.	
207

6.4 × 108	18 × 10−3
14	Au:SnS:Au	365	1	1.28 × 103	44 × 10−3	—	
293

—	3.02 × 1011	53 × 10−3
15	Ni:MoS2:Ni	White light	
V
ds = 2	150	0.5	The device shows no change in photocurrent after 100 bending cycles at a 25 mm bending radius.	
294

1	
V
g = −2	∼1012	1.15

 	Fig. 14  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and silicon. (a) The carrier migration process of heterojunctions with the aid of surface states of Bi2Se3 film and (b) the responsivity of the device at various illumination intensities under two different bias voltages (taken from ref. 120 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of carrier migration in a Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure, (d) an energy band diagram of the heterostructure under illumination, (e) the carrier migration in the heterostructure with a thin MXene layer and (f) the carrier migration in the heterostructure with a thick MXene layer (taken from ref. 98 with permission). (g) A schematic diagram of the polarization sensitivity of a device consisting of WS2/Si heterostructures and (h) the normalized photocurrent of the device with varying polarization angles (taken from ref. 209 with permission).	 


01	Au:MoS2/Si:Au	550	1	0.4	0.210	—	3 × 10−4	—	
295

3 × 10−4
02	Au:Si/MoS2:Ag	808	0	30	0.3	∼1013	3 × 10−6	8 × 103	
296

4 × 10−5
03	Gr:MoSe2/Si:Ag	650	—	15	0.270	7.13 × 1010	27 × 10−8	—	
297

35 × 10−8
04	Cu:Si/MoS2:Ti/Au	650	−2	90	11.9	2.1 × 1010	3 × 10−6	59.9	
298

4 × 10−5
05	Au:Bi2Se3/Si:Au	808	−1	0.06	24.28	4.39 × 1012	25 × 10−7	1.55 × 105	
120

37.4	55 × 10−6
06	Al:Si/SnS:ITO	760	0	7	0.013	3 × 1014	12 × 10−6	—	
299

55 × 10−6
07	Al:Si/SnS:ITO	850	−1	20	0.25	1.3 × 1011	41 × 10−6	462.8	
63

40.7 × 10−6
08	Ti/Au:Ti3C2/Si:Ti/Au	465	0	15.17	0.02695	—	0.84 × 10−3	105	
98

1.67 × 10−3
09	Au:MoSe2/PFO/Si:Au	835	5	—	2.5	2.34 × 1014	0.1	104	
110

0.1
10	Ag:g-C3N4/Si:Ag	950	0	0.049	0.16	4.5 × 1013	13 × 10−5	1.2 × 105	
90

43 × 10−5
11	Au:Gr/In2S3/Si:Ag	405	−2	0.026	4.53 × 104	3.02 × 1011	33 × 10−6	666	
72

4 × 10−5
12	Ti/Au:In2S3/Si:Ag	700	−2	9.35 × 10−3	579.6	2 × 1011	9 × 10−3	—	
74

13.1 × 10−5
13	Ag:Si/WS2:Gr	650	−2	1.55 × 10−3	1.5	2 × 1012	2 × 10−6	—	
300

7.2 × 10−6
14	Ag:Gr/In2Se3/Si:In/Ga	808	0	5.43 × 10−3	0.57	2.6 × 1012	35 × 10−6	1.6 × 104	
301

115 × 10−6
15	Ag:Si/WS2:Ag	785	—	11.696	10.46 × 10−3	1.17 × 109	—	—	
302

16	Au:WS2/Si:Au	980	0	0.03 × 10−3	0.224	1.5 × 1012	16 × 10−6	106	
209

29 × 10−6
17	Au:SnS0.25Se0.75/Si:Ag	635	0	44.88	0.377	∼1012	4.7 × 10−3	4.5 × 102	
303

3.9 × 10−3
18	In:Si/SiO2/SnSe:Pd	900	0	—	39.2	4.2 × 1016	29 × 10−6	106	
304

19	Ti/Au:In2S3/Si:Ti/Au	405	0	0.026	0.74	1.56 × 1010	9 × 10−3	—	
305

10−2
20	Ag:Si/Bi2Se3:Ag	900	—	14.6	0.168	1.85 × 1011	4 × 10−3	113	
148

4 × 10−3

 	Fig. 15  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and III–V semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of MoS2/GaN heterostructures along with the photodetection measurement process and (b) an energy band diagram of the heterojunction under UV illumination (taken from ref. 210 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a γ-In2Se3/GaAs PD array along with the setup for tracking the trajectory of a moving visible light spot, (d) changes in photocurrent when the light spot passes thorough different pixels, and (e) an image of the letter “E” produced by the PD under visible illumination (taken from ref. 212 with permission). (f) A schematic diagram of a WS2/GaAs heterostructure device and (g) the I–V characteristics of the devices under both dark conditions and 808 nm illumination (taken from ref. 213 with permission).	 


01	Au:MoS2/GaAs:Au	635	0	—	0.321	3.5 × 1013	17 × 10−6	—	
306

31 × 10−6
02	Au:MoS2/GaN:Ni/Au	265	0	10−3	0.187	2.34 × 1013	46.4 × 10−6	105	
210

114.1 × 10−6
03	Au/Cr:MoS2/GaN:Al	365	1	12	∼103	∼1011	5.4 × 10−3	—	
307

5.6 × 10−3
04	Au:WS2/GaN:Ni/Au	375	0	10−3	0.226	4 × 1014	7.3 × 10−6	3 × 105	
211

4.2 × 10−4
05	Ti/Au:MoS2/InAlAs/InGaAs:Ti/Au	1550	—	5	8 × 105	2 × 1012	14 × 10−3	—	
308

70 × 10−3
06	Au:In2Se3/GaAs:Au	660	0	3.06 × 10−3	0.25	7.34 × 1012	23.6 × 1012	1.29 × 104	
212

146.7 × 1012
07	Ag/Au:MoS2/GaN:Ag/Au	405	5	0.076	444	—	0.15	—	
309

0.10
08	Au:WS2/GaAs:Au	365	1	0.012	65.58	4.47 × 1012	30 × 10−3	1.15 × 103	
310

10−2
09	Au:WS2/GaAs:Au	808	0	17 × 10−6	0.527	1.03 × 1014	21.8 × 10−6	107	
213

49.6 × 10−6
10	g-C3N4/microporous GaN	360–635	3	10−3	3	1014	—	—	
311

103

 	Fig. 16  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and oxide semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of a crumped r-GO particle decorated MoS2-based photodiode and (b) the energy band diagram after forming the heterojunction (taken from ref. 214 with permission). (c) Carrier collection by a bare MoS2 device and (d) carrier collection by a vertical heterostructure between ITO, MoS2, and Cu2O (taken from ref. 215 with permission). (e) An energy band diagram of a MoS2/MnO QD heterostructure device and (f) the current–voltage characteristics of both bare MoS2 and MnO QDs/MoS2 devices (taken from ref. 217 with permission).	 


01	ITO:MoS2/Cu2O:Au	532	−0.5	0.026	5.77 × 104	3.2 × 1014	70 × 10−3	36	
215

02	Au:MoSe2/MoOX:Cr2	254	5	0.29	3.4	0.85 × 108	0.4	—	
312

0.5
03	Au/Cr:rGO/MoS2:Au/Cr	460	4	8	2.10	5 × 1011	18 × 10−3	102	
214

18 × 10−3
04	ITO:WS2/ZNO:FTO	365	−1	0.5	2.7	5.8 × 1012	0.8 × 10−3	—	
313

2.2 × 10−3
05	Au/Ti:MoS2/ZnO:Au/Ti	405	1	—	0.084	1.05 × 1011	1.5	—	
216

1.1
06	Ti/Au:MoS2/MnO QD:Ti/Au	260	—	100	20	5 × 1011	0.5	—	
217

0.5
07	Au/Ti:MoSe2/MoO2:Ti/Au	532	3	3.38	0.10086	23.4 × 109	0.43	∼800	
314

1.2
08	Au:MoS2/TiO2:Au	
	VGS = 0	2.32	1099	1.7 × 1013	—	106	
315

VDS = 1
09	Au:WSe2/rGO:Au	540	5	0.2 × 10−3	105	—	0.001	—	
316

0.002
10	Ti/Au:MoS2:Ti/Au	365	—	—	24.36	—	0.9	—	
317

8.28 × 103	1.04
11	WS2/ZnO/Si	670	−2	0.2	9.48	6.39 × 1011	125 × 10−3	—	
318

150 × 10−3
12	Cr/Au:WSe2/ZnO:Cr/Au	405	—	1	4.83 × 103	1.56 × 1013	10 × 10−6	—	
319

1.48 × 104	10 × 10−6

 	Fig. 17  The performance parameters of PDs involving van der Waals heterostructures between different 2DMs. (a) A schematic diagram of a graphene/WS2 nanodisc/Ag nanoparticle based device and a zoomed-in cross-section image, (b) the temporal photocurrent of devices both with and without Ag nanoparticles, and (c) the spectral photoresponsivity of devices both with and without Ag nanoparticles (taken from ref. 218 with permission). (d and e) Schematic diagrams of a WS2/CSPbBr3 vdWH under compressive and tensile strain, respectively and (f and g) energy band diagrams under compressive and tensile strain, respectively (taken from ref. 219 with permission). (h) A schematic diagram of a vertical heterostructure between MoS2 and MoSe2 under illumination, (i) a schematic diagram of carrier migration under illumination, and (j) the dependence of responsivity and detectivity on the intensity (taken from ref. 220 with permission).	 


01	Cr/Au:WS2/CsPbBr3:Cr/Au	450	2	38.2 × 103	57.2	1.36 × 1014	2 × 10−3	109	
219

2 × 10−3
02	Ag:Gr/WS2:Si	800	−0.3	0.32	54.5	4.1 × 1012	45 × 10−6	—	
320

21 × 10−5
03	Au/In:InSe/Se:Au/In	460	0	1	32 × 10−3	1.7 × 1011	3 × 10−2	500	
321

37 × 10−3
04	Au/Cr:MoS2/MoSe2:Au/Cr	520	0.6	1	36	4.8 × 1011	1.5 × 10−3	107	
220

3.5 × 10−3
05	Cr/Au:WSe2/MoTe2:Cr/Au	633	0	—	1.8 × 10−3	—	72 × 10−6	104	
322

48 × 10−6
06	Cr/Au:In2S3/Gr:Cr/Au	808	5	13.02	0.49 × 10−3	3.05 × 107	—	——	
323

07	Ti/Au:MoS2/NbS2:Ti/Au	520	1	0.425	1.27	——	30 × 10−3	107	
324

70 × 10−3
08	Au/Cr:InSe/Te:Au/Cr	400	−2	—	0.45	1.1 × 1013	——	104	
325

09	Au:Gr/WS2/Ag NP:Au	450	0.8	0.15	11.7/2390	4.3 × 1010	0.3	—	
218

1.0

 	Fig. 18  The performance parameters of PDs involving heterostructures between 2DMs and perovskite semiconductors. (a) A schematic diagram of a flexible device with a perovskite/MoS2 bulk heterostructure and hybrid r-GO on a flexible PEN substrate and (b) responsivity and detectivity vs. the number of bending cycles (taken from ref. 222 with permission). (c) A schematic diagram of a device containing a heterojunction between MoS2 (2D) and CsPbI3-XBrx (0D) with a TEM image of the perovskite quantum dots and (d and e) carrier migration in the off and on states of the device, respectively (taken from ref. 223 with permission). (f) A comparison of the dark currents of MoS2 and MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 devices; the inset shows a schematic diagram of the MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 hybrid PD, and (g) the variations of the on–off switching ratios of both MoS2 and MoS2/(PEA)2PbI4 devices at different intensities (taken from ref. 225 with permission).	 


01	Gr:WS2/MAPbI3:Gr	532	1	—	950	—/2200	22 × 10−3	106	
221

37 × 10−3
02	Ti/Au:MoS2/MAPbI3/APTES:Ti/Au	520	—	6	1.94 × 106	1.29 × 1012	6.17	—	
326

4.5
03	Cr/Au:MoS2/CsPbBr3:Cr/Au	442	10	0.02	4.4/302	2.5 × 1010	0.72 × 10−3	104	
327

1.01 × 10−3
04	Au:CH3NH3PbI3:Au	White light	5	0.7	68.11	—	0.205	1522	
328

0.206
05	Au:MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3/rGO:Au	660	
V
GS = 0	53 × 10−5	1.08 × 104	4.28 × 1013	45 × 10−3	—	
222


V
DS = 2	45 × 10−3
06	Au:MoS2/CsPI3-XBrx:Au	532	
V
G = 60	—	7.7 × 104	5.6 × 1011	0.59	—	
223

107	0.32
07	Gr:MoS2/(PEA)2SnI4:Gr	660	0	—	0.121	8.09 × 109	34 × 10−3	500	
329

38 × 10−3
08	Au:rGO/CH3NH3PbI3/WS2:Au	660	
V
GS = 0	33.2 × 10−3	678.8	4.99 × 1011	—	—	
330


V
DS = 2
09	Au/Cr:MoS2/CsPbBr3:Au/Cr	532	1	4.86	640	3.38 × 1011	—	—	
331

10	Au:g-C3N4/MLHP:Au	White light	5	0.5 × 10−3	14	∼1013	6.1 × 10−3	105	
224

2.2 × 10−3
11	Gr:MoS2/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP:Al	700	0	0.407	0.41	7.99 × 1010	—	—	
332

12	Cr/Au:(PEA)2PbI4/MoS2:Cr/Au	637	1	—	16.8	1.06 × 1013	4 × 10−3	105	
225

6 × 10−3

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
