Local reaction environment for selective electroreduction of carbon monoxide   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03838A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03838A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2470-2478Local reaction environment for selective electroreduction of carbon monoxide†

        
          
            Ming 
            Ma
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Wanyu 
            Deng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Aoni 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Degenhart 
            Hochfilzer
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Qiao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Karen 
            Chan
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Ib 
            Chorkendorff
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Brian 
            Seger
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, People's Republic of China. E-mail: mingma@xjtu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: kchan@fysik.dtu.dk; brse@fysik.dtu.dk
Received 
      11th December 2021
    , Accepted 27th April 2022First published on 28th April 2022AbstractThe electroreduction of CO2 to multi-carbon products (C2+) is an attractive route for high-density renewable energy storage, but catalytic selectivity toward a desired C2+ product is low. Although the pH in the vicinity of the catalysts has previously been correlated with selectivity of C2+ products, solid evidence of the local pH effect on specific C2+ products is lacking. Here, we present a very simple strategy for experimentally probing the local pH value in GDE-based high-rate CO electroreduction via the CO2 capture rate. From the local pH determination method as well as the consideration of other possibilities that may influence the C2+ formation, we explicitly demonstrate that the increased OH− concentration near the cathodic GDE surface in CO reduction can significantly facilitate acetate formation via a homogeneous solution reaction which is the key step, influenced by local pH near the cathode surface, correspondingly inhibiting other C2+ products such as ethanol, n-propanol and C2H4. Notably, a total C2+ faradaic efficiency of >90% that encompasses up to nearly 50% acetate faradaic efficiency is achieved via elevating average local OH− concentration. In addition, the exploration of the link between local CO availability and the specific C2+ selectivity demonstrates that high CO coverage is required for C2+ formation owing to a preferred CO coupling. Further analysis indicates that a certain intermediate should be directly shared for acetate and ethanol, but the relevant reaction paths of this intermediate may be separated from that of C2H4.

Broader context
Electroreduction of CO2 powered by renewable electricity provides a sustainable and promising strategy for producing fuels and value-added chemicals as the price of solar and wind based renewable electricity rapidly decreases. However, controlling the selectivity of catalytic reduction of CO2 to a highly valuable multi-carbon product (C2+) remains a scientific challenge. The pH near the catalysts is expected to influence C2+ products formation, but the link between local pH with the formation of specific C2+ is still elusive. This work used a very simple strategy to experimentally probe the local pH value near the cathodic GDE during high-rate CO electroreduction, thus enabling us to reliably link the local pH with the specific C2+ selectivity. We explicitly demonstrate the enhanced local pH close to the cathode surface in CO reduction can significantly promote acetate formation while inhibiting other C2+ products, and the key step toward acetate formation is a solution reaction, affected by local pH value near the cathode surface rather than bulk pH. In addition, the experiments showing the correlation of local CO availability with specific C2+ selectivity demonstrates C2+ formation requires high CO coverage to achieve CO coupling.

Introduction
The electrochemical conversion of CO2 and H2O into carbon-based fuels and value-added chemicals not only provides a promising avenue for the storage of intermittent and fluctuating renewable electricity but also acts as an incentive for CO2 capture.1–8 In this field, while the selective and efficient electroreduction of CO2 to single-carbon products such as CO has been well-developed and currently is being commercially deployed,9 electrochemically converting CO2 into multi-carbon products (C2+) including hydrocarbons and oxygenates is more appealing due to their higher energy density and widespread market potential. To date, Cu is still the only known material that can catalyze CO2 effectively into numerous multi-carbon products at high reaction rates under mild conditions. Many attempts have focused on improving the selectivity of C2+ products via tuning morphology,6,10 crystal facets,11–13 compositions14–18 and oxidation states19,20 of Cu-based catalysts. Since the electrosynthesis of C2+ products from CO2 is a complex multistep reaction process with numerous adsorbed intermediates and involves multiple electron transfer steps,21 controlling the reaction pathway to selectively convert CO2 into a desired C2+ product on a Cu surface remains a scientific challenge.
In CO2 electrolysis, the pH in the vicinity of the cathode plays a crucial role in the formation of certain intermediates and reaction pathways, which determines the final products.22,23 In order to understand the effect of local pH on the formation of C2+ products and to achieve controllable C2+ selectivity via tuning local pH, CO reduction instead of CO2 reduction has been employed, owing to several important reasons. Firstly, CO acts as a key intermediate for C–C coupling that leads to the formation of C2+ products. In addition, CO can exist in distinct pH electrolytes without reacting with electrolyte species such as OH−. Conversely, CO2 forms carbonate via the reaction with OH− in alkaline conditions, and this buffering reaction makes the local reaction environment very complicated (uncertainty of reactant concentration and pH value) in CO2 reduction. In the past, most of the (local) pH effect studies in CO reduction have been performed using traditional H-cells.12,24–27 However, the exceedingly low CO solubility in electrolytes significantly limits CO mass transport to the surface of the catalysts, which may lead to misunderstandings of the local pH effect on catalytic performance.
To better understand the local pH effect, recently the performance of electrocatalytic CO reduction in different pH electrolytes has been evaluated using flow electrolyzers with gas-diffusion electrodes (GDEs) that can overcome the mass transport limitations.28 The recent report showed an enhanced selectivity for both ethylene and acetate at high-rate CO reduction in an alkaline solutions using GDE-type flow electrolyzers,28 but other researchers discovered a slight decrease in ethylene selectivity with increasing the alkalinity of electrolytes.29 Although the pH values in the vicinity of the cathode could affect the selectivity of C2+ products, the correlation of local pH with the formation of specific C2+ products is still elusive. In addition, linking the local pH with catalytic performance also requires a simple and low-cost method to probe the local pH experimentally.
Here, we report a very simple strategy for experimentally determining the local pH value in GDE-based high-rate CO electroreduction, without using in situ spectroscopy30,31 that is difficult to operate and requires a special design of the flow electrolyzers with a transparent window path for laser to probe the cathodic GDE surface. This simple method enables us to reliably correlate the local pH with the specific C2+ selectivity in CO reduction on Cu catalysts, revealing a gradually enhanced selectivity of acetate formation from 14% to nearly 50% through a solution-phase reaction by systematically increasing the local pH. In addition, we also explored the link between the local CO availability and specific C2+ selectivity, which demonstrates that C–C coupling was significantly inhibited with low CO coverage, resulting in a decline in selectivity for the formation of acetate and ethylene along with an enhancement in CH4 selectivity. Moreover, this work provides further insights into the mechanism of C2+ products formation via a systematic exploration of the effect of the local reaction environment in the vicinity of the cathode surface.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and CO reduction performance of Cu catalysts
Cu electrocatalysts with ∼70 nm thick layers were prepared on top of microporous carbon layers of GDEs by magnetron sputtering at an argon pressure of 2 mTorr. This vacuum deposition technique is capable of maintaining the high purity and the excellent reproducibility of the catalyst layers. For identifying the phase of the prepared Cu layers, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed (Fig. S2a, ESI†), revealing the dominant (111) Cu peak with the only other detectable (200), and (220) peaks. The CO electroreduction experiments were performed in a three-compartment flow electrolyzer which consists of catholyte and anolyte flow chambers, where electrolyte was separated via an anion exchange membrane (AEM) and continuously flowed, and a gas chamber in which CO at a constant flow rate (45 ml min−1) was continuously fed (Fig. S3, ESI†). The gas diffusion layer of GDE, which was positioned between catholyte and gas chambers, allows CO to efficiently diffuse to the surface of the Cu catalysts immersed in an electrolyte, where CO was electrochemically converted into gas and liquid products. Gas products were mixed with the continuously purged CO, directly venting into the gas-sampling loop of a gas chromatograph (GC) for periodic quantification. The liquid products diluted in the given catholyte and anolyte reservoirs were collected after completion of the CO reduction electrolysis, and were then analyzed via high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).32 In addition, liquid products evaporated from GDEs into the gas chamber of the electolyzer were also condensed and collected for analysis.33
In this work, for obtaining reliable catalytic selectivity of gas products, the gas flow out of the electrolyzer was monitored via a volumetric flowmeter during CO reduction (Fig. S3, ESI†).32 At different current densities (j), no significant discrepancy in the flowrate between gas inlet and outlet was observed (Table S1, ESI†), which is consistent with the theoretical estimation (Table S2, ESI†). This observation is due to a relatively low CO consumption rate for converting into C2+ products, which is linked to our small geometric surface area of cathode. However, it should be noted that the flowrate variation may be apparent when using large surface area of cathode GDEs at commercially-relevant current densities (i.e. high CO consumption rate to C2+). The faradaic efficiencies (FEs) for gas and liquid products were plotted at various current densities for CO reduction in 1 M KHCO3 (Fig. 1a). As shown in Fig. 1a, C2H4, acetate and ethanol were observed as the primary C2+ product across all different current densities ranges, along with small amounts of n-propanol and only trace amounts of allyl alcohol and acetaldehyde. Notably, as the current densities increased, the FEs for C2H4 and ethanol steadily dropped, whereas FE for acetate gradually enhanced. In addition, while the partial current densities for ethanol and n-propanol retained almost constant at more negative potentials, the partial current density for acetate experienced a significant enhancement (Fig. 1b). These observations may be attributed to elevated OH− concentration in the vicinity of the cathode upon increasing current densities, and the high pH value near the cathode/electrolyte interface influences the reaction intermediates and pathways toward C2+ products. In contrast, our previous CO2 reduction work exhibited only a slight increase in FEs for C2H4, ethanol and acetate even in highly concentrated alkaline solutions and elevated current densities,32 which may be linked to that the local OH− concentration was significantly neutralized in CO2 reduction via the buffering reaction of CO2 and OH−.
 Fig. 1  CO electroreduction performance at various current densities in 1 M KHCO3. (a) Faradaic efficiencies for CO reduction to all detected gas and liquid products. (b) Partial current density for C2+ products. The potentials were iR-corrected. 
Although previous transport calculations also implies that a high pH value may facilitate acetate formation during CO reduction,28 direct evidence requires the experimental determination of the local pH value near the cathodic GDE surface in CO reduction.
Local pH determination
To determine the local pH value near the cathodic GDE surface under reaction conditions, recently in situ Raman spectroscopy has been demonstrated to be a possible tool.30,31 In that technique, the local pH values were estimated via the relative integration of the HCO3− and CO32− signals of the Raman spectra. However, CO reduction in alkaline electrolytes (such as highly concentrated KOH) does not have the existing HCO3− and CO32− species near the cathode surface, which means that it is unsuitable to utilize the Raman spectroscopy for probing the local pH in this situation. Thus, local pH determination in CO reduction has never been experimentally demonstrated to date.
In this work, we developed a very simple method based on the CO2 capture via the reaction with OH− near the cathodic GDE/electrolyte interface. In our recent work, we demonstrated that only 30% of consumed CO2 in the gas chamber was involved in product formation, and ∼70% of the consumed CO2 during the CO2 reduction process was captured near the cathodic GDE/electrolyte interface via the reaction with OH− (Fig. 2a), forming CO32−.32 This observation entails that CO2 consumption mostly derives from the neutralization reaction instead of the electrochemical conversion into products in GDE-type flow CO2 electrolyzers. From a techno-economic perspective, the substantial CO2 capture will lower the profit of CO2 reduction. However, the amount of CO2 captured in the form of CO32− directly reflects the OH− concentration in the vicinity of the cathode, which can be possibly utilized to determine the local pH value near the cathode surface (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of CO2 capture via the reaction with OH− in CO2 reduction (a) and high local pH in CO reduction without CO2 capture (b) near the cathodic GDE/electrolyte interface. A comparison of CO2 capture rates in the form of CO32− for CO2 reduction electrolysis at various current densities (c) and for various KOH concentration electrolytes without electrolysis (d). The dash line between (c) and (d) shows the equivalent CO2 capture rate between CO2 reduction at various current densities and open-circuit potential (j = 0 mA cm−2) in various OH− concentration electrolytes. (e) The local pH in CO reduction determined by comparing (c) with (d). 
A higher local pH could be created at elevated current densities, owing to that the OH− generation rate is linearly correlated with current densities via cathodic reactions. As expected, the CO2 capture rate gradually enhanced upon increasing current densities (Fig. 2c). The amount of CO2 captured in the form of CO32− depends on the OH− concentration close to the cathodic GDE/electrolyte interface. In addition, the significant variation of OH− concentration near the cathodic GDE should be within hydrodynamic boundary layer, and CO2 capture should also mainly take place within the boundary layer.28 Thus, the identical capture ability of CO2 represents the equivalent OH− concentration within the boundary layer near the cathode surface in the identical system. The pH value for the average OH− concentration within the boundary layer is the local pH in this work. In addition, we found ∼70.0 μm thick boundary layer by measuring the diffusion-limited current of ferricyanide reduction (Fig. S7, ESI†).
In order to correlate the capture ability of CO2 with an exact OH− concentration, the amount of CO2 capture (i.e. CO2 capture rate) was measured in various concentrations of KOH solutions without electrolysis (i.e. open-circuit potential) under identical conditions. Fig. 2d presents the CO2 capture rate as a function of OH− concentration in flow electrolyzers, which can be the reference for determining the current-dependent local pH. When purging CO2, the equal CO2 capture rate between current-induced OH− and a certain OH− concentration reference should correspond to roughly equal OH− concentration within their boundary layers. For instance, the amount of CO2 capture that is reacted with OH− produced at 100 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2c) is equal to that of 0.4 M OH− concentration (Fig. 2d), which reflects the equivalent local OH− concentration (i.e. equal local pH) when purging CO2. Here, if CO is purged instead of CO2 for the above two equivalent local pH systems, local OH− concentration (no buffering with CO2) is also thought to be roughly identical between the current-induced OH− and the OH− concentration reference. Local pH for the OH− concentration reference with purging CO is the bulk pH. Thus, the local pH in CO reduction can be estimated by comparing the CO2 capture rate in CO2 reduction at various current densities (Fig. 2c) with that of no electrolysis at various OH− concentration (Fig. 2d). The average OH− concentration (i.e. local pH) near the surface of the cathode as a function of current density during CO reduction in 1 M KHCO3 is shown in Fig. 2e. As current densities increased, the average OH− concentration near the cathodic GDE surface gradually elevated (Fig. 2e). This observation is in line with the theoretically calculated pH profiles at the cathode/electrolyte interface (Fig. S8, ESI†).
Effect of local pH on CO reduction performance
To consolidate the hypothesis of the local pH effect, it is essential to rule out the variation in applied potentials, current densities and local CO concentration as well as the possibilities of oxidation of the Cu surface and cation effect, which all influence the formation of intermediates that are relevant to the final C2+ products. In this work, the CO reduction electrolysis was also performed in 0.5 M KOH, 1 M KOH and 2 M KOH at a constant current density of 100 mA cm−2 (at roughly identical potentials, as shown in Table S7, ESI†). Here, the relatively low current density was employed to avoid insufficient reactant supply to the surface of the catalysts, keeping the local CO concentration identical. In addition, current-induced OH− generation rate should be identical at the constant current density, thus an increase in the alkalinity of the electrolyte apparently contributes to an enhanced local pH (i.e. higher OH− concentration) near the cathodic GDE in CO reduction, which is confirmed by the measured local pH for CO reduction in different electrolytes (Fig. 3a) based on the method of CO2 capture rate that we developed in the previous section. Moreover, these experimentally determined local pH values are nearly consistent with the theoretically estimated pH gradients close to the surface of the cathode (0 < x < 70 nm, Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  Comparison of electrocatalytic performance of CO reduction in different pH electrolytes. The measured local pH (a) and calculated local pH profiles (b) in CO reduction with various electrolytes (local pH calculation is based on eqn (S22)–(S31), ESI†). (c) Faradaic efficiencies for all detected products in 1 M KHCO3, 0.5 M KOH, 1 M KOH and 2 M KOH at 100 mA cm−2. (d) Catholyte pH over CO reduction electrolysis using an AEM. (e) Catalytic performance with in situ dilution of the electrolyte from 1 M KOH to 0.5 M KOH. The inset shows faradaic efficiencies of products formed over the in situ dilution of the electrolyte. All the tests were carried out within 3 hours. 
A comparison of the faradaic efficiencies for CO reduction products in different alkalinity of the electrolyte is presented in Fig. 3c. A relatively higher FE for H2 evolution reaction (HER) was detected in 1 M KHCO3 compared to that in various concentrations of KOH solutions, which is ascribed to that the bicarbonate also contributes to HER as the proton donor.34–36 In addition, the FE of CH4 had no obvious discrepancy in different alkalinity of the electrolyte (with the exception of a slight increase in CH4 formation in 1 M KHCO3). It should be noted that while the local pH close to the cathode surface enhanced upon increasing the pH of the electrolyte, the surface pH (x = 0, Fig. 3b) was almost equivalent in various concentrations of KOH solutions. Thus, CH4 formation in the electrocatalytic CO reduction should be directly linked to surface pH,25 instead of the local pH close to the cathode surface or the pH of the electrolyte. Furthermore, the nearly identical FE of ∼90% for total C2+ products was observed in various concentrations of KOH solutions (Fig. S9, ESI†), indicating that the pH of the electrolyte (i.e. local pH) is minimal in affecting the total C2+ formation.
Notably, among the C2+ products, the FE for acetate production significantly enhanced from ∼14% to >48% upon elevating OH− concentration in the vicinity of the Cu cathode (Fig. 3c), whereas the FE for alcohol formation such as ethanol correspondingly declined. Interestingly, Fig. 3c exhibits that the FE of C2H4 was maintained when the OH− concentration was not high enough, and started to reduce at higher alkaline electrolytes than 0.5 M KOH (i.e. average local OH− concentration >0.9 M, as shown in Fig. 3a). These results suggest that there may be a certain intermediate shared for the formation of acetate and ethanol, and OH− should influence the intermediate to facilitate acetate production while inhibiting alcohol formation. In addition, OH− does not directly influence selectivity of C2H4 below a certain level of alkalinity, which means that the key reaction pathway toward C2H4 should be separated from those for producing acetate and ethanol.
Regarding the formation of acetate, it is well established that OH− can catalyze ketene (H2CCO) to form acetate in solution.37,38 When considering the nearly equivalent surface pH in different alkalinity of electrolyte (Fig. 3b), the key step for acetate formation should take place via a solution reaction that may be influenced by bulk pH or the local pH value close to the cathode surface (Fig. 3a) instead of surface pH. However, at GDE-based high-rate CO2 reduction, we did not observe an enhanced acetate formation with increasing the alkalinity of the electrolyte (Fig. S12, ESI†).32 This observation is due to that the OH− ions near the cathode/electrolyte interface is significantly buffered with CO2, which also implies that bulk pH could not directly affect this homogeneous solution reaction for acetate formation. Thereby, this solution reaction for acetate formation just occurs near the cathode surface, directly affected by the local pH close to the surface. Moreover, Hori et al. has demonstrated that the formation rate of C2H4 and ethanol is independent of pH.25 With the nearly identical FE of total C2+ products (Fig. S9, ESI†), the improvement in acetate formation correspondingly inhibited the rest of C2+ products upon increasing the pH of the electrolyte (i.e. the increased local pH in this work).
In our previous studies, a significant variation in the electrolyte pH has been demonstrated over the course of high-rate CO2 reduction experiments via an AEM.32 To avoid the misinterpretation of the pH effect caused by this variation, the pH of the catholyte was also monitored over the course of CO reduction electrolysis. As noted in Fig. 3d, the catholyte pH was almost maintained when using various concentrations of KOH catholyte, which is ascribed to that a constant supply of OH−via the cathodic reactions should be equivalent to the constant loss of OH− that transported from the catholyte to the anolyte via an AEM as the charge-carrier at a fixed current density. In contrast, when using 1 M KHCO3 as the initial catholyte, the catholyte pH gradually increased from ∼8.3 to ∼9.5 over the 3 h electrolysis due to the cathodic-current induced OH−. Compared to the high local pH value (Fig. 3a), this slight increment of catholyte pH is not sufficient to lead to a variation in the related local pH created near the cathode/electrolyte interface at 100 mA cm−2. These results indicate a negligible variation in the local pH value over the 3 h CO electrolysis experiment in the different electrolytes. It should be noted that if the duration of the CO electrolysis experiment is sufficiently long, the initial KHCO3 catholyte can be transformed to KOH catholyte, owing to the carbon crossover (HCO3− or CO32−) issue.32
Sargent and co-workers reported that Cu can be oxidized when immersing into highly concentrated alkaline solutions at the open-circuit potential,39 which gives rise to an oxide-derived Cu surface in the initial of CO or CO2 electrolysis. The grain boundaries resulting from oxide-derived Cu was demonstrated to be able to enhance the catalytic activity of CO reduction.2,28 In this work, to confirm the local pH effect, the possibility of Cu oxidation in highly concentrated alkaline electrolyte and the additional influence of oxide-derived Cu were also taken into account. Although SEM images show the similar morphology before and after electrolysis (Fig. S1, ESI†), it is impossible to identify which defects or grain boundaries are active from ex situ microscopy. Here, a two-step procedure was designed with an initial CO reduction in 1 M KOH for ∼30 min and a subsequent ∼120 min CO reduction in 0.5 M KOH that was obtained via slowly adding de-ionized water into the original 1 M KOH without stopping CO electrolysis. This in situ dilution of highly concentrated alkaline electrolytes during CO reduction process enables us to distinguish the effect of local pH and oxide-derived Cu. Fig. 3e presents that ∼45% FE for C2H4 and ∼22% FE for acetate were achieved as the primary gas and liquid products, which is in line with those in only 0.5 M KOH (Fig. 3c). This observation reveals that the oxidization and following electroreduction of Cu surface in highly concentrated alkaline had a minimal effect on the primary C2+ products formation in this work, thereby the primary effect is derived from the local pH.
It was demonstrated that cation plays an important role in CO or CO2 reduction.24,40–45 All tests in this work were performed using only K+, thus the effect of different cation species can be excluded. In addition, the role of K+ concentration in CO or CO2 electrolysis should be considered to further confirm the local pH effect. Hori et al. discovered that while a slight variation in selectivity when changing K+ concentration (0.05–0.3 M) in relatively low K+ concentration solutions, the selectivity of multi-carbon products was maintained upon increasing K+ concentration (≥0.3 M) in high K+ concentration solutions.24 This observation in high K+ concentration electrolyte can be attributed to the crowding (saturation) of the double layer with high near-surface cation concentration when using high bulk cation concentration.46 Therefore, high cation concentration electrolytes (K+ concentration ≥0.5 M) were used for all tests in this work, which can rule out the cation concentration effect. In addition, with same cation concentration, a significant discrepancy in C2+ formation during CO reduction was observed between 1 M KHCO3 and 1 M KOH, as shown in Fig. 3c (FE of acetate is ∼14% and ∼39% in 1 M KHCO3 and 1 M KOH, respectively), which can further confirm the local pH effect instead of cation effect.
Based on all the above results in this section with carefully ruling out other existing parameters that can influence the C2+ products, we therefore conclude that the enhanced local pH close to the cathode surface in CO reduction can significantly facilitate acetate formation while inhibiting the rest of C2+ products such as ethanol, n-propanol and C2H4. Of particular note, the key step toward acetate formation is the solution reaction which is directly influenced by local pH value close to the electrode surface rather than surface pH and bulk pH.
Effect of local CO concentration on CO reduction performance
To better understand the mechanism of C2+ products formation, we also explored the influence of local CO concentration. Tuning the local CO concentration allows for controlling the CO coverage on the surface of the catalysts, which plays an important role in certain intermediates formation. The local CO concentration is linked to CO partial pressure according to Henry's law.29 Herein, for exploring the influence of local CO concentration (i.e. CO coverage), the catalytic performance of CO reduction as a function of CO partial pressure was performed at 100 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH. The CO partial pressure of the inlet flow was modulated from 100% to 5% by changing the inlet gas composition ratio of CO and N2, and the total inlet flow rate was kept at 45 ml min−1. We found a slight increase in the applied potential with decreasing the CO concentration (Table S8, ESI†), which may be due to the combination of two reasons: (i) lack of CO reactant suppresses CO reduction, correspondingly leading to an enhanced catalytic activity for H2 evolution (Fig. 4a), and (ii) H2O reduction may be more difficult to occur kinetically on a Cu surface compared to CO reduction in alkaline electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  The electrocatalytic performance of CO reduction at various local CO concentrations in 1 M KOH. (a) Faradaic efficiencies for products. (b) Normalized selectivity for CO reduction products (i.e. excluding H2 evolution) via the comparison of FE for certain CO reduction product with the total FEs for all CO reduction products. (c) Possible reaction paths for CO reduction on Cu, with path (i), showing liquid C2+ formation, and path (ii), showing gaseous C2+ production (C2+ formation requires high CO coverage). 
The FE for total C2+ products gradually decreased from ∼88% to ∼14% upon decreasing the CO concentration (Fig. 4a). In contrast, the dramatically enhanced C1 (i.e. CH4) formation was observed at lower CO concentration. With CO concentration as low as 10%, the CH4 became the dominant product with the FE of ∼29% (Fig. 4a). The normalized selectivity for CO reduction products (i.e. selectivity excluding H2 evolution) in Fig. 4b clearly exhibits the significantly suppressed catalytic activity for total C2+ formation with a considerable increase in CH4 formation when decreasing the CO concentration. In addition, *CHO or *COH were considered to be the intermediate for producing CH4 (Fig. 4c).21,47 These observations may suggest that the low CO coverage (i.e. low CO availability) on the catalyst surface reduces the possibility of C–C coupling (Fig. 4c), thus inhibiting total C2+ formation while promoting C1 product. In other words, the high CO coverage favors the C–C coupling toward the formation of C2+ products.
Many studies in H-type cells showed a relatively high CH4 selectivity on flat Cu for both CO2 and CO reduction,24,25,27,48 however GDE-type flow electrolyzers could significantly suppress CH4 formation in CO2 or CO reduction.28,32,39,49,50 This discrepancy in the CH4 selectivity between H-type cells and GDE-type flow electrolyzers may be explained by the aforementioned result that CH4 formation strongly relies on local CO concentration (Fig. 4c). Specifically, the extremely low CO solubility in electrolytes significantly constrains CO availability on the surface of the catalysts in H-cells, promoting CH4 formation. However, GDE-type flow electrolyzers, where the mass-transport of reactant and gas products can be dramatically accelerated, are capable of providing sufficient CO reactant to the surface of the catalysts, which facilitates CO dimerization pathway, correspondingly inhibiting CH4 formation.
Regarding C2+ product distribution, when CO concentration reduced from 100% to 50%, the FE for acetate formation apparently decreased, whereas the FE of C2H4 was almost unchanged (Fig. 4a). This finding further confirms that the key reaction path toward acetate formation is separated from that of C2H4 formation, which we also discovered in the section of local pH effect. In addition, the previous DTF simulation work10 has demonstrated that liquid C2+ may be formed through a *CHCO intermediate in path i, and gaseous C2+ production is mainly from a *HOCCOH intermediate in path ii (Fig. 4c), which is in line with our finding. Of particular note, the normalized selectivity shows the nearly stable catalytic activity for ethanol when reducing CO concentration from 100% to 5% (Fig. 4b), which is consistent with previous work.29 This observation entails that while the total C2+ formation strongly relies on the local CO concentration, ethanol formation seems to be independent from the local CO concentration.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the simple local pH determination method developed in this work enables us to provide direct evidence for the correlation between local pH and the specific C2+ formation in CO reduction, demonstrating a gradual enhancement in acetate formation upon increasing OH− concentration in the vicinity of the catalyst, along with correspondingly inhibited formation of ethanol, n-propanol and C2H4. Importantly, we found that the key step for acetate formation should occur near the cathode surface via a solution reaction instead of taking place on the cathode surface or in the bulk electrolyte, and this solution reaction step toward acetate is directly linked to the concentration of OH− ions near the cathode/electrolyte interface. In addition, the investigation of the role of the local CO availability in specific C2+ selectivity shows a significantly preferred CO coupling with high CO coverage, which gives rise to the enhanced selectivity in the formation of acetate and C2H4. This work illustrates that C2+ formation is not only locally pH-dependent but also strongly relies on local CO availability, which reflects that tailoring the local reaction environment in the vicinity of the catalysts is a promising approach for controlling the reaction pathways toward a desired C2+ product in CO or CO2 conversion.
Author contributions
M. M. conceived the conceptual idea and designed the experiments. M. M. and B. S. wrote the original manuscript. M. M., K. C. and B. S. supervised this project. W. D. performed and analysed the boundary layer thickness. A. X. calculated the pH gradients near the cathode theoretically. Y. Q. performed real-time detection of intermediates via EC-MS. All authors contributed to discussing the results and editing the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (22179105) and the Villum Foundation V-SUSTAIN grant 9455 to the Villum Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals. This work was also supported by ECOEthylene project from the Innovation Fund Denmark (Grant# 8057-00018B) and “Young Talent Support Plan” of Xi’an Jiaotong University (awarded to M. M.). Authors also would like to thank Dr Georg Kastlunger and Qixian Xie for discussion about acetate formation and assistance in SEM tests, respectively.
Notes and references
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807166 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, R. B. Sandberg, A. J. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, K. Djanashvili and W. A. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6680–6684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Whipple and P. J.-A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luc, X. Fu, J. Shi, J.-J. Lv, M. Jouny, B. H. Ko, Y. Xu, Q. Tu, X. Hu, J. Wu, Q. Yue, Y. Liu, F. Jiao and Y. Kang, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
K. J.-P. Schouten, Z. Qin, E. Pérez Gallent and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9864–9867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhong, Z. Zhao, Q. Zhao, D. Cheng, B. Liu, G. Zhang, W. Deng, H. Dong, L. Zhang, J. Li, J. Li and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4879–4885 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J.-A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi, V. Mantella and R. Buonsanti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2490–2499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Ren and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18704–18714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Clark, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15848–15857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhong, K. Tran, Y. Min, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, P. De Luna, Z. Yu, A. S. Rasouli, P. Brodersen, S. Sun, O. Voznyy, C.-S. Tan, M. Askerka, F. Che, M. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, A. Ip, Z. Ulissi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 581, 178–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12123 CrossRef PubMed .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C.-T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E.-L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T.-M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, R. Takahashi, Y. Yoshinami and A. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7075–7081 CrossRef CAS .
K. J.-P. Schouten, E. Pérez Gallent and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 716, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 748–755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Wang, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, F. Li, Y. Wang, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, T.-T. Zhuang, L. Wang, J. Y. Howe, Y. Ren, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1124–1131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, J. S. Francisco and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15438–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Melo, R. P. Jansonius, F. Habibzadeh, E. R. Grant and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3101–3107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, E. L. Clark, K. T. Therkildsen, S. Dalsgaard, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 977–985 RSC .
M. Ma, S. Kim, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8854–8861 RSC .
A. Wuttig, M. Yaguchi, K. Motobayashi, M. Osawa and Y. Surendranath, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E4585–E4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goyal, G. Marcandalli, V. A. Mints and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4154–4161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Marcandalli, A. Goyal and M. T.-M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 4936–4945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Andraos and A. J. Kresge, Can. J. Chem., 2000, 78, 508–515 CAS .
Y. Chiang, A. J. Kresge and V. V. Popik, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, 1107–1110 RSC .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Thorson, K. I. Siil and P. J.-A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, F69–F74 CrossRef .
M. R. Singh, Y. Kwon, Y. Lum, J. W. Ager and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13006–13012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Resasco, L. D. Chen, E. Clark, C. Tsai, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, K. Chan and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11277–11287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pérez-Gallent, G. Marcandalli, M. C. Figueiredo, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16412–16419 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C.-O. Monteiro, F. Dattila, B. Hagedoorn, R. García-Muelas, N. López and M. T.-M. Koper, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 654–662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. Wu, A. S. Malkani, X. Chang, M. Cheng, B. Xu and Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 4494–4499 CrossRef .
A. Goyal and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Chem. Phys., 2021, 155, 134705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J.-P. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T.-M. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050 RSC .
D. S. Ripatti, T. R. Veltman and M. W. Kanan, Joule, 2019, 3, 240–256 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Lv, M. Jouny, W. Luc, W. Zhu, J.-J. Zhu and F. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803111 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ee03838aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Electroreduction of CO2 powered by renewable electricity provides a sustainable and promising strategy for producing fuels and value-added chemicals as the price of solar and wind based renewable electricity rapidly decreases. However, controlling the selectivity of catalytic reduction of CO2 to a highly valuable multi-carbon product (C2+) remains a scientific challenge. The pH near the catalysts is expected to influence C2+ products formation, but the link between local pH with the formation of specific C2+ is still elusive. This work used a very simple strategy to experimentally probe the local pH value near the cathodic GDE during high-rate CO electroreduction, thus enabling us to reliably link the local pH with the specific C2+ selectivity. We explicitly demonstrate the enhanced local pH close to the cathode surface in CO reduction can significantly promote acetate formation while inhibiting other C2+ products, and the key step toward acetate formation is a solution reaction, affected by local pH value near the cathode surface rather than bulk pH. In addition, the experiments showing the correlation of local CO availability with specific C2+ selectivity demonstrates C2+ formation requires high CO coverage to achieve CO coupling.


 	Fig. 1  CO electroreduction performance at various current densities in 1 M KHCO3. (a) Faradaic efficiencies for CO reduction to all detected gas and liquid products. (b) Partial current density for C2+ products. The potentials were iR-corrected.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of CO2 capture via the reaction with OH− in CO2 reduction (a) and high local pH in CO reduction without CO2 capture (b) near the cathodic GDE/electrolyte interface. A comparison of CO2 capture rates in the form of CO32− for CO2 reduction electrolysis at various current densities (c) and for various KOH concentration electrolytes without electrolysis (d). The dash line between (c) and (d) shows the equivalent CO2 capture rate between CO2 reduction at various current densities and open-circuit potential (j = 0 mA cm−2) in various OH− concentration electrolytes. (e) The local pH in CO reduction determined by comparing (c) with (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of electrocatalytic performance of CO reduction in different pH electrolytes. The measured local pH (a) and calculated local pH profiles (b) in CO reduction with various electrolytes (local pH calculation is based on eqn (S22)–(S31), ESI†). (c) Faradaic efficiencies for all detected products in 1 M KHCO3, 0.5 M KOH, 1 M KOH and 2 M KOH at 100 mA cm−2. (d) Catholyte pH over CO reduction electrolysis using an AEM. (e) Catalytic performance with in situ dilution of the electrolyte from 1 M KOH to 0.5 M KOH. The inset shows faradaic efficiencies of products formed over the in situ dilution of the electrolyte. All the tests were carried out within 3 hours.	 

 	Fig. 4  The electrocatalytic performance of CO reduction at various local CO concentrations in 1 M KOH. (a) Faradaic efficiencies for products. (b) Normalized selectivity for CO reduction products (i.e. excluding H2 evolution) via the comparison of FE for certain CO reduction product with the total FEs for all CO reduction products. (c) Possible reaction paths for CO reduction on Cu, with path (i), showing liquid C2+ formation, and path (ii), showing gaseous C2+ production (C2+ formation requires high CO coverage).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ee03838a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
