An enhanced couette flow printing strategy to recover efficiency losses by area and substrate differences in perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00966H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00966H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4313-4322An enhanced couette flow printing strategy to recover efficiency losses by area and substrate differences in perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Chenxiang 
            Gong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Baojin 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhi 
            Xing
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangchuan 
            Meng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaotian 
            Hu
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yiwang 
            Chen
          
        
      *abc
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering/Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; happyhu@ncu.edu.cn
bPeking University Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, Nantong 226010, China
cNational Engineering Research Center for Carbohydrate Synthesis/Key Lab of Fluorine and Silicon for Energy Materials and Chemistry of Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China
Received 
      24th March 2022
    , Accepted 26th August 2022First published on 29th August 2022AbstractThe uneven crystallization rate of perovskite films causes the inevitable efficiency losses, due to the intrinsic agglomeration of colloidal particles and substrate differences. Herein, a patterned-meniscus coating strategy is introduced to enhance the Couette flow during the printing of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), which avoids the agglomeration in the film entirety. Owing to the introduction of shear strain and extensional flow by the patterned-meniscus coating, generation of the colloidal particle fluxion in the perovskite wet-film state can be greatly decreased, which further inhibits the influence of secondary agglomeration on perovskite films. In addition, patterned-meniscus coating can enhance the printing window tolerance of perovskite films. Consequently, the corresponding inverted PSCs achieve a PCE of 20.08% based on a flexible substrate. More importantly, the sensitivity of colloidal particles to scale and substrate discrepancies can be well reduced. The efficiency loss caused by different areas and substrate conversion decreases from 34.7% to 12.6% (enlarging the scale from 0.04 cm2 to 1.01 cm2), and from 48.2% to 29.3% with the substrate transition (rigid to flexible), respectively. This handleability strategy provides a reference for fabricating high-quality perovskite films and outstanding-performance PSCs.

Broader context
The photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) loss of the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) caused by the agglomeration of perovskite colloidal particles is one of the factors that cannot be disregarded in printing fabrication. With the increase of device area, the agglomeration tendency of perovskite colloidal particles will become one of the main factors dominating the PSC performance. Therefore, we propose a silicon slice with ordered silicon column arrays to shear perovskite colloidal particles during printing preparation. Benefiting from the effective shear of the agglomerated perovskite colloidal particles by the patterned silicon slice (PSS), the uniform distribution of colloidal particles can obviously enhance the overall crystallization uniformity of the perovskite film. This easy-handle strategy provides a positive strategy for achieving crystal uniformity in meniscus-coating fabricated PSCs.

Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved a high power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5% via a low-cost spin-coating process, exhibiting significant potential as a pioneering technology in the green energy industry.1–5 Based on the spin-coating method, the corresponding PCE values have been gained with small-area devices (<1.0 cm2), while achieving high efficiency with large-scale devices is still a bottleneck in the commercialization process.6 In various studies, methods such as slot-die coating,7 meniscus-coating,8 and spray-coating9 have been employed in large-scale perovskite film fabrication. As a prototype for roll-to-roll technology, the meniscus-coating based on constant shear force has demonstrated remarkable advances owing to its easy-handling and small solution consumption.10 However, based on the meniscus-coating process, when the scale of PSCs is constantly increasing (>1.0 cm2) or changing to a flexible substrate, the inevitable PCE loss caused by unsuitability between the device scale (substrate difference) and fabrication technology tends to be obvious.6,11 Therefore, it is urgent to develop a technology to solve the inevitable PCE loss in large-scale or flexible PSC fabrication.
The inferior crystal quality of perovskite films has been certified as a crucial factor that contributes to the efficiency and operational stability degradation of large-scale PSCs.12 To improve crystallization rate issues, massive efforts in additive and interface engineering have been reported to enhance the crystallization quality of large-area perovskite films.13 Some compounds having an anchoring group are successfully doped into perovskite precursor inks to boost the crystal quality of perovskite films.14 However, when the substrate area is over 1.0 cm2, perovskite precursor ink levelling will aggravate the uneven distribution of colloidal particles.15 Moreover, this inherent characteristic of perovskite precursor ink caused inferior crystal quality of perovskite films is less investigated. In fact, the agglomeration effect is aggravated by the increase of viscous resistance, resulting in the colloidal particles accumulating at the front and edge of the perovskite wet film.16 Moreover, because of boosted evaporation at fluid boundaries, the viscous resistance of colloidal particle migration is further increased, which indicates that the weakened Couette flow is not enough to induce the effective migration of colloidal particles.17 To overcome this issue, some strategies have been introduced to improve uneven colloidal particle distribution on perovskite films, such as solvent-exchange, surfactant-doping, and ionic liquid-treatment.13,18,19 However, these strategies have not solved the tendency of perovskite colloids to agglomerate easily; especially, the colloidal particles agglomerate in perovskite wet film state. Thus, it is necessary to explore a specific strategy with low-cost and easy-handling to eliminate the perovskite colloidal agglomeration during meniscus-coating of perovskite precursor inks.
Herein, we introduce a patterned silicon scraper (PSS) with an ordered microcolumn-array (sphere) to accelerate the sheared Couette flow and inhibit the agglomeration of perovskite colloidal particles during the meniscus-coating process (Fig. 1a). The uniform distribution of colloidal particles is the crucial factor to obtaining high-quality perovskite films. Compared with a flat silicon scraper (FSS), colloidal particles can be effectively sheared by a PSS due to the introduction of shear strain and extensional flow. The mobility of colloidal particles is significantly enhanced by patterned-meniscus coating, and the colloidal particle hysteresis time is remarkably reduced on the substrates. In addition, patterned-meniscus coating is beneficial to improving the fault tolerance of perovskite precursor inks for preparation conditions, which indicates that the printing window of perovskite films fabricated by patterned-meniscus coating can be enhanced effectively. The uniform distribution of colloidal particles improves the crystallization performance of perovskite films, thus obtaining a high-quality perovskite film and high-performance PSCs; the corresponding structure of PSCs is illustrated in Fig. 1b. Accordingly, based on this strategy, the corresponding PSCs fabricated by the patterned-meniscus coating achieve a PCE of 21.12% (rigid device) and 20.08% (flexible device) with negligible hysteresis. More importantly, when the device area is continuously enlarged, the difference in efficiency loss becomes more obvious (from 0.04 cm2 to 1.01 cm2). Compared with the devices fabricated by the FSS process, the efficiency of PSCs fabricated by a PSS just lost 12.6% (1.01 cm2) of the original PCE; on the contrary, the reference efficiency evidently lost 34.7% (1.01 cm2) of the pristine PCE. Due to uniform perovskite crystal quality, the corresponding PSCs retain 93% of their initial efficiency after 200 days of storage under atmospheric conditions. These results indicate the importance of inhibiting the aggregation of colloidal particles to reduce efficiency loss in improving the uniformity and stability of perovskite films, thereby promoting the development of stable and efficient PSCs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of the patterned-meniscus coating process for perovskite films. (a) The optical images of a flat silicon scraper (FSS) and patterned silicon scraper (PSS). (b) The schematic diagram of PSCs. The flow state of the perovskite precursor ink during (c) FSS and (d) PSS coating processes. 
Results and discussion
With the fluid-boundary solvent continuing to evaporate, the increase of viscous resistance contributes to colloidal particles being hard to migrate in the direction of silicon slice movement.20 Meanwhile, the difference in the concentration of meniscus further generates a reverse capillary effect. The capillary effect prevents the normal migration of colloidal particles at the front end, leading to the transportation of colloidal particles at the back end to the meniscus.21 Subsequently, the agglomeration of colloidal particles deteriorates the crystallization of perovskite films, which indicates the weakened and shunted Couette flow harder to induce the colloidal particles to migrate regularly (Fig. 1c).16,18 To overcome those issues, we employ patterned-meniscus coating to shear the colloidal particles, inhibiting the large-scale agglomeration of colloidal particles. Moreover, to improve the fluidity of colloidal particles, it is important to intensify the Couette flow to conquer the capillary effect (Fig. 1d).22–25
Based on our previous research, the addition of polyurethane (PU) with an anchoring effect to the perovskite precursor ink can improve the crystal quality of perovskite films.14,26 Therefore, we used PU as an additive to the perovskite precursor solution, facilitating the movement of colloidal particles in the polymer extended direction via patterned-meniscus coating.27 Moreover, we expect that the curving-conformation of the polymer can be stretched directionally via patterned-meniscus coating, enhancing the superiority of patterned-meniscus coating in fabricated flexible devices.25 To demonstrate the impact of the additive on the perovskite colloidal fluidity, rotational rheometer measurements are performed to characterize the viscosity distribution of the perovskite precursor ink. The viscosity of the perovskite precursor ink with PU is significantly increased as illustrated in Fig. S1a (ESI†). The increase in hydrodynamic properties can also be demonstrated with the size distribution of the perovskite precursor ink by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Fig. 2a). The average particle size based on with and without the additive of perovskite inks is approximately 354 and 304 nm, respectively. These results likewise can be illustrated in Fig. S1b, (ESI†) both perovskite precursor inks show the Tyndall effect under the green laser. The increase of scattering intensity indicates the further enhancement of particle size by colloidal particles. We speculate that PU can induce colloidal particle adhesion, deteriorating the tendency of perovskite colloidal agglomeration. In addition, we found that the size of colloidal particles in perovskite precursor inks will be further increased with a period of aging time. This is well proved by the enhancement of the scattering intensity of the Tyndall effect, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Moreover, the distribution of colloidal particle size exhibited that the increasing trend of colloidal particle size is consistent regardless of reference or additive perovskite precursor inks. As shown in Fig. S3, (ESI†) the distribution of colloidal particle size of the reference and optimized perovskite precursor inks increased from 313 nm to 953 nm and 374 nm to 863 nm, respectively, after 15 days aging time. The above results indicate that the agglomeration trend of colloidal particles would be more obvious with the extension of ink aging time. Meanwhile, to investigate the variation tendency of colloidal particle size, we characterized the viscosity performances of the corresponding perovskite precursor inks with ageing time (Fig. S4, ESI†). With the deterioration of perovskite colloidal particle agglomeration, the viscosity of the perovskite ink will similarly increase, implying that the change of perovskite ink fluid properties is a coordinated variation process. Therefore, we speculate that the patterned-meniscus coating is suitable for perovskite inks with different production times, which prolongs the working life of the corresponding perovskite inks.
 Fig. 2  Perovskite precursor ink and PSS performance. (a) The particle size distribution characterization of perovskite precursor inks with and without PU. (b) Wettability characterization of the perovskite precursor ink on the FSS and PSS. (c) The images demonstrating the crystallization behaviour of colloidal particles under excessive aggregation. (d) Flow simulation of the perovskite precursor ink on the FSS and PSS. (e and f) The dependency map of the perovskite precursor ink on the shear rate and the slit intervals. 
To eliminate the negative effects of additives on the printing process, the affinity of a PSS for perovskite precursor inks is a crucial factor affecting the movement of colloidal particles. When the perovskite precursor ink droplet is deposited on the patterned silicon, it will experience three typical processes including contact, spreading, and levelling. The droplet spreads homogeneously in the spreading process because the surface heterogeneity is overcome by the relatively large potential energy until it reaches the maximum spreading.28 Since the instantaneous contact angle on the PSS cannot be detected, high-speed cameras are used to investigate this process. Compared with the FSS, the perovskite precursor ink has a more evident spreading result on the PSS, and without an obvious retraction phenomenon (Fig. 2b). The corresponding dynamic process of perovskite precursor ink spreading on PSS and FSS substrates is shown in Movie S1 (ESI†). The theoretical value of the contact angle (sphere) can be derived from the fractal Cassie–Baxter equation:29–31 cosθf = fa(L/l)D–2cosθ0 − fv(1)In this eqn, (L/l)D–2 is the surface roughness factor and D is the fractal dimension. According to the Koch curve model, the value of D can be described as 2.2618. The fs and fv are the fractions of ink in contact and the substrate sealed gas, which is fs + fv = 1. Because the microcolumns are arranged regularly, the sizes of the top and bottom in microcolumns are all the same. Therefore, the calculation equation can be simplified and the theoretical value of the contact angle of the PSS can be calculated to be 9.09°. On the contrary, the contact angle of a FSS is 19.2°.32 Moreover, the advancing angle (ϑa) and receding angle (ϑr) measured by contact-angle analysis have been employed to verify the viscous force of the PSS for perovskite precursor inks. The phenomenon of unequal ϑa and ϑr is contact angle hysteresis (CAH, ϑH), and the ϑa is usually larger than the ϑr: θH = θa − θr(2)
As illustrated in Fig. S5, (ESI†) the ϑH of the FSS and PSS is 5.49° and 1.52°, respectively. Therefore, perovskite inks have good spreading performances on the PSS, which demonstrates that the PSS can better guide perovskite precursor ink spreading on the substrate in large-scale printing. Furthermore, the patterned-meniscus coating can inhibit the excessive aggregation of colloidal particles and reduce the surface tension at the meniscus. Meanwhile, the improvement of surface tension of the meniscus further reduces the Laplace pressure difference at the gas–liquid interface, which demonstrates that the fluidity of colloidal particles is further improved by patterned-meniscus coating. Therefore, colloidal particles can be more effectively guided and transported by patterned-meniscus coating, avoiding colloidal particle aggregates on the front of the substrate; the corresponding dynamic process of colloidal particle shear by the PSS is shown in Movie S2 (ESI†).
To more intuitively detect the colloidal transport and nucleation process of perovskite films by patterned-meniscus coating, the characterization using an in situ optical microscope is demonstrated in Fig. 2c. To simulate the crystallization process in the supersaturated state of the film, both the films are pre-heated at 50 °C for 15 s. Here, we selected a period of 120 s to explore the evolution of crystal growth.33 It can be detected from the microscopy images that the reference film exhibits a distinct black large crystal, and the orientation of crystallization expands to the other side. This result indicates that the colloidal aggregates are absorbed and precipitated out as crystals. Oppositely, the perovskite films with a patterned-meniscus coating showed a relatively small crystal precipitation. Over time, the rate of solvent evaporation is accelerated, the film reaches supersaturated state, the crystal seed is precipitated rapidly, and the whole crystallization growth stage begins.20 These results show that when the perovskite precursor ink extrudes through the microcolumn slit, the aggregation of colloidal particles can be effectively inhibited and sheared. The differences in crystallization rates suggest that the patterned-meniscus coating can inhibit the secondary agglomeration effect of colloidal particles in wet-film state, preventing premature nucleation leading to further crystallization.22 Moreover, according to the Diao et al. study, a patterned-meniscus slice with ordered microcolumn arrays rationally designed to locally increase shear strain and induce extensional flow is shown to enhance the polymer orientation.23,34 More importantly, the agglomerated colloidal particles can receive more effective migration based on ordered polymer orientation. Meanwhile, fluid dynamics simulations of the PSS with ordered microcolumn arrays indicate variations in fluid velocity that both contribute to higher shear strain and cause extensional flow (colours represent the flow rate of fluid) (Fig. 2d).35,36 Here, the improvement of orientation of polymer is caused by the use of a patterned-meniscus coating to induce extensional flow and increased shear strain; meanwhile, the increase of shear strain can further reduce the resistance of colloidal particle migration.37–39 However, the conventional meniscus coating does not have this effect due to the uniform flow rate of fluid extrusion. Similar results can be obtained from stereograms of fluid dynamics simulations (Fig. S6, ESI†). Subsequently, higher meniscus speeds employing a patterned meniscus with microcolumn arrays that causes extensional flow induce the formation of smaller colloidal particles, generating the colloidal particles to be evenly distributed on the substrate. In addition, the fast-flowing ink also enables the solvent to evaporate rapidly, effectively inhibiting the drift time of colloidal particles in the wet film state. The reduction of hysteresis time remarkably reduces the secondary agglomeration effect of colloidal particles, providing a good basis for the crystallization uniformity of perovskite films.23
Based on the above positive results, we speculate that patterned-meniscus coating can enhance the printing-window in large-area perovskite films. To achieve reproducible fabrication of high-quality, large-scale perovskite films, the relation of shear rate and slit interval with the sphere (reference) must be well investigated.11,40 Here, we demonstrated the dependence of preparation condition (shear rate/slit interval) on the silicon slice (reference and sphere). We employed patterned-meniscus coating to fabricate a batch of perovskite films; meanwhile, the crystallization quality of perovskite films is taken as a reference and the preparation conditions are summarized and analysed (Fig. 2e and f). According to the Chen et al. report, when shear rate and slit interval exceed the tolerance limits of preparation conditions, the non-normal crystallization (snowflake and pin-hole crystal) dominated the crystallization process of perovskite films.41 We used shear rate (slit interval) which exceeded the tolerance limit to fabricate the perovskite films, and the corresponding perovskite morphology conforms to the above discussion of non-normal perovskite crystallization, as shown in Fig. S7, ESI.† Likewise, we deem that different thicknesses of films will obtain perovskite films with different morphologies. Accordingly, the thickness of the corresponding perovskite film is 764 nm (snowflake), 105 nm (pin-hole), and 411 nm (high-quality crystal), respectively (Fig. S8, ESI†). On the contrary, we discover that the use of patterned-meniscus coating is beneficial to expand the tolerance limit of the preparation of perovskite films by meniscus-coating. Therefore, patterned-meniscus coating can enhance the contact area between the meniscus and the perovskite precursor ink, and improve the tolerance limits of preparation conditions, increasing the printing-window for perovskite film fabrication.
Based on the above results, we divided the distribution state of colloidal particles on the substrate into four steps, which are Diffusion (I), Levelling (II), Nucleation (III) and Crystallization (IV), as shown in Fig. 3a. Meanwhile, the corresponding motion of colloidal particles will change with the patterned-meniscus coating strategy. When the ink diffuses on the substrate, the unequal evaporation rates of the three-phase edge and the solution dome led to the gradient difference of concentration, which generates the capillary effect.15 The deterioration of the capillary effect further leads to the agglomeration of colloidal particles at the liquid edge, resulting in a coffee ring effect (step I), while patterned-meniscus coating can effectively suppress the agglomeration of colloidal particles; thereby, the thickness difference and the crystallization rate of the perovskite film can be effectively optimized. And the anisotropic migration of colloidal particles can be inhibited by the patterned-meniscus coating (step II). Consequently, the colloidal particles are sheared and evenly distributed on the substrate via the patterned-meniscus coating (step III). The uniform distribution of colloidal particles is an important prerequisite for improving crystallization rate; thereby, the crystal quality of the perovskite layer will improve obviously after annealing treatment (step IV). The improvement of perovskite film morphology and optical performances are the optimum proof of this result. Due to the uniform distribution of colloidal particles, the corresponding perovskite film is composed of large and compact grains via patterned-meniscus coating.20 On the contrary, agglomerated colloids deteriorated the distribution of nucleation sites, which exhibits a small grain with a larger cavity of perovskite film, as shown in the SEM images in Fig. 3b. And an increase in grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) intensity also proves an improvement of crystallization quality (Fig. 3c). The enhancement of perovskite crystal quality and orientation indicates that the patterned-meniscus coating and the additive are co-optimization strategies, rather than merely the additive improving the morphology of perovskite films. To verify the reliability of using patterned-meniscus coating, we fabricated a batch of perovskite films and devices with corresponding inks to verify the patterned-meniscus coating validatation for non-optimized perovskite precursor inks. The various charged colloids of perovskite precursor inks have an agglomeration phenomenon, which will deteriorate the crystallization rate difference of the perovskite film.20 We speculate that patterned-meniscus coating is likewise effective for pristine inks with an agglomerative effect. Subsequently, both morphology and optical characterization provide positive results, confirming the above discussion, as shown in Fig. S9 and S10 (the detailed discussion is exhibited in the ESI†). Compared with pristine films, the perovskite films obtained by patterned-meniscus coating show an enhanced crystallization performance and the average grain size for the corresponding perovskite films increased from 250 nm to 500 nm (Fig. S11, ESI†). These results likewise can be verified by the enhancement of perovskite crystal quality and orientation by x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Fig. 3d). Besides, the UV-vis absorption spectrum, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and fitted time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements are investigated to intuitionally reflect the improvement of optical performance in perovskite films. Based on the patterned-meniscus coating, a distinct increase of optical absorption and PL in perovskite films is observed (Fig. 3e and f), generating high-quality perovskite film improves the carrier transport efficiency and reduces the carrier being shunted. Therefore, the perovskite films with a patterned-meniscus coating demonstrate a higher lifetime (163.3 ns) than those references (118.2 ns), which manifested the lower concentration of trap states and superior carrier transport properties in corresponding perovskite films (Fig. 3g).42 Moreover, to explore the shear effect of different shape microcolumns on the perovskite colloidal particles, we used three other shapes of silicon slices to shear the perovskite precursor ink during the preparation process; the corresponding silicon slice is shown in Fig. S12a (ESI†). Due to the compact permutation of sphere microcolumn arrays, the agglomerated colloidal particles can be sufficiently sheared, and the crystal quality of the corresponding perovskite film is likewise significantly enhanced (Fig. S12b, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Morphology and crystalline quality characterization of perovskite films. (a) The diverse kinestate of the perovskite precursor ink on a substrate. (b) SEM images. (c) GIWAXS patterns, and (d) XRD patterns of the perovskite film with a patterned-meniscus coating. (e) The absorbance spectra and (f) steady-state photoluminescence for the perovskite films. (g) TRPL decay spectra of perovskite films. Crystalline homogeneity of large-scale (3 × 3 cm2) perovskite films (reverse and front) via (h) flat and (i) patterned-meniscus coating (here different colours stand for the carrier lifetime difference on the perovskite films). 
In order to verify the crystallization uniformity, we fabricated a large-scale perovskite film (3 × 3 cm2) via the PSS process on a rigid and flexible substrate (Fig. S13, ESI†). Then, we selected 400 points on the front and reverse of the corresponding perovskite film, respectively, to demonstrate its crystal homogeneity (Fig. 3h and i). Compared with the pristine large-scale perovskite film, the perovskite film prepared via patterned-meniscus coating exhibits a slower decay both on the front (134.9 ns) and reverse (99.8 ns) with a small difference of average lifetime, while the average lifetime on both the front (66 ns) and reverse (34.9 ns) in the reference film shows a relatively large distribution. The higher fluorescence intensity (front) also proved the improvement of crystal quality of the corresponding perovskite film. Meanwhile, the marginal fluorescence intensity difference indicates that the uniform distribution of colloidal particles overcomes the inferior crystal quality of the bottom caused by nucleation behaviour from wet-films to dry-films. When the agglomerating colloidal particles are deposited on the substrate, the colloidal particles with comparatively large mass will crystallize first. The difference in crystallization time leads to the island effect, leading to the migration of colloidal particles to large-mass colloidal particles. In view of the remarkable shear effect of the PSS process on perovskite colloidal particles, the uniform distribution of perovskite colloidal particles notably inhibits the impact of the island effect on device performance. Therefore, due to the effective shearing of colloidal particles by patterned-meniscus coating, both surface and bottom side perovskite crystals have been enhanced obviously in corresponding perovskite films.43
To validate the superiority of the patterned-meniscus coating process, the PSCs with a structure of hc-PEDOT:PSS/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag were fabricated. Fig. 4a shows the current density-voltage (J–V) curves for the corresponding PSCs. A PCE of 21.12% (reverse scan) and 20.70% (forward scan) is achieved on the device prepared via the patterned-meniscus coating process, while the PCE of reference PSCs is only 19.99% (reverse scan) and 19.77% (forward scan). The detailed photoelectric parameters are summarized in Table 1. Further, the Jsc value is in good agreement with the corresponding integrated device from the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 4b). To further demonstrate the advance of device performance with patterned-meniscus coating, the steady-state output of current density and PCE values are tested at the maximum power point. The optimized device exhibits a stabilized photocurrent of 24.44 mA cm−2 and a steady-state PCE of 21.03%. On the contrary, the reference device shows a stabilized photocurrent of 20.83 mA cm−2, and a PCE of 18.74% with 10 min of incessant irradiation, which can further demonstrate the advantages of the PSS process (Fig. S14, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Electricity, mechanical and long-term stability performance of PSCs. (a) J–V curves of the PSCs measured in both the reverse (RS) and forward (FS) directions. (b) The corresponding IPCE spectra of PSCs. (c) J–V curves of flexible PSCs. (d) The relationship between device area and efficiency loss value for the PSCs with PSS and FSS processes. (e) The relationship between device area and efficiency loss value for the PSCs based on the flexible substrate. (f) Normalized averaged PCE value for the flexible PSCs after bending cycles with a radius of 3 mm. (g) Long-term stability of devices over 200 days of storage in air. 
Table 1 The parameters derived from the J–V curves of PSCs with a patterned-meniscus coating




Silicon slice shape
Substrate
Scan Direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Sphere
Rigid
Forward
24.76
1.12
74.51
20.70


Reverse
24.86
1.14
74.55
21.12


Flexible
24.62
1.09
74.83
20.08


Reference
Rigid
Forward
24.19
1.08
75.66
19.77


Reverse
24.36
1.09
75.29
19.99


Flexible
22.96
1.08
76.21
18.90




To verify the universality of the PSS strategy, we replace the substrate (from rigid to flexible). Here, we also fabricate flexible PSCs (0.04 cm2) by PSS meniscus-coating. After incorporating the PSS strategy, the PCE of the devices increased from 18.90% to 20.08% based on a 0.04 cm2 area (Fig. 4c). Aiming at the universality of colloidal agglomeration in perovskite precursor inks, with the increase of device area, the influence of colloidal agglomeration will gradually dominate perovskite crystal growth, so the efficiency losses with different areas (from 0.04 cm2 to 1.01 cm2) will be distinctly exhibited. Moreover, patterned meniscus-coating can also minimize the PCE loss caused by substrate sensitivity of perovskite films.11 The effect of roughness on the migration resistance of colloidal particles cannot be ignored as the scale of substrates enlarged. Patterned meniscus-coating improves the fluidity of colloidal particles while minimizing the effects of different substrate roughness. Therefore, the PCE of PSCs fabricated by PSS meniscus-coating lost 12.6% (1.01 cm2) of the initial PCE, as compared with the 34.7% (1.01 cm2) decrease from the original PCE by the FSS on a rigid substrate (Fig. 4d). The corresponding detailed photoelectric parameters are exhibited in Table S1 (ESI†). As expected, the PCE of the corresponding flexible PSCs just loses 29.3% (1.01 cm2) of the initial PCE, as compared with the 48.2% loss from the original PCE by FSS meniscus-coating (Fig. 4e and Table S2, ESI†). Additionally, we demonstrate that the PCE loss of devices utilizing the PSS process is considerably lower than that of the other studies reported, which are shown in Table S3, ESI.†
Furthermore, the electrical performance of the corresponding large-scale devices (1.01 cm2) is further improved by patterned-meniscus coating. The dark J–V curves are characterized to explore the transport performance of photogenerated carriers. For the PSCs obtained by patterned-meniscus coating, a lower dark current density under the operating bias indicates that more photogenerated carriers can be transmitted efficiently through the perovskite films rather than directly diverged.44 Therefore, the corresponding PSCs can be effectively suppressing the recombination of charge carriers and leakage current (Fig. S15, ESI†). Moreover, the details of carrier recombination are further studied by measuring J–V curves under various illumination intensities (Fig. S16, ESI†).45,46 The slope of Vocversus illumination intensity is demonstrated as kT/e (where k, T, and e are the Boltzmann constant, temperature in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively). The slope values of the corresponding devices with PSS and FSS processes are 1.25 kT/e and 1.64 kT/e, respectively, which indicates that the trap-assisted recombination is effectively reduced under open-circuit conditions for the corresponding device. On the other hand, the value of α for the device (0.979) with the PSS process is higher than that of the reference device (0.958), which indicates the decrease in the bimolecular recombination under short-circuit conditions. Subsequently, we employed electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to obtain insight into the charge-transportation processes of different PSCs.47 The corresponding Nyquist plots of PSCs with the PSS and FSS are shown in Fig. S17, ESI.† The enhanced charge-recombination resistance manifests that the uniform distribution of colloidal particles improves the crystal quality of the perovskite film, reducing the density of defect states at grain boundaries. In addition, based on the characteristic J–V curve calculation in space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) (Fig. S18, ESI†), the trap density of perovskite devices obtained via FSS and PSS fabrication is 1.04 × 1015 cm−3 and 7.1 × 1014 cm−3, respectively.48 These results are consistent with the above analysis, which indicates that the PSS meniscus-coating can overcome the size effect on the crystal quality of perovskite films and improve the electrical properties of devices.
In fact, mechanical and environmental stability are important criteria to evaluate the feasibility of flexible devices. Therefore, we employed patterned-meniscus coating to fabricate corresponding flexible devices. As shown in Fig. S19, (ESI†) after 300 bending cycles with various curvature radii from flat to 3 mm, the comparison indicates that the enhanced flexible devices exhibit a greater bending resistance, which maintains over 92% of the initial PCE under a 3 mm bending radius, and the illustration shows the bending diagram of the corresponding flexible device. Furthermore, the normalized PCE for the corresponding devices with different bending cycles at a limit-bending radius of about 3 mm is tested (Fig. 4f). The improved devices retain about 91% of the original PCE after 7000 bending cycles; on the contrary, the reference devices can still maintain 83% of the original PCE. The enhanced Couette flow inhibits the agglomeration of colloidal particles, overcoming the holes caused by uneven crystallization. Therefore, we expect that the patterned-meniscus coating can improve the even distribution of colloidal particles, further inducing stress conduction in the device.17,22
On the other hand, the PSCs obtained by patterned-meniscus coating illustrate long-term stability in both air (Fig. 4g) and nitrogen (Fig. S20, ESI†) atmosphere after being stored for 200 days. The corresponding devices maintain 90% (in air) and 92% (in nitrogen) of the initial PCE; in contrast, the normalized PCE values of reference devices maintain about 82% (in air) and 90% (in nitrogen) of the original PCE. Additionally, we exposed the corresponding devices to air with 75% humidity to measure the environment stability of the devices (Fig. S21a, ESI†). The PCE of the reference device descended to 74% of its original value after 200 h. Surprisingly, the device fabricated by the PSS process still retained 87% of its original efficiency. Moreover, similar results can also be intuitively observed from UV (365 nm) stability measurements of the corresponding devices (Fig. S21b, ESI†). After 200 h of uninterrupted UV light exposure, the device fabricated by the PSS process exhibited remarkable anti-UV performance. The PCE of the reference device has slumped to 82% of the original efficiency; however, the target-device still retained 94% of its initial PCE. Importantly, to intuitively explore the mechanism for the improvement of environmental stability, we employ time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) to detect the element distribution (Fig. S22, ESI†).49 The I− and CN− are detected to characterize the perovskite in-depth profiles. In the devices with a patterned-meniscus coating, there is no significant I− and CN− ion diffusion in the corresponding devices. However, in reference devices, the ion migration to the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL) can be detected obviously. We speculate that the high-quality crystal (integrity) of perovskite films reduces the ion migration pathway, inhibiting ion migration to adjacent transport layers.50 Therefore, to verify the reliability of patterned-meniscus coating, we fabricated 200 devices with PSS and FSS process from 10 batches and the corresponding PCE distributions are summarized in Fig. S23 ESI.† The PSCs obtained by the PSS process demonstrate excellent reliability with high-efficiency distribution of PCE. In contrast, the reference devices have a relatively low-efficiency distribution of PCE. This clearly shows that the PSS strategy has simultaneously improved the integrited crystallization quality of perovskite films, avoiding the negative effect of cavities in perovskite films.
Conclusions
In summary, we report a strategy for shearing colloidal particles to fabricate a high-quality perovskite film. Specifically, combining patterned-meniscus coating and additives is proposed to inhibit colloidal agglomeration. Based on this co-optimization strategy, the colloidal particles are effectively sheared, meanwhile improving the mobility of colloidal particles during the film formation process. Therefore, on the edge and front-end of the perovskite film, the excessive aggregation of perovskite colloidal particles is remarkably reduced, which demonstrated that the uneven distribution of the solute is significantly improved. Moreover, the use of patterned-meniscus coating can well reduce the inevitable efficiency loss caused by the size-effect (with different substrates). Thus, the corresponding PSCs based on the PSS process achieved a champion PCE of 21.12% under one sun illumination and remarkable mechanical stability, maintaining 90% of the initial PCE for 200 days under ambient air at room temperature. To verify the universality of patterned-meniscus coating, employing the unoptimized perovskite inks and optimized method, the hysteresis effect of the corresponding devices is also eliminated. This easy-handle strategy provides a positive strategy for achieving crystal uniformity in meniscus-coating fabricated PSCs.
Author contributions
C. G. and B. F. contributed equally to this work; Y. C., X. H. and T. H. conceived and designed the experiments; C. G. and B. F. fabricated the devices; F. L. and Z. X. analyzed the film performance; X. M; and C. G. performed spectrum analysis; X. H. and T. H. conducted printing dynamic analysis. All authors contributed to the data analysis, discussed the results, and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51833004, 22005131, 52173169 and U20A20128), the “Double Thousand Plan” Science and Technology Innovation High-end Talent Project of Jiangxi Province (jxsq2019201049) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20212BAB214055). X. M. thanks support from the China National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX2021117) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M700060).
Notes and references
NREL, Best research-cell efficiency chart, Photovoltaic research, 2022 Search PubMed  , https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, D. Y. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. Seok II, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. W. Zhang, X. L. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. M. Chu, Q. F. Ye, X. X. Li, Z. G. Yin and J. B. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bai, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, H. Liu, X. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H. Yan, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904735 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, X. Meng, D. Li, T. Hu, X. Hu and Y. Chen, Sci. Bull., 2022, 67, 561–564 CrossRef .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. V. Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18017 CrossRef CAS .
J.-E. Kim, S.-S. Kim, C. Zuo, M. Gao, D. Vak and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809194 CrossRef .
X. Hu, X. Meng, X. Yang, Z. Huang, Z. Xing, P. Li, L. Tan, M. Su, F. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 527–535 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Paik, Y. Lee, H.-S. Yun, S.-U. Lee, S.-T. Hong and S. Seok II, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001799 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Xiao, X. Meng, Z. Xing, L. Rao, C. Gong, R. Wu, T. Hu, L. Tan, X. Hu, S. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5759–5768 RSC .
H.-H. Huang, Q.-H. Liu, H. Tsai, S. Shrestha, L.-Y. Su, P.-T. Chen, Y.-T. Chen, T.-A. Yang, H. Lu, C.-H. Chuang, K.-F. Lin, S.-P. Rwei, W. Nie and L. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 958–974 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, X. Zhou, P. Li, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, M. Su, W. Ren, F. Li, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703236 CrossRef .
J. W. Yoo, J. Jang, U. Kim, Y. Lee, S.-G. Ji, E. Noh, S. Hong, M. Choi and S. Seok II, Joule, 2021, 5, 2420–2436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Z. Xing, X. Hu, Z. Huang, T. Hu, L. Tan, F. Li and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2–9 CrossRef .
A. Gao, J. Yan, Z. Wang, P. Liu, D. Wu, X. Tang, F. Fang, S. Ding, X. Li, J. Sun, M. Cao, L. Wang, L. Li, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2569–2577 RSC .
B. Dou, J. B. Whitaker, K. Bruening, D. T. Moore, L. M. Wheeler, J. Ryter, N. J. Breslin, J. J. Berry, S. M. Garner, F. S. Barnes, S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Tassone, K. Zhu and M. F. A. M. V. Hest, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O’Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. E.-Sayed, J. Huang and Z. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, Q. Wang, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 8, 560–566 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lin, N. Sakai, P. Da, J. Wu, H. C. Sansom, A. J. Ramadan, S. Mahesh, J. Liu, R. D. J. Oliver, J. Lim, L. Aspitarte, K. Sharma, P. K. Madhu, A. B. Morales-Vilches, P. K. Nayak, S. Bai, F. Gao, C. R. M. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, J. G. Labram, J. R. Durrant, J. M. Ball, B. Wenger, B. Stannowski and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2020, 369, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xing, S. Lin, X. Meng, T. Hu, D. Li, B. Fan, Y. Cui, F. Li, X. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107726 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Yiantsios and B. G. Higgins, Phys. Fluids, 2006, 18, 082103 CrossRef .
Y. Diao, Y. Zhou, T. Kurosawa, L. Shaw, C. Wang, S. Park, Y. Guo, J. A. Reinspach, K. Gu, X. Gu, B. C. K. Tee, C. Pang, H. Yan, D. Zhao, M. F. Toney, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7955 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, B. C.-K. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, D. H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, L. Shaw, K. Gu, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 534 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, H.-C. Wu, C. Zhu, A. Ehrlich, L. Shaw, M. Nikolka, S. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, X. Gu, S. Luo, D. Zhou, Y.-H. Kim, G.-J. N. Wang, K. Gu, V. R. Feig, S. Chen, Y. Kim, T. Katsumata, Y.-Q. Zheng, H. Yan, J. W. Chung, J. Lopez, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, F. Li, M. Su, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, Z. Cai, X. Yang, X. Meng, P. Li, Y. Wang, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 979–987 RSC .
X. Meng, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Xing, Z. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Cui, T. Hu, M. Su, X. Liao, L. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, T. Li, T. Zhang, H. Li, A. Li, Z. Li, X. Lai, X. Hou, Y. Wang, L. Shi, M. Li and Y. Song, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabh1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. W. Adamson and A. P. Gast, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, Wiley, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .

          B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, San Francisco, CA,  1982 Search PubMed .
B. L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef .
W. Barthlott, C. Neinhuis, D. Cutler, F. Ditsch, I. Meusel, I. Theisen and H. Wilhelmi, Bot. J. Linn. Soc., 1998, 126, 237 CrossRef .
T. Bu, J. Li, H. Li, C. Tian, J. Su, G. Tong, L. K. Ono, C. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Chai, X. L. Zhang, J. Chang, J. Lu, J. Zhong, W. Huang, Y. Qi, Y. B. Cheng and F. Huang, Science, 2021, 372, 1327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, L. Shaw, Z. Bao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2145–2159 RSC .
G. Lamberti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2240–2252 RSC .
A. J. Pennings, J. M. A. A. van der Mark and H. C. Booij, Kolloid Z. Z. Polym., 1970, 236, 99–111 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Pennings, J. M. A. A. van der Mark and A. M. Kiel, Kolloid Z. Z. Polym., 1970, 237, 336–358 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Lagasse and B. Maxwell, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1976, 16, 189–199 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Somani, B. S. Hsiao, A. Nogales, S. Srinivas, A. H. Tsou, I. Sics, F. J. Balta-Calleja and T. A. Ezquerra, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 9385–9394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Su, F. Li, S. Chen, Z. Huang, M. Qin, W. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1369–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Xiao, B. Chen, L. L. Kelly, J. Zhao, Y. Lin, M. F. Toney and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabb2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y.-H. Chiang, Y. Tu, R. Su, Q. Hu, H. Yu, G. Shao, W. Huang, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, S. D. Stranks, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Dai, S. Xu, H. Jiao, L. Zhao and J. Huang, Science, 2021, 373, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, K.-T. Lee and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 640–648 RSC .
B. Zhao, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Tabachnyk, H. Glass, V. S. Kamboj, W. A. Nie, J. Pearson, Y. Puttisong, K. C. Gödel, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, A. D. Mohite, S. E. Dutton, R. H. Friend and A. Sadhanala, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604744 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, M. Sexton, H.-Y. Park, G. Baure, J. C. Nino and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 1401855 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Lei, H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701757 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, F. Ma, R. Wang, S. Dou, P. Cui, H. Huang, J. Ji, E. Jia, X. Jia, S. Sajid, A. M. Elseman, L. Chu, Y. Li, B. Jiang, J. Qiao, Y. Yuan and M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707583 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shielda and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00966hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
The photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) loss of the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) caused by the agglomeration of perovskite colloidal particles is one of the factors that cannot be disregarded in printing fabrication. With the increase of device area, the agglomeration tendency of perovskite colloidal particles will become one of the main factors dominating the PSC performance. Therefore, we propose a silicon slice with ordered silicon column arrays to shear perovskite colloidal particles during printing preparation. Benefiting from the effective shear of the agglomerated perovskite colloidal particles by the patterned silicon slice (PSS), the uniform distribution of colloidal particles can obviously enhance the overall crystallization uniformity of the perovskite film. This easy-handle strategy provides a positive strategy for achieving crystal uniformity in meniscus-coating fabricated PSCs.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of the patterned-meniscus coating process for perovskite films. (a) The optical images of a flat silicon scraper (FSS) and patterned silicon scraper (PSS). (b) The schematic diagram of PSCs. The flow state of the perovskite precursor ink during (c) FSS and (d) PSS coating processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Perovskite precursor ink and PSS performance. (a) The particle size distribution characterization of perovskite precursor inks with and without PU. (b) Wettability characterization of the perovskite precursor ink on the FSS and PSS. (c) The images demonstrating the crystallization behaviour of colloidal particles under excessive aggregation. (d) Flow simulation of the perovskite precursor ink on the FSS and PSS. (e and f) The dependency map of the perovskite precursor ink on the shear rate and the slit intervals.	 
cosθf = fa(L/l)D–2cosθ0 − fv	(1)
θH = θa − θr	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Morphology and crystalline quality characterization of perovskite films. (a) The diverse kinestate of the perovskite precursor ink on a substrate. (b) SEM images. (c) GIWAXS patterns, and (d) XRD patterns of the perovskite film with a patterned-meniscus coating. (e) The absorbance spectra and (f) steady-state photoluminescence for the perovskite films. (g) TRPL decay spectra of perovskite films. Crystalline homogeneity of large-scale (3 × 3 cm2) perovskite films (reverse and front) via (h) flat and (i) patterned-meniscus coating (here different colours stand for the carrier lifetime difference on the perovskite films).	 

 	Fig. 4  Electricity, mechanical and long-term stability performance of PSCs. (a) J–V curves of the PSCs measured in both the reverse (RS) and forward (FS) directions. (b) The corresponding IPCE spectra of PSCs. (c) J–V curves of flexible PSCs. (d) The relationship between device area and efficiency loss value for the PSCs with PSS and FSS processes. (e) The relationship between device area and efficiency loss value for the PSCs based on the flexible substrate. (f) Normalized averaged PCE value for the flexible PSCs after bending cycles with a radius of 3 mm. (g) Long-term stability of devices over 200 days of storage in air.	 

Sphere	Rigid	Forward	24.76	1.12	74.51	20.70
Reverse	24.86	1.14	74.55	21.12
Flexible	24.62	1.09	74.83	20.08
Reference	Rigid	Forward	24.19	1.08	75.66	19.77
Reverse	24.36	1.09	75.29	19.99
Flexible	22.96	1.08	76.21	18.90
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00966h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
