Overview of electric-field-induced deposition technology in fabricating organic thin films  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC04175K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC04175K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 374-394Overview of electric-field-induced deposition technology in fabricating organic thin films

        
          
            Cheng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Qichun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Jianmei 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: lihuaw@suda.edu.cn; lujm@suda.edu.cn
bJiangsu Key Laboratory of Micro and Nano Heat Fluid Flow Technology and Energy Application, School of Physical Science and Technology, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, 215009, China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: qiczhang@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      2nd September 2020
    , Accepted 20th November 2020First published on 23rd November 2020AbstractElectric-field induced deposition (EFID) technology has been demonstrated as an effective technique for tuning the properties of inorganic, organic or organic–inorganic hybrid thin films. Here, the progress in research on thin-film fabrication using the EFID method is summarized in a concise and well-rounded way. We cover the applications of EFID in various organic materials such as organic small molecules, polymers, MOFs, COFs, HOFs, biomaterials, other carbon-based materials and their hybrid composites. Moreover, the deposition mechanism, processing parameters, and wide applications are also discussed. Although EFID could act as a versatile and reliable material-processing approach to fabricate scalable thin films, there still remain significant challenges to control the nucleation, crystallization, and self-assembly of organic materials.
Cheng Zhang
Cheng Zhang is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. In 2019, he joined Prof. Qichun Zhang's group at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, as a joint PhD student. His research interests include the synthesis and application of organic semiconductor materials, particularly, organic resistive memory devices.
Yang Li
Yang Li received his BS and PhD degrees in applied chemistry from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a research fellow at the School of Physical Science and Technology, Suzhou University of Science and Technology.
Hua Li
Hua Li received his BS and PhD degrees in applied chemistry from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu in 2000 and 2011, respectively. He is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. His research focuses on the design and preparation of high-performance organic semiconductor materials and organic resistive memory devices.
Qichun Zhang
Qichun Zhang is a professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. In 2014, he was promoted as an associate professor with tenure at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include carbon-rich conjugated materials and their applications (novel organic conjugated materials for optoelectronic and semiconductor devices, novel electrode materials, and new design for microbial fuel cells). Currently, he is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He has published more than 395 papers (H-index: 79).
Jianmei Lu
Jianmei Lu received her PhD degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in China and was then appointed as a full professor at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University in 2000. She is currently a fellow of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China and the vice president of Soochow University. She has particular research interests in the development of materials for nonvolatile electronic memory devices, organic sensors, smart electronics, adsorption of oils, and low concentration volatile organic compound (VOC) contaminant treatment.
1. Introduction
With the upcoming of the fourth industrial revolution, various cutting-edge technologies (i.e. artificial intelligence (AI), big data technology, cloud computing, and integrated circuits) and advanced functional materials are changing our world.1 In particular, these fields of optoelectronic and energy-storage devices, such as sensors, resistive memory devices (RMDs),2 artificial synapses,3 solar cells,4 lithium batteries (LIBs),5 supercapacitors,6 field-effect transistors (FETs),7 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),8 and thermoelectric devices (TEs),9 have received considerable attention. However, for these technologies, there still remain a lot of challenges on the way from laboratory to future industrialization. For instance, how to prepare scalable and well-patterned thin-films efficiently becomes a significant topic.
To date, a number of innovative scientific methods, including wet techniques (i.e. spin-coating, dip-coating, drop-coating, brushing, layer-by-layer (LBL), Langmuir–Blodgett (LB), template-wetting method, solution-sheared deposition, solution epitaxy, and ink-jet printing) and dry approaches (i.e. vacuum sublimation),10 have been developed to deposit micro- and nano-meter thin-films. However, these processing techniques usually induce the formation of spontaneous molecular aggregation behaviors with poor controllability. The novel electric-field induced deposition (EFID) technology, involving electrochemical deposition (ECD), electrophoresis deposition (EPD), electroplating, electrospinning, electrochemical intercalation, electro-compaction, and electrowetting, stands out among these methods. The applications of EFID have been extended to various functional materials such as inorganic materials, organic small molecules, polymers, covalent organic frameworks (COFs), hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks (HOFs), organometallic complexes, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), graphene, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, and so on.11 With the assistance of an external electric field, the molecular growth direction and arrangement can be precisely regulated. Thus, the properties of the as-fabricated films can be controlled, and films with well-defined morphology, thickness, packing density, and purity can be assembled. Furthermore, the EFID technology also brings some other merits, such as short duration, low consumption of energy and raw materials, simple apparatus, and excellent versatility, for designing substrates with different sizes and shapes.
Although EFID technologies have been applied to practical use since 1933, most of the attention was concentrated on the deposition of inorganic materials. A variety of inorganic functional films such as single-component metals (e.g., Zn, titania nanosheets),12 metallic oxides (e.g. CoPt magnetic nanodots, TiO2 nanoparticles, ZnO nanocrystals, Ag2O clathrate),13 others (e.g. ceramic particles, single-crystal Sr2Nb3O10 nanosheets, cesium lead halide perovskites),14 and multi-components composite films (e.g. CdS/Co nanowire arrays, Er/Tb or Cu/Ag alloys, glass-nanoclay),15 have been successfully fabricated via EFID technology. These high-quality inorganic films have been widely applied to membrane electrodes, separation layers, LiBs, electro-catalysis, biological field, and so on. Recently, EFID technologies have gained attention with the development of new applications and advanced materials. For example, He et al. reviewed the applications of EFID in electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices. Typical anode materials (e.g. graphite, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), silicon) and cathode materials (e.g. LiFePO4, LiCoO2, LiNiO2, LiMn2O4, and other multielement composite materials) have been utilized to prepare electrodes and solid electrolytes via the EFID method.16 In 2019, Zhang et al. presented a more detailed discussion on the latest progress of EIFD technologies in LiBs.17 So far, a series of reviews concerning the deposition of inorganic particles (i.e. behaviors and characteristics, fundamentals and mechanisms, kinetics, and applications), have been well summarized.18 In contrast, the application of EFID in fabricating organic micro- and nano-meter thin films has received less attention.
Due to many advantages offered by organic materials and their thin films, such as designable ability, low-cost manufacture, excellent flexibility and easy device miniaturization, they have been widely investigated over the past few decades.19 Unlike inorganic materials, most of the organic materials undergo anisotropic molecular orientation and alter the packing state, strongly influencing their film quality and performance.20 Thus, it becomes a significant challenge to produce controllable organic films accompanied by desired nanostructures and molecular stacking. Clearly, some traditional film-preparation techniques (e.g. spin-coating, vacuum deposition) are not suitable for creating desired nanostructures. In contrast, EFID can be a viable approach to address this issue. Second, EFID has significant advantages of operating at low temperature and utilizing a simple apparatus. Third, the film that is fabricated via EFID can be readily scaled up for industrial applications. Furthermore, EFID has the commercial virtue of source saving and more efficient material utilization. In fact, the increasing number of reports on using EFID to fabricate organic functional materials reveals the significant potential of this method for future development.
In this review, we focus on the research progress in the fabrication of organic micro- or nano-thin films through the EFID method. The applicable materials (i.e., organic small molecules, polymers, MOFs, COFs, metal complexes, other carbon-based materials, and their hybrid composites), the deposition mechanism, processing parameters (i.e. solvents, electrodes, and concentrations), derivative technologies (i.e. template-supported EPD (T-EPD), sacrificial layer EPD (SL-EPD), electrophoresis assisted LBL (EP-LBL), light-directed EPD (L-EPD), magnetically assisted EFID (M-EFID), capillary electrophoresis doping technique (CEPD), triboelectric-generator-driven pulse EFID (P-EFID), and electrophoresis assisted printing (EP-Printing)), and their wide applications (i.e. OLED, second-order nonlinear optics (SONLO), and RMDs), are summarized in a concise and well-rounded way. Fig. 1 depicts the overview diagram of all these discussed contents of the EFID technology. It can be concluded that EFID is a versatile and reliable material processing approach to fabricate scalable organic thin-films. Nevertheless, in the domain of the deposition of these organic materials, there still remain some significant challenges to control their nucleation, crystallization, and self-assembly. In this course, we hope to provide a deep understanding on the preparation of organic thin films through the EFID technology, and propose a perspective of clear development directions on technical improvement, film growth and promising applications.
 Fig. 1  Overview diagram of EFID technology concerning applications, deposition mechanisms, processing parameters, derivative technologies, and applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 24a. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, Weily. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 61h. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
2. Mechanism and type of EFID technology
Among all the EFID technologies, ECD and EPD are the most widely-used approaches to deposit organic materials. For ECD, three general steps are involved, including initial chemical reactions (i.e. electrochemical oxidation, protonation/deprotonation, combining charged species, electrosynthesis, electropolymerization (EPM)), electrophoresis (EP), and electrodeposition (ED), whereas the EPD method only consists of the latter two steps. The EP process can actuate the micro- or nanoparticles to migrate toward the oppositely charged electrode in the electrolyte medium when a suitable electric field is applied. These particles aggregate around the electrode and deposit on the substrate surface with the aid of interfacial bonding, electrostatic force and electric field force.21 Intriguingly, the diverse electric-field-enhanced molecular self-assembly may occur in the presence of these incorporative applied forces.22 According to different charges that these particles possess, EPD can be classified into anodic EPD (A-EPD) and cathodic EPD (C-EPD). Accordingly, these technologies can also be sorted by solvents (i.e., aqueous-media or organic-media EPD), voltages (i.e., low-voltage (0–50 V) or high-voltage (50–1000 V) EPD, direct-current- (DC), alternating-current- (AC) or pulse-voltage EPD), or types of electrolytes (i.e., solution, suspension, and colloid EPD).
3. Processing parameters
3.1 Equipment
As shown in Fig. 2, the classic top–bottom two-electrode, vertical two-electrode and three-electrode devices are well-known systems for EFID operations.21,23 The top–bottom electrode system can deposit active materials on the electrode surface by the force of gravity and electric field, whereas vertical electrode systems have to push against the gravity to avoid sinking. For vertical electrode systems, the surface attachment ability usually limits their versatile applications. Although this problem is likely to be solved by applying a high voltage, the intensive electric field is unfavorable for the stability of the electrolyte. Compared with the two-electrode system, the three-electrode system can precisely record the potential difference between the working electrode and reference electrode (i.e., standard Ag/AgCl electrode or saturated calomel electrode (SCE)). The required electric power is commonly supplied by using a current rectifier or some novel energy storage components (i.e., solar cells, supercapacitors, LIBs, fuel cells, and triboelectric generators).
 Fig. 2  Schematics of the representative EFID equipment used to form organic thin films. 
3.2 Electrode
A majority of the EFID process occurs at the surface of various conductive substrates, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, indium tin oxide (ITO) glass, PPV-modified ITO (PPV/ITO), glassy carbon (GC) plates, graphite plates, Pt plates, gold (Au), Cr/Au alloys, stainless steel, and some semiconductor- or insulator-modified metal electrodes.21,24 To the best of our knowledge, the transparent ITO and FTO electrodes allow many possible spectroscopic studies. However, ITO can be readily destroyed under high applied potentials, while FTO has high resistance although it has a larger electrochemical window. By contrast, the GC electrode has better conductive properties but relatively weak mechanical immobilization for organic materials.25 Based on the applied requirements and the features of electrode materials, choosing suitable electrodes for EFID operation is necessary. However, some organic thin films are required to be deposited on the insulating or semi-insulating substrates (e.g. polymeric porous membrane, quartz slides, silicon wafers). To achieve this goal, Zhang and his coworkers reported a new approach to implement the deposition on these substrates. They accomplished the deposition in a capacitor cell, with the two stainless steel electrodes located on two sides, which are parallel to the insulating substrate. The solution of the charged polyelectrolytes (PEs) or PE-coated nanoparticles was filled between the substrate and the electrode. Under the applied voltage, the polycations and polyanions, as well as other charged species, could deposit on various insulating substrates in layers.26 Besides, T-EPD and SL-EPD methods also provide feasible ways to transfer the deposited film to other substrates, which have been discussed below.
3.3 Solvents
As mentioned above, the EFID technology can be classified into two categories of aqueous-media and organic-media depositions. Although water has been widely used in the deposition of inorganic materials due to the advantages of low cost and environmental friendliness, the unacceptable electrolysis problem to form oxygen or hydrogen bubbles is hard to be avoided. Several attempts have been reported to diminish the effect. For example, absorbing hydrogen by Pd electrodes together with using lower voltage or chemical addition is employed to suppress the decomposition of water. Hirata and Vleugels suggested the usage of high-frequency AC electric fields to prevent the formation of gas bubbles.27 In contrast, organic solvents are preferable for the steady deposition of organic materials. Compared with organic polar solvents (e.g. acetone, alcohol), nonpolar solvents (e.g. n-hexane) are more suitable to improve the film quality, however, much higher voltage is required due to their low conductivity and dielectric constant.16 Notably, Lu et al. suggested the usage of aprotic organic solvents (i.e. acetonitrile (MeCN), toluene (TOL) or their mixed solvents) rather than aprotic solvents. They found that aqueous and alcoholic media could etch the ITO surface of the cathode electrode, leading to a low-quality EPD film, which is unfavorable for the EPD system.21 Some other aprotic organic solvents (i.e. dichloromethane (DCM), dichloroethane (DCE), trichloroethane (TCE), N-Methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), N,N-diethylformaide (DEF), dimethylacetamide (DMAc), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and 1,3-dimethylimidazolidinone (DMI)) are also commonly used in previous reports.21–26 Furthermore, it is well known that the solvation has a significant effect on the film morphology and self-assembly architectures.28 Thus, selecting appropriate solvents and preparing a stable electrolyte system become the prerequisites of an EFID process.
3.4 Other parameters
Some other influential parameters such as concentration (C), electric field (E), deposition time (T), electrode spacing (d), voltage (U), zeta potential (ζ), conductivity (σ, S/m), dielectric constant (ε), the net charge of active molecules (q), electrode surface area (S, m2), electrophoretic mobility (M, m2 V s−1), and conduction-current density (J, A m−2) also play essential roles in the EFID operation. Some of the relevant equations are listed below. The values of ζ and σ reveal the stability and current-conduction-capability of the electrolyte system, respectively. Most researchers pay great attention to the C, E and T values, which actively affect the deposition yield, film-growth speed and the self-assembly nanostructures.29 [Electric field]: E = U/d(1) [Conduction density]: J = σE(2)
3.5 Characterization
To figure out the EFID mechanisms, much effort has been input through the setup of theoretical and modeling studies as well as practical experiments. The defined evaluation indicators have been established, including species migration speed (V), deposition mass (m, g), deposition yield, electric field force on these charged molecules (F), the viscous force of media, the adhesive force on the electrode surface, film-growth speed, film thickness (A), morphologies, and nanostructures. Hamaker's law has been regarded as a useful principle to predict the mass ratio of the composite deposits, which is shown in the following equation (ƒ is a correction factor due to the incomplete deposition (f ≤ 1)).30 In addition, the film thickness can be monitored by using an ellipsometer or cross-sectional views through an atomic force microscope (AFM) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The electric-field-enhanced self-assembly morphologies and nanostructures can be evaluated by many advanced characterization technologies, such as AFM, SEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), small-angle scattering (SAXS), wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), and selected area electron diffraction (SAED).21,22,24a [Migration speed]: V = ME(3) [Electric field force]: F = qE(4) [Hamaker's law]: dm/dt = fMESC(5)
4. Thin-film preparation and application
4.1 Organic small molecules
Although organic small molecules have attracted enormous attention, only a few reports focused on the fabrication of organic thin-films via EPD technology. We classify these practicable organic small molecules into two categories: non-ionic and ionic organic materials. As we all know, uncharged materials cannot spontaneously migrate and then deposit on the conductive electrode under an external electric field. To address this problem, scientists have exploited the following approaches, namely, electrochemical oxidation or electrosynthesis (Method I), protonation or deprotonation (Method II), the combination of charged species (Method III), and high-voltage EPD (Method IV). On the other hand, ionic organic materials should be the optimal precursors to facilitate the EPD process under low electric field intensity without any pretreatment.

4.1.1 Non-ionic organic materials. 
Method I: electrochemical oxidation. 
Phthalocyanine (Pc) and its derivatives (Pcs) (i.e. lithium phthalocyanine (Li2Pc), copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), lutetium phthalocyanine (LuPc), gadolinium biphthalocyanine (GdPc2) and europium bisphthalocyanine (EuPc2)) have been widely reported because of their good π–π conjugated macrocyclic systems, thermal stability and carrier transport capability.31 The schematic molecular structures of phthalocyanine, phthalocyanines and biphthalocyanines are shown in Fig. 3a. Several techniques have been applied to grow Pc or Pcs thin films, including the LB, cell-disruption, vacuum sublimation, and EFID techniques. By contrast, the Pcs films fabricated via EFID showed a strong interfacial adhesive force and preferential orientation of the crystallites. Graff et al. reported the preparation of an oriented LiPc-based film via an ECD method.32 First of all, a stable LiPc radical was synthesized from Li2Pc through electrochemical oxidation in a three-electrode two-compartment cell, as shown in Fig. 3b. The electrosynthesis and EPD process proceeded in a mixed solution containing 50 mL of acetone or MeCN, tetraethylammonium perchlorate (TEAP) (10–50 mM) and 50 μL of Li2Pc pentanol solution (0.1 M) under a low working potential (0.2–1 V). As a result, the self-assembled nano- or microcrystallites in the χ-form were obtained regardless of the solvent and the low applied voltage. Fig. 3c and d show the representative dendritic morphologies grown in acetone and MeCN, respectively. Notably, the as-obtained morphologies (i.e., crystal shapes and sizes and substrate coverage) were strongly affected by the nature of the solvents. In contrast to acetone, the LiPc film grown in MeCN preferentially exhibited a unidirectional crystalline orientation induced by gravity or some hydrodynamical effects.
 Fig. 3  (a) The schematic molecular structures of phthalocyanine, phthalocyanines and biphthalocyanines. (b) Electrochemical cell for the elaboration of oriented LiPc thin films onto the ITO glass substrate. The arrows demonstrate the preferential unidirectional growth direction of the microcrystallites. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 1999, Cambridge University Press. (c and d) SEM micrographs of LiPc thin films grown by electrochemical oxidation of Li2Pc: (c) acetone for 8 min; (d) MeCN for 20 min. The concentrations of PcLi2 and TEAP are 10−4 and 10−2 M, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 1999, Cambridge University Press. (e–g) SEM micrographs of Pcs thin films grown by C-EPD: (e) GdPc2, CHCl3, 30 V cm−1, 10 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (f) ErPc2, CHCl3, 20 V cm−1, 10 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (g) EuPc2, CHCl3, 60 V cm−1, 5 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 
Method II: protonation. 
Different from the substituted Pcs that show good solubility in common organic solvents, most unsubstituted Pcs are insoluble. However, scientists found that some unsubstituted Pcs can be dissolved in appropriate organic solvents in the presence of strong organic acids, such as trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).31b The changed solubility was explained by the coordination of protons to peripheric aza nitrogen atoms of Pcs. For example, 1 mM CuPc DCM solution can be obtained by stirring these mixtures for 30 min. These Pcs monomers could act as catalysts to dissociate TFA into H+ and A− (trifluoroacetate anions). Thus, the protonation of CuPc occurred following the two-step equilibrium reaction:33 [Anode – Step1]: CuPc + 2HA → CuPc·H22+, 2A−(6) [Step 2]: CuPc·H22+, 2A− + 2HA → CuPc·H44+, 4A−(7)
It was assumed that 0.81 mM CuPc·H22+ and 0.19 mM CuPc·H44+ were present in the DCM solution according to the ideal equilibrium constants. These protonated species migrated to the cathode undergoing the EP process and then was reduced to CuPc and H2 under an electric field of 100 V cm−1 in a short while. The CuPc monomers were subsequently deposited on the electrode surface to form a thin film (ED procedure). The SEM image reveals a dense packing composed of fibrous crystallites, whose size was controlled by the increasing deposition time. The imperfect film crystalline structure was attributed to the short time formation (within 5 s) and high electric field, resulting in the transition from the α-type to β-type crystalline phase. When a mild voltage (5–30 V d.c.) and prolonged T value (10 min) were applied, needle-shaped grains were obtained. The optical absorption spectra demonstrated that the as-fabricated films exhibited α-type polymorphs.34 Additionally, the concentration of Pcs and TFA and their σ, ε, the solvent effect, were all taken into consideration. It was found that the σ value was enhanced with the increasing concentration of Pcs until 1 mM. Besides, under the same conditions of the T, C, E values, the amount of deposit was affected by the solvent types, e.g., DCE > DCM > TCE, which could be ascribed to the levels of ion-pair dissociation. It was speculated that the dissociation could be evaluated by the solvation energy of ions calculated by Born equation:35 [Born equation]: S′ = −N(qe)2(1 − 1/Ds)/2r(8)where S′, N, Ds, and r are the solvation energy of the ionic species, Avogadro number, the dielectric constant of the solvent, and the radius of the ionic species, respectively. Later on, this technique was proven as a successful way to prepare other Pcs-based films, for instance, Pc, FePc, NiPc, ZnPc, VOPs, EuPc2, GdPc2, and ErPc2. Fig. 3e–g show the representative SEM micrographs of GdPc2, ErPc2 and EuPc2 thin films grown by C-EPD. For GdPc2, the morphology of its film was determined by the deposition time and applied voltages. In sequence, nanoparticles (20 s), nanowires (1 min), and rod-like (8 min) and leaf-like (10 min) microcrystallites were formed under the conditions of 30 V cm−1 and 10−4 M. The concentration of GdPc2 influenced the migration rate of the protonated particles, leading to a different operating time to form these nano/microstructures.36 Similar experimental results of ErPc2 and EuPc2 could also be available under the same protocol.29,37 These as-obtained films with defined nanostructures can be used as organic active blocks for photoelectric devices, such as NIR photodetectors and FETs.
Method III: combining charged species. 
For the electrically neutral materials, it is a useful solution to charge them through absorbing or grafting some charged dispersants or PEs. Zhitomirsky et al. conducted an investigation on depositing composite films, containing uncharged model drugs (tetracycline (TC) or ibuprofen (IB)) and bile salts (BS) with amphiphilic structures.38 The commercially available BS, such as deoxycholic acid sodium salt (DChNa) and cholic acid sodium salt (ChNa), could act as efficient detergents to solubilize many organic molecules (e.g. vitamins, lipids, and cholesterol) and form mixed micelles due to the presence of hydrogen bonds. Thus, by the combination of drug molecules and BS, their composite films with a thickness of 5 μm can be successfully prepared from aqueous solutions. Note that the water-insoluble bile acid film may be formed at the anode surface due to the PH decrease. [Anode Step 1]: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(9) [Step 2]: DchCOO−/ChCOO− + H+ → DChCOOH/ChCOOH(10)
Generally, BS, acting as the solubilizing, charging and film-forming agent, presents a superior performance in the EFID process, and shows promising applications in the deposition of other functional organic molecules.


4.1.2 Ionic small molecules. 
According to the above-mentioned elaboration, the treatment of electrochemical oxidation or protonation seems to have a limitation for most organic materials. To develop diverse applicable active materials, ionic organic molecules are deemed as a suitable choice. In recent years, ionic organic molecules have been explored in the application of RMDs, linear and nonlinear optical studies, ionic liquid crystals (ILCs), supramolecular self-assembly, luminophores, etc., due to their unique properties of electron delocalization and electrostatic induction.39 However, few cases have been reported to construct organic thin-films via EFID technology, which are discussed as follows.
Ionic D/A conjugated organic semiconductors. 
Several cases of ionic D/A conjugated organic semiconductors have been synthesized in the Lu's group, which have been proven as outstanding active materials for the sandwich-structured RMDs, comparative to their neutral bulk materials.40 Inspired by the EFID technology, Lu and coworkers attempted to produce exquisite organic thin-films through the combination of EFID and rational molecular design.21Fig. 4a shows the D/A structure of the molecules and the monolithic devices with 2745 cell units integrated into one independent thin film. The film obtained via C-EPD from an organic solvent can be precisely controlled by varying the experimental conditions, leading to their thickness varying from 50 nm to 5 μm and the deposition area as large as 104 mm.2 However, a severe limitation was found that not all of the positively charged organic salts could adhere to the ITO glass due to their weak adhesion at the ITO surface. The molecules with short alkyl chains (R1 and R2) could visibly aggregate, precipitate, and deposit around the cathode, especially under a high voltage (>30 V d.c.). To address these issues, flexible substituents were introduced to enhance the solubility, intermolecular entanglement, van der Waals interactions and weaken the electrostatic repulsion. As a result, the compounds C8CzPy-C6Br (R1 = n-octyl, R2 = n-octyl) and C20CzPy-MeI (R1 = 2-octyl-dodecyl, R2 = methyl) could form scalable thin-films, and the RMDs based on these active thin films exhibited superior electric performances than that of the bulk materials. Besides, compact molecular packing and strong molecule/molecule and interface/molecule forces were observed in the EPD film. Thus, the film could hardly be dissolved in the electrolyte without an external force.
 Fig. 4  (a) D/A conjugated skeletons of the organic semiconductor materials composed of pyridinium group (left), photographs of the monolithic devices based on large-area and uniform organic thin films (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism of the reflection color change by EPD of IonD. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
Molecular self-assembly. 
Electric-field-enhanced molecular self-assembly is an interesting research topic that has attracted many scientists’ attention. Zhitomirsky et al. also prepared BiqCOOK films in fibrous or flower-like nanostructures from water and ethanol–water solvent, respectively.41 In the presence of N-containing ligands, BiqCOOK exhibits chelating properties to act as dispersing and binding agents for the co-deposition of different materials, such as Pd, NiO and carbon nanotubes (CNTs). However, a further theoretical and modeling study is needed to provide a better insight into the self-assemble mechanisms.
Ionic dopant for liquid-crystalline materials. 
Liquid-crystalline materials (LCs) comprising of an aromatic core and flexible peripheral have been applied to various applications such as sensors and solar cells42 due to their unique orientation and anisotropy properties. Aida et al. attempted to investigate the electric-field response of the LCs doped with an ionic chiral dopant (IonD).43 As shown in Fig. 4b, the sandwich-type glass cell was constructed by glass, ITO, polyimide orientation film, and ILC molecules. When an alternating voltage of 40 V d.c. (peak-to-peak, 100 Hz) was applied to the device for 360 s, most of the IonD electrophoretically deposited from the LC medium to polyimide-coated ITO electrode, where the color changed from blue to green. After heating devices at 80 °C for 24 h, the deposited IonD could redissolve in the LC medium, leading to a reverse color. Notably, the color would change in a narrower range at a lower operating voltage and frequency, whereas the device would short-circuit under a higher operating voltage or frequency.

4.2 Polymers
As similar to organic small molecules, polymers (i.e. linear, star, and porous organic polymers (POPs)) can also be classified into non-ionic and ionic/conducting organic materials. According to the intrinsic properties of polymers, we could choose a suitable EFID technology (e.g., ECD, high-voltage EPD, low-voltage EPD, and electropolymerization (EPM)) to form corresponding polymer films. For the deposition of non-ionic polymers, two apparent disadvantages exist: (1) not all non-ionic polymers could exhibit EP and ED behaviors, and (2) the process requires high energy consumption. The deposition of ionic polymers would introduce some ionic impurities into their films, which may have a great impact on their original characteristics and follow-on applications.

4.2.1 High-voltage EPD for non-ionic polymers. 
Over the past decades, only a few examples of the non-ionic polymer materials have been successfully deposited on conductive substrates via the EPD technologies. Several paradigms, including conjugated, linear and star polymers, are summarized here and their structural features and EPD characteristics are analysed. For example, a soluble conjugated polymer, poly(3-octadecythiophene) (PAT18) was utilized to deposit nanostructured polymer films from 0.1 mg mL−1 colloidal suspensions via high-voltage EPD (100 V d.c.) for 5 s.23b The stable colloidal suspension was prepared by a simple mixing method of adding PAT18 TOL solution into a poor solvent (MeCN). Notably, the stability of the colloidal suspension depended on the polymer concentration. However, no deposition was observed in the pure TOL solution of PAT18 under the condition of 200 V d.c. for 20 s, manifesting that the conjugated polymer in good solvents could not be effectively driven via the EPD principle. Inspired by this protocol, Dickerso et al. reported the deposition of the polystyrene/divinylbenzene (PS/DVB) star polymer.44 The PS/DVB DCM solution was injected into a phase-separated liquid of Hex/DCM (9/1 v/v) to form a Hex-rich colloidal suspension, a DCM-rich solution and a well-mixed Hex/DCM suspension. A constant applied voltage of 100 V d.c. was applied with a deposition time of 5 min, followed by an additional 5 min for further densification after extraction. The as-obtained film with defined nanostructures exhibited broad application in optical and biological fields. Takasu et al. have reported a series of electrophoretic non-ionic polymers with different functional groups (e.g., sulfonyl and fluorinated fragments) since 2012, for examples, poly(ester-sulfone), poly(ester-sulfone) gel, poly(2-oxazoline), poly(urethane), poly(acrylamide), poly(methacrylate), and fluorinated poly(methacrylate)s.45 The representative structures of the sulfonyl-containing polymers and fluoroalkyl polymers are shown in Fig. 5a and b, respectively. To figure out the mechanism of the electrophoresis behavior of these non-ionic polymers, Takasu et al. speculated that the EPD was triggered by the electrode reaction, which could produce an electrical potential difference between the electrodes.
 Fig. 5  (a) The representative electrophoretic non-ionic polymers containing sulfonyl groups. (b) Schematic of anode selective EPD of the representative electrophoretic non-ionic polymer containing fluorinated fragments. Adapted with permission from ref. 45n. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of EPD behavior of charged fluorinated polymer dispersions. Adapted with permission from ref. 45n. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
For the sulfonyl-containing polymers:45i [Anode]: Me → Mn+ + ne−:(11) [Cathode]: 2ROH + 2e− → 2RO− + 2H+(12)
For fluoroalkyl polymers:45n[Anode Step 1] 2ROH → 2R = O(aldehyde) + 2H+ + 2e−(13) [Step 2]: 2Me + O2 → 2Me(II)O(in case of bivalent metals) + 4e−(14) [Cathode]: 2ROH + 2e− → 2RO− + 2H+(15)
In particular, as shown in Fig. 5c, the electrically neutral fluorinated polymers accumulated on the anode and the C–F linkage started to polarize under a high voltage of 500 V d.c., which induced the charge-separation of alcohol molecules at the interface of the dispersions, followed by forming an electric double layer. Thus, finite electrophoretic mobility was generated due to the selective affinity between the neutral polymers and ions. The next EP and ED procedures occurred on the electrically neutral sphere particles, which coincided with the theoretical models.46


4.2.2 EPD for ionic/conducting polymers. 
Ionic polymers including polycations, polyanions and conducting polymers are considered to be appropriate EPD precursor materials.47 In 2001, a luminescent polyanion CPMOPPV derived from poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) was successfully deposited onto ITO substrates, semiconducting or insulative polymer film substrates (e.g. PPV or polyimide films), and other metal substrates.48 Notably, the sodium salt of CPMOPPV could be readily transformed by reacting with sodium hydroxide. Both CPMOPPV and its sodium salt exhibited good solubility in common organic solvents. Prior to use, the ethanol solution of CPMOPPV was prepared with a concentration of 0.004–0.01 M, followed by filtration through a 0.5 μm filter. The EPD process was carried out in a three-electrode system with an ITO working electrode and a Pt counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. After the deposition in 0.01 M CPMOPPV solution at 1.5 V d.c. voltage for 15 min, a smooth CPMOPPV film was obtained. Electroluminescent (EL) devices were fabricated using the CPMOPPV films, showing typical rectifying characteristics and strong yellow EL properties. Additionally, the effects of the electric field and concentration on film thickness were monitored by UV absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) intensity, both demonstrating a linear dependence. Besides, the linear polymers films (chiral poly-L-lysine hydrobromide) (PLL-HBr), poly-L-ornithine hydrobromide (PLO-HBr) and their composites with hydroxyapatite (HA) nanoparticles could also be deposited on platinized silicon wafers under a mild condition of 3–20 V d.c. voltage in water or a mixed water–ethanol solvent containing 0.2–2 mg mL−1 of polymers and 0.5–2 mg mL−1 of HA. In the presence of water medium, the hydrolysis and deprotonation reactions may take place at the cathode surface:49 [Cathode Step 1]: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−;(16) [Step 2]: PLL−H+/PLO−H+ + OH− → PLL/PLO + H2O(17)The deposition process could also be evaluated by mass changes, which can be monitored by a quartz crystal microbalance method (QCM) and calculated through Sauerbrey's equation:
[Sauerbrey's equation]: (18)where F, F0, ρ, and μ, are the frequency decrease of the QCM, the parent frequency of the QCM, the density of the quartz (2.65 g cm−3) and the shear modulus of the quartz (2.95 × 1011 dyne cm−2).


4.2.3 ECD for porous organic polymers. 
The EPD technology can also be applied to deposit POPs, especially, organic–inorganic hybrid POPs. A series of salen-metal-based POPs have been reported by the incorporation of Al(III), Co(III) and Cr(III) metals at the salen chelating site.50 D'Alessandro and their coworkers attempted to attach the synthetic salen-Co(III)-based POPs (Co-POPs) onto the GC electrode surface via EFID technology at a mild voltage.68 The suspension of POPs in TOL was formed by sonicating for 30 s, with a concentration of 1 mg mL−1. A d.c. voltage of 30 V was applied to the stirred suspension for 6 h, with sonication over 30 min to avoid larger aggregates. The deposition mechanism proposed was that the incorporation of the salen into the POP structure tended to bring the Co(II/I) process and changed reduction potentials to more cathodic potentials.


4.2.4 Electropolymerization. 
Electrochemistry has been regarded as a powerful tool in the field of organic synthesis.51 In particular, EPM or electrosynthesis has been utilized to synthesize a variety of polymers from electroactive monomers.52Fig. 6a depicts the difference between EPM and EPD in forming polymer films on electrodes. A three-electrode cell is commonly used to anodically oxidize or cathodically reduce the monomers and electrolyte in a suitable solvent, leading to produce radical anions or cations, followed by the formation of insoluble polymers on the electrode surface. Compared to EPD, the EPM method exhibits an outstanding advantage for in situ film growth and characterization. Some different examples of EPM are shown in Fig. 6b and c. Wang et al. reported the preparation of the chiral PDA film by EPM of diacetylene (DA) monomers. Mild conditions (4 V d.c., 30 min, and room temperature) were utilized to realize 100% surface coverage and dense PDA films.53 Analogously, the polycarbazole film and thiophene-based D/A polymer film could also be fabricated under appropriate EPM conditions.54 However, during the deposition of insulating polymers, a severe current drop may occur with the increased insulating layers on the electrode substrates, limiting the film thickness to the range of several hundred nano-meters.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic difference between EPM and EPD of polymers to the electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019, MDPI. (b) Polymerization reaction of DA via EPD. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2013, Wiley. (c) Polymerization reaction of M3 and M4 via EPD. Adapted with permission from ref. 54b. Copyright 2014, Wiley. 


4.2.5 Co-deposition. 
Organic polymers have been considered as favorable agents in EFID to control the surface charges of other active materials or enhance the interfacial adhesion force. For example, a series of research studies have been reported to charge organic or inorganic particles (e.g., C60, ZnO, SiO2, TiO2, gibbsite, and Pt nanoparticles) in a dispersion solution or to switch the charge states of the particles by attaching PEs or conducting polymers onto their surface.55 Thus, polymers such as polythiophene (PTh), poly(vinylbenzyl trimethyl ammonium chloride) (PVT), Nafion, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride) (PDDA), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), etc. have been confirmed as efficient agents to modify the active materials or the electrode surface. The as-obtained nanocomposite films demonstrate extensive applications in biomedicine, catalysis, and so on.

4.3 Covalent organic frameworks
COFs have appeared as an outstanding tailor-made platform to combine different organic monomers through covalent bonds.24 The intrinsic advantages of high crystallinity and well-designed pore structures of the metal-free 2D and 3D COF networks have attracted much attention in the field of catalysis, sensors, energy storage, gas detection and separation, etc.56 Generally, COFs could be prepared as an insoluble nanocrystalline precipitate through solvothermal reactions. However, the insoluble and unprocessable characteristics of COFs impede the film preparation, leading to limited development in organic optoelectronic fields.57 Herein, exploring soluble COF materials and advanced COF film-growth techniques have been deemed as efficient solutions. Among the reported techniques such as “bottom-up”58 and vapor-assisted conversion (VAC) approaches,59 EPD or ECD techniques have been proven as efficient and rapid ways to fabricate COF films on conductive surfaces.

4.3.1 High-voltage EPD of non-ionic COFs. 
Single-component deposition. 
As shown in Fig. 7, Medina et al. reported on the deposition of the three well-characterized bulk COF materials (COF-5, COF-300 and BET-ETTA COF, featuring 2D and 3D structures) via high-voltage EPD technology.24a Prior to the EPD process, these COF-5 and COF-300 particles were suspended into the deposition solvent with a concentration of 0.005-1.0 mg mL−1, followed by brief sonication in an ultrasonic bath to disperse them homogeneously. It is worthy pointing that sonication times would better be within 15 s, otherwise, the crystallinity may be damaged. For the robust 2D BET-ETTA COF, an ultrasound-based attrition process was required to break the agglomerates into smaller particles. The prepared suspensions of the BET-ETTA COF underwent sonication in an ice bath for 30 min and subsequent centrifugation to reduce the particle size, which determined the final concentration of 0.03 mg mL−1 and the average particle size of approximately 200 nm. Besides, the aprotic organic solvents with low polarity (e.g., EA, TOL, anisole) were chosen as the suitable media to suspend and migrate these COF particles. According to the zeta-potential measurements, it was validated that these COF particles could bear negative charges under an electric field of 900 V cm−1, indicating that the C-EPD process could happen without any connection to their linkage-type. A quantitative deposition could be completed within 2 min using the above-mentioned protocol, which afforded COF films on the FTO electrode surface with an area of 100–2500 mm2 and a thickness ranging from 400 nm to 24 μm. Intriguingly, the zeta-potential value could be readily inverted by protonated treatment of the terminal groups with glacial acetic acid, leading to an adverse C-EPD process. By further investigation on the parameters governing the deposition rate, amount, and thickness of BET-ETTA COF films, a linear dependence was found between the film thickness and the deposition time with a deposition rate of 16 nm s−1. Thus, under the conditions of a specific voltage, electrode distance and particle concentration, a general correlation formula could be established among the parameters of deposition time, electric field, and film thickness.
 Fig. 7  Schematic presentation of the EPD setup with a typical COF film (right). SEM images (left) and cross-section file (middle) of the fabricated films are shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 24a. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Co-deposition. 
The co-deposition of different COFs or COF/Pt nanoparticles has been carried out. For the co-deposition of COF-300 and BDT-ETTA COF, the mixture of 0.006 mg mL−1 BDT-ETTA COF and 0.02 mg mL−1 COF-300 was first prepared in a sonication bath for 1 min. The subsequent EPD process proceeded on an ITO glass under the same protocol as the single-component deposition, affording homogeneous hybrid films. The BDT-ETTA COF/Pt nanoparticles could also be coated on the ITO substrate from the defined concentration of 0.03/0.015 mg mL−1.


4.3.2 Low-voltage EPD of ionic COFs. 
As shown in Fig. 8a, Ma et al. have synthesized the elaborate ionic COF material PyVg-COF. By introducing high-density electrostatic repulsion to regulate its interlayer interactions and to hamper the inter-layer π–π stacking, PyVg-COF showed remarkable solubility in a variety of organic solvents, which allowed further film preparation via the EPD technique.24bFig. 8b illustrates the principle of COF-based EPD film growth in a two-electrode EPD system. In contrast to the unstable COF suspension, the deposition that occurred in the solution state could provide high-quality COF films with outstanding uniformity and reproducibility. Through the optimization of processing parameters, DMI was chosen as the medium with a PyVg-COF concentration of 4.9 mg mL−1 and constant electric field intensity. After an EPD operation, the residual DMI on the COF films was washed with the MeCN solvent. As shown in Fig. 8c, the brown thin-film and black thick-film (from left to right) could be obtained at the surface of cathode electrodes (e.g. ITO, stainless steel and gold). The detailed processing parameters are listed in Table 1. The dependences of film thickness on the electric field intensities and EPD time have been investigated. It was found that the film thickness could be well-controlled by varying the electric field and deposition time. For example, at the same duration (20 s), the film thickness presented a linear dependence on the electric field with a slope of 1.4 nm/(V cm−1) in Fig. 8d. Similarly, under a constant electric field (e.g. 33.3 V cm−1), the film thickness linearly increased by 1.1 nm s−1 (Fig. 8e), which reveals the same tendency of the deposition of COF suspensions. A 70 nm-thick film could be swiftly produced in 20 s at a low electric field intensity of 33.3 V cm−1. Significantly, these charged COF molecules could only be deposited on the electrode surface with the same size and shape as the counter electrodes.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the PyVg-COF. (b) Scheme illustrating the principle of COF EPD film growth, showing the attraction of the positively charged COF nanosheets toward the negatively charged electrode using an applied electric field. (c) Photographs of the COF EPD films (left: thin film on ITO; middle: thick film on ITO; and right: thick film on stainless steel). The width of the films was 14 mm. (d) Dependence of film thickness on the electric field intensity at an EPD time of 20 s. (e) Dependence of film thickness on the EPD time at an electric field intensity of 33.3 V cm−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 24b. Copyright 2019, Royal Society Chemistry. 
Table 1 EFID preparation conditions of organic thin films and their applications




Material
Medium
Concentration
Solvent
EPD type
Voltage (V) & duration (min)
Electrode distance (mm)
Electrode
Application
Ref.




LiPc
Solution
0.1 mM, 0.001–0.005 M TEAP
Acetone or MeCN
Three-electrode ECD
0.2–1.0 V d.c., 5 s–30 min
—
ITO
Magnetic properties

32



CuPc
Solution
1 mM
1 M TFA, DCM
C-EPD (100 V)
100 V d.c., 5 s
10
ITO, GC plates
FET

33



CuPc
Solution
1 mM
1 M TFA, DCM
C-EPD (5–30 V)
30 V d.c., 10 min
10
Pt plate, Cr/Au,
FET

34



GdPc2
Solution
0.05–0.1 mM
TFA, CHCl3
C-EPD (20–30 V)
30 V d.c., 10 min
10
ITO
NIR photodetectors

36



ErPc2
Solution
—
0.5 mL TFA, 20 mL CHCl3
C-EPD (30 V)
30 V d.c., 10 min
5
ITO, graphite plates
Nanowires

37



EuPc2
Solution
0.0125–0.0725 mg mL−1
0.5 mL TFA, 20 mL CHCl3
C-EPD (30 V)
30 V d.c., 10 min
5
ITO, graphite plates
Nanowires

29



TC or IB drugs
Solution
TC or IB 3 g L−
1 g/L BS, water
EPD (10 V)
10 V d.c., —
15
Stainless steel/Pt plate
Drugencapsulation

38



C8CzPy-C6Br
Solution
0.1 mg mL−1
MeCN
C-EPD (0–30 V)
20 V d.c., 2 min
10
ITO glass
RMDs

21



BiqCOOK
Solution
1 mg mL−1
Water/eathnol
ECD (10-30 V)
10-30 V d.c., —
15
Stainless steel/Pt plate
Co-deposition

41



PAT18
Colloidal suspension
0.01–0.5 mg mL−1
MeCN/TOL (9/1 v/v)
High-voltage EPD (50–300 V)
100 V d.c., 5 s
10
ITO glass
Electrochemical senor

23b



PS/DVB
Colloidal suspension
1 mg mL−1
DCM/Hex
High-voltage EPD (100 V)
100 V d.c., 5 min
2
ITO glass
Optical and Biological device

44



CPMOPPV
Solution
0.004–0.01 M
EtOH
Three-electrode EPD
1.5 V d.c., 15 min
—
ITO glass, PPV/ITO,
EL device

48



PLL-HBr, PLO-HBr
Solution
0.2–2 mg mL−1 for PLL and PLO
Water & Water/EtOH
ECD & low-voltage EPD
3–20 V d.c., —
15
Pt plate
Surface modification & biomedical implants

49



PLO/HA, PLL/HA
0.5–2 mg mL−1 for HA


Co-POPs
Suspension
1 mg mL−1
TOL
ECD
30 V d.c., 6 h
10
GC plates
CO2 electro-reduction

68



COF-5, COF-300, BDT-ETTA COF
Suspension
0.05, 0.005–1.0, 0.03 mg mL−1
EA/TOL/anisole
High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)
900 V d.c., 2 min
10
FTO glass
Catalysis

24a



COF-300/BDT-ETTA COF,
Suspension
0.006/0.02 mg mL−1
EA
High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)
900 V d.c., 2 min
10
ITO glass
Co-deposition & catalysis

24a



BDT-ETTA/Pt
Suspension
0.03/0.015 mg mL−1
EA
High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)
900 V d.c., 2 min
10
ITO glass
Catalysis

24a



PyVg-COF
Solution
4.9 mg mL−1
DMI
Low-voltage EPD (0–50 V)
10 V d.c., —
3
ITO glass, Au, Stainless steel,
Optoelectronic devices

24b



pTAPP
Suspension
0.25 mM TAPP, 0.5 M TEA(PF6), 5% v/v pyridine
DCM
Three-electrode ECD
−0.4 to 0.7 V, 10 cycles
—
GC plate, ITO glass, Au
Electro-catalytic

22







4.3.3 ECD of COFs. 
Besides the EPD method, Nejati et al. reported the ECD method to synthesize porphyrin-based COFs, named pTAPP, which involved two steps of EPM and EPD.22 As shown in Fig. 9a, a three-electrode set-up was utilized to carry out the polymerization in the DCM solution of 0.25 mM 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin monomer (TAPP), 0.05 M supporting electrolyte salt (tetraethylammonium hexafluorophosphate TEA(PF6)) and 5% v/v pyridine. GC, ITO glass and gold electrode were chosen as different working electrodes, while the Pt gauze and Ag/AgNO3 electrode were used as the respective counter and reference electrodes, respectively. During the potentiodynamic deposition, the cyclic voltage varying from −0.4 to 0.7 V d.c. was applied to the electrolyte for several cycles (<10 times). For the galvanostatic deposition, the process lasted for 6 min with a constant current of 0.05 mA, whereas 0.6 V d.c. voltage was applied in the potentiostatic method referring to the oxidation potential of aminophenyl groups. The EPM mechanism proposed was that the radical cations of TAPP were initially formed and then amine coupling reactions were carried out, followed by a transition to dihydrophenazines and phenazine linkages. The pyridine additive played a significant role in neutralizing the protonated amine groups, improving polymerization efficiency, simultaneously stabilizing the heterostructure and enhancing the crystallinity via co-deposition with the pTAPP. In Fig. 9b, dendritic COF structures could be formed, and the size was governed by deposition temperatures and scan rates. As illustrated in Fig. 9c, a persuasive assumption of the dendrite growth mechanism was proposed that the growth started with the formation of the pTAPP nanowire networks on the substrate, followed by dendrite nucleation and then pTAPP crystals were grown along (1 1 0) dendrite nucleation. Besides, the smoother surface of substrates tended to form larger dendrites. Intriguingly, the crystalline dendrite COF thin film could readily be transferred from the GC base to an organic electrolyte via capillary force-assisted clean-stamp method without any damage.60
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the EPM and EPD process. (b) Dendrite angle of the pTAPP electrodeposited with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 at 5 °C. The DFT-derived structure of pTAPP is in the inset. (c) Schematic mechanism of dendrite formation during the EPM of pTAPP. The EPM is carried out in a 5% v/v pyridine in DCM solution containing 0.25 mM TAPP and 0.05 M TEA(PF6). Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

4.4 Hydrogen-bonded organic framework (HOFs)
HOF materials can be constructed by the self-assembly of organic ligands through intermolecular hydrogen bonds and other interactions without further polymerization or coordination. Different from COFs, HOFs possess some unique merits such as the solvent process ability and easy synthesis. In order to deposit these HOF materials on conducting substrates, Cao et al. developed an efficient strategy to charge them by protonation or deprotonation.28 The large-area (>15 cm2) or well-patterned HOF films could be successfully fabricated by the EPD method, and their film thickness can be controlled by the applied voltage ranging from 15 to 90 V d.c. More importantly, the inevitably unbonded functional groups allow the incorporation of some exogenous species by post-synthetic modification (PSM).
4.5 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), composed of organic linkers and metal ions, possess numerous advantages including high thermal stability, stable molecular skeleton, large surface areas and enormous porosity, which have been developed for various applications, particularly in energy storage, catalysis, sensors, adsorption and separation.6 To deposit MOF-based thin films, the ECD method has been deemed as an efficient way together with the merits of mild conditions, controllable morphology and roughness, and short growth time.61 In 2016, Cao et al. reviewed the development of MOF-based thin-films fabricated via the ECD methods.62 They systematically demonstrated the growth mechanisms, characterization techniques, various conductive substrates (e.g. ITO glass, FTO glass and GC plates) and applications. Generally, the deposition of MOF thin-films on the conductive electrode surface mainly involves the steps of first anodic metallic oxidation, sequential reductive electrosynthesis between coordinating anodic oxidized ions and organic ligands or between deprotonated organic ligands and metal ions, and then the EPD procedure to generate charged MOF nanoparticles or realize in situ growth on the conductive electrode. Fig. 10 shows twelve representative structures of the MOFs that could produce their corresponding films via the ECD method. Much effort has been made to investigate the processing parameters and ECD mechanisms. However, there is a growing demand for developing more abundant MOF films (e.g., electronically conductive MOFs) on various substrates (e.g. flexible base), which can be applied for future portable electronics, electric vehicles, photovoltaic cells, etc.
 Fig. 10  The representative structures of the MOFs that could produce corresponding films via the ECD method. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2016, Royal Society Chemistry. 
4.6 Carbon materials
A larger number of 1D and 2D carbon/carbon-containing materials, such as CNTs, carbon nanowalls, carbon nitrides (CNs), carbon quantum dots (QDs), Mxene, fullerene (C60), carbon black (CB), SiC, and graphene-based derivatives, have been explored to produce their micro- and nano- thin-films via EFID technology.14d,63 For the deposition of these carbon-based materials, two-step colloidal forming processes were involved. First, carbon-containing materials should be electrostatically charged through chemical or electrochemical approaches. Then the charged materials were suspended in a suitable medium and migrated to the electrode under an electric field. The representative EFID process of Mxene, CNTs and graphene is shown in Fig. 11a–c. In 2018, Wang et al. gave a comprehensive summary of the applications of the EPD technique in graphene-based materials.30 The deposition conditions, mechanisms and kinetics, and wide applications have been discussed in a detailed and in-depth way.30 Notably, Nam et al. successfully transferred the deposited large-area reduced-graphene-oxide (RGO) layers to other substrates through modifying chemical etching and electrochemical etching methods.64 In addition to the two-step approach, Zhitomirsky et al. reviewed some new strategies (i.e. non-covalent surface modification, dispersion) and new dispersants (i.e. BS, chelating dyes, organic dyes) to deposit CNTs or efficiently separate single-wall CNTs (SWCNTs) according to their unique types and sizes.65 Lu et al. proposed a straightforward EPD method to fabricate dense-packed C60 films by electrophoretically deriving and depositing uncharged C60 molecules and tetra-n-octyl ammonium bromide (TOABr) molecules in TOL solution.63e As shown in Fig. 11d, C60 and TOAB were dissolved in TOL solution with the respective concentrations of 0.4 and 10 mmol L−1. When 100 V d.c. voltage was applied to these two electrodes (electrode distance: 8 mm), the bromide ions (Br−) first separated from the ammonium cation (TOA+) and moved toward the anodic region due to the strong electric force. Subsequently, the C60 molecules with the assistance of the long hydrophobic arms of TOAB were actuated toward the anodic region due to the electrostatic attraction between the Br− and TOA+ ions. Note that uneven C60 thin films were obtained in the mixed solution of (TOL:MeCN) (9/1 v/v), and no C60 film was observed at a lower molar ratio (<20:1, TOAB:C60). It was found that when the deposited ratio of C60/TOAB approached 1:1, a single hydrophobic C60 molecule could be tangled by one TOAB molecule with four long alkyl arms. The controllable thickness of the ultrathin films, varying from 200 to 500 nm, played a crucial role in determining their resistive memory performances.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation route of Mxene/CNTs films by the EPD method. Adapted with permission from ref. 63b. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Schematic demonstration of the synthesis and fabrication of a mesoporous carbon nitride coated solid-phase microextraction fiber. Adapted with permission from ref. 14d. Copyright 2018, Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Different strategies to fabricate graphene-based composite materials by EPD and their application. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) A mimic picture of C60 and TOAB interactions in toluene solution without an electric field and under an electric field. Adapted with permission from ref. 63e. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
4.7 Organic biomaterials
The EFID technology can also be specifically employed to deposit conventional bioactive coatings (i.e. hydroxyapatite, bioactive glass, chitosan, collagen, and cellulose), biological entities (i.e. enzymes, bacteria and cells), and composite coatings (i.e. polymer-nanoceramic, acetylsalicylic acid loaded chitosan/gelatin).23a,e Zhitomirsky and Payne et al. have already given a comprehensive summary on the relevant applications of EFID in biological fields such as tissue engineering, drug encapsulation, biosensors, and orthopedic application.23c,f However, the relationship of deposition kinetics, processing parameters, and film properties is not very clear and further investigation is urgently required.
5. Other derivative technologies of EFID
5.1 Template supported EPD (T-EPD)
To fabricate well-patterned organic thin-films, a series of technologies have been developed, such as lithography, ink-jet printing, interface modification, template synthesis, etc.66 Template synthesis, first reported by Martin et al. in 1999,67 has been proven as a versatile and efficient approach to fabricate controllable nanoscale structures.68 Therefore, Chen et al. attempted to generate 1D perylene-diimide derivative (PDI) nanowire arrays via the combination of the EPD method and anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) templates.69 The well-aligned and highly ordered AAO template was successfully fabricated from Al sheets in 0.3 M oxalic acid solution by potentiostatic anodization at 40 V d.c. voltage for 2 h, followed by soaking into 5% phosphoric acid for 1 h to realize reduction.70 Subsequently, the EPD process was performed in 40 mL of CHCl3 solution with a PDI concentration of 10−5 M, where 0.5 mL of TFA was added as the protonating reagent. As listed in Table 1, the as-fabricated AAO/Al and a platinum sheet (25 × 25 mm2) acted as the respective cathode and anode electrode together with an electrode distance of 10 mm. According to the experimental results, the suitable voltage range was from 30 to 60 V, and the EPD duration had good control of the length of the PDI nanowires. The pores of the conductive AAO/Al substrate were well-covered by PDIs. A forest of free-standing and vertically oriented nanowire arrays was presented after the removal of the AAO templates by immersing the membrane into a 10% NaOH aqueous solution for 2–30 min and subsequently washing with deionized water. In order to have a bottom view of the membrane, the template with the nanowire membrane was first stuck onto a glass substrate using epoxy resin, ensuring the template upright. Then, the glass-membrane-template composite was treated with the CuCl2: HCl aqueous solution and 10% NaOH aqueous solution to fully dissolve the AAO supports. Thus, the “bottom-up” growth model was proposed as follows: the PDI molecules were attached onto the bottom of the AAO pore at first, where the PDI nanowires could be formed by gradual accumulation in the channels. Then, the PDI nanowire arrays in AAO templates were used as the charge generation layer to fabricate photoreceptor devices, which exhibited one order of magnitude higher photosensitivity than that of the device based on bulk PDIs. These results demonstrated that the high-efficiency T-EPD method is favorable to produce high-quality organic thin-films with ordered and aligned nanostructures.
5.2 Sacrificial layer EPD (SL-EPD)
Dickerson et al. previously reported the SL-EPD method to deposit free-standing nanoparticle films.71 As they described, a two-step process was involved: active materials were first deposited on a polymer layer (i.e. poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)), which serves as a sacrificial layer. Sequentially, the polymer could minimally swell and degrade in hexane to liberate the deposited active layer. According to the favorable solvent chemistry, more suitable sacrificial layer materials could be chosen. Therefore, free-standing films could be formed and transferred to arbitrary substrates. Inspired by this, we can extend the SL-EPD methodology to fabricate other free-standing organic films and induce the active molecules to grow an exquisite film with a preferred molecular orientation.
5.3 EP assisted LBL (EP-LBL)
The LBL technique has been constantly evolved to construct layered thin films over the past few decades, which commonly combines with interface modification and utilizes electrostatic interactions as the driving force. During the LBL assembly, the excess charges are initially required on the surface and alternately switched to an opposite sign after further adsorption.72 Inspired by this, Yang and Cui et al. developed the EP-LBL technique to construct multilayer films for the application of SONLO.73Fig. 12a displays the formation of multilayer films on the ITO glass through an LBL-EPD process. Polyimide acid (PAA) was first utilized to modify the substrate surface as a cladding layer. Subsequently, polycation diazoresin (DAR) was stuck to the PAA surface to obtain a positively charged layer by immersing the substrate into DAR aqueous solution (0.5 mg mL−1) for 10 min. The DAR-modified slide was employed as the anode for the further LBL assembly of ionized small molecule 2-((4-(4-(2-carboxy-2-cyano-vinyl)-phenylazo)-phenyl)-methyl-amino)-ethyl acid (DRCB). Thus, it remained in the DRCB solution (0.5 mg mL−1, pH 8) for 20 min under 2 V d.c. voltage with an electrode distance of 2.5 mm. By repeating this protocol, multilayers were formed with high electrostatic interactions between layers. After UV irradiation, the formation of stable covalent bonds improved the chemical and thermal stability of DAR/DRCB multilayer films. Furthermore, the applied voltage has a strong impact on the orientation of DRCB films, which can be monitored through second-harmonic generation (SHG) measurements. Notably, the obvious aggregations and disordered arrays of DRCB were observed on the slide with voltages over 3 V d.c.
 Fig. 12  (a) EP-LbL process for the construction of DAR/DRCB multilayer films on quartz slide. ITO was plated on the back of the quartz slide. Adapted with permission from ref. 73b. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) The scheme of L-EPD (left), including the photoconductive electrode, a photomask, TiO2 layer, particles (white) and other active materials (black). Plane view images of the resulting composites (right): Side-by-side deposition of tungsten (black) and alumina (white) particles (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, Weily. (c) Schematic illustration of doping Rhodamine 6G molecules by the CEPD technique. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the M-EFID process. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society. (e) The output open-circuit voltage of the triboelectric generator. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012, American Chemistry Society. (f) Experimental setup of EP-printing with an external applied electric field. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. 
5.4 Light-directed EPD (L-EPD)
As we have already known, the electrodes of EFID are generally fixed in a specific location, which brings an obvious drawback to deposit multimaterial patterns and scalable thin films. To address this issue, several attempts have been made, for instance, designing a movable counter electrode,74 and combining illumination and electric fields.75 Hayward et al. produced 2D patterned colloidal crystals by the cooperative effect of DC fields and UV light, which was attributed to near-surface electrohydrodynamic flows.76 Kuntz et al. proposed the L-EPD technique to realize the 3D multimaterial deposits, where the electrode pattern could be reconfigured by altering the pattern of illumination on the photoconductive electrode.77 As shown in Fig. 12b, the electrode consists of a layer of FTO and a photoconductive layer of titania (TiO2) nanorods. An L-EPD process occurred on the photoconductive electrode under a light source with a photomask. The conductivity of the illuminated region of the TiO2 layer was increased, leading to an enhanced electric field and the movement of these particles along the field lines. According to this principle, another material can migrate and deposit in a different location within the same layer or subsequent layers, forming an arbitrarily patterned functional and graded 3D composite. However, this technique still faces some challenges for large-scale manufacturing, e.g., the limitation of higher resolution photomasks and well-patterned physical masks or digital illumination patterns. Although L-EPD has been recognized as an advanced thin-film preparation technique, it still deserves much more investigation.
5.5 Magnetically assisted EFID (M-EFID)
Besides the external electric field forces, other physical forces can also be employed in the EFID system to support the film formation. For example, Wang et al. reported M-EFID to produce well-aligned type-I collagen nanofibers.79 Using iron oxide nanoparticles (IOPs) and an external magnetic field during the EFID process, the collagen nanofibrils in electrolyte harvested magnetic assistance to better straighten and assembled into aligned nanofibers. The electrolyte was prepared by mixing IOPs (0.4 mg mL−1), type I collagen solution (0.4 mg mL−1), and Ca(NO3)2 and NH4H2PO4 solution (80 mM). As shown in Fig. 12c, collagen magnetization (IOPs-COL) first proceeded through the interaction between the carboxylate groups of collagen and amino groups on the IOP surface, which was confirmed by the changes of the isoelectric point. The IOP-COL species were constrained to straighten under the applied magnetic field, due to their strong magnetic dipole–dipole interactions. The subsequent migration, aggregation, self-assembly and deposition on cathode Ti plates, happened to form orientational nanofibers driven by the electric field force. In contrast, random collagen coatings were formed by alternating-potential-assisted ECD (A-ECD) without magnetic assistance.82 The structural single-orientation nanofibers obtained through the M-EFID method exhibited strong adhesion strength, which was measured by using a universal testing machine with 3 M adhesive tapes, and manifested potential applications such as in bone tissue engineering.
5.6 Capillary electrophoresis doping technique (CEPD)
The CEPD technique was first proposed by Tetsuji et al. to realize the doping of molecules, ions, monomers, oligomers, polymers, and colloids into hybrid films.78Fig. 12d shows the schematic illustration of doping Rhodamine 6G (o-(6-ethylamino-3-ethylimino-2,7-dimethyl-3H-xanthen-9-yl)benzonic acid ethylester) molecules into the organic–inorganic hybrid film by the CEPD technique. The organic–inorganic hybrid film on ITO glass was first prepared through the dip-coating method in a hybrid sol composed of 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane, tetramethoxysilane and titaniumtetraisopropoxide. The silica-glass capillary with an inner diameter of 530 μm and an outer diameter of 660 μm was utilized in the CEPD of Rhodamin 6G. As high as 1000 V d.c. voltage was applied to the Rhodamine 6G EtOH solution with a concentration of 1 × 10−3 M. Intriguingly, the orientation of the doped molecules can be controlled along the electric field, which was confirmed from their aligned dipole moment using single-molecule defocused fluorescence imaging technology. These organic–inorganic hybrid films with doped isotropic molecules bring about the enhanced functionality for the application of optical integrated circuits.
5.7 Triboelectric-generator-driven Pulse EFID (P-EFID)
For EFID technology, the external power source has an important impact on thin-film growth. Typically, the power supply is provided by a precision rectifier transformer that converts AC signals to DC voltage. However, as the electricity-generating technologies are developed, various new methods (e.g., energy-storage devices,5a photoelectric conversion,83 thermoelectric conversions,84 piezoelectric effect,85 triboelectric generator86) have been utilized as effective power sources for such kinds of applications. Notably, Wang et al. used a triboelectric generator as a direct power source for P-EFID with the maximum open-circuit voltage of 110 V.80 Compared with the traditional power supplies, the triboelectric generators harvest mechanical energy through a cycled process of contact and separation between two polymer films, which can be explained by the coupling of contact charging and electrostatic induction. Thus, the pulsed electric output with controlled frequency and amplitude was triggered by a stable vibration source, as shown in Fig. 12e. Micro/nanocrystalline silver structures were successfully electroplated on a well-patterned electrode driven by the power source of the triboelectric generator. Although this self-charged generator has the virtue of low cost, fewer limitations, simple fabrication and strong performance, it has not been applied in thin-film deposition or structure fabrication of organic materials.
5.8 Electrophoresis assisted Printing (EP-Printing)
Different from the commonly-used EPD method, the electric field can also be imported to some typical film-processing methods, such as solution shearing, spin-coating, or spraying. Some attempts aim to apply the electric field as a postproduction method (PSPM),87 while others try to use it to tailor the nanoscale morphology and molecular packing during processing.88 Recently, Herzig et al. developed an EP-Printing method, where a vertical electric field (10–100 V) was applied for 30 s between the print head and ITO substrate (distance 0.3 mm) during the usage of a slot-die coating method to transfer the active material to the ITO base.81Fig. 12f shows the sketch of the EP-Printing experimental process. The applied positive voltage caused a high electric field (0.3–3.3 kV cm−1) between the print head and the ITO substrate, which induced a vertical enrichment layer composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and fullerene. In the EP-printing system, the polymer crystals are reoriented from the edge-on state to the face-on state. By optimizing the solvent, the material could present the properties of electrophoretic mobility, which is helpful to realize the crystal transition and morphology control. Thus, this EP-Printing method has been widely considered as a competing film-preparation approach to optimize the active layer for high-performance organic electric devices.
6. Conclusions
In this review, the development of EFID technologies for manufacturing organic micro- and nano-thin-films, involving ECD, EPD, EPM, and their derivative technologies such as T-EPD, SL-EPD, EP-LBL, L-EPD, M-EFID, CEPD, P-EFID, and EP-Printing, has been summarized in a concise and well-rounded way. The widely used ECD and EPD methods are emphatically introduced, including their technology mechanisms and types, processing parameters, technology evaluation standards, and wide applications. These technologies have been demonstrated to show good applicability for many popular active materials including non-ionic and ionic organic small molecules, polymers, MOFs, COFs, HOFs, 2D carbon-based materials (i.e., Mxene, CNTs, and graphene), and organic biomaterials. For non-ionic organic materials, the approaches of electrochemical oxidation, electrosynthesis, EPM (Method I), protonation or deprotonation (Method II), the combination of charged species (Method III) and high-voltage EPD (Method IV) have been proven useful to generate their own charges. Nevertheless, ionic or conducting organic materials have been deemed as optimal precursors to facilitate the EPD process with the requirement of low electric field intensity and no pretreatment. Furthermore, the electric-field-induced co-deposition technology has been applied to fabricate composite thin-films by the incorporation of organic materials (e.g. COFs, polymers, chelating dyes) and other species (e.g. nanoparticles, CNTs, C60). More importantly, the EFID technology can be utilized to control the orientation of molecular packing and facilitate the desirable self-assembly with a defined nanostructure. Accordingly, a variety of high-performance applications based on these as-obtained films can be realized, including but not limited to optoelectronic devices, LIBs, catalysis, sensors, biomedical implants, drug loading and encapsulation, etc. The derivative technologies provide more possibilities to form ordered, uniform, well-patterned, single or multiple-layer thin films on various substrates.
Although EFID could act as a versatile and reliable manipulation approach to fabricate scalable high-quality organic thin-films, there still remain some challenges for further developments: (a) Only few successful film-preparation cases of organic cases (i.e. organic small molecules, COFs, HOFs and POPs) have been reported until now, implying that the fabrication of organic thin-films via EFID is still in its very early stage. Thus, more research input is highly desirable; (b) For the vertical electrode system, there is a weak adhesion force between the ITO electrode and charged molecules, which becomes a limitation to adhere the active materials on the substrates. Thus, searching for more efficient surfactants or interfacial modifiers, or rational molecular salification strategies seems to be an inevitable procedure; (c) It has been proven that non-ionic polymers with sulfonyl or fluorinated fragments can be polarized and then proceed with an EPD process under a high electric field. To this regard, it is intriguing to exploit more polarizable functional groups to achieve EP properties for polymers, even for small molecules; (d) More advanced materials such as electroactive monomers, conducting polymers, conducting MOFs and stimuli-responsive pieces are worthy of the observation; (e) Other derivative techniques are expected to incorporate EFID techniques for manufacturing more complicated multilayer thin-films with a controlled pattern; (f) A universal protocol of the nucleation, crystallization, and self-assembly phenomenon is highly desirable to provide a better understanding of the mechanism. In short, in the domain of the deposition of these organic materials, EFID technology would provide a bright future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Q. Z. acknowledges the starting-up funding from City University of Hong Kong, financial support from the 111 Project (D20015) and the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University (sklssm2020041). J. L. and H. L. acknowledge financial support from the NSF of China (21878199, 21808149), the NSF of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (grant no. 17KJA430015), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD). Y. L. acknowledges financial support from the NSF of China (22008164).
Notes and references

  (a) M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica and M. Zaharia, Commun. ACM, 2010, 53, 50–58 CrossRef ; 
  (b) I. A. T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N. B. Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. Gani and S. Ullah Khan, Inf. Syst., 2015, 47, 98–115 CrossRef .

  (a) G. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Gao, B. Zhang, R.-W. Li and X. Zhuang, Engineered Sci., 2018, 4, 4–43 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Li, Q. Qian, X. Zhu, Y. Li, M. Zhang, J. Li, C. Ma, H. Li, J. Lu and Q. Zhang, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 995–1033 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Su, F. Yu, C. Li, Q. Zhang and J. Lu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3280–3289 RSC ; 
  (d) C. Wang, J. Wang, P. Li, J. Gao, S. Y. Tan, W. Xiong, B. Hu, P. S. Lee, Y. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 779–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) G. Li, K. Zheng, C. Wang, K. S. Leck, F. Hu, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6458–6462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kim, J. S. Han, H. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800457 CrossRef .

  (a) R. S. Gurney, D. G. Lidzey and T. Wang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2019, 82, 036601 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Li, M. Chen, J. Cai, E. L. K. Spooner, H. Zhang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, D. G. Lidzey, L. Ding and T. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 819–833 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. A. Said, J. Xie, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, K. Zhao, W. B. Gao, T. Michinobu and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1803339 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) N. Wang, K. Zhao, T. Ding, W. Liu, A. S. Ahmed, Z. Wang, M. Tian, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700522 CrossRef ; 
  (e) P. Gu, N. Wang, A. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Tian, Z. Fu, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2135–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) H. Sun, X. Song, J. Xie, P. Sun, P. Gu, C. Liu, F. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z.-K. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29924–29931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Xie and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7091–7106 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Xie, C. Zhao, Z. Lin, P. Gu and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1489–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Xie, Z. Wang, Z. J. Xu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703509 CrossRef ; 
  (d) C. Li, C. Zhang, J. Xie, K. Wang, J. Li and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 404, 126463 CrossRef ; 
  (e) Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .

  (a) K. Wang, B. Lv, Z. Wang, H. Wu, J. Xu and Q. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 411–417 RSC ; 
  (b) K.-B. Wang, Q. Xun and Q. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100025 CrossRef ; 
  (c) S. X. Lin, W. L. Pan, R. J. Niu, Y. Liu, J. X. Chen, W. H. Zhang, J. P. Lang and D. J. Young, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 5308–5314 RSC .

  (a) C. Wang, X. Ren, C. Xu, B. Fu, R. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Li, H. Li, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, S. Lei, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706260 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. H. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Michinobu, S. W. Chang, Y. C. Chiu, C. Y. Ke and G. S. Liou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6144–6150 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P.-Y. Gu, Z. Wang, G. Liu, H. Yao, Z. Wang, Y. Li, J. Zhu, S. Li and Q. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4172–4175 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Zhang, J. Jin, H. Xu, Q. Zhang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3485–3498 RSC .

  (a) Z. Wu, P. Liu, W. Zhang, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1095–1106 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Gu, Y. Zhao, J.-H. He, J. Zhang, C. Wang, Q.-F. Xu, J.-M. Lu, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 3030–3035 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Xiao, S. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Ji, X. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Sun and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 561–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Xiao, H. Yang, Z. Yin, J. Guo, F. Boey, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1423–1427 RSC .

  (a) S. Wang, H. Sun, T. Erdmann, G. Wang, D. Fazzi, U. Lappan, Y. Puttisong, Z. Chen, M. Berggren, X. Crispin, A. Kiriy, B. Voit, T. J. Marks, S. Fabiano and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801898 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) S.-X. Lin, X. Tan, H. Shao, J. Xu, Q. Wu, G.-Q. Liu, W.-H. Zhang and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15996–16002 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. Zhao, S. Fan, N. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Y. Tay, C. Yu, D. Sim, H. H. Hng, Q. Zhang, F. Boey, J. Ma, X. Zhao, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5364–5369 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Wu, Y. Sun, W.-B. Pei, L. Huang, W. Xu and Q. Zhang, Synth. Met., 2014, 196, 173–177 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C.-J. Yao, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Polymers, 2019, 11, 107 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) H. A. Becerril, M. E. Roberts, Z. Liu, J. Locklin and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2588–2594 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Gu, Z. Wang, H. Li, J. Lu and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3512–3521 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Xu, P. He, J. Liu, A. Cui, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, W. Chen and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9519–9523 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) C. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Li, Y. Li, Q. j. Zhang and J. m. Lu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2019, 220, 1900334 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Li, Q. Xu, J. He and J. Lu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) R. Makiura, S. Motoyama, Y. Umemura, H. Yamanaka, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. N. Molinari, E. Barragán, E. Bilbao, L. Patrone, G. Giménez, A. V. Medrano, A. Tolley and L. N. Monsalve, Polymer, 2020, 194 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Li, H. Yan, B. Xu, L. Zhen and C. Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000581 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) E. Cudjoe, M. Younesi, E. Cudjoe, O. Akkus and S. J. Rowan, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1259–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Plog, J. M. Lowe, Y. Jiang, Y. Pan and A. L. Yarin, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 11023–11036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and L. A. Archer, Science, 2019, 366, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Yui, Y. Mori, T. Tsuchino, T. Itoh, T. Hattori, Y. Fukushima and K. Takagi, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 206–211 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Ouchi, Y. Arikawa and T. Homma, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2008, 320, 3104–3107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Hamadanian, A. Gravand and V. Jabbari, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 1352–1359 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Bao, C. Chen, J. Xia, H. Chen and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4981–4987 RSC ; 
  (d) R. C. Hoffmann, N. Koslowski, S. Sanctis, M. O. Liedke, A. Wagner, M. Butterling and J. J. Schneider, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9501–9509 RSC ; 
  (e) Y. Wang, L. Zhao, Y. Zhao, W. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Gu, J. Li, G. Zhang, T. J. Huang and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805686 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Zarbov, I. Schuster and L. Gal-or, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 813–817 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Xu and M. Shalom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13058–13063 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y.-S. Lee, H. Yim, S.-Y. Yoo, B.-K. Ju and J.-W. Choi, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 711, 51–57 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Ghaemmaghami, Y. Yamini, H. Amanzadeh and B. Hosseini Monjezi, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 507–510 RSC ; 
  (e) V. K. Ravi, R. A. Scheidt, J. DuBose and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8887–8894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Yoon and J. S. Suh, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2002, 33, 1519–1523 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) T. T. H. Hoang, S. Verma, S. Ma, T. T. Fister, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5791–5797 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) U. Mehana Usmaniya, V. V. Anusha Thampi and B. Subramanian, Appl. Clay Sci., 2019, 167, 1–8 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Thomas, J. Mallet, H. Rinnert and M. Molinari, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3789–3797 RSC .
L. Ye, K. Wen, Z. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Liang, W. Lv, Y. Lin, J. Gu, J. H. Dickerson and W. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502018 CrossRef .
J. Pu, Z. Shen, C. Zhong, Q. Zhou, J. Liu, J. Zhu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1903808 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) D. R. Brown and F. W. Salt, J. Appl. Chem., 1965, 15, 40–48 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Sarkar and P. S. Nicholson, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 1987–2002 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. V. Blaaderen, M. Dijkstra, R. V. Roij, A. Imhof, M. Kamp, B. W. Kwaadgras, T. Vissers and B. Liu, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2013, 222, 2895–2909 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) O. O. Van der Biest and L. J. Vandeperre, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1999, 29, 327–352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) L. Besra and M. Liu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1–61 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S.-J. Ciou, K.-Z. Fung and K.-W. Chiang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 33–39 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. Ammam, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7633–7646 RSC ; 
  (h) M. S. Ata, Y. Liu and I. Zhitomirsky, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15983–15994 RSC .

  (a) N. Alagna, J. Han, N. Wollscheid, J. L. P. Lustres, J. Herz, S. Hahn, S. Koser, F. Paulus, U. H. F. Bunz, A. Dreuw, T. Buckup and M. Motzkus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8834–8845 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Li, J. Lu and Q. Zhang, Org. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 3001–3026 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Rossi, M. Calovi and M. Fedel, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 109, 144–151 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Huang, Z. Wang, Z. Chen and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9696–9711 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Huang, F. Yu, X. Cao, L. Nie, P. Zhang, F. Xu, Q. Gong, X. Zhan, K. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Mai and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3058–3067 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Jiang and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1408–1428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Su, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15482–15490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tavakoli, A. Kakekhani, S. Kaviani, P. Tan, M. M. Ghaleni, M. A. Zaeem, A. M. Rappe and S. Nejati, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19560–19564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Q. Chen, J. Jing, H. Qi, I. Ahmed, H. Yang, X. Liu, T. L. Lu and A. R. Boccaccini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11529–11538 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Tada and M. Onoda, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 420–424 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. R. Boccaccini, S. Keim, R. Ma, Y. Li and I. Zhitomirsky, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2010, 7, S581–S613 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. J. Wang, T. Y. Lo, C. H. Wu and D. M. Liu, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2013, 10, 20130411 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) F. Wang, P. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Hu, K. Ma, X. Cai and T. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 2304–2314 RSC ; 
  (f) J. Li, S. Wu, E. Kim, K. Yan, H. Liu, C. Liu, H. Dong, X. Qu, X. Shi, J. Shen, W. E. Bentley and G. F. Payne, Biofabrication, 2019, 11, 032002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. M. Rotter, S. Weinberger, J. Kampmann, T. Sick, M. Shalom, T. Bein and D. D. Medina, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 10008–10016 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Wang, C. Zeng, H. Xu, P. Yin, D. Chen, J. Deng, M. Li, N. Zheng, C. Gu and Y. Ma, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1023–1028 RSC .
M. B. Solomon, A. Rawal, J. M. Hook, S. M. Cohen, C. P. Kubiak, K. A. Jolliffe and D. M. D'Alessandro, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24128–24142 RSC .
G. Zhang, L. Dai, L. Zhang and S. Ji, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2093–2098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Neirinck, J. Fransaer, O. V. d. Biest and J. Vleugels, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 57–60 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Feng, T. Liu and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22392–22396 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Feng, X. Yan, Z. Ji, T. Liu and R. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29854–29860 CAS .
R. Bai, M. Shi, M. Ouyang, Y. Cheng, H. Zhou, L. Yang, M. Wang and H. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2099–2105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, J. Han, M. Wang, X. Chen and S. Jia, J. Materiomics, 2018, 4, 108–120 CrossRef .

  (a) Z. Belarbi, C. Sirlin, J. Simon and J. J. Andre, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 8105–8110 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Ogawa, H. Yonehara and C. Pac, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 2068–2070 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmanna and S. Graff, J. Mater. Res., 1999, 14, 2164–2172 Search PubMed .
H. Yamanouchi, K. Irie and T. Saji, Chem. Lett., 2000, 10–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takada, H. Yoshioka, H. Tada and K. Matsushige, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 41, 73–75 CrossRef .
N. K. Shrestha, H. Kohn, M. Imamura, K. Irie, H. Ogihara and T. Saji, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17024–17027 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Z. Chen, L. Cao, H.-B. Zhou, Y. Rong and M. Wang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 281, 530–537 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bai, H.-Z. Chen, H.-B. Zhou, M.-M. Shi and M. Wang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 285, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
A. Clifford and I. Zhitomirsky, Mater. Lett., 2018, 227, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Dong, C. Zhang, H. Peng, J. Gong, H. Wang, Q. Zhao and J. Yuan, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2683–2689 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Gsanger, E. Kirchner, M. Stolte, C. Burschka, V. Stepanenko, J. Pflaum and F. Wurthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2351–2362 CrossRef ; 
  (c) H. Kang, A. Facchetti, H. Jiang, E. Cariati, S. Righetto, R. Ugo, C. Zuccaccia, A. Macchioni, C. L. Stern, Z. Liu, S.-T. Ho, E. C. Brown, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3267–3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) K. Leduskrasts, A. Kinens and E. Suna, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12663–12666 RSC ; 
  (e) A. Riccobono, R. R. Parker, A. C. Whitwood, J. M. Slattery, D. W. Bruce, I. Pibiri and A. Pace, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9965–9968 RSC ; 
  (f) W. Yang, L. Lv, X. Li, X. Han, M. Li and C. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10600–10607 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) C. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, H. Li and J. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10610–10613 RSC .
Q. Liu, Q. Xu, H. Dong, H. Li, D. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Li and J. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10471–10477 RSC .
C. J. Wallar, T. Zhang, D. Luo and I. Zhitomirsky, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2016, 32, 389–393 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Sergeyev, W. Pisula and Y. H. Geerts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1902–1929 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Goossens, K. Lava, C. W. Bielawski and K. Binnemans, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4643–4807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tokunaga, Y. Itoh, Y. Yaguchi, H. Tanaka, F. Araoka, H. Takezoe and T. Aida, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4077–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Somarajan, S. A. Hasan, C. T. Adkins, E. Harth and J. H. Dickerson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Nagao, A. Takasu and A. R. Boccaccini, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3326–3334 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Fukuoka and A. Takasu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15983–15994 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. Mano, Y. Nagao and A. Takasu, Polym. J., 2014, 46, 682–687 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Rajeswari, D. Gopi, S. Ramya and L. Kavitha, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61525–61536 RSC ; 
  (e) T. Hayashi and A. Takasu, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 1259–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) T. Hayashi and A. Takasu, Key Eng. Mater., 2015, 654, 183–188 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) T. Kameyama and A. Takasu, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4336–4342 RSC ; 
  (h) R. Subramani, S. Elangomannan, K. Louis, S. Kannan and D. Gopi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12404–12421 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) M. Yokoyama and A. Takasu, Polymer, 2016, 88, 1–8 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) Y. Matsumoto and A. Takasu, Polym. J., 2017, 50, 187–196 CrossRef ; 
  (k) D. Mokude, A. Takasu and M. Higuchi, Polymer, 2017, 117, 243–248 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) K. Kimizu and A. Takasu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219 Search PubMed ; 
  (m) A. Ohno, M. Hayashi and A. Takasu, Polym. J., 2018, 50, 959–966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (n) K. Kimizu, M. Hayashi and A. Takasu, Polymer, 2019, 167, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Uematsu, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2015, 91, 022303 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Ohshima, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 13633–13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fuseini, A. H. El-Shazly, M. Elkady and E. Hares, Key Eng. Mater., 2019, 821, 273–279 Search PubMed .
T. Fujisawa, R. Ootake, Y. Nishihara, A. Fujii and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, L474–L477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Pang and I. Zhitomirsky, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 87, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Chun, S. Kang, N. Kang, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Xie, T. T. Wang, X. H. Liu, K. Zou and W. Q. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1960 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) S. R. Waldvogel, S. Lips, M. Selt, B. Riehl and C. J. Kampf, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6706–6765 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Yu, P. Guo, J.-S. Zhong, Y. Yuan and K.-Y. Ye, Org. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 131–135 RSC .
S. Cometa, M. A. Bonifacio, M. Mattioli-Belmonte, L. Sabbatini and E. De Giglio, Coatings, 2019, 9, 268 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Huo, G. H. Deng, W. Wu, J. F. Xiong, M. L. Zhong and Z. Y. Wang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Inzelt, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 7, 503–510 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Mahmut, T. Awut, I. Nurulla and M. Mijit, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40861 CrossRef .

  (a) J. Karbowniczek, L. Cordero-Arias, S. Virtanen, S. K. Misra, E. Valsami-Jones, L. Tuchscherr, B. Rutkowski, K. Gorecki, P. Bala, A. Czyrska-Filemonowicz and A. R. Boccaccini, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 77, 780–789 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Zhang and I. Zhitomirsky, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2016, 32, 404–408 CrossRef ; 
  (c) K. Kanamura, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 172, 303–308 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Q.-T. Vu, M. Pavlik, N. Hebestreit, J. Pfleger, U. Rammelt and W. Plieth, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 1117–1124 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T.-H. Lin, W.-H. Huang, I.-K. Jun and P. Jiang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 14–17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) K. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1628–1632 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) K. Katagiri, K. Uemura, R. Uesugi, K. Inumaru, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10776–10784 RSC .

  (a) Y. Zhi, Z. Wang, H. L. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001070 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Sun, J. Xie, W. Guo, D. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904199 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C.-J. Yao, Z. Wu, J. Xie, F. Yu, W. Guo, Z. J. Xu, D. Li, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2457–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Z. Lin, J. Xie, B. Zhang, J. Li, J.-N. Weng, R. Song, X. Huang, H. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. J. Xu, W. Huang and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, W. Liu, B. Li, D. Tian, J. L. Zuo and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16101–16104 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Mukherjee, A. E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. P. Bisbey, C. R. DeBlase, B. J. Smith and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11433–11436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, T. Langenhahn, M. Ye, C. Schlesiger, S. Praetz, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. D. Medina, J. M. Rotter, Y. Hu, M. Dogru, V. Werner, F. Auras, J. T. Markiewicz, P. Knochel and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1016–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Q. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, S. Kim, Y. Cui, L. Zhong and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6961–6967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) I. Hod, W. Bury, D. M. Karlin, P. Deria, C. W. Kung, M. J. Katz, M. So, B. Klahr, D. Jin, Y. W. Chung, T. W. Odom, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6295–6300 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Campagnol, E. R. Souza, D. E. De Vos, K. Binnemans and J. Fransaer, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12545–12547 RSC ; 
  (c) N. Campagnol, T. Van Assche, T. Boudewijns, J. Denayer, K. Binnemans, D. De Vos and J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC ; 
  (e) W. J. Li, J. F. Feng, Z. J. Lin, Y. L. Yang, Y. Yang, X. S. Wang, S. Y. Gao and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3951–3954 RSC ; 
  (f) I. Stassen, M. Styles, T. Van Assche, N. Campagnol, J. Fransaer, J. Denayer, J.-C. Tan, P. Falcaro, D. De Vos and R. Ameloot, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1801–1807 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. Kang, K. Lyu, L. Li, J. Li, L. Kimberley, B. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Cheng, M. D. Frogley, S. Rudic, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, R. A. W. Dryfe, B. Han, S. Yang and M. Schroder, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4466 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (h) W. W. Zhan, Q. Kuang, J. Z. Zhou, X. J. Kong, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1926–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Li, M. Tu, R. Cao and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12356–12369 RSC .

  (a) Q. Yao, J. Jing, Q. Zeng, T. L. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Zheng and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39962–39970 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Yang, W. Zheng, P. Zhang, J. Chen, W. B. Tian, Y. M. Zhang and Z. M. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 830–831, 1–6 CAS ; 
  (c) Z.-S. Wu, S. Pei, W. Ren, D. Tang, L. Gao, B. Liu, F. Li, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1756–1760 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. Russo, M. Xiao and N. Y. Zhou, Carbon, 2017, 120, 54–62 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Li and J. Lu, Org. Electron., 2019, 66, 70–75 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M.-J. Hwang, M.-G. Kim, S. Kim, Y. C. Kim, H. W. Seo, J. K. Cho, I.-K. Park, J. Suhr, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, H. R. Choi, K. J. Kim, Y. Tak and J.-D. Nam, Carbon, 2019, 142, 68–77 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) C. Du and N. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1487–1494 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) L. Jamilpanah, S. Azadian, J. Shoae Gharehbagh, S. Haghniaz Jahromi, Z. Sheykhifard, S. Hosseinzadeh, S. Erfanifam, M. R. Hajiali, M. M. Tehranchi and S. M. Mohseni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 447, 423–429 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) J. D. Mangadlao, A. C. De Leon, M. J. Felipe, P. Cao, P. A. Advincula and R. C. Advincula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10266–10274 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) Q.-G. Fu, X.-Y. Nan, X. Chen, W.-L. Wang, H.-J. Li, Y.-Y. Li and L.-T. Jia, Mater. Des., 2015, 80, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, D. Duong le, J. S. Oh, N. T. Mai, S. Kim, S. Hong, T. Hwang, Y. Lee and J. D. Nam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1747–1753 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ata, R. Poon, A. M. Syed, J. Milne and I. Zhitomirsky, Carbon, 2018, 130, 584–598 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nie, L. Pan, Y. Liu, H. Li, T. Chen, T. Lu and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 66, 106–109 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sapp, B. B. Lakshmi and C. R. Martin, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 402–404 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 848–858 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. Xie, D. Kocaefe, C. Chen and Y. Kocaefe, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 1–10 CrossRef .
R. Bai, M. Ouyang, R. J. Zhou, M. M. Shi, M. Wang and H. Z. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 055604 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Li, L. Zhang and R. M. Metzger, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2470–2480 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hasan, D. W. Kavich and J. H. Dickerson, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3723–3725 RSC .

  (a) A. Matsuda, T. Kambayashi, Y. Daiko, H. Muto and M. Sakai, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 30, 1151–1158 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. H. Ko, Y. H. Kim, J. Park, K. T. Nam, J. H. Park and P. J. Yoo, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2866–2872 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Shi, Z. Cui and Y. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 470–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Wang, L. Zhao and Z. Cui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 366, 233–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nold, J. Zeiner, T. Assion and R. Clasen, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 30, 1163–1170 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Jamshidi, S. L. Neale, K. Yu, P. J. Pauzauskie, P. J. Schuck, J. K. Valley, H.-Y. Hsu, A. T. Ohta and M. C. Wu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2921–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Liu, F. Wang, L. Liu, H. Yu, S. Xie, J. Wang, Y. Wang, G. B. Lee and W. J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Hayward, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, Nature, 2000, 404, 56–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Pascall, F. Qian, G. Wang, M. A. Worsley, Y. Li and J. D. Kuntz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2252–2256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Taguchi, T. Yano, S. Habuchi, M. Vacha and S. Shibata, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 6106–6109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuang, S. Lin, L. Dong, K. Cheng and W. Weng, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 1528–1535 CAS .
G. Zhu, C. Pan, W. Guo, C. Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. Yu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4960–4965 CrossRef CAS .
S. Proller, O. Filonik, F. Eller, S. Mansi, C. Zhu, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer, P. Muller-Buschbaum and E. M. Herzig, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5219–5225 CrossRef .
J. Zhuang, J. Lin, J. Li, W. Weng, K. Cheng and H. Wang, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 136, 479–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. A. Said, J. Xie and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900854 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Li, S. Chen, Z. Wang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16, 1518–1530 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Q. Zhang, Y. Divayana, J. Xiao, Z. Wang, E. R. T. Tiekink, H. M. Doung, H. Zhang, F. Boey, X. W. Sun and F. Wudl, Eur. Chem. J., 2010, 16, 7422–7426 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Wu, Z. Yin, J. Xiao, Y. Liu, F. Wei, K. J. Tan, C. Kloc, L. Huang, Q. Yan, F. Hu, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1883–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. Zhao, F. Zhang, X. Dai, W. Jin, L. Xiang, J. Ding, X. Wang, Y. Wan, H. Shen, Z. He, J. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Zou, C. A. Di and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000273 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang and G. Chen, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 408–436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. Gao, G. Shao, Z. Du, W. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21903–21911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, T. Zhang, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3426 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) A. Solanki, A. Bagui, G. Long, B. Wu, T. Salim, Y. Chen, Y. M. Lam and T. C. Sum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32282–32291 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Elshobaki, R. Gebhardt, J. Carr, W. Lindemann, W. Wang, E. Grieser, S. Venkatesan, E. Ngo, U. Bhattacharjee, J. Strzalka, Z. Jiang, Q. Qiao, J. Petrich, D. Vaknin and S. Chaudhary, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2678–2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Bagui and S. S. K. Iyer, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1387–1395 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C.-C. Lin, Y.-Y. Lin, S.-S. Li, C.-C. Yu, C.-L. Huang, S.-H. Lee, C.-H. Du, J.-J. Lee, H.-L. Chen and C.-W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2134–2139 RSC ; 
  (e) B. Liu, H. Zhang, T. Ma, L. Bai, J. Lin and D. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6503–6512 RSC .

  (a) T. Mohammad, V. Bharti, V. Kumar, S. Mudgal and V. Dutta, Org. Electron., 2019, 66, 242–248 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Molina-Lopez, H. Yan, X. Gu, Y. Kim, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605503 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Cheng Zhang
	Cheng Zhang is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. In 2019, he joined Prof. Qichun Zhang's group at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, as a joint PhD student. His research interests include the synthesis and application of organic semiconductor materials, particularly, organic resistive memory devices.

Yang Li
	Yang Li received his BS and PhD degrees in applied chemistry from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a research fellow at the School of Physical Science and Technology, Suzhou University of Science and Technology.

Hua Li
	Hua Li received his BS and PhD degrees in applied chemistry from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, under the supervision of Prof Jianmei Lu in 2000 and 2011, respectively. He is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University. His research focuses on the design and preparation of high-performance organic semiconductor materials and organic resistive memory devices.

Qichun Zhang
	Qichun Zhang is a professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. In 2014, he was promoted as an associate professor with tenure at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include carbon-rich conjugated materials and their applications (novel organic conjugated materials for optoelectronic and semiconductor devices, novel electrode materials, and new design for microbial fuel cells). Currently, he is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He has published more than 395 papers (H-index: 79).

Jianmei Lu
	Jianmei Lu received her PhD degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in China and was then appointed as a full professor at the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University in 2000. She is currently a fellow of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China and the vice president of Soochow University. She has particular research interests in the development of materials for nonvolatile electronic memory devices, organic sensors, smart electronics, adsorption of oils, and low concentration volatile organic compound (VOC) contaminant treatment.

 	Fig. 1  Overview diagram of EFID technology concerning applications, deposition mechanisms, processing parameters, derivative technologies, and applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 24a. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, Weily. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 61h. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of the representative EFID equipment used to form organic thin films.	 
[Electric field]: E = U/d	(1)
[Conduction density]: J = σE	(2)
[Migration speed]: V = ME	(3)
[Electric field force]: F = qE	(4)
[Hamaker's law]: dm/dt = fMESC	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The schematic molecular structures of phthalocyanine, phthalocyanines and biphthalocyanines. (b) Electrochemical cell for the elaboration of oriented LiPc thin films onto the ITO glass substrate. The arrows demonstrate the preferential unidirectional growth direction of the microcrystallites. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 1999, Cambridge University Press. (c and d) SEM micrographs of LiPc thin films grown by electrochemical oxidation of Li2Pc: (c) acetone for 8 min; (d) MeCN for 20 min. The concentrations of PcLi2 and TEAP are 10−4 and 10−2 M, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 1999, Cambridge University Press. (e–g) SEM micrographs of Pcs thin films grown by C-EPD: (e) GdPc2, CHCl3, 30 V cm−1, 10 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (f) ErPc2, CHCl3, 20 V cm−1, 10 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (g) EuPc2, CHCl3, 60 V cm−1, 5 min. Adapted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 
[Anode – Step1]: CuPc + 2HA → CuPc·H22+, 2A−	(6)
[Step 2]: CuPc·H22+, 2A− + 2HA → CuPc·H44+, 4A−	(7)
[Born equation]: S′ = −N(qe)2(1 − 1/Ds)/2r	(8)
[Anode Step 1]: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(9)
[Step 2]: DchCOO−/ChCOO− + H+ → DChCOOH/ChCOOH	(10)

 	Fig. 4  (a) D/A conjugated skeletons of the organic semiconductor materials composed of pyridinium group (left), photographs of the monolithic devices based on large-area and uniform organic thin films (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism of the reflection color change by EPD of IonD. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The representative electrophoretic non-ionic polymers containing sulfonyl groups. (b) Schematic of anode selective EPD of the representative electrophoretic non-ionic polymer containing fluorinated fragments. Adapted with permission from ref. 45n. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of EPD behavior of charged fluorinated polymer dispersions. Adapted with permission from ref. 45n. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 
[Anode]: Me → Mn+ + ne−:	(11)
[Cathode]: 2ROH + 2e− → 2RO− + 2H+	(12)
[Anode Step 1]
2ROH → 2R = O(aldehyde) + 2H+ + 2e−	(13)
[Step 2]: 2Me + O2 → 2Me(II)O(in case of bivalent metals) + 4e−	(14)
[Cathode]: 2ROH + 2e− → 2RO− + 2H+	(15)
[Cathode Step 1]: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−;	(16)
[Step 2]: PLL−H+/PLO−H+ + OH− → PLL/PLO + H2O	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic difference between EPM and EPD of polymers to the electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019, MDPI. (b) Polymerization reaction of DA via EPD. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2013, Wiley. (c) Polymerization reaction of M3 and M4 via EPD. Adapted with permission from ref. 54b. Copyright 2014, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic presentation of the EPD setup with a typical COF film (right). SEM images (left) and cross-section file (middle) of the fabricated films are shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 24a. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the PyVg-COF. (b) Scheme illustrating the principle of COF EPD film growth, showing the attraction of the positively charged COF nanosheets toward the negatively charged electrode using an applied electric field. (c) Photographs of the COF EPD films (left: thin film on ITO; middle: thick film on ITO; and right: thick film on stainless steel). The width of the films was 14 mm. (d) Dependence of film thickness on the electric field intensity at an EPD time of 20 s. (e) Dependence of film thickness on the EPD time at an electric field intensity of 33.3 V cm−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 24b. Copyright 2019, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

LiPc	Solution	0.1 mM, 0.001–0.005 M TEAP	Acetone or MeCN	Three-electrode ECD	0.2–1.0 V d.c., 5 s–30 min	—	ITO	Magnetic properties	
32

CuPc	Solution	1 mM	1 M TFA, DCM	C-EPD (100 V)	100 V d.c., 5 s	10	ITO, GC plates	FET	
33

CuPc	Solution	1 mM	1 M TFA, DCM	C-EPD (5–30 V)	30 V d.c., 10 min	10	Pt plate, Cr/Au,	FET	
34

GdPc2	Solution	0.05–0.1 mM	TFA, CHCl3	C-EPD (20–30 V)	30 V d.c., 10 min	10	ITO	NIR photodetectors	
36

ErPc2	Solution	—	0.5 mL TFA, 20 mL CHCl3	C-EPD (30 V)	30 V d.c., 10 min	5	ITO, graphite plates	Nanowires	
37

EuPc2	Solution	0.0125–0.0725 mg mL−1	0.5 mL TFA, 20 mL CHCl3	C-EPD (30 V)	30 V d.c., 10 min	5	ITO, graphite plates	Nanowires	
29

TC or IB drugs	Solution	TC or IB 3 g L−	1 g/L BS, water	EPD (10 V)	10 V d.c., —	15	Stainless steel/Pt plate	Drugencapsulation	
38

C8CzPy-C6Br	Solution	0.1 mg mL−1	MeCN	C-EPD (0–30 V)	20 V d.c., 2 min	10	ITO glass	RMDs	
21

BiqCOOK	Solution	1 mg mL−1	Water/eathnol	ECD (10-30 V)	10-30 V d.c., —	15	Stainless steel/Pt plate	Co-deposition	
41

PAT18	Colloidal suspension	0.01–0.5 mg mL−1	MeCN/TOL (9/1 v/v)	High-voltage EPD (50–300 V)	100 V d.c., 5 s	10	ITO glass	Electrochemical senor	
23b

PS/DVB	Colloidal suspension	1 mg mL−1	DCM/Hex	High-voltage EPD (100 V)	100 V d.c., 5 min	2	ITO glass	Optical and Biological device	
44

CPMOPPV	Solution	0.004–0.01 M	EtOH	Three-electrode EPD	1.5 V d.c., 15 min	—	ITO glass, PPV/ITO,	EL device	
48

PLL-HBr, PLO-HBr	Solution	0.2–2 mg mL−1 for PLL and PLO	Water & Water/EtOH	ECD & low-voltage EPD	3–20 V d.c., —	15	Pt plate	Surface modification & biomedical implants	
49

PLO/HA, PLL/HA	0.5–2 mg mL−1 for HA
Co-POPs	Suspension	1 mg mL−1	TOL	ECD	30 V d.c., 6 h	10	GC plates	CO2 electro-reduction	
68

COF-5, COF-300, BDT-ETTA COF	Suspension	0.05, 0.005–1.0, 0.03 mg mL−1	EA/TOL/anisole	High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)	900 V d.c., 2 min	10	FTO glass	Catalysis	
24a

COF-300/BDT-ETTA COF,	Suspension	0.006/0.02 mg mL−1	EA	High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)	900 V d.c., 2 min	10	ITO glass	Co-deposition & catalysis	
24a

BDT-ETTA/Pt	Suspension	0.03/0.015 mg mL−1	EA	High-voltage EPD (100–900 V)	900 V d.c., 2 min	10	ITO glass	Catalysis	
24a

PyVg-COF	Solution	4.9 mg mL−1	DMI	Low-voltage EPD (0–50 V)	10 V d.c., —	3	ITO glass, Au, Stainless steel,	Optoelectronic devices	
24b

pTAPP	Suspension	0.25 mM TAPP, 0.5 M TEA(PF6), 5% v/v pyridine	DCM	Three-electrode ECD	−0.4 to 0.7 V, 10 cycles	—	GC plate, ITO glass, Au	Electro-catalytic	
22


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the EPM and EPD process. (b) Dendrite angle of the pTAPP electrodeposited with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 at 5 °C. The DFT-derived structure of pTAPP is in the inset. (c) Schematic mechanism of dendrite formation during the EPM of pTAPP. The EPM is carried out in a 5% v/v pyridine in DCM solution containing 0.25 mM TAPP and 0.05 M TEA(PF6). Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The representative structures of the MOFs that could produce corresponding films via the ECD method. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2016, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation route of Mxene/CNTs films by the EPD method. Adapted with permission from ref. 63b. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Schematic demonstration of the synthesis and fabrication of a mesoporous carbon nitride coated solid-phase microextraction fiber. Adapted with permission from ref. 14d. Copyright 2018, Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Different strategies to fabricate graphene-based composite materials by EPD and their application. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) A mimic picture of C60 and TOAB interactions in toluene solution without an electric field and under an electric field. Adapted with permission from ref. 63e. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) EP-LbL process for the construction of DAR/DRCB multilayer films on quartz slide. ITO was plated on the back of the quartz slide. Adapted with permission from ref. 73b. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) The scheme of L-EPD (left), including the photoconductive electrode, a photomask, TiO2 layer, particles (white) and other active materials (black). Plane view images of the resulting composites (right): Side-by-side deposition of tungsten (black) and alumina (white) particles (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, Weily. (c) Schematic illustration of doping Rhodamine 6G molecules by the CEPD technique. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the M-EFID process. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society. (e) The output open-circuit voltage of the triboelectric generator. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012, American Chemistry Society. (f) Experimental setup of EP-printing with an external applied electric field. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
