Enhanced photo-conversion efficiency of CdSe –ZnS core–shell quantum dots with Au  nanoparticles on TiO2  electrodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM03431B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM03431B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2694-2700Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsEnhanced photo-conversion efficiency of CdSe–ZnS core–shell quantum dots with Au nanoparticles on TiO2 electrodes

        
          
            Mi-Hee 
            Jung
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Man Gu 
            Kang
          
        
      *
      Thin Film Solar Cell Technology Research Team, Advanced Solar Technology Research Department, Convergence Components and Materials Research Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 138 Gajeongno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-700, Republic of Korea. E-mail: 10009kang@etri.re.kr;  Fax: +82-42-860-6495;   Tel: +82-42-860-6817
Received 
      12th October 2010
    , Accepted 29th November 2010First published on 24th December 2010AbstractThis study demonstrates that configurations that include gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) as the primary layer attached to a TiO2 electrode with quantum dots (QDs) as the secondary layer have superior photoelectrochemical properties. We found that all Au–QD nanoparticle hybrid systems reveal enhanced photocurrent generation as compared to only a QD–nanoparticle interface. The enhanced Jsc is attributed to sensitization that results indirectly from quantum dots becoming attached to Au NPs by intramolecular charge transfers. As a result of the improved performance, the overall energy conversion efficiency was increased by 100% as compared to that of a reference cell without Au NPs at 100 mW cm−2. When (CdSe)ZnS is prepared from Au-coated TiO2, incident photon-to-current efficiency values approaching 20% can be achieved by (CdSe)ZnS devices. In the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results, the intermediate frequency region of the Au–QD cells was more significantly reduced compared to that in bare QD cells due to the enhanced charge separation that occurs in the Au–QD structure. Mott–Schottky (C−2–ϕ) analysis shows that the lowest acceptor and donor densities having a positive effect on the efficiency could be found in (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2 cells. Therefore, (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2 has a very thin depletion layer that is restricted to the surface of Au/TiO2. Consequently, this system can be employed to enhance the effective efficiency in the design of the QD-sensitized solar cells.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are regarded as a promising alternative to conventional solid-state semiconductor solar cells. DSSCs are cost effective, easy to manufacture, and can be readily shaped with flexible substrates to satisfy the demands of various applications. To date, the highest level of solar-to-energy conversion efficiency (greater than 11%) has been achieved with films that consist of 20 nm of TiO2 that is sensitized by ruthenium-based dyes, particularly N3, N719, and black dye.1 Instead of using organic dye, researchers have achieved the sensitization of TiO2 nanoporous electrodes by modifying quantum dots (QDs) of low-band gap materials such as CdS,2 CdSe,3 CdTe,4 PbS,5 and InAs,6 which absorb light in the visible region. Semiconductor QDs offer significant advantages over dyes. QDs can match the solar spectrum better because their absorption spectrum can be tuned to the particle size.7 In addition, QDs were recently shown to generate multiple excitons, which can improve the efficiency of devices.8 However, despite the advantages of using QDs as a sensitizer, QD cells are less efficient than dye cells9 because significant carrier loss can be caused by nonradiative recombination processes occurring at the interfaces between the QDs and the electrolyte, the oxide electrode, and adjacent QDs.
However, core–shell type composite QDs exhibit novel properties that make them attractive from an experimental and practical perspective. The coating of nanocrystallites using inorganic materials with a higher band gap has been shown to improve the photoluminescence quantum yields via the passivation of surface nonradiative recombination sites. Particles passivated with inorganic shell structures are more robust than organically passivated dots. Moreover, they have a greater tolerance to the processing conditions necessary for incorporation into solid-state structures. Some examples of core–shell QD structures reported earlier include CdS on CdSe10 and CdSe on CdS,11 as well as ZnS grown on CdS,5 ZnS on CdSe,12 as well as inverse structures. These structures are proven to be very effective fluorescence resonance energy transfer donors with an array of organic dye acceptors, and several fluorescence resonance energy transfer based biosensing assemblies utilizing QDs have been demonstrated in the past few years. Conversely, gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) are known for their capacity to induce strong fluorescence quenching of conventional dye donors. This suggests that QDs and Au NPs could provide excellent donor–acceptor pairs. As a noble metal, nanosized Au exhibits unusual electric and optical properties as well as high chemical stability. To date, research has focused on developing methods to assemble and characterize structures that incorporate both QDs and Au NPs and the investigations aimed at probing the nature of the interactions between luminescent QDs and Au NPs embedded in controlled assemblies. However, photoinduced electron transfer from QDs to Au NPs could affect the optical properties in the solar cells has not yet been reported.
Herein, we report the co-adsorption of QD dots and Au NPs on TiO2 surfaces for quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells. COOH-functionalized CdSe or (CdSe)ZnS dots are linked to the COOH-functionalized Au NPs assembly, and then Au NPs are bound to QDs via hydrogen bonds. The photocurrent observed in the Au NPs/QDs composite system is approximately five-fold enhanced relative to the system that lacks the Au NPs. The enhanced photocurrent in the Au NPs/QDs system is attributed to effective charge separation of the electron–hole pair that is generated upon the photochemical excitation of the QDs particles; that is, an electron is excited in the QDs, transported through the Au NPs by the quenching process and injected into the conduction band of TiO2, leading to the retardation of the electron–hole recombination. As a result of the improved performance, the overall energy conversion efficiency was increased by 100% compared to that of a reference cell without Au NPs at 100 W cm−2.
2. Experimental details
CdSe nanocrystal QDs were prepared according to the procedure developed by peng et al.13 A selenium (Se) solution was prepared by mixing 0.4 g of Se powder, 10 mL of trioctylphosphine (TOP, technical grade, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 mL of toluene. A total of 20 g of technical-grade trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, technical grade, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.25 g of cadmium acetate dihydrate was placed in a three-neck, round-bottom flask and heated to about 150 °C. After the solution was degassed and purged with nitrogen a few times at this temperature, it was heated to 280 °C. At this temperature, the Se solution was quickly injected into the reaction vessel through the rubber septum. The reaction was stopped 5 min after the injection, and heat was immediately removed. The reaction mixture was allowed to cool to ∼30 to 50 °C and the CdSe QDs were precipitated with a copious amount of ethanol and collected by centrifugation and decantation. The precipitated CdSe QDs were recovered by adding a small amount of toluene and reprecipitated with ethanol. This purification process was repeated two more times. The resulting CdSe was dissolved in toluene for further use.
For the ZnS shell growth,14 12 g of TOPO were weighed in a 50 mL 3-necked flask, pumped to vacuum at 120 °C for 20 minutes. One mL of TOP was injected into the flask. 60 mg of a dry nanocrystal powder were dissolved in 3 mL of chloroform and the resulting solution was injected into the flask. The chloroform was removed by evacuating the flask for few minutes. The temperature of the mixture was then raised to 160 °C. The stock solution for the ZnS growth was freshly prepared by dissolving 0.647 g of a solution of diethylzinc (C4H10Zn, 1.0 M solution in heptane, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.19 g of hexamethyldisilathiane (C6H18Si2S, Sigma-Aldrich) in 4.73 g of tributylphosphine (90%, TCI). Several drop-wise injections of this solution were done (1 mL each) at 160 °C. The waiting time between injections was of the order of 5–10 minutes, during which it was assumed that the precursors injected had completely reacted. The injections were done dropwise, to allow a slow and uniform shell growth and to prevent the nucleation of ZnS crystals. After the injections were completed, the solution was cooled to 60 °C and 3 mL of butanol were added in order to avoid solidification and to quench the residual unreacted chemicals.
TOP/TOPO-capped QDs were surface–ligand exchanged with thiol containing bifunctional ligands. The CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs were ultrasonically resuspended in dimethylformamide. Excess 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) was added, and the mixture was shaken violently for 30 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation to discard the precipitate. The MPA-modified QDs in the supernatant were precipitated again with 4 M NaOH and excess tetrahydrofuran, removing the solution, and the resulting pellet of MPA modified QDs was dispersed in water.15
Citrate-stabilized Au NPs were synthesized by the addition of trisodium citrate (20 mg) to a refluxing, rapidly stirred, solution of HAuCl4·3H2O (10 mg) in water (100 mL), which was stirred under reflux for an additional 30 min before being allowed to cool.16 The particle diameter was 5.0 ± 1.2 nm. Then 1 mL of bis-(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenylphosphine (BSPP) (5 mM) was added to 15 mL of the as synthesized Au NPs (∼1.3 × 10−6 mol of dot L−1). Conjugate stability was enhanced by treating citrate-stabilized Au NPs with BSPP.17 The resulting Au colloid was gently stirred for 24 h. MPA functionalized Au NPs were prepared by post-treating BSPP-conjugated Au NPs with MPA (50 mM) for 24 h (Scheme 1(a)).
 Scheme 1  (a) Two step chemisorption of alkanethiols to colloidal gold particles using the BSPP which can stabilize them against aggregation. (b) Stepwise transfer of electrons from Au to TiO2 following the excitation of QDs particles. 
Anatase TiO2 colloid particles were prepared by the following method. A volume of 30 mL of titanium(IV) isopropoxide (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%) in 7.5 mL of 2-propanol was slowly dripped over 30 min into a stirred mixture of 62.5 mL of glacial acetic acid and 197 mL of deionized water at 0 °C. The resulting solution was heated to 80 °C for 8 h. It was then heated to 230 °C for 12 h in an autoclave.18 The resulting TiO2 nanoparticles were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 60 min and redispered in the ethanol. To prepare the DSSCs working electrodes, ethyl cellulose, lauric acid, and terpineol were added into the ethanol solution of the TiO2, and then ethanol was removed from the solution using a rotary evaporator to obtain a viscous paste. The resulting TiO2 slurry was coated on fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO, 3 mm, 10 Ω square−1, Pilkington TEC8) using a doctor-blade method then annealed at 550 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 films were placed in Au NPs solution for 48 h and subsequently immersed in the 3-mercaptopropionic acid modified QDs solution (∼4 × 10−5 mol of dot L−1) for 24 h (Scheme 1(b)).
To prepare Pt counter-electrodes, we coated the FTO glass with 10 mM of hydrogen hexachloroplatinate(IV) hydrate (H2PtCl6, Aldrich, 99.9%) in a 2-propanol solution and subjected it to heating at 450 °C for 30 min. The QDs adsorbed the TiO2 electrode and the Pt counter-electrodes were assembled into a sealed sandwich-type cell by heating with a hot melt of a 50 µm thick Surlyn polymer film (Surlyn, Dupont 1702). The electrolyte consists of Na2S (0.5 M), S (2 M) and KCl (0.2 M) in a methanol/water (7:3 by volume) solution.19 The photocurrent (Jsc) and photovoltage (Voc) of the DSSCs were measured with an active area of 0.15–0.25 cm2 using a simulated solar light at AM 1.5 that was produced by a 1000 W xenon lamp (Oriel, 91193). Its irradiant power was adjusted with respect to a Si reference solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System: Mono-Si + KG filter) to approximately one-sun light intensity (100 mW cm−2). Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a system designed by PV measurement. A 12 W halogen lamp was applied as a light source for the monochromatic beam. For its calibration, a silicon photodiode (NIST-calibrated photodiode G425) was used. IPCE data were obtained at a low chopping speed of 5 Hz, and the quantum efficiency was detected by a lock-in amplifier. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was obtained under a one sun illumination with a potentiostat (Solartron 1287) equipped with a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260) in a frequency range of 10−2 Hz to 106 Hz.
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements of QDs were performed using the 325 nm line of a He–Cd laser as the excitation source at room temperature. Time-resolved PL spectra and decays were measured by the time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) using a Micro-Time 200 (PicoQuant GmbH) spectrofluorimeter equipped with a 470 nm diode (full width at half maximum, 96 ps) with a 40 MHz repetition rate. Field-emission transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM) was obtained with a JEM-2100F (JEOL Ltd., Japan). The optical-absorption spectra of the QDs solution were measured with an ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1601). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed using a Nanoscope III (Digital Instruments) operated at room temperature in air. Images were obtained in tapping mode using silicon tips at a driving frequency of ∼270 kHz.
3. Results and discussion

Scheme 1 depicts the configuration of the Au NPs/CdSe or (CdSe)ZnS QDs hybrid system assembled on the TiO2 electrodes via an interparticle hydrogen bond association. In this configuration, Scheme 1(a), citrate-stabilized Au NPs were stabilized with BSPP prior to modification of the carboxylate-terminated alkanethiol. BSPP is a water-soluble derivative of triphenylphosphine that is commonly used as a stabilizing ligand. It prevented the nanoparticles from aggregating in the subsequent reaction.20 The MPA penetrated through the BSPP and built up densely packed monolayers on the Au surface. Scheme 1(b) shows that the MPA-functionalized Au NPs are covalently linked to the TiO2 electrodes. The carboxyl groups are deprotonated, i.e. all oxygens (–OH and =O in the carboxyl group) bind to surface Ti ions and become chemically equivalent.21 Thus, –COOH functionalized Au NPs are binding to TiO2 surface with the bidentate state, resulting in the stable forms. In the Au–QDs connection state, the Au NPs and QDs were functionalized with –COOH, respectively. COOH-functionalized QDs are linked to the COOH-functionalized Au NPs assembly through the intermolecular hydrogen bonds.22

Fig. 1 shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs in toluene. These particles, which were prepared in accordance with a previously reported procedure,9,13 exhibit absorption in the visible region with a characteristic exciton absorption peak. The first (1S3/21Se) excitonic peak exhibits transitions with a sharp band edge of 555 nm (2.23 eV). By comparing this spectrum to the sizing curve reported by Peng et al.,23 we obtained a particle diameter of approximately 3.1 nm. We observed a small shift in the absorption spectra to red (lower energies) after the ZnS coating; the shift was due to a partial leakage of the exciton into the ZnS matrix.24 However, the first electronic states of the CdSe core were slightly modified. This modification indicates that there is no major alloying or incorporation of Zn or S inside the CdSe core.25 To determine the (CdSe)ZnS particle diameter, the monolayer thickness of the ZnS shell was calculated according to the 3.1 Å distance between consecutive planes along the [002] axis in bulk wurtzite ZnS.24 The average (CdSe)ZnS particle diameter ranges from 4.3 to 5.0 nm, as prepared from ∼3.1 nm CdSe nanocrystals. It can be estimated that two to three monolayers of ZnS constitute the shell of the bare dot CdSe core. Fig. 1 shows the room-temperature PL of CdSe before and after overcoating with ZnS. The PL quantum yield increases from 15% for bare dot to values starting at 50% for dots passivated with ZnS. In smaller CdSe dots, the surface-to-volume ration is high and the PL for TOPO-capped dots is dominated by broad deep trap emissions due to incomplete surface passivation. Overcoating with ZnS suppresses the deep trap emission by passivating most of the vacancies and trap sites on the crystallite surface, resulting in PL which is dominated by band-edge recombination.
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra for (a) bare (solid lines) and (b) ZnS overcoated (dashed lines) CdSe dots with a diameter of 3.1 nm. The absorption spectra for the (CdSe)ZnS dots are broader and slightly red-shifted from their respective bare dot spectra. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra for (c) bare (solid lines) and (d) ZnS overcoated (dashed lines) dots with core sizes of 3.1 nm. The PL spectra for the overcoated dots are much more intense owing to their higher quantum yields. 

Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the TEM examinations that were conducted for the Au-decorated TiO2 nanoparticles. The Au NPs are situated on TiO2 particles with an area or a point contact. The high-resolution TEM examination confirmed the good connection in the interface between the Au NPs and the TiO2 surfaces. The lattice-resolved image of the interface region shows that the [111] direction of the single crystalline Au is aligned along the [111] axis of the TiO2. An FE-TEM image of the TiO2 surface (Fig. 2(c)) provides evidence that QDs are attached to the TiO2 surface. Fig. 2(d) shows a TEM image of the Au NPs, showing the connection of several CdSe QD particles to the TiO2 surface. Further insight into the structure of the chemically bridged Au NPs/CdSe QDs system was obtained by the AFM measurement.
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of TiO2 decorated with Au NPs capped with MPA, (b) a lattice-resolved image of the interface region shows that the [111] direction of the single crystalline Au is aligned along the [111] axis of the TiO2, (c) TEM images of a 3.1 nm CdSe, as indicated with the arrow, attached to TiO2, and (d) Au NPs connected to several CdSe QDs on the TiO2 surface. 
We analyzed the excited QDs deactivation by monitoring the emission decay. Fig. 3 show the time-resolved PL spectra for the Au–QDs samples. The emission decay data were analyzed with biexponential kinetics in which two decay components were derived. The intensity average lifetime was then calculated to make an overall comparison of the emission decay behavior. The emission lifetime of Au–QDs (〈τ〉 = 3.29 ns) nanocrystals was shorter than that of the corresponding QDs (〈τ〉 = 3.56 ns) counterpart. The difference in the average emission lifetime between Au–CdSe and CdS counterpart indicates the emergence of a nonradiative pathway from the interaction between QDs and Au. Such difference became more noticeable as the Au–CdSe(ZnS) nanocrystals further decreased to 〈τ〉 = 3.22 ns, inferring a much more significant electronic interaction between CdSe(ZnS) and Au.
 Fig. 3  Time resolved PL spectra of bare CdSe and Au–QD system deposited on the TiO2 nanoparticles electrode. The fitting results (solid curves) were also included for comparison. 
The effectiveness of CdSe and CdSe–Au as photoanodes in photoelectrochemical QD-sensitized solar cells was assessed by IPCE measurements (Fig. 4). The IPCE spectra of CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS are consistent with the corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra shown in Fig. 1.26 The CdSe–Au absorbed electrode exhibited an IPCE of ∼10%, which was significantly higher than those of Au or CdSe films. This indicates that the IPCE response of CdSe–Au reflects the synergy arising from the excited interaction between CdSe and Au. When (CdSe)ZnS was prepared with the Au-absorbed TiO2, IPCE values as high as 20% can be achieved in (CdSe)ZnS devices. This result indicates that excited electrons in core–shell (CdSe)ZnS dots can inject more efficiently than those in bare CdSe dots into Au NPs and thus become collected by the electrode.
 Fig. 4  IPCE spectra of CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au NPs adsorbed TiO2 electrodes. 

Fig. 5 presents the photocurrent density (Jsc) versus the photovoltage (Voc) curves consisting of the Au NPs/QDs configuration. The data in Fig. 5 suggest that a nearly 2–5 fold enhancement of the photocurrent originating from the CdSe–Au configuration (Jsc = 2.618 mA cm−2) was noted, as compared to the Au NPs (Jsc = 0.518 mA cm−2) and CdSe nanoparticle layer (Jsc = 1.457 mA cm−2) alone. In the CdSe–nanoparticles system, the rapid electron–hole recombination degrades the photogenerated redox-species, leading to the low photocurrent yield. The enhanced photocurrent observed in the hybrid CdSe–Au layer is attributed to the function of Au NPs that act as an electron trap that facilitates charge separation. Given that Au is a good electron acceptor (Eo = +0.5 V vs. NHE), a quick electron transfer from the excited CdSe to the Au can be expected. The Jsc, Voc and FF values were increased more with the core–shell (CdSe)ZnS QDs–Au hybrid structure than with the bare CdSe–Au system. The maximum open circuit photovoltage and photocurrent observed with white light illumination (λ > 300 nm; incident light, 100 mW cm−2) were 0.386 V and 3.072 mA cm−2, respectively. The ZnS shell on CdSe QDs suppresses the surface-trapping process of the photoexcited carrier in the CdSe QDs while the photogenerated electrons in the CdSe are quickly transferred to the Au NPs. Moreover, given the energetic band of CdSe and ZnS, the fact that ZnS has a higher conduction edge than the CdSe QDs prevents the leakage of current from CdSe to the electrolyte and consequently causes more electrons to be injected into the Au NPs, resulting in an increase in both Jsc and Voc.27 This result indicates that excited electrons in the core–shell (CdSe)ZnS dots are more efficient than bare CdSe dots in terms of being injected into Au NPs and being collected by the electrode. Jin and Lian28 reported that, in a charged–separate state, the electron transfer from QDs to photoanodes generates charged QDs (holes) and injects electrons into photoanodes. The QDs most likely have a short exciton life span due to the Auger relaxation process, which involves an extra valence band hole. The electrons in the photoanode particles and holes in the QDs eventually recombine. However, in the (CdSe)ZnS QD cells, the photogenerated electrons in the CdSe are quickly transferred from ZnS to Au. The holes remain in the valence bands because the conduction band of Au is lower than that of ZnS. The photogenerated electrons can therefore escape through the recombination holes, resulting in an improvement in the charge-separation efficiency.
 Fig. 5  (a) Current density (Jsc)–voltage (V) characteristics of solar cells sensitized with CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on Au–NPs-adsorbed TiO2 electrodes at 100 mW cm−2 irradiation (AM 1.5). 
To reveal the difference in the interfacial characteristics of these photoelectrodes, we measured the EIS spectra of QDSSCs at an applied bias of Voc in a frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV in simulated solar light of 1000 W m−2 (AM 1.5). Fig. 6 shows two semicircles comprised of a small circle at a high frequency and a large semicircle at an intermediate frequency. According to the EIS model reported in the literature,29 the hemisphere in the high-frequency region (<0.1 MHz) represents the charge transfer resistance applied to the charge transfer at the interfaces of the redox electrolyte/Pt counter electrode, whereas those at intermediate frequencies represent the impedance associated with the transport resistance of electrons within the TiO2/Au–QD/electrolyte interface. The intermediate frequency region of the Au–QD hybrid systems was reduced more significantly compared to that of the bare QD cells. This is attributed to the enhanced charge separation that occurs in the Au–CdSe structure. Excitation of the CdSe nanoparticles results in the transfer of conduction-band electrons to the Au NPs. The spatial separation of the electron–hole pairs in the different particles retards their recombination. As a result, oxidation of the stabilized electron donor by valence-band holes facilitates electron propagation from the Au NPs to the TiO2 electrode along with the generation of the photocurrent. In the layer consisting of only CdSe particles, the intraparticle electron–hole recombination is fast (the lifetime of an electron–hole pair is ca. 2 µs), resulting in inefficient generation of the photocurrent. The intermediate-frequency region of the core–shell (CdSe)ZnS QDs was reduced more significantly than that of the bare CdSe QD cells, indicating a reduction in the effective series resistance of the Au–TiO2 electrode in the presence of a ZnS shell.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical impedance spectra of solar cells sensitized with CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au–NPs–adsorbed TiO2 electrodes. 
To enhance efficiencies of Au–QDs/TiO2 based solar cells, understanding of the space charge at the Au–QDs/TiO2 interface is crucial. Mott–Schottky analysis is commonly used to determine both dopant density and flat band potential at semiconductior/liquid contact.30Fig. 7 shows Mott–Schottky (C−2–ϕ) plots for the QDs cells. Two slopes are observed, a steep slope for ϕ < 0 V, and a flatter one for ϕ > 0.2 V. The negative potential region of the straight region (ϕ < 0 V) indicates the p-type semiconducting nature of the passive film. In the second potential region, the positive region of the straight line (ϕ > 0.2 V) indicates the n-type semiconducting behavior. The intermediate region shows a valley superimposed on the two slopes. The intermediate region is probably related to interface traps at the CdSe/Au/TiO2 interface. The nature of these traps is still under investigation and will not be further discussed in the present paper. We will focus now on the two slopes.
 Fig. 7  Mott–Schottky (C−2–ϕ) plots for CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au–NPs-adsorbed TiO2 electrodes. The symbols represent the experimental data and the solid lines represent the fit curves. The potential regions R1, R2, and R3 are related to the band diagrams in Fig. 8. 
 Fig. 8  Band diagram of the QD–Au/TiO2 heterojunction of the CdSe quantum dot layer where QDs are fully depleted (R1), a flat band situation exists (R2) and a TiO2 fully depleted situation exists (R3). Fig. 7 shows the corresponding potential ranges for the three cases. Vbi is the built-in potential. 
For ϕ < 0 V QDs layer are fully depleted and both Au and TiO2 layers contributed to the slope in the C−2–ϕ plot. From the C−2–ϕ analysis, acceptor densities, NA, are derived from the slopes of the plot according to (1)where, q is the elementary charge (1.60 × 10−19 C), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), ε the relative dielectric constant of the semiconductor layer. Following with the above the equation, the NA of the QDs cell has been determined using the slopes for descending voltages. Acceptor densities around 5.47 × 1020 cm−3, 2.59 × 1020 cm−3, 2.24 × 1020 cm−3, and 1.83 × 1020 cm−3 for Au/TiO2, CdSe/TiO2, CdSe–Au/TiO2, and (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2 were observed, respectively. These results indicated that the lowest electron acceptor density which is a positive effect on the efficiency was found in the QDs/Au/TiO2 cells and shows that the effective charge separation was generated from QDs to TiO2 due to the Au NPs. In the mean while, the bare QD cells have a higher electron acceptor density than the Au–QDs hybrid systems as the Auger recombination was rapidly taken place, which is a negative effect on the solar cell efficiency.
The slope at ϕ > 0.2 V is related to the situation where QDs are not fully depleted and the only QDs layer contributes to the slope of the C−2–ϕ plot in the linear regime, according to (2)The slope at ϕ > 0.2 V is related to the situation where the TiO2 layer is fully depleted and capacitance change is caused by the change of the depletion layer width in Au and TiO2. A donor density was decreased in the following order, 4.43 × 1020 cm−3, 1.31 × 1020 cm−3, 9.0 × 1019 cm−3, and 7.99 × 1019 cm−3 for Au/TiO2, CdSe/TiO2, CdSe–Au/TiO2, and (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2, respectively. The bare dot cell systems have a higher donor density than the Au–QD systems. It means that the charge separation was limited due to the reverse process in the bare dot system. In the Au–QDs system, the electron transfer is the internal electron emission process, where an electron is excited in the QDs, transported through the Au NPs by the quenching process, and injected into the conduction band of TiO2. The electron transfer rate was enhanced due to the effective charge separation at the interface of Au and QDs, resulting in the electron charged Au core and hole enriched QDs. The less pronounced interaction between electrons and holes contributed to increase the electron transfer rate in the Au–QDs. Therefore, the (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2 shows the lower donor densities than the CdSe–Au/TiO2 system and has a very thin depletion layer restricted in the surface of Au/TiO2 and consequently that this system can be employed to enhance the effective efficiency in the design of the solar cells.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we demonstrated that configurations that include Au NPs as the primary layer attached to a TiO2 electrode with QDs as the secondary layer facilitate superior photoelectrochemical properties. We found that all Au–QD nanoparticle hybrid systems reveal enhanced photocurrent generation as compared to only the QD–nanoparticles systems. The enhanced photocurrents in this system are attributed to the electron-acceptor-facilitated directional electron transfer from the QDs to the Au NPs. As a result of the improved performance, the overall energy conversion efficiency was increased by 200% as compared to that for a reference cell without Au NPs at 100 mW cm−2. When (CdSe)ZnS is prepared from the Au-coated TiO2, incident photon-to-current efficiency values that approach 20% can be achieved by the (CdSe)ZnS devices. In the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results, the intermediate-frequency region of the Au–QD cells was reduced more significantly than that of the bare QD cells due to the enhanced charge separation that occurs in the Au–QD structure. Mott–Schottky (C−2–ϕ) analysis showed that the lowest acceptor and donor densities with a positive effect on the efficiency were found in the (CdSe)ZnS–Au/TiO2 cells.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by New & Renewable Energy R&D program (20093020010100) under the Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Republic of Korea.
References
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44(20), 6841 CrossRef .
W.-T. Sun, Y. Yu, H.-Y. Pan, X.-F. Gao, Q. Chen and L.-M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(4), 1124 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(7), 2385 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(6), 1467 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yang, C. H. Huang, J. Zhai, Z. S. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12(5), 1459 RSC .
P. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(50), 25451 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15(22), 4300 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92(18), 186601 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, J.-H. Yum, H. C. Leventis, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. A. Haque, P. Chen, S. I. Seok, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(30), 11600 CrossRef CAS .
S. Michele, M. Stefan, Q. Francesco, R. Juergen, M. Marco, G. Agnieszka, V. K. Maksym, V. T. Dmitri, H. Wolfgang, M. Andrea and B. Giovanni, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(9999), 1 .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19(4), 604 CrossRef .
D. Dorokhin, N. Tomczak, M. Han, D. N. Reinhoudt, A. H. Velders and G. J. Vancso, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(3), 661 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aldana, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123(36), 8844 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pellegrino, L. Manna, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, D. Koktysh, A. L. Rogach, S. Keller, J. Radler, G. Natile and W. J. Parak, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(4), 703 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Mitchell, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121(35), 8122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hiller, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55 RSC .
C. J. Loweth, W. B. Caldwell, X. Peng, A. P. Alivisatos and P. G. Schultz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38(12), 1808 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zaban, S. Ferrere, J. Sprague and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101(1), 55 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Lee and C.-H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185(1), 584 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Chakrabarti and A. M. Klibanov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125(41), 12531 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Xue, G. S. Metraux, J. E. Millstone and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(26), 8337 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y.-N. Tan, J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and D. I. C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(38), 14084 CrossRef CAS .
K. Westermark, H. Rensmo, A. C. Lees, J. G. Vos and H. Siegbahn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(39), 10108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, C.-H. Kim, Y. Lee and K.-J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22(1), 207 .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15(14), 2854 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101(46), 9463 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100(2), 468 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7(6), 1793 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. T. Kuo, D. M. Liu, S. Y. Chen and C. C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(37), 6780 RSC ; 
  (b) J. B. Sambur and B. A. Parkinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(7), 2130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(6), 2448 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F.-S. Francisco, B. Juan, G.-B. Germ, B. Gerrit and H. Anders, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87(1–4), 117 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(31), 14945 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Kuang, S. Ito, B. Wenger, C. Klein, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(12), 4146 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Loef, A. J. Houtepen, E. Talgorn, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(2), 856 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Loef, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102(2), 024512 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (a) Two step chemisorption of alkanethiols to colloidal gold particles using the BSPP which can stabilize them against aggregation. (b) Stepwise transfer of electrons from Au to TiO2 following the excitation of QDs particles.	 

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra for (a) bare (solid lines) and (b) ZnS overcoated (dashed lines) CdSe dots with a diameter of 3.1 nm. The absorption spectra for the (CdSe)ZnS dots are broader and slightly red-shifted from their respective bare dot spectra. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra for (c) bare (solid lines) and (d) ZnS overcoated (dashed lines) dots with core sizes of 3.1 nm. The PL spectra for the overcoated dots are much more intense owing to their higher quantum yields.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of TiO2 decorated with Au NPs capped with MPA, (b) a lattice-resolved image of the interface region shows that the [111] direction of the single crystalline Au is aligned along the [111] axis of the TiO2, (c) TEM images of a 3.1 nm CdSe, as indicated with the arrow, attached to TiO2, and (d) Au NPs connected to several CdSe QDs on the TiO2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time resolved PL spectra of bare CdSe and Au–QD system deposited on the TiO2 nanoparticles electrode. The fitting results (solid curves) were also included for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 4  IPCE spectra of CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au NPs adsorbed TiO2 electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Current density (Jsc)–voltage (V) characteristics of solar cells sensitized with CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on Au–NPs-adsorbed TiO2 electrodes at 100 mW cm−2 irradiation (AM 1.5).	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical impedance spectra of solar cells sensitized with CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au–NPs–adsorbed TiO2 electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 7  Mott–Schottky (C−2–ϕ) plots for CdSe and (CdSe)ZnS QDs on the Au–NPs-adsorbed TiO2 electrodes. The symbols represent the experimental data and the solid lines represent the fit curves. The potential regions R1, R2, and R3 are related to the band diagrams in Fig. 8.	 

 	Fig. 8  Band diagram of the QD–Au/TiO2 heterojunction of the CdSe quantum dot layer where QDs are fully depleted (R1), a flat band situation exists (R2) and a TiO2 fully depleted situation exists (R3). Fig. 7 shows the corresponding potential ranges for the three cases. Vbi is the built-in potential.	 
	(1)
	(2)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
