Large area, highly transparent carbon nanotube spiderwebs for energy harvesting  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM01361G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM01361G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7236-7240Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsLarge area, highly transparent carbon nanotube spiderwebs for energy harvesting

        
          
            Zhen 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Jia†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinke 
            Shu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuchun 
            Gui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: wdh-dme@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-10-62770190;   Tel: + 86-10-62792845
bDepartment of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-10-62767142
Received 
      7th May 2010
    , Accepted 13th June 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      30th July 2010
    AbstractCarbon nanotubes possess excellent electronic properties, and when self-assembled into thin films, they form conductive and transparent networks that are useful for many applications. Here, we synthesized large-area (100 cm2) spiderwebs consisting of interconnected single-walled nanotubes by floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition and a solvent-induced condensation process. These spiderwebs are sticky and robust, can be directly deposited or transferred to various materials and structures such as metal, paper, texture surface, and micro carbon fibers. The spiderwebs offer tunable transparency in the range up to 95%, and show enhanced conductivity compared with most of previous directly grown or post treatment films. Serving as transparent electrodes of solar cells, the nanotube spiderwebs can extract charge carriers from industrial semiconductors with a power conversion efficiency of 7.3% under AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination.
Introduction
Thin films of interconnected carbon nanotubes (CNTs) represent a typical structure with many useful properties such as optical transparency, electrical conductivity, and conformal transfer to flexible substrates.1 They have demonstrated potential applications in a broad area including sensors,2,3 flexible electronics,4 optoelectronic devices5 and super capacitors.6 Recently, CNT film-based transparent conductive coating showed comparable device performance with indium tin oxide (ITO) in organic solar cells, OLED, and other electronics, with extra advantage of bringing device flexibility.7–9 This has stimulated intensive interest in the fabrication of large-area, uniform CNT films by direct growth10–13 or post treatment methods such as filtration,14 spray coating,15 spin coating,16 LB deposition17 and rod coating.18 While their optical, electrical, and mechanical properties have been studied in depth, it remains challenging to produce CNT films with a combination of high transparency and conductivity.
Post treatment methods usually involve a chemical purification process using surfactant and acid to improve solubility of CNTs in solution.10,15,18–22 Not only the procedure is complex but also the surfactants and chemical residues will increase tube-to-tube contact resistance and degrade optoelectronic properties of the film. Chemical-induced cutting of CNTs make it unfavorable to construct a percolated conductive network. Consequently, a higher concentration of CNTs is required for improving conductivity, which leads to reduction of optical transparency. Direct synthesis approach of constructing CNT networks can avoid these disadvantages and is promising in large scale application.12,13 These films usually have stronger inter-bundle interactions, and better mechanical properties such as flexibility and robustness. However, use of directly synthesized CNT film as transparent conducting material has been rarely seen because these films tend to grow thick and nonuniform during high temperature synthesis. Practical applications require controlled growth and process of CNT films with high homogeneity and purity over large area.
Here, we report a large-area (100 cm2), uniform spiderweb-like structure consisting of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) that shows both enhanced conductivity and transparency by a floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method and a subsequent liquid-induced collapse process. As-grown multi-layer film can be transformed into a spiderweb by ethanol addition, in which individual nanotubes condense into thin bundles leaving a large void area. These spiderwebs are sticky and robust, can be handled in freestanding form and easily transferred to a variety of substrates such as metal, texture surface, A4 size paper, wafer, and micro carbon fibers. The spiderweb transparency is tunable in the range of 65% to 95% by deposition parameters, and the sheet resistance is considerably lower than most of previous directly grown or post treatment films. We demonstrate the application of using the SWNT spiderweb as a transparent electrode to extract charge carriers from industrial semiconductors (silicon) in a solar cell configuration, with a power conversion efficiency of 7.3% under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination.
Experimental
Large area, thin films of single-walled carbon nanotubes were prepared using a floating catalyst CVD process in a horizontal furnace. A nickel mesh was placed at the front end of the quartz tube acting as a gas flow stabilizer. Liquid carbon source was introduced into the quartz tube through a capillary tube, then vaporized at a temperature of 200∼220 °C. The vapor was carried to the reaction zone by a gas mixture of Ar (2500 sccm) and H2 (600 sccm). Reaction zone temperature was set to 1150 °C∼1170 °C for favor growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes. Films of carbon nanotubes were collected by substrates clinging to the inner wall of the quartz tube. Temperature of the film deposition zone ranged from 600 °C to 60 °C. The relatively low temperature of deposition zone enabled the usage of plastic and paper as collecting substrates. The liquid carbon source was a mixture of xylene, ferrocene and a small amount of sulfur (ferrocene concentration 0.36M and sulfur concentration 0.036M). The mixture was injected into the furnace at a feeding rate of 2∼4μL min−1 using an automatic syringe pump.
Single-walled carbon nanotubes films were characterized using SEM (LEO-1530), TEM (JEM-2010) and Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw RM-1000). UV-Vis transmittance of the carbon nanotubes films on silica substrate were measured using a spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-3010). The baseline of a bare silica substrate was subtracted from the measured transmittance to obtain films only transmittance of the SWNT spiderwebs. The sheet resistance of the films was measured using a four point probe resistivity test system with probes in a line and spacing 1 mm each other.
For making solar cells, a SWNT film was transferred onto an n-doped silicon substrate (resistivity 3∼5 Ωcm) with an 7 mm × 7 mm SiO2 windows. A silver thread was pasted to the SWNT film by silver paste as anode lead. Ti/Au electrode was deposited on the opposite side of the silicon substrate to form an ohmic contact. The Ti/Au electrode serves as the cathode of the solar cell. Solar cell tests were carried out using a solar simulator (Newport 91195 class A) equipped with a standard silicon cell for calibration, under AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2 power intensity conditions. The I–V curves of the cells were recorded using a Keithley 2635 source meter.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the picture of a large-area (∼100 cm2) freestanding SWNT film being peeled off from a nickel foil substrate. This thin film has about 80% transparency, and is robust enough for peeling, suspending and transferring. A key factor of our method is the relatively slow but steady carbon source feeding rate (about 2∼4 μL min−1), leading to uniform deposition of SWNTs over a long distance range along the furnace. A higher feeding rate of carbon source may give rise to the formation of thick bundles across the quartz tube rather than thin films. Our products show several characteristics as the following. First, as-grown SWNTs are in a loose multi-layer form, but they can be collapsed into a thin spiderweb with enhanced bundle interconnections as well as the ability to adhere to other surfaces (Fig. 1b). A drop of ethanol condensed loose SWNTs into thin bundles forming a highly interconnected two-dimensional network, in which the circular pore area could enhance transparency (Fig. 1a). Transmittance of the film can be finely tuned to meet different application requirements by varying the deposition time. Regular depositions of 20 min to 1 h produced films with average transmittances of 95% to 70%. This presents the highest film transparency ever reported from direct synthesis techniques.10–13 Pristine SWNT films also appear sticky and can hold small objects without using binders (Fig.1c). Withdrawing a glass rod after contacting a freestanding film shows that the film has adhered well to the rod (Fig. 1d).
 Fig. 1  Direct synthesis of clean, sticky SWNT spiderwebs. (a) (left) Photo image of a large area (7 × 15 cm2) freestanding SWNT film being peeled off the nickel substrate, (middle) SEM image of as-deposited loosely-packed multi-layer SWNTs, and (right) SEM image of spiderwebs formed by ethanol induced condensation. (b) Illustration of the ethanol condensation process for transforming as-grown SWNTs into a thin layer of spiderweb. (c) Photo of a piece of spiderweb fixed on a circular frame holding three polymeric foaming balls at the bottom. (d) Photo of a spiderweb sticking to a glass rod that was made contact with the spiderweb and then withdrawing away (arrow indicates the moving direction). The spiderweb was initially suspended vertically and then pulled by the glass rod (inset). (e) TEM image of high purity SWNTs in the spiderweb. Inset, TEM image of a single-walled and a double-walled nanotube. (f) Raman spectrum of as-grown SWNT film activated by laser of 633 nm wavelength. Inset, RBM peaks revealed from Raman spectrum. 
Second, the as-synthesized SWNT films have a high purity. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image reveals small SWNTs bundles with diameters of 10∼20 nm (Fig. 1e). There are very less amount of catalyst particles observed on the bundle surface, owing to the low precursor feeding rate in our CVD process. These bundles consist of single-walled tubes with diameters of 1∼2 nm although double-walled tubes are occasionally observed, indicating the mixed chirality and diameter nature in the film. Raman spectrum shows a very low D band (1320 cm−1), indicating negligible presence of amorphous carbon impurity (Fig. 1f). Two strong radial breathing mode (RBM) peaks at 140.6 cm−1 and 194.3 cm−1 correspond to tube diameters of 1.8 nm and 1.3 nm, respectively.
Third, the sticky spiderwebs can be deposited or conformally transferred to a variety of substrates with different shapes and features. They have been deposited on large (A4 size) paper sheets (Fig. 2a) and metals (Fig. 2b), by placing the paper or metal at the deposition zone inside the CVD furnace. SEM images reveal interconnected SWNT bundles hanging across the cellulose bone of the copy paper (Fig. 2a). The spiderweb adheres to the paper fiber very well, and cannot be detached by gentle scratching.
 Fig. 2  Versatility of spiderweb deposition and transfer. (a) Photo (left) and SEM images (middle and right) of a spiderweb-coated A4-size copy paper via direct CVD deposition. SWNT spiderwebs hanging between the paper fibers can be observed. (b) Photo image of a SWNT spiderweb directly deposited on a metal coin, and conformally coated on the letters and relief on the coin surface after ethanol condensation. (c) Schematic procedures for transferring large-area spiderwebs assisted by a steel mesh. (d) SEM images of a texture surface with 200 nm to 1 μm raised islands (obtained by wet-etching of silicon) that is coated by a spiderweb of SWNTs. The spiderweb follows the topography in a perfect manner. (e) SEM images of a single carbon fiber about 4 μm diameter (top) tightly wrapped by SWNT spiderwebs (down). (f) Photo image of a 2 inch silicon wafer after spiderweb transfer, where a small portion of the wafer was left empty (without SWNTs) to give visible contrast. (g) Optical microscopic image of the transferred spiderweb on silicon substrate showing the mesh-like topography. 
Two different methods have been developed for convenient film transfer. At a relatively small scale, SWNT films can be directly peeled off from substrate and lay down on receiving structures such as texture surface (Fig. 2d) and micro fibers (Fig. 2e). Delivering several drops of ethanol to the film condenses SWNTs into a spiderweb that is well adhered to the contact surface. Conformal coating of SWNTs onto fine texture with nanoscale features indicates high flexibility of the spiderweb (Fig. 2d). The spiderweb can be also wrapped around a micro carbon fiber (4 μm in diameter) with potential uses as fiber sensors (Fig. 2e).
For larger area applications, we adopted a transfer process as shown in Fig. 2c involving three steps: i) SWNT film was directly grown on a stainless steel screen mesh with hole diameter of about 100 μm by CVD (as on the nickel foil). ii) The mesh was flipped and covered onto a receiving substrate (e.g. a silicon wafer) with the SWNT film contacting the substrate. When ethanol drops were applied and infiltrated through the mesh, the SWNT film adhered to the substrate forming the spiderweb structure during ethanol evaporation. iii) The mesh was removed leaving a fully transferred film on the substrate. The successful transfer is due to the higher contact area between the SWNT film and the flat substrate than that between the film and screen mesh. Fig. 2f shows the optical image of a SWNT film transferred to a 2 inch silicon wafer. The SWNT film was perfectly transferred to the wafer without any macroscopic defects or wrinkling. During CVD, CNTs tend to attach on the mesh wires resulting in less density of CNTs on the empty space between mesh wires. Therefore, microscopic image of the SWNT film shows a textile-like morphology reproducing the mesh structure (Fig. 2g). Compared with conventional transferring methods such as washing away filter membrane for filtration film23 or picking up by a deposited gold layer for substrate growth film,24 our process is more simple and less contaminative. Easy transferring procedure of directly synthesized film also has the potential for scale-up production.
Optical transmission and sheet resistance measurements were taken on SWNT films collected by silica slices during CVD. Silica slices were placed at different positions near the furnace outlet area to check the uniformity of SWNT films. It shows that within a distance of 30 cm from the outlet, the films maintain a transmittance of above 80% across a wavelength range of 400 nm to 2.5 μm (Fig. 3a). By varying the CVD time, SWCNT films with thicknesses of 20 to 40 nm and different optical transmittances have been obtained (Fig. 3b). Transmittance at 550 nm of these films is 91.7% to 66.6% after a deposition period of 40 to 100 min, respectively. Sheet resistance values were measured by a 4 point probe resistivity test system and calculated by averaging 8 different positions on each sample. The relationship between film transmittance at 550 nm and sheet resistance was plotted in Fig. 3c. The film resistance is 341 Ω/sq at about 80% transmittance and has increased to a few kΩ/sq at a transmittance of above 95%.
 Fig. 3  Optical and electrical properties of SWNT spiderwebs. (a) Optical transmittance spectra of spiderwebs collected from different deposition positions (D is the distance to the edge of reaction zone, see inset). (b) Optical transmittance values (for 550 nm incident light) measured from spiderwebs after different deposition times. (c) Correlation between the spiderweb sheet resistance and transmittance at wavelength of 550 nm. (d) Comparison of the sheet resistance and transmittance for our spiderwebs and other films prepared by direct synthesis or post treatment methods. 
We had also used acid treatment to improve the film conductivity. Carbon nanotube films deposited on silica slices were immersed into concentrated HNO3 for 1 h. The films were then rinsed with distilled water and dried. After acid treatment, the sheet resistance has decreased by 2∼3 folds compared with pristine films, while the optical transmittance remains almost unchanged (Fig. 3c). Decrease of sheet resistance can be due to the reason that acid treatment removed amorphous carbon and iron catalyst particles, thus decreased the contact resistance between SWNT bundles. Comparison of our spiderwebs with other films prepared by different methods was summarized in Fig. 3d.10,15,18–22 The spiderweb shows relatively lower sheet resistance compared with most of directly synthesized and post treatment films, except one report on arc-discharge SWNTs films by spray coating (Fig. 3d). Here, we think that the combined high transparency and conductivity of our spiderwebs stems from the following three factors, including 1) absence of surfactant molecules used for dispersing SWNTs in post treatment methods, 2) enhanced inter-bundle interaction during spiderweb formation, and 3) the high purity and large-area uniformity of the structure. Given the simple procedure of preparation, controlled thickness and optoelectronic properties, and substrate-independent transfer, the spiderwebs show the potential as transparent electrodes for future flexible electronics devices.
We have made stable, efficient solar cells by pasting a spiderweb on an n-type silicon wafer, in which the spiderweb forms a heterojunction with Si and also serves as a transparent electrode. Under light illumination, charge separation occurs at the SWNT-Si interface, in which electrons are directed to the Si portion and holes flow through the spiderweb on the other side. Since charge carriers are excited from crystalline Si, the role of spiderweb is actually to extract and transport holes provided by Si as illustrated in Fig. 4a. The J-V characteristics measured under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination condition show a open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.53 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 25 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 55%, and a power conversion efficiency of 7.29% (Fig. 4b). Previously, we have used post-treated double-walled nanotube films to make solar cells with Si and obtained cell efficiencies in the range of 1–7%.25,26 Direct transfer of as-synthesized SWNT spiderwebs allows better control of the process and simplifies device fabrication, and readily reach higher efficiencies without much fluctuation. A similar configuration by airbrushing SWNTs onto Si has produced a cell efficiency of 2.7%, and about 4% after SOCl2 treatment.27
 Fig. 4  A spiderweb energy harvester. (a) Illustration showing the solar cell configuration and the spiderweb extracting holes from a silicon substrate under solar excitation. (b) J-V curves of the solar cell in dark and under AM1.5 illumination. (c) J-V curves of solar cells using spiderwebs with different transmittances (from 79.3% to 90.4%). (d) Relationship between the cell performance (efficiency and fill factor) and the spiderweb transparency. 
The combined excellent transparency and conductivity of the spiderwebs is important for reaching larger fill factor and high efficiency. A systematic study shows that spiderwebs with transmittances close to 90% (e.g. 89.3% and 90.4%) yield better cell performance in terms of JSC and FF (Fig. 4c). In contrast, when the transmittance drops to 79.3%, both JSC and FF show significant degradation, and the cell efficiency has dropped to 0.39% compared with 4.58% of the cell made of thinner SWNT films (90.4% transmittance). The main reasons include reduced transparency of thicker films and that the contact between thicker SWNTs and Si is not as good as thinner films (which are more flexible). The effect of SWNT spiderweb transparency on cell efficiency is clearly seen in Fig. 4d, in which higher transparency ensures more incident energy delivering to the SWNT-Si interface for photon-induced carrier generation. The results indicate that a thinner film with higher transparency is a critical factor for making SWNT-based solar cells, even though the film conductivity would decrease at reduced film thickness.
Conclusions
To summarize, we have made large-area SWNT spiderwebs that can be conveniently deposited or transferred to many substrates. The spiderweb structure, formed by ethanol-induced condensation, shows high flexibility, robustness, excellent transparency and conductivity. The direct synthesis process is scalable by extending the deposition zone or using a rolled substrate for deposition. Combined with silicon, we made solar cells with efficiencies up to 7.29%. The SWNT spiderwebs have many potential applications in energy harvesting devices, conductive coatings, flexible electronics, and multifunctional textile.
Acknowledgements
We thank Professor Daming Zhuang, Professor Gong Zhang, Professor Liduo Wang for helpful discussion. We also thank Dr Shanshan Wang and Dr Jiang Liu for film characterization and electrical testing. This work is financially supported by 863 Program (Grant No. 2009AA05Z423), Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation (Grant No. 2007B37) Key Project of Ministry of Education (Grant No. 108006), China, National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50972067) and Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University of State Education Ministry of China (#NCET-08-0322).
Notes and references
Q. Cao and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 29–53 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Li, P. Dharap, S. Nagarajaiah, E. V. Barrera and J. D. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 640 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Snow, F. K. Perkins, E. J. Houser, S. C. Badescu and T. L. Reinecke, Science, 2005, 307, 1942–1945 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, H. Kim, N. Pimparkar, J. P. Kulkarni, C. Wang, M. Shim, K. Roy, M. A. Alam and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2008, 454, 495–495 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Itkis, F. Borondics, A. P. Yu and R. Haddon, Science, 2006, 312, 413–416 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, H. Zeng, V. Subramanian, C. Masarapu, K. Hung and B. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 465204 CrossRef .
J. van de Lagemaat, T. M. Barnes, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen, T. J. Coutts, C. Weeks, I. Levitsky, J. Peltola and P. Glatkowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233503 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880–1886 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, L. Song, R. Yang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Sun, Y. Ren, D. Liu, L. Liu, J. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2307–2311 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, H. Zhu, Y. Li, B. Chen, Y. Jia, K. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Liu, J. Luo, M. Zheng, D. Wu, Y. Zhu and B. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. M. Zhao, M. Roe, D. Furniss, Y. Q. Zhu, S. R. P. Silva, J. Q. Wei, D. H. Wu and C. H. P. Poa, Small, 2006, 2, 1026–1030 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu and B. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3042–3044 RSC .
Z. C. Wu, Z. H. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Tenent, T. M. Barnes, J. D. Bergeson, A. J. Ferguson, B. To, L. M. Gedvilas, M. J. Heben and J. L. Blackburn, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3210 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Hu and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef .
V. Krstic, G. S. Duesberg, J. Muster, M. Burghard and S. Roth, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2338 CrossRef .
B. Dan, G. C. Irvin and M. Pasquali, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 835–843 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Parekh, G. Fanchini, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 121913 CrossRef .
H. Geng, K. K. Kim, K. P. So, Y. S. Lee, Y. Chang and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7758 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Jang, T. J. Kang, H. W. Im, D. W. Kim and Y. H. Kim, Small, 2008, 4, 2255–2261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Di, Y. Liu, H. Kajiura, S. Ye, L. Cao, D. Wei, H. Zhang, Y. Li and K. Noda, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4442–4449 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Ishikawa, H. Chang, K. Ryu, P. Chen, A. Badmaev, L. G. De Arco, G. Shen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Wei, Y. Jia, Q. K. Shu, Z. Y. Gu, K. L. Wang, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo, A. Y. Cao and D. H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2317–2321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, Q. K. Shu, X. C. Gui, Y. Q. Zhu, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, B. B. Ma, L. D. Wang, W. J. Liu, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4594–4598 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, V. P. Kunets, V. Saini, Y. Xu, E. Dervishi, G. J. Salamo, A. R. Biris and A. S. Biris, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1407–1414 CrossRef .

Footnote† These Authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Direct synthesis of clean, sticky SWNT spiderwebs. (a) (left) Photo image of a large area (7 × 15 cm2) freestanding SWNT film being peeled off the nickel substrate, (middle) SEM image of as-deposited loosely-packed multi-layer SWNTs, and (right) SEM image of spiderwebs formed by ethanol induced condensation. (b) Illustration of the ethanol condensation process for transforming as-grown SWNTs into a thin layer of spiderweb. (c) Photo of a piece of spiderweb fixed on a circular frame holding three polymeric foaming balls at the bottom. (d) Photo of a spiderweb sticking to a glass rod that was made contact with the spiderweb and then withdrawing away (arrow indicates the moving direction). The spiderweb was initially suspended vertically and then pulled by the glass rod (inset). (e) TEM image of high purity SWNTs in the spiderweb. Inset, TEM image of a single-walled and a double-walled nanotube. (f) Raman spectrum of as-grown SWNT film activated by laser of 633 nm wavelength. Inset, RBM peaks revealed from Raman spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 2  Versatility of spiderweb deposition and transfer. (a) Photo (left) and SEM images (middle and right) of a spiderweb-coated A4-size copy paper via direct CVD deposition. SWNT spiderwebs hanging between the paper fibers can be observed. (b) Photo image of a SWNT spiderweb directly deposited on a metal coin, and conformally coated on the letters and relief on the coin surface after ethanol condensation. (c) Schematic procedures for transferring large-area spiderwebs assisted by a steel mesh. (d) SEM images of a texture surface with 200 nm to 1 μm raised islands (obtained by wet-etching of silicon) that is coated by a spiderweb of SWNTs. The spiderweb follows the topography in a perfect manner. (e) SEM images of a single carbon fiber about 4 μm diameter (top) tightly wrapped by SWNT spiderwebs (down). (f) Photo image of a 2 inch silicon wafer after spiderweb transfer, where a small portion of the wafer was left empty (without SWNTs) to give visible contrast. (g) Optical microscopic image of the transferred spiderweb on silicon substrate showing the mesh-like topography.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical and electrical properties of SWNT spiderwebs. (a) Optical transmittance spectra of spiderwebs collected from different deposition positions (D is the distance to the edge of reaction zone, see inset). (b) Optical transmittance values (for 550 nm incident light) measured from spiderwebs after different deposition times. (c) Correlation between the spiderweb sheet resistance and transmittance at wavelength of 550 nm. (d) Comparison of the sheet resistance and transmittance for our spiderwebs and other films prepared by direct synthesis or post treatment methods.	 

 	Fig. 4  A spiderweb energy harvester. (a) Illustration showing the solar cell configuration and the spiderweb extracting holes from a silicon substrate under solar excitation. (b) J-V curves of the solar cell in dark and under AM1.5 illumination. (c) J-V curves of solar cells using spiderwebs with different transmittances (from 79.3% to 90.4%). (d) Relationship between the cell performance (efficiency and fill factor) and the spiderweb transparency.	 
Footnote
† These Authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
