Optical molecular sensing with semiconductor quantum dots (QDs)  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS15357B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS15357B
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4067-4085Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOptical molecular sensing with semiconductor quantum dots (QDs)

        
          
            Ronit 
            Freeman
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Itamar 
            Willner
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Chemistry, Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. E-mail: willnea@vms.huji.ac.il;  Fax: +972-2-652-77-15;   Tel: +972-2-658-52-72
Received 
      25th December 2011
    First published on 5th April 2012AbstractSemiconductor quantum dots (QDs) exhibit unique optical and photophysical properties. These features are implemented to develop optical molecular sensor systems. The review addresses the methods to functionalize the QDs with chemical capping layers that enable the use of the resulting hybrid structures for sensing, and discusses the photophysical mechanisms being applied in the different sensor systems. Different methods to design the chemically-modified QDs hybrid structures for sensing low-molecular-weight substrates, metal ions, anions and gases are presented. These include the functionalization of the QDs with ligands that bind ions, the modification of the QDs with substrate-specific ligands or receptor units, and the chemical modification of the QDs upon sensing. Specific emphasis is directed to describe the cooperative catalytic functions of the QDs in the sensing processes, and to address the function of sensing with logic-gate operations.
Ronit Freeman
Ronit Freeman is a PhD student in the laboratory of Professor I. Willner. Her research involves analytical and bioanalytical applications of quantum dots, DNA nanostructures, and the use of modified nanoparticles for probing intracellular processes. She holds the Clore Foundation Scholars Award for PhD studies.
Itamar Willner
Itamar Willner is a Professor of Chemistry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. His research interests include synthesis, characterization and application of nanoparticles, bioelectronics, nanobiotechnology, molecular and biomolecular machines and artificial photosynthesis. He has coauthored over 600 papers and monographs. He received the Israel Prize in Chemistry (2002), the Rothschild Prize (2008), and the EMET Prize (2008). He is a member of the Israel Academy of Sciences, the German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is a member of many editorial advisory boards including Angewandte Chemie, Nano Letters, Small, ChemPhysChem, Langmuir and more.
1. Introduction
The synthesis and characterization of semiconductor nanoparticles, quantum dots (QDs), represent one of the major advances in material science in the last two decades. Photoexcitation of valence-band electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor material yields electron–hole pairs that recombine and yield luminescence. The theoretical understanding of the parameters controlling the luminescence features of QDs was extensively reviewed,1–7 and experimental studies demonstrating the luminescence properties of numerous compositions of semiconductor materials exhibiting variable sizes, shapes and compositions were reported.8–13 These studies have established a new class of materials that find broad applications in energy conversion and storage,14–17 optoelectronic devices,18 sensor applications,19–21 photocatalysis22–25 and more.26 Ingenious synthetic routes for the preparation of size-controlled semiconductor nanoparticles were developed, and these included the kinetic-controlled growth of monolayer- or thin films-protected QDs27 or the synthesis of the QDs in nano reactor systems such as micelles,28 microemulsions,29,30 or mesoporous inorganic supports.31,32 Further versatility in the synthesis of QDs was demonstrated with the preparation of core–shell semiconductor materials6,33–39 or semiconductor materials exhibiting nanorod shapes40–43 and even branched nanorod structures.9,44–46 The unique functions of QDs are reflected by their photophysical and chemical properties: (i) the QDs exhibit high fluorescence quantum yields and they reveal a high stability against degradation and photobleaching.47 (ii) The QDs reveal size-controlled and shape-controlled absorption and luminescence features, due to the quantum confinement of the electrons in the particles. Thus, as the particles are smaller, the luminescence energies are blue-shifted to higher energies.1,3,48–50 Similarly, non-symmetrical particles, e.g. rods, exhibit longitudinal excitons controlled by the aspect-ratios of the nano-objects. As control over the sizes and shapes of QDs is achieved by the different synthetic and separation methods, particles of the same material revealing luminescence properties covering a broad spectral region are available. (iii) The fluorescence spectra of the QDs are usually characterized by narrow emission bands exhibiting a large Stokes shift. These properties are important for coupling the emission functions of the QDs to other sized QDs,51 or to organic fluorophores.52 (iv) Unlike molecular fluorophores, semiconductor QDs have broad absorbance bands. This allows the photoexcitation of different sized QDs by a single wavelength, while generating the size-controlled luminescence of the QDs. (v) Finally, the arsenal of synthetic methodologies for the preparation of QDs leads to monolayer- or thin-film protected nanoparticles with tailored functionalities. This enables the tethering of molecular units to the QDs,53 and allows the electronic coupling between the photoexcited QDs and the tethered molecules. The electron transfer (ET) quenching of photoexcited QDs is a versatile useful photophysical mechanism to follow spatially-restricted close interactions between electron donor–acceptor sites. The photoexcited QDs might participate in electron transfer via two general routes outlined in Fig. 1. The photoexcitation of the QDs yields an electron–hole pair in the conduction band and valence band of the QDs. In the presence of an electron acceptor (A), exhibiting a LUMO energy level more positive than the conduction band potential, electron transfer quenching of the conduction band electrons to the acceptor units occurs. Similarly, in the presence of an electron donor (D) exhibiting a HOMO level that is less positive than the valence band potential, electron transfer from the donor to the holes associated with the valence band proceeds.
 Fig. 1  Electron transfer quenching routes of semiconductor quantum dots by electron acceptor or electron donor units. 
The two electron transfer routes deplete either the conduction band electrons or the valence band holes, thus prohibiting the recombination of the electron–hole pairs on the photoexcited QDs. Provided that the electron–hole recombination process leads to the generation of luminescence, any of the competitive electron transfer reactions leads to the quenching of the luminescence of the QDs. The rate of electron transfer between the QDs and an electron acceptor (or an electron donor and the QDs) is given by eqn (1) where R0 and R represent the van-der Waals distance and the real distance separating the donor–acceptor pair, respectively, β is the electronic coupling constant, ΔG0 is the free energy change associated with the electron transfer process, and λ is the reorganization energy accompanying the electron transfer process. (1)The fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process between a donor and an acceptor luminescent probe is a further versatile spectroscopic tool to follow intimate contact between donor and acceptor components, and, hence, is a useful method to monitor sensing events between recognition elements and their analytes.54–56 The fluorescence resonance energy process (FRET) involves the dipole–dipole interactions between a donor and an acceptor, where the FRET probability, assuming a two point-like random distribution of the dipoles, decreases with distance by the sixth power. This turns the FRET efficiency, E, to be very sensitive to the distance, r, separating the donor–acceptor couple, (where R0 is the Förster radius), eqn (2). The Förster radius R0 is calculated by eqn (3), where K2 is a parameter that depends on the relative orientation of the dipoles, and gains a value between 0 and 4 (for two randomly oriented dipoles the value of K2 is 2/3). QYD corresponds to the luminescence quantum yield of the donor fluorophore, n is the refractive index of the medium, and J(λ) represents the overlap integral that provides a quantitative measure for the donor–acceptor spectral overlap, Fig. 2. The overlap integral is calculated by eqn (4), where εA(λ) is the extinction coefficient of the acceptor and FD(λ) is the normalized emission spectrum. (2) (3) (4) (5)Typical Förster distances separating the donor and the acceptor range between 2 and 8 nm. FRET signals are detectable up to about twice the Förster distance separating the donor–acceptor pair. If, however, the acceptor unit is tethered to n × donor sites, the FRET efficiency increases and is given by eqn (5).
 Fig. 2  Parameters affecting the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process. (A) Spectral overlap between the emission and absorption spectra of the donor–acceptor pair. (B) Effect of distance separating the donor–acceptor pair on the energy transfer efficiency. 
The synthesis of ligand or receptor-coated semiconductor QDs and the binding of the respective analytes provide the fundamental principles for sensing of molecular analytes by the general mechanisms outlined in Fig. 3. The analyte is labeled by a quencher unit that interacts with the QDs by either FRET or ET mechanisms. The competitive binding of the analyte and labeled analyte to the ligand, Fig. 3(a), or the equilibrium displacement of the label, Fig. 3(b), controls the resulting luminescence functions of the hybrid QDs. Alternatively, the association of the analyte to the ligand/receptor modifiers of the QDs may control the luminescence features of the QDs, thus leading to the quantitative detection of the analyte, Fig. 3(c).
 Fig. 3  Different mechanisms for the application of QDs as optical sensors: (a) Competitive detection of an analyte using a labeled analyte and FRET/ET as transduction mechanisms. (b) Direct FRET/ET quenching of a labeled analyte. (c) Direct FRET/ET quenching by the analyte. 
Substantial progress in the application of QDs for optical sensing and biosensing was accomplished in the last decade, and several review articles summarized the advances in this field.57–60 Most of the reviews addressed, however, the use of the QDs for optical biosensing and intracellular imaging. The present review highlights recent advances in the use of QDs for sensing of low-molecular-weight substrates or ions using modified QDs as optical probes and addresses the application of chemically-modified quantum dots as optical switches or logic-gate devices.
2. Chemically-modified semiconductor quantum dots
Semiconductor quantum dots with superior photophysical features (i.e., high fluorescence quantum yields and stability against photobleaching) are usually synthesized from organometallic precursors, and are generally protected by a capping layer composed of organic ligands such as trioctylphosphine (TOP) or trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO).61–64 While QDs composed of a single semiconductor core material reveal, often, limited stability and low luminescence quantum yields, due to surface defects, composite core–shell QDs of two different, lattice-matching, semiconductors reveal enhanced stabilities and high luminescence yields of the core material.6,34,38,65–70 The resulting capped nanocrystals are hydrophobic, and therefore, soluble in organic solvents. One may replace, however, the TOP/TOPO ligands with other capping agents via ligand exchange reactions. Alternatively, modifications of the existing ligand using electrostatic, hydrophobic interactions or host–guest interactions can be performed.19,71–91 The selection of the ligands protecting the QDs depends on the desired applications of the QDs and the dispersion media. For application in aqueous media the organic capping ligands must be exchanged or further functionalized with hydrophilic capping agents or alternatively, aqueous synthetic methods for the production of QDs need to be implemented.
The introduction of the QDs into aqueous media is usually accompanied with a drastic decrease in the luminescence yields of the QDs. This effect presumably originates from the reaction of surface states with water, a process that yields surface traps for the conduction-band electrons.92 Different methods to stabilize the luminescence properties of semiconductor QDs in aqueous media have been reported, Fig. 4. These include the surface passivation with protective layers, such as proteins71,93 and the coating of the QDs with protecting silicon oxide films,94,95 polymer films,47,90,96 or alternatively, with amphiphilic polymers that have both a hydrophobic side chain that interacts with the organic capping layer of the QDs, and a hydrophilic component such as PEG backbone for water solubility.83,97 Such water-soluble QDs retained up to 55% of their quantum yields upon transfer from hydrophobic environments to aqueous media. While these methods successfully preserve the photophysical properties of the QDs, they produce QDs with thick stabilizing capping layers that hamper the photophysical functions of the QDs. For example, the thick passivation layers introduce barriers for the application of the QDs in fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) or electron-transfer quenching processes associated with sensing events. Thus, a delicate balance between the structure of the modifying capping layer associated with the QDs and its effect on the photophysical features of the particles must be maintained.
 Fig. 4  Modification of semiconductor QDs with functional capping layers for water solubilization and preservation of luminescence properties: (A) Exchange of the organic capping layer with a water-soluble layer; (a)–(d) thiolated or dithiolated functional monolayers, (e) cysteine-terminated peptide, (f) thiolated siloxane, (g) carboxylic acid-functionalized dendrone. (B) Encapsulation and stabilization of QDs stabilized in functional bilayer films composed of (h) a phospholipid layer, and (i) a diblock copolymer. 
An additional method to produce organic or water soluble QDs relies on the exchange of native organic ligands linked to the QD, such as trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) or octadecylamine (ODA), with other ligands. The most common examples of binding groups are thiols, phosphines and amines. Polar and charged molecules provide good dispersibility in aqueous media, while hydrophobic ligands are soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. The most common thiolated molecules used to stabilize semiconductor QDs in aqueous media are thiolated aliphatic carboxylic acids, such as mercaptoacetic acid (MAA),52,71,98 mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), or mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA), Fig. 4. To achieve higher stability, bidentate surface ligands composed of derivatives of dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA)93,99 or dithiothreitol74 were used for the preparation of water-soluble CdSe/ZnS QDs.100,101 These bidentate ligands provide stable interactions with the QD surfaces owing to the chelate effect of the dithiol groups. Also, lipoic acid units tethered to poly(ethylene glycol) spacers that were functionalized with linkable functionalities were used to modify the QDs. These modifiers eliminate nonspecific adsorption processes, and also provide anchoring sites for the covalent immobilization of the recognition ligands. Other thiol-containing materials, such as peptides with a polycysteine adhesive domains, were used to synthesize water soluble QDs.102,103 Additionally, QDs were stabilized by exchanging ODA with water-soluble dendrons to yield water-soluble QDs with quantum yields of 36%.104
Several methods to synthesize functionalized QDs directly in water were reported.57,105,106 As compared to the organic synthesis, aqueous synthetic approaches to prepare QDs are simpler, reproducible, and can be easily scaled up, yet the resulting QDs exhibit, often, lower crystallinity or quantum yields. Different aqueous-based synthetic routes to prepare QDs that retain high fluorescence yields have been developed. These methods are based on the reaction of metal salts (e.g. cadmium salts) and NaHTe or NaHSe in the presence of water-soluble molecular or macromolecular capping agents that kinetically protect the growth of the QDs by covalent or ligand–ion interactions to yield monolayer or thin-film capped particles.107 For example, nanocrystals, such as CdSe108,109 or HgTe,110 were successfully prepared in water using mercapto-ethanol and thioglycerol as stabilizers, and the resulting QDs possessed high quantum yields (up to 40%). Also, CdSe QDs with a narrow size distribution that reveal a high fluorescence quantum yield (25%) were synthesized by a single-step procedure in water using glutathione (GSH) as a stabilizing agent.111 Similarly, glutathione-capped CdTe (GSH-CdTe) QDs with tunable fluorescence features (500–650 nm) and quantum yields as high as 45% were synthesized in aqueous media and employed for the staining of fixed cells.112 The single-step synthesis of thiolated cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/CdS core–shell QDs resulted in water-soluble QDs with a quantum yield of 46% in water.113,114
Also, the aqueous synthesis of citrate-capped QDs115,116 and cysteine-modified QDs117 have been reported. Another aqueous synthesis of QDs is based on microwave irradiation under controlled temperature. This method allowed the preparation of a series of stable water-soluble MPA-capped CdTe QDs with tunable emission properties (505–733 nm) and high quantum yields (40–60%). This method was used also for the production of high quality alloyed QDs.118
The functionalization of the quantum dots, not only tunes their solubility properties, but also allows the introduction of functionalities for further coupling to other molecules or ligands, as depicted in Fig. 5. The most common method involves the coupling of amine-functionalized molecules to carboxylic acid residues associated with the encapsulating layer that modifies the nanoparticles. For example, amino-modified nucleic acids or amino acids may be covalently coupled to the QDs, Fig. 5, path (a) and (b). This method is, however, limited to mono-amine functionalized molecules since poly-functionalities may induce the aggregation of the QDs. The stepwise assembly of molecular functionalities on QDs can be achieved by the primary assembly of a thiolated capping layer that allows the covalent tethering of a ligand for the binding of the recognition element to the QDs. For example, the assembly of mercaptopropionic acid on the QDs provided the base capping layer for the covalent attachment of the p-aminophenyl boronic acid ligand. The subsequent binding of vicinal dihydroxy-modified host molecules enabled, then, the functionalization of the QDs with boronic ester molecular functionalization, Fig. 5, path(c). A further method to modify the QDs involves a layer-by-layer modification process using electrostatic interactions as a binding motif. For example, the deposition of positively charged polymers on carboxylate-monolayer-functionalized QDs enabled the construction of bilayers on the QDs, Fig. 5(d). By the appropriate functionalization of the positively charged polymer, further covalent modification of the QDs can be achieved.
 Fig. 5  Modification of monolayer-functionalized QDs with molecular or macromolecular components: (a) and (b) Covalent attachment. (c) Attachment of ligands. (d) Electrostatic association of a polymer. 
As the different molecular sensing platforms involve ligand-functionalized QDs that, usually, bind the analyte by equilibrium, ligand–analyte, supramolecular complexes, the efficiency of the sensing process is controlled by the surface coverage of the ligands. Accordingly, it is important to characterize the surface coverage of the ligands on the modified QDs, and it is important to optimize the synthesis of the modified QDs to establish reliable sensing materials.
3. Sensing of metal ions with chemically-functionalized QDs
The functionalization of QDs with ligands that bind metal ions provides a general mean to develop functional QDs acting as ion sensors. The ability of many ions or metal–ligand complexes to quench the QDs provides an intrinsic feature for the operation of these sensors. While many of the sensors turn to be non-selective, the appropriate design of the ligands may, often, improve the selectivity of the systems. Different capping functionalities such as mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), mercaptoacetic acid, glutathione, mercaptosuccinic acid, thioglycolic acid or L-cysteine were used as ligands for the modification of QDs and for the association of metal ions.119–121 Electron transfer quenching of the luminescence of the QDs allows, then, the analysis of the ions. For example, mercaptoacetic acid-capped CdS QDs bind Hg2+ ions, resulting in a linear decrease in the fluorescence intensity of the QDs in the range 0.05 × 10−7 to 4.0 × 10−7 M of Hg2+. This enabled the analysis of the ions with a detection limit corresponding to 4.2 × 10−9 M.122 Also, mercaptopropionic acid-functionalized QDs were applied for the analysis of Cu2+ ions. The fluorescence of the QDs was quenched linearly in the range 0–256 ng × ml−1 of Cu2+ with a detection limit of 0.19 ng × ml−1.121 Calixarene-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs were, also, used for the selective sensing of mercury ions. Higher concentrations of Hg2+ resulted in lower intensities of the luminescence of the QDs.123 In addition, CdSe QDs were modified with triethanolamine (TEA) for the recognition of mercury and iodide ions. The iodide anion bridged the positively charged TEA-QDs thus, allowing the association of the Hg2+ ions and the formation of a stable QD–I−–Hg2+ complex. This resulted in the quenching of the luminescence of the QDs via an electron transfer path from the QDs to the surface-associated mercury ions.124 By designing capping layers consisting of peptides with tailored metal binding properties or Schiff-base ligands, enhanced sensitivities and selectivities were demonstrated. The pentapeptide Gly-His-Leu-Leu-Cys was immobilized on CdS QD, and the selective luminescence detection of Cu2+ or Ag+ was demonstrated.125 Similarly, CdS QDs modified with Schiff-base functionalities revealed specific sensing of Cu2+ and Fe3+ ions.119 These solution-based optical sensors were further improved by the assembly of the QDs on solid supports and the optical detection of ions in complex mixtures. For example, mercaptosuccinic acid-functionalized CdTe QDs were deposited on quartz surfaces by a layer-by-layer process that involved poly(dimethyldiallyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) as electrostatic “glue”. The resulting surfaces were used for the optical detection of Hg2+.126
The Hg2+ ions quenched the fluorescence of the QDs by an electron transfer process. The fluorescence of the QDs multilayer films was examined in the presence of different concentrations of mercury ions, Fig. 6. As the concentration of the Hg2+ ions increased, the fluorescence of the QDs decreased. This enabled the sensing of mercury ions with a detection limit that corresponds to 0.01 μM.
 Fig. 6  Luminescence spectra of the CdTe multilayer films, upon interaction with different concentrations of Hg2+ ions for 3 hours: (A) 0 μM. (B) 0.01 μM. (C) 0.05 μM. (D) 0.1 μM. (E) 0.2 μM. (F) 5 μM. (G) 1 μM. Inset: Resulting calibration curve (Reproduced from ref. 126, with permission from Elsevier). 
While the interaction of metal ions with functionalized-QDs usually results in the quenching of the luminescence of the QDs, fluorescence enhancement can also be observed. Such a phenomenon is usually observed when the ligand associated with the QDs quenches the particles, yet the resulting metal ion–ligand complex lacks the possibility to quench the QDs. For example, CdSe/ZnS QDs modified with the azamacrocycle receptor units, cyclam (1), were used for the sensing of zinc ions (Fig. 7).127 The fluorescence of the QDs was quenched by the azamacrocycle units through electron transfer from the amine functionalities to the valence-band holes of the photoexcited QDs, thereby eliminating the radiative electron–hole recombination process, and the luminescence of the QDs. The binding of zinc ions to the azamacrocycle receptor eliminated the electron donor properties of the amine functionalities, resulting in an increase of the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 7. This enabled the sensing of Zn2+ ions with a detection limit of ca. 2.2 μM.
Purine and pyrimidine bases incorporated in nucleic acids or in synthetic nucleic acid analogs bind specifically different metal ions. For example, thymine yields a thymine–Hg2+–thymine complex,128,129 and cytosine forms specifically a cytosine–Ag+–cytosine complex.130,131 These properties of the nucleic acids were utilized to develop QDs-based Hg2+-ions and Ag+-ions sensors, and different sized QDs were implemented for the multiplexed analysis of Hg2+ and Ag+.132 Two different sized CdSe/ZnS QDs were modified with nucleic acids exhibiting specific ion binding properties. The green-emitting QDs, λem = 560 nm, were functionalized with the T-rich nucleic acid, (2), that binds Hg2+-ions, and the red-emitting QDs, λem = 620 nm, were functionalized with the C-rich nucleic acid, (3), that associates the Ag+-ions, Fig. 8(A). The formation of the Hg2+-modified complexes on the (2)-modified QDs resulted in the quenching of the green-emitting QDs, Fig. 8(B), whereas the association of Ag+ to the (3)-modified QDs led to the quenching of the red-emitting QDs, Fig. 8(C). The respective QDs revealed selectivity and other metal ions did not affect the luminescence properties of the QDs. The QDs enabled the optical analysis of Hg2+ and Ag+ with detection limits that corresponded to 10 nM (2 ppb) and 1 μM (200 ppb), respectively. Also, multiplexed analysis of the two ions was accomplished by the different sized functionalized QDs, Fig. 8(D). Upon mixing of the two-sized (2)- and (3)-functionalized QDs the selective and simultaneous analysis of the Hg2+ and Ag+ ions was demonstrated by the quenching of the respective QDs.132
 Fig. 7  (A) Fluorescent sensing of zinc ions using cyclam-modified QDs. (B) Luminescence spectra of the cyclam-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs, upon interaction with different concentrations of Zn2+ ions: (1) 0 μM, (2) 5 μM, (3) 15 μM, (4) 32 μM, (5) 62 μM, (6) 125 μM, (7) 250 μM, (8) 500 μM. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 8  (A) Optical analysis of Hg2+/Ag+ ions by nucleic acid-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of (2)-QD560 upon interaction with 1 × 10−4 M Hg2+. Inset: Calibration curve for various concentrations of Hg2+. (C) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of (3)-QD620 upon interaction with 5 × 10−5 M Ag+. Inset: Calibration curve for various concentrations of Ag+. (D) Fluorescence changes of the (2)-QD560 and (3)-QD620 upon interaction with: (a) no Hg2+, no Ag+; (b) no Hg2+, 30 μM Ag+; (c) no Ag+, 30 μM Hg2+; (d) 30 μM Hg2+, 30 μM Ag+ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH). 
The nucleic acid-functionalized QDs used for the multiplexed sensing of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions were further implemented as a system that performs an “AND” logic operation.132 The Hg2+ and Ag+ ions may act as inputs of the gates, Fig. 9(A). The use of different sized QDs modified with the nucleic acids (2) and (3) for the recognition of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions, respectively, acts as the constituents of the logic gate system, Fig. 9(A). Only in the presence of both inputs, the luminescence of the two different-sized QDs are quenched, cf.Fig. 8(D), leading to the “AND” gate. This concept was extended to design the “OR” gate, Fig. 9(B). In this system, the two sized QDs are modified each with the sequences (2) and (3) that recognize Hg2+ and Ag+, respectively. In the presence of each of the inputs, and in the presence of both inputs, the luminescence of the two QDs is quenched, leading to the “OR” gate, Fig. 9(C).
 Fig. 9  (A) The “AND” logic gate system based on electron-transfer quenching of the 2- and 3-QDs by Hg2+ and Ag+ inputs, respectively. (B) The “OR” logic gate system based on the electron-transfer quenching of 2- and 3-QDs by Hg2+ and Ag+ inputs. (C) Time-dependent fluorescence changes of the “OR” logic gate system activated by the following inputs: (a) no Hg2+, no Ag+ (0, 0); (b) no Hg2+, 30 mm Ag+ (0, 1); (c) no Ag+, 30 mm Hg2+ (1, 0); (d) 30 mm Hg2+, 30 mm Ag+ (1,1). Inset: Truth table of the “OR” logic-gate system (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH). 
Synthetic nucleic acids exhibiting catalytic activities (DNAzymes) find growing interest as amplifying labels for sensing events.133–135 Among the many catalytic nucleic acids a series of metal ion-dependent DNAzymes are known. For example, DNAzymes that depend on Pb2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Mg2+, UO22+ and more are known. The different catalytic nucleic acids differ in the loop-region composing the core for accommodating the respective metal ions, and the sequences for binding the substrates. The substrates usually include a ribonucleobase (r) as cleavage site, and the catalytic function of the DNAzyme is reflected by the hydrolytic scission of the substrate, and its separation into two subunits, Fig. 10(A). Accordingly, the Pb2+- and Cu2+-dependent DNAzymes and different-sized QDs were implemented for the analysis of Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions, as depicted in Fig. 10(B).136 The 5′ amino-functionalized substrates of the Pb2+- and Cu2+-dependent DNAzymes ((4) and (5), respectively) were covalently linked to different sized CdSe QDs functionalized with a carboxylated siloxane capping layer.
 Fig. 10  (A) The different metal-dependent DNAzymes for: (a) UO22+, (b) Pb2+, (c) Mg2+, (d) Cu2+. (B) Schematic detection of metal ions using DNAzyme-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (C) (I) Fluorescence spectra of the QDs–DNAzyme conjugates after interaction with various concentrations of Pb2+, taken after a fixed time-interval of 25 min. (II) Fluorescence spectra of the QDs–DNAzyme conjugates after interaction with various concentrations of Cu2+, taken after a fixed time-interval of 25 min (Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society). 
The respective substrates were also labeled with the respective black hole quenchers Iowa black FQ (for the Pb2+ substrate) and Iowa black RQ (for the Cu2+-dependent substrate), leading to the quenching of the luminescence of the two-sized QDs. In the presence of the respective Pb2+-dependent DNAzyme, (6), (modified at its 3′-end with Iowa black FQ) or the Cu2+-dependent DNAzyme, (7), (functionalized with the Iowa black RQ) and Pb2+ and/or Cu2+ ions, the cleavage of the respective substrates occurred, leading to the removal of the quencher units and the quencher-functionalized DNAzyme. This triggered-on the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 10(C). In the presence of the two ions, the simultaneous activation of the luminescence of the two-sized QDs was demonstrated, implying that the system may be implemented for the analysis of different ions.
4. Ligand- and receptor-functionalized QDs for sensing
The competitive binding of vicinal diols to a boronic acid ligand allowed the development of quantum dots-based chemical sensors. 3-Aminophenyl boronic acid was covalently linked to CdSe/ZnS QDs. The ATTO-590-labeled-galactose (8) or ATTO-590-modified dopamine (9) were linked to the boronic acid ligand associated with the QDs, and this resulted in the FRET from the QDs to the dye. In the presence of monosaccharides, competitive binding to the QDs proceeded, and this resulted in higher intensities of the luminescence of the QDs and lower fluorescence intensities of the acceptor dye. The system allowed the competitive optical assay of galactose (10), glucose (11), or dopamine (12),137Fig. 11. The detection limit for analyzing galactose, glucose or dopamine corresponded to 5 × 10−5 M, 1 × 10−4 M, and 1 × 10−6 M, respectively.
 Fig. 11  (A) Competitive analysis of monosaccharides or dopamine using fluorophore-labeled galactose- or fluorophore-labeled dopamine-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs, respectively. (B) Time-dependent fluorescence changes upon the interaction of the fluorophore-labeled galactose-functionalized QDs with galactose, 5 mM. Spectra were recorded at time intervals of 3 minutes. (C) Calibration curves corresponding to the competitive analysis of: (a) galactose; (b) glucose (Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Various molecular receptors, such as cyclodextrins, calixarenes and crown-ethers, were used for the optical analysis of different substrates. The luminescence of the receptor-modified QDs can be controlled by the binding of the analytes to the receptor sites using different affinity interactions. For example, β-cyclodextrin, β-CD, -modified CdSe/ZnS QDs have been used to develop selective sensing and chiroselective sensing platforms using a competitive FRET assay or a direct electron transfer quenching route.138 Cyclodextrins are cyclic polysaccharide consisting of glucose units linked by 1-4-β-glycoside bonds. They bind hydrophobic organic substrates to their hydrophobic cavities.139–143 The binding properties of the cyclodextrins are controlled by the relative sizes of the guest substrates and the dimensions of their hydrophobic cavities (α-, β-, and γ-cyclodextrines). Furthermore, cyclodextrins are chiral receptors, and hence, reveal chiroselective binding of chiral guest substrates.144–149 These properties of cyclodextrins were used to develop selective and chiroselective chromatographic matrices, sensors, and slow-release systems.139,141,144,146,149–154 The β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) receptor consists of seven glucose units linked through 1-4-β-glycoside bonds. β-CD was linked to CdSe/ZnS QDs modified by the boronic acid ligand, Fig. 12(A), to yield the receptor-functionalized QDs. The dye, Rhodamine B, (13) was incorporated into the receptor sites of β-CD, resulting in, upon excitation of the QDs, the FRET process from the QDs to the β-CD-entrapped dye. The FRET between the QDs and Rhodamine B was further used for the competitive analysis of adamantane carboxylic acid (14) and of p-hydroxytoluene (15). For example, Fig. 12(B) shows the fluorescence of the functionalized QDs upon analyzing different concentrations of adamantane carboxylic acid (14). Also, the chiroselective optical discrimination between D,L-phenylalanine (16) and (17) and D,L-tyrosine (18) and (19) was demonstrated.138Fig. 12(C) exemplifies the luminescence intensities of the FRET signal upon analyzing D- and L-tyrosine. L-Tyrosine results in a substantially lower signal of the Rhodamine B FRET acceptor, implying that L-tyrosine binds effectively to the β-CD cavities, resulting in the elimination of the dye acceptor from the receptor sites. These results imply that, indeed, chiroselective detection of the enantiomers proceeds. The β-CD-modified QDs were further used for the label-free analysis of p-nitrophenol (20), using an electron transfer quenching mechanism as shown in Fig. 12(D). The association of p-nitrophenol to the β-CD cavity resulted in the electron transfer quenching of the luminescence of the QDs, and the quantitative analysis of the guest substrate. A similar approach used thiolated β-CD-modified CdS QDs, Fig. 13. The addition of ferrocene derivatives to the system resulted in the electron transfer quenching of the luminescence of the QDs. In the presence of adamantane carboxylic acid, competitive binding to the CD-QDs proceeded. This resulted in increased luminescence intensities of the QDs as the concentration of the adamantane carboxylic acid was elevated, due to the elimination of the ferrocene quencher units from the β-CD cavities.155 In a different example, the formation of a complex between TOPO-capped QDs and CD using hydrophobic interactions resulted in water-soluble nanoparticles. The association of p-nitrophenol or 1-naphthol to the CD cavity displaced the TOPO–CD complex, and this led to the exposure of the TOPO-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs to water, resulting in the precipitation of the QDs.156 Calixarenes exhibit unique binding properties toward ions (e.g., quaternary ammonium ions) or organic substrates.157–159 The calixarene receptor units were linked to TOPO-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs using hydrophobic interactions. The calixarene-functionalized QDs were, then, used for sensing of molecules that bind to the calixarene receptor and act as ET quenchers of the QDs. For example, QDs were functionalized with the tetrahexyl ether derivative of p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene receptor (21), Fig. 14A, and the receptor-QDs hybrid structure was used for the quantitative analysis of the acetylcholine, (22), neurotransmitter, Fig. 14(B). As the concentration of the neurotransmitter increased, the quenching of the QDs was enhanced,160Fig. 14(B). Similarly, the luminescence of the calixarene-functionalized QDs was quenched upon the association of the N,N′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium electron acceptor.161 Also, it was demonstrated that the binding of guest molecules to calix[4]arene or calix[6]arene receptor-modified QDs resulted in an increase of the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 15. This phenomenon was attributed to the increased conformational rigidity of the system and the suppression of non-radiative recombination paths. This method was used for the sensing of the amino acids methionine and phenylalanine.162 Also, p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene–CdTe QDs conjugates were used to sense the pesticides, fenamithion and acetamipirid.124 The modification of QDs with crown ethers enabled the analysis of the K+ ions.51 The lipoic acid tethered 15-crown-5-ether, (23), was used to functionalize two different sized CdSe/ZnS QDs, Fig. 16(A). The 15-crown receptor is known to form a “sandwich”-type complex with the crown ether. Accordingly, K+-ions added to the two sized QDs resulted in the interparticle association of the QDs through the bis-crown-ether–K+ bridging complex, Fig. 16(B). Aggregation of the two-sized QDs resulted in the energy transfer from the green-emitting QDs to the red-emitting QDs, Fig. 16(C). As the extent of interparticle aggregation was controlled by the concentration of K+, the resulting FRET changes provided a quantitative signal for the K+ ions. A related macrocycle-modified QDs system was used for the analysis of Cd2+ by an electron transfer mechanism.163 CdS:Mn/ZnS QDs were functionalized with 1,10-diaza-18-crown-6. The amine-donor groups quenched the luminescence of the QDs by an ET mechanism. The binding of Cd2+ ions to the macrocycle and its amine functionalities depleted the donor site, thus, enhancing the luminescence of the QDs as the concentration of Cd2+ was elevated.
 Fig. 12  (A) Sensing of substrates by a competitive FRET assay using β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs with receptor-bound Rhodamine B (13). (B) Calibration curve corresponding to the analysis of variable concentrations of 14 by the Rhodamine B/β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs system. (C) Calibration curve corresponding to the analysis of variable concentrations of 18, curve a, and 19, curve b, by the Rhodamine B/β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs system. (D) Direct analysis of substrates by the β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs using an electron transfer quenching route (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 13  Sensing of substrates by a competitive ET assay using β-cyclodextrin-modified CdS QDs and a ferrocene quenching label that binds to the CD cavities (Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 14  (A) Synthesis of TOPO-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs with tetrahexyl ether derivative of p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene receptor and mercapto acetic acid (MAA). (B) Quenching of the fluorescence emission of the modified CdSe/ZnS QDs upon the addition of different concentrations of acetylcholine (Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 15  Sensing of methionine or phenylalanine by the calixarene-modified QDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. IOP Publishing Ltd). 
 Fig. 16  (A) Synthesis of 15-crown-5 and 15-crown-5-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Aggregation of the 15-crown-5-modified two-sized CdSe/ZnS QDs upon the addition of K+ ions. (C) Fluorescence titration spectra of the two sized QDs upon addition of K+ ions (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Royal Society of Chemistry). 
5. Surface-modified QDs for sensing
While the previous QDs-based systems were based on the formation of complexes between the analytes and ligands associated with the QDs, other associative interaction between the modified QDs and the analytes, such as electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions, may also provide the driving interactions for the sensor systems. Different capping layers were used to passivate the QDs surface and to stabilize the QDs. These capping units may interact with different analytes, thus, affecting the luminescence properties of the semiconductor nanocrystals. Oleic acid-coated CdSe QDs were synthesized and dispersed in chloroform, and the nitroaromatic explosives: 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), 2.4-dinitrotoluene (DNT), nitrobenzene (NB) and 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene were intercalated within the hydrophobic layer surrounding the CdSe QDs. The associated nitro-aromatic analytes quenched the luminescence of the nanocrystals via an electron transfer mechanism and this enabled the analysis of the different explosives.164
The adsorption of analytes on the capping layer stabilizing the QDs often affects the luminescence of the QDs. Electrostatic interactions facilitate the electrostatic association of charged substrates to QDs modified with an oppositely charged capping layer. For example, mercaptopropionic acid (MPA)-capped CdSe QDs adsorb edavarone by electrostatic interactions, resulting in the blocking of non-radiative electron–hole recombination paths and the intensified luminescence of the QDs.165 Similarly, the attraction of the negatively charged adenosine triphosphate by positively charged QDs affected the quenching of the QDs. The system enabled the selective optical analysis of ATP in the presence of other nucleotides.166 In addition, mercaptoethane sulfonate-modified CdSe QDs were used for the optical detection of cyanide ions via an electron transfer quenching of the QDs.167 Also, the fluorescence quenching of negatively charged MPA-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs by the positively charged herbicide, N,N′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium, via an electron transfer mechanism was demonstrated. This sensor system was further developed by coupling the receptor cucurbituril that binds the bipyridinium salt to its cavity. The competitive dissociation of the bipyridinium salt from the QDs restored the luminescence of the QDs, thus providing a positive fluorescence signal for the sensing of the bipyridinium salt.168 In analogy, a boronic acid-modified bipyridinium salt associated with positively charged QDs was used as a label for the competitive analysis of glucose.169 While the adsorbed bipyridinium salt quenched the luminescence of the nanocrystals, the competitive formation of the glucose–boronate complex detached the bipyridinium units from the QDs leading to intensified luminescence. A similar approach was used for the detection of glutathione,170Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  (A) The activation of the luminescence of the quantum dots by the association of the bipyridinium quencher to the macrocyclic receptor (Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2006) National Academy of Sciences, USA). (B) Competitive analysis of glutathione using methyl viologen associated with negatively-charged QDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Methyl viologen associated with mercaptoacetic acid-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs through electrostatic interactions quenched the luminescence of the QDs via an efficient electron transfer process. In the presence of glutathione, competitive binding to the QDs proceeded, and this resulted in higher intensities of the luminescence of the QDs.
QDs modified with carboxylic acid functionalities reveal pH-controlled luminescence properties. Although the origin for the effect of protonation/deprotonation of the carboxylic acid on the luminescence of the QDs is not fully understood, presumably, the neutralization of cationic surface-states by the carboxylate units removes electron traps, thus enhancing the fluorescence of the QDs. Acidification of the carboxylate units and the formation of carboxylic acids units regenerate the cationic surface traps, thus, decreasing the luminescence of the QDs. For example, CdTe QDs capped with thioglycolic acid have been used as a pH indicator for the pH range of 4–6.171 A QDs-based pH sensor of enhanced complexity was developed by the coupling of CdSe nanocrystals with the pH-sensitive Squarine dye, thus controlling the FRET process between the QDs and the dye units by means of pH, Fig. 18. The deprotonated Squaraine dye (a) exhibits the appropriate absorption band to stimulate a FRET process between the QDs and the dye acceptor, while the protonated squaraine state, (b), cannot act as a FRET acceptor. Thus, the pH-controlled ratio of (a)/(b) modulated the FRET intensity, and the ratio of the luminescence of the QD/squarine fluorescence provides a quantitative measure for the pH of the solution.59 In another example, the pH sensitive fluorescein isothiocyanate dye was conjugated to glutathione-modified QDs and the resulting conjugates were used as a ratiometric pH sensor within the pH range of 4–6.172 QDs functionalized with the [1,3] oxazine ligand (24) were implemented as pH sensors,173Fig. 19. The oxazine compound (a) undergoes structural isomerization to form the open phenolate state (b) (under basic conditions) or the open protonated phenol state (c) (under acidic conditions), Fig. 19(B). While the protonated phenol state (c) exhibits a slightly blue-shifted absorbance as compared to the parent [1,3] oxazine ligand, the phenolate open isomer (b) exhibits an intense absorbance band in the visible spectrum, λ = 585 nm, Fig. 19(C). The [1,3] oxazine ligand-functionalized QDs revealed a quenched luminescence as compared to the non-modified parent QDs, Fig. 19(D), curves (d) and (e), respectively, and this was attributed to the electron transfer quenching of the QDs by the indole, electron-donor, ring. While the protonated isomer (c) does not quench the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 19(D), curve (g), the phenolate open isomer (b) quenched effectively the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 19(D), curve (f). The quenching proceeds via a FRET mechanism due to the spectral overlap between the absorbance of (b) and the luminescence of the QDs. These functionalized QDs could probe pH changes in the range from 3 to 11. The pH-sensitive QDs were also used as a sensing device for different analytes. For example, the pH controlled luminescence of mercaptoacetic acid-capped CdTe QDs was used to detect the drug tiopronin (N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)glycine). Tiopronin acidifies the solution, thus, resulting in the quenching of the luminescence of the QDs.174
 Fig. 18  (A) Sensing of pH using the pH-sensitive squaraine dye conjugated to CdSe/ZnS QDs modified by an amphiphilic polymer associated with the hydrophobic nanocrystals. (B) Fluorescence spectra of the dye-modified QDs upon changing the pH. Inset: Absorption spectra of the squaraine dye at acidic (a) and basic (b) pH values (Reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 19  (A) Sensing of pH using QDs modified with the pH-sensitive [1,3]oxazine ligand. (B) Transformations of the [1,3]oxazine ligand upon addition of base or acid. (C) Absorption spectra of the [1,3]oxazine ligand in a neutral pH (a), basic pH (b) or acidic pH (c). (D) Fluorescence spectra of the unmodified QDs, curve d, and of the [1,3]oxazine-modified QDs in a neutral pH (e), basic pH (f) or acidic pH (g). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society). 
The functionalization of QDs with pH-sensitive units or ion-sensitive ligands was not only used to detect pH changes or ions, but also to develop a “smart” logic gate construct.175 CdSe/ZnS QDs were modified with a thioaniline ligand and a N-(o-methoxyphenyl)aza-15-crown-5-receptor unit. While the amine functionalities of the thioaniline ligand and the aza-crown ether receptor quench the luminescence of the QDs, only the protonation of the aniline ligand, and the ligation of the aza-crown ether to Na+ ions prohibit the quenching of the QDs, leading to an “AND” gate, Fig. 20.
 Fig. 20  The “AND” molecular logic gate system based on the restoration of the QDs emission by the simultaneous addition of both protons and sodium ions. (Adapted from ref. 175, with permission from Elsevier). 
6. Chemically-modified QDs as reactive hybrids for sensing
While the sensor systems described in the previous sections included receptor or ligand sites for the selective association of the guest analyte, a variety of chemically-modified QDs use the capping layer as a chemically-reactive interface that actively participates in the sensing process. In these systems the analyte reacts with the capping layer, and this leads to changes in the luminescence properties of the QDs that enable the quantitative optical detection of analytes. Semiconductor QDs functionalized with redox-active dyes or with redox-active capping components may change their photophysical properties as a result of a color change of the dye by a redox process, or by the electronic coupling of the redox-active capping component with the photoexcited electron–hole pair generated in the QDs. Alternatively, the analyte might react with the inorganic shell layer of the QDs, and this may lead to changes in the luminescence features of the QDs. For example, Nile-blue-functionalized CdSe/ZnS quantum dots were prepared and used as a hybrid material for the optical sensing of the 1,4-dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (phosphate) cofactors, NAD(P)H.176 Water soluble CdSe/ZnS QDs were obtained by ligand exchange with 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA). The modified QDs were functionalized with bovine serum albumin (BSA), and then, oxidized Nile blue was covalently linked to the BSA layer. The fluorescence of the QDs was quenched by the oxidized Nile blue through a FRET quenching mechanism. The Nile blue capping layer is reduced by the NAD(P)H cofactors to the colorless dihydro Nile blue product that does not quench the luminescence of the QDs. The reduction of the Nile blue capping layer by the NAD(P)H cofactors activated the fluorescence of the QDs, Fig. 21(A). This enabled the quantitative optical detection of NADH, Fig. 21(B) and (C). The NADH-sensitive QDs were further used as luminescent probes to follow NAD+-dependent enzymes, and their substrates.176
 Fig. 21  (A) Sensing of NADH by Nile-blue-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence changes of the CdSe/ZnS QDs upon interaction of the QDs with NADH, 0.5 mM. (C) Derived calibration curve. (D) Sensing of the RDX explosive by the NADH-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (A–C were reproduced with permission from ref. 176 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH); (D) was reproduced with permission from ref. 177 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society). 
In another example, phenyl boronic acid-functionalized CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs) were synthesized and modified by nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) or 1,4-dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), through the formation of boronic acid ester functionalities. The quenching of the luminescence of the QDs by the NAD+ cofactor, via an ET quenching route, was found to be substantially more efficient than the quenching of the QDs by the reduced cofactor, NADH. This difference in the quenching features of the QDs by NAD+ or NADH was used to optically sense the trinitrotriazine, RDX explosive.177 The NADH, coordinated to the boronic acid-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs, reduced the explosive while transforming the capping monolayer to the NAD+ state that effectively quenched the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 21(D). The changes in the fluorescence of the QDs enabled the analysis of RDX with a detection limit corresponding to 1 × 10−10 M. Interestingly, besides the photophysical functions of the QDs in the detection of the RDX, cooperative catalytic functions of the QDs in the NADH-mediated reduction of RDX were discovered. It was found that Zn2+-ions present in the shell layer of the CdSe/ZnS QDs, coordinated as a Lewis acid to the nitro groups of RDX, thus polarizing the nitro group and enabling the hydride transfer from NADH, Fig. 21D. Such catalytic functions of appropriately shell-modified QDs are anticipated to act cooperatively with the luminescence properties of the QDs, and allow the development of new sensing platforms.
A nitric oxide (NO) QD-based sensor was developed by the NO-stimulated ligand substitution of a transition metal complex associated with CdSe/ZnS QDs.178 The red-colored tris(N-(dithiocarboxy)carcosine)iron(III), [Fe(DTCS)3]3−, was linked to ammonium-capped QDs by ionic interactions. The functionalized QDs were reacted with NO by an electron transfer process, followed by ligand substitution, to yield the colorless paramagnetic bis(dithiocarbamato)nitrosyl iron(I) complex as a capping layer. This process triggered-on the luminescence of the QDs, thus enabling the detection of NO, Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  (A) The use of [Fe(DTCS)3]3− functionalized QDs as optical sensor for NO. The reaction of NO with the capping layer triggers-on the luminescence of the QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of the modified QDs upon reaction with NO. (C) Luminescence features of the solution of the modified QDs upon their reaction with NO. (D) Time-dependent luminescence changes of the functionalized QDs upon reaction with variable concentrations of NO (expressed as [NO]/[Fe] ratios). (E) Derived calibration curve (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society). 
A QD-based sensor for carbon-centered radicals (alkyl or phenyl radicals) was developed by the use of 4-amino-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine oxide (4-amino-TEMPO)-functionalized CdSe QDs.179 The nitroxide moiety in the functional capping layer leads to the quenching of the luminescence of the QDs. The nitroxide units of the capping layer react, however, with the carbon-centered radical to yield the diamagnetic alkoxyamine-modified protecting layer. The resulting units do not quench the luminescence of the QDs, leading to intensified luminescence upon interaction with reactive carbon-centered radicals, Fig. 23.
 Fig. 23  Fluorescence detection of carbon-centered free radicals by the 4-amino-TEMPO modified QDs. The plot shows the emission intensity at 517 nm versus the UV irradiation time of a toluene solution containing CdSe QDs (9.0 μM), and the radical source, azo-bis-isobutyronitrile (0.13 M), after the addition of 4-amino-TEMPO (75 μM) before any irradiation (dashed blue arrow), and after irradiation with UV (λ > 340 nm) (red curve) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society). 
QDs were also applied for the ratiometric analysis of H2O2.180 Glutathione-capped CdSe/ZnS were functionalized with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-modified avidin, Fig. 24. It was found that the reaction of H2O2 with CdSe/ZnS QDs results in the quenching of the luminescence properties of the QDs. Fig. 24(B) shows the ratiometric probing of the effect of H2O2 on the luminescence of the QDs. While the luminescence of the QDs decreases, the fluorescence of the reference dye is unaffected. It was suggested that the reaction of H2O2 with the inorganic surface of the QDs yields metal oxide traps for the conduction band electrons. Trapping of the conduction band electrons prevents, then, the radiative electron–hole recombination. While this phenomenon enabled the quantitative optical detection of H2O2, it provided a general platform to follow H2O2 generated by oxidases and their substrates.
 Fig. 24  (A) (a) Ratiometric analysis of H2O2 by fluorophore-functionalized avidin-CdSe/ZnS QDs. (b) Configuration of avidin-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (c) Structure of the fluorophore that functionalizes avidin. (B) Ratiometric time-dependent analysis of 4 mM H2O2 using the fluorophore-functionalized avidin-capped QDs. (1) 0 min, (2) 2 min, (3) 5 min, (4) 10 min, (5) 15 min, (6) 20 min (Reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH). 
7. Chemically-modified QDs as optical switches
The modification of QDs with photoisomerizable chromophores was implemented to reversibly switch the luminescence of QDs. Specifically, the spectral overlap of one of the photoisomerizable states of the chromophore with the luminescence spectra of the QDs resulted in the FRET quenching of the luminescence of the QDs. Mercaptoalkyl nitrospiropyran photoisomerizable units were used to modify CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs,181Fig. 25(A).
 Fig. 25  (A) Light-controlled molecular switch based on nitrospiropyran-modified QDs. (B) Fluorescence intensity at λ = 546 nm upon subjecting the functionalized QDs to alternating cycles of UV and visible light. Overlay: Six cuvettes showing the response time at intervals of 1 second for conversion from the spiro state to the mero form under 365 nm UV illumination (Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society). 
The nitrospiropyran units (SP) undergo, under UV irradiation, photoisomerization to the colored zwitterionic nitromerocyanine state (MR), exhibiting absorbance band at λ = 590 nm. The latter photoisomer undergoes reverse photoisomerization to the SP state upon irradiation with visible light. CdSe/ZnS QDs that exhibited a CdSe core diameter of 2.6 nm and a ZnS shell layer of 1.7 nm thickness revealed optimized optical properties where the luminescence of the QDs (λem = 578 nm) overlaps with the absorbance of the MR photoisomer state. This led to an effective FRET quenching of the luminescence of the QDs (ca. 95%). By the cyclic photoisomerization of the photoisomerizable units between the SP and MR states, the reversible “ON” and “OFF” switching of the luminescence was demonstrated, Fig. 25(B). The chemical nanoengineering of the QDs and their diameter was found to affect the FRET quenching efficiency. By substituting the thiolated linkage of the nitrospiropyran units to the QDs with a dithiolane linker, and upon the application of smaller sized QDs that emitted at λ = 554 nm, the quenching efficiency decreased to ca. 45%.182 This was attributed to the poor spectral overlap between the luminescence of the QDs and the absorbance of the MR state, and to the lower coverage of the photoisomerizable units on the QDs, due to the large footprint area of the dithiolane linker.
Similarly, the biotin-modified hexafluorinated dithiophene ethylene derivative, (25), was attached to avidin-functionalized QDs via avidin–biotin affinity interactions.183 The dithiophene compound exhibits photoisomerizable properties where the open isomer, (25a), that lacks absorbance in the visible region, undergoes photochemical electrocyclization upon UV irradiation to form the closed isomer state, (25b). The latter isomer (25b) absorbs in the visible spectral region that overlaps with the luminescence of the QDs, Fig. 26(A), and the FRET quenching of the luminescence of the QDs may proceed. The reverse photoisomerization of (25b) to (25a) occurs upon irradiation of the system with visible light. Indeed, upon photoisomerization of the functionalized QDs between the states (25a) and (25b), the cyclic “ON” and “OFF” switching of the luminescence of the QDs was demonstrated, Fig. 26(B). The quenching efficiency was only ca. 35%, due to the large distance that separated the acceptor dye (25b) from the QDs.
 Fig. 26  (A) Modulation of the emission of the diheteroarylethene-modified QDs by irradiation with UV or visible light. (B) Fluorescence intensities of the QDs conjugate upon subjecting the modified QDs to UV (a) or visible light (b) irradiation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright (2005) Taylor & Francis). 
8. Conclusions and perspectives
Substantial progress was accomplished in the past few years in the synthesis of chemically-modified QDs and their application for optical sensing of molecular analytes, ions (cations or anions) and for monitoring pH changes. Different chemical methodologies were used to prepare the chemically-modified QDs conjugates, and a variety of means to bind the analytes to the functionalized QDs were developed. These included the functionalization of the QDs with monolayer or thin film coatings consisting of ligands, receptors, transition metal complexes, and pH-sensitive or redox-active units. The QDs conjugates were then implemented for developing different optical sensor systems using fluorescence, resonance energy transfer (FRET) and luminescence electron transfer (ET) quenching as readout signals. While the synthesis and sensing applications of chemically-modified QDs for molecular sensing is already a mature research area, several scientific challenges are still ahead of us: (i) the design of new molecular functionalities for conjugations to the QDs could allow the sensing of other analytes. For example, the use of donor–acceptor interactions, H-bonds, or the conjugation of new receptor sites to the QDs could reach this goal. (ii) Until now, most of the studies implemented, separately, the unique photophysical properties of the QDs and the electrical, optical, and binding properties of the chemical modifier layers. Nonetheless, many of the QDs consist of core–shell nanostructures, and, thus, the shell layer may cooperatively participate in the binding or catalytic activation of the analyte towards the interaction with the QDs. Similarly, one may introduce catalytic units into the capping layer that activate the substrate analyte toward interaction with the QDs. Such examples are scarce,177 yet the existing examples suggest that this is a viable promising approach. (iii) Most of the chemically-modified QDs were used to develop sensor systems.176 Nonetheless, other applications may be envisaged. For example, the electrical control of the luminescence properties of QDs that are modified by redox-active capping layers may lead to new optical switching systems. Similarly, the immobilization of chemically-functionalized QDs on electrode surfaces may lead to new electronic devices, and particularly, to improved solar cells. For example, the chemical modification of QDs with electropolymerizable groups might assist the ordered deposition on electrodes, and by tailoring of the molecular chemical coating layer, improved charge separation and effective charge transport may be accomplished. (iv) The successful construction of molecular-based, chemically-functionalized QDs for monitoring different sensing processes suggests that these hybrid nanostructures may be soon adapted for different practical applications. For example, the use of the QDs as in vivo imaging reagents, or the formulation of the functionalized QDs in the form of sprays for the detection of trace analytes on surfaces or skin, e.g., explosives may be interesting paths to follow.
With the rapid advances in the area of chemically-modified QDs one may expect a bright future for this class of materials.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by NanoSensoMach ERC advanced Grant No. 267574 under the EU FP7/2007-2013 program.
Notes and references
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nirmal and L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuno, J. K. Lee, B. O. Dabbousi, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 9869–9882 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1–208 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. RodriguezViejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Gaponenko, Optical properties of semiconductor nanocrystals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998 Search PubMed .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700–12706 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Jun, S. M. Lee, N. J. Kang and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5150–5151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Jun, Y. Y. Jung and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 615–619 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna, K. Weiss, J. Urban and M. P. Pileni, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 261–264 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 1866011–1866014 CrossRef .
R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger, M. Gratzel and U. Bach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578–7580 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Physica E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
P. T. Snee, R. C. Somers, G. Nair, J. P. Zimmer, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13320–13321 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Walker, V. C. Sundar, C. M. Rudzinski, A. W. Wun, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3555–3557 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hildebrandt, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5286–5290 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 267–300 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 197–210 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5259–5275 CAS .
C. Harris and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 682–690 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Charbonniere and N. Hildebrandt, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3241–3251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, B. Ohtani and K. Uosaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Chen and L. Gao, Solid State Commun., 2005, 133, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Darbandi, R. Thomann and T. Nann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5720–5725 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. S. Kim, N. Lee, T. Kim, H. Kim, T. Yu, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8438–8441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. E. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Yu, B. C. Kim, K. An, Y. Hwang, C. H. Shin, J. G. Park, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 688–689 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danek, K. F. Jensen, C. B. Murray and M. G. Bawendi, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. RodriguezViejo, K. F. Jensen, H. Mattoussi, J. Michel, B. O. Dabbousi and M. G. Bawendi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2132–2134 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micic, B. B. Smith and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12149–12156 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danek, K. F. Jensen, C. B. Murray and M. G. Bawendi, J. Cryst. Growth, 1994, 145, 714–720 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kan, T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg and U. Banin, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yu, J. Joo, H. M. Park, S. I. Baik, Y. W. Kim, S. C. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5662–5670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, L. S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7136–7145 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188–1191 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. B. Li, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382–385 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 355–356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wu, H. J. Liu, J. Q. Liu, K. N. Haley, J. A. Treadway, J. P. Larson, N. F. Ge, F. Peale and M. P. Bruchez, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1991, 53, 465–474 CrossRef .
K. Grieve, P. Mulvaney and F. Grieser, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 5, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chen, C. T. Cheng, C. W. Lai, P. W. Wu, K. C. Wu, P. T. Chou, Y. H. Chou and H. T. Chiu, Chem. Commun., 2006, 263–265 RSC .
D. M. Willard, L. L. Carillo, J. Jung and A. Van Orden, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pons, H. T. Uyeda, I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20308–20316 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Miyawaki, Dev. Cell, 2003, 4, 295–305 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Jares-Erijman and T. M. Jovin, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1387–1395 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan, D. J. Maxwell, X. H. Gao, R. E. Bailey, M. Y. Han and S. M. Nie, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2002, 13, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Somers, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 579–591 RSC .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Qu, Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Qu and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2049–2055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Tian, T. Newton, N. A. Kotov, D. M. Guldi and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8927–8939 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Youn, S. Baral and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 6320–6327 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kortan, R. Hull, R. L. Opila, M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald, P. J. Carroll and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1327–1332 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mews, A. Eychmuller, M. Giersig, D. Schooss and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 934–941 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Littau, P. J. Szajowski, A. J. Muller, A. R. Kortan and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1224–1230 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Wilson, P. F. Szajowski and L. E. Brus, Science, 1993, 262, 1242–1244 CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. M. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dubertret, P. Skourides, D. J. Norris, V. Noireaux, A. H. Brivanlou and A. Libchaber, Science, 2002, 298, 1759–1762 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Jaiswal, H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro and S. M. Simon, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pathak, S. K. Choi, N. Arnheim and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4103–4104 CrossRef CAS .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, J. Bleuse and A. Pron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11574–11582 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dubois, B. Mahler, B. Dubertret, E. Doris and C. Mioskowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 482–483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14652–14653 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, S. Kim, J. B. Tracy, A. Jasanoff and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4556–4557 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yang, C. J. Bhongale, C.-H. Chou, S.-H. Yang, C.-N. Lo, T.-M. Chen and C.-S. Hsu, Polymer, 2007, 48, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jaffar, K. T. Nam, A. Khademhosseini, J. Xing, R. S. Langer and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1421–1425 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schneider and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
I. Potapova, R. Mruk, S. Prehl, R. Zentel, T. Basche and A. Mews, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 320–321 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, E. Chang, J. C. Falkner, J. Y. Zhang, A. M. Al-Somali, C. M. Sayes, J. Johns, R. Drezek and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2871–2879 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luccardini, C. Tribet, F. Vial, V. Marchi-Artzner and M. Dahan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2304–2310 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. C. Cui, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, X. L. Ji, C. L. Lu, B. Yang and M. Y. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 777–780 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Petruska, A. P. Bartko and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 714–715 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Anderson and W. C. W. Chan, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1341–1352 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Kairdolf, M. C. Mancini, A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 3029–3034 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Kairdolf, A. M. Smith and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12866–12867 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pellegrino, L. Manna, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, D. Koktysh, A. L. Rogach, S. Keller, J. Radler, G. Natile and W. J. Parak, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 703–707 CrossRef CAS .
R. Di Corato, A. Quarta, P. Piacenza, A. Ragusa, A. Figuerola, R. Buonsanti, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and T. Pellegrino, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1991–1996 RSC .
S. R. Cordero, P. J. Carson, R. A. Estabrook, G. F. Strouse and S. K. Buratto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12137–12142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro, E. R. Goldman, G. P. Anderson, V. C. Sundar, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12142–12150 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gerion, F. Pinaud, S. C. Williams, W. J. Parak, D. Zanchet, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8861–8871 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Gao, Y. Y. Cui, R. M. Levenson, L. W. K. Chung and S. M. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 969–976 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Nikolic, M. Krack, V. Aleksandrovic, A. Kornowski, S. Forster and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6577–6580 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Wang, N. Mamedova, N. A. Kotov, W. Chen and J. Studer, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 817–822 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Medintz, A. R. Clapp, H. Mattoussi, E. R. Goldman, B. Fisher and J. M. Mauro, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 630–638 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Uyeda, I. L. Medintz, J. K. Jaiswal, S. M. Simon and H. Mattoussi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3870–3878 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. Howarth, A. B. Greytak, Y. Zheng, D. G. Nocera, A. Y. Ting and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1274–1284 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pinaud, D. King, H. P. Moore and S. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6115–6123 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iyer, F. Pinaud, J. Tsay and S. Weiss, Small, 2007, 3, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Liu, R. Brandon, M. Cate, X. G. Peng, R. Stony and M. Johnson, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 8796–8802 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith, H. W. Duan, M. N. Rhyner, G. Ruan and S. M. Nie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3895–3903 RSC .
T. Pellegrino, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, A. M. Javier, L. Manna and W. J. Parak, Small, 2005, 1, 48–63 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Y. Gao, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3065–3069 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, L. Katsikas, A. Kornowski, D. S. Su, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1996, 100, 1772–1778 CAS .
N. Gaponik, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, K. Hoppe, E. V. Shevchenko, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7177–7185 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rogach, S. Kershaw, M. Burt, M. Harrison, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 552–555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Zheng, S. J. Gao and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
K. Palaniappan, C. H. Xue, G. Arumugam, S. A. Hackney and J. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1275–1280 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, D. Nagesha, J. W. Ostrander, M. Giersig and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2676–2685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, C. Yang, N. Li and X. R. Yang, Talanta, 2005, 67, 979–983 CrossRef CAS .
A. Priyam, A. Chatterjee, S. K. Das and A. Saha, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2005, 31, 691–702 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vossmeyer, L. Katsikas, M. Giersig, I. G. Popovic, K. Diesner, A. Chemseddine, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7665–7673 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, H. F. Qian and J. C. Ren, Chem. Commun., 2005, 528–530 RSC .
H. F. Qian, L. Li and J. C. Ren, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 1726–1736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Chen and Z. Rosenzweig, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 5132–5138 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-h. Zhang, H.-s. Zhang, M. Ma, X.-f. Guo and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 4747–4753 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bo and Z. Ping, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381, 986–992 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koneswaran and R. Narayanaswamy, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139, 91–96 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Xiong and Y. Bai, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1474–1477 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bin Shang, Y. Wang and W. J. Jin, Talanta, 2009, 78, 364–369 CrossRef .
K. A. Gattas-Asfura and R. M. Leblanc, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2684–2685 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Lou, Q. Ma and X. G. Su, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139, 476–482 CrossRef .
M. J. Ruedas-Rama and E. A. H. Hall, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 8260–8268 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Clever, C. Kaul and T. Carell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6226–6236 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ono, S. Cao, H. Togashi, M. Tashiro, T. Fujimoto, T. Machinami, S. Oda, Y. Miyake, I. Okamoto and Y. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4825–4827 RSC .
D. Li, A. Wieckowska and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3927–3931 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS .
R. Freeman, T. Finder and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7818–7821 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Breaker, Nat. Biotechnol., 1997, 15, 427–431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and J. Liu, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2006, 17, 580–588 CrossRef CAS .
I. Willner, B. Shlyahovsky, M. Zayats and B. Willner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1153–1165 RSC .
C.-S. Wu, M. K. K. Oo and X. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5897–5904 CrossRef CAS .
R. Freeman, L. Bahshi, T. Finder, R. Gill and I. Willner, Chem. Commun., 2009, 764–766 RSC .
R. Freeman, T. Finder, L. Bahshi and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2073–2076 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ueno, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 132–134 CrossRef CAS .
R. Corradini, A. Dossena, G. Galaverna, R. Marchelli, A. Panagia and G. Sartor, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 6283–6289 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Haider and Z. Pikramenou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 120–132 RSC .
S. Furukawa, H. Mihara and A. Ueno, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2003, 24, 202–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pagliari, R. Corradini, G. Galaverna, S. Sforza, A. Dossena, M. Montalti, L. Prodi, N. Zaccheroni and R. Marchelli, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 2749–2758 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Stalcup and K. L. Williams, J. Liq. Chromatogr., 1992, 15, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
P. Camilleri, C. A. Reid and D. T. Manallack, Chromatographia, 1994, 38, 771–775 CAS .
D. S. Risley and M. A. Strege, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 1736–1739 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Schumacher, C. R. Mitchell, T. L. Xiao, R. V. Rozhkov, R. C. Larock and D. W. Armstrong, J. Chromatogr., A, 2003, 1011, 37–47 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Q. Zhong, D. Yue, N. Della Ca, R. C. Larock and D. W. Armstrong, Chromatographia, 2005, 61, 205–211 CAS .
P. Sun, C. Wang, D. W. Armstrong, A. Peter and E. Forro, J. Liq. Chromatogr. Relat. Technol., 2006, 29, 1847–1860 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Armstrong and W. Demond, J. Chromatogr. Sci., 1984, 22, 411–415 CAS .
W. L. Hinze, T. E. Riehl, D. W. Armstrong, W. Demond, A. Alak and T. Ward, Anal. Chem., 1985, 57, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Armstrong, T. J. Ward, R. D. Armstrong and T. E. Beesley, Science, 1986, 232, 1132–1135 CAS .
K. D. Sternitzke, T. Y. Fan and D. L. Dunn, J. Chromatogr., 1992, 589, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wang, W. Kan, X. L. He, T. W. Tan and J. Jan-Christer, J. Liq. Chromatogr. Relat. Technol., 2005, 28, 1509–1518 CrossRef CAS .
K. Palaniappan, S. A. Hackney and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2704–2705 RSC .
H. Li and C. Han, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6053–6059 CrossRef CAS .
A. Credi, S. Dumas, S. Silvi, M. Venturi, A. Arduini, A. Pochini and A. Secchi, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5881–5887 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Beer and P. A. Gale, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 486–516 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Gale, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 240, 191–221 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, F. Fujii, H. Sakata, M. Tamura and M. Kinjo, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4300–4302 RSC .
B. Gadenne, I. Yildiz, M. Amelia, F. Ciesa, A. Secchi, A. Arduini, A. Credi and F. M. Raymo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2022–2027 RSC .
X. Q. Wang, J. F. Wu, F. Y. Li and H. B. Li, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 1–8 CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. Kara and S. Santra, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3037–3039 RSC .
G. H. Shi, Z. B. Shang, Y. Wang, W. J. Jin and T. C. Zhang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2008, 70, 247–252 CrossRef .
P. Liao, Z. Y. Yan, Z. J. Xu and X. Sun, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 72, 1066–1070 CrossRef .
J. F. Callan, R. C. Mulrooney and S. Karnila, J. Fluoresc., 2008, 18, 1157–1161 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Jin, M. T. Fernandez-Arguelles, J. M. Costa-Fernandez, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, Chem. Commun., 2005, 883–885 RSC .
I. Yildiz, M. Tomasulo and F. M. Raymo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11457–11460 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Cordes, S. Gamsey and B. Singaram, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3829–3832 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Bao, X. Zhong, C. Zhao and L. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2971–2973 RSC .
M. Y. Gao, S. Kirstein, H. Mohwald, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8360–8363 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, A. Sasaki, M. Kinjo and J. Miyazaki, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2408–2410 RSC .
M. Tomasulo, I. Yildiz, S. L. Kaanumalle and F. M. Raymo, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 10284–10290 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Q. Wang, C. Ye, Z.-H. Zhu and Y.-Z. Hu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 610, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kaur, N. Singh, B. McCaughan and J. F. Callan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 88–91 CrossRef .
R. Freeman, R. Gill, I. Shweky, M. Kotler, U. Banin and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
R. Freeman and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 322–326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M.-Y. Han and D. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11692–11694 CrossRef CAS .
V. Maurel, M. Laferriere, P. Billone, R. Godin and J. C. Scaiano, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16353–16358 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, L. Bahshi, R. Freeman and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1676–1679 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhu, M. Q. Zhu, J. K. Hurst and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8968–8970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tomasulo, I. Yildiz and F. M. Raymo, Aust. J. Chem., 2006, 59, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jares-Erijman, L. Giordano, C. Spagnuolo, K. Lidke and T. M. Jovin, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2005, 430, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Ronit Freeman
	Ronit Freeman is a PhD student in the laboratory of Professor I. Willner. Her research involves analytical and bioanalytical applications of quantum dots, DNA nanostructures, and the use of modified nanoparticles for probing intracellular processes. She holds the Clore Foundation Scholars Award for PhD studies.

Itamar Willner
	Itamar Willner is a Professor of Chemistry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. His research interests include synthesis, characterization and application of nanoparticles, bioelectronics, nanobiotechnology, molecular and biomolecular machines and artificial photosynthesis. He has coauthored over 600 papers and monographs. He received the Israel Prize in Chemistry (2002), the Rothschild Prize (2008), and the EMET Prize (2008). He is a member of the Israel Academy of Sciences, the German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is a member of many editorial advisory boards including Angewandte Chemie, Nano Letters, Small, ChemPhysChem, Langmuir and more.

 	Fig. 1  Electron transfer quenching routes of semiconductor quantum dots by electron acceptor or electron donor units.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Parameters affecting the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process. (A) Spectral overlap between the emission and absorption spectra of the donor–acceptor pair. (B) Effect of distance separating the donor–acceptor pair on the energy transfer efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 3  Different mechanisms for the application of QDs as optical sensors: (a) Competitive detection of an analyte using a labeled analyte and FRET/ET as transduction mechanisms. (b) Direct FRET/ET quenching of a labeled analyte. (c) Direct FRET/ET quenching by the analyte.	 

 	Fig. 4  Modification of semiconductor QDs with functional capping layers for water solubilization and preservation of luminescence properties: (A) Exchange of the organic capping layer with a water-soluble layer; (a)–(d) thiolated or dithiolated functional monolayers, (e) cysteine-terminated peptide, (f) thiolated siloxane, (g) carboxylic acid-functionalized dendrone. (B) Encapsulation and stabilization of QDs stabilized in functional bilayer films composed of (h) a phospholipid layer, and (i) a diblock copolymer.	 

 	Fig. 5  Modification of monolayer-functionalized QDs with molecular or macromolecular components: (a) and (b) Covalent attachment. (c) Attachment of ligands. (d) Electrostatic association of a polymer.	 

 	Fig. 6  Luminescence spectra of the CdTe multilayer films, upon interaction with different concentrations of Hg2+ ions for 3 hours: (A) 0 μM. (B) 0.01 μM. (C) 0.05 μM. (D) 0.1 μM. (E) 0.2 μM. (F) 5 μM. (G) 1 μM. Inset: Resulting calibration curve (Reproduced from ref. 126, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Fluorescent sensing of zinc ions using cyclam-modified QDs. (B) Luminescence spectra of the cyclam-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs, upon interaction with different concentrations of Zn2+ ions: (1) 0 μM, (2) 5 μM, (3) 15 μM, (4) 32 μM, (5) 62 μM, (6) 125 μM, (7) 250 μM, (8) 500 μM. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Optical analysis of Hg2+/Ag+ ions by nucleic acid-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of (2)-QD560 upon interaction with 1 × 10−4 M Hg2+. Inset: Calibration curve for various concentrations of Hg2+. (C) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of (3)-QD620 upon interaction with 5 × 10−5 M Ag+. Inset: Calibration curve for various concentrations of Ag+. (D) Fluorescence changes of the (2)-QD560 and (3)-QD620 upon interaction with: (a) no Hg2+, no Ag+; (b) no Hg2+, 30 μM Ag+; (c) no Ag+, 30 μM Hg2+; (d) 30 μM Hg2+, 30 μM Ag+ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) The “AND” logic gate system based on electron-transfer quenching of the 2- and 3-QDs by Hg2+ and Ag+ inputs, respectively. (B) The “OR” logic gate system based on the electron-transfer quenching of 2- and 3-QDs by Hg2+ and Ag+ inputs. (C) Time-dependent fluorescence changes of the “OR” logic gate system activated by the following inputs: (a) no Hg2+, no Ag+ (0, 0); (b) no Hg2+, 30 mm Ag+ (0, 1); (c) no Ag+, 30 mm Hg2+ (1, 0); (d) 30 mm Hg2+, 30 mm Ag+ (1,1). Inset: Truth table of the “OR” logic-gate system (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) The different metal-dependent DNAzymes for: (a) UO22+, (b) Pb2+, (c) Mg2+, (d) Cu2+. (B) Schematic detection of metal ions using DNAzyme-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (C) (I) Fluorescence spectra of the QDs–DNAzyme conjugates after interaction with various concentrations of Pb2+, taken after a fixed time-interval of 25 min. (II) Fluorescence spectra of the QDs–DNAzyme conjugates after interaction with various concentrations of Cu2+, taken after a fixed time-interval of 25 min (Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Competitive analysis of monosaccharides or dopamine using fluorophore-labeled galactose- or fluorophore-labeled dopamine-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs, respectively. (B) Time-dependent fluorescence changes upon the interaction of the fluorophore-labeled galactose-functionalized QDs with galactose, 5 mM. Spectra were recorded at time intervals of 3 minutes. (C) Calibration curves corresponding to the competitive analysis of: (a) galactose; (b) glucose (Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Sensing of substrates by a competitive FRET assay using β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs with receptor-bound Rhodamine B (13). (B) Calibration curve corresponding to the analysis of variable concentrations of 14 by the Rhodamine B/β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs system. (C) Calibration curve corresponding to the analysis of variable concentrations of 18, curve a, and 19, curve b, by the Rhodamine B/β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs system. (D) Direct analysis of substrates by the β-cyclodextrin-modified CdSe/ZnS QDs using an electron transfer quenching route (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  Sensing of substrates by a competitive ET assay using β-cyclodextrin-modified CdS QDs and a ferrocene quenching label that binds to the CD cavities (Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Synthesis of TOPO-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs with tetrahexyl ether derivative of p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene receptor and mercapto acetic acid (MAA). (B) Quenching of the fluorescence emission of the modified CdSe/ZnS QDs upon the addition of different concentrations of acetylcholine (Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 15  Sensing of methionine or phenylalanine by the calixarene-modified QDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. IOP Publishing Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Synthesis of 15-crown-5 and 15-crown-5-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Aggregation of the 15-crown-5-modified two-sized CdSe/ZnS QDs upon the addition of K+ ions. (C) Fluorescence titration spectra of the two sized QDs upon addition of K+ ions (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) The activation of the luminescence of the quantum dots by the association of the bipyridinium quencher to the macrocyclic receptor (Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2006) National Academy of Sciences, USA). (B) Competitive analysis of glutathione using methyl viologen associated with negatively-charged QDs (Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Sensing of pH using the pH-sensitive squaraine dye conjugated to CdSe/ZnS QDs modified by an amphiphilic polymer associated with the hydrophobic nanocrystals. (B) Fluorescence spectra of the dye-modified QDs upon changing the pH. Inset: Absorption spectra of the squaraine dye at acidic (a) and basic (b) pH values (Reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Sensing of pH using QDs modified with the pH-sensitive [1,3]oxazine ligand. (B) Transformations of the [1,3]oxazine ligand upon addition of base or acid. (C) Absorption spectra of the [1,3]oxazine ligand in a neutral pH (a), basic pH (b) or acidic pH (c). (D) Fluorescence spectra of the unmodified QDs, curve d, and of the [1,3]oxazine-modified QDs in a neutral pH (e), basic pH (f) or acidic pH (g). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  The “AND” molecular logic gate system based on the restoration of the QDs emission by the simultaneous addition of both protons and sodium ions. (Adapted from ref. 175, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Sensing of NADH by Nile-blue-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence changes of the CdSe/ZnS QDs upon interaction of the QDs with NADH, 0.5 mM. (C) Derived calibration curve. (D) Sensing of the RDX explosive by the NADH-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (A–C were reproduced with permission from ref. 176 Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH); (D) was reproduced with permission from ref. 177 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) The use of [Fe(DTCS)3]3− functionalized QDs as optical sensor for NO. The reaction of NO with the capping layer triggers-on the luminescence of the QDs. (B) Time-dependent luminescence spectra of the modified QDs upon reaction with NO. (C) Luminescence features of the solution of the modified QDs upon their reaction with NO. (D) Time-dependent luminescence changes of the functionalized QDs upon reaction with variable concentrations of NO (expressed as [NO]/[Fe] ratios). (E) Derived calibration curve (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 23  Fluorescence detection of carbon-centered free radicals by the 4-amino-TEMPO modified QDs. The plot shows the emission intensity at 517 nm versus the UV irradiation time of a toluene solution containing CdSe QDs (9.0 μM), and the radical source, azo-bis-isobutyronitrile (0.13 M), after the addition of 4-amino-TEMPO (75 μM) before any irradiation (dashed blue arrow), and after irradiation with UV (λ > 340 nm) (red curve) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) (a) Ratiometric analysis of H2O2 by fluorophore-functionalized avidin-CdSe/ZnS QDs. (b) Configuration of avidin-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (c) Structure of the fluorophore that functionalizes avidin. (B) Ratiometric time-dependent analysis of 4 mM H2O2 using the fluorophore-functionalized avidin-capped QDs. (1) 0 min, (2) 2 min, (3) 5 min, (4) 10 min, (5) 15 min, (6) 20 min (Reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Light-controlled molecular switch based on nitrospiropyran-modified QDs. (B) Fluorescence intensity at λ = 546 nm upon subjecting the functionalized QDs to alternating cycles of UV and visible light. Overlay: Six cuvettes showing the response time at intervals of 1 second for conversion from the spiro state to the mero form under 365 nm UV illumination (Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Modulation of the emission of the diheteroarylethene-modified QDs by irradiation with UV or visible light. (B) Fluorescence intensities of the QDs conjugate upon subjecting the modified QDs to UV (a) or visible light (b) irradiation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright (2005) Taylor & Francis).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
