Inexhaustible natural celluloses in advanced Li–S batteries: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TC01147J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3TC01147J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 6819-6833Inexhaustible natural celluloses in advanced Li–S batteries: a review

        
          
            Ming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongxue 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liucheng 
            Meng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sha 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yige 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Huang
          
        
      *a
aInternational Innovation Center for Forest Chemicals & Materials and Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center of Efficient Processing & Utilization of Forest Resources, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China. E-mail: yanghuang@njfu.edu.cn
bNanjing Peiyuan Environmental Technology Services Co., Ltd, Nanjing, 210046, China
cSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 224051, China
Received 
      31st March 2023
    , Accepted 28th April 2023First published on 5th May 2023AbstractLithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs) have long been regarded as a promising alternative to lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) due to their overwhelming energy density of ca. five-fold to that of the state-of-the-art LIBs. However, the further development of LSBs is hampered by several obstacles including the insulating nature of sulfides, volumetric expansion of active materials, shuttling effect of polysulfides, and growth of lithium dendrites. Cellulose, the most abundant biomass on earth, presents abundant hydroxyl groups, high mechanical modulus, and considerable porous surface, which are highly desirable for tackling the aforementioned issues. Notably, the high carbon content in celluloses, originating mainly from CO2 in the atmosphere, can be properly utilized after carbonization as conductive scaffolds, meeting the new demands for materials on the way to “carbon neutrality”. In this review, we summarize the recent progress of LSBs prepared with cellulosic materials including sulfuric cathodes, functional interlayers, battery separators, and binders. The underlying mechanisms of cellulosic materials for the enhancement in electrochemical behaviors are analyzed and elaborated insightfully. Eventually, an outlook on the future directions of celluloses in LSBs is also provided.
1. Introduction
Although fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas have propelled the rapid development of industrial society since 1960s, the approaching depletion of these non-renewable fuels and the aggravation of environmental contamination are calling for an urgent exploitation of advanced, clean and sustainable power sources.1,2 To this end, alternative energy categories including solar, wind, geothermal, and tidal are intensively developed nowadays to gain popularity.3,4 Unfortunately, many of these natural energy sources are intermittent on earth and unable to generate continuous power steadily.5 Electrochemical energy systems are able to harvest the fluctuated energy and then output tunably in connection with smart grids. Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been previously considered as promising candidates for application in intermittent energy storage, due to their decent reversibility, high security, and superb energy efficiency.6–8 However, LIBs, mostly based on the ion intercalation mechanism are now approaching their theoretical energy density of 300–350 W h kg−1 and can satisfy neither the large-scale energy storage scenario,9–11 such as the power grids aforementioned, nor the prevailing electric vehicles. Hence, it is urgent to develop a powerful and reliable energy storage system on the way of exploiting and utilizing the natural energy resources with almost no carbon emission (Fig. 1), which is regarded as an indispensable avenue for the realization of carbon neutrality globally.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of LSB and great contributions of LSB in low-carbon era. 
Among the various types of advanced energy storage systems, lithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs) have been regarded as one of the most promising candidates because of their exceptionally high theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1, at least 5 times higher than that of the state-of-the-art LIBs.12,13 In addition, sulphur, as a cathode active material, possesses the intriguing advantages of low cost, safety, earth abundance, and environmental benignity, which makes it highly possible to achieve large-scale applications.14 A traditional LSB consists of a cathode (sulfur incorporation), an anode (lithium metal), and electrolytes (including liquid organic electrolytes and separators). Besides low-carbon application scenarios of LSB, Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the LSB with each of the assembling components. However, there still exist some obstacles to be overcome before swarming into the commercialization of LSBs. First, the sulfur cathode generates soluble polysulfides, Li2Sn (3 ≤ n ≤ 8), during discharging, which diffuse from the sulfur cathode to the lithium anode, undoubtedly get reduced by lithium and, meanwhile, corrode the lithium anode. Moreover, the low conductivity of sulfur and lithium sulfur retards the electron transfer and results in the sluggish reactivity.15 Notably, the large volume expansion, caused by the density change from sulfur (ρ = 2.07 g cm−3) to lithium sulfur (ρ = 1.66 g cm−3) leads to microstructural collapse of cathodes, deteriorating the long-term cycling performance.16 In addition, the highly active Li metal anode is prone to the growth of needle-like dendrites, leading to short-circuits and even serious safety hazards.17–20
Various nanomaterials have been employed to tackle the deleterious shuttling effect of polysulfides mainly via physical confinement and/or chemical polar–polar interaction.12,14,21,22 Among them, the natural cellulose and cellulosic derivatives have recently attracted extensive attention. The cellulose can be mostly produced through photosynthesis, which is believed as the most abundant bio-macromolecule on earth with an extremely high annual production of ca. 1012 t.23–25 Notably, cellulosic molecular chains present sufficient polar hydroxyl groups and the intrinsic high crystallinity of cellulose nanofibers normally delivers a tough mechanical modulus, which are favorable for the alleviation of the shuttling effect and lithium dendrite puncture, respectively.26,27 Besides, the hydroxyl groups on celluloses make chemical modifications such as esterification, oxidation, etherification, and polymer grafting possible.,28–31 further enhancing the applicability of celluloses. Typically, as a biomass material, the carbon element in celluloses (44 wt% carbon contents) is mainly taken from the atmospheric environment, delivering a great possibility to leverage the green “carbon” captured from nature. Cellulosic materials have been widely employed in the field of energy storage in the last 20 years.32 However, the applications of these cellulose-based materials in LSBs have not yet been thoroughly summarized; even a rapid enhancement in relevant publications has come into being in the last 10 years (Fig. 2). It is of great necessity to review the state-of-the-art research works and streamline the efforts devoted to promote the development of LSBs with the intriguing cellulosic materials.
 Fig. 2  Publication statistics of papers relevant to LSBs involving cellulosic materials from 2013 to 2022. 
In this review, we mainly present a systematic summary of the timely achievements, as well as the intractable challenges confronted by LSBs prepared with cellulosic materials. We start from the introduction of fundamental principles and scientific challenges of LSBs. Based on the Li–S battery chemistry, we present a comprehensive review on the chemical modification and structural optimization of cellulosic materials in tackling the issues in LSBs. The major obstacles impeding the commercialization of this battery system are also discussed and several possible avenues for future applications of the naturally abundant and cost-effective cellulose are mentioned. Eventually, the future prospects of LSBs are rationally elaborated with insightful perspectives in view of the critical effects of cellulosic chemistry.
2. Overview of LSBs
2.1 Principles of LSBs
The energy storage mechanism of LSBs depends on the reversible redox reaction between elemental sulfur and Li2S. Ring S8 is the most stable sulfur allotrope in nature, which is commonly used as the cathode active material in LSBs. During the discharge process, lithium metal anode delivers electrons and generates Li+, while sulfur in the cathode side will be reduced by accepting these electrons.33 After a sequence of reduction of sulfur accompanied by lithium ions in the electrolyte, the solid lithium sulfide is finally generated. During this process, each S8 maximally accepts 16 electrons, and thus can totally release 1672 mA h g−1 theoretical specific capacity. The charge process occurs in the reversed reaction direction, and the overall redox reaction (eqn (1)) is as follows:34 S8 + 16Li ↔ 8Li2S(1)The charge/discharge process of LSB involves multielectron reactions, in which some intermediates such as Li2S8, Li2S6, Li2S4, Li2S3, and Li2S2 are produced. Notably, some of these lithium polysulfides (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) present high solubility in the ether electrolyte, and thereby normally dissolve into the liquid electrolyte upon generation.
The solubility of polysulfides in the electrolyte increases with the increment in chain length. In contrast, the solubility of the reactants S8 as well as the eventual reduced products Li2S/Li2S2 in the electrolyte is extremely low, mainly in the form of a solid state. Consequently, the operation of LSB involves multi-electron and multi-phase transferring reactions of “solid (S8) → liquid (polysulfides) → solid (Li2S2/Li2S)” during the charge/discharge cycles.35–38 Theoretically, the first voltage plateau appeared at around 2.3 V during discharge, in which the ring-opening reaction of S8 occurred upon the acceptance of electrons, corresponding to the “solid–liquid phase” conversion from S8 into Li2S8/Li2S6. As for the first stage, each S atom can accept 0.5 electron on average, delivering a theoretical specific capacity of 418 mA h g−1. The second voltage plateau appears at about 2.1 V, corresponding to the further reduction of Li2S4 into Li2S2/Li2S, a typical “liquid–solid phase” conversion reaction. In this stage, each S atom can maximally obtain 1.5 electrons, which releases a theoretical specific capacity up to 1254 mA h g−1. In the charging process, two voltage plateaus fuzzily appear at ca. 2.2 V and 2.4 V, attributing to the electrochemical oxidation of Li2S into chain-like polysulfides and subsequent solid S8, respectively. In contrast to the sluggish transmission of ions and electrons in solid sulfides, the soluble long-chain polysulfides present a much higher redox kinetics. It well explains the reasons why polysulfides with a long chain length are responsible for the higher voltage plateau with low polarization (narrow gap between charge/discharge curves) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Typical charge/discharge profile of LSBs associated with the variations in sulfur utilization and reaction kinetics.38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 (Wiley 2021). 
2.2 Challenges of LSBs
Although LSBs perform great superiority in energy density, the low coulombic efficiency, short lifespan, and potential safety hazard impede their large-scale commercial development.39,40 The formidable challenges of LSBs, as well as the underlying mechanisms are elaborated in depth as follows:
(1) Low electronic conductivity. The electronic conductivities of sulfur and lithium sulfide at room temperature are only 5 × 10−30 S cm−1 and 3.6 × 10−7 S cm−1, respectively, which are both typical electronic insulators.41 The insulating properties of sulfur and lithium sulfide severely restrain the electronic transmission during charge/discharge, which evidently aggravates the polarization and retards the electrochemical reactions. The terribly poor conductivity of sulfur and lithium sulfide makes it impossible to take a good advantage of those active materials, resulting in a big gap between the actual capacity and the theoretical one.
(2) Large volume variation.42 The difference in density between sulfur (2.07 g cm−3) and lithium sulfide (1.66 g cm−3)19 gives rise to the detrimental volume variation (ca. 80 vol%) of the active materials during charge/discharge. From a view of microstructure, the relatively large deformation causes great stress and strain, and hence, leads to the rupture of the cathode or even pulverization. As a result, the sulfurous species will easily detach from current collectors. The losing of electric contact with the collector will lead to a rapid decline in reversible capacity. More terribly, the unstable electrode structure will bring about serious security risks.
(3) Dissolution and side reactions of polysulfides.43 A large number of lithium polysulfide (Li2Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) intermediates generated during the charge/discharge process are easily dissoluble in ether electrolyte. On the one hand, the long-chain polysulfides are susceptible to be reduced or oxidized through disproportionation reactions into short-chain lithium polysulfides or elemental sulfur, respectively. The specific solid–liquid–solid redox process gives rise to a repetitive dissolution–precipitation cycle of the sulfurous materials in the cathode, usually bringing about the partial agglomeration.
On the other hand, lithium polysulfides dissolved in electrolytes diffuse through the separator to the lithium anode under the effects of concentration gradient, as well as the electric field force, and undesirably react with lithium to produce lithium sulfide. The as-formed lithium sulfide layers on the lithium surface passivate the anode severely, thereby aggravating the detrimental battery polarization. Subsequently, these lithium sulfide layers can further reduce the long-chain polysulfides migrating from the cathode and, thus, create more soluble polysulfides. These polysulfides concentrated on the anodic side will spread back to the cathode during the following charge process.43 The term “shuttling effect” is employed to represent the behavior of polysulfides migrating back and forth between the both electrodes. It can be seen that those polysulfides shuttling during charge/discharge are though active materials, can hardly contribute to producing any specific capacity, because of the bare internal electronic transmission without external circuits. As a result, the notorious shuttling effect leads to a low coulombic efficiency as well as a rapid decline in reversible capacity.
(4) Sluggish kinetics of the redox conversion.44 During the discharge process of LSBs, the capacity released from the liquid–solid (i.e. polysulfides into Li2S2/Li2S) conversion accounts for ca. 3/4 of the total capacity. However, the intrinsic sluggish kinetics of this process will be responsible for the continuous accumulation of the soluble polysulfides in the electrolyte, further aggravating the shuttling effect. In spite of the detrimental insulation of sulfides, the sluggishness of liquid–solid conversion in LSBs dramatically restricts the applications in high power density. The catalytic approaches have been recently adopted to accelerate the interconversion between polysulfides and lithium sulfide, which is believed as a promising avenue in boosting the dynamic behaviors of LSBs.
(5) The issues from the lithium metal anode.45 Usually, a layer of solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) film is generated on the surface of lithium anode during the first discharge. Afterwards, the SEI film experiences constant decomposition and regeneration cycles during the following charge/discharge, leading to the continuous consumption of liquid electrolytes, as well as the lithium metal. Moreover, the growth of lithium dendrites normally takes place on the surface of lithium metal, which is presumably due to the inhomogeneous flux of Li+ ions diffusing in between the both electrodes. In addition, the lumps on lithium metal with the rugged surface are unable to contact with the adjacent separator intimately, and thus aggravates the growth of lithium dendrites owing to terribly uneven Li+ flux, as well as the numerous nucleation sites (rugged lithium). The overgrowth of dendrites will cause the fractures of the needle-like lithium, and the as-formed “dead lithium” can no longer take part in the electrochemical reactions. What is more, this needle-like lithium can puncture through the ordinary separator (low strength and toughness) to induce the battery short circuit or even serious explosion.
3. Features of celluloses
The cellulose is a high-molecular weight linear homopolymer formed by linking cellobiose via β-1,4-glycosidic bonds.46 It is rich in hydroxyl groups, with which the numerous cellulose nanofibrils are created via the parallel stacking of those gluconic chains.47,48 After following higher levels of self-assemblies, the cellulosic fibers are eventually formed with the majority of regular crystal regions and the minority of loosely arranged amorphous regions.49 Normally, the cellulose with a relatively high crystallinity shows high mechanical strength. Notably, the hydroxyl groups, as well as the reductive or non-reductive gluconic terminal groups on celluloses are prone to undergoing esterification, oxidation, etherification, graft modification, hydrolytic degradation, etc., offering great possibilities to synthesize various cellulose-based functional materials.
The cellulose on the earth is mainly created by the photosynthesis of plants, which can typically be extracted from the plant cell walls with the boiling alkaline solution. Cellulosic fibers, whose average diameter is in nanoscale, are thereby defined as nanocelluloses. In general, nanocelluloses can be classified into three categories according to their origin and manufacturing strategies, i.e. cellulose nanofibers (CNFs),50 cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs),51 and bacterial celluloses (BCs).52 CNFs present long length and high aspect ratio, but relatively low crystallinity (with both amorphous and crystalline zones), while CNCs exhibit short length, low aspect ratio, and high crystallinity (88%).53 The BC produced by biological fermentation normally has a 3D nanofibrous architecture with almost no disconnection, and thus can be regarded to show an infinity in fibrous length. Notably, benefiting from the specific self-assemblies under microbial effects, the BC displays a superbly high crystallinity, approaching the complete crystallization of CNCs.
Sandberg et al.50 pioneered the preparation of the CNFs in the 1980s via a high-pressure homogenization approach, and these CNFs present the diameter range of 2–60 nm, and the length from 500 nm to several microns.54 Typically, CNFs possess both the crystalline and amorphous regions, and thus exhibit a combination of decent mechanical strength and excellent flexibility. Hence, CNFs show great potential in the research of high modulus separators and bendable electrodes.
Instead of the mechanical exfoliation avenue for CNFs, CNCs are majorly prepared by chemical hydrolysis in an acidic medium (mostly sulfuric acid) with the thermal control strategy.55 The selective etching of the amorphous region of the cellulose leads to the successful extraction of crystal nanorods from the cellulosic matrix. In case of hydrolysis by sulfuric acid, the negatively charged sulfate groups are grafted onto CNCs, leading to a stable aqueous suspension due to the electrostatic repulsion effects. Notably, the CNC suspension normally performs a concentration-dependent liquid crystal self-assembly behavior, which originates from the ingenious steric compatibility of CNCs under the effects of hydrogen bonds.56
The BC, as a secondary metabolite of bacteria, can be easily purified into almost 100% cellulose due to the absence of lignin and hemicellulose, which are identified to entangle tightly with cellulose in plant cell walls.57 Moreover, BC attracts great attention in terms of the exceptionally high degree of polymerization (∼8000) and crystallinity (∼95%),58 much superior to those of the plant cellulose. Taken an individual nanofiber into account, the BC is ribbon-like in nature with 30–100 nm width and 3–8 nm thickness.59 Notably, both the BC and plant cellulose normally present an extremely low coefficient of thermal expansion (<8.5 ppm K−1), which greatly alleviates the deformation of the cellulosic components even under the terrible battery thermal runaway. After carbonization in an inert atmosphere, the BC-derived carbon aerogels present decent conductivity, and meanwhile, inherit the BC 3D nanofibrous architecture. In general, all categories of nanocellulose, as well as their carbonized aerogels, are highly flexible in nature, and therefore, are feasibly employed in the popular wearable energy storage devices.
The unique physical and chemical features of nanocellulose including high strength, low thermal expansion, large aspect ratio, abundant hydroxyl groups, and 3D porous architecture (for BC) are greatly desirable as the critical components of LSBs (Fig. 4). In the next section, we will summarize the applications of cellulosic materials in LSBs and elaborate their superiorities on the basis of the combination of cellulosic natures with the mechanisms of battery operation.
 Fig. 4  Intrinsic features and basic functions of cellulosic materials, as well as several components. 
4. Applications of cellulosic materials in LSBs
4.1 Cellulose-derived separators for LSBs
Separator has been believed as one of the most vital components in LSB, which plays a decisive role in battery performance, including specific capacity, cycling lifespan, internal impedance, and puncture resistance. The separator inserted in between the cathode and the anode basically acts as a physical barrier to avoid any contacts of the both electrodes. Meanwhile, the separator should ensure the smooth transportations of Li+ ions to achieve an efficient interconversion between electric energy and chemical energy.60 Besides, the separator is expected to possess superior electrochemical stability and thermal stability to maintain prolonged reversible charge/discharge reactions even under high current densities (might release heat).61 What is more, the property of flame retardancy has been recently taken into consideration for the design of advanced separators to avoid the fire risk caused by the serious short-circuit. With respect to LSBs, the separators are also anticipated to be able to block the migration of polysulfides. Moreover, the mechanical strength of separators is of great significance in avoiding the deleterious short-circuit even in the presence of Li dendrites.
Currently, the commercialized olefin-type separator has been mostly employed in LSBs due to the mature production techniques, low cost, tailorable aperture size, and superior electrochemical tolerance. However, the unfavorable wettability (due to inertia) and poor thermo-mechanical stability of the separator bring about inferior dynamics in ion migration and potential safety risks especially under an intractable thermal runaway, respectively. Unfortunately, the large pore size on a micron scale can absolutely not prevent the shuttling of soluble polysulfides with the size of nanoscale.62 To tackle the aforementioned issues, the researchers have devoted a great deal of efforts to the optimization of the LSB separator in terms of accelerating redox kinetics, promoting the efficient utilization of active materials, resisting puncture of dendrites, and alleviating shuttling of polysulfides.
Cellulosic materials have been recently reckoned as promising candidates of substitutes for the traditional polyolefin separators, due to the strong mechanical strength, abundant ionic channels, and decent wettability to electrolyte. Benefiting from the sufficient polar hydroxyls on celluloses, the cellulosic separators are able to mitigate the shuttling of polysulfides through the chemical confinements of polar–polar interaction. Moreover, the intrinsic functional groups of celluloses can be facilely tailored through chemical modification, which offers a great deal of possibilities to confine polysulfides in between the cathode and the separator.63 Additionally, the inherent biodegradability of the biomass materials excludes the concerns for environmental burden in the coming age when numerous wasted batteries are to be well disposed.
Yu et al.56 fabricated the separators of LSBs with BC pellicles from the skin-care facial masks (Fig. 5a). The BC-derived separators were reported to possess anisotropic nanofibrous textures with high concentration of small pores. The intrinsic networks interweaved by numerous BC nanofibers can well disperse the electrolyte and maintain the uniform deposition of Li on the anode. It is anticipated that the growth of lithium dendrites is greatly mitigated by using the BC film as a separator (Fig. 5b). In comparison with the commercial polypropylene (PP) separator (Celgard 2500), the BC film exhibits some more superiorities including high strength, good wettability, and decent thermal stability. Thanks to the high strength and flexibility, the BC as well as its derivatives was employed in both the cathode and separator of the bendable LSB. From the view of commercial applications, the LSB was tested with a high S area loading of 5 mg cm−2.64 The cell presented a superb electrochemical performance in 500 cycles with a high capacity retention of 82%.
 Fig. 5  (a) Configuration of a LSB with a cellulose-based porous membrane (upper graph: EDS mapping image of the carbon paper/S cathode; right graph: FTIR spectra of the cellulose-based porous membrane).56 (b) Cycling stability of freshly packed CBC@BC at 1.0C.64 (c) Li stripping and plating behavior in Li//Li symmetric cells.65 (d) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the Ti3C2Tx–SnS2-PBC membrane.66 (e) Schematic of the CF-coated separator repelling polysulfides and redistributing Li ions.67 (f) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CNF separators and mechanism diagram of the interaction between CNFs (inset).69 (g) Characteristic morphology of lithium before cycling and after 500 h of cycling for WE faced to NFC_20PO or Celgard separators.70 (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a composite polymer electrolyte membrane by a solution-casting technique.71 (i) Schematic illustration of the interaction mechanism between polysulfides and NCP-CPE.72 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 (ACS Publications 2016), ref. 64 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 65 (Wiley 2021), ref. 66 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 67 (Elsevier 2021), ref. 69 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 70 (ECS 2019), ref. 71 (Elsevier 2018), and ref. 72 (Wiley 2018). 
To tackle the intractable shuttling effect, the separators of LSBs are highly desirable to trap polysulfides and suppress their diffusion towards the Li anode. An innovative all-in-one configuration of the separator was proposed by Li et al.65 by facile vacuum-assisted infiltration with BC supports. The as-prepared Janus separator composed of CNFs/BN, BC, and rGO@Ru/CNT displayed superior thermal/mechanical properties and effectively inhibited the growth of lithium dendrites (Fig. 5c). Notably, the functional groups on CNFs present a strong lithiophilicity and thus facilitate the homogeneous flux of Li+ through the self-concentration effect. Moreover, the ultrafine Ru clusters on rGO can effectively capture polysulfides and then accelerate the conversion kinetics greatly. As a result, the LSB using this Janus separator delivered a high specific capacity of 1288 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with a decay rate of only 0.045% per cycle over 800 cycles. Likewise, Wu et al.66 prepared the Ti3C2Tx–SnS2-BC multi-functional separator via a interfacial engineering strategy. The employment of the BC film significantly enhanced the thermo-stability (no shrinking up to 200 °C) and puncture resistance of the composite separator. The electrocatalyst of SnS2 coated onto Ti3C2Tx was reported to alleviate the shuttling effect by adsorbing and promoting the interconversion of polysulfides with different valences (Fig. 5d).
Despite the biosynthetic BC materials, the more extensively used plant celluloses can also be employed as the separators of LSBs. Zhou et al.67 extracted the CNFs from the recycled cardboard followed by depositing onto the commercial PP separator through vacuum filtration (Fig. 5e). The negatively charged groups on CNFs were reported to repulse the polysulfides and, meanwhile, promote the homogeneous distribution of Li+ during passing through the separator. After assembling with this cost-effective composite separators, the LSBs presented almost no capacity attenuation during the initial several cycles and maintained a capacity retention rate of 71.69% over 800 cycles. Chien et al.68 integrated the cellulose separator with a cathode-facing porous carbon layer. The facilely prepared separator led to a significant improvement in the cycling lifespan. It is estimated that the introduction of celluloses in the separator is able to alleviate the decomposition of electrolytes. Li et al.69 mixed the isopropyl alcohol with the CNF aqueous suspension and then prepared the functional LSB separators by simple vacuum filtration. CNFs with abundant polar groups can chemically immobilize the polysulfides and also suppress the formation of dendrites by regulating the SEI morphologies on the lithium anode (Fig. 5f). Moreover, the contents of isopropyl alcohol in the suspension can be well controlled to optimize the porous structures of the separators. Eventually, the superior separator with an extremely high porosity of 98.05%, an ultra-low thickness of 19 μm, and a lightweight of 0.87 mg cm−2 was employed in LSBs, and a high capacity of 1255.5 mA h g−1 can be released at 0.05C over 500 cycles, 1.4 times higher than the one armed with the PP separator. In view of regulating the pores of separators, Pavlin et al.70 prepared the CNF-based separator with a pore-forming agent, paraffin oil, and a surfactant (Brijc-10), with which the porous structure, as well as the morphology, of the separator can be precisely regulated to guarantee the efficient transmission of Li+. Thanks to the interaction in between CNFs and lithium metal, the as-prepared separator was able to hinder the growth of dendrites and, thus, slow down the degradation of lithium anode (Fig. 5g).
Nowadays, the advent of solid polymer electrolyte opens up great possibilities to avoid the safety risks of LIBs resulting from the volatilization and leakage of liquid electrolytes. As for LSBs, the utilization of solid electrolytes will evidently slow down the migration of polysulfides with a much larger molecular size than that of Li+. Chen et al.71 prepared the polysiloxane solid electrolyte with a rigid substrate made by cellulose acetate. At the ambient temperature, the polymer electrolyte exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 4.0 × 10−4 S cm−1, an appropriate ion transference number of 0.52, and a strong mechanical strength of 6.8 MPa. What is more, the as-prepared solid electrolyte was capable of inhibiting the growth of lithium dendrites (Fig. 5h). A judicious design of sandwich-structured polymer electrolyte composed of polymer, cellulosic nonwoven (Fig. 5i), and nanocarbon in sequence was proposed by Qu et al.72 for high-performance LSBs. It has been verified that the batteries armed with the multifunctional polymer electrolytes delivered excellent long-term stability and superior rate capability. Even subjected to a high S loading of 4.9 mg cm−2, the battery could still offer a high areal capacity of 5.1 mA h cm−2. Table 1 summarizes the employments of celluloses as various types of separators in LSBs.
Table 1 Summary of the uses of celluloses as separators in LSBs




Cellulosic types
Separator styles
Features
Functions
Capacitya (mA h g−1)/current density
Cycling stability (retention@cycles/current density)
Ref.





a Capacity: calculated based on the mass of cathode active materials.
b NR: not reported.
c CF: cellulose fiber.
d CPE: composite polymer electrolyte.





BC
Paper-like separator
Good thermal stability; high mechanical strength; high wettability.
Suppress Li dendrite growth; relieves polysulfide corrosion of lithium anodes.
1388/0.2C
68.22%@100 cycles/0.2C 33.14%@1000 cycles/0.2C

56



High adsorption efficiency.
The electrolyte is evenly distributed.
849/1C
82%@500 cycles/NRb

64



Excellent tensile strength; high thermostability (no shrinking at 200 °C); high puncture resistance.
Suppress Li dendrite growth; ensure the battery system's safety during overcharge, heat release, or violent impact.
1390.9/0.2C
65%@500 cycles/0.2C

66



BC and CNF
Paper-like separator
Strong lipophilicity; high thermal conductivity; high Young's modulus.
Suppress Li dendrite growth; impedes irreversible polysulfide diffusion.
1288/0.1C
63.2%@800 cycles/1C

65



CFc
Paper-like separator
Rendered a negatively charged surface.
Repelled the anionic polysulfides (Sx-2); redistributed the cationic Li ions (Li+)
1016/0.5C
71.69%@800 cycles/0.5C

67



CNF
Paper-like separator
Homogeneous mesoscale pore distribution.
Uniform Li deposition; slower electrolyte decomposition.
NR
NR

68



Ultrathin thickness (19 μm); lightweight (0.87 mg cm−2); extremely high porosity (98.05%);
Mitigate the migration of polysulfide; suppress Li dendrite growth;
1255.5/0.05C
NR

69



Large surface area; easy modification; good mechanical properties and chemical durability.
Hinders the formation of high surface area lithium (HSAL).
NR
NR

70



CPEd
Solid polymer electrolyte
High ionic conductivity at ambient temperature (7.8 × 10−4 S cm-1); high mechanical strength.
Block the lithium dendrite growth and diffusion of polysulfides.
1493/1C
90%@80 cycles/1C

71



CPE
Gel polymer electrolyte
The cellulose chain is rich in hydroxyl groups; good biocompatibility; environmental benignity.
Facilitate electronic transfers; accelerate the conversion of polysulfides; mitigate the migration of polysulfides.
1146/0.5C
41.5%@1500 cycles/0.5C

72





4.2 Cellulose-derived materials as functional interlayers
An additional interlayer in between the cathode and the separator was normally regarded as an upper current collector, which affords one more component to further boosting the performance of LSBs. Cellulose-derived carbons were frequently employed as the interlayers with the merits of ultralight weight, high conductivity, microstructural nondestruction, huge surface area, etc., which are all conducive to being the multifunctional interlayers.
Li et al.73 pyrolyzed the cellulose filter papers under Ar and then used them as the low-cost and high-quality interlayers for LSBs. As shown in Fig. 6a, the carbon interlayers can still preserve the morphologies of the cellulose precursors, despite the inevitable thermal shrinkage. The inherited cross-linking networks of the interlayers are beneficial for trapping the soluble polysulfides. Meanwhile, the high conductivity facilitates the efficient transmission of electrons, which greatly enhances the conversion kinetics of the confined polysulfides. The LSB armed with this interlayer displayed a discharge capacity of above 830 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of more than 97% at 0.2C. Park et al.74 prepared a lightweight (0.38 mg cm−2) and ultrathin (10 μm) carbon interlayer via the carbonization of the electrospun cellulose (Fig. 6b). After chemical activation by KOH, the as-prepared carbon nanofibrous interlayers featured both an extremely large surface area and abundant micropores, beneficial for the effective entrapment of short-chain polysulfide intermediates. After employing the functional interlayers, the as-obtained LSBs provided a high capacity of 1403 mA h g−1 and a remarkable areal capacity of 4.83 mA h cm−2 with a S loading of 4.6 mg cm−2 at 0.1C.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the cellulose filter paper (white) and carbonized paper (black). The inset shows the flexibility of the carbonized paper; SEM images of the filter paper.73 (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of ACCF with an optical image in the inset.74 (c) Optical images of the pristine BC, polymer-functionalized BC, and Ni-CBC.76 (d) Image of the labyrinth composed of cypress woods and illustration of the fabrication process of the NS-RHGO-CCP interlayer with diagrammatic expressions of the structures of CCP, RGO-CCP, RHGO-CCP, and NS-RHGO-CCP at the bottom.77 (e) Schematic of the interlayer location in the battery with the FESEM images and the cycling stability at 1 A g−1 current density.79 (f) Synthetic process of the SnO2-containing pyrolyzed BC (SnO2-PBC).80 (g) Mechanism of action of Fe/Fe3C nanocatalysts and the rate performance of batteries with and without the CF interlayers.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 74 (Elsevier 2021), ref. 76 (Springer 2017), ref. 77 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 79 (Springer 2018), ref. 80 (Elsevier 2018), and ref. 81 (Elsevier 2019). 
To acquire versatile properties, the interlayers are sometimes prepared by the carbonization of the cellulosic hybrids consisting of other functional components. Shen et al.75 embedded the 2D GO nanosheets into 3D interweaved BC skeletons. The highly interconnected carbonaceous nanofibers within the 3D pyrolyzed BC assist in electron transport, while the developed reticular architectures enhance the absorbability towards the electrolytes. The LSBs assembled with the composite interlayers presented a capacity of nearly 600 mA h g−1 at 3C and an attenuation rate of only 0.055% per cycle over 200 cycles.
Owing to the nonpolar feature of the carbonaceous materials, the interactions between the polysulfides (polar molecules) and the carbon interlayers are dominated by the relatively weak physical adsorption. To further enhance the affinity between the interlayers and the sulfides, the heteroatoms are usually introduced into the cellulose-derived carbon interlayers. Zhang et al.76 prepared the Ni-containing CBC (Ni-CBC) interlayers via the carbonization of the Ni-BC aerogels (Fig. 6c). The doped Ni in Ni-CBC can not only capture the polysulfides by dipolar interactions, but also catalytically prompt the electrochemical conversion of those active materials. The battery equipped with this interlayer delivered a highly reversible capacity of 852 mA h g−1 at 2C. Chen et al.77 incorporated the holey graphene oxide into the cellulose paper by a facile impregnation method. After carbonization with nitrogen and sulfur source, they finally obtained the N,S co-doped labyrinth-like interlayers. The plenty of nanosized holes, as well as the heteroatomic dopants in the interlayers were responsible for the permselectivity of Li+ and effective interception of the shuttling polysulfides (Fig. 6d). As a result, the LSBs display a low fading rate of 0.0487% per cycle during 300 cycles at 1C and a superior rate capability of 864.6 mA h g−1 at 2C. Rani et al.78 fabricated the interlayers by coating pencil graphite onto the pyrolyzed cellulose papers (Fig. 6e). It was reported that the polar SiO2 clay in pencil graphite facilitated the adsorption to polysulfides, while the graphitic matrix evidently enhanced the electronic conductivity. After optimization of the balance between silica and graphite, the LSBs presented a high S utilization with a capacity of 1352 mA h g−1 approaching the theoretical value.
Metal-based compounds have been believed as the promising candidates in trapping and/or catalyzing polysulfides, although most of them suffer from the low conductivity for both ions and electrons.80 To tackle the aforementioned issues, Celik et al.80 closely wrapped the SnO2 nanoparticles with CBC conductive skeletons via a biosynthesis process (Fig. 6f). It was demonstrated from the EIS that the battery redox kinetics can be maintained at a high level throughout the whole testing period. Notably, the adsorption tests, as well as the XPS results, corroborated the superior confinement of SnO2 nanoparticles towards soluble polysulfides. After employing the Li2S cathode materials, a capacity of 468 mA h g−1 was obtained at C/10 current density over 100 cycles. Zhang et al.81 integrated the Fe sources with the cellulose paper by a method of solution infiltration. After successive drying and calcining, the Fe/Fe3C nanoparticles were homogeneously dispersed onto the freestanding graphitic networks. It was confirmed that the presence of Fe/Fe3C dramatically enhanced the redox kinetics of those sulfides, and meanwhile, suppressed the shuttling effect, benefiting for the utilization of sulfur to a great extent. The batteries delivered capacities around 1000 and 750 mA h g−1 with the current densities of 0.2C and 2C, respectively. After 200 cycles at 1C, a reversible capacity of 772 mA h g−1 can still be maintained (Fig. 6g).
4.3 Cellulose-derived carbon hosts for sulfur as the cathode
It is of great significance for the judicious design of cathodes in LSBs, as it involves most of the sulfurous active materials, which normally undergo a series of transforms during the repetitive charge/discharge cycles. Besides, both sulfur and lithium sulfide are electrical and ionic insulators at room temperature, leading to the very limited utilization of active materials.82 Additionally, the significant volumetric variations of the sulfurous species during lithiation and delithiation give rise to the deleterious pulverization of cathodic microstructures.83 To tackle the issues aforementioned, the advanced cathodes are desirable to possess the following merits: (1) good conductivity for the efficient transmission of electrons; (2) abundant pores to ensure the fast migration of ions and accommodate the volume changes of sulfur; and (3) high specific surface area to confine the diffusion of soluble polysulfides.84–86 Taken these superiorities into account, cellulosic materials are reckoned as the decent choices to be carbonized into multifunctional hosts for sulfur in LSB cathodes.
Our group87 pioneered the employment of the BC as the precursor of the carbonaceous skeleton in the LSB cathode. It was found that the intrinsic macropores of CBC permitted a high sulfur loading of 81 wt%, while the spare voids after infiltrated by S were able to accommodate the volumetric variation of active species. The inherited 3D nanofibrous architecture of CBC presented a superior electrical conductivity, as well as a decent mechanical stability. Li et al.88 believed that the extremely low density of the CBC aerogel is beneficial for the enhancement of the ratio of active materials in the cathode, contributing to a high energy density on the basis of the overall mass of cathode (Fig. 7a). Particularly, the strong affinity of CBC towards the catholyte (Li2S6) is responsible for the mitigation of the notorious shuttling effect. When applying CBC as the conductive matrix in the cathode, the battery presented an initial capacity of 1360 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, and a decent cycling stability with 76% retention rate over 200 cycles. Quan et al.89 doped N atoms into the CBC lattice with the nitrogen resource of the residual culture medium. After activation by KOH at 900 °C, they obtained the N-doped microporous carbon (NMC) with a high surface area of 1479 m2 g−1 and an adequate pore volume of 1.14 cm3 g−1. After incorporating with S via the melt-diffusion avenue, the as-prepared S@NMC cathode exhibited a high reversible capacity of 995 mA h g−1 even after 500 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of around 99.0%.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of the BC aerogel and CNFA.88 (b) Long-term cycling stabilities of bare sulfur, S-CBC, and S-Mn2O3@CBC at 1.0C.91 (c) Schematic diagram for the evolution process of the as-prepared CoS2/N-CNFs@S.92 (d) Schematic comparison between 2D Al and 3D CCA current collectors, and schematic illustration of the discharge process of CCA cathodes.93 (e) Rate performance of the activated-carbon/sulfur composites at different current densities.94 (f) Fabrication process of the 3D C@S.95 (g) SEM images of the cross-section and plane view of MXene/T-CNF-1 and MXene/T-CNF-2.96 (h) Synthetic schemes of the preparation of the Cellulose(CMK-3/S)CB composite.98 Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 91 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 92 (ECS 2021), ref. 93 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 94 (Elsevier 2020), ref. 95 (Elsevier 2020), ref. 96 (Springer 2022), and ref. 98 (Elsevier 2018). 
Very similar to the interlayers of LSBs, the metal-based compounds are frequently employed as the polysulfide trapper and catalytic sites in sulfurous cathodes. Shi et al.90 successfully decorated the ultrafine MoC onto N-doped CBC nanofibers (MoC@N-CBC) via typical cellulose precursor hybridization followed by a “one-pot” carbonization approach. It was reported that the coated MoC nanoparticles were sulfophilic carbide, thus favorable to the immobilization of polysulfides. Meanwhile, the catalytic effects from the MoC were beneficial for the efficient interconversion of those sulfides during the redox processes. After infiltration of the polysulfide catholyte, the battery displayed a high areal capacity of 12.3 mA h cm−2 with an extremely high S loading of 10 mg cm−2. Likewise, Bharti et al.91 embedded Mn2O3 onto CBC conductive skeletons to use as sulfur hosts (Fig. 7b), while Wang et al.92 anchored the CoS2 nanospheres onto the N-doped CBC to acquire 3D sulfuric cathodes (Fig. 7c). As for CBC carbonaceous scaffolds, the highly interweaved nanofibers and the as-formed pores in the networks provided numerous pathways for the efficient transportation of both electrons and Li+ ions. The metal-based compounds, however, assisted in restraining the diffusion of polysulfides by polar interaction, and meanwhile, expedited the redox kinetics via catalytic mechanisms.
Besides the BC materials, the plant celluloses are also capable of being used in the cathodes of LSBs. Mao et al.93 mixed the cotton cellulose with graphene oxide (GO) and then built the cellulose/GO composite aerogels by gelation at ambient temperature followed by freeze-drying (Fig. 7d). After annealing in N2, they obtained the 3D free-standing carbon aerogel with the intriguing merits including ultralow density (0.018 g cm−3), high surface area (657.85 m2 g−1), adequate porosity (96%), and decent electrolyte wettability. After impregnating elemental sulfur into the carbon aerogels, a relatively high area capacity of 8.60 mA h cm−2 can be achieved. The other two works associated with the plant cellulose were reported by Li et al.94 and Chen et al.,95 who prepared the carbonaceous nanofibrous aerogels by carbonizing the laboratory filter papers (Fig. 7e) and TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (Fig. 7f), respectively. When adopted as the 3D conductive substrates for S, the cellulose-derived biochar displayed a high porosity and large surface area, which were favorable for buffering the large volume expansion of S and restraining the diffusion of polysulfides. Liu et al.96 developed 3D Mxene/CNFs aerogels via a strategy of premixing of suspensions followed by freeze-drying (Fig. 7g). After annealing under Ar at 600 °C, the free-standing cathode exhibited a superior capacity retention of 99.4% after 200 cycles. Subsequently, the same group97 further optimized the battery performance by investigating the influence of CNFs with different charge states. Finally, they found that the positively charged CNFs presented a stronger electrostatic interaction with the Mxene nanosheets, which effectively mitigated the shuttling effect, whereas the negatively charged ones facilitated the dispersion of the solution and created a better porous architecture.
Except for the cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers, the pristine cellulose can also be employed in the synthesis of advanced cathodes of LSBs. Li et al.98 fabricated core-sheath fibrous hybrids via a co-electrospinning process, in which the cellulose served as the outer shell, while the S/C composites were located at the inner core (Fig. 7h). It has been demonstrated that the cellulosic shells were conducive for the transmission of ions, and meanwhile, were able to accommodate the volumetric changes of S during charge/discharge cycles. More importantly, after incorporating the layer of cellulose, the dissolution of the polysulfides can be mitigated to some extent. As a result, the as-prepared cathodes presented a low attenuation rate of ca. 0.12% per cycle over 300 cycles with a high coulombic efficiency of above 99.0%.
4.4 Cellulose-based binders used in LSBs
As an indispensable ingredient in the battery electrolyte, the binder is of great significance in combining all the stuffs prepared for electrodes into an integer. Basically, the binder enables the close contacts of active materials, conductive scaffolds, current collectors, etc. With respect to LSBs, it is significantly anticipated that the binder is capable of physically and/or chemically confining the dissolution or migration of polysulfides in electrolytes, leading to excellent cyclability.99 Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), the most commonly used binder in LSBs, presents strong adhesive strength and decent electrochemical stability. However, the hydrophobic nature of PVDF brings about the troubles of swelling and dissolving in organic electrolytes, which causes the gradual detachments of the electrode constituents. However, the solvent of PVDF, N-methyl pyrrolidinone (NMP) is a hazardous organic solvent100,101 with a relatively high boiling point of ca. 230 °C, suggesting a higher energy consumption in removing this solvent.
It is worth noting that the binders made of cellulosic materials could potentially overcome the aforementioned drawbacks. Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), a typical cellulosic derivative, possesses decent solubility in water, and thus can be employed in preparing the aqueous electrode slurry. Moreover, the hydroxyl groups in CMC are reported to make a contribution in strengthening the adhesion to aluminum foil, whose surface usually grows a layer of hydrophilic metal oxides.102 However, it is difficult to thoroughly remove moisture from sulfuric cathodes in the cases that the cellulosic binders are involved in LSBs. The situation might be even worse if the volatile nature of sulfur is taken into account. The residual moisture in cathodes will be a threat to both lithium anode and polysulfides, because the vigorous irreversible reactions will occur in both upon contact with H2O. To circumvent this dilemma, Li et al.103 prepared the sulfurized carbon cathodes by vulcanization of polyacrylonitrile, in which S was covalently bonded into the conductive carbonaceous skeletons. The authors in this work made a comparison between the traditional binder of PVDF and the water-soluble CMC. They concluded that the LSBs with the CMC binder exhibited much better performance in terms of cycling stability and rate capability than those of their PVDF counterparts. The superior electrochemical behaviors were mainly ascribed to the abundant oxygen groups in CMC with great polysulfide capturing ability. Liu et al.104 used CMC/butadiene rubber (SBR) to prepare a slurry battery binder, which could be easily employed as thick and uniform coatings on the current collector (>4 mg cm−2). The thick coating on the electrode was reported to present a superior wettability towards electrolytes even with a high viscosity and limited solvability. Sun et al.105 found that hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC), another cellulosic derivative, could offer stronger adhesion between electrode materials and Al current collectors. Although the introduction of HPC slightly increased the electrode resistance, it greatly enhanced the mechanical stability, which is highly desirable for the cathodes with thick and high S active coatings. Liu et al.106 employed CNC as both a binder and a polysulfide stopper in LSBs. The abundant oxygen-containing groups on CNC not only firmly fixed sulfur as a binder in the cathode, but also restricted polysulfide shuttling to the Li anode. In this work, the LSBs incorporated with CNC showed outstanding cycling performance even under the conditions of a high S content of 90 wt%, a high S loading of 8.5 mg cm−2, and a high temperature of 60 °C.
5. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, the employment of cellulosic materials in LSBs has gained great interest of the researchers owing to their highly exposed active surfaces, strong mechanical toughness, and remarkably porous architecture. This review begins with an overview of LSB working mechanisms, followed by the challenges they confronted. To get out of the dilemma, several categories of cellulosic materials are introduced in the preparation of crucial components in LSBs. The results indicated that the unique surficial chemistry and highly entangled nanofibrous microstructure are favorable for buffering deformation stress, alleviating the polysulfide shuttling effect, and inhibiting Li dendrite growth. However, the commercialization of LSBs with cellulosic materials is still in its infancy. To make a further move ahead, we herein proposed several perspectives on the judicious utilization of celluloses in LSBs.
(1) A large amount of works centered on the carbonization of celluloses at a high temperature up to 1000 °C, with which though offering a decent conductivity, it will inevitably lose most of the mechanical strength. Taking the mobility of polysulfides into account, the conductivity of the LSB cathode can be maintained by adding carbon additives. Thus, cellulosic scaffolds can be used directly to support sulfurous active materials with all the inherent features without any degradation.
(2) Up to now, there is no report on celluloses in the application to lithium anodes. A cellulosic film close to lithium anode is predicted to homogenize the Li+ flux before arriving onto the anode. However, an anodic composite can be prepared by infiltrating molten lithium inside cellulosic aerogels. Besides homogenizing Li+, the cellulosic scaffolds can stabilize the Li volumetric variation.
(3) Thanks to the abundant hydroxyl groups on celluloses, the surface modification can be facilely carried out by means of grafting various functional groups. As a result, the controlling effects onto polysulfides by different charge densities and polarities of groups can be systematically investigated.
(4) Solid electrolytes are believed to circumvent the shuttling effect and also maintain an extremely high safety. The highly porous architecture of cellulose aerogels enables sufficient space for the infiltration of Li+-conductive materials. Moreover, the as-prepared cellulosic solid electrolytes will undoubtedly inherit the superior mechanical properties of celluloses including flexibility and toughness.
(5) Organic sulfur in LSBs has gained great interest recently for the distinctive electrochemical behaviors. Benefiting from the active groups of celluloses, the sulfurous molecules can also covalently bound to cellulosic macromolecules. It is highly anticipated that organic sulfur offers superior battery performance under such cellulosic conditions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (51702162), Project of Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training for College Students in Jiangsu Province (202210298180H; 2021NFUSPITPO338; 202010298177H), and Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD). We thank the Ms CY Zhong (Hainan Yeguo Foods Co., Ltd.) for kindly supplying some of the raw materials.
References
N. Kittner, F. Lill and D. M. Kammen, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17125 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, S. Wang, T. Lu, L. Guan, L. Hou, H. Du, H. Wei, X. Liu, Y. Wei and H. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2023, 10, 2205233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3193–3222 RSC .
M. S. Zantye, A. Arora and M. M. F. Hasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3986–4008 RSC .
B. Owens-Baird, J. P. S. Sousa, Y. Ziouani, D. Y. Petrovykh, N. A. Zarkevich, D. D. Johnson, Y. V. Kolen'ko and K. Kovnir, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5007–5016 RSC .
H. Gong, T. Wang, K. Chang, P. Li, L. Liu, X. Yu, B. Gao, H. Xue, R. Ma, J. He and J. Ye, Carbon Energy, 2022, 6, 1169–1181 CrossRef .
H. Gong, X. Yu, Y. Xu, B. Gao, H. Xue, X. Fan, H. Guo, T. Wang and J. He, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 1533–1540 RSC .
H. Tian, H. Tian, S. Wang, S. Chen, F. Zhang, L. Song, H. Liu, J. Liu and G. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lyu, F. Luo, D. Wang, L. Bu, L. Tao and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fotouhi, D. J. Auger, K. Propp, S. Longo and M. Wild, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 56, 1008–1021 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, P. Zou, L. Ren, S. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, Z. Hou, Z. Jiang, X. Lu, T. Lu, L. Guan, L. Hou, C. Yang, W. Liu and Y. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023 DOI:10.1002/adfm.202213648 .
G. Zhou, K. Liu, Y. Fan, M. Yuan, B. Liu, W. Liu, F. Shi, Y. Liu, W. Chen, J. Lopez, D. Zhuo, J. Zhao, Y. Tsao, X. Huang, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 260–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Xu, C. He, J. Zhao and Y. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7066–7075 RSC .
F. Liu, G. Sun, H. B. Wu, G. Chen, D. Xu, R. Mo, L. Shen, X. Li, S. Ma, R. Tao, X. Li, X. Tan, B. Xu, G. Wang, B. S. Dunn, P. Sautet and Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, Z. Wu, Y. Yuan, P. Chen, L. Yu, L. Yuan, Q. Han, Y. Lan, W. Bai, E. Kan, C. Huang, X. Ouyang, X. Wang, J. Zhu and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, Q.-b Yan, S. Wang, A. Kushima, P. Bai, K. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6619–6625 RSC .
M. Liu, N. Deng, J. Ju, L. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Ma, W. Kang and J. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17843–17852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 936–958 RSC .
C. Zu and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, J. Su, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rana, Q. He, B. Luo, T. Lin, L. Ran, M. Li, I. Gentle and R. Knibbe, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1946–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safari, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 560–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li and Y. Zhao, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 374–383 RSC .
B. C. Knott, M. F. Crowley, M. E. Himmel, J. Zimmer and G. T. Beckham, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3108–3116 RSC .
A. Benítez, J. Amaro-Gahete, Y.-C. Chien, Á. Caballero, J. Morales and D. Brandell, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 154, 111783 CrossRef .
T. C. Mokhena and M. J. John, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 1149–1194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Zeng, X. Liu, W.-Y. Lai and L. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3200–3207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Huang, P. Huo and J. Gu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 165, 266–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Xie and K. Zhang, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 3703–3731 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Rana, E. Frollini and V. K. Thakur, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 182, 1554–1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Ding, J. Liang, C. Li, H. Bian, H. Dai and C. Hu, Cellulose, 2023, 30, 3901–3913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Fang, Y. Xiang, D. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Qu, M. Sun, H. Tang and J. Li, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 255, 117469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. Cui and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2170058 CrossRef CAS .
T. Danner and A. Latz, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 322, 134719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Lin, D. Wang, T. Gao, J. Song, P. Zhou, Z. Xu, Z. Yang, N. Xiao and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, F. Lu, X. Dou, X. Wang, D. Luo, H. Sun, A. Yu and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3583–3592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Zhou, W. Lv, G. Ling, L. Zhi and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700270 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, Z. Sun, D.-W. Wang, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606823 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Q. Zhang and Y.-K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 19–32 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, W. Yan, C. You, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Fu, Y. Zhang, N. Yu and Y. Wu, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Xie, C. S. Kim, K. Zaghib, A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2017, 121, 1–29 CrossRef .
W. Deng, J. Phung, G. Li and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105761 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, A. Yang, G. Gao, X. Yu, J. Xu, C. Liu, Y. Ye, A. Pei, Y. Wu, Y. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Liang, K. Liu, L. W. Wang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay5098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, J. Guo, S. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Shi, Y. Yin, M. Yang, X. Wang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21867–21876 RSC .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Liao, Y. C. Wang, S. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rol, M. N. Belgacem, A. Gandini and J. Bras, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 241–264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, A. Sultana, J. Edberg, M. Shiran Chaharsoughi, M. Elmahmoudy, U. Ail, K. Tybrandt and X. Crispin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2732–2741 RSC .
S. Głazowska, L. Baldwin, J. Mravec, C. Bukh, J. U. Fangel, W. G. Willats and J. K. Schjoerring, J. Exp. Bot., 2019, 70, 6461–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Klemm, F. Kramer, S. Moritz, T. Lindström, M. Ankerfors, D. Gray and A. Dorris, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5438–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Moon, A. Martini, J. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941–3994 RSC .
G. P. Touey and W. M. Gearhart, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1961, 6, 566–569 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lin and A. Dufresne, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5384–5393 RSC .
P. Phanthong, P. Reubroycharoen, X. Hao, G. Xu, A. Abudula and G. Guan, Carbon Resour. Convers., 2018, 1, 32–43 CrossRef .
E. Lizundia, U. Goikuria, J. L. Vilas, F. Cristofaro, G. Bruni, E. Fortunati, I. Armentano, L. Visai and L. Torre, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2618–2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-C. Yu, K. Park, J.-H. Jang and J. B. Goodenough, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ling, W. Chen, Y. Fan, K. Zheng, K. Jin, H. Yu, M. J. Buehler and D. L. Kaplan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 85, 1–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Choi, K. M. Rao, S. M. Zo, E. J. Shin and S. S. Han, Polymers, 2022, 14, 1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Wang, Y. Deng and Q. Wei, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2022, 49, kuab071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3857–3886 RSC .
J. H. Jo, C. H. Jo, Z. Qiu, H. Yashiro, L. Shi, Z. Wang, S. Yuan and S. T. Myung, Front Chem., 2020, 8, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Aslam, S. Jamil, S. Hussain and M. Xu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2023, 0, 1–23 CAS .
X. Tian, C. Yan, J. Kang, X. Yang, Q. Li, J. Yan, N. Deng, B. Cheng and W. Kang, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 9, e202100995 Search PubMed .
V. K. Bharti, A. D. Pathak, C. S. Sharma and M. Khandelwal, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 293, 119731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, D. Ni, Y. Zhou, M. Yousaf, Z. Guo, J. Zhou, P. Zhou, Q. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Shi, X. Nie, Z. Yu and F. Huang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 285, 119201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and X. Li, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 19, 100591 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chien, R. Pan, M.-T. Lee, L. Nyholm, D. Brandell and M. J. Lacey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A3235–A3241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Dai, Z. Wang, H. Wang, L. Xie, J. Chen, C. Yan, H. Yuan, H. Wang and C. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pavlin, S. Hribernik, G. Kapun, S. D. Talian, C. Njel, R. Dedryvère and R. Dominko, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 166, A5237–A5243 CrossRef .
L. Chen and L. Z. Fan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 37–45 CrossRef .
H. Qu, J. Zhang, A. Du, B. Chen, J. Chai, N. Xue, L. Wang, L. Qiao, C. Wang, X. Zang, J. Yang, X. Wang and G. Cui, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700503 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, G. Ren, M. N. F. Hoque, Z. Dong, J. Warzywoda and Z. Fan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 637–643 CrossRef CAS .
D. Park, S. Park and D.-W. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126596 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-D. Shen, Z.-C. Xiao, L.-X. Miao, D.-B. Kong, X.-Y. Zheng, Y.-H. Chang and L.-J. Zhi, Rare Met., 2017, 36, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Guo, G. Chang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 9231–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, Y. Fu, Z. Wu, J. Xia, Y. Zhou, J. Xu, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226728 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rani, K. S. Kumar, A. D. Pathak and C. S. Sharma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 533, 147483 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu and C. Lai, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 16–31 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Celik, E. C. Cengiz, T. Sar, B. Dursun, O. Ozturk, M. Y. Akbas and R. Demir-Cakan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 137–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Zhang, J. Qu, Q.-Y. Ji, T.-T. Zhang, W. Chang, S.-M. Hao and Z.-Z. Yu, Carbon, 2019, 155, 353–360 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .
G. Ren, S. Li, Z.-X. Fan, J. Warzywoda and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16507–16515 RSC .
Y. Liu, G. Li, J. Fu, Z. Chen and X. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 6176–6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, Q. B. Yan, S. Wang, A. Kushima, P. Bai, K. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6619–6625 RSC .
Y. Huang, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, B. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Zhu, H. Zhang, D. Sun and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10910–10918 RSC .
S. Li, J. Warzywoda, S. Wang, G. Ren and Z. Fan, Carbon, 2017, 124, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Quan, D. Han, Y. Feng, S. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 12, 5984–5997 Search PubMed .
H. Shi, Z. Sun, W. Lv, S. Wang, Y. Shi, Y. Zhang, S. Xiao, H. Yang, Q.-H. Yang and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11298–11304 RSC .
V. K. Bharti, A. D. Pathak, C. S. Sharma and M. Khandelwal, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 422, 140531 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Guo, R. Guo, X. Sun, F. Li, T. Li, X. Zhao and Y. Luo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 020512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mao, L. Liu, L. Shi, H. Wu, J. Lang, K. Wang, T. Zhu, Y. Gao, Z. Sun, J. Zhao, G. Gao, D. Zhang, W. Yan and S. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 803–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Lin, G. He and J. Huang, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 2020, 602, 125129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Yin, Q. Yang, Z. Shi and C. Xiong, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 2020, 603, 103249 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Zhang and J. Guo, Ionics, 2022, 28, 647–655 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-e Liu and M.-g Zhang, Ionics, 2022, 28, 2805–2815 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Hou, J. Cheng, T. Simmons, F. Zhang, L. T. Zhang, R. J. Linhardt and N. Koratkar, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 388–395 CrossRef .
S.-L. Chou, Y. Pan, J.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20347–20359 RSC .
S. S. Zhang, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2004, 138, 226–231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Cai, Y. Liang, W. S. Li, L. D. Xing and Y. H. Liao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 547–551 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lv, J. Zheng, Q. Li, X. Xie, S. Ferrara, Z. Nie, L. B. Mehdi, N. D. Browning, J.-G. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402290 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Q. Zeng, I. R. Gentle and D.-W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5460–5465 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Li, M. Marium, B. Wang, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1821–1831 RSC .
K. Sun, C. A. Cama, J. Huang, Q. Zhang, S. Hwang, D. Su, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and H. Gan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 399–408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Xuan, L. Zhou, D. Wang, Z. Li, H. Lin, S. Tretiak, H. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Guo and S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17592–17601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of LSB and great contributions of LSB in low-carbon era.	 

 	Fig. 2  Publication statistics of papers relevant to LSBs involving cellulosic materials from 2013 to 2022.	 
S8 + 16Li ↔ 8Li2S	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Typical charge/discharge profile of LSBs associated with the variations in sulfur utilization and reaction kinetics.38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 (Wiley 2021).	 

 	Fig. 4  Intrinsic features and basic functions of cellulosic materials, as well as several components.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Configuration of a LSB with a cellulose-based porous membrane (upper graph: EDS mapping image of the carbon paper/S cathode; right graph: FTIR spectra of the cellulose-based porous membrane).56 (b) Cycling stability of freshly packed CBC@BC at 1.0C.64 (c) Li stripping and plating behavior in Li//Li symmetric cells.65 (d) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the Ti3C2Tx–SnS2-PBC membrane.66 (e) Schematic of the CF-coated separator repelling polysulfides and redistributing Li ions.67 (f) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CNF separators and mechanism diagram of the interaction between CNFs (inset).69 (g) Characteristic morphology of lithium before cycling and after 500 h of cycling for WE faced to NFC_20PO or Celgard separators.70 (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a composite polymer electrolyte membrane by a solution-casting technique.71 (i) Schematic illustration of the interaction mechanism between polysulfides and NCP-CPE.72 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 (ACS Publications 2016), ref. 64 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 65 (Wiley 2021), ref. 66 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 67 (Elsevier 2021), ref. 69 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 70 (ECS 2019), ref. 71 (Elsevier 2018), and ref. 72 (Wiley 2018).	 


BC	Paper-like separator	Good thermal stability; high mechanical strength; high wettability.	Suppress Li dendrite growth; relieves polysulfide corrosion of lithium anodes.	1388/0.2C	68.22%@100 cycles/0.2C 33.14%@1000 cycles/0.2C	
56

High adsorption efficiency.	The electrolyte is evenly distributed.	849/1C	82%@500 cycles/NRb	
64

Excellent tensile strength; high thermostability (no shrinking at 200 °C); high puncture resistance.	Suppress Li dendrite growth; ensure the battery system's safety during overcharge, heat release, or violent impact.	1390.9/0.2C	65%@500 cycles/0.2C	
66

BC and CNF	Paper-like separator	Strong lipophilicity; high thermal conductivity; high Young's modulus.	Suppress Li dendrite growth; impedes irreversible polysulfide diffusion.	1288/0.1C	63.2%@800 cycles/1C	
65

CFc	Paper-like separator	Rendered a negatively charged surface.	Repelled the anionic polysulfides (Sx-2); redistributed the cationic Li ions (Li+)	1016/0.5C	71.69%@800 cycles/0.5C	
67

CNF	Paper-like separator	Homogeneous mesoscale pore distribution.	Uniform Li deposition; slower electrolyte decomposition.	NR	NR	
68

Ultrathin thickness (19 μm); lightweight (0.87 mg cm−2); extremely high porosity (98.05%);	Mitigate the migration of polysulfide; suppress Li dendrite growth;	1255.5/0.05C	NR	
69

Large surface area; easy modification; good mechanical properties and chemical durability.	Hinders the formation of high surface area lithium (HSAL).	NR	NR	
70

CPEd	Solid polymer electrolyte	High ionic conductivity at ambient temperature (7.8 × 10−4 S cm-1); high mechanical strength.	Block the lithium dendrite growth and diffusion of polysulfides.	1493/1C	90%@80 cycles/1C	
71

CPE	Gel polymer electrolyte	The cellulose chain is rich in hydroxyl groups; good biocompatibility; environmental benignity.	Facilitate electronic transfers; accelerate the conversion of polysulfides; mitigate the migration of polysulfides.	1146/0.5C	41.5%@1500 cycles/0.5C	
72


 	Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the cellulose filter paper (white) and carbonized paper (black). The inset shows the flexibility of the carbonized paper; SEM images of the filter paper.73 (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of ACCF with an optical image in the inset.74 (c) Optical images of the pristine BC, polymer-functionalized BC, and Ni-CBC.76 (d) Image of the labyrinth composed of cypress woods and illustration of the fabrication process of the NS-RHGO-CCP interlayer with diagrammatic expressions of the structures of CCP, RGO-CCP, RHGO-CCP, and NS-RHGO-CCP at the bottom.77 (e) Schematic of the interlayer location in the battery with the FESEM images and the cycling stability at 1 A g−1 current density.79 (f) Synthetic process of the SnO2-containing pyrolyzed BC (SnO2-PBC).80 (g) Mechanism of action of Fe/Fe3C nanocatalysts and the rate performance of batteries with and without the CF interlayers.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 74 (Elsevier 2021), ref. 76 (Springer 2017), ref. 77 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 79 (Springer 2018), ref. 80 (Elsevier 2018), and ref. 81 (Elsevier 2019).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of the BC aerogel and CNFA.88 (b) Long-term cycling stabilities of bare sulfur, S-CBC, and S-Mn2O3@CBC at 1.0C.91 (c) Schematic diagram for the evolution process of the as-prepared CoS2/N-CNFs@S.92 (d) Schematic comparison between 2D Al and 3D CCA current collectors, and schematic illustration of the discharge process of CCA cathodes.93 (e) Rate performance of the activated-carbon/sulfur composites at different current densities.94 (f) Fabrication process of the 3D C@S.95 (g) SEM images of the cross-section and plane view of MXene/T-CNF-1 and MXene/T-CNF-2.96 (h) Synthetic schemes of the preparation of the Cellulose(CMK-3/S)CB composite.98 Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 (Elsevier 2017), ref. 91 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 92 (ECS 2021), ref. 93 (Elsevier 2022), ref. 94 (Elsevier 2020), ref. 95 (Elsevier 2020), ref. 96 (Springer 2022), and ref. 98 (Elsevier 2018).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
