11.5% efficiency of TiO 2 protected and Pt catalyzed n + np + -Si photocathodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting: manipulating the Pt distribu ...  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CC08409A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CC08409A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 543-54611.5% efficiency of TiO2 protected and Pt catalyzed n+np+-Si photocathodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting: manipulating the Pt distribution and Pt/Si contact†

        
          
            Zhihao 
            Yin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ronglei 
            Fan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guanping 
            Huang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mingrong 
            Shen
          
        
      *
      College of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Thin Films, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: mrshen@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      1st November 2017
    , Accepted 18th December 2017First published on 18th December 2017AbstractA combination of hydrogen passivation, electroless deposition of a Pt catalyst and coating a TiO2 protective layer leads to an unprecedented 11.5% energy conversion efficiency and one-week stability of an n+np+-Si photocathode for solar water splitting.
Extracting hydrogen from water using solar-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices has recently been of particular interest, due to its recyclable use of the hydrogen fuel in a green and sustainable way.1–3 Si is a mainstream material in photovoltaic cells since it is earth-abundant, low cost and capable of efficient sunlight absorption.4 It has also been studied as a photocathode for solar water splitting because its conduction band edge position is more negative than the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) potential.5–8 Like solar cells, a p–n junction can be buried in a Si photocathode in order to increase its onset potential where the HER happens, and its energy conversion efficiency (η) can be defined similarly from the photocurrent–voltage curve measured in a three-electrode PEC “half” cell.9 However, its front surface is quite different from the solar cells where the catalyst and its protection are essential to accelerate and stabilize the PEC-HER rate.
Compared with ∼20% energy conversion efficiency in photovoltaics, rare works reported higher η than 11% in crystal Si photocathodes, which are much simpler and low-cost than the amorphous Si/crystal Si heterojunction ones.10 Remarkably, Kast et al. reported a η of ∼10.6% in a Pt/TiO2/F:SnO2/Ti/n+p-Si photocathode with a ∼24 h stability.11 Cabán-Acevedo et al. also obtained a η of around 10% in Pt/n+pp+-Si; however, the stability was not reported.12 In these studies, the use of Pt along with its effective loading is a prerequisite to achieve high η, since it is the most efficient and stable catalyst for HER.10 In principle, the Pt catalyst should be prepared via low-cost and scalable methods, be small enough to avoid light blocking, be uniformly distributed on the usually uneven electrode surface to maximize the catalytic effect, and have a good contact with Si to let electrons go through the interface freely. Recently we reported a high η of 10.8% in TiO2 covered Pt/n+p-Si photocathodes, together with a superior stability of over one week.13 The key point is to fabricate a hydrophilic SiO2/Si surface for the water diluted PtCl62−-containing solution using oxygen plasma. Dropping a small amount of the solution on Si forms a uniform liquid layer, then uniformly distributed small Pt nanoparticles (10–20 nm) are obtained after drying, and finally the SiO2 beneath Pt is etched. If there is no SiO2, Pt nanoparticles (NPs) still are formed since the limited supply of the solution, however, gathers into the valley of the Si light-trapping structure. Obviously, such a process is complicated, not cost-effective and also not scalable. If there is a surfactant to make the Pt salt solution hydrophilic to the Si surface, uniformly distributed and small Pt NPs may also be achieved.
In the Si microelectronics industry, the wet etching process is a common manufacturing process for surface texturing. A reputedly inactive chemical agent, isopropanol (ISO), is often added to the etchant in order to control the surface morphology.14–16 Importantly, it is hydrophilic to Si surfaces. In this study, we try to obtain uniformly distributed and small Pt NPs on Si using an electroless deposition (ELD) method based on the ISO-diluted Pt salt. ELD of metallic NPs onto semiconducting surfaces via galvanic displacement has been demonstrated to be a powerful, simple, and fast method to produce metallized surfaces with a high density of NPs.17 In addition, we adapted the passivation idea of the Si surface to hydrogen in photovoltaics.18 Si was annealed in a H2-containing forming gas before the deposition of Pt for improving the subsequent Pt/Si contact. As a result, 11.3% η was obtained in Pt catalyzed n+np+-Si photocathodes. Based on the measurements and simulation of the electrochemical impedance spectra, the charge transfer resistances of the different junctions in the photocathode are obtained and the mechanism behind the elevation of η is analyzed. Finally, the photocathodes are stabilized using a 15 nm TiO2 layer. 11.5% η and a stability of 7 days under continuous PEC-HER were finally achieved.
The fabrication process of n+np+-Si can be found in our previous study.19 Briefly, an aluminum-doped p-type rear emitter was formed using a standard screen-printing process plus firing in a conveyor belt furnace. An n+ layer is fabricated on the n-type surface using a standard process of phosphorus doping. To passivate the high-doped n+-Si surface, a Si wafer was annealed at 650 °C in a tube furnace for about 30 min with a forming gas (5% H2 and 95% Ar) flowing at a rate of 20 sccm under normal atmospheric pressure. To deposit the Pt catalyst on n+np+-Si, an ELD method was used.17 We firstly used 5% hydrofluoric acid (HF) in alcohol to remove the possible SiO2 on the Si surface. Then, the Si substrate was immersed into a solution containing ISO-diluted 2 M HF and 1 mM H2PtCl6·6H2O for a fixed length of time. For comparison, a mixture of water (WA)-diluted 2 M HF and 1 mM H2PtCl6·6H2O was used as another solution. The optimum deposition time for the PEC performance of the photocathodes was found to be 240 s in ISO and 30 s in WA solutions, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI†).
ELD of Pt occurs spontaneously onto oxide-free silicon since the redox potential (∼0.8 V vs. NHE) of PtCl62−/Pt is higher than those of both the Si surface and the hydrogen evolution.20 Usually, HF is added in the metallic salt solution to ensure continuous metallic growth. Under these conditions, Si acts as a source of electrons that reduce Pt4+ to Pt on the surface, and Si is oxidized spontaneously into a soluble hexafluoride silicon salt. Although this method has been largely developed, the principal drawback of this approach is related to some difficulties of controlling both the density and the morphology of the deposited particles.17 In Fig. 1a, we present the surface morphology for the Pt catalyst obtained in the conventional WA-diluted solution. Large Pt particles can be seen on the light-trapping pyramid Si surface when Si is immersed in the solution for only 30 seconds, indicating that the deposition happens very quickly and Pt grows continuously on the grown Pt particles. Large Pt particles of around hundred nanometers will block the light entering into Si, which is disadvantageous for the PEC performance, as will be shown in the following. Therefore, ISO instead of WA is used to dilute the solution. Fig. 1b is the case for the Pt deposition time of 240 seconds in the ISO-diluted solution. Surprisingly, uniformly distributed but small Pt NPs (5–10 nm in size) appear on the Si surface. Obviously, the growth rate of Pt slows down significantly. In the inset of Fig. 1a and b, the wettability of the solutions on Si is presented. The contact angle in Fig. 1a is 107°, illustrating that the WA-diluted solution is hydrophobic to Si. However, the ISO-diluted solution is super-hydrophilic to Si with a zero contact angle. Therefore ISO will be adsorbed on the Si surface and thus suppresses both the Pt4+ reduction and Si oxidation including SiO2 dissolution processes. A similar phenomenon is found in the metal-assisted chemical etching of Si.14–16 Based on this idea, we found that the density and size of Pt NPs in Fig. 1b can be tuned through adding some water into the solution. Fig. 1c is the case for the ISO-diluted solution with 5% water. The Pt deposition time remains 240 seconds. Relatively high density and a slightly larger size (10–20 nm) of Pt can be observed. Note the X-ray photoelectron spectra confirm that the elements on the sample surface of Fig. 1c are Si and Pt (Fig. S2, ESI†). Finally, we check the Pt/Si contact using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 1d and Fig. S3 (ESI†) unveil that the Pt particle has a close contact with Si.
 Fig. 1  Surface scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures for Pt deposition on Si using (a) WA-diluted solution, (b) ISO-diluted solution and (c) ISO-diluted solution with 5% water. Insets: The corresponding wettability of the solutions on Si. (d) TEM picture for the Pt/Si contact. 
PEC hydrogen evolution was assessed by performing the photocurrent density (J) vs. potential (V) measurements at 50 mV s−1 in an electrolyte of 1 M HClO4 and under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination in a three-electrode configuration. To demonstrate the effect of annealing in H2/Ar forming gas, we compare the J–V curves for pure Si and A-Si photocathodes. The two left J–V curves in Fig. 2 show that the PEC performance improves obviously for A-Si. Its J–V curves right-shifts and the onset potential (Von) where the photocurrent occurs at −1 mA cm−2 moves from −0.25 to −0.1 V vs. RHE (VRHE), while the saturated photocurrent (Js) remains at 35.2 mA cm−2. This manifests that the annealing in H2/Ar forming gas is effective for PEC-HER of the Si photocathodes. The right four J–V curves in Fig. 2 reveal both the effect of the annealing in H2/Ar and the Pt loading using the ISO-diluted solution. The WA/Si sample has an enhanced Von of 0.52 VRHE, but a lower Js of 31.6 mA cm−2. Similar to the electrodeposited Pt on a Si surface in our previous study, the large Pt particles with the size of around hundred nanometers in Fig. 1a can lead to the reflectance increase of the electrode surface, then the decrease of the light intensity obtained by Si and therefore the decreased Js.17,19 The energy conversion efficiency η can be defined based on the J–V curve: (1)where E0 is the equilibrium water reduction potential in the 1 M acid electrolyte (pH = 0), which is 0 V vs. RHE; JE0 is the current density at E0; FF is the fill factor and Pin is the incident optical power density. WA/Si has an FF of 0.5 and a η of 8.3%. WA/A-Si exhibits a better PEC performance: Js = 30.9 mA cm−2, Von = 0.53 VRHE, FF = 0.63 and η = 10.3%. The FF enhances a lot due to the annealing in H2/Ar; however, Js is still limited because of the use of the WA-diluted solution. After the use of the ISO-diluted solution (here 5% water is added), the saturated photocurrents for both the ISO/Si and ISO/A-Si photocathodes increase to 35.1 mA cm−2. As expected, ISO/A-Si has larger FF than ISO/Si (0.6 vs. 0.56), resulting in larger η (11.3% vs. 10.6%). Clearly, the synergic role of annealing in H2/Ar and the use of ISO-diluted solution brings about the high η of 11.3%. Note that such a conclusion is also fitted to the conventional n+p-Si photocathode (Fig. S4, ESI†). In addition, annealing in H2/Ar is also effective for the case where Pt is electro-deposited (Fig. S5, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  
J–V curves of the n+np+-Si (Si), annealed n+np+-Si in forming gas (A-Si), Pt/n+np+-Si (where Pt is deposited in the WA-diluted solution (WA/Si) or in the ISO-diluted one (ISO/Si)), WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si photocathodes. 
To get insight into the roles of annealing in H2/Ar and ISO-diluted solution, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements to elucidate the charge transfer resistances in the different Si photocathodes, which were measured at 0.5 VRHE in 1 M HClO4 solution under simulated AM 1.5G illumination. In Fig. 3, each EIS spectrum contains two semicircles. The semicircles on the left are nearly the same for WA/Si and ISO/Si (Fig. S6, ESI†), which have close transfer resistances of 5.1 and 5.3 Ω. The annealing in H2/Ar results in the decrease of the transfer resistance R1 to 3.4 Ω for both WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si. We note that the left semicircles are not affected by the different Pt loadings, indicating that they are assigned to the same p+n back junction. However, annealing is shown to influence this junction because it is formed due to the Al diffusion into Si during the firing in a conveyor belt furnace and another post-annealing may lead to further diffusion. To check this point, we performed cross-sectional SEM measurements for the interface of Al-p+ Si back electrodes before and after the annealing in H2/Ar. In Fig. S7 (ESI†), the Al-p+ region appears brighter than the bulk of the Si wafer due to the potential contrast.21,22 The Al-p+ depth before the annealing is about 6 μm. After the annealing, it increases to about 9 μm, indicating that annealing does lead to further diffusion of Al into Si. We propose that this results in the lower transfer resistance in both WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si compared to those in WA/Si and ISO/Si.
 Fig. 3  (a) EIS curves for the WA/Si, ISO/Si, WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si photocathodes. (b) The corresponding equivalent circuit. R1, R2, R3 and R4 respectively represent the junctions of p+/n, n/n+, n+/Pt, Pt/electrolyte (EL). (c) The fitting results for the transfer resistances using the equivalent circuit of (b). 
The second semicircles of low frequency range on the right change obviously due to the different Pt loading and annealing, indicating that they are related to the front electrode/electrolyte junctions. The charge transfer resistance R2 is an indicator of the coupling between the n-Si substrate and the surface n+-Si doping layer. For all of the samples, R2 values are between 4.5 and 4.7 Ω, illustrating that the annealing and Pt loading hardly change the n/n+ junction. R3 is the charge transfer resistance across the Si/Pt interface. Annealing in H2/Ar improves this value from 18.6 for WA/Si to 16.4 Ω for WA/A-Si, and from 16.3 for ISO/Si to 15.4 Ω for ISO/A-Si. The passivation effect of hydrogen after annealing lowers the defect density in the n+ layer, then decreases the carrier recombination, and finally improves the Pt/Si contact and the related charge transfer resistance. R4 is the charge transfer resistance across the Pt/electrolyte interface. The effect of the use of ISO-diluted solution during ELD of Pt is significant. R4 dramatically reduces from 14.4 Ω for WA/Si to 3.5 Ω for ISO/Si, and 14.9 Ω for WA/A-Si to 3.4 Ω for ISO/A-Si. In all, the annealing in H2/Ar and the uniformly distributed and small Pt NPs contribute to the smaller resistances for charge transfer in the ISO/A-Si photocathodes and faster HER rates at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which both contribute to the high η.
Based on our previous study, the Pt NP catalyzed Si photocathode is not stable after 24 h of continuous PEC testing, due to the de-attachment of the Pt and the oxidation of the exposed Si surface during the PEC reaction in the electrolyte where a small amount of oxygen is present.13 A thin TiO2 layer fabricated via atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a promising candidate as the protection layer for Si photoelectrodes because of its excellent uniformity and consistency, good conductivity and corrosion-resistant properties in the electrolyte.13,23,24 Therefore, we deposit a ∼15 nm TiO2 layer via ALD onto ISO/A-Si to improve its stability. Fig. 4a unveils the scanning TEM (STEM)-energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mappings of Ti/Pt/Si. Pt NPs still have a close contact with Si as indicated in the figure. The thin interface dark layer (∼2 nm) is oxygen-rich (Fig. S8, ESI†), indicating it is SiO2. Similar to our previous study, Pt NPs are “glued” by the ALD TiO2 layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) STEM-EDS mapping of the TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathode. (b) PEC stability measurements for the TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathodes: photocurrent vs. time data at a constant potential of 0.4 VRHE. Inset: The J–V curves for the ISO/A-Si, TiO2/ISO/A-Si and TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathodes after 168 h PEC testing. 
We firstly compared the PEC performance for the ISO/A-Si photocathodes with and without the TiO2 layer. The J–V curves are presented in the inset of Fig. 4b. TiO2 covered ISO/A-Si exhibits a better FF than that of pure one (0.62 vs. 0.61), and consequently it has higher η (11.5% vs. 11.3%) due to the passivation effect of the TiO2 layer. Secondly, we show the high stability of TiO2/ISO/A-Si in Fig. 4b. The electrode remains stable with a maximum photocurrent of ∼25 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VRHE for over 7 days (168 h). To ensure the same test conditions, we changed the electrolyte every 24 hours. The fluctuation of the photocurrent can be attributed to the nucleation and release of H2 bubbles on the electrode surface. In the inset of Fig. 4b, the J–V curve for TiO2/ISO/A-Si after PEC 168 h testing is given. There is nearly no loss in PEC performance, illustrating the good stability of the photocathode. Commonly, Si photocathodes were firstly covered by protection layers such as TiO2, and then catalysts such as Pt were deposited on the protective Si surface. However, the catalyst can leave the Si surface during the drastic PEC water splitting. In this study, we firstly deposited Pt NPs and then they were “glued” using a thin ALD-TiO2 layer as shown in Fig. 4a. This can be the main reason for the good stability.
As pointed out in the introduction, a high η of 10.8% was obtained in TiO2 covered ELD-Pt/n+p-Si photocathodes.13 However, the ideas are different. In our previous study, we tuned the hydrophilism of the Si/SiO2 surface to obtain uniformly distributed Pt NPs, combining with complicated oxidation and etching processes. In this study, we tuned the Pt-containing solution to directly and easily get uniformly distributed Pt NPs on Si. In addition, the Si surface was passivated by annealing in a H2-containing forming gas before the Pt deposition, which leads to a better Pt/Si contact. Therefore higher efficiency (11.5% vs. 10.8%) was achieved.
In summary, we use three ways to elevate the energy conversion efficiency and stability of an n+np+-Si photocathode: (1) passivating the Si surface by annealing in a H2-containing forming gas; (2) fabricating uniformly distributed but small Pt NPs onto the electrode surface, using an ELD method based on the ISO-diluted Pt salt; and (3) protecting the photocathode through ALD-coating a thin TiO2 layer. 11.5% η and 168 h stability under a continuous PEC reaction were obtained in TiO2/Pt/n+np+-Si photocathodes. In addition, the mechanism behind the elevation of η is revealed based on the measurements and simulation of the EIS spectra.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51672183), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Education committee of China (15KJA140003), and a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 1 CrossRef .
P. Varadhan, H. C. Fu, D. Priante, J. R. D. Retamal, C. Zhao, M. Ebaid, T. K. Ng, I. Ajia, S. Mitra, I. S. Roqan, B. S. Ooi and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Dominey, N. S. Lewis, J. A. Bruce, D. C. Bookbinder and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 467 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, H. Lee, J. Choi, D. Oh, J. Shim, K. Cho, J. Kim, S. Lee, B. Hallam, S. R. Wenham and H. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3592 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Zhang, Q. Ding, D. H. He, H. Liu, Z. J. Li, B. Yang, X. W. Zhang, L. C. Lei and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3113 CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Wang, K. Sun, S. Y. Noh, A. Kargar, M. L. Tsai, M. Y. Huang, D. L. Wang and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830 CAS .
M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. L. Stone, J. R. Schmidt, J. G. Thomas, Q. Ding, H. Chang, M. Tsai, J. He and S. Jin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1245 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Fan, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. G. Zheng and M. R. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18744 CAS .
A. Halkier, W. Klopper, T. Helgaker, P. Jørgensen and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 9157 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Monteiro, P. Kastytis, L. M. Gonçalves, G. Minas and S. Cardoso, Micromachines, 2015, 6, 1534 CrossRef .
L. Romano, J. Vila-Comamala, K. Jefimovs and M. Stampanoni, Microelectron. Eng., 2017, 177, 59 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fabre, L. Hennous, S. Ababou-Girard and C. Meriadec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 338 CAS .
A. Agarwal, D. Bana and C. M. Singal, Int. J. Electron., 1985, 58, 769 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Fan, J. W. Min, Y. Li, X. D. Su, S. Zou, X. S. Wang and M. R. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 213901 CrossRef .
Z. P. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. D. Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bock, J. Schmidt and R. Brendel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 112112 CrossRef .
C. P. Sealy, M. R. Castell and P. R. Wilshaw, J. Electron Microsc., 2000, 49, 311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, D. S. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Grätzel and I. Chorkendorff, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25902 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and other information for the photoelectrodes (S1–S7). See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc08409aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Surface scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures for Pt deposition on Si using (a) WA-diluted solution, (b) ISO-diluted solution and (c) ISO-diluted solution with 5% water. Insets: The corresponding wettability of the solutions on Si. (d) TEM picture for the Pt/Si contact.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  
J–V curves of the n+np+-Si (Si), annealed n+np+-Si in forming gas (A-Si), Pt/n+np+-Si (where Pt is deposited in the WA-diluted solution (WA/Si) or in the ISO-diluted one (ISO/Si)), WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si photocathodes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) EIS curves for the WA/Si, ISO/Si, WA/A-Si and ISO/A-Si photocathodes. (b) The corresponding equivalent circuit. R1, R2, R3 and R4 respectively represent the junctions of p+/n, n/n+, n+/Pt, Pt/electrolyte (EL). (c) The fitting results for the transfer resistances using the equivalent circuit of (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) STEM-EDS mapping of the TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathode. (b) PEC stability measurements for the TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathodes: photocurrent vs. time data at a constant potential of 0.4 VRHE. Inset: The J–V curves for the ISO/A-Si, TiO2/ISO/A-Si and TiO2/ISO/A-Si photocathodes after 168 h PEC testing.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and other information for the photoelectrodes (S1–S7). See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc08409a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
