Recent developments in superhydrophobic surfaces with unique structural and functional properties  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2SM26517F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2SM26517F
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 11217-11231Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent developments in superhydrophobic surfaces with unique structural and functional properties

        
          
            Yong-Lai 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Xia
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eunkyoung 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hong-Bo 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *ac
aState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: hbsun@jlu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85168281;   Tel: +86-431-85168281
bActive Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (APCPI), Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, South Korea. E-mail: eunkim@yonsei.kr
cCollege of Physics, Jilin University, 119 Jiefang Road, Changchun, 130023, People's Republic of China
Received 
      30th June 2012
    , Accepted 27th July 2012First published on 20th August 2012AbstractThe surface wettability control of solid materials has been considered as an essential aspect of surface chemistry. In the past decade, superhydrophobic surfaces have revealed a cornucopia of novel structural and functional properties, exhibiting considerable importance in both fundamental research and practical applications. In this review, we summarize the recent developments of superhydrophobic surfaces with unique structural and functional properties. Both the fabricative methods and the working performance of superhydrophobic surfaces with multidisciplinary functionalities including self-cleaning, icephobicity, anti-corrosion, drag reduction, transparency, anti-reflection, structural color, droplet transportation, anisotropy, oil–water separation, water supporting force, superamphiphobicity and responsive switching, have been discussed briefly. Finally, the current challenges and future prospects of this dynamic field are discussed based on our own opinion.Yong-Lai ZhangYong-Lai Zhang received his BS (2004) and PhD (2009) from Jilin University, China. After receiving his PhD, he joined the faculty at the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University. In 2011, he worked as a research professor at Yonsei University, Korea. After that, he was awarded a “Hong Kong Scholar” postdoctoral fellow and worked at the Center of Super Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), City University of Hong Kong. His research interests include laser micro-nanofabrication of biomimetic surfaces, graphene-based microdevices and lab-on-a-chip systems.Hong XiaHong Xia received her BS and PhD degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 2001 and 2006. She joined the faculty at the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University in 2006. In 2010, she worked as a CRYST Fellow at the National Institute For Materials Science, Japan. She is currently an associate professor at Jilin University. Her research is focused on the synthesis of optical and magnetic functional materials, and laser based micro-nanofabrication of functional resins and polymers.Eunkyoung KimEunkyoung Kim received her BS degree in chemistry from Yonsei University in 1982, a master's degree in chemistry from Seoul National University in 1984, and a PhD in chemistry from the University of Houston in 1990. Currently, she is a professor of chemical engineering at Yonsei University, Korea. She has been a part of the program committee for the SPIE-organic 3D material session (since 2005), editor (Macromolecular Research), vice chair of Academic Meetings (Korea Polymer Society), and senior managing director the Korea Society of Imaging Science and Technology (KSIST). She has been the director of the Active Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (APCPI), an engineering center of excellence in Korea. Her work has primarily focused on the development of functional polymers including chromogenic polymers, photopolymers, bio-engineering polymers and charge transport issues.Hong-Bo SunHong-Bo Sun received his PhD from Jilin University, China, in 1996. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Tokushima, Japan, from 1996 to 2000, and then as an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Physics, Osaka University. He became a project leader in 2001. He was awarded by the Optical Science and Technology Society for his contribution to the technology of femtosecond laser initiated nanofabrication in 2002, and won the Outstanding Young Scientist Award issued by the minister of MEXT (Japan) in 2006. In 2005, he became a professor (Changjiang Scholar) at Jilin University. His research has been focused on laser micro-nanofabrication, and its applications in microoptics, micromachines, microfluids, and microsensors.
1 Introduction
As an essential aspect of surface chemistry, the wettability control of a solid surface shows enormous value in both fundamental research and practical applications.1–4 Ever since the discovery of the “lotus leaf effect”,5,6 superhydrophobic surfaces with ultra high water contact angles (CAs, larger than 150°) have earned rapidly increased interest as evidenced by the vast body of related publications.7–10 Particularly in the past decade, more and more multidisciplined researchers have participated in this dynamic field, and thus superhydrophobic surfaces have revealed a cornucopia of both novel functionalities and broad applications.2–4 On the basis of classical theories (i.e. the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter models),11,12 there exist two crucial factors that govern the surface wetting behavior. One is the surface roughness represented by various periodically or randomly distributed micro/nanostructures, and the other is the surface chemical composition. According to this basic principle,13,14 various hydrophobic surfaces have been successfully prepared by combining hierarchical surface structures with low surface energy material coatings, such as fluoroalkylsilane (FAS).15,16 Generally, due to the diversity of the surface topography (e.g., hierarchical morphologies, periodic arrangements and orientations), the inherent multi-scale structures not only contribute to the universal water resistance, but also impart other structural and functional properties to the superhydrophobic surfaces.4,17 In recent years, beyond the research on the fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces, more and more attention has been paid to the structural design and functional integration of superhydrophobic surfaces towards various scientific and practical applications.18–22
In fact, the development of multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces has been effectively motivated by mimicking nature.23–30 In nature, various plants and animals exhibit promising structurally-defined functionalities in addition to the superhydrophobicity derived from special surface structure and chemical composition.13,31–34 In order to endow man-made materials with surface properties or functionalities similar to or even better than that of natural materials, great efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of artificial materials with biomimetic morphology through various micronanofabrication techniques.35–38Fig. 1 shows some successful bio-prototypes which have inspired researchers to develop such multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces. For example, mimicking lotus leaves, superhydrophobic films with self-cleaning properties have been readily prepared; learning from butterfly wings, iridescent superhydrophobic surfaces with anisotropic wettability have been fabricated. Actually, superhydrophobic bio-prototypes are not limited to the well-known examples which have been reported elsewhere,29,39 with the rapid progress of interdisciplinary cooperation, newly discovered biomaterials or bio-behavior will continuously stimulate research interest in superhydrophobic surfaces with exceptional structural and functional properties. Besides learning from nature, the gradually increasing requirements on high-performance materials and smart surfaces will also push forward the rapid development of multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces.
 Fig. 1  Photographs of and the surface structure (scanning electron microscope, SEM images) of various bio-prototypes bearing superhydrophobic surfaces. (a) Photograph of a lotus leaf; (b) SEM image of the lotus leaf surface. Randomly distributed micropapillaes with sizes between 5 and 9 μm can be clearly observed. The inset is a SEM image of a typical micropapillae, fine branch-like nanostructures cover the surface.13 (c) Photograph of a water strider. (d) SEM image of the water strider leg. Oriented and spindly shaped microsetae covered with grooved nanostructures (see the inset) on the surface can be observed.31 (e) Photograph of a Morpho. (f) SEM image of the hierarchical micro- and nanostructures on the surface of butterfly wings. There exist periodic tile-like microstructures and fine lamella-stacking nano-stripes (inset) on each tile of the wings surface.32 (g) Photograph of a red rose, water droplets can pin to the rose petals surface. (h) SEM image of a rose petals surface. The inset is a magnified SEM image of the micropapillae arrays. Periodic pattern nanofolders can also be identified from the inset image.33 (i) Photograph of a dragonfly. (j) SEM image of a dragonflys wing. Randomly distributed micropillars with diameters of 50–80 nm can be observed. (k) Photograph of a peacock whose feathers show beautiful colors and patterns. (l) SEM images of the transverse (top) and longitudinal (bottom) cross-sections of the cortex of the green barbule.34 (Reproduced from ref. 13 and 31–34 with the permission of Wiley, NPG, RSC, ACS and PNAS, respectively.) 
In this review, we will focus on the recent developments in superhydrophobic surfaces with novel structural and functional properties, especially, in the realms of anti-water functionalities derived from air–solid composite interfaces, optical properties, manipulation of droplets and other novel applications such as oil–water separation, water supporting forces and responsive switching. Recently developed methodologies for the fabrication of multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces in combination with their excellent working performance in the above-mentioned applications have been discussed. The unique structural and functional properties of superhydrophobic surfaces have been summarized, and our personal opinion on the challenges and prospects within this topic is briefly discussed.
2 The unique structural and functional properties
2.1 Air–solid composite interfaces
When a water droplet contacts a superhydrophobic surface, typically, in a Cassie–Baxter state, a thin air layer is trapped between the water droplet and the solid substrate due to the presence of hierarchical structures, and thus water–air–solid composite interfaces are usually formed instead of simple water–solid interfaces.11,40 The presence of an air layer significantly reduces the contact area between the water droplet and the solid surface,41 which consequently brings various unique functional properties towards different applications. For example, with the help of the air layer, a water droplet can roll off easily when the superhydrophobic surface is tilted at a small angle, giving self-cleaning properties;13 the air layer also prevents contact with corrosive solutions and protects the substrate effectively, or acts as a lubricant to reduce the fluidic drag. In the following section, we will discuss the unique functional properties of superhydrophobic surfaces in the realms of self-cleaning properties,8,42–45 icephobicity,46–52 anti-corrosion53–59 and fluidic drag reduction,40,60–68 which are generally due to the presence of water–air–solid composite interfaces.

2.1.1 Self-cleaning properties. 
In nature, lotus leaves always take on a clean appearance despite growing in a mire environment, because water droplets can roll off immediately upon contact with the leaf, and take away the dirt adhered on its surface at the same time. The promising self-cleaning properties, the so-called “lotus effect”, have triggered research interest in the development of artificial superhydrophobic surfaces towards dirt-resistant applications. Based on experimental investigations on the surface of the lotus leaf, it has been found that the presence of hierarchical micro-nanostructures and hydrophobic epicuticular wax are critical for the formation of the superhydrophobicity.13 Therefore, artificial superhydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning properties have been readily designed and prepared based on a principle of combining hierarchical roughness with low surface energy materials.

Fig. 2b shows the concept of the self-cleaning behavior of a superhydrophobic surface. As compared with a general surface, the water droplet on a superhydrophobic surface shows a quasi-spherical shape. When it is tilted to a certain angle, the water droplet rolls off the surface easily and picks up foreign dirt particles at the same time, this is considering the fact that most dust shows relatively strong adherence to water in comparison to a solid surface. In this way, superhydrophobic surfaces can keep their surfaces clean. Typically, when the sliding angle of a superhydrophobic surface is lower than 10°, it means that the surface has self-cleaning properties.4
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the self-cleaning mechanism. (a) A normal smooth surface, and (b) a superhydrophobic surface. When both of the surfaces are tilted to a certain degree, denoted as θ, the water droplet just passes over the dust on the normal surface, whereas the round droplet on the superhydrophobic surface rolls off the surface with the dust. 
Notably, superhydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning properties show great potential in various realms, from windshield and architecture coatings to solar cells and anti-biofouling surfaces. For instance, in the solar cell,69,70 the superhydrophobic surface prevents efficiency degradation caused by dust or particles accumulated on the panels. Recently, Zhu et al.,69 fabricated nanodome solar cells by introducing close paced manocones into the glass or quartz substrates via Langmuir–Blodgett assembly and reactive ion etching. By simply rolling a water droplet across the surface, the accumulated dust of different sizes and shapes on the device can be cleaned up, which effectively avoids the blocking of sunlight and the induced efficiency reduction. Besides, Yang and Jiang,71 created self-assembled macroporous films by roll-to-roll compatible doctor bladed coating technology and surface functionalization. After being submerged in a bacteria culture solution for 24 h, only less than 1% of the bacterial contaminant was left on the inclined sample at an angle of 5°, showing the unique anti-biofouling property.
The self-cleaning surface is so promising that it could make all kinds of common surfaces clean and smart. However, for routine applications the stability and durability of the materials should be taken into account, as the tiny micro-nanostructures would be destroyed during repeated use. Moreover, the oleophobicity also plays an important role in the dirt-resistance property. For the development of self-cleaning surfaces, a robust superamphiphobic coating with high stability is highly desired.


2.1.2 Icephobicity. 
Water-repellent properties found in nature have continuously inspired researchers to develop anti-water materials or structures towards novel functionality. For instance, the compound eyes of mosquitoes show anti-fogging properties.72 Inspired by this phenomenon, superhydrophobic surfaces have been proposed to prevent ice accumulation, as droplets can bounce off from the superhydrophobic surface before ice nucleation takes place even in supercooled conditions. As compared with conventional thermal or chemical approaches, superhydrophobic surfaces provide a relatively simple but effective strategy to tackle the frost deposition problem, which frequently induces damaging occurrences in both daily life and aeronautics, such as slippery roads, frozen engines, attenuated signasl, and burst pipes. Triggered by the promising applications, the icephobicity of superhydrophobic surfaces has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally.
For example, Tourkine et al.,49 demonstrated delayed freezing on water repellent materials taking advantage of the presence of the air–solid composite interface; He et al.,48 pointed out that superhydrophobic films can retard frost formation; Cao et al.,51 reported direct experimental evidence that superhydrophobic surfaces prepared using nanoparticle–polymer composites are able to prevent ice formation upon impact with supercooled water both in laboratory conditions and in the natural environment. In the above mentioned studies, the work was mainly focused on the freezing process of static droplets resting on supercooled surfaces, however, ice accretion generally begins with droplet–substrate collision followed by freezing, which is a dynamic process. Based on this argument, Aizenberg and coworkers,73 studied the dynamic droplet freezing experimentally and theoretically by analyzing a broad range of geometries, impact angles and droplet temperatures, as well as the physical mechanism. As shown in Fig. 3, through the comparison of the ice accumulation process on hydrophilic, hydrophobic, and superhydrophobic surfaces, the icephobicity of the superhydrophobic surface is quite obvious. The researchers also suggested that structures with close-cell geometries may be favorable in mechanical robust and pressure stability. Zheng et al.,52 fabricated impact icephobic carbon nanotube films by a straightforward and cost-effective acetone treatment, which has been proven to be promising for mass production. It is recognized that the entrapped air underneath the water surface could be responsible for the delayed droplet solidification. Triple phase line design is another important factor, as the heat transfer rate in this region is faster than that in other areas and solidification tends to be initiated from here.
 Fig. 3  The ice accumulation process on (a) flat aluminum, (b) smooth fluorinated Si, and (c) microstructured fluorinated Si surfaces. (d) SEM images of exemplary superhydrophobic surfaces with microstructure arrays such as posts, bricks, blades, and honeycombs (scale bars: 10 μm). A stream of droplets at 0 °C was impinged from a 10 cm height at a rate of 0.06 mL s−1 onto the tilted substrate (30°) whose temperature was −10 °C. The white dashed circles indicate the position of droplet impact. Notably, after 10 minutes, ice accumulation could be observed on both the hydrophilic (contact angle, CA ∼0–5°) and normal hydrophobic surfaces (CA ∼115°), whereas no ice was found on the superhydrophobic surface (CA ∼145–170°), indicating its anti-icing property. (Reproduced from ref. 73 with the permission of ACS.) 
Despite the successful examples of anti-icing surfaces based on superhydrophobic films, there are also opposite opinions.46 Poulikakos and coworkers, investigated water freezing delays on various surfaces ranging from hydrophilic to superhydrophobic and evaluated their icephobicity. As compared with superhydrophobic surfaces that possess larger hierarchical structures, the surfaces with nanometre roughness and higher wettability showed longer freezing delays, more than 1 order of magnitude. Their results directly bring in to question the emphasis on superhydrophobic surfaces for the retardation of ice formation, and suggest that the rational design of anti-icing surfaces must optimize the competing influences of both surface roughness and wettability.


2.1.3 Anti-corrosive coating. 
In the practical environment, many surfaces may gradually deteriorate due to corrosive reactions, especially in the cases of reactive metals widely employed in industrial applications. Despite methods including oil paint and treatment with chromium containing compounds as anti-corrosive layers, concerns regarding human health and environmental effects have significantly limited their broad application in both daily life and industry. Alternatively, superhydrophobic coating can be listed as a much more effective method to solve this problem.53–59 When coated superhydrophobic surfaces are immersed in corrosive solutions, air trapped in the surface valleys between the rough structures and the liquid form natural isolations and prevent direct contact between the corrosive ions and the substrate. In this regard, superhydrophobic films coated on metal substrates could be used as effective corrosive inhibitors.
Typically, active metallic materials (e.g., copper, iron, magnesium and their alloys) do not resist the corrosive environment well, for instance, in the presence of aggressive chloride anions. Thus superhydrophobic coatings fabricated as anti-corrosive layers are generally applied to metallic substrates. Fig. 4 shows the preparation of a superhydrophobic and color-tuned magnesium alloy with anticorrosive properties and damping capacity through a simple chemical-free immersion process followed by surface modification with n-octadecyltrimethoxysilane.56 The corrosion resistance of the superhydrophobic magnesium alloy was investigated by using electrochemical potentiodynamic measurements. By mimicking the superhydrophobicity of plant leaves (Xanthosoma sagittifolium), Weng et al., reported a superhydrophobic electroactive epoxy coating applied as corrosion protection on cold rolled steel by direct replication of fresh plant leaves.57 The obtained material exhibited a synergistic effect of superhydrophobicity and redox catalytic capability, as well as remarkably enhanced corrosion protection. In addition, Xu et al.,74 generated a superhydrophobic surface by electroless galvanic deposition of a nano Ag film followed by the self-assembly of n-octadecanethiol. The prepared metal substrate is stable at different pH values from 1 to 13. Xu et al.,59 fabricated a superhydrophobic surface on Mg alloys via electrochemical machining using a relatively nonpoisonous neutral aqueous solution at room temperature, and was subsequently covered with a fluoroalkylsilane film. A high contact angle above 160° was still obtained after 24 h of immersion in 3.5 wt% NaCl aqueous, or 6 months of air exposure, indicating excellent anti-corrosive properties.
 Fig. 4  (a) A photograph of water droplet behavior on a color-tuned magnesium alloy substrate. (b) The contact angle of a water droplet (8 μL) on a surface. (c) A photograph of water droplet behavior on a different sample with a larger size. (d) The water droplet contact angle (8 μL) on this color-tuned superhydrophobic magnesium alloy. (Reproduced from ref. 56 with the permission of ACS.) 


2.1.4 Drag reduction. 
On immersed superhydrophobic surfaces, there usually exist solid–gas composite interfaces due to air filling.11 In this case, water tends to be stopped on the solid fraction while being locally accelerated on the water–air boundary in the flowing condition. This lubricating effect, known as the surface slip,75–78 endows superhydrophobic surfaces with promising potential for underwater applications. Compared with the conventional bubble injunction method for drag reduction, for example with hovercraft,66 the volatile and energy-efficient superhydrophobic method is considered to be a superior alternative.
Over the past decade, the fluidic drag reduction effect of superhydrophobic surfaces has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally, and there are a lot of successful examples. For instance, Fukagata et al.,61 theoretically predicted that drag reduction could be achieved by superhydrophobic surfaces not only in laminar flow, but also in turbulent channel flow. In order to experimentally clarify the hypothesis that superhydrophobic surfaces can effectively decrease the fluidic drag, Zhang and coworkers,79 fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on gold threads, and compared the moving rate with the normally hydrophobic one. In their work, the gold threads were powered by the catalytic decomposition of H2O2 on the Pt deposited end. Experiment results confirm that a superhydrophobic coating can effectively reduce the fluidic drag for objects moving in water.
Recently, McHale and coworkers,66 created a uniform superhydrophobic nanoribbon layer on the inside of round copper tubes and experimentally tested the fluid flow behavior in both the superhydrophobic tubes and in as received tubes for comparison. In their experiments, a reservoir is used to feed the two tubes with open ends via a T-piece. As shown in Fig. 5, once the flow commences, the fluid flows down through the superhydrophobic tube preferentially, indicating the low frictional drag of the superhydrophobic tube wall. Typically, Newtonian liquids undergo laminar flow across solid surfaces, and it is commonly assumed that, in a circular solid channels, the velocity profile is a parabola, as shown in Fig. 5b. So the maximum flow rate is considered to be at the mid-point of the channel. However, in the boundary condition between a liquid and a gas, the maximum velocity is close to the liquid–air interface due to the continuity of the shear stress (Fig. 5b). In this case, the frictional drag between the solid and liquid interface is replaced by a much lower frictional drag between liquid and air. Providing that the channel walls were coated with a superhydrophobic layer, the friction between fluids and channel walls is quite similar to that of the fluid–air interface, because there exists a layer of air in the superhydrophobic walls, and therefore it presents a plug velocity profile (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) A sequence of images taken during the flow of water (flow speed: 5 mL min−1) through a superhydrophobic tube and an as received tube for comparison. The left tube is a superhydrophobic one. (b–d) Schematic illustrations of the cross-section of laminar flow through a tube channel with different boundary conditions. (b) General no-slip boundary conditions, (c) a half-tube with an air–water interface, and (d) a superhydrophobic boundary condition with composite water–air–solid interfaces. (Reproduced from ref. 66 with the permission of ACS.) 
Later, Carlborg and van der Wijngaart,80 introduced a novel self-regulating design for friction reduction in laminar flow systems with large channels and high pressure. An inevitable problem which limits the drag reduction by superhydrophobic surfaces to the laboratory scale is that the gas may diffuse away over time or the gas bubble would collapse under pressure. Lee and Kim,81 solved this problem by developing surface structures that allow the restoration of a gas layer under an immersed state and a self-controlled gas-generation mechanism that maintains the superhydrophobic condition under high liquid pressures, which therefore, removes a fundamental barrier against practical application.

2.2 Optical properties

2.2.1 Transparency. 
In addition to the typical self-cleaning properties, recently, superhydrophobic surfaces have also faced some specific applications which require optical transparency as well, such as windshields, window glass, display screens and even solar cells. Actually, the two properties (superhydrophobicity and transparency) are generally competitive.82 It is well known that a superhydrophobic substrate requires hierarchical structures to improve surface roughness, whereas rough surfaces constructed by various micro-nanostructures may be completely opaque due to the extensive light scattering effect. Consequently, to avoid Mie scattering of visible light, the feature size of the rough texture should be theoretically smaller than the wavelength of light, preferably less than 80 nm.83
To date, there exist some successful examples of achieving superhydrophobic surfaces with remarkable transparency.82–95 A general approach to a transparent and superhydrophobic surface is the deposition of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles prepared by surface modification with low surface energy silane on a general glass substrate.88,89,95 For instance, He and coworkers,88 reported a transparent and superhydrophilic film prepared via the layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of mesoporous silica nanoparticles, followed by calcination. After post treatment with a low surface energy material (fluoroalkyl silane), the surface became superhydrophobic (CA >150°) with a very low sliding angle, while maintaining high transparency (>90%). In a similar manner, Yang and coworkers,87 reported a simple and versatile approach to a highly transparent superhydrophobic surface by the sequential dip coating of 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTS)-functionalized silica nanoparticles of two different sizes (100 and 20 nm), followed by thermal annealing and hydrophobilization with fluoroalkyl silane. As shown in Fig. 6, when the hierarchical nanoparticle film was coated onto a glass substrate, the letters underneath were visible. The UV-vis spectra showed that it maintained a relative transmission larger than 99% in the visible wavelength region with respect to bare glass (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  Optical transparency of superhydrophobic films prepared by the coassembly of dual-sized nanoparticles. (a) Photograph of water droplets (7 μL) on the superhydrophobic glass, which was coated with 100 nm SiO2 nanoparticles (0.5 wt%) and 20 nm SiO2 nanoparticles (0.5 wt%) in turn, and treated with fluorosilane for 3 h. (b) UV-Vis spectra of general glass and the superhydrophobic glass coated with SiO2 nanoparticles in different sequences. (c) A photograph of fingers coated with superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers. The bright air layer indicates the hydrophobicity; and the coating layer is transparent as observed from the photo. (Reproduced from ref. 87 and 96 with the permission of ACS.) 
In addition to the silica nanoparticle coated films, nanoporous polymers which possess both hierarchical roughness and low surface energy frameworks have also been used for coating superhydrophobic surfaces with simultaneous optical transparency. For example, Fréchet and coworkers,83 fabricated superhydrophobic nanoporous polymer layers through an in situ polymerization of divinylbenzene in the presence of a porogenic solvent. By simply tuning the composition of the mixture used in preparation, the average globule size of the porous polymers decreased from 486 nm to 45 nm, while the corresponding transparency gradually increased. Later, Zhang et al.,96 also achieved transparent superhydrophobicity by coating a transparent PDMS slice with a novel nanoporous polymer chalk prepared through solvothermal polymerization. Moreover the nanoporous polymer chalk can impart water-resistance to almost any nonplanar surface, such as paper, and even human skin, while retaining the transparent feature (Fig. 6c).
Lee and coworkers,86 introduced a facile method to fabricate transparent, conductive films from a mixture containing multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) and a silane sol. By varying the silane compound used for the surface coatings (e.g., tetraethoxysilane, methyltrimethoxysilane, fluorinated silane, glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane, etc.), the wettability of the hybrid films can be controlled in a wide range, from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity. In addition, both the transparency and the surface superhydrophobicity of the CNT–silane conductive films can be improved by introducing nanoparticles into the coating solution.
More recently, Vollmer and coworkers,97 designed an easily fabricated, transparent, and oil-rebounding superamphiphobic coating by using candle soot as a template. In their work, a porous deposit of candle soot was coated with a 25 nanometre-thick silica shell. The black coating became transparent after calcination at 600 °C. After silanization, the coating was superamphiphobic and remained so even after its top layer was damaged by sand impingement. In combination with the optical transparent feature, superhydrophobic surfaces could find broad applications as window materials for either architectural glass or electronic display screens.


2.2.2 Anti-reflection. 
Anti-reflection is absolutely important to window materials widely used in optical devices such as solar cells, organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) and lasers. Inspired by moth-eyes,98,99 microstructured surfaces with sub-wavelength hexagonal honeycomb microstructures have been developed to efficiently reduce light reflection, and therefore gain high transmittance. Generally, anti-reflective microstructures with a period smaller than the propagating wavelength could lead to an effective refractive-index gradient between air and the substrate, which could suppress the Fresnel reflection and improve the transmission of light at the interface.100 From approximate effective-medium-theory (EMT), the anti-reflective wavelength range is mainly determined by the period of the microstructure, whereas the transmission rate is determined by the height of the microstructure. If a 100% transmission rate was to be obtained, the structure height h must be satisfied by the following equation:  where λp is the propagating wavelength and n1 and n2 are the refractive indexes of air and the optical substrate, respectively.101
Based on this principle, theoretically designed microstructures must possess considerable roughness. Therefore, they usually exhibit a certain hydrophobicity synchronously, and in some cases, they can reach the superhydrophobic range. The combination of anti-reflection and superhydrophobicity makes multifunctional films promising for developing novel optoelectronic devices. For example, in solar cells,70 efficient light management by reducing incident light reflection while enhancing optical absorption is important for performance improvement and cost reduction. Additionally, the superhydrophobicity may also contribute to the self-cleaning behavior. Taking advantage of the two merits, Cui and coworkers,69 reported novel nanodome solar cells, which have periodic nanoscale modulations for all layers from the bottom substrate, through the active absorber to the top transparent contact. Photographs of nanodomes and flat films show that the nanodome devices look black due to efficient anti-reflection and light trapping, whereas flat film devices are red colour because of inefficient light absorption at long wavelengths, indicating the anti-reflection property of the nanodome structure (Fig. 7). Moreover, the nanodome devices show power conversion efficiencies that are 25% higher than the flat devices made under the same conditions. For the nanodome cell, the tapered shape of the nanodome structure forms a graded refractive index profile, creating a better refractive index matching air and thus a broad band anti-reflection effect. Additionally, the nanodome shape can also efficiently couple the incident light into the guided modes, contributing to the high transmittance. Interestingly, after surface treatment with hydrophobic molecules (perfluorooctyl trichlorosilane, PFOS), the nanodome surface shows hydrophobicity (CA of 141 ± 2°), due to the combination of nanodome morphology and the low surface energy coating layer. The hydrophobicity endows the nanodome surface with self-cleaning properties, which offers the capability for dust removal and therefore further improves light harvesting.
 Fig. 7  Photographs of (a) nanodome solar cells and (b) flat film solar cells. The inset of (a) is the SEM image of the nanodome solar cells after the deposition of multilayers of materials on nanocones. The scale bar is 500 nm. (c) The dark and light I–V curves of solar cell devices for (c) nanodomes and (d) flat substrates. (Reproduced from ref. 69 with the permission of ACS.) 
In addition to the solar cell, Wu et al.,102 fabricated self-cleaning regular nanopillar arrays which produce a gradient refractive index from glass to air and effectively outcouple the emitting light of the OLEDs. Compared with the reference OLEDs, the current efficiency for OLEDs with anti-reflective films is enhanced by 25%.


2.2.3 Structural color. 
Besides lotus leaves, some surfaces with beautiful colors in nature also possess unique superhydrophobicity. For instance, butterfly wings (e.g., Morpho) exhibit a brilliant blue color and anisotropy in the water sliding direction;32 red rose petals have superhydrophobicity with a high adhesive force to water droplets; peacock feathers show multiple colors and patterns, together with superhydrophobicity.34 Typically, the presence of these beautiful colors in the superhydrophobic surfaces arises from the periodically arranged photonic crystal structures. These microstructures define multi-colors, which are usually called structural colors or iridescence, are generally believed to originate from the interaction of light with these two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) periodic sub-microstructures.
Inspired by iridescent natural materials, artificial micro/nanostructured films have also been developed to replicate or partly replicate promising structural colors. In most cases, these iridescent films synchronously possess unique hydrophobicity, and some of them could reach a degree of superhydrophobicity. The simplest method for the reconstruction of these photonic crystal structures is direct replication. For example, by using the butterfly wing as a “hard template”, various metal oxide duplicates with structural colors could be obtained through novel approaches such as low-temperature atomic layer deposition (ALD) and the sol–gel approach.38,103 In addition to butterfly wings, the red rose is another example which possesses both iridescence and superhydrophobicity.33,35 Observation of the rose petal surface by either optical microscopy or SEM shows that there are micropapillae all over the surface and nanofolders exist on each papilla, which endow the petal with superhydrophobicity. Interestingly, on these nanofolders, periodically arranged nanorods with much tinier sizes were also observed, which contribute to the structural color. By directly duplicating the hierarchical structures on the rose petal, a polymeric duplicate further confirms the presence of structural color, since no pigment was introduced.
Mimicking the structural color of natural materials, colloidal photonic crystal films with both structural color and superhydrophobicity have been successfully prepared by the self-assembly of polystyrene spheres and silica nanoparticles.104 In addition to the self assembly approach, Sun and coworkers105 reported bio-inspired photonic surface structures consisting of periodic micro-needle arrays covered with nano-sized silver protrusions, which are prepared by the multi-beam laser interference patterning of photopolymers and subsequent electroless plating. The resultant films exhibit superhydrophobicity and synchronous iridescent colors.
Recently, inspired by butterfly wings and red rose petals, Zhang and coworkers106 reported the fabrication of superhydrophobic and iridescent graphene films by the two beam laser interference technique. As shown in Fig. 8, a periodic grating structure with an average period of 2 μm was created through the laser ablation and removal of oxygen containing groups such as hydroxyl, epoxy and carboxyl groups. The origin of such a beautiful iridescence could be explained by the light diffraction of the grating. In addition to the 2D grating structure, on the edge of the grating patterns, a nanofolder structure was also formed due to the layered arrangement of the graphene oxide sheets. These hierarchical structures contribute to a high adhesive superhydrophobic property, similar to that observed on rose petals. Since the period of the grating on the graphene film could be tuned in a certain range, the optical properties could be manipulated in a controlled manner by changing the laser processing parameters. Recently, Kim and coworkers reported an electroactive subwavelength grating for color and intensity modulation. This conductive polymer grating changes its color intensity by the applied potential in wide spectral range.107 Therefore, it can be inferred that the graphene grating structure together with the unique surface wettability will attract intense interest in the development of graphene based optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of the two-beam laser interference system for the fabrication of superhydrophobic graphene films. (b) A photograph of an as-patterned graphene film, the structural color can be observed by the naked eye. (c) An optical microscopic image of the graphene pattern. (d) A schematic illustration of the graphene surface after two-beam laser interference treatment. (e) A SEM image of the superhydrophobic and iridescent graphene film. (Reproduced from ref. 106 with the permission of Wiley.) 

2.3 Manipulation of water droplets

2.3.1 Droplet transportation. 
Generally, a water droplet on a superhydrophobic surface usually takes a quasi-spherical shape which dramatically reduces the contact area between the liquid and the solid, and accordingly avoids being contaminated by the surrounding medium. In particular, with the rapid development of superhydrophobic materials as well as novel wettability control techniques, water droplets could be pinned to the substrate or roll down freely from the surface without any residuals in a controlled fashion. In this regard, superhydrophobic surfaces become a valuable alternative in the mass-loss-free transportation of water droplets. Typical examples can be found in the work reported by Jiang and coworkers.108,109 In their work, a superhydrophobic surface constructed by aligned polystyrene (PS) nanotubes was successfully prepared by using a porous alumina membrane covering method. The unique nanotube topography endows the film surface with not only considerable roughness which contributes to the superhydrophobicity, but also to a strong adhesive effect on the water droplet, about 52 μN, due to the capillary force and the capillarity-induced negative pressure. The PS nanotube surface could be used as a “mechanical hand” for the controllable and no-loss transportation of superparamagnetic microdroplets by manipulating the extra magnetic field. Later, inspired by the gecko's foot which can reversibly stick and unstick to various surfaces, a novel superhydrophobic iron surface was fabricated by the controlled acid corrosion of iron plates and subsequent fluoroalkylsilane modification.108 A tunable adhesive force to a superparamagnetic microdroplet could be achieved by simply switching between the magnetizing and demagnetizing state of the surface, due to the cooperation of the soft ferromagnetic property of iron plates and the microstructure. Such an intelligent surface holds great promise for a broad range of applications including biochemical separation, in situ analysis, and in particular the no-loss transport of microdroplets.
Recently, Lin et al.,110 reported the preparation of mechanically robust magnetic liquid marbles by simply coating a highly hydrophobic Fe3O4 nanoparticle layer on a water droplet. The magnetic liquid marbles are nonstick to all kinds of substrates such as flat glass plates, which provides the possibility for the manipulation of a single water droplet by magnetic field actuation. They found that, under the action of a magnetic field, the reversible opening and closing of the magnetic liquid marbles as well as the coalescing of two liquid marbles into a larger one could be easily realized, revealing a potential application as a single droplet microreactor for allowing non-loss transportation.
Besides the manipulation of magnetic droplets by using superhydrophobic substrates together with an external magnetic field, pure water droplets can also be transported in a non-loss manner providing the “pinned” and “roll-down” superhydrophobic states can be reversibly switched through a certain scheme. In our previous work,111 we reported the reversible tuning of the superhydrophobicity of PDMS micro-pillar arrays from the “pinned” to the “roll-down” state by adjusting the surface curvature. Both a schematic illustration and the video frames of the water droplet transportation are shown in Fig. 9. Typically, the PDMS micro-pillar array film, with a period of 2 μm, shows a very high adhesion force to water droplets, represented by the pinned superhydrophobic state. When the surface curvature was increased to a certain range, both the adhesion force and the SA (sliding angle) decreased significantly (SA <5°), which is a typical feature of the Cassie superhydrophobic state. The origination of the curvature induced switching between the “pinned” and the “roll down” states can be attributed to the difference in the contact area of the substrate and the droplet under different curvature. Based on this unique switching, the surfaces can be employed as a mechanical hand for water “pickup” at flat form and “release” under certain curvature.
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic illustration of water-droplet transport using curvature-driven switching of a superhydrophobic PDMS film between the pinned state and roll-down state. (b) The process for capturing and releasing a water droplet. A water droplet can be picked up from a superhydrophobic substrate by the flat PDMS pillar array without mass loss owing to its strong adhesive force. When the curvature of the PDMS pillar array surface (top) was increased, the surface superhydrophobicity was tuned to the Cassie state, and the water droplet could be released. (Reproduced from ref. 111 with the permission of Wiley.) 
Recently, Ras and coworkers112 reported the low-friction and guided transport of water droplets by using a superhydrophobic track. In their work, water droplets could be driven by gravity or electrostatic forces along designed tracks which have vertical walls as gravitational potential barriers. By tilting the platform slightly, for instance by a few degrees, the drops can move at a considerable speed up to 14 cm s−1, even in highly curved trajectories, indicating both the low-friction and the guided feature of the superhydrophobic track.
Controlled manipulation of small volumes of liquid, for example droplets, is of great importance in various miniature systems for both chemical and biological applications, such as high-throughput analysis and synthesis. In addition to microfluidic devices, superhydrophobic surfaces also provide an alternative method to reach this end. Once superhydrophobic surfaces bearing tunable interactions with water have been successfully developed, water droplets could be manipulated in a controlled manner through magnetic field, electrostatic forces, or gravity. The technology for non-loss drop transport based on superhydrophobic surfaces could exhibit great potential for the development of microfluidic devices (e.g., low-cost microfluidic chips, channel-free microfluidic systems, surface microfluidic channels)113–118 and smart droplet microreactors towards a wide range of applications including liquid transportation, biochemical separation, localized chemical synthesis and in situ detection.


2.3.2 Anisotropy. 
With regards to some of the superhydrophobic surfaces in nature, the surface textures are asymmetric. Due to this unique structural feature, a water droplet on them usually has a preferential sliding mode or direction, which therefore makes it possible for the guided transportation of water droplets. For instance, the wings of a butterfly Morpho aega not only show unique superhydrophobicity, but also exhibit a directional adhesive force to water droplets.32 A droplet can easily roll off the surface of the wings along the radial outward direction of the central axis of the body, whereas it is pinned tightly to the surface against the radial outward direction, indicating the interesting anisotropic wettability. The strider leg possesses numerous oriented micrometre-scale needle-shaped setae arranged at an inclined angle of about 20° with nanoscale grooves on the surface.31 The oriented arrangement of micro-needle arrays may not only impart superhydrophobicity to the leg, but also lead to anisotropic dewetting, which greatly influences the hydrodynamics and brings a super-repellent force to water, and thus allows the strider to stand effortlessly and walk quickly on water. These examples show that the unique anisotropic wettability is not only critical for the development of self-cleaning surfaces with oriented water rolling behavior, but is also potentially useful in the directional transportation of water and novel microfluidic devices.
In recent years, triggered by the promising properties and functionalities, anisotropic superhydrophobic surfaces have been investigated both experimentally and numerically.119–130 Generally, a superhydrophobic surface with anisotropic dewetting properties can be achieved by creating micrometre-scale parallel grooves with considerable roughness. To date, various technologies including photolithography, electrospinning, multi-beam laser interference, and surface wrinkling have been adopted to fabricate the quasi-1D groove-like microstructures. For example, Takahara and coworkers123 reported a macroscopic wetting anisotropy on a line-patterned surface prepared by vacuum ultraviolet photolithography. Brennan and coworkers122 achieved anisotropic wetting surfaces with tunable static and dynamic contact angles through a soft lithography technique. Seven patterned topographies comprising elongated discontinuous microfeatures oriented along parallel paths and one comprising ridges were successfully fabricated, and the static contact angle, advancing/receding contact angle, contact angle hysteresis, and slip angle were carefully measured at three in-plane perspectives based on the feature orientation.
Brueck and Xia,126 observed strongly anisotropic wetting behavior on one-dimensional nanopatterned surfaces prepared by multi-beam-laser interference lithography. Anisotropic contact angles from 5° to 79° have been successfully produced by the precise design of the different groove arrays. Moreover, the surface wetting behavior could be tuned from hydrophobic to hydrophilic while retaining the structural wetting anisotropy through a simple coating with silica nanoparticles. Later, the anisotropic wetting properties of the 1D submicrometre-scale grooved surface were further tailored by using a simple plasma treatment with different gas compositions (e.g., CHF3, CF4, O2) and polymer deposition, due to a change in the surface chemical composition.
The above-mentioned examples of anisotropic wetting surfaces are generally based on quasi-1D microgrooved structures, which suffer from low contact angles, typically, in Wenzel's state. Therefore, the anisotropy was usually depicted by static measurements such as CA, advancing/receding CA, and CA hysteresis. For superhydrophobic surfaces with exceptional anisotropy, it is obviously insufficient to evaluate the anisotropic wetting only by CAs and water droplet morphology. In this regard, the sliding behaviour of the water droplets becomes an important parameter in the characterization of the anisotropy dewetting property. As inspired by rice leaves, which show strong anisotropic wettability represented by the oriented guiding of water droplets to roll along the leaf vein heading to the stem, Sun and coworkers125 proposed a three-level structure model containing macrogrooves, micropapillae and nanostructures to elucidate the directional sliding mechanism. As shown in Fig. 10, the hierarchically biomimetic surface was prepared by photolithography and subsequent nanoporous polymer coating. The relationship between the groove width (50–200 μm) and anisotropy with different groove heights (10–60 μm) was investigated. In their work, the oriental grooves are crucial for the anisotropy in that they can make the droplet run in the parallel direction but energy is blocked in the perpendicular direction. According to the model, they prepared a line of artificial rice leaves, and the exhibited sliding angle difference between the two directions reached 5°, analogous to the natural performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of the rice leaf surface. (b) An SEM image of the artificial rice leaves prepared by soft lithography and nanoporous polymer coating. (c–f) Sliding-angle measurements of different artificial rice leaves and the relationship between the groove width and anisotropy with different groove heights (c–f), from 10–60 μm. The insets are the physical models of the water droplets on the films with different groove arrays. (Reproduced from ref. 125 with the permission of Wiley.) 
In nature there is also a unique ratchet like phenomenon, that is, a droplet can be easily translated in one direction while being tightly pinned backwards, as observed on the wing of the Morpho aega butterfly mentioned above. Mimicking butterfly wings, Lyons and Barahman,131 fabricated surfaces composed of tilted posts by a type of 3D printing. By controlling the dispense parameters, the slope of the asymmetric posts could be varied from 0 to 50°. When the surface was tilted opposite to the feature slope, the contact line was observed to increase once the droplet began to slip, and the increased interaction made a much larger slip angle compared to that in the case when the surfaces were tilted parallel to the slope.
Based on the thorough investigation of the anisotropic wetting behavior both experimentally and theoretically, functional hydrophobic surfaces with unusual anisotropy can be readily designed and fabricated for the controllable manipulation of water droplets. The development of hydrophobic surface anisotropic wettability holds great promise for novel devices concerning microfluids and single droplets.

2.4 Oil–water separation
In recent years, the frequently occurring leakage of organic pollutants into water, such as crude oil and toxic aromatics, continuously threatens human health and daily life. Therefore, enormous efforts have been devoted to the effective removal and collection of these organic pollutants from water by using advanced techniques and materials.132 In particular, for accident remediation, the effective separation of such organic compounds from water becomes of considerable importance, not only for the reduction of the economic loss but also due to the environmental concerns. However, the currently available methods for oil cleanup are generally based on common adsorptive materials such as zeolites, activated carbon, natural clays, straw, and wool fibers. These adsorbents usually suffer from their hydrophilic nature, resulting in a relatively poor selectivity for organic pollutants. In practical applications, they can be saturated by water and thereafter become disabled in terms of oil adsorption.
Considering the distinct difference in surface tension between water (72.8 mN m−1) and oil (<30 mN m−1), superhydrophobic surfaces which are commonly oleophilic or superoleophilic provide a desirable choice for the cleanup of oil spillages.133–138 Taking advantage of the unique water repellency properties, organic compounds can be selectively removed or collected from water in a highly effective manner. To reach this end, various superhydrophobic surfaces or materials have been successfully developed. As shown in Fig. 11, Jiang and coworkers133 reported a novel poly(tetrafluoroethylene)-coated mesh prepared by a facile and inexpensive spray-and-dry method. In their work, the mesh film shows both superhydrophobicity and superoleophilicity, represented by the high water CA of 156 ± 2.8° (inset of Fig. 11a), and the very small water SA (∼4°), as well as an oil CA of 0°, which makes the mesh an enabler for oil–water separation. When an oil droplet is dropped onto the superhydrophobic and superoleophilic mesh, it spreads out rapidly and then penetrates through the mesh in about 240 ms (Fig. 11b). It can be reasonably inferred that when an oil–water mixture is poured onto the mesh film, oil will penetrate through the film freely, whereas, water will remain on the superhydrophobic film, showing the feasibility for oil–water separation. Similarly, Zhang and Seeger136 fabricated polyester textiles from volatile, inexpensive and nontoxic materials by a simple chemical vapor deposition method. When a mixture of water and oil was poured onto the textile coated with silicone filaments, oil penetrated deep inside while water was left outside and was collected thereafter.
 Fig. 11  (a) An SEM image of the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coated stainless mesh film with an average pore diameter of about 115 μm. The inset is the shape of a water droplet on the coating mesh film with a contact angle of ∼156°. (b) Spreading and permeating behavior of a diesel oil droplet on the coating mesh film. The diesel oil spreads quickly on the coating mesh film and flows through (within only 240 ms). (c–e) The separation process of n-hexane (HT) and water by using nanoporous polydivinylbenzene. (c) A mixture of HT and water. The inset is the SEM image of the nanoporous polymer. (d) The addition of superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers into the HT–water mixture, and the insets are the water and oil contact angles on the nanoporous polymer. (e) After separation, the HT adsorbed by the nanoporous polymers was separated from water. The inset is the regenerated nanoporous polymers and the desorbed HT, indicating the reusable property of the superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers. (Reproduced from ref. 133 and 137 with the permission of Wiley and Elsevier Ltd.) 
In addition to the superhydrophobic and superoleophilic mesh, Zhang et al.137 prepared a nanoporous polydivinylbenzene material by a simple solvothermal polymerization. The nanoporous polymers exhibited high surface areas, adjustable pore sized, large pore volumed, and exceptional swelling properties in organic solvents (Fig. 11c). Particularly, due to the hierarchical roughness caused by the nanoporous structure, and the organic framework, the resultant materials show unique superhydrophobicity and superoleophilicity. All of these features impart a high-capacity and selective adsorption of oil to the nanoporous polymers, which makes them excellent candidates for the effective remediation of oil spillages and chemical leakages. It is worth noting that, as compared with conventional porous adsorbents, for instance activated carbon, the superhydrophobicity of the nanoporous polymers determines the high selectivity for organic compounds. Latterly, Zhu et al.138 reported a superhydrophobic and superoleophilic sponge that could be used for the facile removal and collection of oils from water surfaces. By the electroless deposition of copper and subsequent modification with superhydrophobic and superoleophilic coatings, the as-prepared sponges could selectively absorb various oils with a capacity of 13 times the materials' weight while repelling water completely.
In fact, for the development of novel materials and films which could be used for oil separation from water, there exist a lot of key factors, for instance, high absorption capacity, low cost, scalable fabrication, high selectivity, and excellent recyclability, among which superhydrophobicity plays an important role for achieving high selectivity. Therefore, only if novel superhydrophobic surfaces have been prepared in a low cost and mass producible manner, can they be practically used for oil collection and accident treatment.
2.5 Other functional properties

2.5.1 Water-supporting force. 
Due to the excellent water repellency when objects which are wrapped with superhydrophobic coatings fall onto the water surface, the surface tension on the object–liquid interface will generate repulsive forces acting like vigorous supports and prevent the object from sinking even if the target object has a higher density than water.31,79,139 Larmour et al.140 obtained superhydrophobic particles through galvanic deposition and 1-decanethiol modification of commercially available copper powders. The powders can spontaneously move closer together and form a robust close-packed sheet capable of supporting external loads. Although the meniscus will deform downwards into the water, the enhanced buoyancy caused by the surface water-repellency will lift the external loads up vigorously.


2.5.2 Superamphiphobicity. 
As most contaminants and pollutants are oily and organic materials, superhydrophobic surfaces exhibiting extremely high oil repellency, named superamphiphobic surfaces, are expected to have wider practical applications than solo superhydrophobic surfaces. However, it is a technical challenge to achieve this superamphiphobicity in that many oils have lower surface energies than water and thus show high affinities toward most of natural and artificial surfaces. Recently, reports demonstrated that a unique bifunctional material can be realized by finely designing the surface structure.97,141–151 The as-prepared re-entrant or overhang texture was able to pin the composite contact line and prevented deep penetration, indicating effective resistance with a variety of liquids.


2.5.3 Responsive switching. 
The development of stimuli-responsive materials (SRMs) has provided the possibility to control surface chemical properties or morphology under special environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, light,152 pH value,153 electric field, metal ions, solvent polarity). Therefore, the surface wettability of the resultant superhydrophobic surfaces based on the SRMs could be tuned in a controlled fashion, leading to responsive and reversible switching among diverse surface dewetting states, represented by significantly changed water contact angles or different superhydrophobic regimes.111,154–160 Responsive switching would make the superhydrophobic surface smart, and contribute to various exceptional functions.

3 Conclusions and future perspectives
Learning from natures masterpieces, a great many artificial superhydrophobic surfaces with multiscale structures have been successfully fabricated; and the desired water-resistance has also been reproduced. Inherited from the core properties of water repellency, superhydrophobic surfaces have earned many extending capabilities effortlessly, for instance, self-cleaning, icephobicity, anti-corrosive, anti-fogging, anti-corrosive and drag reduction. In addition, the intricate structures themselves also bring about many inherent properties including transparency, anti-reflection and structural color, which show great potential for novel optical devices. Moreover, the combination of material or structure defined properties with superhydrophobicity may generate some new functions. For instance, superhydrophobic surfaces with certain oleophilicity could be used for oil–water separation, and anisotropic superhydrophobic surfaces provide liquid-guiding capabilities. The recently developed structural and functional properties of superhydrophobic surfaces have been summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Typical superhydrophobic surfaces with various structural and functional propertiesa




Functional property
Structural property
Materials
Ref.





a TCD: transparent conducting oxide; ETPTA: ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate; FAS: fluoroalkylsilane.





Self-cleaning
Randomly distributed micropapillaes (5–9 μm) with nano-branches (120 nm)
Lotus leaves

13



Order nanodome structure (450 nm spacing)
Ag/TCD/amorphous silicon/TCD

69



Anti-biofouling
Periodic macroporous structure (pore size: 170–240 nm)
Polymer (ETPTA, SR 454)

71



Disordered nanostructures
Fluorinated silica colloids

161



Icephobicity
Periodic staggered bricks/posts/blades/honeycombs (1–5 μm wall, 4–40 μm pitch)
Si substrate with FAS

73



Disordered rough structure
Nanoparticle–polymer composites

51



Anti-fogging
Periodic micro-hemisphere arrays (26 μm in diameter)
Mosquito compound eye

72



Randomly distributed nanobelts
Titania/FAS

162



Waterproof coating
Disordered nanoporous structure
Polydivinylbenzene

96



Flat thin layer
Fluoropolymer

163



Anti-corrosion
Self aligned nano- and microsheets (50–1500 nm long, 20–50 nm thick)
Magnesium alloy AZ31

56



Randomly distributed silica particles (50 nm)
Aluminium foil/silica (FAS)

58



Fluidic drag reduction
Randomly distributed silver nanoparticles (200–500 nm in size)
Silver

68



Cu nanoribbon (1 μm × 100 nm × 6 nm in size)
Copper with perfluorocarbon coating

66



Transparency
Disordered nanoporous polymer (globule size 45–486 nm)
Polydivinylbenzene

83



Co-assembled silica nanoparticles (100 and 20 nm)
Silica with FAS

87



Anti-reflection
Order nanodome structure (450 nm spacing)
Ag/TCD/p-i-n a-Si/TCD

69



Dual-scale hierarchical structure
Perfluoropolyethers

70



Structural color
Periodic grating structure (2 μm) with layered nanostructure
Graphene

106



Periodic nanoneedle arrays (2.5 μm period, 300 nm–3 μm in height)
Photopolymer (NOA 61) with FAS

105



Droplet transportation
Aligned polystyrene nanotube layer (∼200 nm in diameter)
Polystyrene

109



Micro-pillar arrays with a period of 2 μm (curvature)
PDMS

111



Anisotropy
One-dimensional parallel nanopattern (1500 nm pitch, ∼500 nm in height)
Photopolymer

126



Microgroove arrays coated with nanoporous polymer powder
PDMS/polydivinylbenzene

125



Oil–water separation
Disordered nanoporous structure
Polydivinylbenzene

137



Sponge-like porous structure with nanoparticles on the surface
Polyurethane/copper

138



Water supporting force
Copper particles (<400 mm) following electroless deposition of Ag
Copper/silver powder

140



Superhydrophobic valve
Microfeature treated with fluorine-plasma
PMMA

164



Surface microfluids
Glass microchannel patterned with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) coating
Glass/OTS surface

117



Superamphiphobicity
Disordered porous structure
Silica/FAS

97





However, it is worth pointing out that the functional application of superhydrophobic surfaces is not limited to the reported ones. It is anticipated that more and more properties and functions will be developed in the ongoing research. Considering the diverse characters of the materials used in superhydrophobic surfaces, there will be more interesting and new features, though this is not included in this review. In addition to the pursual of new functionalities derived from surface superhydrophobicity, it is also highly desirable to prepare superhydrophobic structures with multifunctional integrations. With the cooperation of diverse functionalities, superhydrophobic surfaces could exhibit fascinating properties and thus hold great promise for multidisciplinary applications.
For practical applications in both daily life and industry, the durability and stability of superhydrophobic surfaces, which directly relate to the performance of the functional surfaces in working condition, should be taken into consideration. After all, in real situations, there are various external disturbances, which may cause changes in the surface chemical composition or morphology, resulting in the degradation or even loss of functionality. With this in mind, many robust non-wetting surfaces are under investigation, including the mechanical tolerance, thermal resistance, performance under hydraulic pressure, impact patience, and so on. All in all, the perfect integration of novel structural and functional properties and long service life is an eternal goal for artificial superhydrophobic surfaces. With the continuous development of interdisciplinary cooperation, multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces prepared from all kinds of materials may find broad applications in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant nos 90923037, 61008014, and 6078048). We also acknowledge the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation no. 20110490156 and the Hong Kong Scholar Program XJ2011014. The authors also acknowledge the financial support from a National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MEST) through the Active Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (R11-2007-050-00000-0).
Notes and references
M. L. Ma and R. M. Hill, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 11, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 270–280 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Xue, S. T. Jia, J. Zhang and J. Z. Ma, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2010, 11, 033002 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, F. Shi, J. Niu, Y. G. Jiang and Z. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 621–633 RSC .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667–677 CrossRef .
P. Roach, N. J. Shirtcliffe and M. I. Newton, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 224–240 RSC .
I. Sas, R. E. Gorga, J. A. Joines and K. A. Thoney, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 824–845 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang, B. Ding, J. Y. Yu and M. R. Wang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 510–530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80–105 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 0546–0550 RSC .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, S. H. Li, Y. S. Li, H. J. Li, L. J. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. L. Song, B. Q. Liu, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1350–1368 RSC .
J. Bico, C. Marzolin and D. Quere, Europhys. Lett., 1999, 47, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Li, Y. Li, S. Gao and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8366–8371 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Li and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2972–2978 RSC .
C. R. Crick and I. P. Parkin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 3568–3588 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balu, A. D. Berry, D. W. Hess and V. Breedveld, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 3066–3075 RSC .
V. A. Lifton, J. A. Taylor, B. Vyas, P. Kolodner, R. Cirelli, N. Basavanhally, A. Papazian, R. Frahm, S. Simon and T. Krupenkin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043112 CrossRef .
X. K. Liu, B. Y. Dai, L. Zhou and J. Q. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 497–504 RSC .
O. U. Nimittrakoolchai and S. Supothina, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 28, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Song, A. C. Lima and J. F. Mano, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5868–5871 RSC .
C. G. Du, F. Xia, S. T. Wang, J. X. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2010, 31, 421–431 CAS .
E. K. Her, T. J. Ko, K. R. Lee, K. H. Oh and M. W. Moon, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2900–2905 RSC .
K. S. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240–3255 RSC .
W. L. Song, D. D. Veiga, C. A. Custodio and J. F. Mano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1830 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Sun, L. Feng, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 644–652 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, S. T. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 405–415 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6786–6790 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2842–2858 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zheng, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .
L. Feng, Y. A. Zhang, J. M. Xi, Y. Zhu, N. Wang, F. Xia and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zi, X. D. Yu, Y. Z. Li, X. H. Hu, C. Xu, X. J. Wang, X. H. Liu and R. T. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. A. Zhang, M. Z. Li, Y. M. Zheng, W. Z. Shen and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14885–14888 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, Y. Bando and M. Aono, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e17 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. N. Zang, J. J. Gu, S. M. Zhu, H. L. Su, D. Zhang, X. B. Hu, Q. L. Liu, W. Zhang and D. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6140–6143 RSC .
M. R. Weatherspoon, Y. Cai, M. Crne, M. Srinivasarao and K. H. Sandhage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7921–7923 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
R. Truesdell, A. Mammoli, P. Vorobieff, F. van Swol and C. J. Brinker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 44504 CrossRef .
W. Chen, A. Y. Fadeev, M. C. Hsieh, D. Oner, J. Youngblood and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 3395–3399 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Ding, S. X. Zhou, G. X. Gu and L. M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6161–6164 RSC .
R. Furstner, W. Barthlott, C. Neinhuis and P. Walzel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 956–961 CrossRef .
A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto, T. Watanabe, K. Takai, G. Yamauchi and A. Fujishima, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7044–7047 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nystrom, J. Lindqvist, E. Ostmark, P. Antoni, A. Carlmark, A. Hult and E. Malmstrom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 816–823 Search PubMed .
S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3059–3066 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jafari, R. Menini and M. Farzaneh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 1540–1543 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, J. X. Wang, H. L. Li, X. L. Jin, J. J. Wang, B. Q. Liu and Y. L. Song, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2396–2399 RSC .
P. Tourkine, M. Le Merrer and D. Quere, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7214–7216 CrossRef CAS .
C. Antonini, M. Innocenti, T. Horn, M. Marengo and A. Amirfazli, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2011, 67, 58–67 CrossRef .
L. L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Z. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12444–12448 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Zheng, Z. R. Li, S. Bourdo, K. R. Khedir, M. P. Asar, C. C. Ryerson and A. S. Biris, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9936–9943 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. G. Chen, F. Yu, W. W. Sun, H. Y. Zhu and Y. S. Yin, Surf. Interface Anal., 2009, 41, 872–877 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Li, Y. G. Wang, J. H. Liu and W. Wei, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2007, 23, 1631–1636 CAS .
Y. H. Fan, C. Z. Li, Z. J. Chen and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 6531–6536 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishizaki and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2375–2381 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Weng, C. H. Chang, C. W. Peng, S. W. Chen, J. M. Yeh, C. L. Hsu and Y. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2075–2083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Xu and J. N. Wang, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 734–738 RSC .
W. J. Xu, J. L. Song, J. Sun, Y. Lu and Z. Y. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4404–4414 CAS .
R. J. Daniello, N. E. Waterhouse and J. P. Rothstein, Phys. Fluids, 2009, 21, 112002 CrossRef .
K. Fukagata, N. Kasagi and P. Koumoutsakos, Phys. Fluids, 2006, 18, 035103 CrossRef .
C. G. Jiang, S. C. Xin and C. W. Wu, AIP Adv., 2011, 1, 032148 CrossRef .
G. McHale, M. I. Newton and N. J. Shirtcliffe, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 714–719 RSC .
G. McHale, N. J. Shirtcliffe, C. R. Evans and M. I. Newton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 064104 CrossRef .
M. A. Samaha, H. V. Tafreshi and M. Gad-el-Hak, Phys. Fluids, 2011, 23, 012001 CrossRef .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, M. I. Newton and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1316–1323 CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Li, C. X. Wu, X. K. Zhou and L. Cai, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4391–4396 RSC .
Y. L. Zhou, M. Li, B. Su and Q. H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3301–3306 RSC .
J. Zhu, C. M. Hsu, Z. F. Yu, S. H. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979–1984 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Choi and S. Y. Huh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Yang and P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12598–12604 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. H. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, V. Bahadur, J. A. Taylor, T. Krupenkin and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7699–7707 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xu, Z. Z. Zhang and J. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3654–3658 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi and C. J. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 066001 CrossRef .
S. Gogte, P. Vorobieff, R. Truesdell, A. Mammoli, F. van Swol, P. Shah and C. J. Brinker, Phys. Fluids, 2005, 17, 051701 CrossRef .
J. P. Rothstein, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2010, 42, 89–109 CrossRef .
R. S. Voronov, D. V. Papavassiliou and L. L. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 2455–2477 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, J. Niu, J. L. Liu, F. Liu, Z. Q. Wang, X. Q. Feng and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2257 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Carlborg and W. van der Wijngaart, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee and C. J. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 014502 CrossRef .
H. Yabu and M. Shimomura, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5231–5234 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Levkin, F. Svec and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Crick and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9362–9366 RSC .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, Y. F. Zhao, P. Lellig, K. Mullen, C. Li, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2962 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. S. Woo and G. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3724 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Karunakaran, C. H. Lu, Z. H. Zhang and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4594–4602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Li, X. Du and J. H. He, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13528–13534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bravo, L. Zhai, Z. Z. Wu, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7293–7298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Liu and J. Q. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2730–2732 RSC .
L. D. Liu, C. S. Lin, M. Tikekar and P. H. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 6224–6229 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Tarwal and P. S. Patil, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 7451–7456 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Wang and S. S. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5443–5450 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Xu, R. G. Karunakaran, J. Guo and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1118–1125 CAS .
L. G. Xu and J. H. He, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7512–7518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhang, J. N. Wang, Y. He, Y. Y. He, B. B. Xu, S. Wei and F. S. Xiao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12585–12590 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Clapham and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281–282 CrossRef .
M. Ibn-Elhaj and M. Schadt, Nature, 2001, 410, 796–799 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Xi, M. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, M. F. Chen, S. Y. Lin, W. Liu and J. A. Smart, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 176–179 CAS .
L. Wang, B. B. Xu, Q. D. Chen, Z. C. Ma, R. Zhang, Q. X. Liu and H. B. Sun, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 3305–3307 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Y. B. Zhao, S. Z. Wu, Y. F. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. D. Chen, D. G. Ma and H. B. Sun, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 2635–2637 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325–2331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Gu, H. Uetsuka, K. Takahashi, R. Nakajima, H. Onishi, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 894 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Q. D. Chen, H. Xia, J. Jiao, B. B. Xu, X. F. Lin, Y. Xu and H. B. Sun, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 263–267 RSC .
J. N. Wang, R. Q. Shao, Y. L. Zhang, L. Guo, H. B. Jiang, D. X. Lu and H. B. Sun, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 301–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bhuvana, B. Kim, X. Yang, H. Shin and E. Kim, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3679–3686 RSC .
Z. J. Cheng, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3219–3225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1478 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Fang, H. X. Wang, X. G. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 707 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, S. Z. Wu, Q. D. Chen, Y. L. Zhang, J. Yao, X. Yao, L. G. Niu, J. N. Wang, L. Jiang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 545 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mertaniemi, V. Jokinen, L. Sainiemi, S. Franssila, A. Marmur, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2911 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Abate, J. Thiele, M. Weinhart and D. A. Weitz, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 1774–1776 RSC .
M. Watanabe, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 1143–1146 RSC .
J. West, A. Michels, S. Kittel, P. Jacob and J. Franzke, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 981–983 RSC .
S. Y. Yang, J. A. DeFranco, Y. A. Sylvester, T. J. Gobert, D. J. Macaya, R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 704–708 RSC .
B. Zhao, J. S. Moore and D. J. Beebe, Science, 2001, 291, 1023–1026 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, J. S. Moore and D. J. Beebe, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 4259–4268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. He, J. H. Lee and N. A. Patankar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 281, 458–464 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusumaatmaja, R. J. Vrancken, C. W. M. Bastiaansen and J. M. Yeomans, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7299–7308 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, G. P. Fang, Y. F. Lij and G. J. Qiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 7234–7243 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Long, J. F. Schumacher and A. B. Brennan, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12982–12989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morita, T. Koga, H. Otsuka and A. Takahara, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
C. Semprebon, G. Mistura, E. Orlandini, G. Bissacco, A. Segato and J. M. Yeomans, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5619–5625 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, J. N. Wang, S. Z. Wu, Q. D. Chen, S. A. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. B. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2927–2932 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Xia and S. R. J. Brueck, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2819–2824 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Xia, X. He, Y. B. Jiang, G. P. Lopez and S. R. J. Brueck, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2700–2706 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Xu, J. N. Wang, I. H. Smith and K. D. Sanderson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 233122 Search PubMed .
D. S. Zhang, F. Chen, G. P. Fang, Q. Yang, D. G. Xie, G. J. Qiao, W. Li, J. H. Si and X. Hou, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 075029 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Q. H. Lu, M. Li and X. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6212–6217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barahman and A. M. Lyons, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9902–9909 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Sun, L. F. Wang, P. P. Liu, S. C. Wang, B. Sun, D. Z. Jiang and F. S. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1968 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Z. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Mai, Y. M. Ma, B. Q. Liu, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2012–2014 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Shi, Y. Chen, Y. B. Zhang, Z. G. Guo, B. L. Su and W. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9774–9781 RSC .
R. B. Pernites, R. R. Ponnapati and R. C. Advincula, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3207 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zhang and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4699–4704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhang, S. Wei, F. J. Liu, Y. C. Du, S. Liu, Y. Y. Ji, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and F. S. Xiao, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, Q. M. Pan and F. T. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17464–17470 CAS .
F. Shi, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Larmour, G. C. Saunders and S. E. J. Bell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5043–5045 CrossRef CAS .
N. Canter, Tribol. Lubr. Technol., 2012, 68, 10–11 Search PubMed .
S. S. Chhatre, W. Choi, A. Tuteja, K. C. Park, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4027–4035 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Cunha, C. S. R. Freire, A. J. D. Silvestre, C. P. Neto and A. Gandini, Carbohydr. Polym., 2010, 80, 1048–1056 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dufour, M. Harnois, V. Thomy, R. Boukherroub and V. Senez, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9380–9387 RSC .
G. Perry, Y. Coffinier, V. Thomy and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 389–395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 18200–18205 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Meng, S. T. Wang, J. M. Xi, Z. Y. Tang and L. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11454–11458 CAS .
Y. C. Sheen, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Liao, H. Y. Chou and F. C. Chang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46, 1984–1990 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Wang, Y. H. Xue and T. Lin, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8158–8161 RSC .
J. M. Xi, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053102 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhang, N. Zhao, S. M. Liang, X. Y. Lu, X. F. Li, Q. D. Xie, X. L. Zhang and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2938–2946 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Anastasiadis, M. I. Lygeraki, A. Athanassiou, M. Farsari and D. Pisignano, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2008, 22, 1853–1868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Jiang, Z. Q. Wang, X. Yu, F. Shi, H. P. Xu, X. Zhang, M. Smet and W. Dehaen, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1986–1990 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, M. J. Liu, L. Lin, T. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2708–2712 RSC .
J. A. Gao, Y. L. Liu, H. P. Xu, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9673–9676 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Gu, Z. M. Wang, J. B. Li and J. Ren, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2010, 295, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, Y. Zhu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 275–281 RSC .
S. X. Hu, X. Y. Cao, Y. L. Song, C. Li, P. Xie and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2025–2027 RSC .
X. J. Liu, Q. A. Ye, X. W. Song, Y. W. Zhu, X. L. Cao, Y. M. Liang and F. Zhou, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 515–523 RSC .
Y. Zhu, L. Feng, F. Xia, J. Zhai, M. X. Wan and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Privett, J. Youn, S. A. Hong, J. Lee, J. Han, J. H. Shin and M. H. Schoenfisch, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9597–9601 CAS .
Y. K. Lai, Y. X. Tang, J. J. Gong, D. G. Gong, L. F. Chi, C. J. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420–7426 RSC .
J. D. J. S. Samuel, P. Ruther, H.-P. Frerichs, M. Lehmannc, O. Paulb and J. Ruhe, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 110, 218–224 CrossRef .
C. M. Lu, Y. B. Xie, Y. Yang, M. M.-C. Cheng, C. G. Koh, Y. L. Bai and Y. J. Juang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 994–1001 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Yong-Lai Zhang	Yong-Lai Zhang received his BS (2004) and PhD (2009) from Jilin University, China. After receiving his PhD, he joined the faculty at the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University. In 2011, he worked as a research professor at Yonsei University, Korea. After that, he was awarded a “Hong Kong Scholar” postdoctoral fellow and worked at the Center of Super Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), City University of Hong Kong. His research interests include laser micro-nanofabrication of biomimetic surfaces, graphene-based microdevices and lab-on-a-chip systems.
Hong Xia	Hong Xia received her BS and PhD degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 2001 and 2006. She joined the faculty at the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University in 2006. In 2010, she worked as a CRYST Fellow at the National Institute For Materials Science, Japan. She is currently an associate professor at Jilin University. Her research is focused on the synthesis of optical and magnetic functional materials, and laser based micro-nanofabrication of functional resins and polymers.
Eunkyoung Kim	Eunkyoung Kim received her BS degree in chemistry from Yonsei University in 1982, a master's degree in chemistry from Seoul National University in 1984, and a PhD in chemistry from the University of Houston in 1990. Currently, she is a professor of chemical engineering at Yonsei University, Korea. She has been a part of the program committee for the SPIE-organic 3D material session (since 2005), editor (Macromolecular Research), vice chair of Academic Meetings (Korea Polymer Society), and senior managing director the Korea Society of Imaging Science and Technology (KSIST). She has been the director of the Active Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (APCPI), an engineering center of excellence in Korea. Her work has primarily focused on the development of functional polymers including chromogenic polymers, photopolymers, bio-engineering polymers and charge transport issues.
Hong-Bo Sun	Hong-Bo Sun received his PhD from Jilin University, China, in 1996. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Tokushima, Japan, from 1996 to 2000, and then as an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Physics, Osaka University. He became a project leader in 2001. He was awarded by the Optical Science and Technology Society for his contribution to the technology of femtosecond laser initiated nanofabrication in 2002, and won the Outstanding Young Scientist Award issued by the minister of MEXT (Japan) in 2006. In 2005, he became a professor (Changjiang Scholar) at Jilin University. His research has been focused on laser micro-nanofabrication, and its applications in microoptics, micromachines, microfluids, and microsensors.

 	Fig. 1  Photographs of and the surface structure (scanning electron microscope, SEM images) of various bio-prototypes bearing superhydrophobic surfaces. (a) Photograph of a lotus leaf; (b) SEM image of the lotus leaf surface. Randomly distributed micropapillaes with sizes between 5 and 9 μm can be clearly observed. The inset is a SEM image of a typical micropapillae, fine branch-like nanostructures cover the surface.13 (c) Photograph of a water strider. (d) SEM image of the water strider leg. Oriented and spindly shaped microsetae covered with grooved nanostructures (see the inset) on the surface can be observed.31 (e) Photograph of a Morpho. (f) SEM image of the hierarchical micro- and nanostructures on the surface of butterfly wings. There exist periodic tile-like microstructures and fine lamella-stacking nano-stripes (inset) on each tile of the wings surface.32 (g) Photograph of a red rose, water droplets can pin to the rose petals surface. (h) SEM image of a rose petals surface. The inset is a magnified SEM image of the micropapillae arrays. Periodic pattern nanofolders can also be identified from the inset image.33 (i) Photograph of a dragonfly. (j) SEM image of a dragonflys wing. Randomly distributed micropillars with diameters of 50–80 nm can be observed. (k) Photograph of a peacock whose feathers show beautiful colors and patterns. (l) SEM images of the transverse (top) and longitudinal (bottom) cross-sections of the cortex of the green barbule.34 (Reproduced from ref. 13 and 31–34 with the permission of Wiley, NPG, RSC, ACS and PNAS, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the self-cleaning mechanism. (a) A normal smooth surface, and (b) a superhydrophobic surface. When both of the surfaces are tilted to a certain degree, denoted as θ, the water droplet just passes over the dust on the normal surface, whereas the round droplet on the superhydrophobic surface rolls off the surface with the dust.	 

 	Fig. 3  The ice accumulation process on (a) flat aluminum, (b) smooth fluorinated Si, and (c) microstructured fluorinated Si surfaces. (d) SEM images of exemplary superhydrophobic surfaces with microstructure arrays such as posts, bricks, blades, and honeycombs (scale bars: 10 μm). A stream of droplets at 0 °C was impinged from a 10 cm height at a rate of 0.06 mL s−1 onto the tilted substrate (30°) whose temperature was −10 °C. The white dashed circles indicate the position of droplet impact. Notably, after 10 minutes, ice accumulation could be observed on both the hydrophilic (contact angle, CA ∼0–5°) and normal hydrophobic surfaces (CA ∼115°), whereas no ice was found on the superhydrophobic surface (CA ∼145–170°), indicating its anti-icing property. (Reproduced from ref. 73 with the permission of ACS.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A photograph of water droplet behavior on a color-tuned magnesium alloy substrate. (b) The contact angle of a water droplet (8 μL) on a surface. (c) A photograph of water droplet behavior on a different sample with a larger size. (d) The water droplet contact angle (8 μL) on this color-tuned superhydrophobic magnesium alloy. (Reproduced from ref. 56 with the permission of ACS.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A sequence of images taken during the flow of water (flow speed: 5 mL min−1) through a superhydrophobic tube and an as received tube for comparison. The left tube is a superhydrophobic one. (b–d) Schematic illustrations of the cross-section of laminar flow through a tube channel with different boundary conditions. (b) General no-slip boundary conditions, (c) a half-tube with an air–water interface, and (d) a superhydrophobic boundary condition with composite water–air–solid interfaces. (Reproduced from ref. 66 with the permission of ACS.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical transparency of superhydrophobic films prepared by the coassembly of dual-sized nanoparticles. (a) Photograph of water droplets (7 μL) on the superhydrophobic glass, which was coated with 100 nm SiO2 nanoparticles (0.5 wt%) and 20 nm SiO2 nanoparticles (0.5 wt%) in turn, and treated with fluorosilane for 3 h. (b) UV-Vis spectra of general glass and the superhydrophobic glass coated with SiO2 nanoparticles in different sequences. (c) A photograph of fingers coated with superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers. The bright air layer indicates the hydrophobicity; and the coating layer is transparent as observed from the photo. (Reproduced from ref. 87 and 96 with the permission of ACS.)	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Photographs of (a) nanodome solar cells and (b) flat film solar cells. The inset of (a) is the SEM image of the nanodome solar cells after the deposition of multilayers of materials on nanocones. The scale bar is 500 nm. (c) The dark and light I–V curves of solar cell devices for (c) nanodomes and (d) flat substrates. (Reproduced from ref. 69 with the permission of ACS.)	 

 	Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of the two-beam laser interference system for the fabrication of superhydrophobic graphene films. (b) A photograph of an as-patterned graphene film, the structural color can be observed by the naked eye. (c) An optical microscopic image of the graphene pattern. (d) A schematic illustration of the graphene surface after two-beam laser interference treatment. (e) A SEM image of the superhydrophobic and iridescent graphene film. (Reproduced from ref. 106 with the permission of Wiley.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic illustration of water-droplet transport using curvature-driven switching of a superhydrophobic PDMS film between the pinned state and roll-down state. (b) The process for capturing and releasing a water droplet. A water droplet can be picked up from a superhydrophobic substrate by the flat PDMS pillar array without mass loss owing to its strong adhesive force. When the curvature of the PDMS pillar array surface (top) was increased, the surface superhydrophobicity was tuned to the Cassie state, and the water droplet could be released. (Reproduced from ref. 111 with the permission of Wiley.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of the rice leaf surface. (b) An SEM image of the artificial rice leaves prepared by soft lithography and nanoporous polymer coating. (c–f) Sliding-angle measurements of different artificial rice leaves and the relationship between the groove width and anisotropy with different groove heights (c–f), from 10–60 μm. The insets are the physical models of the water droplets on the films with different groove arrays. (Reproduced from ref. 125 with the permission of Wiley.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) An SEM image of the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coated stainless mesh film with an average pore diameter of about 115 μm. The inset is the shape of a water droplet on the coating mesh film with a contact angle of ∼156°. (b) Spreading and permeating behavior of a diesel oil droplet on the coating mesh film. The diesel oil spreads quickly on the coating mesh film and flows through (within only 240 ms). (c–e) The separation process of n-hexane (HT) and water by using nanoporous polydivinylbenzene. (c) A mixture of HT and water. The inset is the SEM image of the nanoporous polymer. (d) The addition of superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers into the HT–water mixture, and the insets are the water and oil contact angles on the nanoporous polymer. (e) After separation, the HT adsorbed by the nanoporous polymers was separated from water. The inset is the regenerated nanoporous polymers and the desorbed HT, indicating the reusable property of the superhydrophobic nanoporous polymers. (Reproduced from ref. 133 and 137 with the permission of Wiley and Elsevier Ltd.)	 


Self-cleaning	Randomly distributed micropapillaes (5–9 μm) with nano-branches (120 nm)	Lotus leaves	
13

Order nanodome structure (450 nm spacing)	Ag/TCD/amorphous silicon/TCD	
69

Anti-biofouling	Periodic macroporous structure (pore size: 170–240 nm)	Polymer (ETPTA, SR 454)	
71

Disordered nanostructures	Fluorinated silica colloids	
161

Icephobicity	Periodic staggered bricks/posts/blades/honeycombs (1–5 μm wall, 4–40 μm pitch)	Si substrate with FAS	
73

Disordered rough structure	Nanoparticle–polymer composites	
51

Anti-fogging	Periodic micro-hemisphere arrays (26 μm in diameter)	Mosquito compound eye	
72

Randomly distributed nanobelts	Titania/FAS	
162

Waterproof coating	Disordered nanoporous structure	Polydivinylbenzene	
96

Flat thin layer	Fluoropolymer	
163

Anti-corrosion	Self aligned nano- and microsheets (50–1500 nm long, 20–50 nm thick)	Magnesium alloy AZ31	
56

Randomly distributed silica particles (50 nm)	Aluminium foil/silica (FAS)	
58

Fluidic drag reduction	Randomly distributed silver nanoparticles (200–500 nm in size)	Silver	
68

Cu nanoribbon (1 μm × 100 nm × 6 nm in size)	Copper with perfluorocarbon coating	
66

Transparency	Disordered nanoporous polymer (globule size 45–486 nm)	Polydivinylbenzene	
83

Co-assembled silica nanoparticles (100 and 20 nm)	Silica with FAS	
87

Anti-reflection	Order nanodome structure (450 nm spacing)	Ag/TCD/p-i-n a-Si/TCD	
69

Dual-scale hierarchical structure	Perfluoropolyethers	
70

Structural color	Periodic grating structure (2 μm) with layered nanostructure	Graphene	
106

Periodic nanoneedle arrays (2.5 μm period, 300 nm–3 μm in height)	Photopolymer (NOA 61) with FAS	
105

Droplet transportation	Aligned polystyrene nanotube layer (∼200 nm in diameter)	Polystyrene	
109

Micro-pillar arrays with a period of 2 μm (curvature)	PDMS	
111

Anisotropy	One-dimensional parallel nanopattern (1500 nm pitch, ∼500 nm in height)	Photopolymer	
126

Microgroove arrays coated with nanoporous polymer powder	PDMS/polydivinylbenzene	
125

Oil–water separation	Disordered nanoporous structure	Polydivinylbenzene	
137

Sponge-like porous structure with nanoparticles on the surface	Polyurethane/copper	
138

Water supporting force	Copper particles (<400 mm) following electroless deposition of Ag	Copper/silver powder	
140

Superhydrophobic valve	Microfeature treated with fluorine-plasma	PMMA	
164

Surface microfluids	Glass microchannel patterned with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) coating	Glass/OTS surface	
117

Superamphiphobicity	Disordered porous structure	Silica/FAS	
97


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
