Recent progress in conductive polymers for advanced fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00745E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00745E
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1140-1163Recent progress in conductive polymers for advanced fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices

        
          
            Xiaoqin 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojuan 
            Chen†
b, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoyu 
            Jin
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Panpan 
            Li
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Dan 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University, Chengdu, 610106, China
bCollege of Chemical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China. E-mail: xiaodan@scu.edu.cn
cCenter for Electrochemistry, Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
dMaterials Science and Engineering Program and Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: lpp0428@utexas.edu
Received 
      25th September 2020
    , Accepted 23rd October 2020First published on 27th October 2020AbstractOver the past decades, flexible and wearable energy storage devices have received tremendous interest due to the development of smart electronic products, such as Apple Watch, Google Glass, and sport wristbands. Fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices (FEESDs) derived from fibrous electrodes are standing out as a result of the excellent flexibility and breathability compared with the planar counterparts. Textiles and fabrics can be simply achieved by spinning and weaving FEESDs, which perfectly match with an arbitrary uneven and mobile surface, revealing enormous potentialities in wearable electronics. Combining mechanical features with the electrically conductive properties and biocompatibility, conductive polymers (CPs) have emerged as a promising candidate for smart textile products including medical textiles, protective clothing, touch screen displays, and flexible fabric power supplies. In this context, this review summarizes the material design of CPs for fibrous electrodes and provides a critical discussion on their applications in flexible energy storage devices. Meanwhile, basic principles are briefly presented, including the conduction mechanism of conductive polymers, fibrous electrode design, and the evaluation of the electrochemical/mechanical performance for fibrous devices. Last, possibilities and challenges for the development of CP derived FEESDs are outlined as well.
Xiaoqin Li
Xiaoqin Li received her PhD degree in new energy materials and devices from Sichuan University in China in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Dan Xiao. She is currently an associate professor at Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University. Her current research interests focus on nanomaterials for energy storage.
Xiaojuan Chen
Xiaojuan Chen received her BS degree in chemical engineering and technology from Panzhihua University and her MS degree in chemical engineering from Sichuan University. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree at Sichuan University, where she aims at developing 3D transition metal materials for high-efficient electrochemical energy conversion and storage.
Zhaoyu Jin
Zhaoyu Jin obtained his BS degree in chemistry from Sichuan University and also received a PhD in analytical chemistry in 2017. He is currently a postdoc at the University of Texas at Austin. His research focuses on understanding fundamental properties of single-atom/molecule electrocatalysts.
Panpan Li
Panpan Li received her BS degree in chemistry, MEng in environmental engineering, and PhD in environmental science under the supervision of Prof. Dan Xiao from Sichuan University, China. She is currently a postdoc scholar with Prof. Guihua Yu at the University of Texas at Austin. Her current research interests focus on hydrogel-derived nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.
Dan Xiao
Dan Xiao is currently a professor of analytical chemistry at Department of Chemical Engineering in Sichuan University in China. He received his PhD in analytical chemistry from Hunan University in 1994. His research interests focus on chemical sensors and biosensors, chromatography and electrophoresis separation technology, chemical education, and energy storage and conversion. Prof. Xiao has published over 300 papers and filed more than 10 patents.
1 Introduction
As the heart of “Internet of Things” (IoT), wearable and portable intelligent electronics have been emerging as irreplaceable smart products and have revolutionized our lifestyle, revealing considerable potential in health and environmental monitoring devices, portable military equipment, and communications.1,2 To power these electronic devices, energy supply units are required to demonstrate advantageous features of flexibility, light weight, miniaturization, comfortability, durability, and high specific energy/power densities.3 Traditional planar energy storage devices can easily deform under bending or stretching states via constructing flexible film-shaped electrodes, but mostly fail under twisting, torsional, or other severe mechanical deformations due to the rigid and bulky structure.
Benefiting from the minimized size and light weight, fiber-shaped configurations outperform the planar counterparts in terms of superior flexibility, great comfort, high compatibility with traditional textiles, and easy integration with diverse devices. FEESDs can adapt to various mechanical deformations because of the large length-to-diameter (L/D) ratio, offering outstanding bending, twisting, and stretching ability. The superior flexibility endows FEESDs with high compatibility with industrial fabrics, such as yarns and cotton cloth, guaranteeing their great possibilities for practical applications. The fabric products knitted from FEESDs provide a large surface area and permeable structure for air and moisture, making them more comfortable than most planar structures with impervious features. More importantly, the fiber-shaped structure enables feasible integration with multiple functions, such as piezoelectricity and solar cells for self-powering,4–6 and sensors for monitoring the environment.7,8 While great efforts have been devoted to developing FEESDs, it is still challenging to achieve satisfactory fiber-shaped electronics with favorable electrochemical/mechanical properties. The relatively inferior energy storage ability is mainly ascribed to the high internal resistance caused by their large L/D ratio. In practice, fibrous electrodes are difficult to construct and more challenges remain in the following assembly of fiber-shaped devices, such as short circuits and encapsulation. Therefore, it is still far from satisfactory for FEESDs to achieve large-scale energy fabrics.
Various active materials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), conductive polymers, and transition-metal oxides, have been frequently employed to fabricate energy storage fibers for constructing fiber-shaped supercapacitors (SCs) and batteries.9–12 CPs have been receiving great interest for designing fibrous electrodes as a consequence of their high electrical conductivity (up to 105 S cm−1), light weight, large capacitance, good flexibility, easy processing, and low cost.18 Typical intrinsically conductive polymers include polyacetylene (PA), polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PTh), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) (Fig. 1a). The π-conjugated structure allows the delocalization of electrons, enabling high electrical conductivity via introducing dopants. Besides, conductive polymer composites via mixing insulating polymers with conductive fillers are extensively applied in FEESDs due to their improved mechanical properties and electrical conductivity. Thanks to the enhanced π–π stacking and hydrophobic attraction, PEDOT can be prepared as a self-standing electrode for fibrous supercapacitors (Fig. 1b).13,19–21 Among them, PANI and PPy directly act as capacitive materials to store energy mainly via redox reactions, which are generally mixed with graphene or CNTs to form composite fibers combining both features of toughness and high capacitance (Fig. 1c–e).9,14,15 Besides, CPs also function as conductive interconnectors or conductive binders,22 active materials,23–25 and conductive substrates23,26 in the application of fiber-shaped batteries.
 Fig. 1  The evolution of smart textile products originating from conductive polymers. (a) The category of CPs. (b–e) Fibrous electrodes derived from PEDOT:PSS, PANI/rGO, PPy@CNT@urethane, and MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT. (f–h) The typical configuration of FEESDs: parallel, twisted, and coaxial structures. (i–k) The illustration of CP-based smart textile products. (b) Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (c and j) Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Wiley-VCH. (d) Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Elsevier. (e and g) Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH. (h) Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (i) Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the American Chemical Society. (k) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the American Chemical Society. 
Though quite a few papers have summarized CP-derived flexible energy storage electronics,27–31 comprehensive reviews related to fiber-shaped devices based on these materials are lacking. Thus, it is of great importance to review the basic principles, latest advances, and remaining challenges in this field. In this review, we introduced CP-based FEESDs from material design to recent advancements in supercapacitors and batteries, especially focusing on the conduction mechanism, material/configuration design principles, and detailed electrochemical/mechanical evaluation of FEESDs. Finally, opportunities and challenges of CP-derived FEESDs are discussed to provide possible solutions for further improvements. We hope that this critical review paves the way for the material design, structural optimization, and standard performance evaluation of conducting polymers in next-generation energy storage products.
2 Material design of conductive polymers for fibrous electrodes
2.1 Conductive polymers and conduction mechanism
Conductive polymers have been extensively employed as active materials for flexible and wearable energy storage materials due to their high electrical conductivity, large capacitance, good flexibility, easy processing, good affinity to other materials, low cost, and so on.30,32,33 According to the conduction mechanism, CPs can be divided into two subgroups. The first is intrinsically conductive polymers, also known as conjugated polymers, possessing broad conductivity (10−10–105 S cm−1) and environmental stability but mostly inferior mechanical properties.33,34Fig. 2a shows the chemical structures of representative conjugated polymers, such as PANI, PPy, PTh, and PEDOT. The others are defined as extrinsically conductive polymers or conductive polymer composites, which are prepared by blending conductive fillers with an insulating polymer matrix. The conductive fillers include carbon black, carbon nanotubes, graphene, metal powder, and intrinsically CPs described above.33 Conductive polymer composites have the advantages of good electrical (up to 103 S cm−1) and thermal conductivity, improved mechanical properties, and corrosion resistance, which can be self-standing materials for flexible devices.
 Fig. 2  Conductive polymers and the conduction mechanism. (a) Chemical structures of typical CPs. (b) The schematic illustration of the conduction mechanism for a conjugated backbone. (c) The conductivity range of polymers compared to other materials’ conductivity. (b) Reproduced from ref. 35 under the terms of the Creative Commons CC-BY license. (c) Reproduced from ref. 36 under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/). 
A conjugated bond is the prerequisite to intrinsically conduct electrons for conductive polymers, which involves alternating single and double bonds as indicated in Fig. 2b. Here, localized σ bonds as strong chemical bonds are responsible for the structure stability, while localized π bonds allow electrons to freely delocalize in the polymer backbones. Another essential factor for the high conductivity is a dopant, such as H+, ClO4−, or poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PSS), which donates or accepts electrons to/from polymer chains and delocalizes electrons in the form of polarons or bipolarons.35,37 The delocalization of π electrons into a conduction band gives rise to the metallic behavior, achieving a high conductivity up to ca. 105 S cm−1 from Fig. 2c.36 But, the conductivity of undoped conductive polymers, such as pristine PANI, is lower than 10−10 S cm−1, which is located in the range of insulators.34 PPy is a typical p-type conductive polymer that contains positively charged dopants. For example, by means of doping and cross-linking with copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium (CuPcTs), PPy reveals a conductivity of ca. 7.8 S cm−1, increasing by two orders of magnitude compared to pristine PPy (7 × 10−2 S cm−1).38,39 Here, CuPcTs as the counterions (negatively charged ions) can be entrapped into the polymer matrix to enhance the interchain charge transport of PPy, resulting in much improved conductivity. With proper dopants introduced, PPy can reach a conductivity of ca. 7.5 × 103 S cm−1.35 PANI and PEDOT can conduct electrons via both p-doping upon oxidization and n-doping upon reduction.40 PANI in the emeraldine base form has a low conductivity of 10−10 S cm−1, while its oxidative state is highly conductive with ca. 103 S cm−1.33 PSS is commonly used as dopants to balance positive charges on PEDOT and the resulting PEDOT:PSS shows tunable conductivity from 0.2 to 5400 S cm−1.41 Thanks to the high conductivity, satisfactory mechanical properties, good adhesion, and biocompatibility, PPy, PANI, and PEDOT:PSS are applied in a variety of fields, such as microelectronics, neural tissue engineering, drug delivery, catalysis, sensors, and flexible energy storage devices.42–45
2.2 Conductive polymers for fibrous electrodes
Fibers consisting of polymers allow remarkable flexibility as a result of mechanical features of molecular chains. With the substantially improved conductivity of CPs as discussed above, one would expect them to be promising electrode materials, particularly for self-standing fibers without a current collector. However, according to the mechanism of charge storage for CPs, their structures are likely to suffer from shrinking and swelling issues during the charge/discharge process. Therefore, pristine conductive polymers show relatively low mechanical stability as electrodes, which is not beneficial to wearable device assembly.46 To address this issue, considerable literature has reported 3D cross-linked CPs as emerging materials for fibrous electrodes.47,48 Among them, a 3D cross-linked CP, PEDOT:PSS, has received growing interest. PEDOT:PSS is a typical core–shell structure consisting of a hydrophobic PEDOT+ core and hydrophilic PSS− shell. Three major molecular interactions exist in PEDOT:PSS, including electrostatic attraction between PEDOT and PSS chains, π–π stacking of PEDOT chains, and interchain entanglement between long PSS chains.47,49 Specifically, π–π stacking and hydrophobic attraction are mainly responsible for generating an interconnected 3D network, resulting in self-standing structures with arbitrary shapes.13 By taming the molecular interactions and the content ratio of PEDOT and PSS, the flexibility, conductivity, and electrochemical properties of PEDOT:PSS fibrous electrodes can be designed. For example, Zhang et al. applied a 4-dodecylbenzenesulfonic (DBSA) acidic surfactant to weaken the electrostatic attraction between PEDOT and PSS to produce RT-PEDOT:PSS hydrogel fibers with a good conductivity of ∼10−1 S cm−1 for bioelectronic devices.47
The mass production of fibers is important for the development of fibrous devices. For example, Yuan et al.19 developed a new coagulation bath with CaCl2 to prepare PEDOT:PSS fibers (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  Pure CPs for fibrous electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of the wet-spinning processes. (b) Digital photograph of a PEDOT:PSS fiber. (c) SEM image of the wet spun fiber tied in a knot. (d) Schematic illustration of the re-arrangement mechanism of PEDOT-S:PSS fibers in sulfuric acid. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PEDOT:PSS fibers by microfluidic spinning. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (e) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Wiley-VCH. 
The positively charged PEDOT would bond with Cl− and the negatively charged PSS would bond with Ca2+ to form fibers upon the injection of the polymer. The produced PEDOT:PSS fibers showed a low resistance of 100 Ω cm−1. In addition, the method permits the fabrication of ultralong fibers with a length of up to several meters as demonstrated in Fig. 3b. Also, the prepared fiber could be tied into a knot without cracking (Fig. 3c) due to the good dispersion of the PEDOT:PSS solution with lower concentration. The assembled PEDOT:PSS fiber-based solid-state YSCs showed a high specific areal capacitance of 119 mF cm−2, and could be charged/discharged at an impressively high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 (86.9 mF cm−2). Besides, Wang et al.20 prepared an all-in-one fiber by wet-spinning of PEDOT:PSS and a post-spinning treatment with sulfuric acid (PEDOT-S:PSS), as shown in Fig. 3d. Through the control of the treatment time, the electrical conductivity and tensile strength could be tuned. As such these two parameters showed a maximum of 1771.8 S cm−1 and 112.7 MPa. The symmetric PEDOT-S:PSS fiber-shaped supercapacitor shows a high voltage output of 1.6 V, and a high areal energy density of 8.3 μW h cm−2 with a maximum power density of 400 μW cm−2. In other work, Guo et al.21 applied the multi-flow microfluidics stratagem to spin conductive PEDOT:PSS microfibers. As shown in Fig. 3e, the authors designed multiple injection channels to ensure the continuous spinning of microfibers comprised of PEDOT:PSS cores and alginate shells. The alginate hydrogel shells were quickly formed by a gelation reaction, and the PEDOT:PSS cores were produced in the hollow alginate hydrogel shell when the precursor solutions of the shells and cores were injected into the channels. The PEDOT:PSS microfibers synthesized by this multi-flow microfluidics strategy showed high conductivity and flexibility, which implied that the microfibers could display significant potential in biomedical engineering.
2.3 Conductive polymer composites for fibrous electrodes
To further improve the mechanical and electrochemical properties of CP-based energy storage devices, carbon and its derived materials, as well as transition-metal compounds, are commonly used to form conductive polymer composites.50–52 While carbon-based materials can show excellent conductivity and good physical strength, their theoretical specific capacity is unfavorable due to the charge absorption/desorption mechanism of the electrode/interface reaction in principle.50,53 Instead, transition-metal compounds usually exhibit good electrochemical performance with high theoretical capacity but suffer from low conductivity.54,55 As such, CP composites consisting of two or more other materials can combine the advantages of each component, greatly promoting the performance for flexible energy storage devices.54–56
To date, several types of carbons have been studied as supports or active materials as fiber electrodes including graphene,57 carbon,58 carbon nanotubes,59 and their composite fibers.60 Graphene fibers are assembled with 2D graphene oxide (GO) followed by thermal treatment and wet spinning. Due to its multiple functional sites, including epoxide groups, phenol hydroxyl, and carboxylic acids, GO can provide an ideal platform to cross-link polymers.11 Besides, the conductivity of GO or the corresponding composite fibers can be further improved by chemical, thermal, or light treatment as a consequence of the formation of reduced GO (rGO). Graphene fibers also show a unique geometry, high specific surface area, good mechanical properties, light weight, and remarkable chemical stability.57 Thus, graphene fibers are widely used in energy storage devices. For example, Li et al.9 reported a fiber-shaped electrode, which was fabricated by self-assembly of PANI and GO hydrogels (Fig. 4a). Compared with pure rGO fibers, this composite fiber exhibited an improved capacitance and strength ability. The PANI/GO hybrid hydrogels were produced through strong macromolecular interactions involving hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking, and electrostatic effects among phytic acid, PANI, and GO. After being assembled from the crosslinked gel electrolyte, the fiber-shaped PANI/GO supercapacitor can be remolded to an elastic and shape-memory spring-like structure. The excellent mechanical flexibility of the assembled symmetric supercapacitor indicated that this all-hydrogel-state device had the potential to construct integrated energy storage textiles.
 Fig. 4  CP-based composites for fibrous electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogel formation and the further shaping/reduction process. (b) The fabrication of the CNY@PPy@rGO core–shell fiber electrode. (c) The fabrication process of MnO2@PEDOT:PSS@OCNTF. (d) The preparation of porous hollow conductive fibers (PHCFs). (a) Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Wiley-VCH. (b) Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (c) Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Elsevier. (d) Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon fibers, a commercial product, are usually manufactured from the pyrolysis of polymer precursors. Considerable previous literature has reported carbon fibers as a kind of conductive substrate for energy storage devices because of the high conductivity, remarkable electronic and thermal stability, and good flexibility. For example, Zhou and co-workers described carbon fibers as flexible substrates in all-solid-state supercapacitors with high performance.56,58 Additionally, carbon fibers, derived from electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofibers, can be also used as active materials, which has attracted much attention to the community of flexible supercapacitors.63,64 Chen et al.59 fabricated carbon nanofiber yarns (CNYs) from electrospun PAN nanofibers followed by carbonization, and subsequently used them as flexible substrates to produce composite binder-free electrodes for all-solid-state symmetric supercapacitors (Fig. 4b). The CNY showed a high specific surface area attributed to the interweaved porous and tangled nanofibers. To improve the capacitance and cyclic stability, the authors further designed a CNY@PPy@rGO fiber electrode by electrochemical deposition of PPy and immersion in GO solution.
CNT fibers suffer from intrinsic hydrophobicity, which results in inferior electrochemical performance. Several reports have shown that functional CNT fibers can be a promising candidate for fiber-shaped electrodes with good electrochemical properties. For example, Zhang et al.61 synthesized functional CNT fibers by simple electrochemical activation in H2SO4 electrolyte, which is beneficial for the adsorption of counter charged species to yield a higher specific mass loading of active materials (Fig. 4c). A hierarchically structured positive electrode (MnO2@PEDOT:PSS@OCNTF) was fabricated based on the functional CNT fibers (OCNTFs), and then coupled with a MoS2@CNTF negative electrode to assemble fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitors with a high energy density of 125.37 μW h cm−2. Similarly, Zhang et al.62 reported a conductive polymer composite fiber-shaped electrode (PHCF@PANI) with a porous and hollow structure by a multiple dip-coating method and further porosity engineering of the solubility of the polymer (Fig. 4d). This electrode showed a high specific surface area and good mechanical properties. The nanoporous structure originated from the intertwined CNTs and the networks of polymer chains. The PHCF@PANI electrode could load a high amount of PANI (9 mg cm−2) as the active material, which effectively improved the specific capacitance and the energy density of the assembled fibrous symmetric supercapacitor.
3 Configuration design of fiber-shaped devices
Benefiting from light weight, excellent flexibility, and small size, fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices can adapt well to irregular surfaces to overcome frequent mechanical deformations, such as bending, stretching, and twisting. In FEESDs, the fibrous electrodes, electrolytes, separators, and packages are all required to demonstrate flexibility and stretchability. Except for the fibrous electrodes mentioned in the previous section, another important component of FEESDs is the gel-state or quasi-solid-state electrolyte serving as both the separator and ion conductive membrane as indicated in Fig. 5a. Compared with solid inorganic electrolytes (e.g. ceramics, glasses) and liquid electrolytes, gel electrolytes are more easily coated on fibrous electrodes and sealed into wearable packages, giving much better flexibility and stability. Generally, gel electrolytes are prepared by mixing liquid electrolytes (e.g. acids or alkalis in water for aqueous energy storage devices, Li salts in an organic solution for Li-ion batteries) and polymers (e.g. polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyethylene oxide (PEO)).65,66 Gel electrolytes not only provide good mechanical strength and high ionic conductivity (10−4–10−2 S cm−1) but also act as a protection layer to prevent the exfoliation of active materials during large mechanical deformations. Besides, encapsulation is another essential step for fabricating fiber-shaped devices, which can effectively prevent water and oxygen from destroying the electrolytes and active materials, thus prolonging the service life. Compared to other configurations, fiber-shaped devices are required to have remarkable flexibility and lightweight features due to their high curvature and mini sizes. Currently, polymer packaging materials (e.g. heat-shrinkable tubes, PET thin films, and silicone rubber) have been frequently employed to encapsulate fibrous electronics in the lab. But encapsulation probably causes considerably increased volume and weight of devices and accordingly deteriorates the overall performance. Moreover, these polymer packages are usually used on a small scale in the laboratory, and they may be hard to extend to industrial production. Thus, it is still challenging to explore more effective encapsulation strategies to meet the requirement of electronic textiles woven from FEESDs.
 Fig. 5  Configurations of FEESDs. (a) Main structures and cross section of various FEESDs. The assembly of (b) parallel, (c) single twisted, (d) coaxial, (e) double twisted, and (f) rolled type FEESDs. (b) Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (d) Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH. (e) Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission. Copyright (2015) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier. 
According to the configuration (Fig. 5a), FEESDs can be simply categorized as parallel, twisted, or coaxial structure. Fig. 5b demonstrates the typical assembly of parallel supercapacitors reported by Li et al.67 Specifically, MnO2 nanoparticles were precipitated on an oxidized carbon nanotube fiber via the reduction of potassium permanganate, producing a MnO2/oxidized CNT fibrous electrode. After that, two identical fibrous electrodes separated by a LiCl-PVA gel electrolyte were placed in parallel on a pre-stretched poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) film, forming a stretchable fiber-shaped supercapacitor. Constructing such a parallel structure is a facile and straightforward approach to scale up integrated fibrous devices in series or parallel to achieve high-voltage output. However, this structure requires a flexible substrate to support the device, which may hinder the practical application in textile products. Li et al. reported a parallel fibrous supercapacitor based on PANI/rGO fibrous electrodes and a glutaraldehyde-crosslinked PVA hydrogel electrolyte without using a flexible substrate.9 The hydroxyl groups of PVA can react with the aldehyde groups of glutaraldehyde under acidic conditions to yield acetal or hemiacetal crosslinking points, thereby improving the mechanical strength of the pristine gel-state PVA electrolyte. This all-hydrogel-state fibrous SC was fabricated to be a spring-like structure and even integrated SC yarns with high elasticity and shape-memory.
Double twisted FEESDs indicate a similar structural feature to the parallel configuration (the cross-sections in Fig. 5a). For example, Zhai et al. fabricated all-carbon solid-state yarn supercapacitors using activated carbon loaded carbon fibers, which were assembled via gel electrolyte coating and fibrous electrode twisting steps (Fig. 5e).68 Without using any external substrates to hold the fibrous electrodes, the double twisted structure is relatively simplified and minimized in contrast to the parallel structure. It can be scaled up by a commercial rotation translation setup to realize practical application in wearable electronics.69,70 The overall performance of devices can be greatly determined by the configuration. As indicated in the cross-sections of parallel and double twisted FEESDs, the fibers located at the center of the devices exhibit the shortest distance, while the fibers positioned at the outside of the devices show the largest distance. The increased distance between the positive and negative electrode suggests a rise in the mean ionic diffusion pathway, leading to high internal resistance and low power density.71
Due to the relatively low ion mobility of a gel electrolyte compared with that of a liquid electrolyte, the distance between fibrous electrodes in FEESDs should be carefully taken into account to optimize the overall performance of devices. In contrast, single twisted and coaxial FEESDs demonstrate a more uniform interelectrode distance, showing efficient charge/ion transfer. A single twisted fibrous Ni/Zn battery reported by Li et al. was constructed via twining a Mn/NiOx fiber on a KOH/PVA gel electrolyte coated Zn anode (Fig. 5c).72 This configuration can resolve the easy detachment of two twisted fibers that is usually encountered by the double twisted structure, maintaining the internal resistance and effectively avoiding short circuit. A coaxial FEESD is a multilayer structure where a gel-state electrolyte is sandwiched between a core fibrous electrode and an outer electrode layer. As shown in Fig. 5d, a coaxial Al–air battery reported by Xu et al. was assembled through a layer-by-layer procedure.73 Specifically, a flexible and stretchable Al spring was firstly coated with PVA hydrogel electrolyte, which was sequentially wrapped with a cross-stacked Ag-containing CNT sheet air cathode, producing a core/shell structure. Given the large interfacial area and the intimate contact between the two electrodes, the coaxial fibrous supercapacitor can deliver a high specific capacitance that is ca. 11 times that of its twisted counterpart, which benefits from the more efficient ion/charge transport with lower internal resistance.75 However, the coaxial architecture is technically difficult to use to achieve a multi-layer device with a high length-to-diameter ratio.
To address issues originating from the limited effective surface of two fibrous electrodes, FEESDs are also designed to be rolled and alternative structures with enhanced energy storage capacity via constructing a uniform and minimum distance between the two electrodes. Moreover, due to the technical challenges raised by coaxial FEESDs, Yu et al. reported a facile and simple approach to achieve a rolled fibrous supercapacitor.74 From Fig. 5f, the roll-type structure can be obtained by simply rolling up two polyaniline-coated carbon fiber (PANI/CF) sheets separated by PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte. This design enables a uniform distance, intimate contact, and a large interfacial area between the positive and negative electrodes, offering a more efficient pathway for rapid charge/ion transport and enhanced specific capacitance compared to the parallel and twisted architectures. The alternative configuration is an ideal option, where positive and negative fibrous electrode bundles are uniformly distributed in fiber-shaped devices and are isolated by electrolytes with minimized size and extremely intimate contact. However, it is technically difficult because of the obvious possibility of short circuit during the assembly process.
4 Evaluation parameters of fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices
Although quite a few papers have reviewed the great progress in flexible energy storage devices over the past decades, a search of the literature reveals few studies which systematically organized important parameter evaluations, particularly for fiber-based supercapacitors and batteries. In this section, we discuss the most critical descriptors for benchmarking FEESDs and approaches to obtain them appropriately. As presented in Fig. 6, the evaluation of a fiber-shaped device is mainly divided into electrochemical and mechanical assessments. For the electrochemical properties, several parameters, including the capacitance/capacity, rate capacity, energy/power density, etc., are commonly acquired to determine the energy storage ability of a single fibrous electrode or a fiber-shaped device. In terms of mechanical evaluation, the capacitance/capacity retention is normally taken into account to show the possible application of the assembled fibrous device under mechanical deformations, such as bending, twisting, and stretching states. Apart from the above evaluation criteria, some key factors mainly responsible for these parameters are summarized in the following section as well.
 Fig. 6  The illustration of the essential parameters and corresponding affecting factors for evaluating FEESDs. 
4.1 Evaluation of the electrochemical performance
Due to the high theoretical capacitance and satisfactory electrical conductivity, conductive polymers have been widely used as the active materials in fiber-shaped supercapacitors. To evaluate the energy storage ability of a supercapacitor, cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) are frequently conducted on an electrochemical workstation. CV tests are suitable to simply examine the charge storage mechanisms for a fibrous electrode from the shape of the CV curves via a three-electrode configuration. For a typical electric double layer capacitor, the shape of the CV curves is close to a rectangle. For some pseudocapacitance active materials, obvious redox peaks appear in the CV curves, indicating that the energy storage ability is mainly from a faradaic process on the electrode surface. A SC's capacitance (CSC) can be calculated based on the CV curves plotted as current (A) vs. potential (V) according to eqn (1)50 (1)where I, v, and ΔV are the response current, scan rate, and the operating voltage (V), respectively.
GCD tests are regarded as an accurate and versatile approach to characterize energy storage devices, which describe the charge and discharge behavior of a device or a fibrous electrode at a specific current. The resulting GCD curve is a plot of the potential (E) vs. time (s). The capacitance can be further obtained from the measured parameters according to eqn (2).51 Besides, cyclic GCD and CV tests are also applied to evaluate the electrochemical stability by comparing the capacitance after thousands of cycles with that of the first cycle. The electrochemical stability represents how well a supercapacitor maintains the energy storage ability during cycling. In general, the higher the electrochemical stability, the better the performance of the supercapacitor. Another important aspect related to the energy storage behavior is the rate capacity, which can be calculated from GCD or CV curves by comparing the capacity at a high charge/discharge current density or scan rate with that at a low value. The rate capacity can be used to assess the fast charge/discharge performance of supercapacitors, which is significant for practical application. (2)Here, I and t are the discharge current and the discharge time, respectively.
The energy density (E) and power density (P) are the most important parameters for the application of supercapacitors, which can be calculated from eqn (3) and (4), (3) (4)
The energy density demonstrates the amount of energy stored in a device per unit mass or volume (W h kg−1 or W h L−1), and the power density describes the time rate of energy transfer in energy storage and delivery (W kg−1 or W L−1). The energy density is determined by the capacitance and operating voltage of supercapacitors, especially by the operating voltage, which can be increased by fabricating asymmetric devices and utilizing non-aqueous electrolyte.15,76 A supercapacitor with high energy and power density is expected to be more useful for applications. A Ragone plot is commonly applied to compare a variety of devices, where specific energy densities are plotted versus power densities.
EIS is conducted to explore the conductivity of electrodes or devices, the mass transfer, charge transfer, and charge storage mechanisms. Moreover, it can be used to estimate the capacitance and energy/power density.3,77,78 EIS tests measure the impedance of supercapacitors as a function of frequency at a steady-state potential. The measured data are usually expressed in a Nyquist plot or a Bode plot. The Nyquist plot shows a real part and an imaginary part, which can obtain the resistance of devices, including the equivalent series resistance (RES), the charge transfer, and the ionic diffusion resistance. The equivalent series resistance includes the electrolyte resistance, the intrinsic resistance of the electrode, and the contact resistance between the active materials and current collectors. The charge transfer and ionic diffusion resistance are directly related to the capacitance of supercapacitors. Thus, to decrease the resistance of a device, the electrodes, electrolytes, and configurations are required to be carefully controlled.
For batteries, electrochemical characterization methods are similar to supercapacitors. Their energy storage can be calculated by the following eqn (5), (5)where the capacity (CB) is used. Except for the capacity, rate capacity, cyclic stability, energy density, and power density, another parameter (C-rate) is used to evaluate the electrochemical properties of batteries, which is an approach to characterize the rate when the battery is being charged/discharged. The C-rate can be defined as the required theoretical hours for the full charge or discharge of a battery, reported as nC. For example, 1/4C describes the battery requiring 4 h to reach a fully charged state, while 4C states that the charging time is 15 min.
For FEESDs, the specific capacitance/capacity (Cs) is the measured capacitance/capacity normalized by the whole weight/length/volume of devices (S) according to eqn (6). The energy and power density can also be calculated by the same approach. The energy storage based on S can help researchers design a full textile with a desired electrochemical property. Thus, it is more significant than areal properties, which are calculated from the geometric area of active materials.79 (6)
To assemble satisfactory FEESDs with high electrochemical performance, some factors, such as the active materials, electrolyte, and charge balance of the electrodes, should be precisely optimized. The rational design of CP-based fiber electrodes in terms of compositions and morphologies greatly affects the overall electrochemical performance of the assembled fibrous devices via further improving the electrical conductivity and maximizing the utilization of active materials.16,61,62
The active materials show a significant effect on the electrochemical performance of FEESDs. More active materials usually mean a higher volumetric or length specific capacity of the electrodes. Some strategies, such as forming free-standing configuration and step-by-step deposition, have been used to fabricate fiber-shaped electrodes with the improved loading of active materials.9,80 However, the excessive content of active materials may decrease the effective reaction ratio for energy storage, especially for inner active materials of fiber-shaped electrodes, which will cause a loss of capacity. It is important to adjust the relationship between the content of active materials and the comprehensive electrochemical properties of FEESDs. Considering these issues, some researchers have developed porous electrodes,62 which can increase the contact of the electrode and electrolyte to obtain a fiber-shaped electrode with high electrochemical properties.
Suitable electrolytes are also critical for fiber-shaped energy storage devices. It is directly related to the electrochemical cyclic stability, rate capacity, capacity, and energy density of the device. Traditional liquid electrolytes include aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes, and ionic electrolytes. Among them, aqueous electrolytes have various merits, such as high safety, low cost, and an environmentally friendly nature, which are generally applied in supercapacitors. However, these liquid electrolytes are difficult to load on fibrous devices, resulting in leakage and short-circuit issues. Thus, gel electrolytes, which consist of polymer matrixes and ionic conductive additives, have been used to overcome these issues by providing considerable ionic conductivity and acting as flexible separators. Most of these gel electrolytes possess high stability and physical flexibility, which can meet the requirements of fiber-shaped energy storage devices for wearable applications.
The charge balance of electrodes also greatly affects the energy storage performance of devices, especially for asymmetric supercapacitors. The principle for the charge matching of electrodes is charge balance theory (q+ = q−). But the charge balance of electrodes is difficult to accurately estimate due to the discrepant reaction kinetics between two different electrodes in electrochemical measurements. Some reports have studied the effect of the matching degree on the electrochemical performance. For instance, Zheng et al.81 pointed out that the optimal mass ratio of the electrode in asymmetric cells was the essential factor for achieving high energy density. Similarly, Li et al.82 studied the relationship between the performance parameters of an asymmetric electrochemical capacitor (energy density, power density, specific capacitance, and operating voltage) and the mass ratio of the electrodes. Based on these studies, Xiao's group developed a delicate multi-electrode system to investigate the inter-restricted behavior during the charge/discharge process.54,58,83 From these fundamental studies, we were aware that excess active materials on the negative electrode could motivate the positive electrode and then increase the capacitance of the asymmetric device. The potential contributions of the positive and negative electrodes in asymmetric supercapacitors were also studied by this real-time method.
4.2 Evaluation of the mechanical properties
Great efforts have been devoted to investigating fiber-shaped energy storage devices focusing on the electrochemical performance, while the evaluation methods for the mechanical properties remain coarse. It is highly desired to establish reliable and quantitative parameters for assessing the flexibility and wearability of FEESDs. For one thing, standardized criteria benefit making a comprehensive comparison of the mechanical properties of various FEESDs. For another, it is also essential to realize the commercialization of FEESDs. In this section, measurement methods toward the mechanical properties of a single fibrous electrode and the whole device will be introduced.

4.2.1 Mechanical properties of a single fibrous electrode. 
As an essential component of FEESDs, the fibrous electrodes are mainly responsible for the flexibility of the whole devices. The mechanical properties of fibers used for textile products include strength, elongation, elasticity, and abrasion resistance. Among them, the mechanical strength (or tenacity) is generally employed to describe the force to produce the failure of a fiber per textile unit (g tex−1 or g den−1).84,85 Here, the international textile unit (tex for short) represents the linear mass density of fibers (g km−1).85 Traditionally, denier (or den) is applied to describe the textile unit, meaning 1 gram per 9000 meters of fibers, which is a reference from a single strand of silk. The mechanical strength can be also expressed as the tensile stress (known as Pascal, Pa = 1 N m−2) divided by the density of fibers. Normally, a single fiber with a strength of 5 g den−1 is suitable for various textile products. A tensile test is adopted to determine the tensile modulus, fracture stress, and tension of a fiber. In this test, a fiber is placed between two clamps on a tensile tester, which is then subjected to a tensile force with a given extension rate until it breaks, resulting in a typical stress–strain (σ–ε) curve (Fig. 7b).11 The fracture point at the end of this curve represents the breaking stress and elasticity of the fiber (also expressed as fracture stress and tension).
 Fig. 7  Evaluating the mechanical properties of a fibrous electrode. (a) A single fiber with vertical loading force. (b) The stress–strain curve of a fibrous electrode. (c and d) The illustration of the knittability of the fibrous electrode. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH. 
The elastic Young's modulus (E) is the slope of the stress–strain curve in the elastic deformation region where the shape of a fiber is recoverable after removing the stress (normally a linear region at low stress of this curve), which is expressed in E = σ/ε.33
The flexibility of a single fiber should be also taken into consideration for assembling textile applications, which assesses fibers after being woven and knitted into yarns and fabrics, and further converted to final products. This characteristic can be evaluated using a bending test, where a fiber is horizontally fixed at one end to allow it to deflect from the horizontal with an applied load at the other end. The downward deflection (y) represents the flexibility of a fiber at a loading force (F), expressed as y = 64 × F × l3/(3 × E × π × D4), where l is the length, E is the Young's modulus, and D is the diameter of a fiber.85 Obviously, reducing the diameter of the fiber, e.g. by half, can improve the flexibility 16 times. To successfully process yarns and fabrics, the diameter of a fiber is suggested to be 1/100th of its length to guarantee sufficient flexibility. Fig. 7c and d show that a hollow RGO/conducting polymer composite fiber can be woven into flexible textiles with cotton fibers, which visually reveal the flexibility of the as-prepared fibrous electrode.


4.2.2 Mechanical properties of fiber-shaped energy storage devices. 
To evaluate the mechanical properties of FEESDs, three typical tests are generally adopted, including bending, stretching, and twisting measurements. In the case of a bent fiber-shaped device, the concave side is under compression, while the convex side is stretched as shown in Fig. 8a, which could lead to the deterioration of the device performance.86 For example, the fiber electrode could experience crack formation on the surface, the exfoliation of active materials, and detachment from the gel electrolyte during bending. For a bending test, R, θ, and L are applied to depict the bendability, representing the radius of bending curvature, the bending angle, and the length of the device, respectively. To assess the bending ability of a fibrous device, the capacity or capacitance retention is recorded by varying one parameter and fixing the others. For example, θ is changed from 0 to 180°, while R and L remain constant, resulting in a capacitance retention curve toward various bending angles.12 Since the bending ability is greatly affected by the diameter of the samples, fiber-shaped electronics with minimized cross-sectional area usually demonstrate stable performance under bending. For the first time, Kwon et al. reported a fiber-shaped coaxial lithium-ion battery using hollow spiral Ni–Sn as the anode and tubular LiCoO2 as the cathode separated by a modified PET nonwoven support.89 Due to the good integration of the battery components, this device showed high capacity retention toward repeated mechanical bending.
 Fig. 8  Evaluating the mechanical properties of FEESDs. (a) Bending tests. (b and c) Stretching tests. (d and e) Torsion tests. (a) Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright (2013) from Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Stretchability is another typical mechanical deformation for the practical application of wearable FEESDs. A stretching test is performed by fixing two ends of a fiber-shaped device onto two fixtures controlled by a linear actuator to move them back and forth. The strain (ε) of this device can be calculated using ε = (L/L0) − 1, where L0 and L are the length of the device before and after elongation. Similar to bending ability tests, the electrochemical performance, such as the capacitance, can be measured under different stretching status to indicate the stretchability of FEESDs (Fig. 8c).87 Considering that the majority of electrocapacitive materials are not intrinsically stretchable, stretchable substrates, such as elastomers and stretchable textiles, were employed to endow rigid devices with impressive stretchability.67,87,88 Yang et al. reported a highly stretchable, fiber-shaped supercapacitor using an elastic fiber as a stretchable substrate that is sequentially coated with carbon nanotube sheets and a gel electrolyte as an electrode and a separator (Fig. 8b).87 As shown in Fig. 8b and c, the assembled SC can be easily stretched by 100% compared with the original shape without an obvious capacitance decay. It also maintained ca. 95% capacitance after 100 stretching cycles at a strain of 75%. Though the elastomeric substrate provides outstanding stretchability, it brings about increasing volume and weight of the whole device, further resulting in decreased specific capacity. Thus, Zhang et al. designed a spring-like fibrous electrode composed of twisted aligned multiwalled carbon nanotubes to assemble intrinsically stretchable fiber-shaped supercapacitors and LIBs without using elastomeric substrates.90 The fabricated device exhibited a greatly reduced size by ca. 300% and indicated enhanced linear specific capacitance up to 600%. Moreover, the capacity of the fiber-shaped battery remained nearly unchanged after 300 cycles of stretching at 50% strain.
Except for bending and stretching, fiber-shaped devices can overcome shear deformation under torsional loading, outperforming other flexible planar counterparts. This deformation is common in wearable textiles but so far has been paid less attention. For instance, fibrous electronics are generally under considerable tortuosity when the wearer performs activities, such as walking and sports. Thus, it is meaningful to evaluate the tortuosity of fiber-shaped devices. A torsion test is generally applied to evaluate the torsional deformation, where one end of the specimen is fixed and the other end is subject to a specified force rotating with its axis until the specimen fails in torsion. During the torsional loading, the testing sample shrinks in diameter but extends in length. Thus, it is hard for materials to overcome the torsional deformation. Meng et al. reported anisotropic carbon nanotube films composed of numerous perpendicular CNT bundles to develop highly torsional supercapacitors (Fig. 8d).88 The shear force produced by the torsional deformation can be well accommodated by the aligned CNT fibrils. The extended CNT bundles effectively maintained the electrical properties under this deformation. Therefore, the prepared fiber-shaped supercapacitor was able to withstand an extreme torsion level of 10π rad and delivered a stable capacitance under repeated stretching deformation (Fig. 8e).
For wearable and portable electronics, the softness and safety of FEESDs should be taken into account to ensure comfortability and compatibility when using on the human body. Fiber-shaped electronics are thereby encapsulated by polymeric packaging, such as PET films, heat-shrink tubes, and Eco-flex silicone, to block water/air infiltration. To be further applied in daily life, FEESDs are also required to be washable and comfortable. Up to now, few reports have ever established quantitative methods to fairly compare the mechanical properties of fiber-shaped energy storage devices. We hope that the standards and parameters mentioned above could facilitate the development of FEESDs in terms of the design of flexible fibrous electrodes and evaluation methodologies.

5 Recent progress in CP-based fiber-shaped electrochemical energy storage devices
Fiber-shaped energy storage devices (e.g. supercapacitors and batteries) have attracted much attention in wearable electronics because of their outstanding flexibility, tiny volume, and light weight. Although a variety of reports have focused on the volumetric capacitance of fibrous supercapacitors, their energy densities need to be improved and some issues, e.g. self-discharge problems, should be addressed. Fibrous batteries provide a high energy density, but their rate capability and cycling stability are unsatisfactory. More importantly, there are still remaining great technical challenges to produce fibrous electrodes and complete the assembly process of whole devices on a large scale. By taking advantage of the tunable conductivity, good processability, and easy affinity with other materials, CPs are considered as desirable materials for FEESDs. Few pure CPs (e.g. PEDOT:PSS) can be processed as self-standing fibrous electrodes. Most CPs, such as PPy and PANI, are more likely to form composites with carbon materials to enhance the inferior flexibility. However, CP-based fibers still suffer from relatively low electrochemical and mechanical performance, which puts an obstacle on the assembly and commercial application of FEESDs. Thus, great efforts still need to be devoted to exploring more impressive CP-based fiber-shaped electrodes or devices with improved energy storage ability and high stability toward various mechanical deformations.
5.1 Fibrous supercapacitors
Fiber-shaped supercapacitors have attracted much attention for wearable applications due to the high specific volumetric energy/power density and remarkable mechanical properties.16,91,92 Elastic fiber electrodes can be stretched, bent, folded, and twisted,86,93 which are easily integrated and processed into textiles. However, fiber-shaped supercapacitors with self-standing electrodes display issues of mechanical properties and electrochemical performance. As such, very few options are available for fibrous electrodes and devices consisting of pure CPs. According to several publications, PEDOT has been reported as self-standing fibrous electrodes for supercapacitors.94,95 For instance, Yao et al.13 prepared a PEDOT:PSS hydrogel with good processability and high conductivity by thermal treatment in 0.1 M sulfuric acid. The produced current-collector-free solid-state fibrous supercapacitor could deliver a high volumetric capacitance of 202 F cm−3. Also, with the treatment of sulfuric acid, Wang et al.20 developed an “internal tandem” fiber-shaped supercapacitor using a highly crystalline polymer fiber (PEDOT:PSS). The fibrous electrode showed tunable conductivity, tensile strain, tensile strength, and diameter with time by treating with sulfuric acid as shown in Fig. 9a. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor exhibited a high volumetric specific capacitance of 74.5 F cm−3, an energy density of 6.6 mW h cm−3, and a power density of 320 mW cm−3. The electrochemical performance of this supercapacitor could remain subtly changed after being stretched up to 500% (Fig. 9b). The wet-spinning method is a promising strategy to produce meter-long PEDOT:PSS fibers. Yuan et al.19 developed a new coagulation bath with CaCl2 in aqueous solution to fabricate PEDOT:PSS fibers with a length of a few meters, which showed marked mechanical properties with a strength and breaking strain of 80 ± 5 and 17 ± 2% MPa. The assembled symmetric fibrous supercapacitor exhibited a high volumetric specific capacitance of 23.8 F cm−3. Besides, the device could be bent 2000 times with no change in capacitance (Fig. 9c and d). Except for PEDOT:PSS, other CPs, such as PANI and PPy, are not likely to be produced as self-standing fibrous electrodes because of the difficulty in building highly robust architectures. According to the literature, combining CPs with carbon materials can address the problem with both improved mechanical properties and electrochemical stability. Graphene is generally incorporated with CPs to fabricate fibrous electrodes due to its high mechanical properties and conductivity. Zheng et al.96 utilized a simple hydrothermal approach to decorate PANI nanorods on the surface of a graphene fibrous electrode (GF@PANI), which could maintain the flexibility of graphene fibers and the behavior of the pseudocapacitance of PANI. The symmetric supercapacitor assembled from GF@PANI electrodes showed excellent stability under bending conditions as there were little changes in the CV curves upon being bent to 90° and 180° (Fig. 10a and b). In addition, the specific capacitance and energy density also increased from 226.3 F cm−3 (5.7 mW h cm−3) to ca. 17.1 mF cm−3 (ca. 0.36 μW h cm−3) compared with the pure GF fibrous supercapacitor. In another study, Qu et al.11 also reported a graphene/CP (PEDOT:PSS) hollow fiber electrode by addition of vitamin C with high electrical conductivity and flexibility. The corresponding symmetric supercapacitor demonstrated a volumetric capacitance up to 143.3 F cm−3.
 Fig. 9  Recently reported fibrous supercapacitors made from pure polymer fibers. (a) 3D histogram of the diameter, tensile strength, tensile strain, and electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT-S:PSS fibers after different treating times with sulfuric acid. Photograph of T-SFSSs lighting up (b) a green LED under different strains increased from 0 to 400%, and (c) a commercial USB light, and (d) a schematic illustration of the assembled T-SFSSs in series. (e) Cyclic stability measurement of YSCs. (f) CV curves before and after bending 2000 times. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 10  Recently reported fibrous supercapacitors with polymer composite fibers. (a) CF@PANI symmetric supercapacitor and (b) CV curves at various bending states. (c) The fabrication of the MxPy fibrous electrode. (d) The conductivity of the MxPy fiber compared with other reported electrodes and (e) the corresponding volumetric capacitance. (f) PPy/CNT-IL/AuNP fiber-shaped SC and (g) its performance compared with other reports. (h) Capacitance retention of PEDOT@MnO2//C@Fe3O4 under various deformations. (i) The specific capacitance and iR drop of the CoSe2@PPy-90//EACF ASC and CoSe2@PPy-90 SSC. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission. Copyright (2019) from the American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Wiley-VCH. (f and g) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier. (h) Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CNT fibers act as both the active material and current collector to produce polymer-based fibrous supercapacitors. For instance, Zhong et al.99 employed a wet-spinning method to synthesize a densely packed multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) fiber electrode, and subsequently deposited PANI on the surface of the MWCNT to promote the specific capacitance. The obtained solid-state symmetric fibrous supercapacitor showed a high volumetric specific capacitance of 427 F cm−3 at 1 mV s−1. By electrodeposition of PPy on the surface of a urethane elastic coated CNT fiber electrode (CNT@UY), Sun et al.14 synthesized a PPy@CNT@UY electrode. Because of the good conductivity and the redox feature of PPy, the specific capacitance of the electrode after the introduction of PPy increased from 50 mF cm−2 to 308 mF cm−2. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor could deliver a high energy density of 0.47 mW h cm−3. The capacitance could retain more than 80% when the supercapacitor was stretched up to 80%. In addition, CNTs grown on the surface of other flexible substrates can produce fiber-shaped electrodes with porous structures. For example, Cherusseri et al.100 reported oxidized-carbon nanotubes loaded on carbon fibers (OCNTF), which was followed by the electrodeposition of PPy to fabricate an ultra-flexible fibrous electrode. The symmetric device exhibited a volumetric capacitance of 14950 mF cm−3, which was higher than that of OCNTF (ca. 3208 mF cm−3) and CNTF (ca. 2000 mF cm−3) based supercapacitors. Moreover, this fiber device could be bent from 0° to 180° with no significant alteration of the capacitance.
Other flexible substrates, such as carbon nanofiber yarns (CNY) and stainless steel (SS), are also used to produce CP-based fibrous electrodes. Chen et al.59 assembled a carbon nanofibers yarn (CNY)@PPy@rGO supercapacitor with an improved volumetric specific capacitance of 80.46 mF cm−3. The carbon/CP composite-based device also showed better electrochemical performance, particularly in terms of the capacitance, than that of the CNY supercapacitor (24.38 mF cm−3) and CNY@PPy supercapacitor (60.95 mF cm−3). Attributed to the flexibility of SS, Zhang et al.101 produced a PPy-coated stainless steel/cotton yarn electrode and showed 24.2 MPa tenacity. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor exhibited a high length specific capacitance of 0.27 F cm−1.
While a large number of studies have focused on developing CP-based fibrous supercapacitors with high electrochemical performance, there is still a significant gap between supercapacitors and batteries in terms of energy density. In contrast to carbon, CP-based materials with redox reactions have demonstrated great enhancement of the capacitance and the energy density. Hence, an effective strategy to synthesize CP-based composites would be a complex of other pseudocapacitive materials, like transition-metal carbides, oxides, and sulfides. For example, Zheng et al.95 fabricated a hybrid fiber electrode comprised of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets and PEDOT:PSS. In this work, the PEDOT:PSS was used as a conductive binder to immobilize Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets (Fig. 10c). The obtained fibrous electrode delivered a high conductivity of 1489 S cm−1 (Fig. 10d) and capacitance of 614.5 F cm−3 and was endowed with good flexibility. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor achieved a maximum volumetric specific capacitance of 361.4 F cm−3 (Fig. 10e) and an energy density of 7.13 W h cm−3. Xiong et al.102 reported a hierarchical core–shell NiCo2O4@polypyrrole fibrous electrode with impressive specific capacitance. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor showed a high energy density of 17.5 W h kg−1.
The energy density of supercapacitors, an important criterion, is majorly determined by the operating voltage of devices. To increase the operating voltage of supercapacitors, one of the effective ways is the usage of non-aqueous electrolytes. For example, Song et al.76 used propylene carbonate–poly(methyl methacrylate)–[EMIM][TFSI] as the gel electrolyte to increase the operating voltage of a PPy/CNT-IL/AuNP symmetric fibrous supercapacitor to 2.5 V. This supercapacitor showed a maximum energy density of 24.7 mW h cm−2, which was higher than many reported fiber-shaped devices (Fig. 10f and g). Construction of asymmetric supercapacitors is another commonly used strategy to dramatically increase the operating voltage. Cheng and co-workers15 reported a hierarchical ternary hybrid fiber-shaped electrode for asymmetric supercapacitors. The synthesized MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT electrode displayed a specific capacitance of 478.6 F cm−3, which is higher than that of MnO2/CNT (386.9 F cm−3) and PEDOT:PSS/CNT (61.2 F cm−3) electrodes. The asymmetric supercapacitor, assembled with MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT as the positive electrode and ordered-microporous carbon (OMC)/CNT as the negative electrode, achieved a high specific capacitance of 23.4 F cm−3, a maximum energy density of 11.3 mW h cm−3, and a power density of 2.1 W cm−3. By coupling a PEDOT@MnO2 fibrous positive electrode with a C@Fe3O4 negative electrode, Sun et al.97 assembled an asymmetric supercapacitor with a high energy density of 4.02 mW h cm−3 and excellent flexibility (Fig. 10h), which could be knotted, twisted, and bent with no capacitance change. Attributed to the good conductivity of PPy and the redox feature of both PPy and CoSe2, Wang et al.98 fabricated a core–shell fiber-shaped CoSe2@PPy electrode with greatly enhanced electrochemical performance compared to that of the pure CoSe2 and PPy electrodes. After combination with an electrochemically activated carbon fiber electrode (EACF), the volumetric specific capacitance and energy density of the assembled asymmetric supercapacitor could reach 7.6 F cm−3 and 2.63 mW h cm−3 (Fig. 10i), which were much higher than those of the CoSe2@PPy symmetric device (ca. 6.3 F cm−3 and ca. 0.85 mW h cm−3). Gong et al.80 reported a porous FeOOH/PPy@CF negative electrode, which was further coupled with a MnO2@CF positive electrode to prepare a fibrous asymmetric supercapacitor with a high energy density of 2 mW h cm−3. The coaxial fibrous structure is an effective approach to assemble an asymmetric supercapacitor due to the high utilization of the surface area and the decrease of the contact resistance between the two electrodes. Zhang et al.103 developed a coaxial asymmetric supercapacitor using a well-aligned 3D vanadium nitride nanowire array on a carbon nanotube fiber (VN@C NWAs) as a negative electrode and MnO2/CP (PEDOT:PSS)/CNT as a positive electrode with remarkable electrochemical performance.
5.2 Fibrous lithium-ion batteries
In contrast to the well-developed fibrous supercapacitors, fiber-shaped lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) need to conquer more complicated problems from electrolytes to assembly. Though organic electrolytes contribute to high energy density for LIBs, they are inherently flammable and toxic, and leakage can cause safety issues and environmental pollution. Thus, polymer or solid-state electrolytes have been constituting an important research field in the development of portable and wearable batteries. Besides, fiber-shaped LIBs suffer from intricate assembly problems to avoid exposure to air and the leakage of organic electrolytes. Moreover, as a result of the different charge storage mechanism from supercapacitors, which involves surface-controlled electrical double-layer or faradaic electron transfer processes, batteries largely rely on the diffusion-controlled ion transport in the solution phase. Even so, numerous efforts have been devoted to shaping traditional planar batteries into fiber-shaped LIBs, Li–air batteries, and Li–S batteries.104–106 By virtue of their light weight, flexibility, controllable resistance, high conductivity, and low cost, conductive polymers have shown remarkable contributions to flexible fibrous batteries since the 1980s.107 Conductive polymers can directly be used as both anodic and cathodic materials owing to the reversible interactions between Li+ and polymer chains.108,109 Binder materials and stretchable substrates of flexible LIBs have also partially been replaced by conducting polymers, which can be modified to tune the chemical structures and related physical/chemical properties as well as simultaneously inhibit additive aggregation and polymer layer detachment during cycling. Volume expansion, electrolyte leakage and volatilization problems of traditional LIBs can also be significantly improved by introducing porous conductive polymer materials.107 However, limited studies have so far reported conductive polymer-related fibrous LIBs.
In 2005, Wang et al. fabricated a fiber-shaped LIB using PPy/PF6 as the cathode and PPy/PSS as the anode.110 A capacity of 10 mA h g−1 was obtained in an electrolyte containing 1 M LiPF6, ethylene carbonate (EC), and dimethyl carbonate (DMC). After replacing the anode with single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), the capacity doubled and the conduction mechanism of PPy was also unveiled during the charge and discharge processes.111 Instead of using polymer conductors as both electrodes for all polymer batteries, more studies are focusing on adopting or designing CPs for shooting specific problems based on the current battery system. As a promising anode candidate of LIBs, silicon has a spectacular theoretical capacity (3579 mA h g−1), high elemental abundance, and environmental friendliness. But the approximately 400% volume expansion during Li insertion is the Achilles’ heel for silicon. Interestingly, conductive polymers show inferior capacity but perform well in conductivity, mechanical flexibility, and cycle stability, which presents huge potential in tackling the volume expansion problem of silicon and further improves the durability of LIBs. Rao et al. developed a 1D fiber-shaped Si/PPy/CF anode made from in situ polymerized PPy with Si particles inside on a carbon fiber substrate (Fig. 11a).22 The uniform dispersion of silicon in PPy prevented large volume change and serious aggregation of nanoparticles, and the conformal coating of the PPy layer also acted as a binder for the silicon and carbon fiber support. With a high silicon weight percentage of 54.5%, the 3D porous interconnected Si/PPy/CF anode exhibited high electron transportation ability and increased electrolyte–electrode interfacial area. The average discharge capacity reached 3050 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and the coulombic efficiency was 84.9% for the first cycle. The 2nd to 100th test at 0.2C kept almost the same capacity retention (Fig. 11a). After alternate sharp bending and folding at an angle for 100 cycles, 2120 mA h g−1 of the capacity still remained, indicating considerable flexibility (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  Fiber-shaped LIBs. (a) Electrochemical performance and (b) flexibility of the flexible Si/PPy/CF electrode; (inset of a) cross-section of Si/PPy/CF and the flexible battery. (c) Rate performance and long-term stability test of the FAL; (insert of c) a simplified structure of the FAL. (d) FALs weaved into textiles and (e) the charge and discharge curves of the FALs connected in series. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Considering safety issues, highly flammable and toxic organic electrolytes in LIBs are partially replaced by cheaper and eco-friendly aqueous electrolytes. However, the available discharge potential is determined by the unfavorable water-splitting reaction.112–114 Polyimide (PI) is a good candidate for aqueous energy storage systems because of the suitable redox voltage in the range of the water splitting potential and the superior energy storage capacity. Zhang et al. developed a fiber-shaped aqueous LIB (FAL) by using PI matrix blended CNTs as a hybrid fiber anode (PI/CNT), which presented a high specific capacity of 86 mA h g−1 at 600C. After assembling with a cathode of a LiMn2O4 (LMO)/CNT hybrid fiber, the FAL achieved a specific discharge capacity of 123 mA h g−1 at 10C and the coulombic efficiency remained at 98% after 1000 cycles (Fig. 11c).26 For the kinetics analysis, the adsorption-controlled electrochemical process derived from PI dominates the outstanding performance of the FAL. Weaved textiles can be bent, folded, and twisted into various forms as shown in Fig. 11d. Through connection in series, four batteries achieved a high operating voltage of around 10 V (Fig. 11e).
Carbon nanotube (CNT) fibers/yarns with excellent electrical and mechanical performance are frequently used for fabricating flexible energy storage devices. However, there is a trend to preferably choose alternative cheaper conductive threads as wearable LIB substrates because of the utilization of expensive high vacuum deposition instruments and techniques during fabrication of CNTs. Qu et al. proposed an all-solid-state fiber-shaped battery using commercially available and cost-effective steel-filled polyester conductive threads (SPCT) as the substrates for cathode and anode materials.23 More specifically, LiFePO4–polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) deposited on SPCT threads was employed as a cathode filament and Li4Ti5O12@SPCT, tin@SPCT, and bare tin wire acted as different anodes. LiPF6–polyethylene oxide (PEO) composites were used as an all-solid electrolyte and a separator simultaneously. TiO2 particles were doped into LiPF6–PEO solution for enhancing the ionic conductivity by lowering the PEO crystallinity. The corresponding twisted assembled batteries delivered maximal capacities of 64.1, 67.1, and 95.7 mA h g−1, respectively, at 0.5C. During 20 charge–discharge cycles at 1C, about 31000 bend–release motions were conducted for the batteries. All corresponding specific capacities only dropped ca. 10% and the coulombic efficiency still maintained ca. 90%.
5.3 Other fibrous energy storage devices
Apart from LIBs, conductive polymers are also applied in other fibrous energy devices, such as zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) and solar cells. Owing to the aqueous electrolyte and stable zinc metal, rechargeable ZIBs have featured high safety and received growing interest.115,116 However, traditional inorganic cathodes of ZIBs cannot afford an output with high energy density because of the relatively narrow potential window. Instead, redox-active conducting polymer electrodes have long π-electron conjugated structures that exhibit broadened redox potentials, e.g. 0.5–1.5 V for PANI, and 0–1.2 V for PPy.24,116 The structural diversity and molecular-level controllability of organic polymer electrodes offer a large number of options for ZIB cathodes with wider voltage windows. Zhao et al. fabricated a poly(1,5-naphthalene diamine, NAPD)/AC fibrous cathode for ZIBs by in situ electrodepositing poly(1,5-NAPD) nanorods on AC-coated carbon fabric, resulting in a relatively wide operating voltage with a range of 0.1–1.8 V (Fig. 12a).25 The deposited poly(1,5-NAPD) or adsorbed 1,5-NAPD small molecules blocked the surface area of the electrode, but increased the average pore size from 2.4 nm to 6.0 nm and finally enhanced the charge storage capacity with capacitor-like energy storage behavior. In a planar cell of Zn//poly(1,5-NAPD)/AC, a maximum specific capacity of 315 mA h g−1 can be achieved at a current density of 0.19 A g−1. When assembled in a cable-shaped cell, the ZIBs delivered a first-cycle discharge capacity of approximately 1.2 mA h cm−2, only showing a slight decay at different bending angles after 600 cycles. Very recently, Wang et al. adopted quinone-rich polydopamine (PDA) coated on carbon nanotube fibers (CNF) as both active materials and a nano binder for a weavable, sewable, and washable fibrous ZIB.119 The prepared aqueous ZIBs showed a high specific capacity of 372.3 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 with an operating voltage of 0.3–1.55 V and retained 80% after 1700 cycles at 1000 mA g−1.
 Fig. 12  Other FEESDs. (a) Cyclic stability of a bendable cable-shaped Zn-ion cell. (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and (c) durability of the integrated Zn-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS fiber device. (d) Integrated device charged by the wind and the discharge curves. (e) Schematic diagram, (f) self-charging/discharging curve and (g) GCDs at various current densities of a quasi-solid-state Zn-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS battery. (a) Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission. Copyright (2020) from Elsevier. (b and d) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission. Copyright (2019) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e–g) Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright (2014) from Wiley-VCH. 
Soft polymer materials could also endow stretchable energy storage devices with an ability of self-healing to some extent. After combining with shape memory alloys based on a heat triggered martensitic phase transformation, fibrous rechargeable ZIBs are expected to show higher mechanical flexibility and cycling stability. Wang et al. applied nitinol (NT) wires and stainless-steel (SS) yarn as flexible substrates to prepare a coaxial core–sheath zinc-ion battery with shape memory functions.120 PPy layers were electrodeposited on the surface of the cathode for avoiding the aggregation of MnO2 nanocrystallites on SS yarns and simultaneously providing extra electrical conductivity and structural support. After assembly with the anode of nitinol wire electrodeposited zinc nanoplatelets, the Zn@NT–MnO2/PPy@SS cell displayed an average specific capacity of 174.2 mA h g−1 at 0.5C with gelatin–borax electrolytes. The fast shape recovery function was shown by manually bending the flexible battery to almost 90° and then it was immersed in water (ca. 45 °C), which was slightly above the phase transformation temperature of the NT wire. Within 6 seconds, the deformed battery recovered to its original state and 96.8% of the initial capacity remained after 5 bending–recovery cycles.
In terms of the structural collapse and Ag ion migration at high energy density for Zn–Ag2O batteries, conductive polymers can be employed as a protective layer for active materials. Li et al. reported a quasi-solid-state fibrous Zn–Ag2O battery using PEDOT:PSS coated Ag2O on a carbon nanotube fiber (CNTF) consisting of nitride-doped nanocarbon arrays (NCAs) as a cathode and Zn nanosheets with deposited CNTF-NCAs as an anode (Fig. 12b).117 The fibrous Zn–Ag2O battery delivered a high capacity of 1.05 mA h cm−2, maintaining above 79.5% after 200 cycles (Fig. 12c). The outstanding durability benefited from the protection of PEDOT:PSS to suppress structural collapse and alleviate Ag ion migration. After integrating with a wind generator (Fig. 12d), Zn-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS batteries can be charged to verify the capability of harvesting and storing wind energy, showing great potential in practical applications.
Electrolyte modification is also an attractive pathway for shooting the issues of working life and energy efficiency for Zn–air batteries (ZABs), but it is more challenging and has been paid little attention. The quasi-solid electrolytes used in the majority of fibrous energy storage ZIBs or Zn–air devices are PVA-based gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs). Disappointingly, traditional GPEs show relatively low ionic conductivity, inferior stretchability, and weak water maintenance ability. In a recent paper, Song et al. developed a novel alkaline gel polymer electrolyte KI–PVAA–GO consisting of PVA, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), graphene oxide (GO), and the KI reaction modifier.123 There were substantial improvements in the aspects of mechanical strength, ionic conductivity, and water retention capability. Besides, UV-Vis spectroscopy was used for illustrating the possible mechanism of KI as an additive to dramatically reduce the charging voltage to 1.69 V. The reduced charge voltage significantly led to alleviated degradation of the carbon-supported catalyst electrode. Finally, improved working life has been seen either in sandwich-type ZABs (742 mA h g−1) or cable-type ZABs (680 mA h g−1) with energy efficiencies of 73% for 200 h and 72% for 100 h.
Conductive polymers can also be used in a wire-shaped dye-sensitized solar cell because of their suitable bandgap. Zhang et al. applied PEDOT:PSS as a hole transfer layer to separate the charge carriers generated in a bulk heterojunction layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) in a twisted stretchable polymer solar cell.122 PSHT:PCM and PEDOT:PSS layers were dip-coated on a titania nanotube-modified Ti wire. The highest photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) reached 1.23% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.51 V and short circuit current density of 6.33 mA cm−2. Moreover, the cell could work well in both argon and air with a PCE retention of above 80% after 7 days. In another study, a polymer solar cell was integrated with a MWCNT/Ti supercapacitor on a coaxial Ti wire (Fig. 12e).118 The quick self-powering process in the energy storage part measured with a potentiostat is shown in Fig. 12f and g. After a very short charging process, the corresponding discharge time sustained above 300 s at 0.1 μA. The specific capacitance of the self-powered energy fiber achieved 0.077 mF cm−1. The entire photoelectric conversion and energy storage efficiency of the energy fiber kept at 75% in 7 days and decreased by less than 10% even after 1000 cyclic bending tests.
The excellent mechanical properties enable FEESDs to be facilely woven into textiles, fabrics, and yarns, revealing huge potential applied in current advanced textile technologies. So far, benefiting from the high conductivity, satisfactory capacity, ease of fabrication, and low cost, conductive polymers have been extensively employed in fibrous supercapacitors. However, it is still required to explore CPs in the application of fiber-shaped batteries, solar cells, and other devices. Table 1 summarizes the configuration, compositions, capacitances/capacity, energy/power density, and cycle life for the advanced conductive polymer-based FEESDs from recent reports. With the aid of transition-metal or small molecule-based materials, CPs would be endowed with particularly unique features, such as redox activity, which has been widely used in the fields of batteries and catalysis.124–130 Yet the fiber-shaped configuration may introduce further challenges. In addition, some remaining challenges of conductive polymers also need to be overcome in the future, such as poor stability due to serious volume changes during the charge/discharge process, and unsatisfactory self-standing ability originating from the poor intermolecular force among polymer chains.
Table 1 Electrochemical properties of conductive polymer based fibrous devices




Device configuration
Cathode (positive)//anode (negative)
Electrolyte
Cell voltage (V)
Capacitance/capacity
Energy density (mW h cm−3)
Power density (mW cm−3)
Cycle life
Ref.




OCP: open circuit potential; PCE: power conversion efficiency.




Parallel
AT-PEDOT:PSS/PPy-60
PVA/H2SO4
0.8
393.8 F cm−3
8.3
∼3000
71.4% (10k cycles)

94



Parallel
MXene/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H2SO4
0.6
361.4 F cm−3
7.13
8249
95% (10k cycles)

95



Parallel
PPy/CNT-IL/AuNP/CF
PC-PMMA-IL
2.5
38.49 mF cm−2
0.024
3.52
69% (10k cycles)

76



Twisted
PPy@CNT@UY
PVA/H3PO4
0.8
69 mF cm−2
0.47
10.18
—

14



Parallel
HDC@NiCo2O4@polypyrrole
PVA/NaOH
1
120 F g−1
17.5 W h kg−1
4 kW kg−1
87.2% (10k cycles)

102



Twisted
GF@PANI
H2SO4/PVA
0.8
357.1 mF cm−2
5.7
14.5
96.2% (5k cycles)

96



Parallel
PHCF@PANI
PVA/H2SO4
0.8
622 mF cm−2
1.55
12
—

62



Parallel
NY@PPy@rGO
PVA/H3PO4
0.8
24.38 F cm−3
—
—
∼100% (10k cycles)

59



Parallel
PANI/RGO
PVA/H2SO4
0.8
148 F cm−3
8.8
30.77
86% (17k cycles)

9



Parallel
PEDOT-S:PSS
PVA/H3PO4
1.6
74.5 F cm−3
6.6
320
∼89% (5k cycles)

20



Parallel
CoSe2@PPy-90//EACF
PVA/LiCl
1.6
7.6 F cm−3
2.63
130
80.1% (15k cycles)

98



Coaxial
MnO2 NB@Ni/CNT//MoS2 NSA/CNTF
PVA/LiCl
1.8
195.38 mF cm−2
0.088
9
88.4% (6k cycles)

8



Parallel
MoS2@CNTF
PVA/LiCl
1.8
278.6 mF cm−2
0.12
5.4
90.7% (5k cycles)

61



Twisted
MnO2@CF//FeOOH/PPy@CF
PVA/LiCl
1.6
5.5 F cm−3
2
∼5
82% (5k cycles)

80



Parallel
PEDOT@MnO2//C@Fe3O4
PVA/LiCl
2
7.23 F cm−3
4.02
∼200
80% (800 cycles)

97



Coaxial
Ni3S2-CF//PPy
PVA-g-GTMAC
1.8
5.4 mF cm−2
84.2
73.8
99% (1k cycles)

121



Twisted
MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT//OMC/CNT
CMC/Na2SO4
1.8
23.4 F cm−3
11.3
2100
85% (1k cycles)

15



Parallel
PNC/PEDOT//CMK-3
PVA/KOH
1.5
3.16 F cm−3
0.011 mW h cm−2
7.8 mW cm−2
∼100% (1.4k cycles)

52



Twisted
CNTF-NCA-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS//CNTF-NCA-Zn
PVA–KOH
1.5
∼1.25 mA h cm−2
1.57 mW h cm−2
14.4 mW cm−2
∼85.2% (200 cycles)

117



Twisted
MnO2/PPy@SS//Zn@NT
Gelatin/borax/ZnSO4/MnSO4
1.0
174.2 mA h g−1
—
—
60% (1k cycles)

120



coaxial
Poly(1,5-NAPD)/AC//Zn foil
PVA/ZnSO4
1.7
1.1 mA h cm−2
—
—
92% (150 cycles)

25



Coaxial
PPy/PF6//SWNT
LiPF6/EC/DMC
2
28 mA h g−1
—
—
71.4% (10 cycles)

111



Parallel
Li wire//Si/PPy/CF
LiPF6/EC/DMC/FEC
1
3050 mA h g−1
—
—
75% (100 cycles)

22



Coaxial
PPy/PF6//PPy/PSS
LiPF6/EC/DMC
2
10 mA h g−1
—
—
∼100% (10 cycles)

110



Parallel
LMO/CNT//PI/CNT
Li2SO4
1.4
183 mA h g−1
48.93 W h kg−1
10.22 kW kg−1
98% (1k cycles)

22



Twisted
TiO2/Ti//MWCNT
P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS
0.51 V OCP
—
—
—
PCE 90% after 1k times bending

122



Coaxial
TiO2/Ti//MWCNT
PVA/H3PO4; P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS
0.6; 0.45 V OCP
0.077 mF cm−1
1.61 × 10−7 W h cm−2
—
75% (7 days); PCE 90% (10 days)

118





6 Conclusions and perspectives
In this contribution, we have reviewed recent progress in the development of CP-based energy fibers and their applications in fiber-shaped energy storage devices. Continuous efforts have been devoted to the synthesis of CPs over past decades, while a good understanding of their conduction mechanism has aided the engineering of these polymers with outstanding performance. This article followed a sequence from polymer chemistry to fiber processing and device assembly, involving the conduction mechanism, synthetic and processing methodologies, evaluation methods, and recent advances. Notably, we demonstrated measurements of a variety of parameters to assess the electrochemical and mechanical properties, which would be particularly helpful for the standardized evaluation of fiber electrodes and devices, which has not been systematically established in previous literature. As a promising candidate for smart textile products, some impressive progress in CP and composite-based supercapacitors, batteries and emerging integrated energy devices was discussed in the paper.
Despite intense efforts, the electrical conductivity of most CPs has been not comparable to that of metals, which requires further great work to exploit more polymer-based functional materials. Surprisingly, to date, the selection of conductive polymers in the majority of publications largely relied on a limited variety of structures, such as PANI, PPy, and PEDOT, as demonstrated in this paper. The inferior conductivity may result in a high iR drop and thus lead to a poor rate capability and energy/power density. The main challenge faced by most researchers is unpredictable physical and chemical properties over a huge number of complex organic molecules, unlike inorganic materials. Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) assisted machine learning have remarkably facilitated the exploration of new molecules and materials.131,132 However, very few published studies have shown the capability of this method in the molecular design of CPs. Indeed, density functional theory-based modeling has been well established to compute electronic structures of macromolecules.133,134 With AI-assisted machine learning, we will look forward to discovering more new conductive polymers with outstanding conductivity as well as improved electrochemical and mechanical properties.
Regarding polymer processing, the shaping of fibrous structure-based electrodes and devices remains under development. As a result of undesirable mechanical strength and stability suffered by reported chemically synthesized conductive polymers, in fact, most previous studies were subject to a number of potential methodological weaknesses in the processing technique. Future work is needed to focus on materials engineering for more advanced processing methods. For example, a programmable and smart 3D or 4D printing system would be potentially useful, attributed to the processible characteristic of polymers.135–138 Directly high-resolution printing fiber-shaped electrodes and even all-in-one devices would be promising to greatly promote the market of smart electronics. Moreover, the configurations of FEESDs are expected to be further tailored with the guidance of computational modelling, which would be greatly beneficial to the robustness of assembled fiber devices for practical applications.
Highly integrated devices have been arousing considerable interest since the earlier years of the last decade. As a consequence of the market demand for miniaturized and multi-functional products, there is a great need for technologies for the development of integrated platforms. Particularly, fibers with cooperative units of energy harvesting, energy storage, and functional modules would endow world-wide industries of apparel, mobile electronics, wireless interactions, and medical care with renewed vitality and unlimited creativity. Prior to this ultimate goal, a large number of scientific and technological issues still need to be addressed urgently, which are substantially challenging and in need of multidisciplinary efforts. For energy harvesting, solar-powered photovoltaics have so far achieved spectacular efficiency, which can convert solar to electricity directly. However, the processing of solar cell assembly is rigorous, thus bringing tremendous difficulties being shaped into fibrous devices.139,140 Other energy harvesting systems with simpler configurations, such as triboelectric nanogenerators, which can convert mechanical energy into electricity, are also promising, but the energy conversion efficiency remains concerning.6,141 Besides, other emerging energy harvesting and conversion systems may also be possibly processed into a fiber shape.142–145 In terms of energy storage, this review clearly demonstrates recent advances in fiber-shaped supercapacitors and batteries consisting of conductive polymers, which have great potential to meet the demand as discussed above. Regarding terminal parts of integrated devices, multi-functional units, like sensors, displays, processors, and communicators, have shown similar processing problems of fibrous configurations and their power consumption should be also considered.146–153 These well-developed individual components will be eventually integrated into one fiber and further applied to downstream industries. We have reason to believe and look forward to meeting these smart products with integrated, all-purpose functions and all-weather, real-time operations in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
D. X. acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81927809).
References
F. Mo, G. Liang, Z. Huang, H. Li, D. Wang and C. Zhi, An Overview of Fiber-Shaped Batteries with a Focus on Multifunctionality, Scalability, and Technical Difficulties, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M.-S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Flexible and Stretchable Energy Storage: Recent Advances and Future Perspectives, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, D. Wang and Z. Zheng, Textile-Based Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
K. Dong, Y.-C. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Dai, S. L. Zhang, H. Zou, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, A Highly Stretchable and Washable All-Yarn-Based Self-Charging Knitting Power Textile Composed of Fiber Triboelectric Nanogenerators and Supercapacitors, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9490 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zi, S. Wang, Z. Li, L. Zheng, F. Yi, S. Li and Z. L. Wang, A Flexible Fiber-Based Supercapacitor–Triboelectric-Nanogenerator Power System for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4830 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Hu, L. Zhu, X. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Self-powered textile for wearable electronics by hybridizing fiber-shaped nanogenerators, solar cells, and supercapacitors, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Xie, X. Zhao, C. Li, J. Qu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. He, Q. Li, C. Lu, X. Xu, W. Lu, L. Li and Y. Yao, 3D Printing Fiber Electrodes for an All-Fiber Integrated Electronic Device via Hybridization of an Asymmetric Supercapacitor and a Temperature Sensor, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801114 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, L. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Peng, X. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Wang, J. Xie, J. Sun, B. He, C. Lu, W. Lu, T. Zhang and Y. Yao, Novel coaxial fiber-shaped sensing system integrated with an asymmetric supercapacitor and a humidity sensor, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 315 CrossRef .
P. Li, Z. Jin, L. Peng, F. Zhao, D. Xiao, Y. Jin and G. Yu, Stretchable All-Gel-State Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitors Enabled by Macromolecularly Interconnected 3D Graphene/Nanostructured Conductive Polymer Hydrogels, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800124 CrossRef .
J. Ren, L. Li, C. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Y. Wang, X. Zhu and H. Peng, Twisting Carbon Nanotube Fibers for Both Wire-Shaped Micro-Supercapacitor and Micro-Battery, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1155 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, A Fiber Supercapacitor with High Energy Density Based on Hollow Graphene/Conducting Polymer Fiber Electrode, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li, Y. Jin and D. Xiao, Superficial-defect engineered nickel/iron oxide nanocrystals enable high-efficient flexible fiber battery, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 160 CrossRef .
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, Ultrahigh-Conductivity Polymer Hydrogels with Arbitrary Structures, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700974 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Fu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, C. Zhi and H. Hu, High-performance stretchable yarn supercapacitor based on PPy@CNTs@urethane elastic fiber core spun yarn, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, J. Zhang, J. Ren, N. Liu, P. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Design of a Hierarchical Ternary Hybrid for a Fiber-Shaped Asymmetric Supercapacitor with High Volumetric Energy Density, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9685 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, W. Lu, J. P. Smith, K. S. Booksh, L. Meng, Y. Huang, Q. Li, J.-H. Byun, Y. Oh, Y. Yan and T.-W. Chou, A High Performance Stretchable Asymmetric Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitor with a Core-Sheath Helical Structure, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600976 CrossRef .
K. Qi, R. Hou, S. Zaman, Y. Qiu, B. Y. Xia and H. Duan, Construction of Metal–Organic Framework/Conductive Polymer Hybrid for All-Solid-State Fabric Supercapacitor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18021 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, P. Li and G. Yu, Gel Electrocatalysts: An Emerging Material Platform for Electrochemical Energy Conversion, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003191 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, B. Li, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, Z. Wang, W. Ni, C. Li, H. Liu and B. Wang, Twisted yarns for fiber-shaped supercapacitors based on wetspun PEDOT:PSS fibers from aqueous coagulation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11616 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, H. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, W. Ni, B. Wang, S. He and H. Peng, All-in-one fiber for stretchable fiber-shaped tandem supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Yu, H. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Conductive Polymer Hydrogel Microfibers from Multiflow Microfluidics, Small, 2019, 15, 1805162 CrossRef .
J. Rao, N. Liu, L. Li, J. Su, F. Long, Z. Zou and Y. Gao, A high performance wire-shaped flexible lithium-ion battery based on silicon nanoparticles within polypyrrole/twisted carbon fibers, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26601 RSC .
H. Qu, X. Lu and M. Skorobogatiy, All-Solid Flexible Fiber-Shaped Lithium Ion Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Liu, M. Hu, J. Zeng, Y. Mu, Y. Guo, J. Yu, X. Ma, Y. Qiu and Y. Huang, A flexible, electrochromic, rechargeable Zn//PPy battery with a short circuit chromatic warning function, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11113 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, T. Xin, N. Wang and J. Liu, Achieving high capacity and long life of aqueous rechargeable zinc battery by using nanoporous-carbon-supported poly (1, 5-naphthalenediamine) nanorods as cathode, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 64 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, C.-M. Lo, Y. Zhao, Y. Jiao, G. Zheng and H. Peng, A fiber-shaped aqueous lithium ion battery with high power density, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9002 RSC .
W. Zhang, P. Feng, J. Chen, Z. Sun and B. Zhao, Electrically conductive hydrogels for
flexible energy storage systems, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Lee, J. You, M.-S. Park, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Conductive polymers for next-generation energy storage systems: recent progress and new functions, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 517 RSC .
Y. Han and L. Dai, Conducting Polymers for Flexible Supercapacitors, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2019, 220, 1800355 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, Conductive polymers for stretchable supercapacitors, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liao, F. Xiong, X. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Luo, Progress in conductive polymers in fibrous energy devices, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 329 CAS .
Y. Shi and G. Yu, Designing Hierarchically Nanostructured Conductive Polymer Gels for Electrochemical Energy Storage and Conversion, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Hydrogels and Hydrogel-Derived Materials for Energy and Water Sustainability, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Grancarić, I. Jerković, V. Koncar, C. Cochrane, F. M. Kelly, D. Soulat and X. Legrand, Conductive polymers for smart textile applications, J. Ind. Text., 2018, 48, 612 CrossRef .
R. Balint, N. J. Cassidy and S. H. Cartmell, Conductive polymers: Towards a smart biomaterial for tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 2341 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaur, R. Adhikari, P. Cass, M. Bown and P. Gunatillake, Electrically conductive polymers and composites for biomedical applications, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37553 RSC .
J. L. Bredas and G. B. Street, Polarons, bipolarons, and solitons in conducting polymers, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 18, 309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Dopant-Enabled Supramolecular Approach for Controlled Synthesis of Nanostructured Conductive Polymer Hydrogels, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7736 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Qian, Z. Fang, D. Xiao and G. Yu, Supramolecular confinement of single Cu atoms in hydrogel frameworks for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis with high atom utilization, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 78 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, W. Shi, K. Yan, L. Pan and G. Yu, Doping engineering of conductive polymer hydrogels and their application in advanced sensor technologies, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6232 RSC .
M. N. Gueye, A. Carella, N. Massonnet, E. Yvenou, S. Brenet, J. Faure-Vincent, S. Pouget, F. Rieutord, H. Okuno, A. Benayad, R. Demadrille and J.-P. Simonato, Structure and Dopant Engineering in PEDOT Thin Films: Practical Tools for a Dramatic Conductivity Enhancement, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Qian, Z. Fang, D. Xiao and G. Yu, Probing Enhanced Site Activity of Co–Fe Bimetallic Subnanoclusters Derived from Dual Cross-Linked Hydrogels for Oxygen Electrocatalysis, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Shi, L. Pan and G. Yu, Multifunctional Nanostructured Conductive Polymer Gels: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1734 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Wang and G. Yu, Conjugated polymers: From synthesis, transport properties, to device applications, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2019, 57, 1557 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, A. Chortos, G. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Isaacson, R. Allen, Y. Shi, R. Dauskardt and Z. Bao, An ultra-sensitive resistive pressure sensor based on hollow-sphere microstructure induced elasticity in conducting polymer film, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3002 CrossRef .
K. D. Fong, T. Wang, H.-K. Kim, R. V. Kumar and S. K. Smoukov, Semi-Interpenetrating Polymer Networks for Enhanced Supercapacitor Electrodes, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Ling, C. Wang, J. Ni, B. Çelebi-Saltik, X. Wang, X. Meng, H.-J. Kim, A. Baidya, S. Ahadian, N. Ashammakhi, M. R. Dokmeci, J. Travas-Sejdic and A. Khademhosseini, Room-Temperature-Formed PEDOT:PSS Hydrogels Enable Injectable, Soft, and Healable Organic Bioelectronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. J. Pan, B. R. Liu, Y. Q. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. A. Bao and G. H. Yu, Nanostructured conductive polypyrrole hydrogels as high-performance, flexible supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6086 RSC .
B. Lu, H. Yuk, S. Lin, N. Jian, K. Qu, J. Xu and X. Zhao, Pure PEDOT:PSS hydrogels, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1043 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Xiang, Y. Liu and D. Xiao, Template-free fabrication of hollow N-doped carbon sphere (h-NCS) to synthesize h-NCS@PANI positive material for MoO3//h-NCS@PANI asymmetric supercapacitor, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 442, 476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Shen, Z. Zhang, E. Barrios and L. Zhai, Core–Shell Composite Fibers for High-Performance Flexible Supercapacitor Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Assembly of NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT Nanocomposites on Contra Wires for Fiber-Shaped Flexible Asymmetric Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, G. Tan, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Meng, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and D. Xiao, Pumpkin-Derived Porous Carbon for Supercapacitors with High Performance, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Jin, P. Li, X. Chen and D. Xiao, Enhanced electrochemical performance of C-NiO/NiCo2O4//AC asymmetric supercapacitor based on material design and device exploration, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 335 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and D. Xiao, Modification of Corroded Metal (Ni or Fe) Foam for High-Performance Rechargeable Alkaline Ni/Fe Batteries, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3098 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, T. Gao, Q. Liu, Y. Wang and D. Xiao, Preparation of quinone modified graphene-based fiber electrodes and its application in flexible asymmetrical supercapacitor, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 336, 135628 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, Graphene-Based Fibers: Recent Advances in Preparation and Application, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901979 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, T. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Liu, M. Qing and D. Xiao, Synthesis of P-Doped and NiCo-Hybridized Graphene-Based Fibers for Flexible Asymmetrical Solid-State Micro-Energy Storage Device, Small, 2019, 15, 1803469 CrossRef .
L. Chen, D. Li, L. Chen, P. Si, J. Feng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lou and L. Ci, Core-shell structured carbon nanofibers yarn@polypyrrole@graphene
for high performance all-solid-state fiber supercapacitors, Carbon, 2018, 138, 264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Pei, C. Wang, Z. Yuan, L. Wei, Y. Pan, A. Mahmood, Q. Shao and Y. Chen, Flexible Zinc-Ion Hybrid Fiber Capacitors with Ultrahigh Energy Density and Long Cycling Life for Wearable Electronics, Small, 2019, 15, 1903817 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Sun, Z. Pan, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yao, W. Lu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Stretchable fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitors with ultrahigh energy density, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, K. Yang, X. Fan, Y. Tong, Z. Zhang, X. Lu, K. Mai, Q. Ni, M. Zhang and X. Chen, Ultrahigh energy fiber-shaped supercapacitors based on porous hollow conductive polymer composite fiber electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12250 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Zhou, W. Fu, P. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, In situ synthesis of CoSx@carbon core-shell nanospheres decorated in carbon nanofibers for capacitor electrodes with superior rate and cycling performances, Carbon, 2017, 114, 187 CrossRef CAS .
F. Miao, C. Shao, X. Li, K. Wang and Y. Liu, Flexible solid-state supercapacitors based on freestanding nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanofibers derived from electrospun polyacrylonitrile@polyaniline nanofibers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4180 RSC .
P. Li, Z. Jin and D. Xiao, A phytic acid etched Ni/Fe nanostructure based flexible network as a high-performance wearable hybrid energy storage device, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3274 RSC .
W. H. Meyer, Polymer Electrolytes for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 439 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, M. Zu, J. Yu, H. Cheng and Q. Li, Stretchable Fiber Supercapacitors with High Volumetric Performance Based on Buckled MnO2/Oxidized Carbon Nanotube Fiber Electrodes, Small, 2017, 13, 1602994 CrossRef .
S. Zhai, W. Jiang, L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, Y. Yuan, A. K. Ng and Y. Chen, All-carbon solid-state yarn supercapacitors from activated carbon and carbon fibers for smart textiles, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 598 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Fang, H. Sun, S. He, J. Ren, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Fabricating Continuous Supercapacitor Fibers with High Performances by Integrating All Building Materials and Steps into One Process, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7854 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Energy harvesting and storage in 1D devices, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17023 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, L. Zhang, L. Liu, B. Zhu, H. Dong and X. Chen, All-Solid-State Flexible Ultrathin Micro-Supercapacitors Based on Graphene, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4035 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin and D. Xiao, Three-dimensional nanotube-array anode enables a flexible Ni/Zn fibrous battery to ultrafast charge and discharge in seconds, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 232 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhao, J. Ren, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, An All-Solid-State Fiber-Shaped Aluminum–Air Battery with Flexibility, Stretchability, and High Electrochemical Performance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7979 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, B. Patil and H. Ahn, Flexible, fiber-shaped supercapacitors with roll-type assembly, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 71, 220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Qiu, J. Ren, G. Guan, H. Lin, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Novel Electric Double-Layer Capacitor with a Coaxial Fiber Structure, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, J. Yun, K. Keum, Y. R. Jeong, H. Park, H. Lee, G. Lee, S. Y. Oh and J. S. Ha, High performance wire-type supercapacitor with Ppy/CNT-ionic liquid/AuNP/carbon fiber electrode and ionic liquid based electrolyte, Carbon, 2019, 144, 639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang and N. Pan, Supercapacitors Performance Evaluation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401401 CrossRef .
P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and J. F. Fauvarque, Electrochemical Characteristics and Impedance Spectroscopy Studies of Carbon-Carbon Supercapacitors, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A292 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jost, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Textile energy storage in perspective, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10776 RSC .
X. Gong, S. Li and P. S. Lee, A fiber asymmetric supercapacitor based on FeOOH/PPy on carbon fibers as an anode electrode with high volumetric energy density for wearable applications, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10794 RSC .
J. P. Zheng, The Limitations of Energy Density of Battery/Double-Layer Capacitor Asymmetric Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A484 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and F. Gao, Analysis of electrodes matching for asymmetric electrochemical capacitor, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, X. Li, X. Xiang, T. Gao, Y. Zhang and D. Xiao, Porous NiCoP in situ grown on Ni foam using molten-salt electrodeposition for asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23746 RSC .
U. Gulzar, S. Goriparti, E. Miele, T. Li, G. Maidecchi, A. Toma, F. De Angelis, C. Capiglia and R. P. Zaccaria, Next-generation textiles: from embedded supercapacitors to lithium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16771 RSC .

          A. R. Bunsell, Handbook of tensile properties of textile and technical fibres, Elsevier,  2009 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu and C. Zhi, Evaluating Flexibility and Wearability of Flexible Energy Storage Devices, Joule, 2019, 3, 613 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, A Highly Stretchable, Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, L. Zheng, S. Luo, D. Li, G. Wang, H. Jin, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Liao and W. J. Cantwell, A highly torsionable fiber-shaped supercapacitor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4397 RSC .
Y. H. Kwon, S.-W. Woo, H.-R. Jung, H. K. Yu, K. Kim, B. H. Oh, S. Ahn, S.-Y. Lee, S.-W. Song, J. Cho, H.-C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Cable-Type Flexible Lithium Ion Battery Based on Hollow Multi-Helix Electrodes, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Cheng, J. Ren, W. Weng, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, Flexible and Stretchable Lithium-Ion Batteries and Supercapacitors Based on Electrically Conducting Carbon Nanotube Fiber Springs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14564 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lee, M. K. Shin, S. H. Kim, H. U. Cho, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, M. D. Lima, X. Lepro, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Ultrafast charge and discharge biscrolled yarn supercapacitors for textiles and microdevices, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1970 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Y. Huang, Y. N. Sze Sea, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, H. Li, X. Tao, C. Zhi and H. Hu, Recent progress of fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitors, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 1 CrossRef .
Q. Meng, K. Wang, W. Guo, J. Fang, Z. Wei and X. She, Thread-like supercapacitors based on one-step spun nanocomposite yarns, Small, 2014, 10, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
W. Teng, Q. Zhou, X. Wang, H. Che, P. Hu, H. Li and J. Wang, Hierarchically interconnected conducting polymer hybrid fiber with high specific capacitance for flexible fiber-shaped supercapacitor, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124569 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, Z. Wang, S. Moradi, F. Yang, P. A. Lynch, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, Highly Conductive Ti3C2Tx MXene Hybrid Fibers for Flexible and Elastic Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitors, Small, 2019, 15, 1804732 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, L. Yao, Y. Qiu, S. Wang and K. Zhang, Core–Sheath Porous Polyaniline Nanorods/Graphene Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitors with High Specific Capacitance and Rate Capability, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4335 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Fu, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, X. Tao, C. Zhi and H. Hu, A high performance fiber-shaped PEDOT@MnO2//C@Fe3O4 asymmetric supercapacitor for wearable electronics, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14877 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Liang, D. Zhang and M. Miao, Novel core/shell CoSe2@PPy nanoflowers for high-performance fiber asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10361 RSC .
J. Zhong, J. Meng, Z. Yang, P. Poulin and N. Koratkar, Shape memory fiber supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cherusseri and K. K. Kar, Ultra-flexible fibrous supercapacitors with carbon nanotube/polypyrrole brush-like electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9910 RSC .
C. Zhang, Z. Chen, W. Rao, L. Fan, Z. Xia, W. Xu and J. Xu, A high-performance all-solid-state yarn supercapacitor based on polypyrrole-coated stainless steel/cotton blended yarns, Cellulose, 2018, 26, 1169 CrossRef .
W. Xiong, X. Hu, X. Wu, Y. Zeng, B. Wang, G. He and Z. Zhu, A flexible fiber-shaped supercapacitor utilizing hierarchical NiCo2O4@polypyrrole core–shell nanowires on hemp-derived carbon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17209 RSC .
Q. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Pan, J. Sun, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Tang, J. Luo, B. Song, Z. Zhang, W. Lu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Yao, Wrapping Aligned Carbon Nanotube Composite Sheets around Vanadium Nitride Nanowire Arrays for Asymmetric Coaxial Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitors with Ultrahigh Energy Density, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2719 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Pan, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, L. Liu and H. Peng, A Li–Air Battery with Ultralong Cycle Life in Ambient Air, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704378 CrossRef .
J. Ren, Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Fang, W. Weng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Elastic and Wearable Wire-Shaped Lithium-Ion Battery with High Electrochemical Performance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7864 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Guo, Y. Xu, Y. Wang and H. Peng, High-Performance Lithium–Air Battery with a Coaxial-Fiber Architecture, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Energy gels: A bio-inspired material platform for advanced energy applications, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, C. R. Bridges, G. Gao, T. Baumgartner and X. He, Poly(5-vinylbenzothiadiazole) for High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, P. Sun, J. Yang and Y. Xu, Benzoquinone- and Naphthoquinone-Bearing Polymers Synthesized by Ring-Opening Metathesis Polymerization as Cathode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 334 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, A highly flexible polymer fibre battery, J. Power Sources, 2005, 150, 223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Y. Wang, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Highly-flexible fibre battery incorporating polypyrrole cathode and carbon nanotubes anode, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1458 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin and A. J. Bard, Atom-by-atom electrodeposition of single isolated cobalt oxide molecules and clusters for studying the oxygen evolution reaction, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 12651 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin, R. Wang, Y. Jin and D. Xiao, Three-dimensional flexible electrode derived from low-cost nickel–phytate with improved electrochemical performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9486 RSC .
X. Chen, P. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Meng, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, Tri-metallic phytate in situ electrodeposited on 3D Ni foam as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for enhanced overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18786 RSC .
D. Bin, W. Huo, Y. Yuan, J. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, F. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Organic-Inorganic-Induced Polymer Intercalation into Layered Composites for Aqueous Zinc-Ion Battery, Chem, 2020, 6, 968 CAS .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Bi, Z. Niu and J. Chen, An Aqueous Rechargeable Zinc-Organic Battery with Hybrid Mechanism, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804975 CrossRef .
C. Li, Q. Zhang, S. E. T. Li, Z. Zhu, B. He, Z. Zhou, P. Man, Q. Li and Y. Yao, An ultra-high endurance and high-performance quasi-solid-state fiber-shaped Zn–Ag2O battery to harvest wind energy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2034 RSC .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Integrated polymer solar cell and electrochemical supercapacitor in a flexible and stable fiber format, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, T. He, J. Cheng, Q. Guan and B. Wang, Bioinspired Interface Design of Sewable, Weavable, and Washable Fiber Zinc Batteries for Wearable Power Textiles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2004430,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202004430 .
Z. Wang, Z. Ruan, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Tang, H. Li, M. Zhu, T. F. Hung, J. Liu and Z. Shi, A flexible rechargeable zinc-ion wire-shaped battery with shape memory function, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8549 RSC .
X. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, A self-healable asymmetric fibered-supercapacitor
integrated in self-supported inorganic nanosheets array and conducting polymer electrodes, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 423 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Stretchable polymer solar cell fibers, Small, 2015, 11, 675 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, J. Ding, B. Liu, X. Liu, X. Han, Y. Deng, W. Hu and C. Zhong, A Rechargeable Zn–Air Battery with High Energy Efficiency and Long Life Enabled by a Highly Water-Retentive Gel Electrolyte with Reaction Modifier, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Meng, T. Gao, J. Zhang, X. Li, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, An iron foam acts as a substrate and iron source for the in situ construction of a robust transition metal phytate electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 331 RSC .
P. Li, Z. Jin, J. Yang, Y. Jin and D. Xiao, Highly Active 3D-Nanoarray-Supported Oxygen-Evolving Electrode Generated From Cobalt-Phytate Nanoplates, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Ding, L. Peng, W. Zhang and G. Yu, A Conductive Molecular Framework Derived Li2S/N,P-Codoped Carbon Cathode for Advanced Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602876 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Z. Jin, X. Tian, X. Li, Q. Zhao and D. Xiao, Core-shell copper oxide@nickel/nickel–iron hydroxides nanoarrays enabled efficient bifunctional electrode for overall water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 695 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin and A. J. Bard, Surface Interrogation of Electrodeposited MnOx and CaMnO3 Perovskites by Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy: Probing Active Sites and Kinetics for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202008052 .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Z. Fang and G. Yu, A surface-strained and geometry-tailored nanoreactor that promotes the ammonia electrosynthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202011596 .
W. Zhang, X. Xu, C. Zhang, Z. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Tang, P. Wu and S. Guo, 3D Space-Confined Pyrolysis of Double-Network Aerogels Containing In–Fe Cyanogel and Polyaniline: A New Approach to Hierarchically Porous Carbon with Exclusive Fe–Nx Active Sites for Oxygen Reduction Catalysis, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700167 CrossRef .
L. J. Points, J. W. Taylor, J. Grizou, K. Donkers and L. Cronin, Artificial intelligence exploration of unstable protocells leads to predictable properties and discovery of collective behavior, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 885 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sanchez-Lengeling and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Inverse molecular design using machine learning: Generative models for matter engineering, Science, 2018, 361, 360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Li and Y. Jiang, A Time-Dependent DFT Study on Band Gaps and Effective Conjugation Lengths of Polyacetylene, Polyphenylene, Polypentafulvene, Polycyclopentadiene, Polypyrrole, Polyfuran, Polysilole, Polyphosphole, and Polythiophene, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 1109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ullah, A.-U.-H. A. Shah, S. Bilal and K. Ayub, Doping and Dedoping Processes of Polypyrrole: DFT Study with Hybrid Functionals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hofmann, 3D Printing Gets a Boost and Opportunities with Polymer Materials, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sydney Gladman, E. A. Matsumoto, R. G. Nuzzo, L. Mahadevan and J. A. Lewis, Biomimetic 4D printing, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 413 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, Y. Yang, K. Gu, E. J. Amis and K. A. Cavicchi, Digital Light Processing 3D Printing of Triple Shape Memory Polymer for Sequential Shape Shifting, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, H. Lu, X. Zhao, O. I. Malyi, J. Peng, C. Lu, X. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Zeng, G. Xing and Y. Tang, Printable Ink Design towards Customizable Miniaturized Energy Storage Devices, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, K. Yan, M. Peng, X. Yu, S. Chen, B. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao and D. Zou, Fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells with 5.3% efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3901 RSC .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Integrating Perovskite Solar Cells into a Flexible Fiber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, W. Song, M. Liu, C. Sun, C. Du, C. Jiang, X. Huang, D. Zou, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Wearable Power-Textiles by Integrating Fabric Triboelectric Nanogenerators and Fiber-Shaped Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601048 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Materials for solar-powered water evaporation, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Atmospheric Water Harvesting: A Review of Material and Structural Designs, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 671 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, A Hydrogen-Evolving Hybrid-Electrolyte Battery with Electrochemical/Photoelectrochemical Charging from Water Oxidation, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 483 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, Photoanode-immobilized molecular cobalt-based oxygen-evolving complexes with enhanced solar-to-fuel efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11228 RSC .
Z. Liu, D. Qi, G. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, Y. Luo, X. J. Loh, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Surface Strain Redistribution on Structured Microfibers to Enhance Sensitivity of Fiber-Shaped Stretchable Strain Sensors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704229 CrossRef .
Y. Jang, S. M. Kim, G. M. Spinks and S. J. Kim, Carbon Nanotube Yarn for Fiber-Shaped Electrical Sensors, Actuators, and Energy Storage for Smart Systems, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kwon, Y. H. Hwang, M. Nam, H. Chae, H. S. Lee, Y. Jeon, S. Lee, C. Y. Kim, S. Choi, E. G. Jeong and K. C. Choi, Recent Progress of Fiber Shaped Lighting Devices for Smart Display Applications—A Fibertronic Perspective, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903488 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Connor, K. H. An, Y. Zhao, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Fiber Shaped Light Emitting Device, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3897 CrossRef .
K. Yan, B. Chen, H. Hu, S. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and D. Zou, First Fiber-Shaped Non-Volatile Memory Device Based on Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Perovskite, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600160 CrossRef .
Z. Jin, P. Li, B. Zheng, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, CuO–Ag2O nanoparticles grown on a AgCuZn alloy substrate in situ for use as a highly sensitive non-enzymatic glucose sensor, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 2215 RSC .
Z. Yang, T. Qin, Y. Niu, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, P. Li, M. Zhu, Y. Jia and Q. Li, Flexible visible-light-driven photoelectrochemical biosensor based on molecularly imprinted nanoparticle intercalation-modulated graphene fiber for ultrasensitive urea detection, Carbon, 2020, 157, 457 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Zhai, D. Dong, T. An, S. Gong, Q. Shi and W. Cheng, Highly Stretchable and Strain-Insensitive Fiber-Based Wearable Electrochemical Biosensor to Monitor Glucose in the Sweat, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 6569 CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Xiaoqin Li
	Xiaoqin Li received her PhD degree in new energy materials and devices from Sichuan University in China in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Dan Xiao. She is currently an associate professor at Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University. Her current research interests focus on nanomaterials for energy storage.

Xiaojuan Chen
	Xiaojuan Chen received her BS degree in chemical engineering and technology from Panzhihua University and her MS degree in chemical engineering from Sichuan University. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree at Sichuan University, where she aims at developing 3D transition metal materials for high-efficient electrochemical energy conversion and storage.

Zhaoyu Jin
	Zhaoyu Jin obtained his BS degree in chemistry from Sichuan University and also received a PhD in analytical chemistry in 2017. He is currently a postdoc at the University of Texas at Austin. His research focuses on understanding fundamental properties of single-atom/molecule electrocatalysts.

Panpan Li
	Panpan Li received her BS degree in chemistry, MEng in environmental engineering, and PhD in environmental science under the supervision of Prof. Dan Xiao from Sichuan University, China. She is currently a postdoc scholar with Prof. Guihua Yu at the University of Texas at Austin. Her current research interests focus on hydrogel-derived nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.

Dan Xiao
	Dan Xiao is currently a professor of analytical chemistry at Department of Chemical Engineering in Sichuan University in China. He received his PhD in analytical chemistry from Hunan University in 1994. His research interests focus on chemical sensors and biosensors, chromatography and electrophoresis separation technology, chemical education, and energy storage and conversion. Prof. Xiao has published over 300 papers and filed more than 10 patents.

 	Fig. 1  The evolution of smart textile products originating from conductive polymers. (a) The category of CPs. (b–e) Fibrous electrodes derived from PEDOT:PSS, PANI/rGO, PPy@CNT@urethane, and MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT. (f–h) The typical configuration of FEESDs: parallel, twisted, and coaxial structures. (i–k) The illustration of CP-based smart textile products. (b) Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (c and j) Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Wiley-VCH. (d) Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Elsevier. (e and g) Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH. (h) Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (i) Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the American Chemical Society. (k) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Conductive polymers and the conduction mechanism. (a) Chemical structures of typical CPs. (b) The schematic illustration of the conduction mechanism for a conjugated backbone. (c) The conductivity range of polymers compared to other materials’ conductivity. (b) Reproduced from ref. 35 under the terms of the Creative Commons CC-BY license. (c) Reproduced from ref. 36 under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/).	 

 	Fig. 3  Pure CPs for fibrous electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of the wet-spinning processes. (b) Digital photograph of a PEDOT:PSS fiber. (c) SEM image of the wet spun fiber tied in a knot. (d) Schematic illustration of the re-arrangement mechanism of PEDOT-S:PSS fibers in sulfuric acid. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PEDOT:PSS fibers by microfluidic spinning. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (e) Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  CP-based composites for fibrous electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogel formation and the further shaping/reduction process. (b) The fabrication of the CNY@PPy@rGO core–shell fiber electrode. (c) The fabrication process of MnO2@PEDOT:PSS@OCNTF. (d) The preparation of porous hollow conductive fibers (PHCFs). (a) Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Wiley-VCH. (b) Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (c) Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Elsevier. (d) Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Configurations of FEESDs. (a) Main structures and cross section of various FEESDs. The assembly of (b) parallel, (c) single twisted, (d) coaxial, (e) double twisted, and (f) rolled type FEESDs. (b) Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright (2017) from Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (d) Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH. (e) Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission. Copyright (2015) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  The illustration of the essential parameters and corresponding affecting factors for evaluating FEESDs.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  Evaluating the mechanical properties of a fibrous electrode. (a) A single fiber with vertical loading force. (b) The stress–strain curve of a fibrous electrode. (c and d) The illustration of the knittability of the fibrous electrode. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission. Copyright (2016) from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Evaluating the mechanical properties of FEESDs. (a) Bending tests. (b and c) Stretching tests. (d and e) Torsion tests. (a) Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright (2013) from Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Recently reported fibrous supercapacitors made from pure polymer fibers. (a) 3D histogram of the diameter, tensile strength, tensile strain, and electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT-S:PSS fibers after different treating times with sulfuric acid. Photograph of T-SFSSs lighting up (b) a green LED under different strains increased from 0 to 400%, and (c) a commercial USB light, and (d) a schematic illustration of the assembled T-SFSSs in series. (e) Cyclic stability measurement of YSCs. (f) CV curves before and after bending 2000 times. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission. Copyright (2018) from Elsevier. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Recently reported fibrous supercapacitors with polymer composite fibers. (a) CF@PANI symmetric supercapacitor and (b) CV curves at various bending states. (c) The fabrication of the MxPy fibrous electrode. (d) The conductivity of the MxPy fiber compared with other reported electrodes and (e) the corresponding volumetric capacitance. (f) PPy/CNT-IL/AuNP fiber-shaped SC and (g) its performance compared with other reports. (h) Capacitance retention of PEDOT@MnO2//C@Fe3O4 under various deformations. (i) The specific capacitance and iR drop of the CoSe2@PPy-90//EACF ASC and CoSe2@PPy-90 SSC. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission. Copyright (2019) from the American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Wiley-VCH. (f and g) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission. Copyright (2019) from Elsevier. (h) Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission. Copyright (2018) from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Fiber-shaped LIBs. (a) Electrochemical performance and (b) flexibility of the flexible Si/PPy/CF electrode; (inset of a) cross-section of Si/PPy/CF and the flexible battery. (c) Rate performance and long-term stability test of the FAL; (insert of c) a simplified structure of the FAL. (d) FALs weaved into textiles and (e) the charge and discharge curves of the FALs connected in series. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission. Copyright (2017) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission. Copyright (2016) from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Other FEESDs. (a) Cyclic stability of a bendable cable-shaped Zn-ion cell. (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and (c) durability of the integrated Zn-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS fiber device. (d) Integrated device charged by the wind and the discharge curves. (e) Schematic diagram, (f) self-charging/discharging curve and (g) GCDs at various current densities of a quasi-solid-state Zn-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS battery. (a) Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission. Copyright (2020) from Elsevier. (b and d) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission. Copyright (2019) from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e–g) Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright (2014) from Wiley-VCH.	 


Parallel	AT-PEDOT:PSS/PPy-60	PVA/H2SO4	0.8	393.8 F cm−3	8.3	∼3000	71.4% (10k cycles)	
94

Parallel	MXene/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H2SO4	0.6	361.4 F cm−3	7.13	8249	95% (10k cycles)	
95

Parallel	PPy/CNT-IL/AuNP/CF	PC-PMMA-IL	2.5	38.49 mF cm−2	0.024	3.52	69% (10k cycles)	
76

Twisted	PPy@CNT@UY	PVA/H3PO4	0.8	69 mF cm−2	0.47	10.18	—	
14

Parallel	HDC@NiCo2O4@polypyrrole	PVA/NaOH	1	120 F g−1	17.5 W h kg−1	4 kW kg−1	87.2% (10k cycles)	
102

Twisted	GF@PANI	H2SO4/PVA	0.8	357.1 mF cm−2	5.7	14.5	96.2% (5k cycles)	
96

Parallel	PHCF@PANI	PVA/H2SO4	0.8	622 mF cm−2	1.55	12	—	
62

Parallel	NY@PPy@rGO	PVA/H3PO4	0.8	24.38 F cm−3	—	—	∼100% (10k cycles)	
59

Parallel	PANI/RGO	PVA/H2SO4	0.8	148 F cm−3	8.8	30.77	86% (17k cycles)	
9

Parallel	PEDOT-S:PSS	PVA/H3PO4	1.6	74.5 F cm−3	6.6	320	∼89% (5k cycles)	
20

Parallel	CoSe2@PPy-90//EACF	PVA/LiCl	1.6	7.6 F cm−3	2.63	130	80.1% (15k cycles)	
98

Coaxial	MnO2 NB@Ni/CNT//MoS2 NSA/CNTF	PVA/LiCl	1.8	195.38 mF cm−2	0.088	9	88.4% (6k cycles)	
8

Parallel	MoS2@CNTF	PVA/LiCl	1.8	278.6 mF cm−2	0.12	5.4	90.7% (5k cycles)	
61

Twisted	MnO2@CF//FeOOH/PPy@CF	PVA/LiCl	1.6	5.5 F cm−3	2	∼5	82% (5k cycles)	
80

Parallel	PEDOT@MnO2//C@Fe3O4	PVA/LiCl	2	7.23 F cm−3	4.02	∼200	80% (800 cycles)	
97

Coaxial	Ni3S2-CF//PPy	PVA-g-GTMAC	1.8	5.4 mF cm−2	84.2	73.8	99% (1k cycles)	
121

Twisted	MnO2/PEDOT:PSS/CNT//OMC/CNT	CMC/Na2SO4	1.8	23.4 F cm−3	11.3	2100	85% (1k cycles)	
15

Parallel	PNC/PEDOT//CMK-3	PVA/KOH	1.5	3.16 F cm−3	0.011 mW h cm−2	7.8 mW cm−2	∼100% (1.4k cycles)	
52

Twisted	CNTF-NCA-Ag2O@PEDOT:PSS//CNTF-NCA-Zn	PVA–KOH	1.5	∼1.25 mA h cm−2	1.57 mW h cm−2	14.4 mW cm−2	∼85.2% (200 cycles)	
117

Twisted	MnO2/PPy@SS//Zn@NT	Gelatin/borax/ZnSO4/MnSO4	1.0	174.2 mA h g−1	—	—	60% (1k cycles)	
120

coaxial	Poly(1,5-NAPD)/AC//Zn foil	PVA/ZnSO4	1.7	1.1 mA h cm−2	—	—	92% (150 cycles)	
25

Coaxial	PPy/PF6//SWNT	LiPF6/EC/DMC	2	28 mA h g−1	—	—	71.4% (10 cycles)	
111

Parallel	Li wire//Si/PPy/CF	LiPF6/EC/DMC/FEC	1	3050 mA h g−1	—	—	75% (100 cycles)	
22

Coaxial	PPy/PF6//PPy/PSS	LiPF6/EC/DMC	2	10 mA h g−1	—	—	∼100% (10 cycles)	
110

Parallel	LMO/CNT//PI/CNT	Li2SO4	1.4	183 mA h g−1	48.93 W h kg−1	10.22 kW kg−1	98% (1k cycles)	
22

Twisted	TiO2/Ti//MWCNT	P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS	0.51 V OCP	—	—	—	PCE 90% after 1k times bending	
122

Coaxial	TiO2/Ti//MWCNT	PVA/H3PO4; P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS	0.6; 0.45 V OCP	0.077 mF cm−1	1.61 × 10−7 W h cm−2	—	75% (7 days); PCE 90% (10 days)	
118

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
