Advancements in excited state absorption-based luminescence thermometry  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC06070H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC06070H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 5744-5782Advancements in excited state absorption-based luminescence thermometry

        
          
            Joanna 
            Stefańska
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Artur 
            Bednarkiewicz
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lukasz 
            Marciniak
          
        
      *
      Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Okólna 2, 50-422 Wroclav, Poland. E-mail: l.marciniak@intibs.pl
Received 
      21st December 2021
    , Accepted 6th March 2022First published on 7th March 2022AbstractLuminescence thermometry is attracting growing interest from the fundamental research community, which is further stimulated by the needs and challenges of other fields of science and technology. Although numerous temperature-responsive luminescent phosphors have been proposed, synthesized and evaluated via various quantification methods, their iterative optimization has not resulted in radical improvements in their sensitivity and accuracy, simplification of temperature measurements to sufficiently meet the growing demands or overcoming specific issues for targeted applications. Nevertheless, occasionally, novel materials and dedicated readout techniques are proposed that contribute significantly to the development of new approaches, circumventing existing issues or problems and promising practical implementation. This review on novel luminescence thermometry materials and techniques not only surveys such achievements but also summarizes the knowledge and results, focusing on single band ratiometric methods and dedicated materials. In addition to presenting a theoretical background, the unique contributions of all the publications discussed are pointed out, and the results and recurring trends are used to identify the most promising future directions.
Introduction
Precise information about the local temperature or temperature gradients is crucial for the development of many fields of science (e.g., biology, thermal therapy, and biotechnology) and technology (e.g., microelectronics, microfluidics, and nanophotonics). Therefore, the demand for innovative temperature reading and 2D/3D mapping is ever-increasing, both in terms of new sensors (compared to conventional thermocouples, TCs, or Hg thermometers) and methodologies (compared to TC voltage recording or medium infrared radiation quantification in thermovision cameras, for example). Conventional devices for temperature measurement suffer from numerous drawbacks, which often disallow temperature quantification in a certain volume (e.g., below the tissue surface), at the sub-millimeter scale (e.g., within living cells or at the single transistor level), in rotating objects (e.g., turbines and engines) or without electrical wiring or interference. Many new applications require measurements that are sensitive and accurate, remote, technically cost-effective and simple to perform at the sub-micrometer and sub-second scale. To meet these numerous challenges posed by the recent rapid advancement in, inter alia, nanotechnology and biomedical technologies1, which demand precise temperature evaluation, the field of luminescence thermometry has been developed, benefiting from the temperature dependence of the optical response of phosphors to light stimulation.2–6 This method allows a semi-non-contact temperature readout (i.e., no direct thermometer–reader coupling requirement) with high sensitivity, precision and accuracy as well as high thermal and temporal resolution. With the development of luminescence thermometry, several main paths in the evolution of this field can be distinguished. Much work has been devoted to proposing new methods of measurement or employing hitherto unexploited phenomena that may contribute to increasing the sensitivity of the optical response of phosphors to temperature change.1,2,5–10 Extensive materials research has also been carried out, covering the whole spectrum of possible proposals.5 Particular attention has also been given to the development of theoretical models to explain the observed experimental results and enable the prediction of their operation.7 Considering that the limitations of the various proposals for temperature-dependent physical processes used in luminescence thermometry are mostly known, it is particularly important to propose new phenomena that can improve the responsiveness of phosphors to temperature change. Besides, most of the luminescent processes used thus far for temperature quantification exhibit a negative temperature coefficient, i.e., they become dimmer with an increase in temperature due to the increasing role of thermally activated energy dissipation processes. High brightness is definitely important for luminescence thermometry given that it directly affects the sensitivity and kinetic response. However, measuring the emission brightness alone is not a good quantity in terms of metrology because many experimental factors affect the absolute luminescence intensity. For example, the concentration of the luminescent reporter or the photoexcitation intensity at the target site may be unknown, in the simplest case. Therefore, relative (e.g., ratiometric) luminescence methods of temperature reading based on the comparison of two differently defined optical signals originating from the same luminescent reporter are employed, which, in the first approximation, neglect the above-mentioned issues of unknown concentration and unknown excitation intensity. Additionally, it is optimal if a known and high thermal extinction coefficient is combined with a phenomenon exhibiting a positive thermal coefficient, i.e., its luminescence intensity increases in response to an increase in temperature. Accordingly, the work discussed in this review represents an incredibly important field to propel luminescence thermometry in directions that open new possibilities.
The emergence of a new class of luminescent thermometers exhibiting excellent thermometric performances based on a strongly temperature-dependent process can be traced back several years. In 2016, Souza et al.11 and Zhou et al.12 proposed the use of the excited-state absorption (ESA) process for temperature evaluation in parallel, one month apart. These authors indicated that by matching the excitation wavelength to the transition from the first or second thermally coupled excited level of Eu3+ ions, i.e., 7F1 → 5D0 or 7F2 → 5D0 (which is opposite to the conventionally used ground state absorption), the emission intensity increases rapidly with temperature. The mechanism responsible for this is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. At low temperature, most electrons occupy the state with the lowest energy, and therefore only a small number are thermally promoted to the energy levels lying above or to vibrational levels of the ground state. Therefore, the probability of an ESA process is marginal at low temperature, and consequently only a low-intensity emission can be expected at this excitation wavelength. However, as the temperature increases, a stronger thermal population of higher lying levels or vibrational states is observed, which originates from the Boltzmann distribution. Due to the larger population of the level from which the ESA transition is induced, the observed emission becomes enhanced.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the basic principles of the excited-state absorption process at low and high temperature in lanthanide (Ln3+) and transition metal (TM) ions. The luminescence intensity is directly proportional to the absorption efficiency, which increases with increasing thermal population in the first excited level. 
Luminescence thermometry is a mature field in science and technology.1,2,5–10 Its materials and methods have been previously discussed in detail, with the main focus on ratiometric techniques using a single excitation wavelength to achieve a temperature-tunable multiband emission. The most well-known representative materials based on this principle are Yb3+Er3+ co-doped upconverting materials. In this case, 980 nm photoexcitation of the sensitizing Yb3+ ions initializes energy transfer upconversion in the Er3+ ions. The well-known emission ratio at 520 and 540 nm (LIR= I@520/I@540), corresponding to the 4S3/2 and 2H11/2 transition of the Er3+ ions to the ground 4I15/2 state, respectively, can be calibrated, enabling temperature reconstruction based on this LIR spectral fingerprint dependence. Thermometers based on these materials have been frequently used to explain the basic principles2 and study the temperature in numerous biological and technology applications. Also, numerous theoretical studies7 have evaluated the validity and accuracy of temperature predictions using these upconverting materials. The fact that NIR excitation light is used and the nanothermometers display perfect photostability and efficient anti-Stokes emission is of great importance for biomedical applications. Unfortunately, their other features are often disregarded, such as pumping power dependence and low absolute quantum yields of emission, which hinder the use of these thermometers for reliable temperature determination. Moreover, although the 520 and 540 nm emission bands are sufficiently far apart to be distinguished with bandpass filters, they can be strongly affected by dispersive samples (e.g., oxygenated/deoxygenated hemoglobin absorbs strongly in this spectral region). Another challenge is how to record the intensities at these two bands in 2D imaging mode and keep the system simple, fast, cost-effective and robust. Mechanical switching between band-pass filters is simple and cheap but slow and prone to spectral bleed-through. The use of 2CCD solutions is faster but also more expensive, given that the cameras used must guarantee sufficient sensitivity. Moreover, spectral bleed-through remains an issue. Hyperspectral imaging is more robust and relatively fast, but also more costly and prone to artifacts such as image shifts and spectral bleed-through. Thus, the drawbacks of existing materials and technologies have motivated the scientific community to search for alternative solutions. One of them is the single band ratiometric approach, where a single emission band is quantified under two different wavelength photoexcitations. This approach is interesting because it is much easier and faster to all-electronically switch between laser light sources and use a single sensitive camera or spectral detectors than in previous systems dedicated to conventional luminescence temperature reporters.
There have been dozens of reports proposing the exploitation of the ESA phenomenon exhibited by various optically active centers or presenting a further extension of existing concepts. However, due to the lack of systematization of the methods for the determination of the thermometric parameters used by various research groups, comparing the results obtained thus far presents certain difficulties.10 The a priori assumption of the equation describing the thermal dependence of the calibration curve may result in the omission of some additional energy transfer processes and a discrepancy between the actual thermometric parameters and the theoretical parameters. A widely recognized parameter in luminescence thermometry is the relative sensitivity (SR), which is defined by the following formula: (1)where X denotes the temperature-dependent parameter and most authors determine SR from the data fitted to the experimentally obtained X as a function of temperature. To standardize the results and make them easier to compare, we decided to digitize all the experimental data appearing in the works in question and we determined the SR parameter in the same arbitrary chosen way (using the fitting functions available in OriginPro2019 software). Our aim was not to under- or overestimate the performance of specific authors but only to standardize the method to more accurately compare individual results.
This review discusses the development of luminescence thermometry, which specifically exploits the ESA phenomenon since its emergence in 2016 to date. The differences and new insights are traced and the individual contributions of each research group are presented and highlighted. Furthermore, due to the repetitive nature of some of the findings and by taking a holistic view of all the results presented, we present collective guidelines for the further development of this field. In addition to the initial information on the ESA process for luminescence thermometry applications, the further discussion on the achievements is divided into four sections, highlighting the main measurement approaches that can be listed for ESA-based optical thermometry. Firstly, absolute luminescence intensity temperature monitoring is discussed (chapter A), followed by details on the single band ratiometric (SBR, subchapter B), single excitation band ratio (EIR, subchapter C) and double band excitation ratiometric techniques (LIR, subchapter D). Besides a discussion, dedicated tables list and summarize the state-of-the-art achievements in a given area of thermometers.
ESA for luminescence thermometry
To highlight how promising results can be expected by engaging the ESA process for luminescence thermometry, the simplest possible case illustrated in Fig. 2a can be analyzed. The excitation wavelength should be chosen to induce a transition from the first excited level to the emitting level but is off-resonance from the ground level in the ground state absorption (GSA) process. The probability of this type of light-induced transition, which is denoted as WLD, depends on the excitation density and on the absorption cross section corresponding to the transition between the two levels involved and is expected to increase with an increase in temperature. In rate equations, to obtain the full term responsible for the ESA process, this probability is further multiplied by the population of the level from which the transition occurs, and thus one would expect a strong temperature dependence in the ESA process. This is because the thermalization between near-lying levels has to be considered via the transitions resulting from the Boltzmann distribution, which is denoted WB, whose temperature dependence is described by the following expression: (2)where A is a parameter, kB is the Boltzmann constant (kB = 0.695 cm−1), and T [K] is temperature. As can be seen, the most significant parameter in this case is the energy gap between the thermalized levels, ΔEij. For the simplest example (Fig. 2a), the behavior of the system can be described by the set of following differential rate equations: (3) (4) (5)The probability of nonradiative transitions between energy levels separated by ΔEij, which depends on the maximum energy of the given matrix phonons, ω, is denoted here as WNR and is defined by the following relation: (6)where D1 and D2 are the material parameters. The probability of radiative transitions WR is independent of temperature and is the inverse of the radiative decay time characterizing a given emitting level.
 Fig. 2  A simplified energy level diagram of the ESA process for SBR luminescence thermometry (a). Expected temperature dependence of the emission intensity upon ESA-matched photoexcitation (b) and corresponding relative sensitivity SR (c) for varying energy distance ΔE01 between the ground and first excited levels. 
When considering eqn (6), it is clear that in addition to the strong thermal dependence, the significant effect of the energy difference between the ground level and the level from which the ESA is induced should also be expected. The modeling performed (Fig. 2b and c) indicates that as the energy gap, ΔE01, increases, for the fixed remaining parameters of the equations, the threshold temperature for obtaining efficient ESA-excited emissions can be expected to shift toward higher temperatures, as shown in Fig. 2b. Moreover, increasing the energy gap, ΔE01, is expected to result in an increasingly strong variation of the emission signal as a function of temperature, which is reflected in the higher SR obtained, as shown in Fig. 2c. In this simplified model, a characteristic feature of ESA-based luminescence thermometers is a monotonic decrease in SR with an increase in temperature, and thus difficulties in implementing this idea at high temperatures can be expected. However, at low temperatures where a high value of SR is observed, the emission signal is very weak, and consequently high measurement errors can be expected. This should be considered when extraordinarily high values of SR are obtained in this temperature regime. Accordingly, these issues have been addressed in numerous reports, as discussed below.
The work discussed in this review involved more complex models, considering a larger number of processes that can affect the population of the emitting level and the level from which ESA is induced. For example, the influence of phonon-assisted absorption, thermalization with higher energy levels, energy dispersion pathways due to, e.g., energy transfer or surface effects, or interionic interactions such as cross-relaxation revealed as dependent on the optically active center concentration were thoroughly analyzed.13,14 However, it must be stated that for the overwhelming majority of works, an analogous shape of the temperature dependence of SR, as depicted in Fig. 2c, was obtained. This emphasizes that the process of thermally activated occupancy of the excited level is crucial for the temperature dependence of the luminescence signal in these cases.
Another aspect that is discussed here is the selection of a variety of methodologies by individual authors to enable the use of the ESA process for luminescence thermometry. With a few exceptions, four main measurement methods can be distinguished among the publications discussed, as shown in Fig. 3. The simplest possible implementation is to study the emission intensity of a single emission band obtained upon an ESA-matched excitation wavelength (Fig. 3a, Section A), which is abbreviated as ABS I for “absolute intensity”. However, despite being conceptually straightforward, this approach is susceptible not only to temperature, but to a range of other parameters, i.e., distance and angle between the phosphor and detection system, type of medium in which it is located and the dispersive properties of the medium between the phosphor and detection system, and acquisition time. Hence, it requires calibration every time before thermal sensing. Using the GSA process to excite the emission of a given optically active center naturally provides an easy path to obtain a reference signal, i.e., by changing the excitation wavelength to match the GSA process, a signal from the same luminescent particle that resides in the same environment and at the same depth in the volumetric sample can be obtained. ESA excited luminescence usually exhibits the opposite intensity dependence on temperature, which is particularly advantageous from a thermometric perspective. Using two excitation wavelengths and monitoring one emission wavelength forms the basis of two further measurement approaches (Fig. 3b). The single band ratiometric (SBR) approach is based on two measurements of the emission spectrum using two excitation wavelengths and comparing the ratio of the intensities obtained in each case (Section B). The excitation intensity ratio (EIR) method (Section C) is based on the measurement of the entire excitation spectrum at a given emission wavelength and analysis of this spectrum in two selected regimes, usually corresponding to bands with the opposite thermal dependence (typically related to GSA and ESA, respectively). The last method distinguished in this work (Section D) is the luminescence intensity ratio (LIR), where a single pumping wavelength is used, which can usually excite two different optically active centers, i.e., one via the ESA process and the other via GSA (Fig. 3c). The latter technique quantifies two emission bands whose ratio is a reliable temperature-dependent parameter.
 Fig. 3  The methods applied to measure temperature in ESA-based luminescence thermometry: ABS I = absolute intensity of a single emission band (a), SBR = ratio of the intensity of a single emission band excited with two wavelengths and EIR = ratio of the intensity of two excitation bands obtained when monitoring a single emission band (b), and LIR = ratio of the intensity of two emission bands obtained using a single excitation wavelength (c). 
Souza et al.11 developed an SBR-type thermometry model for Eu3+ ions, allowing a primary-type thermometer to be obtained. This means that its performance can be predicted only by analyzing a single emission spectrum and calculating the ratio of the intensities of the two bands and based on the energy gap between the lower thermally coupled levels. The following dependence of the temperature-dependent parameter X in this model can be predicted as follows: (7)where F is a factor derived from spectral characteristics at room temperature. The important aspect here is that in determining SR, the derivative is counted, and thus rescaling by any factor F gives the same prediction. Considering this, only the experimental determination of the energy distance between the thermally coupled levels is relevant in this case. This is incredibly beneficial for predicting the theoretical thermal SR dependence for a given material activated with Eu3+ ions. It is worth emphasizing here that this condition can be met only for sufficiently low concentrations of dopant ions to eliminate interionic interactions. As shown in Fig. 4a, the SR determined from this model depends only on the distance ΔEij. The monotonic decrease obtained is consistent with the trend determined for the ESA process itself in luminescence thermometry (see Fig. 2c). Fig. 4b shows the four temperature dependences of SR presented in separate works11,15–17 using the same parameter X as in the work by Souza et al. It can be observed that for Y2O3:Eu3+, the results calculated by us based on the digitalized data from the spectral parameters at room temperature given by the authors (dashed line) are in agreement with that obtained. The same is true for the TiO2 material, which confirms the great performance of this model. However, larger discrepancies were noted for the other two phosphors. In the case of calcium aluminosilicate glass for which the largest deviation was recorded, the discrepancy may be due to the presence of Eu2+ ions in the matrix, as indicated by the authors. In summary, the proposed model due to its relatively correct predictions is highly promising.
 Fig. 4  Relative sensitivity derived from the model by Souza et al.11 for varying energy distances between the ground level and first excited level ΔE01 (a). Model predictions by Souza et al.11 (dashed lines) versus SR results presented in the literature (solid lines) in a 285–330 K temperature range: Souza et al.11 (Y2O3 in red), Morassuti et al.15 (alumino-phosphate glass in blue), Borrero-González et al.16 (TiO2 in green), and Zanuto et al.17 (calcium aluminosilicate glass in yellow) (b). 
Regarding the development of research on the use of the ESA process in luminescence thermometry, some trends can be observed. Firstly, there is a general increase in the number of reports on this topic published each year. However, by analyzing the number of publications devoted to particular measurement methods, it can be found that, as shown in the upper part of Fig. 5, for the ABS I method, there was an initial increase in the number of works devoted to it until 2018, but then a gradual fading of interest was noted. This is because it is easiest to analyze the physical phenomena governing the obtained results using this approach, which indicates that the initial interest of researchers was to study the effect of temperature on the ESA process, rather than to achieve reliable luminescent thermometers, given that this measurement method is hampered by significant limitations. Additionally, the strong growth in the interest in the SBR approach can be attributed to its numerous inherent advantages. It requires only two excitation wavelengths and the studied emission is analyzed in a single spectral range, which makes the results independent of light absorption or scattering by the medium in which phosphorus is located, which is an extremely important problem occurring in other methods. The bottom part of Fig. 5 shows the optically active centers the ESA process that have been used to date in luminescence thermometry. The first work, as already mentioned, was focused on Eu3+ ions. As is evident, interest in the use of Eu3+ ions is still among the most widespread, while Tb3+ ions and Nd3+ ions are also gaining increasing popularity. Besides, the use of Cr3+ ions as the representative transition metal and the ESA process from higher vibrational levels of its ground state have also been proposed. The thermal population of the vibrational levels of the VO4 or WO4 group and the use of excitation matched to their transition were also proposed quite early and the number of publications devoted to this approach is growing significantly. It is worth mentioning that only a few reports thus far used the emission of these groups and most of the proposals additionally used a dopant ion excited via an energy (charge transfer) transfer process from the ESA-excited VO4 or WO4 group.
 Fig. 5  A time scale for the development of the field of luminescence thermometry using the ESA process. In the upper part: the number of papers describing a given measurement approach: ABS I = absolute intensity of a single emission band, SBR = ratio of the intensity of a single emission band excited with two wavelengths, EIR = ratio of the intensity of two excitation bands obtained when monitoring a single emission band, and LIR = ratio of the intensity of two emission bands obtained using a single excitation wavelength. In the lower part: the number of papers describing the use of the ESA process of a given ion, with the first mention marked with a bullet (*the use of WO4 was counted together with VO4). 
The presented approaches (i.e., ABS, SBR, EIR and LIR), as different excitation and readout techniques, may be adopted for various dopant ions and matrices to fit the specific requirements of the target application by considering the most reliable and accurate temperature reading and the technical complexity of the detection. The order in which the subsections appear in this work has been deliberately chosen to show the progress in understanding the advantages, but more importantly, in understanding the limitations of each approach.
Discussion of publications on ESA-based luminescent thermometry
A. Absolute intensity of luminescence (ABS I)
The simplest method to estimate the temperature using the ESA process is to select a photoexcitation wavelength that matches the transition from the excited state, but does not match the ground state absorption. The resulting luminescence intensity should increase proportionally to the thermal population of the first excited level according to eqn (7). This is why one of the first publications on this topic presented by Zhou et al.12 in 2016 (published one month after the pioneering work of Souza et al.11 (see Fig. 7b)) described temperature measurements based on the absolute intensity of a single emission band (Table 1). The authors proposed a thermometric approach based on the temperature-dependent population of the thermally excited state, which is adjacent to the ground state. Using the same type of crystal matrix as that described by Souza et al., namely a Y2O3:5%Eu3+ powder sample, the possibility to induce the ESA of Eu3+ ions using a wavelength of 611.2 nm matched to the 7F2 → 5D0 transition was demonstrated. An emission band at around 700–715 nm corresponding to the 5D0 → 7F4 transition was observed as a result of this excitation, revealing a strong increase in intensity for a temperature change in the range of 150–300 K. The authors investigated the energy of individual multiplets of levels 7F1 and 7F2 levels relative to the ground level 7F0 and estimated the thermal population of the lowest sublevel 7F2 according to the Boltzmann relation. After considering the changes in the shape of the band at around 611 nm in the excitation spectrum and the independence of the decay times from the temperature in the studied range, the agreement of the proposed theoretical equation with the experimental data was demonstrated. The SR presented in this work was determined by fitting the experimental data with an Arrhenius function that takes into account the distance of the 7F2 level from the ground level. A maximum SR of 3.93% K−1 was obtained for the lowest temperature of 150 K and its value decreased monotonically to about 1% K−1 with an increase in temperature. It is worth mentioning that the fit of the digitized data performed by us with a more fitted custom function indicates that the obtained SR at low temperature can reach even over 5% K−1 in this case. As one of the first reports on this type of ESA-based thermometers, it should be noted that the obtained results are among the highest to date, and the investigated temperature at which ESA process is initialized is also one of the lowest presented so far. Considering the need for a thermally induced population of higher energy levels, this is a significant achievement and demonstrates that both the absorption and emission processes must be very efficient for the phosphor under study.
Table 1 Information about publications on the absolute intensity of luminescence




Material
ESA excitation
Monitored emission
Max. SR (Max. SR calculated by us) (%K−1)
Analyzed temperature range (K)
Comment
Ref.




Y2O3:Eu3+
611.2 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
700–715 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
3.93 (>5)@150
150–300
The first proposal of ABS I-type thermometry based on ESA of Eu3+ ions (proposed independently of the pioneering work of Souza et al.11)

12



Ca3Sc2Si3O12: Eu3+, Eu2+
610.6 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
850–602 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
>6 (>10)@123
123–273
Selection of a material to ensure high relative intensity of the monitored band. The remainder of the work is discussed in Section D.

20



GdVO4:Sm3+
601.6 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)
550–580 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
∼4 (>4.5)@183
183–413
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Sm3+ ions. Additional temperature readout based on shortening decay times extending the useful temperature range to higher

18



644 nm (6H9/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)
550–580 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
1.6 (>2)@393
393–603


β-NaYF4:Sm3+
594 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)
545–575 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
1.1 (<1)@300
300–420
Testing a previous idea18 on the nanoscale.

21



Ca3Ga2Ge3O12:Eu3+
610.8 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
702.5–710 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
3.66 (<4)@160
160–300
Selection of a material to ensure high relative intensity of the monitored band

22



NaYF4:Nd3+, Y2O3:Nd3+, YGdO3:Nd3+, YAlO3:Nd3+, Y3Al5O12:Nd3+, LiLaP4O12:Nd3+, Gd2O3:Nd3+
1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
880 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)
>7@300
250–560
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Nd3+ ions. An indication of the impact of the matrix on SR. Proposal of an additional thermometric method based on half-time before saturation analysis

19



LuVO4:Sm3+, LuVO4:Er3+
360 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Sm3+ or Er3+ activator)
520–545 nm (4F3/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
∼4@330 (<4@300)
300–480
Higher signal variability and higher SR for analysis of emission from higher thermally coupled emissive levels. First use of Er3+ activator in an approach based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section D

23



515–540 nm (2H11/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)
3.5 (>4)@300
300–480


550–679 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
∼3 (<2)@300
300–480


540–565 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)
∼2.5 (>2)@300
300–480


YVO4:Eu3+
358 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
532–549 nm (5D1 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
4.36 (>4.5)@300
300–480
The first use of Eu3+ activator in an approach based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section C

26



589.6–600 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
3.11 (<3.5)@300
300–480


CaWO4:Tb3+
405 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
535–555 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
1.1@463 (0.8@440)
(343) 463–873
The first proposal of inducing ESA of Tb3+ ions with excitation, inducing a transition to the higher emissive level of 5D3 for application in luminescence thermometry

27



Ba2LaF7:Tb3+ glass ceramics
543 nm (7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+)
489 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)
2.88 (2.75)@300
300–630
The use of a phosphor in the form of glass ceramics

29



NaGdF4:Sm3+ glass ceramics
593.8 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)
450–578 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
1.51 (>2.5)@303.6
303.6–579
Possibility of high-temperature measurements by limiting temperature quenching through the use of suitable glass ceramic materials

33



640.48 nm (6H9/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)
540–614 nm (5G5/2 → 6H5/2, 5G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)
1.86 (>2)@390
390–773




Research on the use of Eu3+ ions in this approach was continued the following year by the same group (Table 1).20 In their work, the authors noted that two emissive thermally coupled levels located high on the energy diagram may cease to be thermally correlated for higher temperatures, where the depopulation to the lower lying states is faster than the establishment of thermodynamic equilibrium between them. In the case of coupled levels lying at the bottom of the energy diagram, their thermal population is not disturbed as much by depopulation processes, and thus the authors emphasized that they may be more suitable for low temperature measurements given that they still satisfy the Boltzmann relation. The novelty of this work was to select the crystal matrix in the appropriate manner to change the mutual intensities of the Eu3+ emission bands. In the previous work, the emission spectrum of Eu3+ in the Y2O3 matrix was dominated by the 5D0 → 7F2 transition, which could not be used for temperature readings because it overlapped with the ESA-matching excitation line used. In this work, the authors opted for the Ca2.94Eu0.04Sc2Si3O12:Eu3+ material, where Eu3+ substitutes the Ca2+ ions in a symmetry where the 5D0 → 7F2 transition is strictly forbidden. Therefore, the relative intensity of the bands associated with the 5D0 → 7F1 and 5D0 → 7F4 transitions increased in this matrix and could be successfully used for temperature readout with a higher signal-to-noise ratio. The temperature measurement mechanism and intensity dependence of the observed signal were analogous to that described in the previous work, where the 610.6 nm excitation line matching the ESA from the 7F2 level was used and a strong increase in intensity in the dominant band in the emission spectrum in the range of 580–602 nm, which is associated with the 5D0 → 7F1 transition, was analyzed. Fitting with the Arrhenius curve yielded a theoretical SR described by the expression 1008/T2 of more than 6% K−1 at 123 K, which decreased to 1.35% K−1 at 273 K. The value of 1008, expressed in K, corresponds to an energy difference of about 700 cm−1. However, the authors noted that this value is different from the 910 cm−1 that actually separates the 7F0 and 7F2 levels in this matrix. The SR calculated from the digitized data gives even better results, reaching more than 10% K−1 at low temperature. Due to the relatively low emission intensity of the Eu3+ ions with the applied ESA excitation, a broadband emission of residual Eu2+ ions was also observed in the near-infrared range, which was exploited by a thermometric approach based on the intensity ratio of two emission bands, as described in more detail later in this work. Although the authors used a less favorable method to determine the sensitivity, the digitization indicates that the actual SR results are the highest among thermometers operating on the absolute intensity of a single band. This indicates that the dedicated design of the material used can yield very favorable results.
Further research by the same contributors focused on another ion. Cai et al.18 described the first use of the ESA of Sm3+ ions in the GdVO4 matrix for temperature readout, as presented in Fig. 6a and b (Table 1). The authors proposed the use of three different temperature-dependent processes to extend the usable temperature range with high SR from 183 K up to 800 K. The first process suitable for the lowest temperature of 183–413 K used ESA from the 6H7/2 level to the 4G5/2 emissive level using an excitation wavelength of 601.6 nm. Another process ensuring higher SR at higher temperature of 393–603 K due to the larger distance between the thermally coupled levels was based on the induction of ESA from the next upper-laying excited level using a wavelength of 644 nm matched to the 6H9/2 → 4G5/2 transition. The last process took advantage of the observed strong shortening of the lifetimes in the range above 600 K, and therefore no longer based on the use of the ESA process, but on the excitation of Sm3+ ions using GSA from the 6H5/2 level and measuring the decay curves of the luminescence emission from the 4G5/2 level. In the first process, it was possible to observe and analyze both emissions in the range of shorter or longer wavelengths than the excitation used by selecting the 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 or 4G5/2 → 6H9/2 transition. However, the main focus was on the former in the range of 555–575 nm, and the obtained values of the integrals of the emission spectra over a wide temperature range were fit by an Arrhenius curve. A theoretical SR relationship of 1267/T2 was obtained, which as noted, was not as sharp vs. temperature as the theoretically predicted population of the level from which the ESA occurred. At the lowest temperature of 183 K, the SR value reached almost 4% K−1; however, the fitting of the digitalized spectra performed by us provides even slightly higher values. The thermal dependence of the efficiency of the absorption process and the quantum efficiency of the emission process were further discussed. It was also shown that with temperature, the resonant wavelength for the ESA process can be redshifted. Given these theoretical considerations, a reasonably good representation of the experimental data was possible. A similar analysis was performed for the second process proposed for intermediate temperature readings. In this case, using the transition from the 6G9/2 level for excitation, it was possible to analyze the emission signals associated with the transitions from the 4G5/2 level to the 6H7/2 and 6H5/2 levels. In this case, SR described by the 2600/T2 relationship was obtained with the maximum reaching over 1.6% K−1 at 393 K. According to the digitized data, it can be concluded that the SR can exceed 2% K−1 at this temperature. Together with the third method based on decay time measurements, the described GdVO4:1%Sm3+ can be considered as a versatile phosphor suitable for temperature readout over a very wide temperature range with a very high SR. Here, it must be emphasized again that although this research was one of the first studies on the use of the ESA process for luminescence thermometry, the obtained results are strongly competitive with that presented later.
 Fig. 6  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of ABS I luminescence thermometry: Cai et al.18 (a) and (b) and Marciniak et al.19 (c). 
In early 2018, Zhao et al.21 together with the authors of the publication discussed above, investigated the same ESA process of Sm3+ ions (see Fig. 6a)18 in nanocrystals instead of a sub-micrometer material (Table 1). For this purpose, β-NaYF4 nanoparticles were prepared, which were characterized by phase purity, uniform shape, size of about 20 nm and high crystallinity. It was noted that this material is biocompatible and that it shows thermometric properties in the range of physiological temperatures. The spectroscopic properties of this phosphor were investigated, and similarly to one of the methods described in their previous work on Sm3+, the focus was on the analysis of thermally activated changes in the intensity of this ion emission when inducing ESA. An excitation wavelength of 594 nm matched to the 6H7/2 → 4G5/2 transition was used from a level its population depends on temperature, according to the Boltzmann relationship. Among the several observed emission bands for which the thermally enhanced intensity was reported, 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 observed in the range of 545–575 nm, and thus with a wavelength shorter than the excitation line, was selected because as highlighted, this allowed background noise to be avoided. The Arrhenius relation was applied to fit the experimental data, and a decrease in SR from about 1.1% K−1 at 300 K to a little over 0.6% K−1 at 420 K was noted. According to the digitized data fitted with a different curve, it can be concluded that the obtained values have slightly lower values in the entire studied range. It is also worth mentioning that for several heating and cooling cycles, the operation of this optical thermometer was fully reversible.
Further research by the same contributors22 returned to the original idea of using the absolute intensity of the ESA-excited Eu3+ ion emission for temperature measurements (Table 1). In this study, the authors again20 focused on selecting a material to obtain the highest possible emission intensity associated with a different transition than 5D0 → 7F2, which occurs in the same spectral range as the ESA excitation line used by the authors associated with the inverse transition. For this purpose, the Eu3+-activated Ca3Ga2Ge3O12 material in which the highest branching ratio was noted for the desired 5D0 → 7F4 transition was selected and several concentrations of Eu3+ ions were tested, among which 10%Eu3+ was identified as providing the strongest emission associated with this transition. An analogous optical thermometry implementation to that shown by the authors earlier12,20 (see Fig. 7b) was proposed in this work based on monitoring the emission band observed in the range of 702.5–710 nm upon ESA-matched excitation from the thermally populated 7F2 level to the 5D0 level. An excitation wavelength of 610.8 nm was chosen based on careful spectroscopic studies. However, in this case, the reason why the 5D0 → 7F4 band was dominant in the emission spectrum was further discussed, linking it to the selection rules permitting it and simultaneously prohibiting the 5D0 → 7F2 transition. However, the authors did not mention that from the point of view of an ease in the excitation of the ESA process using the inverted transition, this is not a very favorable idea. Nevertheless, in this material, the authors fortunately observed a very efficient emission. This is because the more probable the given emission transition, the more probable the excitation-related reverse transition. However, the authors luckily were able to measure the luminescence decay times using ESA excitation, perhaps unnecessarily, given that the depopulation dynamics of the emitting level should not depend on how it is excited. This indicates that the ESA process was very efficient in this case. The SR achieved in this work reached 3.66% K−1 at 160 K and dropped to 1.04% K−1 at 300 K.
 Fig. 7  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of SBR luminescence thermometry: Souza et al.11 (a) and (b), Bednarkiewicz et al.35 (c), Trejgis et al.36 (c) and (d), and Stefanska et al.37 (e). 
In 2018, Marciniak et al.19 presented the first study utilizing the ESA of Nd3+ ions for luminescence thermometry (Fig. 6c and Table 1). Demonstration studies were performed on several materials doped with Nd3+ ions, including NaYF4, Y2O3, YGdO3, YAlO3, Y3Al5O12, LiLaP4O12, and Gd2O3. The choice of Nd3+ ions allowed the use of both excitation and emission in the near-infrared range, which as highlighted in their publication, corresponds to the biological optical window. The 1064 nm wavelength matched to the ESA from the first excited level of 4I11/2 to the 4F3/2 emitting level was used for excitation. In this case, due to the looping amplification process, the observed emission was very strong, which the authors emphasized by describing it as room temperature photon-avalanche-like behavior. It was shown that this excitation method exhibited a threshold value of excitation power and temperature. The authors explained that the first excited level from which the ESA occurs exhibits thermal coupling to the ground level according to the Boltzmann distribution rule, despite the fact that the energy distance between them reaches as high as 1900 cm−1. However, even despite the very small population of this level, the amplification processes occurring in this case were related to the occurrence of {4F3/2, 4I9/2} ↔ {4I15/2, 4I15/2} cross relaxation. Consequently, this contributed jointly with non-radiative multi-phonon relaxation from the higher 4I15/2 and 4I13/2 levels to increase the occupancy of the 4I11/2 level, and thus the observed emission was recordable even at low temperature. As the temperature increased, an increase in the emission intensity of the Nd3+ ions was recorded, allowing to reach an SR above 5% K−1 at temperatures below 325 K. Interestingly, for the various materials tested, a correlation between the SR (at 310 K) and the minimum energy gap between the sublevels of the ground- and 4I11/2 states was detected. The similarity to the photon-avalanche process was revealed in the temperature dependence of the threshold power. A theoretical model of the system of rate equations was also presented, which predicted the thermal dependence of the rise times observed in this type of system. Based on this, a unique measurement method was proposed to study the half-time before the saturation intensity is reached. It was shown that this parameter is a function of temperature and that the implementation of a method to measure it can be very uncomplicated and inexpensive. Due to the fact that best results were achieved for LiLaP4O12:Nd3+, it was concluded that together with the proposed novel measurement method, it is a promising phosphor for spot measurements or temperature mapping for applications in biological conditions.
Another publication investigating the use of single band intensities was presented by Zhou et al.23 in 2018 (Table 1). These authors previously described the use of the redshift of the absorption band of the vanadate group VO43− for thermometry via the analysis of its excitation spectra (see Fig. 8a)24 or Sm3+ ions excited via energy transfer from this group (see Fig. 8b)25, as described later in Section C of this work. As also explained, this shift is associated with the occupancy of higher vibrational states of the ground state of this group at a higher temperature. Therefore, the excitation wavelength selection at a longer range than the maximum of this band is associated with inducing the ESA of the VO43− group. Due to the efficient energy transfer between the excited matrix and the luminescent lanthanide dopant ion, the observed emission intensity of the activator ion is directly related to the ESA of the vanadate group, and consequently its emission intensity increases with temperature. However, this effect is also superimposed on other processes studied by the authors, with particular emphasis on the thermal coupling between the high-lying emissive levels of the activator ions. In the work discussed here, studies were presented on the Sm3+ activator as in the previous work by these authors25, and for the first time on the Er3+ ion. LuVO4 doped with 4% of Sm3+ and the same vanadate doped with 2% of Er3+ were analyzed. In both cases, the excitation spectra as a function of temperature were measured and the wavelength of 360 nm was chosen to match the ESA of the VO43− group, causing the greatest variation in activator emission as a function of temperature. Remarkably, in the case of Sm3+, the authors did not focus only on the excited emission of this ion from the 4G5/2 level but noted that an even more drastic thermal dependence of the emission intensity can be obtained for the emission of the thermally coupled 4F3/2 level. Although this emission was less intense than the emission from 4G5/2, the recorded increase in emission intensity was greater for the 4F3/2 → 6H5/2 band observed in the range of 520–545 nm than for the bands associated with the 4G5/2 level emission (the 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 band present in the range of 550–679 nm was analyzed). In the case of Er3+, the thermal coupling between the lower level of 4S3/2 and the higher-lying level of 2H11/2 was also used to enhance the thermal dependence. In this case, due to the ESA of the vanadate group and an efficient energy transfer exciting the Er3+ ion in parallel with this thermal coupling, a stronger thermally induced intensity enhancement was also observed for the 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 transition noted as a band in the range of 515–540 nm than for the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition, revealing itself as a band in the range of 540–565 nm. In this case, the intensity ratio between the two emission bands of the Er3+ ions was also investigated, as mentioned later in this work in Section D. The temperature dependence of the luminescence kinetics was further investigated to compare the Sm3+ and Er3+ ions in this approach. Although the lifetime of the Sm3+ ions was practically independent of temperature, the lifetimes of the 2H11/2 state of the Er3+ were shortened at elevated temperatures. This was explained based on the smaller energy distance between the emitting level and the first low-lying level in the case of the Er3+ ion and an increase in the proportion of non-radiative transitions at higher temperatures. The SR obtained from the Arrhenius curve fitting decreased with an increase in temperature for each of the studied emission bands. The highest SR of about 4% K−1 at 330 K was achieved for the emission from the 4F3/2 level of the Sm3+ ions, which decreased monotonically to 2% K−1 at 480 K. Successively lower SR values were achieved for the emission from the 2H11/2 level of the Er3+ ions, emission from the 4G5/2 level of the Sm3+ ions, and emission from the 4S3/2 level of the Er3+ ions. Thus, it was shown that by selecting emissions from higher emissive levels coupled to the lower emissive level, a higher SR can be obtained over the entire range of temperatures investigated, given that both the temperature-dependent ESA of the vanadate group and the temperature-dependent Boltzmann population distribution of this higher level are simultaneously beneficial in this case.
 Fig. 8  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of EIR luminescence thermometry: Zhou et al.24 (a) and Zhou et al.25 (b). 
Analogous to the research discussed above (see Fig. 8b), studies were continued the following year by Zhou et al.26 for the first time on Eu3+ ions in the YVO4 matrix (Table 1). The authors first implemented a scheme to readout the temperature based on the ratio of the intensities of the two wavelengths chosen from the excitation spectrum, as described in Section C of this work. As a second approach, they focused on the analysis of the absolute intensity of the emission bands from the thermally coupled high-lying 5D1 and 5D0 levels of the Eu3+ ions excited by energy transfer from the VO43− group excited in turn via the ESA process from higher vibrational states of its ground state. Thus, for the higher the emission levels studied, this was a composite of two processes with positive temperature dependence, i.e., the ESA process and its population via the Boltzmann pathway. A wavelength of 358 nm matched to the ESA of the vanadate group was used for excitation, and due to the efficient energy transfer to the Eu3+ activator, it was possible to observe in the emission spectrum both intense transitions from the 5D0 level and less intense transitions from the 5D1 level, which in turn showed more a drastic thermal enhancement. A comparative analysis was performed for the absolute band intensities associated with the 5D1 → 7F1 and 5D0 → 7F1 transitions, which were integrated in the range of 532–549 nm and 589.6–600 nm, respectively. Very good Arrhenius curve fits were obtained and the expressions 3923/T2 and 2800/T2 were determined, respectively. SR decreased monotonically in both cases and for the entire temperature range studied, the values obtained for the 5D1 level emission prevailed. A maximum SR value of 4.36% K−1 was obtained at 300 K, which decreased to 2% K−1 at 480 K. The repeatability of the as-defined temperature measurements was also demonstrated.
In 2019, Li et al.27 described the use of the ESA of Tb3+ ions in the CaWO4 matrix for luminescence thermometry (Table 1). Apparently unaware of the publication published two years earlier by Fang et al.28 describing the ESA of Tb3+ ions with simultaneous GSA induction of Ho3+ ions, as discussed in Section D of this work (see Fig. 9a), they believed they were the first to use the thermal coupling between the 7F6 ground level and the higher-lying 7F5 level of Tb3+ ions, from which ESA was induced. However, the excitation wavelength proposed by Fang et al. was matched to the 7F6 → 5D4 transition, making it impossible in this case to monitor the intense emission band associated with the reverse transition at around 545 nm, which is the dominant emission in the emission spectrum of Tb3+ ions. In turn, the proposal by Li et al. to match excitation instead with the transition to the 5D3 level had many advantages. Firstly, the 7F5 → 5D3 transition can be excited using a commercially available 405 nm diode, as implemented in this work, and secondly, it is possible in this case to observe the changes in the intensity of the most intense emission band of Tb3+ at around 545 nm, which is associated with the 5D4 → 7F5 transition. Based on the measurements of the emission spectrum as a function of temperature upon GSA-matched excitation of the Tb3+ ions using an Xe lamp at 370 nm, it was found that there is a quenching channel for emission of the D4 level. Nonetheless, the authors recorded a strong thermally activated emission intensity boost for CaWO4:5%Tb3+ excitation with a wavelength of 405 nm, which was explained by the thermal coupling between the 7F6 and 7F5 levels based on the Boltzmann distribution principle. After removing the observed background boost, the intensity of the strongest band in the range of 535–555 nm was analyzed and a fit was proposed with a formula assuming that the emission from the 5D4 level is proportional to its population and also proportional to that of the 5D3 level, which in turn is proportional to the population of the 7F5 level from which the ESA was induced. Neither the occurrence of {5D3, 7F6} ↔ {5D4, 7F0} CR nor the temperature change in the depopulation of the non-radiative emitting levels was considered here. Nevertheless, a good agreement with the experimental results was obtained and a decrease in SR was determined from around 1.1% K−1 at 463 K to 0.39% K−1 at 873 K. However, the digitized data suggest that the fit in the low-temperature range was not a perfect representation and based on a more accurate fit, the maximum SR is about 0.8% K−1.
 Fig. 9  Examples of the ESA processes involved in LIR luminescence thermometry: Fang et al.28 (a), Zhou et al.45 (b), and Drabik et al.53 (c). 
Another publication using the ESA of Tb3+ ions in this measurement approach was presented the following year by Qiu et al.29 (Table 1). In addition to the above-mentioned analogous use of Tb3+ ions by Li et al.27, in which excitation of the 5D3 level was used rather than 5D4, a number of preceding works describing the use of the ESA of Tb3+ ions can be mentioned, as done in the subsequent sections of this work.13,28,30–32 As previously mentioned, excitation using the 7F5 → 5D4 transition was already described in 2017 by Fang et al.28, as discussed in Section D of this work (Fig. 9a) and earlier in 2020 by Drabik et al.31, as mentioned in Section C. The novelty of this work was the use of a phosphor not in powder form, but Ba2LaF7 glass ceramics. This work was accepted a few days after another study by Drabik et al.32 was published, describing thermometry using two excitations, one of which matched the ESA of Tb3+ ions in glass samples; however, the influence of the presence of a conduction band supporting an efficient thermal quenching process was analyzed, which is discussed in more detail in Section C. In the case of Qiu et al., analysis of the almost temperature-invariant decay times indicated a lack of efficient luminescence quenching, and thus when Tb3+ ions were excited with a wavelength of 543 nm matched to the 7F5 →5D4 ESA-type transition, a strong increase in the emission intensity of the 5D4 → 7F6 transition was observed. A significant decrease in SR from 2.88% K−1 at 300 K to slightly above 0.5% K−1 at 630 K was obtained. The repeatability of this type of measurement was also checked through several heating–cooling cycles.
In early 2021, Hu et al.33 from a group with experience using ESA-excited Sm3+ ion emissions for luminescence thermometry, extended their research to the NaGdF4 glass ceramics material (Table 1). Their previous works in 2017 and 2018 described the use of a sub-micrometer phosphor (see Fig. 6a and b)18 and nanoparticles21 doped with Sm3+ ions, as described in the previous section. In this work, significant attention was paid to the characterization of the unheated precursor glass material and the thermally treated material with crystallized NaGdF4 nanocrystals, where enhanced excitation and emission intensities were obtained. Due to the use of this type of material showing high thermal stability and lack of temperature dependence in the luminescence decay times of the Sm3+ ions (in the range of 305–573 K), it was possible to carry out temperature measurements at much higher temperatures. In this case, two temperature measurement methods analogous to the previous methods (see Fig. 6a and b)18,21 were implemented. In the first process implemented in the thermal range of 303.6–570 K, Sm3+ ions were excited using a wavelength of 593.8 nm matched to the ESA transition of 6H7/2 → 4G5/2, and the emission band at around 450–578 nm was monitored, which is related to the 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 transition. According to the fit of the emission intensity data as a function of temperature, the theoretical thermal dependence of SR described by the expression 1393/T2 was determined, which gave a maximum value of 1.51% K−1 at 303.6 K. The obtained results are slightly better than that for the other two materials tested previously. Moreover, according to the digitized data fitted with a more accurate curve, it appears that in the same thermal range, SR can reach up to 2.5% K−1. At higher temperatures, a wavelength of 640.48 nm was used to excite the transition of 6H9/2 → 4G5/2 from a level more energetically distant from the ground level. The emission intensities were analyzed in the range of 540–614 nm, covering the bands associated with the transitions from the 5G5/2 to 6H5/2 and 6H7/2 levels. Measurements were carried out in the high temperature range of 390–773 K and an expression of 2823/T2 describing SR was obtained, giving a maximum value of 1.86% K−1 at 390 K. In this case, the obtained results were also slightly better than that previously obtained by them using Sm3+-doped materials. Regarding high temperatures above 750 K, similar values were presented by Li et al.27 in 2019 based on the absolute emission band intensity of the Tb3+ ions excited via the ESA process, and only for a few other measurement approaches based on ESA, comparable34 or even higher than 1% K−1 results30 were presented thus far. The intensity of a single band at first glance seems an attractive solution for remote temperature reading. In this case, to maximize sensitivity, one should look for ions with a sufficiently large energy gap between the emitting level and the first level located below. This will prevent luminescence quenching by multi-phonon processes, which are known to attenuate the positive thermal coefficient excited by ESA processes. However, this technique is not sufficiently reliable for real applications. The emission intensity of a single band depends on many non-temperature related factors such as the excitation intensity, the distance between the detector and the temperature probe, the type of the medium in which the phosphor is located and the dispersion dependence of the sample (wavelength-dependent light scattering and absorption), and the local concentration of the phosphor. Because many of these factors are unknown in field-application, it is impossible or extremely difficult to develop a reliable calibration curve in ABS solution. Hence, this type of analysis (change in intensity of a single band as a function of temperature) is often treated as a preliminary estimate of temperature. Alternatively, relative changes in temperature can be tracked when the experimental conditions do not change in the course of the studies and flat relative temperature sensitivity vs. temperature is assured. To make the SB approach suitable for real application, it is necessary to use a reference signal, either as the intensity of the same band at a different excitation (Section C) or another luminescent band (Section D). Information on the results discussed in this section is summarized in Table 1.
B. Single band emission ratio (SBR)
As mentioned in the introduction, the first standard-setting work on luminescence thermometry using thermal ESA was published by Souza et al.11 in 2016 (Table 2) and the concept it is based on is shown in Fig. 7a and b. The idea of the authors went beyond just using this strongly temperature-dependent process, where they aimed to develop a primary luminescence thermometer with a predictable calibration curve independent of the medium being tested. In addition to extensive theoretical considerations expounding the basic operation principles, a proof-of-concept using a highly efficient (>98%) nano- and microcrystalline Y2O3 phosphor doped with Eu3+ ions was presented. An experimental method was proposed to measure the intensity ratio of a single 5D0 → 7F4 emission band of Eu3+ ions at excitations using ESA (7F2 → 5D0) and GSA (7F0 → 5D0) processes, respectively. An argument was presented considering the rate equations describing the population of each level and Boltzmann distribution considering both the degeneracy of the levels and the partition function. The transition probabilities were analyzed and it was concluded that the SBR thermometric parameter described by the following equation: (8)can be transformed to a form based only on the use of the ratio of integrals S under the curves obtained using the following ordinary GSA-matched excitation: (9)multiplied by the factor taking into account the energy difference, ΔE, between the 7F2 and 7F0 levels. By accurately measuring the emission spectra and band deconvolution, this ratio was determined to be 51 and the exponent value as exp(−875/kBT). It was found that the Δ determined experimentally from the ratio of the intensities of the emission band at around 707 nm measured at excitations of 611 nm and 580 nm is consistent with that predicted theoretically. At 611 nm excitation, a strong increase in emission intensity as a function of temperature was observed, while for 580 nm excitation, a slight decrease in intensity was noted. The authors explained the latter based on the thermal depopulation of the ground level. The SR determined for this approach decreased monotonically from about 1.5% K−1 to 1.2% K−1 over the studied temperature range of 288–323 K. For lower temperatures, the possibility of using the thermal ESA of the 7F1 level in a similar manner was explored using a 593 nm excitation line. The theoretical equation was modified with a parameter to account for the refractive index and a calibration factor of 3.6 was obtained in this case, as well as an exponential factor of exp(−378/kBT), because in this case, the energy distance between the ground and first excited levels is smaller. Consequently, high sensitivities exceeding 1.6% K−1 at a low temperature of about 180 K, which decreased to about 0.6% K−1 at 290 K, were also obtained. However, the SR at low temperatures obtained from the digitized data is around 1.15% K−1 and that at high temperatures it is around 0.8% K−1. In summary, the authors proposed a method for the experimental implementation of SBR measurements using the GSA and ESA from the 7F2 and 7F1 levels for a range of higher and lower temperatures, respectively. The presented data were consistent with the theoretically determined parameters, which were obtained with the use of other spectroscopic data. Therefore, it was shown that this method can be considered independent of the medium in which the measurement is performed and Y2O3:Eu3+ can be considered a versatile phosphor in this configuration as a primary luminescent thermometer. Although in later years a much higher SR was obtained for SBR thermometers, the initial results were still very high at that time, and this publication must certainly be considered a breakthrough.
Table 2 Information about publications on the single band emission ratio




Material
GSA excitation
ESA excitation
Monitored emission
Max. SR (Max. SR calculated by us) (%K−1)
Analyzed temperature range
Comment
Ref.




Y2O3:Eu3+
580 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
593 nm (7F1 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
707 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.6 (1.15)@180 K
180–290 K
The first work proposing the use of ESA process in luminescence thermometry. First proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Eu3+ ions from 7F1 or 7F2 level. Primary thermometer with a predictable calibration curve

11



611 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
1.5 (>1.6)@288 K
288–323 K


Alumino-phosphate glass:Eu3+
576 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
614 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
697 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.68 (1.66)@288 K
288–333 K
Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in a material other than a powder phosphor, i.e., glass

15



YAlO3: Cr3+
589 nm (4A2 → 4T2)
610 nm (4A2 → 4T2)
720 nm (4A2 → 2E)
0.37@123.15 K
123.15–573.15 K
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of a transition metal ion, i.e., Cr3+. An indication of the impact of the matrix on SR

35



Y3Al5O12: Cr3+
650 nm (4A2 → 4T2)
0.17@123.15 K


LiLaP4O12: Cr3+
680 nm
875 nm
0.3@123.15 K


CaWO4:Tb3+
380 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
300 nm (ESA of WO42− group transferring energy to Tb3+ activator)
545 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
1.28@303 K (0.65@550 K)
303–783 K
The first use of the redshift effect of the absorption band of the WO4 group, analogous to that described earlier for the VO4 group

34



378 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
310 nm (ESA of WO42− group transferring energy to Tb3+ activator)
1.6@303 K (0.85@600 K)


LuVO4:Eu3+
392 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)
350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
603–637 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
3.46@298 K (<1.5@400 K)
298–448 K
Comparison of selecting one excitation matched to the GSA of the matrix or to the GSA of the activator ions, with a second excitation matched to the ESA of the matrix and monitoring the activator emission. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section C

38



319 nm (GSA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
2.61@298 K (1.3@360 K)


463 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)
3.48@298 K (1.5@400 K)


LiLaP4O12:Eu3+
450 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)
620 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
590 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
2.17@200 K
200–600 K
The first proposal based on ESA of Eu3+ ions from 7F3 or 7F4 level. Discussion on the effect of dopant concentration on SR

36



650 nm (7F3 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
∼2.3@220 K
220–600 K


690 nm (7F4 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
1.9@420 K
340–600 K


TiO2:Eu3+
576 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
610 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.78 (1.67)@288 K
288–323 K
Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in different phosphors

16



KLaP4O12:Tb3+
485 nm (7F6 → 5D4 of Tb3+)
543 nm (7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+)
620 nm (5D4 → 7F3 of Tb3+)
∼5.5@273 K
273–473 K
The first SBR-type thermometer based on Tb3+ only. Demonstration of consistency between theory (rate equations) and experiment for different dopant concentrations (using deconvolution). Modelling of rate equation parameters and identification of optimal development paths

31



LaPO4:Nd3+
808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2 of Nd3+)
1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)
∼7@303 K
303–573 K
The first SBR-type thermometer based on Nd3+ only. Analysis of the effect of dopant concentration on SR. Extending the range of high SR by proposing additional ESA-involving methods of temperature readout

39



TZPN glass:Nd3+
808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2 of Nd3+)
1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)
6.15@223 K
223–303 K
Extension of research on Nd3+ ion-based SBR-type thermometry to macroscopic materials. Analysis of the effect of dopant concentration on SR

40



Lu2O3:Eu3+
-
586.5 nm (7F1 → 5D0 of Eu3+) AND 611 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
0.9@300 K
313–753 K
Atypical use of the two excitations matched to two different ESA processes of Eu3+ ions (and thus they can be analyzed according to the Judd–Ofelt theory). Proposing a model based on the Judd–Ofelt theory, allowing estimation of the experimental results

41



KLaP4O12:Tb3+
377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
543 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
3.2@463 K
273–473 K
Extension of the previous rate equations model31 to include inter-ion interactions and analysis of the effect of dopant concentration. Estimation of the thermal dependence of processes affecting emissions resulting from ESA excitation

13



YVO4:Eu3+
395 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)
350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+, Dy3+ or Sm3+ activator)
594 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
2.23 (3)@298 K
299–466 K
The first use of Dy3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. Comparison of Eu3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+ activators in analogous conditions. Additional temperature reading methods: position and full width at half maximum of the charge transfer band

44



617 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)


701 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)


YVO4:Dy3+
390 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Dy3+)
572 nm (4F9/2 → 6H15/2 of Dy3+)
2.36 (2)@298 K


482 nm (4F9/2 → 6H13/2 of Dy3+)


YVO4:Sm3+
470 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Sm3+)
565 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)
3.09 (>5.3)@298 K


603 nm (4G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)


646 nm (4G5/2 → 6H9/2 of Sm3+)


Calcium aluminosilicate glass:Eu3+
575 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
610 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.6 (<1.5)@288 K
288–333 K
Indication of the reason for the divergence from the model of Souza et al.11, i.e., the presence of co-doped Eu2+ ions. Another method of temperature readout based on the use of Eu3+ and Eu2+ ions excited simultaneously via GSA processes

17



TZPN glass:Tb3+
377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
543 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
∼2@350 K
248–623 K
Investigation of the effect of the presence of a glass conductivity band on thermometer operation

32



GdVO4:Eu3+
581.6 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
594.3 nm (7F1 → 5D1 of Eu3+)
698 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
2.87 (<3)@133 K
133–273 K
Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in different phosphors, which are optimal for low-temperature measurements

47



615.2 nm (7F2 → 5D1 of Eu3+)
6.73 (>6)@133 K
133–313 K


Y3Al5O12:Nd3+ (form: nano-, microcrystals and ceramics)
808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2,2H9/2 of Nd3+)
1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
1335 nm (4F3/2 → 4I13/2 of Nd3+)
9.51@273 K for ceramics
393–573 K for nano-, 353–573 K for microcrystals and 273–573 K for ceramics
Monitored band located further in the infrared region. Indication of the importance of surface quenching processes based on differences for different forms of phosphors. Effect of dopant concentration on SR

14



KGd(WO4)2:Tb3+
377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)
545 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
1.6@370 K
273–573 K
Investigation of the effect of the dopant concentration-dependent thermally activated metal-to-metal charge transfer

48



KLaP4O12:(1%-10%)Pr3+
444 nm (3H4 → 3P2 of Pr3+)
523 nm (3H5 → 3P1 of Pr3+)
592–596 nm (1D2 → 3H4 of Pr3+)
1.75@573 K
273–573 K
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Pr3+ ions. Effect of dopant concentration on the choice of the observed band (yellow/red) and on SR

37



KLaP4O12:(10%-100%)Pr3+
636–640 nm (3P0 → 3F2 of Pr3+)
1.3@573 K
273–573 K


LaF3:Pr3+
444 nm (3H4 → 3P2 of Pr3+)
525 nm (3H5 → 3P1 of Pr3+)
485 nm (3P0 → 3H4 of Pr3+)
∼6@273 K
273–573 K
Verification of the previous idea37 in another phosphor. Investigation of the effect of dopant concentration on SR

49



NaYF4:Nd3+
808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2,2H9/2 of Nd3+)
1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)
>19.1@ 198 K
198–573 K
A regular trend of widening the useful temperature range with an increase in nanocrystallite size was observed






In the following year, Morassuti et al.15 applied the same SBR method of measuring temperature using Eu3+ ions proposed by Souza et al. (Fig. 7b)11; however, the study was performed on a macroscopic sample of alumino-phosphate glass doped with Eu3+ ions rather than on a powder sample (Table 2). Given that one of the authors was the same for both publications, the characterization performed and the discussion of the results were very similar; however, special attention was given to the biological temperature range of 288–333 K, which is also the operating range of solar panels, for which the glass material studied was well suited. The prepared glass material was extensively studied in terms of excitation spectra, emission spectra and decay times at different temperatures. In the SBR approach, the thermally activated changes in the intensity of the emission band of Eu3+ ions at around 697 nm associated with the 5D0 → 7F4 transition were monitored. Due to the lack of efficient luminescence quenching processes in the temperature range studied, it was possible to dope the glass with as much as 5% Eu3+ and use an ordinary lamp for excitation instead of a high-power laser. The 576 nm wavelength corresponding to the 7F0 → 5D0 transition was chosen as the excitation matched to GSA, while the 614 nm line corresponding to the 7F2 → 5D0 transition was used to induce the ESA process. In this case, the possibility of using excitation from the 7F1 level was not investigated because it was judged to be less optimal in the desired temperature range. Importantly, the authors emphasized that the GSA-matched transition chosen in this case is forbidden, which, together with the small thermal population of the 7F2 level from which ESA takes place, indicated that the emission intensities obtained in both cases were comparable, minimizing the measurement errors. Also, the repeatability of these measurements over a heating and cooling cycle was estimated to be as high as 99% agreement. For the excitation wavelength of 576 nm, a thermally activated reduction in the emission intensity by about 11% was observed, while for the excitation of 614 nm, a significant increase was noted by as much as 71% with an increase in temperature from 288 to 333 K. The authors associated both phenomena with Boltzmann's thermal changes in the mutual populations of both levels from which GSA or ESA was induced. Importantly, it was shown that the determination of the proportionality parameter in the theoretical formula for data fitting proposed by Souza et al.11, which can be determined from spectroscopic properties, works in this case with very high accuracy. This means that the optical thermometer presented in this publication can also be considered as primary. The resulting SR decreased from 1.68% K−1 at 288 K to 1.25% K−1 at 333 K.
Another original idea was proposed in the publication by Bednarkiewicz et al.35, showing for the first time the use of the ESA of a single optically active ion other than a lanthanide, as presented in Fig. 7c (Table 2). In this case, the emission of the Cr3+ ion was monitored upon two different excitations, i.e., a resonant excitation matched to GSA and a non-resonant excitation corresponding to the ESA from thermally populated higher vibrational components of the ground level. A theoretical temperature dependence of the emission intensity was presented considering the activation energy ΔE1 of Cr3+ ions in a crystal matrix with a given crystal field strength, which is the energy required for efficient thermal quenching of the luminescence. The Boltzmann model was used to describe a population of higher vibrational states distant by ΔE2 from the lowest fundamental level component. It was indicated that by selecting an appropriate excitation wavelength, the value of ΔE2 in the model describing the ESA-excited emission intensity of Cr3+ ions can be modulated. The ratio of the difference in intensity obtained with resonant and non-resonant excitation to the intensity with non-resonant excitation was chosen as the temperature-dependent parameter. As an experimental confirmation of the proposed solution, three crystal matrices doped with Cr3+ ions, namely YAlO3, Y3Al5O12 and LiLaP4O12, for which a decrease in the value of the crystal field strength can be noted, were investigated. The thermal evolution of the excitation spectra was presented and the effect of temperature on the spectral position, width and intensity of the bands present was analyzed. It was indicated that a predefined temperature-dependent parameter based on different rates of thermal quenching of the Cr3+ ion luminescence excited by the GSA or ESA process can be used to read temperature with an SR not exceeding 0.5% K−1, which decreases with an increase in temperature. An important trend was that the highest value reaching 0.37% K−1 at 123.15 K was achieved for the YAP:Cr3+ phosphor, which was related to the favorable effect of the crystal field on the studied phenomena. Due to the presented proof-of-concept experiment, this work emphasized that the presented method is very suitable for thermal imaging because it does not require point-by-point scanning of the surface under study, only analysis of two images obtained using resonant and non-resonant excitation. The high emission intensity of Cr3+ ions using only a broadband excitation lamp was demonstrated, in contrast to lanthanide ions, which usually require higher excitation powers using a laser. It should be noted here that the use of transition metal ions such as Cr3+, due to the dense energy scheme of their vibrational states, enables modulation of the thermometric parameters including SR and the usable temperature range by the intentional selection of the ESA-matched excitation wavelength.
Another work using the SBR approach based on the GSA-excited emission of Tb3+ ions and ESA of the WO42− group transferring the excitation energy to Tb3+ activator was presented in early 2019 by Li et al. (Table 2).34 Although the authors claimed that this is a new strategy, it should be mentioned that an analogous method was already proposed by Zhou et al.23,25,26 based on the GSA-induced emission of Sm3+, Er3+ or Eu3+ ions and energy transfer to these ions from the ESA-excited VO43− group (see Fig. 8b), analogous to the tungstate group used by Li et al. Admittedly, Zhou et al. proposed measurements based on the ratio of the band intensities in the excitation spectrum23–25 in 2017, but this is a twin strategy to SBR. Zhou et al. further investigated the possibility of implementing this strategy for temperature readout based on both absolute intensity changes of one emission band and the luminescence intensity ratio of two emission bands. The obtained SR results described in these publications were significantly higher and exceeded 4% K−1 at low temperatures of around 200–300 K. However, what was new in the work by Li et al. was the extension of the range of analyzed temperatures up to 783 K. The authors in this publication utilized the redshift in the absorption band of the WO42− group; however, did not link this phenomenon to the ESA from higher vibrational states. Nonetheless, by matching the wavelength to this process (by selecting the line in the band tail range) and due to the energy transfer to the Tb3+ ions, an increase in intensity with temperature was recorded. The second wavelength chosen was matched to the GSA of the Tb3+ ions, inducing the 7F6 → 5D3 transition, and the emission intensity observed in this case was thermally quenched due to the increase in the amount of non-radiative transitions. In both cases, the intensity of the dominant emission band at around 545 nm associated with the 5D4 → 7F5 transition was monitored. Surprisingly, the authors first proposed two excitation wavelengths, 300 and 380 nm, respectively, and presented the measured thermal evolutions of the emission spectra for them, determined the intensity ratio of the band located at around 545 nm, and calculated the SR. However, in the next step, it was implied that these results may be boosted by selecting other wavelengths, and this time, similar wavelengths of 310 and 378 nm were proposed. The SR results obtained were slightly higher for the entire thermal range studied, with a maximum at low temperature and a monotonic decrease for an increase in temperature. The second method achieved an SR of about 1.6% K−1 at 303 K and 0.71% K−1 at 783 K; however, based on the digitized data and the fit with a better fit curve, it is concluded that the presented SR values overlap only in the middle of the investigated temperature range.
An analogous strategy (see Fig. 8b) for SBR measurements, as described above, was proposed by Duan et al.38 at the end of 2019 (Table 2). However, in this case, the focus was on the emission of Eu3+ ions excited via the GSA process and the ESA process of the VO43− group, transferring energy to the Eu3+ activator. A very similar idea based on YVO4:Eu3+ instead of LuVO4:Eu3+, as described here, was proposed by Zhou et al.26 earlier that year, but the authors based the temperature measurements on the analysis of the ratios of the intensity of the bands in the excitation spectra and the absolute intensity of a single emission band, as described in Sections C and A of this work, respectively. Duan et al. also analyzed the band intensity ratios in the excitation spectrum, as described in Section C of this work, and subsequently also proposed ana SBR-based temperature readout in the temperature range of 298–448 K. The excitation spectra of the undoped matrix and the conclusions drawn from them are also discussed in Section C. Nonetheless, in the discussed SBR-related part of the work here, as many as three different pairs of excitation wavelengths were proposed, and each time the changes in the ratio of the intensity of a single emission band associated with the 5D0 → 7F2 transition were monitored thanks to the integration of the emission spectra in the range of 603–637 nm. Each pair included an ESA-matched wavelength of 350 nm, corresponding to the tail of the charge transfer band of the VO43− group, which underwent a thermally induced redshift, as discussed further in Section C when describing thermometry based on excitation spectra proposed by Duan et al. This was a significant novelty because in the case of the previous SBR luminescent thermometers using Eu3+ ions, one of the wavelengths was adjusted to the ESA of the Eu3+ ions themselves. The first excitation pair included an additional wavelength of 392 nm matched to the 7F0 → 5L6 transition of the Eu3+ ions. Based on the fit of the obtained intensity ratio, it was estimated that the SR reached 3.46% K−1 at 298 K and it gradually decreased to about 1.5% K−1 at 448 K. In the next pair, the wavelength of 319 nm matching the GSA of the VO43− group was used. The presence of the Eu3+ activator in this case only served to observe the emission, but the excitation processes were not different in principle from that used by Zhou et al.24 in 2017 in an analogous but undoped GdVO4 material, as shown in Fig. 8a and discussed in Section C of this work. In this case, the SR at 298 K was lower and amounted to 2.61% K−1. In the last pair, the 463 nm wavelength matching the 7F0 → 5D2 transition of the Eu3+ ions was used, which allowed the maximum SR value of 3.48% K−1 at 298 K to be obtained. For this pair of excitations, very good repeatability in the cooling and heating cycle was also demonstrated. It should be mentioned that the empirical expression used to fit the temperature-dependent parameters was not perfectly suited in the low temperature range and the digitized data suggest that the SR values obtained are actually much lower.
In early 2020, Trejgis et al.36 published a work showing SBR using Eu3+ ions (Table 2), expanding on the results presented thus far, as depicted in Fig. 7c and d. Indeed, up to that point, only the ESA of Eu3+ ions from the 7F1 or 7F2 levels was used for luminescence thermometry. Trejgis et al. investigated the possibility of using this process from the excited 7F2 level (like Souza et al.11, as presented in Fig. 7b), and also from the higher-lying 7F3 and 7F4 levels, resulting in an extension in the usable temperature range from 123 to 673 K. Moreover, the effect of dopant ion concentration on the obtained thermometric parameters was investigated by testing the LiLaP4O12 material with different contents of Eu3+ ions (from 1%mol of Eu3+ with respect to La3+ ions and up to 100% for the stoichiometric LiEuP4O12 compound). The emission band at around 590 nm corresponding to the 5D0 → 7F1 transition was monitored in SBR-type thermometry. An excitation of 450 nm, corresponding to the 7F0 → 5D2 transition, was chosen as the wavelength to match the GSA of the Eu3+ ions, given that this allowed the selected emission band to be observed after rapid relaxation to the 5D0 level. The emission intensity obtained in this way was insensitive to temperature changes over the entire temperature range studied. Three different wavelengths capable of inducing the ESA of Eu3+ ions from the 7F2, 7F3 and 7F4 levels were proposed, i.e., 620, 650 and 690 nm, respectively. The presence of a threshold temperature for excitation from successively higher levels was observed, which was due to the population of these levels in the Boltzmann pathway only at higher temperatures. Also a saturation of the obtained characteristics was observed at increasing temperatures and was related to the achievement of a balance between the processes causing thermal population and depopulation of the levels from which the ESA occurred. The effect of concentration on the studied thermally activated emission intensity increments resulting from ESA induction was also analyzed. With an increase in the Eu3+ concentration from 1% to 50%, an enhancement in the increment from 4-fold to 200-fold over the studied temperature range was noted. This relationship was explained by discussing the positive effect of the {5D2, 7F0} ↔ {5D0, 7F5} and {5D1, 7F0} ↔ {5D0, 7F3} CRs, the probabilities of which are additionally temperature dependent due to the slight energy mismatch. Three ratios of single band intensities under two different excitations were defined as temperature-dependent parameters, each time dividing the emission intensity obtained under ESA excitation by the intensity resulting from GSA induction. Thus, for a phosphor with a concentration of 50% Eu3+ ions, an SR for the excitation pair of 450 and 620 nm as high as 2.17% K−1 at 200 K was obtained and did not drop below 1% K−1 until 375 K. For the 450 and 650 nm excitation pair, the SR did not fall below 1% K−1 until 440 K. For the last 450 and 690 nm excitation pair tested, the maximum SR value reached 1.9% K−1 at 420 K, which did not drop below 1% K−1 until 490 K. Considering these values, it should be emphasized that an SR exceeding 1% K−1 was achieved over a very wide range of 120–490 K. Moreover, a proof-of-concept proposal for simple and low-cost 2D temperature imaging using this luminescent thermometer was presented.
Another publication on SBR using Eu3+ by Borrero-Gonzales et al.16 was presented in early 2020 (Table 2), which was another validation of the model described by Souza et al.11 a few years earlier (see Fig. 7b). However, in this case, another material, namely TiO2:Eu3+ nanocrystals, as used, which as emphasized, are biocompatible, and thus they were tested in the biological temperature range of 288–323 K. The authors chose to select transitions already analyzed in several previous publications. The emission band at around 700 nm associated with the 5D0 → 7F4 transition was monitored with GSA excitation from the 7F0 level to the 5D0 level (band at about 576 nm) and ESA excitation from the 7F2 level to the 5D0 level (band at around 610 nm). However, as the authors pointed out, spectra were collected for only 1 s, which means that the ESA-excited induced luminescence was intense. The SBR calibration curve, which is defined as the ratio of the single emission band intensities at 610 to 576 nm, excitation was fitted with the model proposed by Souza et al. and very good agreement was obtained for both factor Δ determined from the spectroscopic properties and the energy distance between the ground level and the 7F2 level. This gave an SR analogous to similar luminescent thermometers previously achieved, reaching 1.78% K−1 at 288 K and decreasing monotonically to 1.41% K−1 at 323 K. The authors emphasized that the use of excitation and emission in the biological optical window is an added advantage of this biocompatible luminescent thermometer.
Later that year, our group first proposed the use the ESA of Tb3+ ions for SBR-type measurements (Table 2).31 Here, ratiometric measurements based on the luminescence intensity ratio of Tb3+ ions excited via ESA and co-doped Ho3+ (see Fig. 9a) or Eu3+ ions excited at the same wavelength in the GSA process were previously proposed.28,30 Slightly earlier, Li et al.27 also described a luminescence thermometer based on the absolute emission of Tb3+ ions excited with an ESA-matched wavelength, but in that case, the excitation was matched to the 5D3 level. Nevertheless, Drabik et al. proposed the first SBR based on the emission of Tb3+ ions excited with wavelengths causing their GSA and ESA to reach the 5D4 level from the 7F6 (485 nm) and 7F5 (543 nm) levels, respectively. This choice of excitation wavelength excluded the occurrence of {5D3, 7F6} ↔ {5D4, 7F0} CR. Therefore the presented system of rate equations describing the probabilities of laser-induced transitions, radiative transitions from the 5D4 level, non-radiative transitions and Boltzmann distributions between all adjacent levels did not contain any term describing the interion interactions. Therefore, no strong influence of the dopant ion concentration on the thermal evolution of the emission spectra at excitation matching either GSA or ESA was expected. The study was performed in KLaP4O12 nanocrystals doped with concentrations of Tb3+ ions ranging from 5% up to a stoichiometric phosphor with 100% Tb3+ ions substituting La3+ ions. Integration of the monitored emission band at around 620 nm, which is associated with the 5D4 → 7F3 transition for GSA excitation, enabled the thermal quenching of the luminescence by about 20%–30% in the range of 273–473 K to be recorded, similar for all the Tb3+ ion concentrations tested. However, a strong dependence on the dopant ion concentration was noted for the thermally activated increase in the ESA-excited integral emission intensity. This did not agree with the results calculated from the rate equations, ruling out a concentration dependence. However, the authors could relate this deviation to a measurement artifact of background boosting by the excitation source used, which played a significant role in the weak signals obtained when Tb3+ ions were excited via ESA at low temperatures. When deconvolution of the actual luminescence signal from Tb3+ ions was conducted, agreement with theoretical predictions was noted where the relationships studied were the same for all concentrations tested. Also, the SBR calibration curves, which are the ratio of the band intensities at wavelengths matching the ESA and GSA, proved to be independent of concentration. A high SR reaching even 5% K−1 at low temperature and not falling below 1% K−1 were obtained for the entire temperature range investigated of 273–473 K. Further modeling of the changes in material parameters in the rate equations was carried out to identify the optimal development paths for this type of luminescent thermometer. To maximize SR, properties were sought that could influence the enhancement of the thermal quenching of the GSA-excited luminescence and thermal enhancement of the emission obtained via ESA excitation. Materials showing efficient electron–phonon coupling, with high phonon energies and low matrix stiffness were found to be promising.
The publication by Trejgis et al.39 presented for the first time an SBR-type thermometer based on Nd3+ (Table 2). Importantly, both the excitation and emission were from the infrared spectral range. This was a continuation of the only previous publication on ESA-based thermometry using Nd3+ ions presented by Marciniak et al. (see Fig. 6c)19; however, in that case, only the absolute intensity of a single band emission was analyzed, as described in Section A of this work. The optical properties of LaPO4 nanocrystals doped with different concentrations of Nd3+ ions were extensively characterized and the effect of the {4F3/2, 4I9/2} ↔ {4I15/2, 4I15/2} CR with an increase in dopant ion content was discussed. The authors described the use of two excitation wavelengths that can be obtained using commonly available excitation sources, namely 808 and 1064 nm, matching the GSA associated with the 4I9/2 → 4F5/2 transition and the ESA associated with the 4I11/2 → 4F3/2 transition, respectively. Using GSA-matched excitation, the thermal evolution of the emission band at around 890 nm associated with the 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 transition was recorded, for which a slight thermally activated enhancement in luminescence intensity was noted. This is associated with an increase in the electron–phonon coupling, and thus in the absorption cross section at 808 nm. Upon induction of the ESA process, a thermal increase in the intensity of the same emission band at around 890 nm associated with the 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 transition was observed. In addition, above 353 and 453 K, transitions from higher emissive levels thermally coupled to the 4F3/2 level, namely 4F5/2 → 4I9/2 (around 810 nm) and 4F7/2 → 4I9/2 (around 750 nm), respectively, were also observed. For all the ESA-excited emission bands, an enhancement in the thermally activated emission intensity gain of 3 orders of magnitude was recorded. These increments were larger with a higher concentration of Nd3+ ions, which was linked to the beneficial effect of the previously mentioned CR on the population of the 4I11/2 level from which the ESA was induced. In the case of the 890 nm band monitored in the SBR approach, an SR reaching as high as 7% K−1 at 303 K was achieved, which decreased monotonically with an increase in temperature. A method besides SBR was also presented to extend the temperature range, in which an SR higher than 2% K−1 was achieved. This involved monitoring two different bands using two different excitations, and given that no such case is distinguished in this work, these results are described here. The ratio of the intensities of the ESA-excited emission bands at around 810 or 750 and the GSA-excited emission band at around 890 nm was analyzed as temperature-dependent parameters. With the additional use of thermal coupling between the higher emission levels used in these cases, the resulting SR for a given temperature was higher when the level from which the transition generating the emission band occurred was higher. However, because these bands were observed only after the corresponding threshold temperatures were exceeded, the maximum SR for the second and third methods was 3% K−1 at 375 K and 4.35% K−1 at 453 K, respectively. However, by proposing these three methods, it was possible to demonstrate an SR higher than 2% K−1 for the entire temperature range studied from 273 to 573 K. The authors also measured the power dependence of the emission intensity at 573 K and found that the ESA process is not a process in which the number of photons associated with the excitation process is equal to 1 because the slope of the obtained characteristics on the log–log scale was greater than unity for the ESA-excited bands.
Trejgis et al.40 continued their research on the use of ESA and GSA of Nd3+ ions39 by extending the study to macroscopic samples and analyzed oxyfluorotellurite glasses with different dopant ion concentrations (Table 2). In this case, analogous transitions as in their previous work were analyzed. The excitons were matched to the 4I9/2 → 4F5/2 and 4I11/2 → 4F3/2 transitions by using 808 and 1060 nm excitation lines, respectively. The intensity of the band that was compared at these excitations was that observed at around 890 nm, which is associated with the 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 transition. As the Nd3+ ion concentration increased, the basis for the shortening of the luminescence decay times from the 4F3/2 level was noted, which was associated with an increase in the probability of the {4F3/2, 4I9/2}↔{4I15/2, 4I15/2} CR process. For the GSA-matched excitation, a decrease in emission intensity was observed, whereas for the ESA-matched excitation, the intensity increased strongly with temperature. For glasses with different Nd3+ ion contents, it was noted that these relationships differed. This was explained based on the competition between two effects resulting from the CR mentioned earlier. It was found that an initial increase in concentration is beneficial for increasing the population of the 4I11/2 level, while a further increase in concentration results in the predominance of the phenomenon of luminescence quenching of the 4F3/2 level. Therefore, the intermediate of the dopant concentrations tested proved to be the optimal, which was reflected in the fact that the strongest increase in the temperature-dependent parameter of the ratio of the single band intensities was recorded for glass doped with 2% Nd3+ ions. However, a maximum SR of 6.15% K−1 was achieved at a low temperature of 223 K for a concentration of 10% Nd3+. Importantly, for all the samples tested, the SR did not drop below 1% K−1 until 470 K. The deviation in the thermal intensity dependence from the Boltzmann distribution led to the conclusion that inter-ion processes also play a very important role in this case.
Another work by Ćirić et al.41 (Table 2) again involved the use of the already broadly investigated Eu3+ ion transitions (see Fig. 7a and b).11,12,15,16,20,22,36,42 However, in this case, the authors were not focused on achieving the best possible thermometric results, but on the possibility of predicting the experimental results based on the Judd–Ofelt theory. Firstly, a crystal matrix for which the 7F2 → 5D0 transition has efficient parameters in the Judd–Ofelt theory was chosen, and thus the Lu2O3 material doped with 0.5% Eu3+ activator was used. The authors had previously described a thermometer model based on the mutual intensity of two emission bands according to the Judd–Ofelt theory43, while in this work, they proposed an extension of that model to this type of thermometry using a dual-excited single emission band. The authors noted that the 7F0 → 5D0 transition is not well described by the Judd–Ofelt theory, and thus proposed that both excitations match the transitions from the excited levels, namely 7F1 → 5D0 and 7F2 → 5D0. It was also analyzed that there are two sites with C2 and S6 symmetries in the selected material and it was found that the bandwidth used for excitation of 2 nm can cause the transitions of Eu3+ ions from both sites. However, only the excitation of Eu3+ ions occupying the C2 sites can cause emission from 5D0 → 7F4, which was chosen to be monitored in this thermometric approach. Considering this, a model taking into account the Boltzmann distribution of the population between levels was proposed, which was expanded with an additional constant factor to reflect the losses resulting from the presence of Eu3+ in the S6 sites. It was pointed out that by using the Judd–Ofelt theory, all the parameters describing the temperature-dependent parameter in this case can be derived using only one emission spectrum measured at room temperature. In addition, by applying some corrections, agreement between the fit parameters of the experimental data and that obtained based on the Judd–Ofelt theory was obtained, which confirms the usefulness of this model. Due to the fact that the thermometry in this case is based on two excitations matched with two different ESA processes, the SR obtained was lower than that for other similar optical thermometers based on Eu3+; however, it was a significant result because they were predictable based on the presented model.
The next publication by Drabik et al. was a continuation of the work described above on the use of Tb3+ ions in thermometry based on this approach31, which was published in mid-2020 (Table 2).13 In this case, it was decided to extend the previously established model by considering interion interactions. To activate these interactions, GSA- and ESA-inducing excitations were used to match transitions to the 5D3 level, namely 377 and 413 nm, respectively, thus activating the possibility of the {5D3, 7F6} ↔ {5D4, 7F0} CR. These interactions were revealed in the measurements of decay times, given that for the 5D3 level, a drastic shortening of these times was noted when the concentration of Tb3+ ions increased. This effect was also evident for the thermally activated ESA-induced emission intensity gain. For higher concentrations, a greater signal variability was observed, which was also reflected in the temperature-dependent parameter of the ratio of the intensity of the band at around 543 nm associated with the 5D4 → 7F5 transition that was monitored. Furthermore, the authors estimated the temperature dependence of several processes affecting the obtained luminescence signals based on additional measurements, and thus the modeling of the rate equation system yielded results consistent with the experimental observations. The main conclusion was that the high concentration of Tb3+ ions in this case contributes to increasing the SR values, where 100% dopant ion concentration in the stoichiometric KTbP4O12 phosphor reached 2%–3% K−1 over the whole investigated temperature range of 273 K to 473 K.
Another work in 2020 by Kolesnikov et al.44 revisited the use of the redshift in the charge band transfer of the vanadate group in the YVO4 host material (Table 2). Many previous works have already exploited this phenomenon (see Fig. 8a and b),23–26,45,46 including SBR-type approaches.34,38 In this study, temperature-dependent excitation spectra were investigated for the YVO4 material activated with 1% Eu3+, Dy3+ or Sm3+ ions. A redshift in the charge transfer band of the VO43− group was observed, and as in previous works, an excitation wavelength of 350 nm was chosen from the range of the thermally enhanced tail of this band, corresponding to the ESA process from higher vibrational levels. The excitation energy was efficiently transferred to the activator ions and an increase in emission intensity for each activator was observed with an increase in temperature. Excitation wavelengths corresponding to the excitations of each ion in the GSA process were also chosen, and thus thermal quenching of the luminescence was observed. In the case of doping with Eu3+ ions, the latter wavelength was chosen as 395 nm to match the 7F0 → 5L6 transition. The 5D0 → 7F1 (594 nm), 5D0 → 7F2 (617 nm) and 5D0 → 7F4 (701 nm) bands were selected for monitoring. The intensity ratio of a single band at two excitations was studied and the obtained relations were fitted by Boltzmann's equation. A similar wavelength from the charge transfer band tail and a wavelength matched to the GSA of Eu3+ ions were already used in both the SBR approach by Duan et al.38 and in an analogous method based on band ratio analysis in the excitation spectrum by Zhou et al.26 The use of the next Dy3+ activator was an original idea by the authors. In addition to excitation by energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group, an excitation wavelength of 390 nm matched to the 6H5/2 → 4F7/2 transition from the ground state of Dy3+ ions was used and the intensity ratios of the single bands associated with the 4F9/2 → 6H15/2 (572 nm) and 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 (482 nm) transitions were analyzed. In the case of doping with Sm3+ ions, an analogy with the 2018 work by Zhou et al.25 described in Section C of this work can be seen (see Fig. 8b), where in addition to the excitation of 350 nm by the vanadate group, a 407 nm excitation wavelength was used to match the 6H5/2 → 4F7/2 transition of Sm3+ ions. The intensity ratios of the single bands for the 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 (565 nm), 4G5/2 → 6H7/2 (603 nm) and 4G5/2 → 6H9/2 (646 nm) transitions were determined. The authors did not determine the SR curves over the entire range of temperatures studied of 299–466 K, but in a table, they collected the values of this parameter at only 298 K obtained for some of the emission bands studied. Increasing SR values were recorded for Eu3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+ ions, respectively, and for YVO4:1%Sm3+, a value of 3.09% K−1 was achieved. It is worth mentioning that for the latter ion, the digitized temperature-dependent parameter data suggest that at 299 K, the SR value can exceed 5% K−1 and it does not fall below 1%–1.5% K−1 until 466 K. The authors also proposed a method for temperature determination based on charge transfer band analysis, and the temperature-dependent parameters such as band position and its full width at half maximum were defined. Their temperature dependence was approximately linear. The SR values obtained at 289 K were similar for the samples doped with each dopant ion studied, which were about 0.3% K−1 and 0.16% K−1, respectively.
The next publication by Zanuto et al.17 accepted at the end of 2020 again presented the use of Eu3+ ions excited with the GSA-related 7F0 → 5D0 transition (575 nm) and the ESA-related 7F2 → 5D0 transition (610 nm) and the intensity ratio of the emission band at around 700 nm associated with the 5D0 → 7F4 transition was analyzed (Table 2). An analogous approach was initially proposed in the pioneering 2016 publication by Souza et al. (Fig. 7a)11 and has also been replicated by many subsequent authors not only in SBR but also in other measurement approaches.15,16,36,42 However, the novelty of the work by Zanuto et al. was the use of a calcium aluminosilicate glass material doped not only with Eu3+ ions but also Eu2+ ions. An extensive analysis of the spectroscopic properties of both ions was carried out and the presence of broad absorption bands derived from Eu2+ ions was indicated, namely associated with the 8S7/2 → t2g and 8S7/2 → eg transitions at around 256 and 323 nm, respectively. The possibility of excitation of both ions separately or simultaneously was presented and for Eu2+ ions the occurrence of a broad emission band with a maximum at around 567 nm was noted. The overlap of the emission bands of the Eu ions in both oxidation states was resolved via deconvolution and a method was even proposed to estimate the temperature based on the differences in the thermal quenching rates of both ions excited simultaneously in the GSA process. Regarding the use of the ESA process of Eu3+ ions, the authors presented an analysis of the implementation of the previously described SBR method for Eu3+ ions. They analyzed both the experimental data of ratiometric measurement and used the model proposed by Souza et al.11 to predict the calibration curve of this type of optical thermometer from spectroscopic properties. The discrepancy obtained in this case was concluded to be related to the presence of Eu2+ ions and the occurrence of energy transfer between co-doped ions, which were not considered by the model. Nevertheless, a high SR reaching 1.6% K−1 at about 288 K and decreasing monotonically to about 1.2% K−1 at about 333 K were obtained in the SBR method.
The subsequent publication by Drabik et al. (Table 2)32 was a continuation of this group's earlier research on the application of Tb3+ ions in SBR-type optical thermometry.13,31 The aim of this work was to investigate whether optimizing the efficient quenching of GSA-excited luminescence of Tb3+ ions would contribute to an increase in SR for an SBR-type thermometer also using ESA-matched excitation. In this study, oxyfluorotellurite TZPN glasses doped with several concentrations of Tb3+ ions were investigated. Importantly, the presence of a conduction band of this material in the energy range close to the 5D3 energy level was indicated. Therefore, it was expected that with an increase in temperature, the transfer of carriers to the conduction band could be observed, which could contribute to an additional enhancement in the thermal quenching of the luminescence of Tb3+ ions. Simultaneously, it was noted that due to the much higher occupancy of the 5D3 level when GSA-matched excitation is used, this process may be of greater importance in the case of this type of excitation. The thermal evolution of the excitation spectra was further investigated and it was observed that the band associated with the transition to the 5D3 level close to the conduction band position experiences faster thermal quenching than its 5D4 level counterpart. With ion excitation using a GSA-matched 377 nm wavelength for the 7F6 → 5D3 transition, strong quenching of the emission intensity associated with the 5D4 → 7F5 transition was observed. When excited with a 413 nm wavelength matched to the 7F5 → 5D3 transition, the observed emission intensity was initially enhanced, and then above 473 K, the quenching processes dominated and it was suppressed. However, the ratio of both signals appeared to monotonically increase with temperature and the SR obtained reached 1%–2% K−1 over the entire temperature range investigated of 248–623 K.
Another publication accepted in early 2021 by Abbas et al.47 investigated GdVO4:Eu3+ (Table 2). Based on the invariant luminescence decay times measured over a temperature range of 113 to 323 K, it was found that thermal quenching of the luminescence does not occur in this thermal range. SBR thermometry was implemented based on the intensity ratio of the band at around 698 nm, which is associated with the 5D0 → 7F4 transition excited using wavelengths of 581.6 nm, corresponding to the GSA-related 7F0 → 5D0 transition, and 615.2 or 594.3 nm, corresponding to ESA-related transitions to the 5D0 level from the 7F2 and 7F1 levels, respectively. The first pair of excitations allowed measurements in the range of 133–313 K, while the second in the range of 133–273 K range. Significantly, when using wavelengths of 581.6 and 615.2 nm, a record SR was obtained in the range of the lowest tested temperatures in the SBR approach for luminescence thermometry, which was as high as 6.73% K−1 at 133 K and decreased monotonically to 1.23% K−1 at 310 K. The digitized data suggest a slightly lower maximum SR was obtained, but it still exceeds 6% K−1, which is a truly impressive result. For a pair of excitations, one of which was 594.3 nm, the maximum SR at 133 K was estimated to be 2.87% K−1.
Subsequently, Trejgis et al.14 proposed an extension of their previous works on Nd3+ ion-based SBR-type optical thermometers.39,40 In the present work, it was decided to investigate the influence of the phosphor form on the thermometric properties by studying nanocrystals, microcrystals and ceramics of a chemically identical Y3Al5O12:Nd3+ material (Table 2) by monitoring the emission band located deeper in the infrared at around 1335 nm, which is associated with the 4F3/2 → 4I13/2 transition. Due to the increased optical path in the case of ceramics relative to micro- and nanocrystals, a more efficient reabsorption process was observed in the macro-sized samples. This became apparent in the excitation spectra, where an enhancement in the intensity of the band at around 1060 nm was observed with respect to the band at around 808 nm for the nano- through micro- to macro-forms. This was confirmed by the determined values of the average lifetimes, which coincided for different phosphor forms with the same dopant ion concentration. Alternatively, the shortening of this value for an increasing Nd3+ ion content was associated with the increase in the probability of the occurrence of the {4F3/2, 4I9/2} ↔ {4I15/2, 4I15/2} CR. Comparing the obtained results for different forms of Y3Al5O12 phosphor doped with a fixed concentration of 0.1% Nd3+, it was noted that with ESA-matched excitation, the signal was already recordable at 273, 353 and 393 K for ceramics, microcrystals and nanocrystals, respectively. The shift in the threshold temperature for the ESA process was related to the surface-related quenching process. The same trend was noted for the multiplicity of intensity increments with temperature enhancement, where the largest was for ceramics. Above 373 K, a reduction in the rate of intensity increase was observed, and for GSA-excited luminescence an enhancement in thermal extinction was noted at this temperature. This was explained based on the thermalization of the emitting level population in favor of higher-lying energy levels. The dependence of the ratio of signals obtained using ESA- and GSA-matched excitation was studied and it was found that the highest variation of the temperature-dependent parameter was recorded for ceramics, which was lower for microcrystals and the lowest for nanocrystals, as also reflected by the SR values. Based on the analysis of the terms present in the rate equations, it was found that these differences for different forms of the same phosphor are due to the increase in the process associated with quenching by functional groups on the surface. For nanocrystals this process plays a more crucial role than for microcrystals, while for ceramics it plays a negligible role. Furthermore, it has been shown that increasing the dopant ion concentration, which increases the probability of a CR process, affects the quenching of emissions, but simultaneously increases the population of the level from which the ESA takes place, and thus it is a desirable effect. Nevertheless, it was indicated that for nanocrystals, microcrystals and ceramics, the maximum values achieved for the highest concentration of 5% Nd3+ were 2.38% K−1, 8.46% K−1 and 9.51% K−1, respectively. The most important message from this publication is to highlight the role of surface-related quenching in the ESA process. Consequently, drawing attention to this fact is important for all luminescence thermometry using this strongly temperature-dependent excitation process.
Subsequently, another work by Stefanska et al.48 on the further development of previous research on SBR based on Tb3+ ions was accepted on the same date (Table 2). In this case, the intention was to check if the use of a thermally activated metal-to-metal charge transfer process could have a beneficial effect on the thermometric properties. For this purpose, the KGd(WO4)2 material doped with 20%, 50%, 80% and 100% Tb3+ ions substituted for Gd3+ ions was studied, and analogous excitation (377 nm and 413 nm matched to GSA and ESA, respectively) and emission (545 nm) wavelengths were utilized. This material was not expected to be optimal for SBR-type thermometry because due to its low phonon energy, it did not fit the trends set previously, as favorable in the case of Tb3+ ions.13,31 Spectroscopic studies revealed that the dopant ion concentration affects the probability of the metal-to-metal charge transfer process, given that the substitution of Tb3+ ions for Gd3+ ions modifies the distances between ions. The presence of an inflection point at around 423 K for the luminescence signal obtained using ESA induction was linked to the activation of the process at this temperature. Also for GSA-excited emission, an enhancement in thermal quenching was observed beyond this threshold temperature. The analysis of the emission intensity ratio obtained using two excitation wavelengths, whose thermally acted variation was positively influenced by this metal-to-metal charge transfer process, yielded an SR reaching 1.6% K−1 for 80% Tb3+ ion concentration.
In a subsequent report, Stefanska et al.37 proposed for the first time the use of the ESA of Pr3+ ions for luminescence thermometry (Table 2), as presented in Fig. 7e. Due to the multitude of possible CR processes for these ions, strong concentration effects were expected. The population of the 3H5 level from which the ESA is induced is dependent on the {3H6, 3H4} ↔ {3H5, 3H5} CR. In contrast, the {1D2, 3H4} ↔ {1G4, 3F4} and {1D2, 3H4} ↔ {3F4, 1G4} CRs affect the depopulation of the 1D2 emitting level. Another {3P0, 3H4} ↔ {1D2, 3H6} CR affects the depopulation of the 3P0 level, in favor of the 1D2 level, which may be associated with the strong changes in the shape of the emission spectrum with an increase in the Pr3+ ion concentration. This is exactly what was observed for the KLaP4O12 series of phosphors studied in this work doped with from 1% to 100% Pr3+ ions with respect to La3+ ions. For low Pr3+ concentrations, bands associated with transitions from the 1D2 level dominated in the emission spectrum, while for high concentrations, bands associated with transitions from the 3P0 level prevailed. Therefore, for the concentration range of 10%–100% Pr3+, the band associated with the 3P0 → 3F2 transition occurring in the red spectral range, induced sequentially by the GSA and ESA process with a wavelength of 444 nm matched to the 3H4 → 3P2 transition and 523 nm matched to the 3H5 → 3P1 transition, respectively, was analyzed. The obtained luminescence signals showed thermal quenching and enhancement, respectively, in the range of 273–573 K. The most significant changes were registered for the highest tested concentration of 100% Pr3+, which was also reflected in the highest increase in the temperature-dependent parameter of the ratio of the two intensities. These results were consistent with that expected, given that the population of the level from which the ESA occurs increases as a result of interionic processes. The temperature dependence of this process is due to the small energy mismatch between the transitions constituting a given CR, which can be overcome thermally. This mismatch is smaller at higher concentrations because in that case the Pr3+ ions occupy more non-equivalent crystallographic positions, which is consistent with the obtained results, indicating that the highest Pr3+ content is optimal. However, the multiplicity of different CR processes for Pr3+ ions resulted in a reversal of this trend for a range of lower concentrations of 1%–10% dopant ions, where the relative intensity of the single band from the yellow spectral range associated with the 1D2 → 3H4 transition was analyzed. In this case, the lowest of the concentrations tested produced the greatest variation in luminescence signals as a function of temperature. Overall, the highest SR was recorded for the phosphor doped with 2% Pr3+ ions, which reached 1.75% K−1 at around 573 K.
In their following work, the research by this group was decided to extending the analysis of a band from the blue spectral range. For this purpose, Stefanska et al.49 studied the YF3:Pr3+ material and analogous wavelengths matched with GSA and ESA as in the above work37 were used for the excitations; however, the intensity analysis was performed for the emission band at around 485 nm, which is associated with the 3P0 → 3H4 transition (Table 2). The selection of the host material was motivated by the relatively low phonon energies and the difference in the energy mismatches for the CR processes of Pr3+ ions (with respect to the previously investigated KLaP4O12:Pr3+)37 due to the slightly different distribution of the Stark levels of particular multiplets. In this case, only the transitions from 3PJ were observed, which were discussed in terms of the Judd–Ofelt parameters. For both signals used in the excitation of the GSA and ESA process, the expected temperature dependence, thermal quenching and enhancement were observed, respectively. In this case, the thermally activated slightly mismatched CR was associated with the occurrence of a higher rate of thermal quenching of GSA-excited luminescence and hampering of the intensity enhancement with ESA-matched excitation for a higher dopant concentration. This is because in this case, the Pr3+ content modulated the depopulation processes of the level from which the emission occurred more strongly, rather than the levels from which the GSA- and ESA-related excitation transitions were induced. The effects occurring for both signals canceled each other when their ratio was examined, which made the temperature-dependent parameter independent of the Pr3+ ion content in the studied concentration range of 0.06%–4.43%. This can be considered an advantageous from the point of view of the possible commercial production of this type of phosphor, where precise control of its composition can be difficult. The SR reached about 5%–6% K−1 at a low temperature of 273 K; however, in this range, the largest measurement errors occurred due to the low intensity of the signal excited via the ESA process. The SR values decreased monotonically and did not drop below 1% K−1 over the entire temperature range up to 573 K.
The high energies of the matrix phonons lead to efficient depopulation of the excited levels, which suppresses the increase in emission intensity with ESA-matched excitation. In addition, the high probability of non-radiative processes leads to more efficient depopulation of the level from which ESA occurs. The benefits of using a low-phonon energy matrix for SBR-type thermometry were confirmed by Trejgis et al.57 By using NaYF4:Nd3+ nanocrystals, it was possible to achieve SR > 15% K−1 sensitivity. In addition, the reduction in non-radiative processes associated with the nanocrystal surface by increasing the nanoparticle size made it possible to lower the temperature at which high relative sensitivity values were achieved. Therefore, for 200 nm nanocrystals, SR = 19.1% K−1 at 198 K was achieved.
In conclusion, the SBR technique (next to the LIR technique described in Section D) offers one of the most reliable temperature readings. The fact that a reference signal is included to enable ratiometric measurement means that unlike ABS, the temperature reading does not depend on the concentration of nanoparticles, the distance between the luminophore and the detector and other experimental factors. Specifically, in contrast to the LIR technique, by analyzing the intensity of the emission occurring in exactly the same spectral range at two different wavelengths, the influence of the medium spectral properties on the shape of the emission spectrum is eliminated, which makes the temperature reading more reliable. As shown in a previous study50, the apparent inconvenience of having to change optical excitation sources is not a significant technical issue when using coupled, phase-shifted optical excitation systems with rectangular supply current characteristics. However, it should be noted that while the medium does not change the shape of the emission spectrum, the dispersive dependence of light absorption and scattering by the medium can change the intensity values of the optical excitation to induce luminescence at ESA and GSA, which can ultimately make temperature measurements somewhat technically difficult.
The results reported in this section are summarized in Table 2.
C. Excitation band ratio (EIR)
The possibility of the occurrence of an ESA process associated with a change in the distribution of the energy level population with a change in temperature implies modifications in the shape of the excitation spectrum. This involves spectral broadening of the excitation bands, which is associated with electron–phonon coupling, and a population of higher vibronic components observed at higher temperatures. These are typical phenomena commonly observed for luminescence occurring through the GSA pathway. However, thermal population of the excited energy levels also allows new bands to appear in the excitation spectra, the intensity of which, in contrast to the bands formed by the GSA process, increases with an increase in temperature. In addition, the fact that the higher-lying energy levels are thermalized relative to the ground level at increased temperatures, the intensity of the bands formed by the GSA pathway further decreases relative to the bands associated with ESA. Therefore, a type of alternative approach to SBR is to analyze the ratio of the intensity of the absorption bands as a thermometric parameter.
In 2017, Zhou et al.24, based on their previous experience using the ESA process in an absolute band intensity-based thermometric approach and in a ratiometric approach using two optically active centers,12,18,20,28 presented a new way to optically measure temperature. Their idea was based on studying the thermally activated changes not in the emission but in the excitation spectrum. The thermal evolution of the intensity for two wavelengths in the excitation spectrum of a given emission band was chosen for monitoring. Although very interesting, it is important to note that this method is not very different from the SBR approach already proposed in the previous year by Souza et al.11 In fact, the optical processes responsible for changing the intensity of the selected wavelength from the emission band under study at the selected two excitation wavelengths are the same for both the measurement of the excitation spectrum and the measurement of the two emission spectra for two specific excitation wavelengths. Importantly, measuring the excitation spectrum is always much more complex than measuring the emission spectrum. In the former case, each measurement point requires a change in the excitation wavelength, and thus it is not possible to measure the entire excitation spectrum simultaneously. In the case of the emission spectrum, it is possible to spectrally separate the luminescence and use, for example, a CCD camera, which makes the measurement much simpler, faster and cheaper. Performing two measurements of the emission spectrum sequentially as required in the SBR approach is still much less complicated than measuring the excitation spectrum. However, this work by Zhou et al. presented a very important element of novelty in addition to a new method of measurement (Table 3), as depicted in Fig. 8a. Studies were conducted on the GdVO4 phosphor, and the thermally induced redshift in the charge transfer absorption band of the vanadate group VO43− present in the ultraviolet range was investigated. This absorption involves charge transfer from the oxygen ligands to vanadium ions. Special attention was given to the identification of the processes causing this band to shift, and for this purpose, both temperature-dependent changes in the shape and position of the bands in the excitation and emission spectra were thoroughly analyzed. It appeared that the opposite direction of the emission band shift of the VO43− group was noted. The conclusion of these considerations was that the main mechanism responsible for the absorption band shift is the thermal population of the higher vibrational components of the ground state of the VO43− group, while the shifting of the mutual position of the energy states due to temperature changes, as suggested earlier in the literature, plays a secondary role in this case. Due to the observed band shift in the excitation spectrum, it was possible to select two wavelengths for which an opposite intensity dependence on temperature was observed. The first wavelength of 315 nm corresponds to the region of the band maximum, and for this wavelength a significant decrease in intensity with an increase in temperature was observed, which is related to the thermal quenching of the luminescence associated with the presence of the intersection point of ground and excited state parabolas with an activation energy that can be thermally provided. Another wavelength of 360 nm was chosen from the sideband, where an increase in intensity with temperature was recorded. In fact, this wavelength matched the ESA from the higher vibrational levels of the ground state of the VO43− group, but the name of this phenomenon was not mentioned explicitly by the authors. A temperature-dependent parameter was defined as the 360 nm to 315 nm intensity ratio in the excitation spectra monitored at an emission wavelength of 450 nm. It was determined that the SR can be described by the 3289/T2 expression, which translates to (not determined by the authors) SR = 3.65% K−1 at 300 K, decreasing monotonically to about 1.5% K−1 at 480 K. The SR determined directly from the digitized data, due to the difficulty of fitting with any function in the low temperature range, can even exceed 5% K−1. Nevertheless, the sufficiently precise fit with the Arrhenius relation confirms that the as-defined luminescence thermometer corresponds to Boltzmann-like thermal coupling between the levels from which the excitation was induced. The thermometric results obtained are very promising, and this work has formed the basis for many other publications describing the utilization of the charge transfer band shift phenomenon in the excitation spectrum of the vanadate group and similar (e.g., tungstate) groups. Piotrowski et al. demonstrated that AVO4:Eu3+ (A = Y, La, Lu, Gd)-type materials can be successfully used for 2D forward imaging in the SBR approach using two low-power LED excitations.50 In addition, in this work, the temperature shift in the excitation spectrum of Eu3+ ions was discussed in terms of the thermally induced population of the 1E(1T1) state of the vanadate group with respect to the ground 1A2(1T1) state.
Table 3 Information about publications on the excitation band ratio




Material
GSA excitation
ESA excitation
Monitored emission
Max. SR (Max. SR calculated by us) (%K−1)
Analyzed temperature range
Comment
Ref.




GdVO4
315 nm (GSA of VO43− group)
360 nm (ESA of VO43− group)
450 nm (VO43− group)
3.65 (>5)@300 K
300–480 K
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of VO43− group

24



GdVO4:Sm3+
407.6 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Sm3+)
360 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Sm3+ activator)
602 nm (4G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)
3.68 (>4.4)@300 K
300–480 K
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of VO43− group, transferring energy to an activator, which in this case is Sm3+

25



YVO4:Eu3+
394.8 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)
358 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
619.2 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)
3.65 (∼3.75)@300 K
300–480 K
The first use of an Eu3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section A

26



YVO4:Eu3+
266 nm 1A2(1T1) → 1B2(1T2) transferring energy to Eu3+ activator
342 nm 1E(1T1) → 1B2(1T2) transferring energy to Eu3+ activator
619.2 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)
3.0@243 K
77–743 K
The first 2D thermal imaging of heat diffusion using the SBR approach

50



GdVO4:Eu3+
1.78@268 K


LuVO4:Eu3+
1.1@225 K


LaVO4:Eu3+
0.8@323 K


YVO4:Eu3+
465 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)
490 nm (7F2 → 5D2 of Eu3+)
618 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
1.23@299 K
299–466 K
Comparison of a method based on excitation spectrum analysis with others based on GSA-excited emission of Eu3+ ions: luminescence intensity ratio and band position. Examination of more band ratios from excitation spectra, where those listed above provide the greatest variation in ratio

42



526 nm (7F0 → 5D1 of Eu3+)
613 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)
698 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.28@299 K


LuVO4:Eu3+
319 nm (GSA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
618 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)
2.68@298 K (<1.4@360 K)
298–448 K
Additional studies relative to the work of Zhou et al.26 of an undoped sample to determine the origin of the band in the excitation spectrum. Comparison of a strategy based on the ratio analysis of both excitation lines from the VO43− band range with one based on lines corresponding to the ESA of the VO43− group and GSA of Eu3+ ions. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section B

38



392 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)
350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
618 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)
3.03@298 K (<1.5@380 K)


Sr3Lu(VO4)3:Eu3+
465 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)
250–360 nm (VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
615 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)
1.015@573 K
298–573 K
Comparison of the performance of a thermometer based on Eu3+ excitation spectra with a classical method based on the analysis of GSA-excited emission spectra. First use of Nd3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited WO4 group

46



CaWO4:Nd3+
Not specified – from the graph: approximately 350 nm corresponding most probably to the 4I9/2 → 4D3/2 transition
Not specified – from the graph: approximately 250–300 nm corresponding to the charge transfer transition of the WO4 group
Not specified in text, inaccuracy in figure: 584 nm is given in the graph and 1064 nm is mentioned in the legend
0.939@303 K


YVO4:Er3+
379 nm (4I15/2 → 4G11/2 of Er3+)
350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)
552 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)
2.34@300 K
299–466 K
Many additional temperature measurement methods: analysis of the emission spectra obtained with GSA-related excitation of the VO43− group, spectral position and full width at half maximum of the deconvoluted 1A1 → 1T2 sub-band of the VO43− group

52



489 nm (4I15/2 → 4F7/2 of Er3+)
2.61@300 K




In the subsequent publication also written by Zhou et al.25, as presented in Fig. 8b, they further improved the performance of this type of optical thermometry by additionally focusing on the temperature dependence of the excitation spectra of Sm3+ ions (Table 3) for an emission band at around 602 nm, corresponding to the 4G5/2 → 6H7/2 transition. One of the excitation wavelengths chosen for monitoring was 407.6 nm, corresponding to the excitation of Sm3+ ions in the GSA process, the intensity of which was observed to decrease with an increase in temperature. Based on the thermal invariability of the decay times measured for the Sm3+ emission, it was deduced that this is related to the depopulation of the ground state at higher temperatures in favor of states lying close above. The next wavelength chosen for analysis was 360 nm, which corresponds to the ESA process from the thermally-populated higher vibrational levels of the VO43− group, as implemented in a previous publication that omitted the possibility of using an additional lanthanide ion activator. The absorbed energy was efficiently transferred in this case to the Sm3+ activator via very efficient energy transfer noted in this matrix. Due to the observed redshift in the band associated with the absorption of this group, a strong enhancement with an increase in temperature was noted for the wavelength of 360 nm selected from the excitation spectrum. The ratiometric approach was implemented by examining the ratio of the intensities corresponding to wavelengths of 360 and 407.6 in the excitation spectrum. The authors fitted the obtained data with the Arrhenius equation, although they stated that this type of model is more appropriate for thermometric strategies associated with a pure Boltzmann distribution. Nevertheless, the expression for SR of 3313/T2 was determined from the fitting, which translated into a maximum value of 3.68% K−1 at 300 K. The SR decreased with temperature to about 1.5% K−1 at 480 K. Based on the digitized data and individual fit, these values may even exceed 4.1%–4.4% K−1 at low temperature. It should also be noted that the authors investigated the repeatability of the obtained results by performing several heating and cooling cycles with excellent results. An important aspect is that the ground level of the Sm3+ ion from which the first monitored GSA-related excitation occurred and the excited vibrational levels of the VO43− group from which the second ESA-related one occurred are not thermally coupled. This is a very interesting case that deserves special attention, especially given that the obtained SR values are high in relation to most of the results published thus far.
Another work exploring the possibility of using the ratio of band intensities in the excitation spectrum was by Zhou et al.26 published in early 2019 (Table 3). This publication was a continuation of previous works by their group on the use of VO43− absorption band shifting (Fig. 8a) and energy transfer to lanthanide ion activators (Fig. 8b).23–25 This time, the authors studied YVO4 activated with 10% Eu3+ ions. The authors in this work presented excitation spectra measured over a wide temperature range for the most intense emission band of 7D0 → 5F2 at 619.2 nm. A thermally induced redshift in the charge transfer excitation band related to the VO43− group was reported, which was attributed to the populating higher vibrational states of the ground energetic state of this group. An excitation wavelength of 358 nm in the tail range of this band was chosen to match the ESA of the VO43− group from the higher thermally populated sublevels, transferring its energy to the Eu3+ activator, and a wavelength of 394.8 corresponding to the direct excitation of the GSA transition of Eu3+ ions was analyzed. In the former case, a strong intensity enhancement was observed, whereas in the latter case, thermal suppression of the band intensity in the excitation spectrum was observed. To understand the mechanism for the thermal quenching of the Eu3+ ion emission upon excitation with a wavelength of 394.8 nm, the temperature dependence of the decay times was also investigated. Given that no changes were recorded for these curves over the temperature range studied, an explanation related to the Boltzmann distribution of the population was adopted. It was found that the 7F0 level from which the excitation occurred was thermally depopulated in favor of the 7F1 and 7F2 states situated above. The ratio of the intensities corresponding to the two chosen wavelengths in the excitation spectrum was defined as a temperature-dependent parameter, and after fitting with an Arrhenius curve, the SR relation expressed by 3287/T2 was obtained. A maximum SR of 3.65% K−1 was achieved at 300 K and around 1.5% K−1 at 480 K. Furthermore, it was indicated that as the temperature increased, the 5D0 state was further depopulated Boltzmann like in favor of the higher-lying 5D1 level. Importantly, the repeatability of the luminescence as-defined thermometer was also demonstrated over several heating and cooling cycles. The possibility of additional thermal enhancement of the emission by exploiting the thermal coupling of the 5D1 level with the underlying 5D0 level, as already described in Section A of this work, was further investigated.
In early 2019, Kolesnikov et al.42 also proposed a similar approach for temperature measurement based on the analysis of excitation spectra (Table 3). Although these authors studied an analogous material to the YVO4:10%Eu3+ used by Zhou et al.26, as described above, in this work, a different thermally dependent phenomenon was utilized. In the work discussed here, three different dopant ion concentrations of 4%, 10% and 16% were investigated. In addition to monitoring the wavelength inducing the GSA of Eu3+ ions, Zhou et al. decided to study the ESA-matched excitation of the VO43− group, transferring energy to the Eu3+ activator, while Kolesnikov et al. described the analysis of wavelengths in the excitation spectrum matching the GSA and ESA of Eu3+ ions. Therefore, this was an identical strategy to the SBR-based idea by Souza et al.11 described earlier in Section B (see Fig. 7b), given that the phenomena responsible for thermal sensitivity do not differ in both cases. The authors also proposed two different ways to measure temperature using this phosphor. The first method was based on the use of thermal coupling between the 5D1 and 5D0 emitting levels of Eu3+ ions excited through GSA by a wavelength of 355 nm. By analyzing the ratio of the intensities of the emission bands at around 538 and 595 nm, a good thermometric performance was obtained (maximum SR reached 2.85% K−1, while the temperature uncertainty was around 3 K). Poorer results were obtained for the analysis of the position of the band associated with the 5D0 → 7F1 transition in the emission spectrum (0.34% K−1 at 298 K); however, they were comparable with literature results for this measurement method. The method using the ESA process from low-lying thermally coupled levels was based on the integration of narrow ranges in the excitation spectra. The excitation spectrum recorded at temperatures in the range of 299–466 K and monitored at 618 nm, which is associated with the 5D0 → 7F2 transition, allowed analysis of the thermally induced intensity changes in the excitation bands associated with the 7F0 → 5D2 and 7F2 → 5D2 transitions observed at around 465 and 490 nm, respectively. An increase in emission intensity with temperature was observed for the GSA-matched excitation and the inverse relationship was observed for ESA excitation. The ratio of the intensities of these integral bands in the excitation spectrum was used as a temperature-dependent parameter. By fitting with an exponential curve consistent with the Boltzmann relation, an SR as high as 1.23% K−1 was obtained. The temperature-dependent excitation spectra for the band at around 698 nm, which is associated with the 5D0 → 7F4 transition, were also studied, allowing more bands to be observed in the range of 500–630 nm. The observed bands corresponded to transitions from the ground level of the 7F0 and 7F1 and 7F2 levels to the 5D1 and 5D0 levels, respectively. The integrated intensities of all these bands present in the emission spectra were analyzed and several different parameters defined as their ratios were determined, enabling the 7F2 → 5D0/7F0 → 5D1 ratio to be distinguished as the most variable as a function of temperature. Based on the Boltzmann formula fit, the highest SR of 1.28% K−1 was obtained for YVOs:10%Eu3+. The repeatability of both measurement methods based on the band excitation spectra at 618 and 698 nm was also checked, and it was found that the results read with the thermocouple differed only by the determined temperature uncertainty in the order of 1–3 K.
Another publication analogous to the penultimate-described (Zhou et al.26) mechanism concerning the VO43− group and Eu3+ ions was published by Duan et al.38 only 6 months later, in late 2019. However, in this case, lutetium vanadate was used instead of yttrium vanadate (Table 3). Additionally, this study focused on measurements of the undoped LuVO4 matrix, thus confirming that the broad band in the excitation spectrum indeed comes from the vanadate group and not from the charge transfer band of the Eu3+ ions. It was discussed that V5+ → O2− charge transfer occurs more easily than Eu3+ → O2− due to the higher charge and smaller ionic radius of V5+ than that of Eu3+. Moreover, although a broad emission band for the VO43− group was observed in a wide range of 350–650 nm in the undoped phosphor, only emission bands associated with the Eu3+ ion were visible after the introduction of 4% Eu3+ ion doping. This was linked to the very efficient energy transfer from the matrix to the Eu3+ ions. In the excitation spectrum, the presence of sub-bands at around 301 and 323 nm, which are associated with the 1A1 → 1T1 and 1A1 → 1T2 transitions of the VO43− group, respectively, was observed. Two components were also distinguished in the emission spectrum of this group, which are associated with the 3T2 → 7A1 and 3T1 → 1A1 transitions present at about 451 and 545 nm, respectively. Here, the temperature readout was based on the measured thermal evolution of the excitation spectra of the Eu3+ ion emission at 618 nm, which is associated with the 7F0 → 5D2 transition. However, in this case, the spectrum was measured over a broader spectral range of 220–550 nm, which also allowed the short-wave slope of the charge transfer band of the VO43− group and more bands associated with f–f transitions of Eu3+ ions to be observed. The first temperature-dependent parameter based on the excitation spectra was defined as the ratio of the intensities of 350 and 319 nm selected in the slope of the charge transfer band and closer to its center, which was analogous to the proposal by Zhou et al.24 in 2017 for the vanadium group in the undoped GdVO4 material. In this case, a lower SR was obtained for this wavelength pair, reaching 2.65% K−1 at 298 K, and the digitized data shows that the empirical fit in the low temperature range used here was slightly inaccurate and the actual SR value in this case is much lower. Another analyzed wavelength pair from the excitation spectrum was the ratio of 350 and 392 nm, the second of which was matched to the GSA of Eu3+ ions, which is related to the 7F0 → 5L6 transition. This was an approach analogous to that proposed by Zhou et al.26 discussed above; however, even the maximum SR of 3.03% K−1 at 298 K obtained here from the empirical fit was lower than the SR values obtained in that previous publication.
Another publication presenting temperature measurements based on the analysis of emission spectra was published by Chang et al.46 in 2020 (Table 3). This was a modification of an already well-described approach using the ESA of vanadate or tungstate groups, transferring energy to the activator ions (see Fig. 8b), as described earlier in this26,38,51 and the other sections23,34,38,45 of this work. However, in this case, the materials under study most likely involved splitting of the ground state parabola of these groups in such a way that with an increase in temperature, not only the higher vibrational components were populated according to Boltzmann distribution, but also this higher sublevel from which the transition had to have the highest probabilities. Hence, not only a redshift was observed, but also an increase in the intensity of the charge transfer band in the excitation spectrum and reflectance spectrum with an increase in temperature. However, the authors did not specify the mechanism responsible for the observed trends. An implementation of temperature measurement using this phenomenon was presented for the Sr3Lu(VO4)3 material doped with Eu3+ ions. In the excitation spectra monitored for the 5D0 → 7F2 transition of the Eu3+ ions, a strong thermally activated increase in the intensity of the charge transfer band of the VO43− group was observed, which simultaneously experienced a redshift, as well as thermal quenching of the bands associated with the excitation of the Eu3+ ions via the GSA process. The ratio of the intensity of the charge transfer band integrated in the range of 250–360 nm to the 7F0 → 5D2 band (observed at about 465 nm) was analyzed. Due to the opposite temperature dependence for the two analyzed bands, an SR reaching 1.015% K−1 at 573 K was obtained, and unusually, it increased monotonically to this value from a value of about 0.4% K−1 at 298 K, which is the opposite trend to that usually observed for thermometry based on the ESA process. The authors compared the result obtained with a typical emission spectrum-based luminescence thermometer using thermal coupling of the 5D0 and 5D1 excited levels of Eu3+ ions excited with a wavelength matched to GSA and obtained a lower maximum SR of 0.67% K−1 at 473 K. A measurement based on the analysis of excitation spectra was also implemented for CaWO4 doped with Nd3+ ions. In this case, an increase in the intensity of the charge transfer band of the WO4 group and its redshift were also observed, as well as thermal quenching of the bands related to the excitation of the Nd3+ ions via the GSA process with an increase in temperature. Testing a similar intensity ratio as in the previous case, a maximum SR of 0.939% K−1 at 298 K was achieved, which decreased with an increase in temperature to about 0.5% K−1 at high temperature.
Kolesnikov et al. previously investigated the use of energy transfer from the ESA-excited vanadate group of the YVO4 material to several activator ions, namely Eu3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+, as described in Section B of this work.44 In a subsequent paper in late 2020 discussed here, Kolesnikov et al.52 described a very similar issue; however, in this case, the Er3+ activator was studied (Table 3). The use of such phenomena for optical thermometry with other activator ions has been extensively described previously (see Fig. 8b).25,26,34,38,45 The case of Er3+ was also studied in 2018 by Zhou et al.,23 who proposed optical thermometry based on the LuVO4:Er3+ material excited using the ESA process of the VO43− group. The authors analyzed an approach based on the single emission band and the analysis of the intensity ratio of the emission bands corresponding to the transitions from the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels of Er3+ with the excitation still matching the ESA of the vanadate group. Significantly, Kolesnikov et al. proposed here as many as seven ways to achieve optical temperature readout using the same phosphor. Most of these methods used the redshift in the absorption band for the charge transfer of the VO43− group, and thus can be related to the ESA process of this group. The authors listed the reasons for the redshift as the decrease in the difference between the ground and excited levels due to thermal expansion, thermally activated population of the higher vibrational levels and temperature-related band broadening. However, the first three of the proposed methods are not based on the ESA process, given that they are based on the analysis of the emission spectra obtained at 300 nm excitation, corresponding to the GSA of the VO43− group. The first temperature-dependent parameter was defined as the ratio of the weak emission band of the matrix (around 450 nm) to the 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 transition (523 nm) of Eu3+ ions and an SR reaching 1.58% K−1 at 300 K was obtained. The next parameter was similar; however, it used the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 (552 nm) band in addition to the VO43−-related band. However, due to the thermal coupling between the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels, which favorably affected the thermal quenching of the former and unfavorably the latter, the SR achieved was much lower at around 0.46% K−1 at 300 K. Another temperature-dependent parameter was already well known earlier and based on the comparison of the ratio of emission bands associated with the transitions from the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels. This method yielded an SR of 1.13% K−1 at 300 K. Other methods considered the ESA from the higher vibrational levels of the VO43− group, given that they were based on the analysis of excitation spectra. Here, two variants were proposed. One of the temperature-dependent parameters was defined as the intensity in the emission spectrum for the corresponding ESA of the vanadate group at 350 nm divided by the intensity at about 379 nm, corresponding to the 4I15/2 → 4G11/2 transition of Er3+ ions. The next parameter was analogous; however, it analyzed the denominator of the intensity of another GSA-related Er3+ excitation band, namely 4I15/2 → 4F7/2, at around 489 nm. These methods resulted in SR values of 2.34% K−1 and 2.61% K−1 at 300 K, respectively. Two other methods were based on the analysis only of the charge transfer band of the VO43− group in the excitation spectrum. It was deconvoluted into two sub-bands, corresponding to the 1A1 → 1T1 (314 nm) and 1A1 → 1T2 (327 nm) transitions, where in the case of the latter, the thermal evolutions of its spectral position and full width at half maximum were analyzed. This allowed an SR of 0.34% K−1 and 0.35% K−1 at 300 K, respectively. Importantly, several cooling and heating cycles were tested for each method, and each time the temperature was evaluated from the respective calibration curves, which were consistent with the temperature set. It is worth mentioning that for temperatures above 300 K up to 466 K, the SR for each method decreased monotonically. According to the digitized data for some of the methods, it appears that this trend is maintained, but the expected SR values may be slightly lower than that reported.
Although the EIR approach is interesting from a scientific perspective, this method cannot be easily adopted for real applications. Its realization requires the excitation spectra to be known, which requires a continuous tunable excitation source. Additionally, this causes any absorption of the excitation radiation on the optical path between the detector and the luminophore to decrease the reliability of the measurement. Hence, this solution has not attracted significant interest in the scientific community, and thus has not been significantly explored since its first demonstration.
A summary of Section C is presented in Table 3.
D. Double band emission ratio (LIR)
The earliest report on the approach based on the intensity ratio of two emission bands, at least one of which is the result of the ESA-matching excitation, published by Zhao et al.20 in 2017 (Table 4) was already partially discussed in Section A of this work. The authors first described the emission intensity of an Eu3+ ion (5D0 → 7F1 band)-doped Ca2.94Eu0.04Sc2Si3O12 crystal matrix, excited with a wavelength of 610.6 nm matched to the 7F2 → 5D0 ESA-related transition as a temperature-dependent parameter. However, using the same excitation, a broad band at around 750 nm was also observed in the emission spectrum, which was associated with the residual Eu2+ ions present in the tested phosphor. This emission was too weak to be recorded along with Eu3+ emission obtained via GSA excitation. However, using a wavelength of 610.6 nm, the presence of Eu2+ ion luminescence became apparent and the authors proposed its use as a reference for the ratiometric measurement. As the first ratiometric parameter, the ratio of the integral intensity of the band at around 580–602 nm related to the 5D0 → 7F1 transition of Eu3+ ions and the spectrum integrated in the range of 750–760 nm related to the emission of Eu2+ ions was defined. The determined SR was related to the expression 1084/T2 and at 123 K its value reached about 7% K−1 and decreased to around 1.5% K−1 at 273 K. The digitized data suggest that the obtained values at low temperature may be much higher, even 10% K−1. A similar ratiometric parameter was analyzed for the second of the observed ESA-excited emission bands of the Eu3+ ions. However, in the case of the 5D0 → 7F4 transition, revealed as a band at around 707 nm, there was an overlap with a broad emission of the Eu2+ ions. In this case, the peak heights were analyzed instead of their integrals. The Eu3+ band was deconvolved from the Eu2+ band, while for Eu2+, the average height was determined in the range of 750–760 nm. However, the as-defined thermally dependent parameter allowed a lower SR to be obtained than in the previous case. Nevertheless, these are some of the best results obtained using this measurement approach.
Table 4 Information about publications on the double band emission ratio




Material
Excitation
Monitored ESA-excited emission
Additional monitored emission
Max. SR (Max. SR calculated by us) (%K−1)
Analyzed temperature range
Comment
Ref.




Ca3Sc2Si3O12:Eu3+, Eu2+
610.6 nm (ESA: 7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+ AND Eu2+)
580–602 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
750–760 nm (Eu2+)
∼7 (∼8)@123 K
123–273 K
The first reported use of ESA for thermometry based on ratio analysis of two simultaneously excited emission bands using a residual Eu2+ co-dopant. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section A

20



707 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
∼6 (∼9)@123 K


YPO4:Tb3+,Ho3+
544.1 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 5I8 → 7F4,5S2 of Ho3+)
486–496 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)
657–661 nm (5F5 → 5I8 of Ho3+)
2.6 (>3.5)@300 K
300–760 K
The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Tb3+ ions. First deliberate selection of two co-doped trivalent lanthanide ions for this type of approach

28



CaWO4:Tb3+,Eu3+
405 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)
545 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)
614 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
2.02 (∼1.9)@610 K
333–773 K
The first proposal to excite the ESA process of Tb3+ ions with wavelength matched to the transition to the 5D3 level, allowing monitoring of the most intense emission band of Tb3+ ions. First proposal for co-doping with Eu3+ ions for ESA-excited Tb3+ ions. Comparison of the obtained SR with a conventional optical thermometer based on decay times

30



YV0.3P0.7O4:Tb3+,Eu3+
352 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator AND GSA: 7F6 → 5D2,5L9,5G4 of Tb3+)
605–635 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
541–555 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)
2.7@365 K
300–440 K
The first extension of the idea based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group to the lanthanide ion by co-doping with another lanthanide ion excited using the same wavelength via the GSA process, which in this case is Tb3+. Use of an optimized solid matrix solution to allow the efficient emission of both co-doped ions

45



YV0.3P0.7O4:Tb3+,Sm3+
352 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator AND GSA: Sm3+)
560–572 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Sm3+)
2.85@365 K


YNbO4:Eu3+,Er3+
487.6 nm (ESA: 7F2 → 5D2 of Eu3+ AND GSA: 4I15/2 → 4F7/2 of Er3+)
580–640 nm (5D0 → 7F1, 5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
550–560 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)
2.9 (∼2.3)@137.3 K
63–393 K
The first proposal for co-doping with Er3+ ions for ESA-excited Eu3+ ions

54



NdAl3(BO3)4
1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)
810 nm (4F3/2 →4I9/2 of Nd3+)
880 nm (4F5/2,2H9/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)
2.95@307 K (>4@298 K)
298–513 K
Examining the ratio of emission intensities from the two thermally coupled levels, where excitation due to ESA is not relevant here. Extensive characterization of the spectroscopic properties of Nd3+ ions excited via the ESA process

55



KTbP4O12:Eu3+
414 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)
541.5–551.5 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)
695–705 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
1.21@370 K
273–473 K

S
R-Oriented concentration optimization and investigation of energy transfer between co-doped ions. Optimization of excitation wavelength. First proposal for doping with transition metal ions, showing stronger thermal quenching than lanthanide ions for ESA excited Tb3+ ions, i.e., Cr3+ in this case

53



416 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)
1.36@413 K


418 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)
1.34@450 K


KTbP4O12:Cr3+
413 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 4A2 → 4T1 of Cr3+)
845–855 nm (4T2 → 4A2 of Cr3+)
2.75@320 K
173–473 K


YVO4:Tm3+,Eu3+
360 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator And GSA: 3H6 → 1D2 of Tm3+)
592–597 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)
449–460 nm (1D2 → 3F4 of Tm3+)
4.6@330 K (>5.5@310 K)
300–380 K
An improvement on the previous idea requiring an unfavorable matrix solid solution by using Tm3+ co-doping. First use of a Tm3+ activator excited via energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group

56



360 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Tm3+ activator AND GSA: 3H6 → 1D2 of Tm3+)
465–490 nm (1G4 → 3H6 of Tm3+)
<3 (<3.5)@350 K




Just one month later, a similar publication by the same group was published28 (Table 4). This study extended the ions previously used for ESA-excited luminescence thermometry to include Tb3+ (Fig. 9a). A YPO4 material doped with 3.2% Tb3+ ions and 0.8% Ho3+ ions was used, where these concentrations were chosen by the authors to minimize the energy transfer between the co-dopants. By studying single-doped materials, it was noted that a band around 540 nm appeared in both the emission spectrum of Tb3+ ions and the excitation spectrum of Ho3+ ions. Therefore, it was proposed that a wavelength in this range be used to simultaneously excite the ESA process of Tb3+ ions, inducing the 7F5 → 5D4 transition and the GSA process of Ho3+ ions associated with the 5I8 → 7F4,5S2 transition. The ESA process of the Tb3+ ions was thoroughly characterized in this case and the obtained temperature dependence of the emission intensity was fitted using the Arrhenius formula, and some deviation was observed, which was discussed in relation to the red-shifting of the band in the excitation spectrum measured over a wide temperature range. Based on the temperature dependence of the measured excitation spectrum of the ESA process, the optimal wavelength of 544.1 nm was selected to provide the greatest thermally induced variation of the resulting luminescence. The luminescence decay times were also measured and based on their near invariability with respect to temperature changes, it was deduced that the Tb3+ ion emission experiences negligible thermal quenching and the energy transfer between Tb3+ and Ho3+ is weak. The ratio of the luminescence intensity in the range of 486–496 nm associated with the 5D4 → 7F6 transition of Tb3+ ions and in the range of 657–661 nm associated with the 5F5 → 5I8 transition of Ho3+ ions was chosen as the temperature-dependent parameter. The authors emphasized that the thermal enhancement of the Tb3+ ion luminescence is mainly due to the increase in the population of its 7F5 level with an increase in temperature. Alternatively, the decrease in the Ho3+ intensity is related to the increase in the probability of multiphoton relaxation, and the distance between the 5F5 level and the 5I4 (2400 cm−1) was compared with the maximum energy of the matrix phonons (1080 cm−1). The SR was determined to reach as high as 2.60% K−1 at around 300 K and decrease monotonically to just under 1% K−1 at 760 K. Notably, in this work, the authors presented a purposeful design and a knowledgeable attempt to optimize many different parameters responsible for obtaining these significant results in this measurement configuration.
The next publication on the luminescence intensity ratio-based approach using the ESA process was presented by Li et al.30 in 2019 (Table 4). They27 successfully used the ESA of Tb3+ ions in a CaWO4 matrix for temperature measurements based on absolute band intensity analysis, as already described in Section A of this work. This time they decided to use an additional co-dopant of Eu3+ ions, which were simultaneously excited via the GSA process by the same wavelength that was chosen to induce the ESA of the Tb3+ ions. Two years earlier, a similar solution based on the ESA of Tb3+ ions and GSA of Ho3+ ions was proposed by Fang et al. (see Fig. 9a)28, as described above in this section. However, in that case, the wavelength was chosen to match the 7F5 → 5D4 transition of Tb3+ ions, which precluded the possibility of monitoring the characteristic dominant green emission of Tb3+ ions associated with the reverse transition. Conversely, in the work by Li et al., this limitation was circumvented by selecting an excitation matched to the 7F5 → 5D3 transition of Tb3+ ions, and simultaneously to the 7F0 → 5D3 transition of Eu3+ ions. This made it possible to monitor the most intense emission bands of both ions, namely, the band in the green spectral range of around 545 nm, which is associated with the 5D4 → 7F5 transition of Tb3+ ions, and the band in the red spectral range at around 614 nm, associated with the 5D0 → 7F2 transition of Eu3+ ions. Accordingly, the chosen excitation and emission transitions allowed the observation of two luminescent signals with opposite intensity dependencies on temperature, which, as the authors explained in the introduction, is the most optimal case for thermometry based on the mutual intensity of two bands. Explanations for these correlations were given, linking the thermal quenching of the GSA-excited luminescence of Eu3+ ions to a thermally activated increase in the contribution of multiphonon relaxation and by the depopulation of the 7F0 state in favor of higher-lying 7FJ states according to the Boltzmann distribution. Regarding the thermal enhancement of the Tb3+ ion emission, the Boltzmann population of the 7F5 level from which ESA was induced at the expense of the ground level population was identified as the cause. It is noteworthy that a commercial widely used laser diode with a maximum emission at 405 nm was used to excite the described CaWO4:0.1%Eu3+,5%Tb3+ phosphor, which significantly improves the availability of this type of temperature sensing method. The temperature-dependent parameter was defined as the ratio of the intensities of the emission bands at around 545 and 614 nm, and its monotonic increase over the temperature range studied, i.e., 333–773 K, was recorded. An empirical formula was used to fit the experimental data, and consequently the SR was determined, increasing from low values at 333 K and reaching as high as 2.02% K−1 at 610 K, and then decreasing to about 1.5% K−1 at 773 K. Based on the digitized data, it can be concluded that even if the achieved SR value is slightly lower, at both 610 K and 773 K, no higher SR values have been presented for optical thermometry using ESA than this case thus far. Moreover, the authors demonstrated the repeatability of the obtained results over a cycle of temperature changes between 493 and 773 K. They also noted a strong shift in emission color from red to green with an increase in temperature in the range of 333–773 K and presented this drastic change in a CIE chromaticity diagram.
Another implementation of ratiometric measurement based on two emission bands was proposed by Zhou et al.45 in 2020 (Table 4). In this case, they decided to use the previously described ESA of the VO43− group, transferring energy to the activator Eu3+ or Sm3+ (see Fig. 8b), where the same authors and others previously reported a strong increase in emission intensity with temperature, as described in the previous sections of this work23,25,26,38. To take advantage of the ESA process of the vanadate group, an excitation wavelength of 352 nm located at the tail of the absorption band and showing a redshift at higher temperatures was used. However, this time, they decided to co-dope another optically active ion to obtain an optical signal with opposite intensity dependence on temperature, which is schematically depicted in Fig. 9b. However, in the selected YVO4 matrix, the Tb3+ ions chosen for this purpose are strongly quenched by the Tb–V interaction. Thus, to reduce this effect, they decided to substitute V5+ ions with different concentrations of P5+ ions to decrease the Tb–V distance. Indeed, this solid solution proved to be advantageous in terms of obtaining efficient emissions of both ions at 352 nm excitation, i.e., GSA-excited emission of Tb3+ ions and emission of Eu3+ ions excited through ESA of the VO43− group. The YV0.3P0.7O4 crystal was selected as the optimum matrix and the thermometric properties in the temperature range of 300–440 K were initially investigated for 3% Tb3+ and 0.2% Eu3+ doping. For excitation at 352 nm, a strong thermally activated increase in the emission intensity of Eu3+ ions in the range of 605–535 nm, which is associated with the 5D0 → 7F2 transition, and thermal quenching of Tb3+ ions, where the 5D4 → 7F5 transition was monitored in the range of 541–555 nm, were recorded. The ratio of these two bands was analyzed as a temperature-dependent parameter and an SR reaching 2.7% K−1 at 365 K was obtained. Similar characterization was also carried out for dopant concentrations of 3% Tb3+ and 0.05% Eu3+, and for the activator Sm3+ (analyzed band associated with the 4G5/2 → 6H5/2 transition was integrated in the range of 560–572 nm), instead of Eu3+, concentrations of 3% Tb3+ and 0.1% Sm3+ were studied. In this case, the thermal evolution of the integrals was presented and the SR was found to reach 2.6% K−1 at 380 K and 2.85% K−1 at 365 K, respectively. Excitation spectra were also measured over a wide temperature range for both the Tb3+ and Eu3+ ion emissions, thus confirming the mechanisms leading to opposite temperature dependencies of their luminescence intensities. A sample singly doped with Tb3+ ions was also studied and the temperature quenching of its luminescence was found to be similar to that reported in co-doped samples. Moreover, the decay times did not show a temperature dependence, which the authors related to the fact that the thermally activated quenching of the Tb3+ ion emission results from a decrease in the absorption cross section with an increase in temperature. An interesting aspect investigated in this publication was the use of the ESA process of the vanadate group energy transfer to Eu3+ ions optimized in the YVO4 matrix and GSA-excited Tb3+ emission, which is more efficient in the YPO4 matrix, due to the use of a solid solution, that is, a combination of two matrices.
Subsequently, Mao et al.54 proposed a ratiometric measurement based on two emission bands using the ESA of Eu3+ ions (Table 4). Although the ratio of the ESA-excited emission band of Eu3+ ions and GSA-excited band of Eu2+ ions, as described above in this section, had been studied previously20, in that case, the excitation of the Eu3+ ions matched the transition to the 5D0 level, which made it impossible to observe all the emissions from this level. Alternatively, Mao et al. used a wavelength of 487.6 nm matched to the transition from the thermally coupled lower excited 7F2 level of Eu3+ ions to the higher 5D2 level, and after a rapid non-radiative transition to the 5D0 emitting level, it was possible to observe all the transitions to the 7FJ levels. The authors in this case used Er3+ ions as a reference, which using the same wavelength could be excited via GSA by inducing the 4I15/2 → 4F7/2 transition. With this selection of transitions of both ions, many of their emission bands could be observed. The emission bands in the range of 580–640 nm associated with the 5D0 → 7F1 and 5D0 → 7F2 transitions of the Eu3+ ions were analyzed, where a strong increase in emission intensity was observed in the temperature range of 63–393 K. In the case of Er3+ ions, the authors decided to monitor their 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition in the range of 550–560 nm because the thermal coupling of the 4S3/2 level with higher energy levels allowed the strongest temperature quenching of the intensity to be recorded for this band. The authors also discussed that Eu3+ ions may also show GSA-type absorption of the used 487.6 nm wavelength in the phonon-assisted process although with low probability. The maximal phonon energy was as high as 800 cm−1 in the case of YNbO4:0.02%Eu3+,0.005%Er3+ studied, and thus only about two phonons were needed to bridge the missing energy difference. The luminescence decay times were also measured and it was shown for Eu3+ that there was no thermal quenching in the studied temperature range, while for Er3+ ions there is a temperature dependence, and the studied curves were not exponential. The possibility of energy transfer between the ions was not discussed. Nevertheless, by analyzing the temperature-dependent parameter, which was defined as the ratio of the intensities of the two bands, it was shown that the SR reached 2.9% K−1 at around 137.3 K, while for lower temperatures, it was indicated to be much lower. However, the digitized data suggest that the authors underestimated the SR in this range and at 63 K it could still be above 2% K−1. Above the temperature corresponding to the maximum SR, a monotonic decrease in its value to about 0.5% K−1 at 393 K was observed.
Another work presenting a ratiometric measurement based on the mutual intensity of two emission bands was reported in 2020 by Silva et al. (Table 4)55, who focused mainly on the characterization of the photon-avalanche-like process of Nd3+ ions. Previously, the use of the ESA of Nd3+ ions for luminescence thermometry by studying the absolute intensity of a single band (Marciniak et al.19) or the ratio of the intensity of a single band at two different excitations (Trejgis et al.39) was described. However, in the work by Silva et al., thermometry was only an additional proof-of-concept, given that the broad characterization of the photon avalanche-like process was relevant. The Nd3+ ions in the stoichiometric matrix NdAl3(BO3)4 of high maximal phonon energy were excited using a wavelength of 1064 nm, matching the ESA transition from the 4I11/2 → 4F3/2 level. An in-depth analysis using a thermal imaging camera to measure the heating of nanoparticles by phonon emission in the crystal lattice and a power-dependence study allowed the analysis of multiple processes responsible for the observed luminescence properties. An emission was observed at higher temperatures not only from the 4F3/2 level (880 nm) but also from higher-lying thermally coupled levels. Thus, transitions of 4F5/2,2H9/2 → 4I9/2 (810 nm), 4S3/2,4F7/2 → 4I9/2 (750 nm) and even 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 (690 nm) were observed. Moreover, an emission was also observed from the higher-lying 4G7/2,2G3/2 levels at around 660, 600 and 536 nm, which is associated with transitions to the 4I13/2, 4I11/2 and 4I9/2 levels, respectively. The latter was concluded to be mainly related to the occurrence of energy transfer upconversion between two Nd3+ ions at the 4F3/2 level. The energy looping mechanism in the studied system was also described and behavior analogous to the photon avalanche process was confirmed by observing the S-shape power dependence of the emission intensity. Interestingly, for the 880 nm emission band, a change in the number of photons involved was observed from 0.6 to 3.7 after exceeding the threshold power (1.1 W), while for the emission band at 810 nm, the number of photons was estimated to be 0.8 below the threshold power and as high as 8.9 above it. These unexpected differences were linked to the light-to-heat conversions recorded with the thermal camera, which were thought to account for the change in the population distribution between the coupled levels of 4F3/2 and 4F5/2,2H9/2. Also, how exposure to laser stimulation at different powers affects the heating of the sample was investigated. Given that a multitude of different temperature-dependent processes resulted in a strong temperature dependence of the shape of the emission spectrum (different bands varying in intensity), a ratiometric thermometer based on the ratio between the band intensities at 810 nm and 880 nm was presented. As the intensity ratio was examined, the excitation by the ESA process shortened each one, similar to the idea by Zhou et al.23 discussed above in this section. Measurements were made immediately after excitation, avoiding additional heating of the sample, and the maximum SR of 2.95% K−1 at 307 K was obtained. This work presented a very complex analysis of the optical properties of Nd3+ ions excited with ESA-matched wavelength and many temperature-dependent processes were considered, such as GSA-related phonon-assisted excitation, CR, energy transfer upconversion, and nonradiative relaxation.
At the end of 2020, Drabik et al.53 presented an approach using two co-dopant ions, where GSA of one ion and ESA of the other were induced using a single excitation wavelength (Table 4). This approach was previously used in 2017 by Fang et al.28, who excited the ESA of Tb3+ ions and GSA of Ho3+ ions (see Fig. 9a), while Li et al.30 studied the ESA of Tb3+ ions and GSA of Eu3+ ions in 2019 and Mao et al.54 described the ESA of Eu3+ ions and GSA of Er3+ ions in 2020, as discussed above. Importantly, in each of these works, single co-doped samples with a specific concentration of both optically active ions were studied. However, a very important factor in the case of co-doping is the possibility of energy transfer, and thus investigating the different reciprocal contents of the two selected ions is extremely important. Due to their previous experience with single-doped samples13,31,32, Drabik et al. decided in this work to use the ESA of Tb3+ ions and specified a number of requirements for optimal co-doping, as listed in their work. Given that previous studies showed that the KTbP4O12 material is optimal for observing an efficient and strongly thermally dependent ESA process of Tb3+ ions13,31 and a high concentration of Tb3+ ions is the most promising13, they decided to use this matrix. Eu3+ was selected as the first co-dopant ion given that it was previously proposed by Li et al. However, in the work of Drabik et al., concentrations of Eu3+ ions of 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, 2% and 5% substituting the crystallographic positions of Tb3+ ions were investigated. Based on the measurements of excitation spectra in a wide temperature range of 123–473 K, three proposals for excitation wavelengths of 414, 416 and 418 nm capable of simultaneously exciting the 7F5 → 5D3 ESA transition of Tb3+ ions and the 7F0 → 5D3 GSA transition of Eu3+ ions were selected for further study. Based on the excitation spectra and decay times measured over a wide range, it was concluded that an unfavorable energy transfer from the Tb3+ to Eu3+ ions occurs, which is enhanced with temperature. The mutual intensity of the 5D4 → 7F5 (541.5–551.5 nm) transition of the Tb3+ ions and 5D0 → 7F4 (695–705 nm) transition of the Eu3+ ions was monitored for each concentration and each excitation over a wide temperature range. Based on the observed trends, it was found that the highest thermally activated emission intensity increase of Tb3+ ions was shown for the highest concentration of these ions, and simultaneously for the lowest concentration of Eu3+ ions, which was also advantageous because the unfavorable Tb3+ → Eu3+ energy transfer was reduced in this case. The excitation wavelength of 416 nm was also found to be optimal because comparable emission intensities of both ions were observed for this wavelength and it excited the co-doped ions separately, and thus the emission of the Eu3+ ions was the most stable as a function of temperature and did not increase due to energy transfer from the Tb3+ ions. Therefore, the highest SR was obtained for KTbP4O12:0.1%Eu3+ excited at 416 nm, which reached 1.36% K−1 at 413 K. It was also observed that due to the increasing fit to the ESA transition of the Tb3+ ions for the selection of shorter excitation wavelengths, and thus more efficient excitation of this process, the temperature at which the process was efficiently induced decreased. Therefore, the greatest variability was obtained at lower and lower temperatures, resulting in the maximum SR being obtained at lower temperatures with shortening of the excitation wavelength from 418 nm to 414 nm. This is a great advantage, allowing arbitrary tuning of the temperature range where SR is the highest. A completely original co-dopant exhibiting stronger thermal quenching of its luminescence, as presented in Fig. 9c, was the second one selected, namely the transition metal ion Cr3+. In this case, the 413 m wavelength matched the ESA of the Tb3+ ions in the slope of the absorption band of the Cr3+ ions associated with the 4A2 → 4T1 transition. In this case, the Cr3+ emission band at around 840 nm (4T2 → 4A2 transition) underwent strong thermal quenching. Hence, the Cr3+ to Tb3+ emission intensity ratio increased by three orders of magnitude in the range of 173–473 K. In this case, the lowest concentration was also found to be optimal and the maximum SR of 2.75% K−1 was obtained without dropping below 2.5% K−1 in the range of 273–473 K. Furthermore, using the strong thermally induced color variation of Tb3+ and Eu3+-doped phosphor emissions, a proof-of-concept experiment was performed, demonstrating the superiority of luminescence thermometry over thermal imaging in the context of through-object imaging, where in this case, imaging of the heating of a printed board circuit through a glass plate under a current flow.
The subsequent publication by Zhou et al.56 in 2021 was a continuation of their work from the previous year45, as described above. In that work, they proposed the use of energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group to Eu3+ ions (or Sm3+ ions), resulting in an increase in their emission intensity with temperature, and the GSA-excited luminescence of Tb3+ ions, which in turn underwent thermal quenching, using the same excitation wavelength (see Fig. 9b). However, to obtain Tb3+ ion luminescence, it was necessary to use a solid solution of YVO4, where it was possible to observe the energy transfer-induced Eu3+ ion emission, and YPO4, where it was possible that the Tb3+ emission was not totally quenched. However, this solution has some drawbacks, given that the substitution of V5+ ions with P5+ ions caused a decrease in the thermally-activated redshift in the charge band transfer matrix YVO4. Therefore, the authors decided to use a different co-dopant ion to take full advantage of the maximum increase in the emission intensity of Eu3+ ions present in the pure YVO4 matrix excited with a wavelength of 360 nm matched to the tail of the charge transfer band of the VO43− group. This time, Tm3+ ions were chosen due to the fact that the 360 nm wavelength matched their GSA-related transition from the 3H6 level to the 1D2 level. Therefore, this work focused on the study of the YVO4:15%Tm3+,1%Eu3+ material (Table 4). Several different variants of Tm3+ co-doping concentrations were tested; however, the target content was chosen based on the comparison of the mutual intensities of the Tm3+ and Eu3+ bands at room temperature. The emission spectra at 360 nm excitation over a wide temperature range of 300–380 K were studied and a strong increase in the emission intensity of the Eu3+ ions was recorded. According to the temperature-dependent excitation spectra monitored at the Eu3+ emission of around 595 nm, it was confirmed that this is due to the redshift in the charge transfer band edge of the matrix. In the case of the Tm3+ ions, the opposite behavior of the bands associated with the 1G4 → 3H6 (around 476 nm) and 1D2 → 3F4 (around 453 nm) transitions was observed, which showed a thermally activated increase and decrease in intensity, respectively. Measurements of the excitation spectra for the emission band of Tm3+ at around 453 nm indicated the presence of a strong 3H6 → 1D2 band at about 360 nm, which was the excitation wavelength used for the luminescence thermometry. This band showed ordinary temperature quenching, and in this case the influence of the charge transfer band was negligible. In the case of the excitation spectrum of the Tm3+ ions at around 476 nm, this f–f band was negligible, suggesting a very weak relaxation from the 1D2 to the lower 1G4 level. Here, the 1G4 level was mainly populated by energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group, which was the reason for the similarity of the intensity changes of its band to that associated with the emission of Eu3+ ions with a temperature change. In addition, the temperature-independent decay times of the Eu3+ ion emission and Tm3+ ion emission from 1G4 were demonstrated. In the case of the emission of Tm3+ ions from the 1D2 level, a strong shortening of the lifetimes was observed, which was attributed to the thermal quenching process. The opposite intensity dependence of the emission of Eu3+ ions, which originated from the 1D2 level emission of the Tm3+ ions, was used for luminescence thermometry. The band at around 592–597 nm associated with the 5D0 → 7F1 transition of the Eu3+ ions and the band at around 449–460 nm associated with the 1D2 → 3F4 transition of the Tm3+ ions were monitored. Consequently, a very high SR exceeding 3.5% K−1 was achieved over the entire temperature range studied of 300–380 K with the maximum reaching 4.6% K−1 at 330 K. This was also compared with that obtained by comparing the intensities of both emission bands of Tm3+ ions associated with the transitions from the 1G4 (465–490 nm) and 1D2 (449–460 nm) levels; however, in this case, a lower SR was achieved, but is still competitive with other luminescent thermometers investigated. Significantly, in the case of the first of these investigated proposals, the digitized data suggest the achievement of an even higher SR of around 5% K−1 over the entire range, with the maximum reaching 6% K−1. Considering this, it must be said that this solution is extremely advantageous in this temperature range compared to the other optical thermometers described in this section.
In conclusion, ratiometric measurement enabled by LIR analysis is a solution with high application potential, owing mostly to the high reliability of the temperature reading. However, in the case of ESA-related processes, there is a significant difficulty associated with the necessity to appropriately select the luminescent ions and the matrix material for the excitation beam to allow simultaneous initiation of the ESA process in the case of one type of ion (without the generation of luminescence by GSA in this case) and excitation of luminescence by GSA in the second type of ion (without causing the generation of ESA emission in these ions). Generally, this condition is very difficult to meet, which naturally limits the applicability of this approach. It is simpler when one of the ions exhibits broadband absorption, as in the case of transition metal ions. However, as shown in this case, due to the relatively small energy distance between the vibronic levels, the resulting thermal signal enhancement is much lower than that observed for Ln3+. Additionally, the need to co-dope one material with two types of luminescent active ions is associated with the problem of non-uniform ion distribution in the matrix in the case of scaling the synthesis to industrial amounts. This is not a significant problem when matrices are used in which one type of luminescent ion is the matrix-building ion (e.g., YVO4). In addition, when applying the LIR approach to materials based on the ESA process, attention should be paid to the optimal concentration of luminescent ions in properly control the probability of energy transfer between ions because without good control, the energy exchange can significantly reduce the thermometric performance of the phosphor.
Limitation of the technique
The SBR approach has gained interest in the field of materials science, spectroscopy and temperature metrology, considering the advantages of this method. The SBR approach is applicable to most of the known luminescent phosphors but optimizing the performance of these luminescent thermometers requires dedicated phosphors and compositions, which ultimately may lead to high sensitivities and acceptable brightness. The latter factor, the brightness of ESA-excited luminescence, may remain a challenge and may limit the sensitivity in a lower temperatures range. Energy looping, well known in photon-avalanche materials, may be the remedy for this issue. The other potential issue of SBR originates from the spectral dispersion of the sample at the two excitation wavelengths. This means that the calibration performed under laboratory conditions may not be suitable for measurements made in situ because the sample will absorb or scatter the excitation light differently for the GSA and ESA cases. Fortunately, the absorption or scattering characteristics of tissues are usually relatively flat or smooth, especially in the NIR spectral region, where many of the SBR thermometers are designed to be excited. Therefore, the first and obvious solution to the dispersion problem is choosing these excitation wavelengths, which are spectrally similar (differ by less than, e.g., 50 nm). It must be clearly stated this approach does not compromise the working principle and performance of SBR thermometers. Unlike in the conventional LIR method, where the spectral bands overlap and spectral bleed through occurs, or the bands shift by 50 or 100 nm, significantly affecting the reading accuracy, the two, spectrally close excitation lines do not pose significant problems in the SBR approach. Firstly, all-electronic switching between the light sources (specifically dedicated for GSA and ESA) is technically simple and effective. The two light beams may even propagate in the same illumination fiber to simplify the design of the optical system. Secondly, distinct excitation lines stimulate distinct absorption transitions, which ensure easier and more reliable quantification of these separate phenomena. Another potential issue, which is directly related to the brightness of the LNTs, originates from safe exposure limits of the skin (when these nanothermometers are used in subcutaneous temperature monitoring for diagnostic purposes) to the photo-stimulation light. However, this requirement is valid for any type of nanothermometer independent of its principle of operation, which is why the brightness and quantum efficiency of emission are additional factors (besides the sensitivity) that must be considered in developing new luminescent nanoprobes for practical applications.
Summary and conclusions
Most of the publications discussed in this review proposed innovative ideas in the context of using the ESA process for luminescence thermometry, and although this field is in its infancy, it is expected that it will further develop rapidly. Many of the proposed proof-of-principle studies involved the incorporation of new optically active ions, or pairs thereof. Several publications were also devoted to proposing new activators excited via the energy transfer from the ESA-excited host VO4 or WO4 group. Moreover, beside postulating new concepts, some of the studies deepened the understanding and evaluated the impact of the host matrix on the performance of ESA thermometers. The influence of the host matrix was discussed in many different ways; however, an even larger number of papers discussed the influence of the dopant ion concentration. A trend can be found that an increase in dopant ion content is often associated with achieving a higher SR. However, it is important to note that increasing the dopant concentration may decrease the intensity of the emission, and thus reduce the reliability of the temperature reading. Therefore, optimization of the dopant ion concentration must be performed to find a balance between these two competing processes.
The relative sensitivity, SR, can also be improved by harnessing other temperature-dependent processes. A good example, which is conceptually straightforward and has been presented by some authors, is the use of thermal coupling, which occurs not only between the ground and first excited levels (Fig. 10a), but also between the two emitting levels lying above (Fig. 10b). Fig. 10c shows the thermally activated intensity increment in the emission from level 2 from the system presented in Fig. 10a and the thermalized level 3 from the system in Fig. 10b, normalized to the first value. This temperature dependence of the parameters is reflected in the higher SR of the latter model.
 Fig. 10  Schematic presentation of possible future directions that can be followed, aiming to improve thermometric results: a comparison of the conventional 3-level model (a) and a new, 4-level model additionally considering thermalization between the emissive energy levels (b). Emission intensity in the 3-level and 4-level model (c) and the corresponding relative sensitivity (d). 
In the first approximation, the useful temperature range depends on the energy gap (ΔE01 [cm−1]) between the base level and the level from which the ESA occurs. According to the Boltzmann distribution, the lower the energy gap, the easier the thermalization of the higher-lying level, and thus at lower temperatures, ESA-induced luminescence can be obtained. Based on this approximation, it can be observed (Fig. 11) that the easiest way to obtain ESA is from the 7F1 level of Eu3+ ions, where ΔE01 = 199 cm−1, while the highest ΔE01 = 2179 cm−1 is found for Pr3+ ions. For a relatively small ΔE01, the first level stays in thermal balance with the ground level, and it is clear that higher levels may also participate in thermal population. Consequently, an increase in temperature may cause thermalization of these higher levels, and concurrently relatively decrease the first level population and decrease the intensity of emission at excitation to ESA from this first excited level. This situation occurs in the case of Eu3+ ions because above the 7F1 (ca. 199 cm−1) level, 7F2 (ca. 860 cm−1) and 7F3 (ca. 1950 cm−1) levels exist. As shown in this review, the highest relative sensitivities for luminescent thermometers using the ESA process were recorded in the temperature range at which ESA luminescence has just been initiated. Therefore, the higher the energy distance between the excited and the fundamental level, the higher the expected sensitivity. It should also be noted that inter-ion interaction processes can also increase the sensitivity values, as is the case with Nd3+ ions. Knowledge of these factors will enable the development of luminescent thermometers with preferred thermometric parameters.
 Fig. 11  The energy difference (ΔE) between the ground and excited states of Ln3+ ions (for ΔE < 2500 cm−1) (a) and the thermal dependence of the excited state population, Nexcited, with respect to the ground state population (Nground) of Ln3+ according to the Boltzmann distribution (simplified to a two-state system) (b). 
As shown in the analysis presented here, the energy gap between the ground and the first excited level (from which the ESA process is initiated), affects the thermometric performance of luminescent thermometers by changing the temperature range, brightness of ESA-induced emission and the overall temperature sensitivity. Also, the type of host material plays an important role in modifying the thermometric properties. The temperature and host dependent non-radiative multiphonon processes are responsible for numerous processes involved in absorption, energy transfer and emission, and thus affect the depopulation probability of both the emitting level and the level from which the ESA process occurs. The higher the phonon energy (e.g., in oxide and phosphate host), the higher the probability of non-radiative depopulation of the level from which ESA is initiated. This is a competitive process to ESA lowering the SR. Additionally, for high phonon energy arrays, luminescence induced by ESA was recorded at higher temperatures. Therefore, to obtain a thermometer with high sensitivity that operates over a wide temperature range, it is advantageous to use materials with low phonon energies, such as fluoride or bromide hosts.
Some authors suggest that the involvement of other thermally dependent nonradiative processes may be additionally beneficial from a thermometric perspective. For example, it was noted that in some cases it may be advantageous to have faster thermal quenching of the emission in the SBR approach, which is ensured by energy transfer to the conduction band or charge transfer band. However, this approach may limit the usable temperature range. In the case of thermometry using two optical centers, one excited by GSA induction and the other by ESA, it was found to be generally advantageous to reduce the energy transfer between them, making the two signals with opposite emission intensity dependence independent of each other.53 For some of the selected examples (for instance, excluding non-optimal concentrations), a comparison of SR was created, as presented in Fig. 11a–d. These results were obtained by digitalization of the temperature-dependent parameter data presented in the publications to maintain the same methodology. Different colors were used to mark the different optically active centers, thus allowing certain trends to be tracked. The first thing that strikes the eye is that the shape postulated from the simple models (see Fig. 2 and 4) is preserved for most of the methods, as expected. SR usually reaches its maximum in the low temperature range and decreases monotonically with an increase in temperature. However, the signal-to-noise ratio at low temperatures is usually very low for ESA-matched excitation, and thus these data are often not sufficiently reliable in this temperature range. It is also evident that most of the works based on the ESA of the VO4 or WO4 group used a two-band analysis approach from the excitation spectra. Moreover, this method was usually implemented in the middle part of the investigated thermal range (300–600 K). Also, it is apparent that the ESA of Eu3+ ions was usually implemented in the lower temperature range and maximum SR values below 200 K were obtained in that case. This is related to the fact that among the ions used thus far, Eu3+ ions have the smallest energy gaps between the ground, first and second excited levels. Another ion that has a smaller energy gap than the others is Sm3+. However, this ion was only studied only in the case of single emission band intensity analysis. In the middle of the thermal scale at around 300 K, the dominance of Nd3+ and Pr3+ over other dopants is apparent, and thus in this range, they have been used to obtain very high SR. These ions have similar energy gaps between the ground and the first excited levels. The obtained results for Tb3+ ion proved that this ion is popular for thermometry investigations in the context of using an additional GSA-excited co-doped ion. Together with the appropriate material selection, Tb3+ ions allowed good SR values to be achieved up to 800 K (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  A comparison of the representative results of SR calculated by us using digitized data from the four approaches discussed in this review, i.e., ABS I (a), SBR (b), EIR (c) and LIR (d). The colors indicate the optical center whose ESA process forms the basis of the thermal dependence of the temperature reading sensitivity (*the use of WO4 was counted together with VO4). 
Although the sub-field of luminescence thermometry focusing specifically on the ESA phenomenon from the thermally coupled levels is in its initial stage of development, it must be concluded that its further development should stimulate further developments of new materials and their practical demonstrations. Based on the provided comparison and analysis, further suggestions can be proposed to optimize the material parameters of phosphors to obtain thermometers with the expected thermometric performance. The performance should be understood here in its widest sense, i.e., from a pure metrology perspective (sensitivity, reading range, accuracy, etc.), through materials science (capability to prepare the ultimate form of the thermometric phosphor as paint, powder, bulk or colloidal nanoparticles), photophysics (brightness, quantum efficiency, spectral range of the response and excitation) to the opto-engineering of the excitation and readout (single point detection vs. wide field of view imaging, high vs. low spectral resolution of detector, high vs. low temporal resolution of detection, etc.). Thermometers based on the ESA process have very high SR values in a relatively narrow temperature range. Therefore, the choice of the matrix and luminescent ions should be dictated by the specific application. Besides the spectral range of emission and excitation, which is often crucial for some applications (e.g., in biological applications), the energy distance between the levels enabling GSA and ESA should be optimized by considering the general trend that for a lower ΔE value, a lower ESA process temperature and lower SR value are obtained. Hence, materials doped with Eu3+ and Sm3+ ions should exhibit better thermometric performances at lower temperatures. Attention should be paid to the role of non-radiative processes responsible for emptying of the excited levels, i.e., both the emitting level and level from which the ESA process occurs. A high probability of these processes hinders an increase in temperature-dependent luminescence, which is stimulated by ESA excitation. Therefore, this is the competition between the process of thermalization of the excited level and its non-radiative depopulation, which determines the sensing range and sensitivity. Hence, materials with a lower phonon energy should improve the ESA luminescence intensities, resulting in higher SR values and a wider useful temperature range. In addition, the non-radiative extinction of excited levels associated with surface interactions is known to be detrimental for the useful temperature range. Hence, a smaller the role of these parasitic processes (achieved either by increasing the phosphor particle size or by surface passivation with undoped/polymeric/SiO2 shells) will result in a wider usable temperature range.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Science Center Poland (NCN) under project DEC-2017/27/B/ST5/02557.
References
A. Bednarkiewicz, J. Drabik, K. Trejgis, D. Jaque, E. Ximendes and L. Marciniak, Luminescence based temperature bio-imaging: Status, challenges, and perspectives, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 011317,  DOI:10.1063/5.0030295 .

          C. D. S. Brites, A. Millán and L. D. Carlos, Lanthanides in Luminescent Thermometry, in Handb. Phys. Chem. Rare Earths,  2016, pp. 339–427 DOI:10.1016/bs.hpcre.2016.03.005 .
C. D. S. Brites, P. P. Lima, N. J. O. Silva, A. Millán, V. S. Amaral, F. Palacio and L. D. Carlos, Thermometry at the nanoscale, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4799,  10.1039/c2nr30663h .

          M. Dramićanin, Luminescence Thermometry: Methods, Materials, and Applications, Matthew Deans,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. D. Dramićanin, Trends in luminescence thermometry, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 040902,  DOI:10.1063/5.0014825 .
D. Jaque and F. Vetrone, Luminescence nanothermometry, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4301,  10.1039/c2nr30764b .
M. Suta and A. Meijerink, A theoretical framework for ratiometric single ion luminescent thermometers—Thermodynamic and kinetic guidelines for optimized performance, Adv. Theory Simul., 2020, 3, 2000176,  DOI:10.1002/adts.202000176 .

          C. D. S. Brites, P. P. Lima, N. J. O. Silva, A. Millán, V. S. Amaral, F. Palacio and L. D. Carlos, Thermometry at the nanoscale, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2012 10.1039/c2nr30663h .
C. D. S. Brites, S. Balabhadra and L. D. Carlos, Lanthanide-based thermometers: At the cutting-edge of luminescence thermometry, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801239,  DOI:10.1002/adom.201801239 .
A. Bednarkiewicz, L. Marciniak, L. D. Carlos and D. Jaque, Standardizing luminescence nanothermometry for biomedical applications, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14405–14421,  10.1039/D0NR03568H .
A. S. Souza, L. A. O. Nunes, I. G. N. Silva, F. A. M. Oliveira, L. L. da Luz, H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, R. A. S. Ferreira, S. A. Júnior, L. D. Carlos and O. L. Malta, Highly-sensitive Eu3+ ratiometric thermometers based on excited state absorption with predictable calibration, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5327–5333,  10.1039/C6NR00158K .
S. Zhou, X. Li, X. Wei, C. Duan and M. Yin, A new mechanism for temperature sensing based on the thermal population of 7F2 state in Eu3+, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 231, 641–645,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2016.03.082 .
J. Drabik, R. Kowalski and L. Marciniak, Enhancement of the sensitivity of single band ratiometric luminescent nanothermometers based on Tb3+ ions through activation of the cross relaxation process, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 11190,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-68145-5 .
K. Trejgis, F. Tian, J. Li, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, The role of surface related quenching in the single band ratiometric approach based on excited state absorption processes in Nd3+ doped phosphors, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 139, 111288,  DOI:10.1016/j.materresbull.2021.111288 .
C. Y. Morassuti, L. A. O. Nunes, S. M. Lima and L. H. C. Andrade, Eu3+-Doped alumino-phosphate glass for ratiometric thermometer based on the excited state absorption, J. Lumin., 2018, 193, 39–43,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2017.09.001 .
L. J. Borrero-González, S. Acosta, C. Bittencourt, M. Garvas, P. Umek and L. A. O. Nunes, Eu3+-Doped titanium oxide nanoparticles for optical thermometry in the first biological window, Opt. Mater., 2020, 101, 109770,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2020.109770 .
V. S. Zanuto, O. A. Capeloto, R. F. Muniz, M. Sandrini, J. H. Rohling, M. L. Baesso and L. A. O. Nunes, Two ratiometric
thermometry methods based on the interplay between Eu2+ and Eu3+ and single Eu3+ emissions on OH−-free low-silica calcium aluminosilicate glass, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 135, 111115,  DOI:10.1016/j.materresbull.2020.111115 .
J. Cai, L. Zhao, F. Hu, X. Wei, Y. Chen, M. Yin and C.-K. Duan, Temperature sensing using thermal population of low-lying energy levels with (Sm0.01Gd0.99)VO4, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 4039–4046,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b03181 .
L. Marciniak, A. Bednarkiewicz and K. Elzbieciak, NIR-NIR photon avalanche based luminescent thermometry with Nd3+ doped nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7568–7575,  10.1039/c8tc01553h .
L. Zhao, J. Cai, F. Hu, X. Li, Z. Cao, X. Wei, Y. Chen, M. Yin and C.-K. Duan, Optical thermometry based on thermal population of low-lying levels of Eu3+ in Ca2.94Eu0.04Sc2Si3O12, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 7198–7202,  10.1039/C6RA28431K .
Z. Zhao, F. Hu, Z. Cao, F. Chi, X. Wei, Y. Chen, C. Duan and M. Yin, Highly uniform and monodisperse β-NaYF4:Sm3+ nanoparticles for a nanoscale optical thermometer, Opt. Lett., 2018, 43, 835,  DOI:10.1364/OL.43.000835 .
F. Chi, X. Wei, S. Zhou, Y. Chen, C. Duan and M. Yin, Enhanced 5D0 → 7F4 transition and optical thermometry of garnet type Ca3Ga2Ge3O12:Eu3+ phosphors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1288–1293,  10.1039/C8QI00199E .
S. Zhou, C. Duan, M. Yin, X. Liu, S. Han, S. Zhang and X. Li, Optical thermometry based on cooperation of temperature-induced shift of charge transfer band edge and thermal coupling, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 27339,  DOI:10.1364/OE.26.027339 .
S. Zhou, C. Duan and M. Wang, Origin of the temperature-induced redshift of the charge transfer band of GdVO4, Opt. Lett., 2017, 42, 4703,  DOI:10.1364/OL.42.004703 .
S. Zhou, C. Duan and S. Han, A novel strategy for thermometry based on the temperature-induced red shift of the charge transfer band edge, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 1599–1603,  10.1039/C7DT04225F .
S. Zhou, C. Duan, M. Yin, S. Zhang and C. Wang, High-sensitive optical temperature sensing based on 5D1 emission of Eu3+ in YVO4, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 784, 970–974,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.01.143 .
L. Li, F. Qin, L. Li, H. Gao, Q. Deng and Z. Zhang, Thermal enhancement of the green luminescence of Tb3+ ion generated by ground state thermal population, J. Lumin., 2019, 211, 258–263,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.03.053 .
H. Fang, X. Wei, S. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Chen, C.-K. Duan and M. Yin, Terbium and holmium codoped yttrium phosphate as non-contact optical temperature sensors, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10200–10205,  10.1039/C6RA27971F .
L. Qiu, J. Mao, Z. Zhao, P. Wang, M. T. Abbas, X. Wei, F. Chi, Y. Chen and M. Yin, Temperature sensing properties of self-crystalized Ba2LaF7:Tb3+ glass ceramics, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 6244–6250,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.10.202 .
L. Li, X. Qi, F. Qin, L. Li, H. Gao, Y. Zheng and Z. Zhang, Highly sensitive optical ratiometric thermometry by exciting Eu3+/Tb3+'s unusual absorption lines, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 24308–24315,  10.1039/c9cp04094c .
J. Drabik and L. Marciniak, KLaP4O12:Tb3+ nanocrystals for luminescent thermometry in a single-band-ratiometric approach, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3798–3806,  DOI:10.1021/acsanm.0c00485 .
J. Drabik, R. Lisiecki and L. Marciniak, Optimization of the thermometric performance of single band ratiometric luminescent thermometer based on Tb3+ luminescence by the enhancement of thermal quenching of GSA-excited luminescence in TZPN glass, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 858, 157690,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.157690 .
F. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Chen, R. Wei, H. Guo and C. Duan, Optical thermometry based on the thermal coupling of low-lying levels of Sm3+ in highly stable NaGdF4 glass ceramics, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 867, 159160,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2021.159160 .
L. Li, F. Qin, L. Li, H. Gao and Z. Zhang, New strategy for circumventing the limitation of thermally linked states and boosting the relative thermal sensitivity of luminescence ratiometric thermometry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 6176–6181,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b12175 .
A. Bednarkiewicz, K. Trejgis, J. Drabik, A. Kowalczyk and L. Marciniak, Phosphor-assisted temperature sensing and imaging using resonant and nonresonant photoexcitation scheme, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43081–43089,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b13649 .
K. Trejgis, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, Engineering excited state absorption based nanothermometry for temperature sensing and imaging, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4667–4675,  10.1039/C9NR09740F .
J. Stefanska and L. Marciniak, Single band ratiometric luminescent thermometry using Pr3+ ions emitting in yellow and red spectral ranges, Adv. Photonics Res., 2021, 2, 2100070,  DOI:10.1002/adpr.202100070 .
D. Duan, Y. Wang, S. Jiang, L. Li, G. Xiang, X. Tang, Y. Li and X. Zhou, An optical thermometry based on abnormal negative thermal quenching of the charge transfer band edge, J. Lumin., 2019, 215, 116636,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.116636 .
K. Trejgis, K. Maciejewska, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, Near-infrared-to-near-infrared excited-state absorption in LaPO4:Nd3+ nanoparticles for luminescent nanothermometry, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4818–4825,  DOI:10.1021/acsanm.0c00853 .
K. Trejgis, R. Lisiecki, A. Bednarkiewicz and L. Marciniak, Nd3+ doped TZPN glasses for NIR operating single band ratiometric approach of contactless temperature readout, J. Lumin., 2020, 224, 117295,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2020.117295 .
A. Ćirić, I. Zeković, M. Medić, Ž. Antić and M. D. Dramićanin, Judd-Ofelt modelling of the dual-excited single band ratiometric luminescence thermometry, J. Lumin., 2020, 225, 117369,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2020.117369 .
I. E. Kolesnikov, A. A. Kalinichev, M. A. Kurochkin, D. V. Mamonova, E. Y. Kolesnikov and E. Lähderanta, Ratiometric optical thermometry based on emission and excitation spectra of YVO4:Eu3+ nanophosphors, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2019, 123, 5136–5143,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b00284 .
A. Ćirić, S. Stojadinović and M. D. Dramićanin, An extension of the Judd-Ofelt theory to the field of lanthanide thermometry, J. Lumin., 2019, 216, 116749,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.116749 .
I. E. Kolesnikov, M. A. Kurochkin, E. V. Golyeva, D. V. Mamonova, A. A. Kalinichev, E. Y. Kolesnikov and E. Lähderanta, Multimode high-sensitivity optical YVO4:Ln3+ nanothermometers (Ln3+ = Eu3+, Dy3+, Sm 3+) using charge transfer band features, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 28183–28190,  10.1039/D0CP04048G .
S. Zhou, X. Li, S. Zhang and H. Zhao, Ratiometric optical thermometry based on temperature-induced shift of V–O charge transfer band edge, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 14396,  DOI:10.1364/OE.384054 .
Q. Chang, X. Zhou, X. Zhou, L. Chen, G. Xiang, S. Jiang, L. Li, Y. Li and X. Tang, Strategy for optical thermometry based on temperature-dependent charge transfer to the Eu3+ 4f–4f excitation intensity ratio in Sr3Lu(VO4)3:Eu3+ and CaWO4:Nd3+, Opt. Lett., 2020, 45, 3637,  DOI:10.1364/OL.396456 .
M. T. Abbas, L. Qiu, J. Mao, B. Jiang, S. A. Khan, Y. Lin, X. Wei, M. Yin and Y. Chen, Temperature sensing based on thermal population of low-lying 7F levels of trivalent europium ions in GdVO4, Opt. Mater., 2021, 112, 110833,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2021.110833 .
J. Stefanska, M. Chrunik and L. Marciniak, Sensitivity enhancement of the Tb3+-based single band ratiometric luminescent thermometry by the metal-to-metal charge transfer process, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 5226–5232,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c11631 .
J. Stefanska, K. Maciejewska and L. Marciniak, Blue-emitting single band ratiometric luminescent thermometry based on LaF3:Pr3+, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 11898–11904,  10.1039/d1nj01869h .
W. Piotrowski, L. Dalipi, K. Elzbieciak-Piecka, A. Bednarkiewicz, B. Fond and L. Marciniak, Self-referenced temperature imaging with dual light emitting diode excitation and single-band emission of AVO4:Eu3+ (A = Y, La, Lu, Gd) nanophosphors, Adv. Photonics Res., 2021, 2100139,  DOI:10.1002/adpr.202100139 .
M. Lu, Y. Duan, Y. Song, J. Tan and L. Zhou, Green preparation of versatile nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots from watermelon juice for cell imaging, detection of Fe3+ ions and cysteine, and optical thermometry, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 269, 766–774,  DOI:10.1016/j.molliq.2018.08.101 .
I. E. Kolesnikov, D. V. Mamonova, M. A. Kurochkin, E. Y. Kolesnikov and E. Lähderanta, Multimode luminescence thermometry based on emission and excitation spectra, J. Lumin., 2021, 231, 117828,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2020.117828 .
J. Drabik and L. Marciniak, Excited state absorption for ratiometric thermal imaging, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1261–1269,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.0c18570 .
J. Mao, B. Jiang, P. Wang, L. Qiu, M. T. Abass, X. Wei, Y. Chen and M. Yin, A study on temperature sensing performance based on the luminescence of Eu3+ and Er3+ co-doped YNbO4, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 8194–8200,  10.1039/D0DT00215A .
J. F. da Silva, R. F. da Silva, E. P. Santos, L. J. Q. Maia and A. L. Moura, Photon-avalanche-like upconversion in NdAl3(BO3)4 nanoparticles excited at 1064 nm, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 151102,  DOI:10.1063/5.0024619 .
S. Zhou, X. Li and S. Zhang, Design of opposite thermal behaviors in Tm3+/Eu3+ co-doped YVO4 for high-sensitivity optical thermometry, Opt. Lett., 2021, 46, 1301,  DOI:10.1364/OL.419557 .
K. Trejgis, K. Ledwa, L. Li and L. Marciniak, Effect of the nanoparticle size on thermometric properties of a single-band ratiometric luminescent thermometer in NaYF4:Nd3+, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 3006–3014,  10.1039/D1TC06069D .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the basic principles of the excited-state absorption process at low and high temperature in lanthanide (Ln3+) and transition metal (TM) ions. The luminescence intensity is directly proportional to the absorption efficiency, which increases with increasing thermal population in the first excited level.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  A simplified energy level diagram of the ESA process for SBR luminescence thermometry (a). Expected temperature dependence of the emission intensity upon ESA-matched photoexcitation (b) and corresponding relative sensitivity SR (c) for varying energy distance ΔE01 between the ground and first excited levels.	 

 	Fig. 3  The methods applied to measure temperature in ESA-based luminescence thermometry: ABS I = absolute intensity of a single emission band (a), SBR = ratio of the intensity of a single emission band excited with two wavelengths and EIR = ratio of the intensity of two excitation bands obtained when monitoring a single emission band (b), and LIR = ratio of the intensity of two emission bands obtained using a single excitation wavelength (c).	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Relative sensitivity derived from the model by Souza et al.11 for varying energy distances between the ground level and first excited level ΔE01 (a). Model predictions by Souza et al.11 (dashed lines) versus SR results presented in the literature (solid lines) in a 285–330 K temperature range: Souza et al.11 (Y2O3 in red), Morassuti et al.15 (alumino-phosphate glass in blue), Borrero-González et al.16 (TiO2 in green), and Zanuto et al.17 (calcium aluminosilicate glass in yellow) (b).	 

 	Fig. 5  A time scale for the development of the field of luminescence thermometry using the ESA process. In the upper part: the number of papers describing a given measurement approach: ABS I = absolute intensity of a single emission band, SBR = ratio of the intensity of a single emission band excited with two wavelengths, EIR = ratio of the intensity of two excitation bands obtained when monitoring a single emission band, and LIR = ratio of the intensity of two emission bands obtained using a single excitation wavelength. In the lower part: the number of papers describing the use of the ESA process of a given ion, with the first mention marked with a bullet (*the use of WO4 was counted together with VO4).	 

Y2O3:Eu3+	611.2 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	700–715 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	3.93 (>5)@150	150–300	The first proposal of ABS I-type thermometry based on ESA of Eu3+ ions (proposed independently of the pioneering work of Souza et al.11)	
12

Ca3Sc2Si3O12: Eu3+, Eu2+	610.6 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	850–602 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	>6 (>10)@123	123–273	Selection of a material to ensure high relative intensity of the monitored band. The remainder of the work is discussed in Section D.	
20

GdVO4:Sm3+	601.6 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)	550–580 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	∼4 (>4.5)@183	183–413	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Sm3+ ions. Additional temperature readout based on shortening decay times extending the useful temperature range to higher	
18

644 nm (6H9/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)	550–580 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	1.6 (>2)@393	393–603
β-NaYF4:Sm3+	594 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)	545–575 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	1.1 (<1)@300	300–420	Testing a previous idea18 on the nanoscale.	
21

Ca3Ga2Ge3O12:Eu3+	610.8 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	702.5–710 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	3.66 (<4)@160	160–300	Selection of a material to ensure high relative intensity of the monitored band	
22

NaYF4:Nd3+, Y2O3:Nd3+, YGdO3:Nd3+, YAlO3:Nd3+, Y3Al5O12:Nd3+, LiLaP4O12:Nd3+, Gd2O3:Nd3+	1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	880 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)	>7@300	250–560	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Nd3+ ions. An indication of the impact of the matrix on SR. Proposal of an additional thermometric method based on half-time before saturation analysis	
19

LuVO4:Sm3+, LuVO4:Er3+	360 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Sm3+ or Er3+ activator)	520–545 nm (4F3/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	∼4@330 (<4@300)	300–480	Higher signal variability and higher SR for analysis of emission from higher thermally coupled emissive levels. First use of Er3+ activator in an approach based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section D	
23

515–540 nm (2H11/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)	3.5 (>4)@300	300–480
550–679 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	∼3 (<2)@300	300–480
540–565 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)	∼2.5 (>2)@300	300–480
YVO4:Eu3+	358 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	532–549 nm (5D1 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	4.36 (>4.5)@300	300–480	The first use of Eu3+ activator in an approach based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section C	
26

589.6–600 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	3.11 (<3.5)@300	300–480
CaWO4:Tb3+	405 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	535–555 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	1.1@463 (0.8@440)	(343) 463–873	The first proposal of inducing ESA of Tb3+ ions with excitation, inducing a transition to the higher emissive level of 5D3 for application in luminescence thermometry	
27

Ba2LaF7:Tb3+ glass ceramics	543 nm (7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+)	489 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)	2.88 (2.75)@300	300–630	The use of a phosphor in the form of glass ceramics	
29

NaGdF4:Sm3+ glass ceramics	593.8 nm (6H7/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)	450–578 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	1.51 (>2.5)@303.6	303.6–579	Possibility of high-temperature measurements by limiting temperature quenching through the use of suitable glass ceramic materials	
33

640.48 nm (6H9/2 → 4G5/2 of Sm3+)	540–614 nm (5G5/2 → 6H5/2, 5G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)	1.86 (>2)@390	390–773

 	Fig. 6  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of ABS I luminescence thermometry: Cai et al.18 (a) and (b) and Marciniak et al.19 (c).	 

 	Fig. 7  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of SBR luminescence thermometry: Souza et al.11 (a) and (b), Bednarkiewicz et al.35 (c), Trejgis et al.36 (c) and (d), and Stefanska et al.37 (e).	 

 	Fig. 8  ESA processes involved for the first time in terms of EIR luminescence thermometry: Zhou et al.24 (a) and Zhou et al.25 (b).	 

 	Fig. 9  Examples of the ESA processes involved in LIR luminescence thermometry: Fang et al.28 (a), Zhou et al.45 (b), and Drabik et al.53 (c).	 
	(8)
	(9)

Y2O3:Eu3+	580 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	593 nm (7F1 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	707 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.6 (1.15)@180 K	180–290 K	The first work proposing the use of ESA process in luminescence thermometry. First proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Eu3+ ions from 7F1 or 7F2 level. Primary thermometer with a predictable calibration curve	
11

611 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	1.5 (>1.6)@288 K	288–323 K
Alumino-phosphate glass:Eu3+	576 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	614 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	697 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.68 (1.66)@288 K	288–333 K	Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in a material other than a powder phosphor, i.e., glass	
15

YAlO3: Cr3+	589 nm (4A2 → 4T2)	610 nm (4A2 → 4T2)	720 nm (4A2 → 2E)	0.37@123.15 K	123.15–573.15 K	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of a transition metal ion, i.e., Cr3+. An indication of the impact of the matrix on SR	
35

Y3Al5O12: Cr3+	650 nm (4A2 → 4T2)	0.17@123.15 K
LiLaP4O12: Cr3+	680 nm	875 nm	0.3@123.15 K
CaWO4:Tb3+	380 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	300 nm (ESA of WO42− group transferring energy to Tb3+ activator)	545 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	1.28@303 K (0.65@550 K)	303–783 K	The first use of the redshift effect of the absorption band of the WO4 group, analogous to that described earlier for the VO4 group	
34

378 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	310 nm (ESA of WO42− group transferring energy to Tb3+ activator)	1.6@303 K (0.85@600 K)
LuVO4:Eu3+	392 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)	350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	603–637 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)	3.46@298 K (<1.5@400 K)	298–448 K	Comparison of selecting one excitation matched to the GSA of the matrix or to the GSA of the activator ions, with a second excitation matched to the ESA of the matrix and monitoring the activator emission. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section C	
38

319 nm (GSA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	2.61@298 K (1.3@360 K)
463 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)	3.48@298 K (1.5@400 K)
LiLaP4O12:Eu3+	450 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)	620 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	590 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	2.17@200 K	200–600 K	The first proposal based on ESA of Eu3+ ions from 7F3 or 7F4 level. Discussion on the effect of dopant concentration on SR	
36

650 nm (7F3 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	∼2.3@220 K	220–600 K
690 nm (7F4 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	1.9@420 K	340–600 K
TiO2:Eu3+	576 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	610 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.78 (1.67)@288 K	288–323 K	Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in different phosphors	
16

KLaP4O12:Tb3+	485 nm (7F6 → 5D4 of Tb3+)	543 nm (7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+)	620 nm (5D4 → 7F3 of Tb3+)	∼5.5@273 K	273–473 K	The first SBR-type thermometer based on Tb3+ only. Demonstration of consistency between theory (rate equations) and experiment for different dopant concentrations (using deconvolution). Modelling of rate equation parameters and identification of optimal development paths	
31

LaPO4:Nd3+	808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2 of Nd3+)	1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)	∼7@303 K	303–573 K	The first SBR-type thermometer based on Nd3+ only. Analysis of the effect of dopant concentration on SR. Extending the range of high SR by proposing additional ESA-involving methods of temperature readout	
39

TZPN glass:Nd3+	808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2 of Nd3+)	1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)	6.15@223 K	223–303 K	Extension of research on Nd3+ ion-based SBR-type thermometry to macroscopic materials. Analysis of the effect of dopant concentration on SR	
40

Lu2O3:Eu3+	-	586.5 nm (7F1 → 5D0 of Eu3+) AND 611 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	0.9@300 K	313–753 K	Atypical use of the two excitations matched to two different ESA processes of Eu3+ ions (and thus they can be analyzed according to the Judd–Ofelt theory). Proposing a model based on the Judd–Ofelt theory, allowing estimation of the experimental results	
41

KLaP4O12:Tb3+	377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	543 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	3.2@463 K	273–473 K	Extension of the previous rate equations model31 to include inter-ion interactions and analysis of the effect of dopant concentration. Estimation of the thermal dependence of processes affecting emissions resulting from ESA excitation	
13

YVO4:Eu3+	395 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)	350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+, Dy3+ or Sm3+ activator)	594 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	2.23 (3)@298 K	299–466 K	The first use of Dy3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. Comparison of Eu3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+ activators in analogous conditions. Additional temperature reading methods: position and full width at half maximum of the charge transfer band	
44

617 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)
701 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)
YVO4:Dy3+	390 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Dy3+)	572 nm (4F9/2 → 6H15/2 of Dy3+)	2.36 (2)@298 K
482 nm (4F9/2 → 6H13/2 of Dy3+)
YVO4:Sm3+	470 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Sm3+)	565 nm (4G5/2 → 6H5/2 of Sm3+)	3.09 (>5.3)@298 K
603 nm (4G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)
646 nm (4G5/2 → 6H9/2 of Sm3+)
Calcium aluminosilicate glass:Eu3+	575 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	610 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	700 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.6 (<1.5)@288 K	288–333 K	Indication of the reason for the divergence from the model of Souza et al.11, i.e., the presence of co-doped Eu2+ ions. Another method of temperature readout based on the use of Eu3+ and Eu2+ ions excited simultaneously via GSA processes	
17

TZPN glass:Tb3+	377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	543 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	∼2@350 K	248–623 K	Investigation of the effect of the presence of a glass conductivity band on thermometer operation	
32

GdVO4:Eu3+	581.6 nm (7F0 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	594.3 nm (7F1 → 5D1 of Eu3+)	698 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	2.87 (<3)@133 K	133–273 K	Verification of the postulates by Souza et al.11 in different phosphors, which are optimal for low-temperature measurements	
47

615.2 nm (7F2 → 5D1 of Eu3+)	6.73 (>6)@133 K	133–313 K
Y3Al5O12:Nd3+ (form: nano-, microcrystals and ceramics)	808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2,2H9/2 of Nd3+)	1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	1335 nm (4F3/2 → 4I13/2 of Nd3+)	9.51@273 K for ceramics	393–573 K for nano-, 353–573 K for microcrystals and 273–573 K for ceramics	Monitored band located further in the infrared region. Indication of the importance of surface quenching processes based on differences for different forms of phosphors. Effect of dopant concentration on SR	
14

KGd(WO4)2:Tb3+	377 nm (7F6 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	413 nm (7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+)	545 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	1.6@370 K	273–573 K	Investigation of the effect of the dopant concentration-dependent thermally activated metal-to-metal charge transfer	
48

KLaP4O12:(1%-10%)Pr3+	444 nm (3H4 → 3P2 of Pr3+)	523 nm (3H5 → 3P1 of Pr3+)	592–596 nm (1D2 → 3H4 of Pr3+)	1.75@573 K	273–573 K	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Pr3+ ions. Effect of dopant concentration on the choice of the observed band (yellow/red) and on SR	
37

KLaP4O12:(10%-100%)Pr3+	636–640 nm (3P0 → 3F2 of Pr3+)	1.3@573 K	273–573 K
LaF3:Pr3+	444 nm (3H4 → 3P2 of Pr3+)	525 nm (3H5 → 3P1 of Pr3+)	485 nm (3P0 → 3H4 of Pr3+)	∼6@273 K	273–573 K	Verification of the previous idea37 in another phosphor. Investigation of the effect of dopant concentration on SR	
49

NaYF4:Nd3+	808 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2,2H9/2 of Nd3+)	1060 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	890 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)	>19.1@ 198 K	198–573 K	A regular trend of widening the useful temperature range with an increase in nanocrystallite size was observed	


GdVO4	315 nm (GSA of VO43− group)	360 nm (ESA of VO43− group)	450 nm (VO43− group)	3.65 (>5)@300 K	300–480 K	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of VO43− group	
24

GdVO4:Sm3+	407.6 nm (6H5/2 → 4F7/2 of Sm3+)	360 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Sm3+ activator)	602 nm (4G5/2 → 6H7/2 of Sm3+)	3.68 (>4.4)@300 K	300–480 K	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of VO43− group, transferring energy to an activator, which in this case is Sm3+	
25

YVO4:Eu3+	394.8 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)	358 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	619.2 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)	3.65 (∼3.75)@300 K	300–480 K	The first use of an Eu3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section A	
26

YVO4:Eu3+	266 nm 1A2(1T1) → 1B2(1T2) transferring energy to Eu3+ activator	342 nm 1E(1T1) → 1B2(1T2) transferring energy to Eu3+ activator	619.2 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)	3.0@243 K	77–743 K	The first 2D thermal imaging of heat diffusion using the SBR approach	
50

GdVO4:Eu3+	1.78@268 K
LuVO4:Eu3+	1.1@225 K
LaVO4:Eu3+	0.8@323 K
YVO4:Eu3+	465 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)	490 nm (7F2 → 5D2 of Eu3+)	618 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)	1.23@299 K	299–466 K	Comparison of a method based on excitation spectrum analysis with others based on GSA-excited emission of Eu3+ ions: luminescence intensity ratio and band position. Examination of more band ratios from excitation spectra, where those listed above provide the greatest variation in ratio	
42

526 nm (7F0 → 5D1 of Eu3+)	613 nm (7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+)	698 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.28@299 K
LuVO4:Eu3+	319 nm (GSA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	618 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)	2.68@298 K (<1.4@360 K)	298–448 K	Additional studies relative to the work of Zhou et al.26 of an undoped sample to determine the origin of the band in the excitation spectrum. Comparison of a strategy based on the ratio analysis of both excitation lines from the VO43− band range with one based on lines corresponding to the ESA of the VO43− group and GSA of Eu3+ ions. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section B	
38

392 nm (7F0 → 5L6 of Eu3+)	350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	618 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)	3.03@298 K (<1.5@380 K)
Sr3Lu(VO4)3:Eu3+	465 nm (7F0 → 5D2 of Eu3+)	250–360 nm (VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	615 nm (7D0 → 5F2 of Eu3+)	1.015@573 K	298–573 K	Comparison of the performance of a thermometer based on Eu3+ excitation spectra with a classical method based on the analysis of GSA-excited emission spectra. First use of Nd3+ activator in an approach based on the energy transfer from the ESA-excited WO4 group	
46

CaWO4:Nd3+	Not specified – from the graph: approximately 350 nm corresponding most probably to the 4I9/2 → 4D3/2 transition	Not specified – from the graph: approximately 250–300 nm corresponding to the charge transfer transition of the WO4 group	Not specified in text, inaccuracy in figure: 584 nm is given in the graph and 1064 nm is mentioned in the legend	0.939@303 K
YVO4:Er3+	379 nm (4I15/2 → 4G11/2 of Er3+)	350 nm (ESA of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator)	552 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)	2.34@300 K	299–466 K	Many additional temperature measurement methods: analysis of the emission spectra obtained with GSA-related excitation of the VO43− group, spectral position and full width at half maximum of the deconvoluted 1A1 → 1T2 sub-band of the VO43− group	
52

489 nm (4I15/2 → 4F7/2 of Er3+)	2.61@300 K

Ca3Sc2Si3O12:Eu3+, Eu2+	610.6 nm (ESA: 7F2 → 5D0 of Eu3+ AND Eu2+)	580–602 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	750–760 nm (Eu2+)	∼7 (∼8)@123 K	123–273 K	The first reported use of ESA for thermometry based on ratio analysis of two simultaneously excited emission bands using a residual Eu2+ co-dopant. The remainder of this work is discussed in Section A	
20

707 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	∼6 (∼9)@123 K
YPO4:Tb3+,Ho3+	544.1 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D4 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 5I8 → 7F4,5S2 of Ho3+)	486–496 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)	657–661 nm (5F5 → 5I8 of Ho3+)	2.6 (>3.5)@300 K	300–760 K	The first proposal of luminescence thermometry based on ESA of Tb3+ ions. First deliberate selection of two co-doped trivalent lanthanide ions for this type of approach	
28

CaWO4:Tb3+,Eu3+	405 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)	545 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)	614 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)	2.02 (∼1.9)@610 K	333–773 K	The first proposal to excite the ESA process of Tb3+ ions with wavelength matched to the transition to the 5D3 level, allowing monitoring of the most intense emission band of Tb3+ ions. First proposal for co-doping with Eu3+ ions for ESA-excited Tb3+ ions. Comparison of the obtained SR with a conventional optical thermometer based on decay times	
30

YV0.3P0.7O4:Tb3+,Eu3+	352 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator AND GSA: 7F6 → 5D2,5L9,5G4 of Tb3+)	605–635 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)	541–555 nm (5D4 → 7F6 of Tb3+)	2.7@365 K	300–440 K	The first extension of the idea based on energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group to the lanthanide ion by co-doping with another lanthanide ion excited using the same wavelength via the GSA process, which in this case is Tb3+. Use of an optimized solid matrix solution to allow the efficient emission of both co-doped ions	
45

YV0.3P0.7O4:Tb3+,Sm3+	352 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator AND GSA: Sm3+)	560–572 nm (5D0 → 7F2 of Sm3+)	2.85@365 K
YNbO4:Eu3+,Er3+	487.6 nm (ESA: 7F2 → 5D2 of Eu3+ AND GSA: 4I15/2 → 4F7/2 of Er3+)	580–640 nm (5D0 → 7F1, 5D0 → 7F2 of Eu3+)	550–560 nm (4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+)	2.9 (∼2.3)@137.3 K	63–393 K	The first proposal for co-doping with Er3+ ions for ESA-excited Eu3+ ions	
54

NdAl3(BO3)4	1064 nm (4I11/2 → 4F3/2 of Nd3+)	810 nm (4F3/2 →4I9/2 of Nd3+)	880 nm (4F5/2,2H9/2 → 4I9/2 of Nd3+)	2.95@307 K (>4@298 K)	298–513 K	Examining the ratio of emission intensities from the two thermally coupled levels, where excitation due to ESA is not relevant here. Extensive characterization of the spectroscopic properties of Nd3+ ions excited via the ESA process	
55

KTbP4O12:Eu3+	414 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)	541.5–551.5 nm (5D4 → 7F5 of Tb3+)	695–705 nm (5D0 → 7F4 of Eu3+)	1.21@370 K	273–473 K	
S
R-Oriented concentration optimization and investigation of energy transfer between co-doped ions. Optimization of excitation wavelength. First proposal for doping with transition metal ions, showing stronger thermal quenching than lanthanide ions for ESA excited Tb3+ ions, i.e., Cr3+ in this case	
53

416 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)	1.36@413 K
418 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 7F0 → 5D3 of Eu3+)	1.34@450 K
KTbP4O12:Cr3+	413 nm (ESA: 7F5 → 5D3 of Tb3+ AND GSA: 4A2 → 4T1 of Cr3+)	845–855 nm (4T2 → 4A2 of Cr3+)	2.75@320 K	173–473 K
YVO4:Tm3+,Eu3+	360 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Eu3+ activator And GSA: 3H6 → 1D2 of Tm3+)	592–597 nm (5D0 → 7F1 of Eu3+)	449–460 nm (1D2 → 3F4 of Tm3+)	4.6@330 K (>5.5@310 K)	300–380 K	An improvement on the previous idea requiring an unfavorable matrix solid solution by using Tm3+ co-doping. First use of a Tm3+ activator excited via energy transfer from the ESA-excited VO43− group	
56

360 nm (ESA: of VO43− group transferring energy to Tm3+ activator AND GSA: 3H6 → 1D2 of Tm3+)	465–490 nm (1G4 → 3H6 of Tm3+)	<3 (<3.5)@350 K

 	Fig. 10  Schematic presentation of possible future directions that can be followed, aiming to improve thermometric results: a comparison of the conventional 3-level model (a) and a new, 4-level model additionally considering thermalization between the emissive energy levels (b). Emission intensity in the 3-level and 4-level model (c) and the corresponding relative sensitivity (d).	 

 	Fig. 11  The energy difference (ΔE) between the ground and excited states of Ln3+ ions (for ΔE < 2500 cm−1) (a) and the thermal dependence of the excited state population, Nexcited, with respect to the ground state population (Nground) of Ln3+ according to the Boltzmann distribution (simplified to a two-state system) (b).	 

 	Fig. 12  A comparison of the representative results of SR calculated by us using digitized data from the four approaches discussed in this review, i.e., ABS I (a), SBR (b), EIR (c) and LIR (d). The colors indicate the optical center whose ESA process forms the basis of the thermal dependence of the temperature reading sensitivity (*the use of WO4 was counted together with VO4).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
