Development of highly transparent seedless ZnO nanorods engineered for inverted polymer solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR03080J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR03080J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12130-12141Development of highly transparent seedless ZnO nanorods engineered for inverted polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Swapnil B. 
            Ambade
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rohan B. 
            Ambade
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wonjoo 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rajaram S. 
            Mane
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sung Cheol 
            Yoon
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Soo-Hyoung 
            Lee
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Semiconductor and Chemical Engineering, Chonbuk National University, 664-14, 1-ga Deokjin-dong, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shlee66@jbnu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-63-270-2306;   Tel: +82-63-270-2435
bDepartment of Defense Ammunitions, Daeduk College, Daejeon, 305-715, Republic of Korea
cCentre for Nanomaterials & Energy Devices, School of Physical Sciences, SRTM, University, 431606, Nanded, India
dAdvanced Materials Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yoonsch@krict.re.kr
Received 
      5th June 2014
    , Accepted 4th August 2014First published on 7th August 2014AbstractThis work reports on inverted polymer solar cells (IPSCs) based on highly transparent (>95%), hydrophobic, seedless ZnO nanorods (NRs) as cathode buffers with extremely enhanced electrical characteristics. The transparent NR suspension with stability for more than a year is achieved by adding a small amount of 2-(2-methoxyethoxy) acetic acid (MEA). The ability of the stable nanorod suspension to easily spin-coat is certainly an advance to the fabrication of films over large areas and to replace the conventional seeding method to grow one-dimensional nanostructures for use in optoelectronic devices. We observe a strong correlation between the photovoltaic performance and the transparency of ZnO NRs. IPSCs using poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C60 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) mixtures in the active layer and transparent (MEA-capped) ZnO NRs as cathode buffers exhibit a power conversion efficiency of 3.24% under simulated AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination.
Introduction
The performance and function of energy-harvesting and electronic devices based on inorganic nanostructures depend critically on their architecture and morphology. Due to their capability of direct charge transportation, anisotropic nanomaterials such as oxidic nanorods (NRs) have found many applications in fabricating electronic, optoelectronic and electrochemical devices.1–5 The role of oxide, which serves as a cathode buffer layer in the advanced energy conversion devices like inverted polymer solar cells (IPSCs), is typically to separate the donor–acceptor poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C60 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) active layer and the indium-tin-oxide (ITO) collecting electrode so as to prevent the possible recombination of positively charged holes in the active layer and the negatively charged electrons in the ITO film.6–9 The use of one-dimensional (1D) oxide NRs with suitable lengths, for the buffer layer, can achieve solar cells with power conversion efficiency (PCE) higher than that obtained for the cell with a planar film buffer layer. The advantage of NRs compared with the planar nanoparticle (NP)-based film is that the NRs stretch into the polymers and may establish larger interfacial contacts with PCBM. Such a large interface between the polymer and the cathode buffer layer may facilitate the transfer of photogenerated electrons from PCBM to the electron collecting electrode (i.e. ITO). Secondly, the higher charge mobility of oxide NRs than that of PCBM is another aspect that makes a contribution to the solar cell performance by improving electron collecting efficiency.
Moreover, 1D nanomaterials are known to have a lower trap density and unperturbed paths as a current-collecting electrode than (spherical) colloidal counterparts, and thus they are expected to facilitate smooth charge transfer.2 Previous studies have shown that the electron transfer in solar cells with zinc oxide (ZnO) NRs is about two orders of magnitude faster than that with ZnO colloidal NPs.10–13 The fact that oxides like ZnO can easily transfer electrons offer quite a prospect for their applications in hybrid optoelectronics.14 Thus, there is a growing need for synthesis guidelines that need to be applied on the development of 1D nanomaterials. The practical requirements for development of 1D nanomaterials include morphology, dimensionality, orientation control, etc. Therefore, much emphasis has been placed on controlling the morphology of inorganic nanostructures during their growth processes.
We chose ZnO as a model metal oxide because 1D nanomaterials of semiconducting ZnO have found wide applications, such as in photonics,15,16 photovoltaics,11,17 piezoelectronics, etc.18 As a demonstration of the versatility of ZnO, Tsukazaki et al. have shown that ZnO can be altered to transport holes as well as electrons, both essential attributes for optoelectronic devices.19 From the perspective of synthesis, ZnO as a material offers immense ease and versatility, as it can be readily grown in solution.20–22 The solution method has a unique advantage in large-scale synthesis of nanostructures at low-temperatures and low costs. This is in contrast to the high-temperature chemical vapor deposited ZnO nanostructures, which restricts the use of many commercially important flexible substrates. One such solution process for 1D ZnO growth is the solvothermal chemical synthesis method, in which crystals form from a supersaturated aqueous solution. In a typical aqueous synthesis method, zinc salts are hydrolyzed in closed containers in the presence of weak polyamine bases for several hours, such as hexamethylenetetramine, producing ZnO nanowires (NWs),23 NRs,24 and even nanotubes (NTs)25 or microtubes.26 The nanostructure morphology is influenced by variations in reagent concentration, growth time, temperature, etc.27 The solvothermal method, however, requires a prior ZnO seeding layer to initiate nucleation of ZnO, formed either chemically via spin-coating of zinc acetate dehydrate in an ethanol solution on the conducting substrate17 or by applying few selective successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction cycles28 followed by annealing. As a result, the generation of the seed layer involves an additional fabrication step, where achieving uniformity and desired thickness possess quite a barrier. Moreover, the seeding method is too tedious considering the degree of control that needs to be executed, since in this case growth density and dimensions of NRs have predominant dependence on the solution concentration, the growth time, or the thickness/size of the pre-deposited ZnO seed layer.29–31 Also, the nature of the films obtained via a seeding process is non-transparent, milky and rough in appearance, resulting in limited light harvesting efficiency. For optoelectronic devices, one of the major pre-requisites is high transparency of oxidic cathode buffer in the visible region.
Thus, the development of a facile chemical method for the growth of transparent ZnO NRs over a wide range, that is free of seeding, remains a challenge. To overcome this impediment and to expand the simplicity of nano-chemical synthesis, strategies to employ novel synthesis routes that provide inexpensive, easy to carry out chemistry and high product yield are highly desirable. Moreover, as a pre-requisite of profitable applications of new methods, it has to be ensured that the synthesis is carried out under mild reaction conditions, a research niche that we have savored over the years.32
This work reports a novel, simple and scalable strategy for developing a clean, seed-layer-free and highly transparent ZnO planar NR film for use as a cathode buffer layer in polymer solar cells with inverted geometry. Our technique is based on spin coating of the pre-synthesized ZnO NRs on the pre-cleaned ITO substrate, and the spinning rate is maintained to obtain a buffer layer of desired thickness (∼80 nm). Solution-based deposition techniques, like spin coating, are the most desirable processes as they are simple, cheap and large-area deposition methods.33,34 During spin-coating, phase separation sets in, and after evaporation of the solvent, the lateral phase morphology is obtained.35 This approach of direct spinning offers immense versatility to allow one-step production of oxidic nanomaterials with excellent coating properties for applications that demand high transparency, uniformity at the minimum possible thickness and ultraclean surfaces.
Experimental
Synthesis procedure
Planar ZnO NRs were synthesized by hydrolysis and condensation of zinc acetate dihydrate by NaOH in ethanol solvent. The synthesis conditions were adapted in order to control the desired morphology of the ZnO NRs with the much necessitated aspect ratio. The alkali solution of zinc to be solvothermally processed was prepared by dissolving a molar ratio of Zn2+:OH− = 1:23 in pure ethanol (assay ≥ 99.9%). Prior to transferring to a Teflon-lined autoclave, the solution mixture was homogeneously stirred for 15–20 minutes in the alcoholic medium ensuring no evaporation of alcohol. The solvothermal synthesis was carried out just close to the boiling point of water for maximum 4 h in an electric furnace ramped up and down at 4 °C min−1. After the reaction, white crystalline products (ZnO NRs) were obtained. These crystallites were sequentially resuspended and washed with ethanol for several times to eliminate undesired salts that would be formed in the due course of reaction, most probably sodium acetate. After several washing steps in ethanol, the supernatant was decanted off carefully, ensuring only an exiguous amount of ethanol to remain in the solution. To this, ∼1.5% (% v/v) chlorobenzene was introduced, prior to capping by MEA. The capping of ZnO NRs is a pivotal step and desires good controllability. The capping of ZnO NRs rapidly introduces hydroxyl groups (confirmed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, FT-IR) without modifying the parent architecture of ZnO i.e. NRs, as depicted in Scheme 1. We speculate that a complex is formed between ZnO NRs and the OH− present in MEA, which is an active site for bonding between MEA and ZnO NRs. This complex formed on ZnO NRs by capping of MEA creates a strong polar interaction and makes ZnO NRs highly charged (confirmed by zeta potential analysis, explained in the ESI†). These heavily charged ZnO NRs would provide a necessary driving force for charge percolation through them. Thus, the hydroxyl groups can be utilized as electronic anchors to effectively extract and transport charge carriers from the PCBM to the ITO electrode, by the virtue of its improved electrical conductivity. To achieve NRs with high purity and yield, an important point of consideration will always be skillful and meticulous pre-experimental conditions like selection of appropriate type of NaOH (e.g. in our experience, the dissolution of NaOH in ethanol was highly influenced by the diameter of the NaOH pellet), secondly, the degree to which the maximum amount of ethanol be decanted-off and the degree of capping, to list a few.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis protocol for solvothermal synthesis of ZnO NRs. 
Results and discussion
A sharp diffraction arising at 2θ = 35.25° in the XRD pattern (see Fig. S1 of ESI†) of capped ZnO reveal that MEA appears to selectively cap the side facets of wurtzite ZnO,36 allowing the growth to occur selectively only along the c-direction compared to uncapped ZnO. The intensities of (100) and (101) peaks in XRD spectra diminish significantly compared to (002) peak intensity after MEA capping revealing that MEA capping not only improves transparency (discussed later) of ZnO but also promotes the formation of unidirectional 1D structures, uncommon for seed-layer based ZnO NRs, which is one of the distinguishing features than previous reports.17 The obtained strong near-UV emission peak of ZnO (Fig. 1a) centered at 362 nm is attributed to near band-edge (NBE) transition of ZnO. Furthermore, a blue shift in a wavelength of ∼15 nm was observed for band-edge transition of capped ZnO. Generally, excess carriers through capping donated by MEA lead to the blue shift of optical band-to-band transitions of the MEA-capped ZnO. This is known as the Burstein–Moss (BM) effect,37 where the number of localized carrier density is responsible for blue shifting of absorption peaks. The blue shift of the absorption peak strongly reveals that ZnO was well-modified by MEA. We believe, it is due to the formation of transparent ZnO as transparent films are known to have comparatively less number of defect states/stacking faults as that of opaque ZnO. In other words, the Fermi energy level of opaque ZnO is at a lower position compared to transparent and functionalized one (as evidenced by Mott–Schottky analyses presented further). The optical properties of ZnO were further studied by the room-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra under photon excitation of 325 nm. The PL spectrum of uncapped ZnO (Fig. 1b) consists of a NBE at ∼386 nm UV emission and a visible broad-band peak in the lower energy region, attributed to deep level emissions. The UV emission originates from the recombination of the free excitons of ZnO, while the visible emissions in the lower energy region probably result from either (a) transition from the conduction band (CB) to deep acceptor levels (Oi or OZn), (b) transition from deep donor levels (VOZni) to the valence band (VB), and (c) transition from shallow donor levels (Zni) to shallow acceptor levels (VZn and Oi), where VZn = vacant Zn, VO = vacant O, Zni = interstitial Zn, Oi = interstitial O, VOZni = complex of VO and Zni, OZn = substitution of O at Zn sites.38 After capping by MEA, the UV emission is blue shifted to 370 nm (consistent with optical studies), and becomes much stronger while the emission peak becomes weaker, resulting in a significant increase in the UV to visible ratio from 1.8 to 5.1. As explained by Bagnall et al.39 the improvement of crystal quality (decrease of impurities and structural defects such as oxygen vacancies) can cause a high NBE emission to deep-level emission ratio, resulting in detectable UV emissions at room temperature. The enhancement of UV emission clearly indicates the decrease in the probabilities of radiative trap recombination. Accordingly, it can be concluded that MEA strongly passivate oxygen vacancies at the surface of ZnO NRs on capping, ultimately resulting in good crystal quality.
 Fig. 1  (a) UV-vis, (b) PL, (c) UV-vis transmittance spectra of ZnO NR films & (d) dispersion image (in the vial) of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs. 
The thin films of capped ZnO NRs appear transparent and absolutely uniform while those of uncapped ZnO NRs were opaque. Apart from the visual examination of the films, which gave a good estimate of their optical quality, transmittance measurement was used to characterize the films quantitatively. From the transmittance analysis, by using Swanepoel's envelope method,40 the calculated refractive index of capped ZnO was 1.79 which is close to the refractive index of ITO (n ≈ 1.8). Thus, there is no physical difference in the reflected light between the capped ZnO film coated and uncoated surfaces. In sharp contrast, the uncapped ZnO film appears opaque as the light strongly scatters off ZnO that possessed a comparatively higher refractive index (n ≈ 2.42). On examining the % transmittance spectrum of both the films, a remarkable difference is detected (Fig. 1c). The thin film of capped ZnO showed an average transmittance of more than 90% in the visible region, a significant enhancement in the light penetrating capability. The valley at 500 nm for capped ZnO is due to excitonic effects on account of its higher transparency. The obtained high transmittance is one of the competitive values compared with the results in previous synthesis of ZnO NRs.41 In particular, for ZnO NRs grown on a seeded layer, it is highly challenging and intricate to achieve films with such high transparency and clarity. In the physical nature, transparency also occurs as a result of increased interactions offered by MEA capping on the surface of ZnO NRs. Simultaneously, as the interactions advance, the overdense ZnO NRs reach the criterion of transparency (i.e. effective nanostructure density lower than that of the uncapped ZnO NRs). This optically switches ZnO from opaque to transparent and enables light propagation through the otherwise opaque, overdense ZnO film. Our University logo is clearly visible from the solution vial filled with capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 1d).
The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of capped and uncapped ZnO are shown in Fig. 2. In comparison with both the films, films of capped ZnO (Fig. 2b) showed much greater surface coverage on the substrate and uniformity than those of uncapped ZnO NRs (Fig. 2a), where the majority of nanostructures seemed to have agglomerated. The high magnification images (Fig. 2c and d) reveal that, in both cases, NRs of ZnO are parallel to the substrate surface which is in contrast to previous results, indicating that in addition to transparent properties, capped ZnO NRs provide a planar structure and higher surface area than vertical. The planar ZnO NRs each of ∼25 nm diameter and ∼100 nm length are clearly seen in the high magnification images. The capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 2d) are morphologically similar to the ones observed prior to capping (Fig. 2c), although slightly longer, distinct and non-agglomerated. This is attributed to the meticulous control that we employ during the capping process. The varying ratios of Zn and O evidenced from energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) microanalysis (Fig. 2e and f) confirm modification of ZnO after capping.
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Low magnification, (c and d) high magnification FE-SEM images, and (e and f) EDS spectra along with Zn & O mapping images (in the inset) of capped and uncapped ZnO NRs, respectively. 
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images also reveal that the geometrical shape of the ZnO nanostructures is a rod-type (Fig. 3a and b). Each nanorod has a uniform width along its entire length, and the typical widths of the NRs are in the range of 20 to 25 nm. The presence of some particles or much condensed NRs (although very few in number) strongly suggests that the reaction is modulated by the diffusion limited Ostwald ripening, wherein large particles develop at the cost of smaller ones. Large particles are more energetically favorable. As the system tries to lower its overall energy, molecules on the surface of a small particle (energetically unfavorable, with only a few bonded neighbors) will tend to detach from the particle, as per the Kelvin equation, and diffuse into the solution. When all small particles do this, it increases the concentration of free molecules in solution. When the free molecules in solution are supersaturated, the free molecules have a tendency to condense on the surface of larger particles.42 Therefore, all smaller particles shrink, while larger particles grow, and overall the average size will increase. The inset in Fig. 3c shows a typical TEM image showing the presence of smaller nanocrystals on the side wall of an uncapped nanorod in the process of dissolution which supports the proposed growth mechanism. To further verify the morphological characteristic of the ZnO NRs, a cross-sectional TEM image taken from a nanorod is given in Fig. 3c, which exhibits a tubular-like cross-section. On transferring the NRs to an organic solvent (chlorobenzene) and capping further, the parent nanorod geometrical morphology was clearly maintained for our ZnO, albeit with a different crystallographic structure. The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and the selective area energy diffraction (SAED) measurements show that the ZnO NRs are structurally uniform and highly crystalline but with different growth directions, consistent with XRD results. The surface of the NRs appears clean, atomically sharp, and without any sheathed amorphous phase (Fig. 3e and f). An HRTEM image (inset of Fig. 3b) reveals that the capped ZnO NRs are single crystalline and dislocation free. The SAED pattern (Fig. 3f) indicates that the capped ZnO NRs have strong c-axis orientation, consistent with XRD findings. The lattice parameters were also calculated from the HRTEM image. The HRTEM image of uncapped ZnO NRs (inset of Fig. 3a) reveals a superlattice structure of crystalline “stripes” with continuous and parallel crystallographic patterns. The HRTEM image shows that the interplanar spacing of 4.5 Å between adjacent lattice planes corresponds to the distance between two [002] crystal planes, further proving [002] to be the preferred growth direction for the ZnO NRs. This [002] preferential NR growth direction on the ITO substrate is also reflected in the XRD pattern, indicating excellent overall c-axis alignment of these NRs over a large substrate area. Based on the lattice image of [002] planes of capped ZnO NRs (inset of Fig. 3b), the interplanar spacing was found to increase by 0.7 Å supporting their different microstructure growth. The increased interplanar spacing in the capped ZnO NRs is believed to result from the electrostatic charge on the polar surfaces, which is disseminated by the anchoring of negatively charged hydroxyl ions. These parameters agree well with the reported values for [002] of wurtzite ZnO.43 Additionally, the fringes are normal to the length of NRs which indeed is very significant for unhindered charge transport such that the diffusion length is minimum, as the transportation takes place across the lengths of NRs. As a key feature, in both ZnO, the fringes were parallel revealing no observation of any Frankel partial dislocation along the c-axis.44–46
 Fig. 3  TEM images: (a & b) low magnification, (c & d) high magnification, (e & f) SAED patterns of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, respectively. Insets (a & b): Corresponding HRTEM images exhibiting parallel fringes. 
Experimental data from the FT-IR studies (see Fig. S2†) carried out on both ZnO (uncapped and capped) under a similar set of conditions clearly point to the hydroxylation of ZnO after capping. The chemical states of surface elements of both the samples were studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. The Zn 2p core level spectra are presented in Fig. 4a and b. The Zn 2p spectra of the uncapped ZnO NRs (Fig. 4a) show two strong peaks centered at 1023.4 and 1046.4 eV, corresponding to Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2, while those for capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 4b) were observed, respectively at comparatively lower binding energies, 1022.5 and 1045.5 eV. These values are in good agreement with the binding energies of Zn2+ ions.47,48 This clearly indicates that both the ZnO NRs have different chemical states despite the same morphology. Furthermore, the exact nature of chemical states responsible for modifying the surface of ZnO NRs was revealed by the O 1s data of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs. The high resolution O 1s spectrum as shown in Fig. 4c for the uncapped ZnO NRs shows a peak at 530.1 corresponding to the lattice O2− of ZnO. The next highest binding energy, centered at 532.1 ± 0.1 eV, is attributed to adsorbed OH− (OH(ads)) located on the surface of ZnO. This peak is also observed at a similar binding energy for the capped ZnO NRs, as shown in Fig. 4d. However, the O 1s spectrum of the capped ZnO NRs does not show any peak related to lattice O2− as in case of uncapped ZnO NRs. Instead this peak is shifted to a higher binding energy of 531.3 eV. A similar observation was also obtained previously by Grosvenor et al.49 which they had attributed to the contributions of lattice OH− species. The ratio of the hydroxyl oxygen to the lattice oxygen is as high as 0.77, indicating that ZnO NRs were strongly bound by OH− groups. The XPS data of both Zn 2p and O 1s provide strong evidence that ZnO NRs have been richly covered by OH− groups with the capping of MEA.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Zn 2p, (c and d) O 1s XPS spectra of uncapped (left panel) and capped (right panel) ZnO NRs, respectively. 
Typical resonance Raman spectra using a solid state laser at 532 nm excitation are shown for the uncapped and capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 5). It appears from Fig. 5 that the Raman spectra exhibit only the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon and its overtones. The significant rise of intensity of the LO modes compared to the E2 modes is attributed to the phenomena of interactions of the short ranged non-polar E2 modes via the deformational potential, while the long ranged polar LO modes are also subjected to the incoming resonance effects with intermediate states due to Frohlich interactions. Thus, as the phonon energy gets closer to the free excitonic energy, the Raman scattering mechanism is mediated via a real excitonic state and exciton-phonon coupling results in the enhancement of scattering intensities of these LO modes and their higher overtones. As expected, owing to the fulfillment of resonance conditions with 532 nm excitation, the LO mode around 576 cm−1 corresponding to A1 symmetry (1LO) is observed for both uncapped and capped NRs. This is in good accordance with previous observations.50 Overtone modes up to higher order (2LO) are also observed in both cases confirming the excellent crystalline quality of both NRs.51 Higher intensity for the high order overtone modes in the capped ZnO NRs (blue spectrum in Fig. 5a) compared to the first order mode is due to the breakdown of the symmetry rule under resonant conditions and is usually observed in samples with excellent crystalline order. Fig. 5b corresponds to the ratio of integrated intensities of 2LO to 1LO (I2LO/I1LO) for capped and uncapped ZnO NRs. The ratio of I2LO/I1LO depends on many factors such as the excitation energy, crystallite size, band gap energy, temperature, impurity concentration, lattice defects, etc. As a consequence of quantum-confinement effects,52 the ratio of I2LO/I1LO is usually less than unity, which is not the case in our ZnO NRs. Thus this ratio was found to be greater than one in both capped as well as uncapped samples. Within the Franck–Condon approximation, the relationship between the intensity of the nth phonon replica In and the main emission Io is given by In = IoSne−S/n!, where, S is the Huang–Rhys parameter, which can also be used to assess the coupling strength of the electron–phonon interaction.53 For I2LO/I1LO > 1, the value of S is expected to be greater than 2. It is seen that with capping, I2LO/I1LO increases, clearly suggesting the enhancement of the electron–phonon coupling strength.54 This is clearly the evidence of improved crystal quality when ZnO was capped. This corroborates the observations of XRD and HRTEM. Consequently, a decrease in S leads to a slight decrease in I2LO/I1LO, as observed in the uncapped ZnO NRs (Fig. 5b). The strong crystalline nature of capped ZnO NRs is also apparent from the Raman maps obtained at LO1 & 2 positions of both uncapped (Fig. 5c and d) and capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 5e and f).
 Fig. 5  (a) Raman spectra of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, (b) LO1 & LO2 Raman mapping of (c and d) uncapped and (e and f) capped ZnO NRs at LO1 & LO2 positions, respectively. 
The interface morphology plays an important role in both charge transport and collection in photovoltaic devices. The critical variation of the interface morphology between the electron transport layer and the active layer was observed after incorporating hydroxyl groups into the surface of ZnO NRs, as also evidenced from the XPS analysis (Fig. 4c and d). This modification resulted from MEA capping enhanced the surface wettability of ZnO nanorods by making them more hydrophobic (contact angle ∼50°), as shown in Fig. 6. Moreover, the charge reverses from plus to minus on capping, reversing the polarity of ZnO NRs, as evidenced by the zeta potential (ζ) studies (see Fig. S3†). The observed negative potential of the hydrophobic capped ZnO NRs is consistent with previous findings.55,56 We attribute this change in polarity to the adsorption of anionic hydroxyl (OH−) ions on the surface of ZnO NRs.
 Fig. 6  Water contact angle measurements of (a) uncapped and (b) capped ZnO NRs. 
The local electronic behavior of the NRs was probed using conducting probe atomic force microscopy (C-AFM). Using C-AFM, one can simultaneously measure topography and current distribution (conductivity) over the sample surface by using the AFM tip as a nanometer-scale electrical probe, by applying the bias voltage between the tip and the sample surface to measure the tunneling current between the two. The current distribution maps (Fig. 7b and d) provide a clear estimation of charge transport capability of ZnO NRs in devices at the nano-scale. The bright (white) and dark (golden) spots indicate relatively high and low values, respectively, of current flow through the ZnO NRs. The current images obtained by applying −1 V bias voltage (Vb) clearly reveal that the quantity of current flowing through the capped ZnO NRs is several orders of magnitude higher than that in the case of uncapped ZnO NRs. This observation reflects the increased surface conductivity of capped ZnO NRs due to charging by accumulation of OH− ions on the outer as well as inner layers of ZnO NRs.56 The surface topography reveals a highly contiguous and a uniform film of capped ZnO NRs (Fig. 7c) unlike of uncapped ZnO NRs (Fig. 7a) wherein, the film is not only non-uniform but also unstable where NRs tend to agglomerate. Thus, the C-AFM experiments clearly reveal that the films of uncapped ZnO NRs are poor conductors. The increased conductivity of capped ZnO NRs suggests that on capping extra electrons are retained by the ZnO NRs. In semiconductors, the conductivity is enhanced as a result of strong confinement of a carrier in the nanostructure. As a result of capping to ZnO, the carrier leaks more into the crystallite surroundings of the ZnO NRs, indicating that many channels exist for charge transport.14,57 The higher and more uniform electron conduction in capped ZnO NRs obviously aids in improving the electron extraction when using capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffers in the IPSCs.
 Fig. 7  Simultaneously recorded surface topography (a and c) and C-AFM current distribution maps (b and d) of uncapped and capped ZnO NR films. 
To verify the difference in cathode buffer layers, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out to investigate the energy levels of both the ZnO NRs. The high binding-energy cut off (Ecutoff) of both ZnO is shown in Fig. 8. The valence band maximum (VBM) energy levels are calculated from the UPS data using eqn (1). VBM = hν − (Ecutoff − Eonset)(1)where hν = 21.22 eV is the incident photon energy and Eonset is the onset relative to the Fermi level (EF) of Au (at 0 eV), where EF is determined from the Au substrate. From the UPS data, the calculated VBM values for uncapped and capped ZnO NRs are −7.69 and −7.53 eV, respectively. On the basis of these VBM energies and optical gaps obtained from the onset of absorption spectra, the estimated conduction band minimum (CBM) positions are −4.41 and −3.96 eV, respectively (see Table 1 for energy levels of both the cathode buffers). The CBM of capped ZnO NRs is shifted by ∼0.45 eV, ensuring a much lower energy barrier. A suitable CBM energy of cathode buffer allows much favorable band alignment to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor (PCBM), and would facilitate smooth electron collection/transport to ITO. Thus, it is expected to have large VOC and JSC from the IPSCs of capped ZnO NRs as there in considerable uplift in the conduction band level compared to uncapped or bulk ZnO NRs. The energy levels of the IPSC components used are shown in Scheme 2.
 Fig. 8  UPS spectra of (a) the inelastic cut-off region and (b) the VBM (onset) region of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs. 
Table 1 Energy levels of the planar ZnO NR cathode buffer layer




ZnO NRs

E
cut-off (eV)

E
onset (eV)
VBM (eV)
CBM (eV)




Uncapped
16.8
3.28
−7.69
−4.41


Capped
17.08
3.4
−7.53
−3.96




 Scheme 2  (a) Device architecture illustration of the IPSCs fabricated in this study. (b) Energy level diagram of the IPSCs using uncapped and capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers. 
To investigate the photovoltaic cell performance of ZnO NRs, we have chosen the most widely studied bulk-heterojunction system with inverted geometry as reference for this initial investigation, with P3HT as the donor polymer and PC60BM as the small-molecule acceptor. The preparation of inverted structure solar cells (depicted in Scheme 2a) involved a spin coating of ZnO NRs (thickness ∼80 nm) on the ultraclean ITO glass substrate followed by spin coating of active polymers forming a bulk heterojunction, with subsequent coating of a hole transporting layer and finally vacuum-deposition of thinner silver contact as the top electrode, forming a device with the ITO/ZnO NRs/P3HT:PC60BM/MoO3/Ag configuration (as depicted in Scheme 2), where the ZnO NRs served as cathode buffer layers, P3HT and PC60BM were the electron-donor and electron-acceptor, respectively, Mo3O4 was a hole transporting layer, and Ag was the top contact electrode. During fabrication, the P3HT:PC60BM active layer was achieved by spin-coating a 1:1 ratio mixture solution in 1,2-dichlorobenzene. On spin coating ZnO NRs, the organics present in the ZnO NRs as a part of synthesis were allowed to evaporate by subjecting the ZnO NR coated samples to open-air thermal treatment of 270 °C for 10 min (optimized conditions). Furthermore, the phase separation in P3HT and PC60BM was achieved by solvent evaporation in a vacuum for 12 h. Finally, the samples were vacuum evaporated to deposit the hole-transporting layer to an optimized thickness of 15 nm prior to the deposition of the Ag electrode. For comparison, another device was fabricated with the same configuration but using a substrate coated with ZnO NRs that were taken in situ from the solvothermal autoclave at the end of reaction and void of any further surface modification (uncapped ZnO NRs).
The photovoltaic behavior of our ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers employed in IPSCs is presented in Fig. 9. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of both the devices under simulated 1 sun AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 9a) and in the dark (Fig. 9b) show that both the devices behave as a rectifying diode with significantly notable photovoltaic response for the device employing capped ZnO NRs as a cathode buffer layer (Table 2). On capping of ZnO NRs, the photovoltaic parameters were enhanced dramatically. With a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 9.64 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.6 V, and a fill factor (ff) of 56%, an enhancement of approximately 159, 157 & 169% was observed, respectively, in JSC, VOC and ff of the IPSCs employing capped ZnO NRs as a cathode buffer layer, resulted in a PCE of 3.24%.
Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters of IPSCs containing uncapped and capped planar ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers




ZnO NRs

J
SC

 (mA cm−2)

V
OC

 (V)
ffa (%)
PCEa (%)





a Average values are in parentheses.





Uncapped
6.03 (5.82)
0.38 (0.37)
33 (32.40)
0.75 (0.71)


Capped
9.64 (9.58)
0.60 (0.60)
56 (55.80)
3.24 (3.21)




 Fig. 9  Photovoltaic characterization of IPSCs: J–V under (a) illumination, (b) dark, (c) % EQE, and (d) J–V curves of IPSC consisting cathode-buffers of capped ZnO NRs synthesized from the scale-up (ZL) batch & ZnO NRs that were preserved for 400 days (ZD). 
Without capping, a significant amount of charge leaks through the ZnO NRs, as evidenced from the dark current (Fig. 9b). Charge runs far too effective through the buffer layer when an uncapped ZnO NRs buffer layer was replaced by the capped ZnO NRs. Lower VOC and ff in the case of uncapped ZnO buffer layer can be attributed to parasitic leakage currents58 caused by film defects and low charge mobility of highly dense and opaque ZnO NRs. Moreover, IPSCs with uncapped ZnO NRs as buffer layers exhibit a slightly S-shaped curve. This ‘kink’ in the J–V curve (Fig. 9a) arises due to the presence of large interfacial energy steps or low mobilities and a reduction of the VOC and crossing of the light and dark current curves when interfacial recombination is strong.59 For very low mobilities, a space charge is built up in the device, because electrons and holes cannot be extracted sufficiently fast. Their concentration at the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface is increased and hence recombination probability as well, which leads to a lower ff. The space charge built-up in the device results in reduction in the field. With decreasing field, the electrons start to pile up at the D/A interface. This obviously increases the recombination such that the J–V curve approaches the low mobility curve resulting in S-kink.
Additionally, the series resistance (Rs) of the device, which is defined by the slope of the J–V curve under illumination, substantially decreased for the capped ZnO NR device (13 Ω cm2) compared to that of the uncapped ZnO NR buffer layer device (79 Ω cm2), suggesting that the capped ZnO NRs are highly capable of reducing contact resistance to facilitate percolation of electrons across the device. This observation is demonstrated by the increased JSC in the ZnO NR capped device. This is very much attributed to the enhancement in the electrical conductivity of capped ZnO NRs (as strongly evidenced by C-AFM results). Higher conductibility ensures improved charge transport by compromising on exciton recombination that determines the VOC of bulk-heterojunction PSCs.60 Thus, a higher VOC is yielded for inverted solar cells with the capped ZnO NRs buffer layer. Furthermore, an inverted solar cell device with capped ZnO NRs showed a reduction in the dark current under reverse bias (Fig. 9b). This result suggests that the capped ZnO NRs effectively passivate the local shunts at the ZnO interface, thereby blocking the injection of holes in the leakage pathways of ZnO. The shunt resistance (Rsh) of the cell with capped ZnO NRs was found to be 1024 Ω cm2 in contrast to a drastically lower Rsh of 107 Ω cm2 of the uncapped ZnO NRs buffer layer device, permitting charges to follow across the device rather than external load. The J–V measurements revealed that hydroxylates anchored to ZnO NRs acted as an excellent electrical bridge between the NRs. The more uniform capped ZnO layer thus formed a better contact, with a higher ff due to reduced series resistance and increased shunt resistance, resulting in an overall PCE of 3.24%. It has to be highlighted that the PCE reported in this work is the highest so far for the type of cathode-buffer (planar ZnO NRs) used in IPSCs.61,62 Moreover, this performance was also superior to the reference devices fabricated using sol–gel ZnO and ZnO nanoparticles (both annealed at 300 °C) as cathode buffer layers (see Fig. S6 and S7 of ESI†).
A direct comparison of external quantum efficiencies in the organic solar cells with inverted geometry containing uncapped and capped ZnO NRs as cathode-buffer layers (Fig. 9c) shows a significant enhancement in extraction and transport of charge carriers in the case of capped ZnO NRs, an enhancement due solely to the presence of the charge transfer interface within the device. After absorption and charge transfer, majority electrons in PC60BM were effectively transported towards ITO by the capped ZnO NRs simultaneously blocking the holes that might diffuse into ITO. This is because, the capped ZnO NRs aid in effective separation of electrons and holes across the interface that enhances the effective driving force for charge extraction while reducing the likelihood of excitonic recombination. In order to assess the stability of capping groups on ZnO NRs, we fabricated devices using a solution of capped ZnO NRs that was stored for almost 400 days (assigned as “Device ZD” in Fig. 9d). The best “ZD” device exhibited an impressive PCE of 3.05% with a JSC of 8.61 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.6 V, and a ff of 59%. This clearly indicates that under ambient conditions, the NRs remained charged for more than a year without any appreciable decay. Device ZL, which is the representative of IPSCs fabricated by employing ZnO NRs from the scale-up reaction (see section S4 of ESI†), also exhibited an impressive PCE of 3.18% owing to a JSC of 9.48 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.59 V, and a ff of 57%.
In order to show that our modifications with capping of ZnO NRs led to the improved charge transfer characteristics of the IPSCs, we conducted Mott–Schottky and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. Mott–Schottky plots were measured in the dark with three electrode assembly and a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV in an aqueous KCl electrolyte. The donor density and flat band potential (Vfb) of ZnO NRs were estimated from the results of Mott–Schottky analysis using the equations used in our previous work.63Fig. 10a shows the Mott–Schottky plots for uncapped and capped ZnO NRs. The positive slopes imply n-type conductivity in both the cathode buffer layers. From the Mott–Schottky analysis, the Vfb values of the uncapped and capped ZnO NRs were determined to be −0.75 V and −0.96 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), respectively. The shift in Vfb to more cathodic values for the capped ZnO NRs suggests the evolution of free carrier concentration in the material.64 The increase in flat-band potential to higher negative values can be attributed to the shift of the Fermi level in the capped ZnO NRs, approaching the conduction band, as the hydroxylation progresses. This obviously results in higher VOC (0.6 V) in the case of IPSCs employing capped ZnO NRs as electron transporting layers. The slope of the linear portions of Mott–Schottky plots is inversely proportional to the dopant density in the films.65 From the slope of the Mott–Schottky plots in Fig. 10a, the donor density was calculated to be 1.08 × 1018 and 6.21 × 1019 cm−3 for uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, respectively. It is thus obvious that capping of ZnO NRs was influential to improve the electrical conducting properties of cathode buffer by increasing its donor density.
 Fig. 10  EIS analysis: (a) Mott–Schottky plots, (b) Nyquist plots (inset: RC-circuit model), (c) Bode's phase plots, and (d) electron lifetime variation (in the log-linear representation) as a function of photovoltage decay of IPSCs of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs. 
To reveal the differences in the charge transport on the interface between the organic active layer and the ITO cathode, ac impedance measurements were carried out on IPSCs using uncapped and capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers. Fig. 10b shows the Nyquist plots of the IPSCs at zero bias under 1 sun illumination. The Nyquist plots show two distinct semicircles in the frequency regions 105 to 103 and 102 to 101 Hz. The ac response of the semicircle in the high-frequency range was faster than that of the one in the low-frequency range. The semicircle in the high frequency range arises from the cathode buffer (ZnO, in this work), while that in the low frequency range is derived from the organic active layers of P3HT:PC60BM.66 All impedance spectra were fitted to a 2-RC circuit model32 which contains one resistor and two RC circuits (sub-circuit with a resistor R and a capacitor C in parallel) in series as shown in the inset of Fig. 10b. The symbol CPE describes the constant phase element of the capacitance, meaning a non-ideal frequency dependent capacitance due to a non-uniform distribution of current by the material heterogeneity. The elements with subscripts 1 and 2 are related to the capacitance of the interfaces at the semicircles of high and low frequencies, respectively, forming a parallel circuit with resistances R1 and R2. Rs represents the ohmic resistance including the electrodes and the bulk resistance in the active layer. The parameters determined by the fitting of the experimental data are summarized in Table 3. The Rs, R1 and R2 values for IPSCs of uncapped ZnO NRs were estimated to be 42.36, 79.36 and 266.83 Ω cm2 respectively. Comparatively, the values of Rs, R1 and R2 for IPSCs of capped ZnO NRs were 6.5, 5.82 and 40.94 Ω cm2 respectively. Such large decrease in resistances in the latter is attributed to unperturbed charge transportation with lesser recombination centers through highly transparent and conductive capped ZnO NRs. It is thus clear that the diameter of semicircles depends strongly on the nature of ZnO in electron transport layers.
Table 3 EIS fitting parameters




ZnO NRs

R
s, Ω cm2

R
1, Ω cm2

R
2, Ω cm2
CPE1-T (F) 10−4
CPE1-P (F)
CPE2-T (F) 10−4
CPE2-P (F)




Uncapped
42.36
79.36
266.83
2.19
0.899
6.19
0.76


Capped
6.5
5.822
40.94
0.33
0.69
3.62
0.54




The lifetime of electrons in the IPSCs (τ) can be estimated from the characteristic frequencies of the impedance semicircle at middle frequencies, obtained by plotting the Bode phase angle plot, according to the relation τ = (1/2πfmax), where fmax is the maximum frequency of the mid-frequency peak.67Fig. 10c shows Bode phase angle versus frequency plots of the IPSC devices based on uncapped and capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers. The corresponding high frequency peak (fmax) of the phase angle related to the charge transfer on the surface of the electrode for uncapped and capped ZnO NR IPSC devices is located respectively at 2540 and 1137 Hz. The Bode phase angle plot clearly shows that fmax is located at lower frequencies for IPSCs of capped ZnO NRs in comparison with that of uncapped ZnO NRs, indicating the increase in electron lifetime. The τ value estimated from the Bode phase plot was found to be 0.062 and 0.139 ms, respectively, for IPSCs of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, indicating a longer electron lifetime in cathode buffer layers of capped ZnO NRs.
The differences of these cathode buffer layers were further studied by the open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) technique which provides a continuous reading of the lifetime as a function of VOC. The electron lifetime (τn) in the IPSCs was calculated by fitting the photovoltage decay plot obtained from open-circuit voltage decay measurement and applying an equation developed by Bisquert et al.68 The electron lifetime is given by τn = −(KT/e)(dVOC/dt)−1, where KT is the thermal energy, e is the positive elementary charge, K is the Boltzmann constant and dVOC/dt is the first-order time derivation of VOC. Fig. 10d shows the plot of electron lifetime, τn (in a log representation), as a function of VOC. It was found that the τn of the capped ZnO NRs cathode buffer was longer than that of uncapped ZnO NRs, implying a lower charge recombination rate, and suggested more efficient electron transfer, which is in accordance with the EIS analysis mentioned above. The τn of capped ZnO NRs is much higher than that in the uncapped NRs in the low VOC region indicating that capped ZnO NRs possess lower surface trap density and hence reduced charge recombination rates compared with uncapped NRs. The lower surface trap density of capped NRs is consistent with the higher ff observed in the IPSCs of capped NRs. Thus, OCVD measurements reveal that the lower surface trap density and enhanced electron lifetime of the IPSCs of capped ZnO NRs validate higher PCE than that of uncapped NRs. Because the geometry and configuration are similar for both the devices, it follows that charge transfer across the cathode buffer layer is significantly influenced by the electronic nature of the underlying electron collector (uncapped and capped ZnO NRs).
Technical perspective of capping
Capping by acids like MEA typically leaves extra electrons on the nanostructure (in this case NRs). The added electrons occupy delocalized, conduction band-like orbitals in ZnO. These extra electrons have a longer lifetime which obviously aid into an effective electron transfer mechanism. Thus, the capping layer ensures selective collection of electrons from the active layer of PSC. Additionally, MEA capping is responsible for hydroxylation of ZnO NR surfaces. Hydroxylation is typically an example of polar surface configurations. The existence of hydroxylation of outer layers invokes stabilization as well as metallization, an important facet of conductivity.69 Moreover, as the path for charge transfer is obviously through the medians of ZnO NRs, the increased charge transfer induced by capped ZnO NRs clearly suggests that the ZnO NRs are negatively charged not only from outside but also from the within. Thus, it is no surprise that the hydroxylated ZnO NRs (i.e. capped) exhibit a colossal enhancement in electrical characteristics.
Conclusions
The capped planar ZnO NRs demonstrate that the modification and deposition process developed by us has tremendous potential of becoming a general approach for fabricating oxidic nanomaterials that can be effectively applied as charge transfer bridges without the use of conventional seed growth methods. As a proof of concept, the IPSCs fabricated using ZnO NRs as a cathode buffer layer exhibited a promising PCE of 3.24%, which is the highest reported PCE so far for the configuration of the IPSCs used in this work. The high transparency, improved wettability and enhanced electrical characteristics (conductivity and mobility) owing to hydroxylated ZnO NRs provided by MEA capping resulted in more efficient charge transport followed by an impressive PCE. On the basis of UPS measurements, we attribute this improvement to a substantial reduction in an energy barrier on using capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffers instead of uncapped ZnO NRs. In this context, our proposed synthesis strategy opens a new avenue for developing solution-based buffer layers with a high degree of functionality and ease of processing. Moreover, capped ZnO NRs exhibited excellent stability in solution for over 400 days. Additionally, high reaction yields in the case of prototype as well as scale-up reactions suggest that reaction proceeds in the same direction without any undesired and impure byproducts. We envisage that such modified nanomaterials may stimulate the development of polymer solar cells at lower cost and on a mass scale.
Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the Pioneer Research Center Program through the NRF of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2013M3C1A3065528) and by a grant from the Program of the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. I. Park, Y. H. Jun, S. W. Jung and G.-C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Yu, X. M. Li and X. D. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, C.-W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Chouli and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Baxter, A. M. Walker, K. van Ommering and E. S. Aydil, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, S304 CrossRef CAS .
E. Galoppini, J. Rochford, H. Chen, G. Saraf, Y. Lu, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, H. Liu and S. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7301 RSC .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros and S. C. Erwin, Science, 2008, 319, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, R829 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20 CrossRef .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, T. Onuman, M. Ohtanin, T. Makino, M. Sumiya, K. Ohtanin, S. F. Chichibu, S. Fuke, Y. Segawa, H. Ohno, H. Koinuma and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 42 CrossRef CAS .
M. Podlogar, J. J. Richardson, D. Vengust, N. Daneau, Z. Samardžija, S. Bernik and A. Recnik, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Zhou, H. Liu, Y. Hang, C. Xia, J. Xu, S. Gu and R. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Tsan, B. Stoeber and K. Walus, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Baeten, B. Conings, H.-G. Boyen, J. D'Haen, A. Hardy, M. D'Olieslaeger, J. V. Manca and M. K. V. Bael, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, W. Fu, C. Yu, H. Yang, R. Wei, M. Li, S. Liu, Y. Sui, Z. Liu, M. Yuan, G. Zou, G. Wang, C. Shao and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17521 CAS .
D. Chu, W. Y. Masuda, T. Ohji and K. Kato, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Devan, R. A. Patil, J.-H. Lin and Y.-R. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Park, H. Y. Go, S. Kalme, R. S. Mane, S. H. Han and M. Y. Yoon, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 4280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, M. Guo, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 035605 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song and S. Lim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 596 CAS .
J. Liu, J. She, S. Deng, J. Chen and N. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11685 CAS .
S. B. Ambade, R. B. Ambade, R. S. Mane, G.-W. Lee, S. F. Shaikh, S. A. Patil, O.-S. Joo, S.-H. Han and S. H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2921 RSC .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi and C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, Science, 1999, 286, 945 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Chou, B. Yan, R. Li, E. Q. Li, K. Zhao, D. H. Anjum, S. Alvarez, R. Gassaway, A. Biocca, S. T. Thoroddsen, A. Hexemer and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Walheim, E. Schaffer, J. Mlynek and U. Steiner, Science, 1999, 283, 520 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Korgel, Science, 2004, 303, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Sernelius, K. F. Berggren, Z. C. Jin, I. Hamberg and C. G. Graqvist, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 10244 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vanheusden, W. L. Warren, C. H. Seager, D. R. Tallant, J. A. Voigt and B. E. Gnade, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Bagnall, Y. F. Chen, M. Y. Shen, Z. T. Zhu and T. Yao, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 185, 605 CrossRef .
J. C. Manifacier, J. Gasiot and J. P. Fillard, J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., 1976, 9, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Choi, K.-S. Lee and T. L. Alford, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 153301 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. Ratke and P. W. Voorhees, Handbook of Growth and Coarsening: Ostwald Ripening in Material Processing, Springer,  2002, ISBN 3-40-42563-2, p. 117 Search PubMed .
H. S. Song, W. J. Zhang, C. Cheng, Y. B. Tang, L. B. Luo, X. Chen, C. Y. Luan, X. M. Meng, J. A. Zapi-en, N. Wang, C. S. Lee, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 147 CAS .
C. Stampfl and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, R15052 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, G. M. Dalpian, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 193206 CrossRef .
X. H. Wu, L. M. Brown, D. Kapolnek, S. Keller, S. P. Den Barrs and J. S. Speck, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 3228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Subash, B. Krishnakumar, M. Swaminathan and M. Shanthi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu, C. Cheng, H. Huang, T. Wong, N. Wang and T. Y. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3278 CAS .
A. P. Grosvenor, B. A. Kobe and N. S. McIntyre, Surf. Sci., 2004, 572, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Damen, S. P. S. Porto and B. Tell, Phys. Rev., 1966, 142, 570 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhara, S. Chandra, G. Mangamma, S. Kalavathi, P. Shankar, K. G. M. Nair, A. K. Tyagi, C. W. Hsu, C. C. Kuo, L. C. Chen and K. K. Sriram, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213104 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Cheng, K. F. Lin, H. C. Hsu and W. F. Hsieh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 261909 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Huang and A. Rhys, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1950, 406, 204 Search PubMed .
A. K. Arora, M. Rajalakshmi, T. R. Ravindran and V. Sivasubramanian, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2007, 38, 604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zimmermann, S. Dukhin and C. Werner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8544 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin and M. K. Chaudhury, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 14276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gadisa, Y. Liu, E. T. Samulski and R. Lopez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 253903 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nelson, J. Kirkpatrick and P. Ravirajan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 035337 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Li, H. Huang, E. D. Peterson, W. Nie, W. Zhou, W. Zeng, W. Huang, G. Fang, N. Sun, X. Zhao and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 103305 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Hartwig, Science, 2002, 297, 1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. F. Shaikh, G. Rahman, R. S. Mane and O.-S. Joo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Coca, M. Mollar, K. C. Singh and B. Mari, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2(7), Q108 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard, R. Memming and B. Miller, Pure Appl. Chem., 1991, 63, 569 CrossRef .
T. Kuwabara, C. Iwata, T. Yamaguchi and K. Takahash, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2254 CAS .
H. Kim, H. Jeong, T. K. An, C. E. Park and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 268 CAS .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13350 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Noguera and J. Goniakowski, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural characterization and figures (Fig. S1–S5). See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03080jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis protocol for solvothermal synthesis of ZnO NRs.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) UV-vis, (b) PL, (c) UV-vis transmittance spectra of ZnO NR films & (d) dispersion image (in the vial) of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Low magnification, (c and d) high magnification FE-SEM images, and (e and f) EDS spectra along with Zn & O mapping images (in the inset) of capped and uncapped ZnO NRs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images: (a & b) low magnification, (c & d) high magnification, (e & f) SAED patterns of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, respectively. Insets (a & b): Corresponding HRTEM images exhibiting parallel fringes.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Zn 2p, (c and d) O 1s XPS spectra of uncapped (left panel) and capped (right panel) ZnO NRs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Raman spectra of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs, (b) LO1 & LO2 Raman mapping of (c and d) uncapped and (e and f) capped ZnO NRs at LO1 & LO2 positions, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Water contact angle measurements of (a) uncapped and (b) capped ZnO NRs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Simultaneously recorded surface topography (a and c) and C-AFM current distribution maps (b and d) of uncapped and capped ZnO NR films.	 
VBM = hν − (Ecutoff − Eonset)	(1)

 	Fig. 8  UPS spectra of (a) the inelastic cut-off region and (b) the VBM (onset) region of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs.	 

Uncapped	16.8	3.28	−7.69	−4.41
Capped	17.08	3.4	−7.53	−3.96

 	Scheme 2  (a) Device architecture illustration of the IPSCs fabricated in this study. (b) Energy level diagram of the IPSCs using uncapped and capped ZnO NRs as cathode buffer layers.	 


Uncapped	6.03 (5.82)	0.38 (0.37)	33 (32.40)	0.75 (0.71)
Capped	9.64 (9.58)	0.60 (0.60)	56 (55.80)	3.24 (3.21)

 	Fig. 9  Photovoltaic characterization of IPSCs: J–V under (a) illumination, (b) dark, (c) % EQE, and (d) J–V curves of IPSC consisting cathode-buffers of capped ZnO NRs synthesized from the scale-up (ZL) batch & ZnO NRs that were preserved for 400 days (ZD).	 

 	Fig. 10  EIS analysis: (a) Mott–Schottky plots, (b) Nyquist plots (inset: RC-circuit model), (c) Bode's phase plots, and (d) electron lifetime variation (in the log-linear representation) as a function of photovoltage decay of IPSCs of uncapped and capped ZnO NRs.	 

Uncapped	42.36	79.36	266.83	2.19	0.899	6.19	0.76
Capped	6.5	5.822	40.94	0.33	0.69	3.62	0.54
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural characterization and figures (Fig. S1–S5). See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03080j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
