Nanostructural and photo-electrochemical properties of solution spin-coated Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 –TiO 2 nanorod forest films with an improved photovoltaic per ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR01422H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01422H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7650-7665Nanostructural and photo-electrochemical properties of solution spin-coated Cu2ZnSnS4–TiO2 nanorod forest films with an improved photovoltaic performance†

        
          
            Zhuoran 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Raynald 
            Gauvin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            George P. 
            Demopoulos
          
        
      *
      Materials Engineering, McGill University, 3610 University Street, Montreal, QC, Canada H3A 0C5. E-mail: george.demopoulos@mcgill.ca
Received 
      27th February 2017
    , Accepted 8th May 2017First published on 10th May 2017AbstractCu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), other than in standard p–n junction device architecture, can be employed as a broad light absorber upon coating onto a wide bandgap electron conducting TiO2 film. Earlier CZTS sensitized TiO2 films have yielded low photoconversion efficiency and Voc. In this work, a water–ethanol solution spin coating approach has been applied to directly deposit CZTS nanocrystallites on rutile TiO2 nanorods grown on an FTO substrate (TNR) for evaluation in a sensitized solar cell configuration. The FTO@TNR@CZTS photoanode following controlled annealing is shown to exhibit improved photovoltaic properties. Focused-ion beam cross-sections of CZTS nanocoating onto TiO2 nanorod forest films have revealed nanoscale morphological details and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy helped identify TiO2 nanorod film growth characteristics for a reduced charge recombination. The band alignment of CZTS and TiO2 has been determined by XPS helping to explain the origin of Voc deficit. An all-solid state device featuring spiro OMeTAD as HTM and CdS as a buffer layer has been designed with 2% efficiency.
Introduction
Cu2ZnSnS4, or CZTS (in particular, its kesterite polymorph), a green candidate for developing new generation photovoltaics, has been attracting a lot of attention among the thin film solar cell research community. Recently, inspired by the great advancement of dye, quantum dot, and perovskite solar cells which feature a semiconductor-sensitized type (absorber–conductor design) cell configuration, researchers started exploring CZTS in a similar capacity because of its excellent light absorber properties and earth abundant element composition. However, the absorber–conductor interface imposes significant impedance leading to serious charge recombination losses and low associated conversion efficiencies. As the method of CZTS deposition and the overall photoanode nanostructure play a critical role in building highly performing semiconductor-sensitized solar cells there is a need for further research in this regard.
The first study to explore CZTS as a sensitizer was reported by Wang et al. in 2013,1 who prepared a CZTS–TiO2 sensitized solar cell via deposition of CZTS particles, pre-synthesized via a solid state reaction, and dispersed into ethanol (“ink”). However, poor sensitizer infiltration into the electron conductor TiO2 framework resulted in only 0.71 mA cm−2 short circuit current density and 0.29% power conversion efficiency. Recently, the infiltration problem was considerably overcome by applying the hot injection method to prepare CZTS nanocrystal colloidal “inks”. Thus Jiang et al.2 reported an efficiency of 2.8% for a CZTS sensitized ZnO nanorod based solid state device; while Bai et al.3 achieved even higher conversion efficiency (4.7%) with a liquid electrolyte junction device based on deposition of the CZTS “ink” into a TiO2 mesoporous film. However, the hot injection method is a relatively low-yield, vacuum and toxic organic solvent based synthesis route that necessitates intricate multi-step extraction, purification, and re-dispersion of the pre-synthesized nanocrystals rendering it unattractive from a scalable manufacturing perspective.
Direct solution coating, as an alternative to the nanocrystal “ink” route, has been proven effective in fabricating CZTS thin film solar cells.4 This approach offers all advantages of non-vacuum deposition such as the possibility to use low-cost and high-throughput equipment, low wastage of raw materials, high uniformity of layer properties over a large area and finally, the potential deployment of large-scale production with low capital investment. Numerous organic solvents (mostly toxic) have been studied, among which the most successful example is hydrazine with a record efficiency of 12.6%.5 Later dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as a safer solvent has been used to achieve over 11% efficiency.6 Besides, mixtures of alcohols,7 ethylene glycol,8 2-methoxyethanol,9 pyridine,10 and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)11 have been employed to thin film CZTS solar cell fabrication. But none of these organic solvent-based routes is as attractive as the water–ethanol route regarding their suitability for large-scale application, out of which an over 5% CZTS thin film device has been described recently.12
As for the CZTS sensitized solar cell configuration, pyridine was used for the direct solution coating of CZTS onto a ZnO nanorod film yielding 1.2% efficiency.13 However, in this case it was found that the ZnO nanorod structure not being well persevered after coating with CZTS showed signs of instability upon exposure to the sulfide-rich environment of the coating solution. In contrast, TiO2 has higher chemical stability and comparable electron conducting property, which makes it a more suitable candidate in this application. In an earlier work published by our group we investigated the growth of CZTS nanocrystallites on either mesoporous nanoparticle-sintered anatase TiO2 films14 or on rutile TiO2 nanorod (RutileNR) arrays15 by employing the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method followed by annealing.17 Of the two CZTS-coated TiO2 films (anatase nanoparticles14vs. rutile nanorods15) was RutileNR@CZTS offering the most promising sensitized photoelectrode structure yielding an initial short circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.22 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.21 V, and an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 0.25%. It was concluded that the amount of CZTS nanocrystal loading on the Rutile NRs should be increased and interfacial CZTS/TiO2 recombination suppressed by modifying the solution deposition approach, a strategy pursued in the present study. More specifically in this work, a water–ethanol solution-based direct coating method followed by annealing was developed step-by-step to facilitate the growth of CZTS nanocrystallites on TiO2 nanorods, which are characterized and correlated to photovoltaic response. More importantly, the detailed morphological information of the CZTS/TiO2 heterostructure has been characterized by electron microscopy including ultra-high resolution SEM, EDS on cross-section via focused ion beam (FIB) and HRTEM for nanoscale observation. The band alignment of CZTS and TiO2 has been determined by XPS helping to explain the interface recombination problem, which was further resolved by applying a CdS buffer layer. Via the solution spin coating method we show the efficiency of the CZTS sensitized solar cell being improved by 8-fold reaching 2% when cast in a solid state device configuration with spiro-OMeTAD as HTM. As such this work serves as a valuable reference for the further development of CZTS sensitized optoelectronic devices.
Experimental section
Material synthesis
To grow vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods as the first step, a piece of pre-cleaned fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (Sigma-Aldrich, 7 Ω sq−1) was placed with the conductive side facing downward in a 125 ml Teflon container. The latter was subsequently filled with an acidic (6 M HCl) solution containing variable Ti concentration titanium butoxide (97%, Sigma-Aldrich). The Teflon container was then placed into a stainless steel autoclave and kept at 150 °C for 2–8 hours. After this hydrothermal treatment, well aligned TiO2 nanorod arrays were grown on the FTO glass, which were subsequently subjected to annealing at 500 °C in air.
The deposition of the CZTS precursor material containing Cu, Zn, Sn and S on the TiO2 nanorod array was done via direct solution spin coating. Specifically, 0.09 M CuCl2 (99%, Alfa Aesar), 0.06 M ZnCl2 (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), 0.07 M SnCl2 (98%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.4 M thioacetamide were dissolved in 20 mL ethanol/water (Vethanol:Vwater = 3:1) to form a homogeneous yellowish solution. The prepared solution was spin-coated on the TiO2 nanorods/FTO substrate at 2500 rpm for 20 s. Annealing was performed afterwards in a tube furnace (MTI mini CVD tube furnace) at different temperatures and times in the presence of tin and sulfur powder to promote crystallization of CZTS on the surface of the TiO2 nanorods. For all annealing experiments, the heat ramping rate was set at 10 °C min−1. The colour of the annealed film changed from white to brownish, indicating the crystallization of CZTS. A further treatment with HCl (4 M) overnight was employed to ensure dissolution/removal of any impurity by-products like ZnS.14
For the solid state device, the hole-transporting material (HTM) was formed on the TNR-CZTS film by spin-coating the 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-pdimethoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) solution at 2500 rpm for 20 s, where 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD was mixed with 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. Finally, 80 nm of Au was deposited using a thermal evaporator at a deposition rate of 1.0 Å s−1. CdS was prepared via chemical bath deposition (CBD)16 at 65 °C for 20 min on a TiO2 nanorod film before coating the CZTS precursor.
Characterization methods
Thermo Scientific K-Alpha X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was used for chemical state and element depth profile analysis. For the depth profile, etching was performed using Ar ion gun sputtering at 3 keV and high current to achieve a maximum etching rate. For high-resolution XPS spectra comparison, the C 1s peak at a binding energy of 285 eV was used for charge correction. A Hitachi SU3500 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) was used for the TiO2 nanorod preliminary morphology study. The Hitachi SU-8230 Field Emission-STEM (FE-STEM) equipped with Oxford EBSD and INCA EDS was used for high resolution SEM secondary electron and backscatter electron image capturing and EDS mapping. The FEI Helios Nanolab 660 DualBeam system was used to perform focused ion beam (FIB) cutting to prepare TNR@CZTS cross-section samples. Raman spectroscopy was performed using a Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer equipped with a LEICA optical microscope with different laser excitation sources. Transmission electron microscopy (FEI Tecnai G2 F20 200 kV Cryo-STEM equipped with EDAX Octane T Ultra W/Apollo XLT2 SDD and TEAM EDS Analysis System) was employed for high resolution nanostructure investigation. An IPCE/EQE system from PVM Inc. was used for optical and external quantum efficiency measurements. A Newport AM1.5 (ABA) solar simulator was used for J–V photovoltaic measurements. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) analysis was performed by using a VSP-potentiostat system (BioLogic) under dark conditions, applying a 5 mV AC signal and scanning in a frequency range between 100 kHz and 100 mHz at a reversed bias from 0.1 V to 0.5 V.
Results and discussion
As shown in the schematic of Fig. 1, the preparation of the CZTS/TiO2 nanocomposite film involves three main steps: 1. Hydrothermal growth of TiO2 nanorods (TNR) on FTO glass (Fig. 1a); 2. Spin-coating of the precursor solution containing Cu, Zn, Sn and S on the TNR substrate (Fig. 1b); 3. Annealing of the as-prepared film to induce CZTS in situ crystallization on TNR (Fig. 1c). In step 1, we started with 0.15 M titanium butoxide in HCl solution for a 2 h hydrothermal reaction, the same as we described in the previous work.15 The TiO2 nanorods are made of rutile.15,17 The morphological features of the obtained TNR film were characterized by SEM and are shown in Fig. S1a and S1b.† The TiO2 film is clearly seen consisting of compact nanorods with a thickness of roughly 1.5 μm. Fig. S1d† shows the photograph of an as-prepared TNR film on FTO glass. In step 2, the ethanol/water solution containing CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, and thioacetamide was spin coated on the TNR film. Fig. 1d shows the homogeneous yellowish alcoholic solution. The solution coating approach as opposed to the nanoparticle suspension-based coating method1–3,18 was adopted seeking to obtain compositional homogeneity of the deposited CZTS throughout the three-dimensional nanorod film. Fig. 1e shows a photograph of the obtained CZTS-coated TNR film following annealing. The uniform colour change from white to brown of the film is attributed indeed to good intra-film CZTS.
 Fig. 1  Three-dimensional schematic depiction of (a) the vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods (TNR) grown on a FTO glass substrate, (b) the film after coating TNR with CZTS precursor solution and (c) after annealing to form CZTS crystallites on TNR; (d) photograph of the CZTS precursor solution and (e) the CZTS coated TNR film after annealing. 
Preliminary annealing temperature effect on photovoltaic response
Annealing plays a key role in the quality of the CZTS film. Annealing temperatures ranging from 350 °C to 750 °C have been reported19 that made necessary the careful selection of this parameter. To this end TNR@CZTS films were annealed at different temperatures (350 to 550 °C) and their annealing-dependent optoelectronic response was assessed. For this work, the sandwich structure used in dye20 or quantum-dot21 sensitized solar cells featuring Pt as a counter electrode and I−/I3− as a hole conductor–electrolyte was adopted. As shown in Fig. 2a, the photoelectrons generated from CZTS are injected into the conduction band of TNR while the holes are recovered by the redox species in the electrolyte, thus enabling the functioning of this photoelectrochemical cell.15 The J–V characteristics of different CZTS/TNR devices tested under AM 1.5 one sun illumination are shown in Fig. 2b and Table 1. It is clear that the annealing temperature plays a vital role in the light absorbing property of CZTS, more specifically, the short-circuit current density is seen to increase as the annealing temperature increased from 350 to 550 °C. This trend is further confirmed by the Incident Photon-Electron Conversion Efficiency (IPCE) test results in Fig. 2c, where the external quantum efficiency in the visible light range (over >400 nm) is seen to increase with higher temperature annealing. Raman spectroscopy was employed to characterize the CZTS/TNR films obtained at different annealing temperatures. Raman characterization was done at 785 nm laser excitation as at this wavelength the near-resonant spectra are highly resolvable facilitating distinction between the kesterite CZTS phase and the undesirable commonly co-existing impurity phase of Cu3SnS4.22 At around 300–400 cm−1 which is in the range of CZTS characteristic peaks (338 and 375 cm−1) the peaks are broad with poor resolution in the case of the lower temperature annealed films (350 °C/400 °C). This is indicative of the formation of an early stage kesterite crystallized phase hence the poor PV response (Table 1). At this lower annealed temperature the films exhibit a relatively sharp peak at ∼495 cm−1 and a smaller one at 570 cm−1, which most likely are due to the complex carbon residue arising from the partial decomposition of thioacetamide.23 As the annealing temperature is raised to 450 °C and above, the CZTS characteristic peaks located around 337 cm−1 and 375 cm−1 are getting stronger and sharper while the carbon impurity residual peaks at 495 cm−1 and 570 cm−1 keep disappearing. After annealing at 550 °C, we got the most distinguishable CZTS characteristic Raman peaks that co-existed with the rutile phase (440 cm−1 and 610 cm−1) from the TNR.15 Therefore, a higher temperature is beneficial in eliminating the impurity residuals as well as developing better crystallinity of CZTS, which we conclude contribute to the observed increased photocurrent generation. But the efficiency does not seem to follow the trend of the photocurrent; instead, it stays at a low constant value of 0.1% over the 450–550 °C annealing temperature range. This behavior is attributed to the reduced open circuit voltage as the temperature increases. Having considered the CZTS side of the CZTS/TNR absorber–conductor interface we decided to examine next how the rutile nanorods influence the device performance.
 Fig. 2  (a) Working principle of a TNR@CZTS sensitized solar cell device. (b) J–V, (c) EQE, and (d) Raman results (785 nm laser) of CZTS/TNR photoanodes annealed at different temperatures. 
Table 1 Preliminary study of the annealing temperature effect on the solar cell performance




 
Efficiency (%)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)




350 °C 30 min
0.03
28.4
1.31
88


400 °C 30 min
0.05
32.3
1.44
113


450 °C 30 min
0.1
34.8
1.87
161


500 °C 30 min
0.1
32.9
2.18
140


550 °C 30 min
0.1
32.1
2.87
107




Effect of TiO2 nanorod growth conditions on photovoltaic response
The crystal properties of the nanostructured TiO2 can influence the device performance in terms of effective charge transfer and recombination control.20,24 In this context, adjustments to the TNR hydrothermal growth process were made in terms of the Ti(IV) concentration and reaction time to evaluate its property as an electron conductor in the CZTS-sensitized TNR solar cell configuration. In this series of tests the annealing temperature of the TNR@CZTS photoanode was kept constant at 550 °C. After various attempts we found the titanium source concentration to be a vital parameter in TNR growth. Generally, with a higher concentration of titanium butoxide, the nanorod film tends to grow thicker and denser. Here we report four TNR films grown at different conditions as summarized in Table 2: TNR 1, TNR 2, TNR 3 (initial/default experimental conditions) and TNR 4. Fig. 3 shows the SEM images of the four TNR films. After 8 h, 6 h and 2 h reaction, the TNR 1, TNR 2 and TNR 3 films all reach the thickness of ∼1.5 μm; it is further clear that the higher concentration of the titanium source produces the denser nanorod film. However, we found that the films grown at a high concentration, independent of the reaction time (TNR 3 and TNR 4), start to detach from the FTO substrate that adversely impacts the device efficiency (Table 2).
 Fig. 3  SEM cross section and top view (inset) images of TNR films grown at different hydrothermal conditions noted as: (a) TNR 1, (b) TNR 2, (c) TNR 3, (d) TNR 4 (refer to Table 2 for preparation conditions). 
Table 2 Characteristics of TiO2 nanorods (TNR) prepared under different conditions and the corresponding efficiency of the CZTS/TNR devices




Film ID
Titanium butoxide
HCl aqueous solution
Reaction time
Nanorod length
Device efficiency




TNR 1
0.04 M
18%
8 h
∼1.5 μm
0.18%


TNR 2
0.075 M
18%
6 h
∼1.5 μm
0.25%


TNR 3
0.15 M
18%
2 h
∼1.5 μm
0.1%


TNR 4
0.15 M
18%
6 h
∼2.5 μm
0.03%




The J–V curves of the different CZTS sensitized-TNR film based photoelectrochemical cells are shown in Fig. 4a, from which we can see TNR 2 has the highest efficiency of 0.25% compared to the other candidates. Fig. 4b compares the shunt resistance of the four TNR films with TNR 2 showing a much higher Rsh, meaning a better anti-recombination property manifested by the higher photocurrent (Jsc) and photovoltage (Voc) recorded—see Fig. 4a. To further verify this effect, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed on these four assembled devices under dark conditions at different biases ranging from 0 V to 0.4 V and the collected results are shown in Fig. S2.† The semicircle in the middle frequency range represents the interfacial charge recombination process between the photoanode and electrolyte. As it can be seen, it becomes smaller for each film as a higher bias voltage is applied; this is caused by the increased electron concentration when the Fermi level in the photoanode gets closer to the lower edge of the conduction band of TNR and thus leads to a decrease in the recombination resistance (Rrec).20 The simplified equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. S2† by introducing a constant phase element (CPE) instead of a capacitance element to better fit the non-ideal semicircle.25 The fitting results of Rrec shown in Fig. S2e† are very consistent with the registered J–V characteristics and the extracted shunt resistance, where TNR 2 represents the best anti-recombination property over all four conditions. In Fig. 4c we selectively re-plot their EIS Nyquist spectra at 0.2 V bias, from which a clear difference of the semicircle profiles becomes evident. The largest diameter indicates the highest value of charge recombination resistance for the TNR 2-based device. Moreover, open-circuit-voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were performed (Fig. S2f†) to evaluate the dynamic charge transport properties of different TNRs. The Voc during the decay process can be expressed as:26  where EFn and EF0 stand for the quasi-equilibrium state under AM 1.5 conditions and the dark equilibrium state, respectively, n is the free electron concentration, n0 is the electron concentration under dark conditions, KB is the Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10−23 J K−1), T is the absolute temperature, and e is the elementary charge. We can easily measure the logarithmic change of the free charge concentration, which is defined as the modified recombination rate (Rk) according to the formula:20  
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves, (b) shunt resistance, (c) Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectra measured under 0.2 V bias, and (d) electron lifetimes extracted from open-circuit-voltage decay (OCVD) curves for different CZTS/TNR sensitized solar cells with TNR synthesized under different hydrothermal growth conditions. 
The carrier lifetime is represented by the inverse of the recombination rate:27  
Since the starting Voc of those devices was not at the same level, we calculated the electron lifetime versus Voc through this dynamic process for a better comparison. The same trend is shown in Fig. 4d, reconfirming the slowest recombination rate of the TNR 2 electrode. We attribute the higher recombination resistance of this film to the optimized coverage of FTO glass by TNR preventing direct contact between CZTS and FTO glass (also the electrolyte and FTO glass). As a result the TNR 2 film was retained for the next step of optimization.
Annealing optimization
After selecting the TNR 2 film, annealing was revisited this time pushing the annealing temperature to 600 °C and considering the effect of annealing time. As depicted in Fig. 5a, the 600 °C annealed CZTS/TNR photoanode shows much better device performance in comparison with the one annealed at 550 °C. What is more, unlike in Fig. 2b, the Voc of the TNR 2 based device increases together with its photocurrent, indicating the importance of the quality of the TNR electron conducting film. As shown in Table 3, the efficiency of the single-step solution spin-coated CZTS/TNR after 600 °C annealing has increased to 0.42% from 0.25%. Fig. 5b shows the corresponding external quantum efficiency spectra of the two devices. We notice that the EQE profile of the 600 °C annealed photoanode based device is slightly different than that of the 550 °C annealed one. The EQE value has been enhanced in the visible light region (over 400 nm), corresponding to the increased Jsc (Fig. 5a) apparently reflecting the better quality of CZTS nanocoating on TNR (removal of defects at an elevated temperature).
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of TNR 2 based CZTS sensitized films annealed at 550 °C and 600 °C for 30 min and (b) their IPCE and (c) Raman spectra at 785 nm laser excitation. (d) High resolution spectrum fitting of the Raman spectrum of the 600 °C annealed film; (e) Raman spectra at 514 nm laser excitation; (f) XPS depth profile of the CZTS/TNR film annealed at 600 °C for 30 min showing only Cu, Zn, Sn and S. 
Table 3 Solar cell performance of 550 °C and 600 °C annealed CZTS/TNR photoanodes




 
Efficiency (%)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)




550 °C 30 min
0.25
34.5
3.69
195


600 °C 30 min
0.42
37.2
4.47
250




Near resonant Raman spectroscopy using a 785 nm laser source excitation was performed on the CZTS/TNR films annealed at 550 °C and 600 °C and the results are shown in Fig. 5c. These spectra confirm the earlier suggestion we made of better quality CZTS nanocoating at an elevated annealing temperature. Thus we find the CZTS characteristic peaks centered at around 337 cm−1 and 375 cm−1 to be strengthened for the 600 °C annealed film reflecting its better developed crystalline structure. We have probed further the structure of the 600 °C annealed CZTS with the aid of the high resolution Raman spectrum shown in Fig. 5d together with the Lorentzian peak fits of the CZTS characteristic wavenumber range. The dominating peak centered at 337 cm−1 is attributed to the main A mode of CZTS;28 the peaks centered at 365 cm−1 and 375 cm−1 belong to E and B modes, respectively. Other less significant peaks identified also agree with previous findings.29 Furthermore, we applied the green laser excitation (514 nm) in order to characterize a larger Raman wavenumber range. Except for the enhanced peak intensity as the annealing temperature increases (Fig. 5e), we observe the initial significant peak located at ∼1440 cm−1 for the 500 °C annealed sample to decrease dramatically after being annealed at a higher temperature, and completely disappearing for the samples going through 600 °C 30 min annealing. It is generally accepted that this peak belongs to the carbon characteristic Raman mode.30 Hence we can say that annealing at 550 → 600 °C does not only improve the crystallinity of CZTS but equally importantly helps eliminate the carbon residual by promoting a more complete reaction, thus removing a source of recombination loss.
To have a better understanding of the CZTS spatial distribution on the TNR three-dimensional scaffold, the XPS depth profile was performed by using a 3 keV Ar ion gun to etch through the CZTS/TNR film annealed at 600 °C. Fig. S3† shows the spatial element distribution of all six elements of CZTS and TiO2, from which we can see that the fraction of CZTS to TiO2 is significantly low. To have a better view we selected the range where it has only Cu, Zn, Sn and S and magnified the plot as shown in Fig. 5f. As it can be seen, we have homogeneous CZTS distribution and the desired copper-poor zinc-rich composition that we attribute to the solution spin-coating technique adopted in this work.
XPS high resolution spectra were also collected to study the effect of annealing temperature on the surface of CZTS/TNR, as the nanoscale region near the semiconductor surface is considered to have the most impact on its optoelectronic response. In Fig. S4† the Cu 2p and Zn 2p core line spectra show the tendency of the peak shifting to a lower binding energy, which could be due to the change of the element chemical states after higher temperature annealing. We also observe the broadening of the O 1s peak to the left in comparison with the pure TNR (refer to Fig. S5c†), indicating that possibly additional oxides other than TiO2 having been formed upon annealing. To verify this possibility, we extracted quantitative information of the surface element composition and plotted them in Fig. 6, where pure TNR was added as the reference. All elements are displayed in their ratio to titanium in Fig. 6a, from which we can notice the oxygen level is much higher than that of pure TiO2 nanorods. When we plot only the fraction of Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements in Fig. 6b, it is seen that sulfur has experienced significant loss with an elevated annealing temperature especially at 600 °C; this is expected given the volatility of S. But surprisingly, the tin fraction was found to have been dramatically increased with the annealing temperature. Therefore, it is reasonable to attribute the additional oxygen and tin content to the formation of SnO2 impurity on the surface of TiO2. In other words, it becomes evident that although the higher annealing temperature contributes to complete reaction and better crystallinity on the one hand, on the other hand it has a negative effect in terms of surface oxidation. To further investigate and ultimately control the parasitic surface oxidation, annealing tests at different times at 600 °C from 5 min to 120 min were performed and details are provided in the ESI,† where 30 min is deemed the right annealing time in lowering the carbon residual content and avoiding significant loss of sulfur, or tin oxide impurity formation.
 Fig. 6  XPS quantitative analysis of the CZTS/TNR film (annealed at 600 °C) surface by (a) calculating the annealing temperature dependent ratio of all the other elements to titanium and (b) the annealing temperature dependent composition change of CZTS. 
The composition effect on solar cell performance
It is generally accepted by the thin film CZTS photovoltaic community that a copper-rich, zinc poor composition is favorable towards better optoelectronic performance.31 As a different device configuration is applied here, the composition effect on the CZTS/TNR photoelectrode should be understood as well. Therefore, we have prepared films by varying the composition of the spin-coated precursor solution. To ensure reliable reproducibility each coating condition involved the fabrication of four cells. The results are shown in Fig. 7 and S11.† The best performing device with an efficiency of ∼0.4% was obtained with a solution containing 0.09 M CuCl2, 0.06 M ZnCl2, and 0.07 M SnCl2 with a fixed thioacetamide concentration of 0.4 M. However, when the ratio of Cu/Zn is increasing and getting close to the stoichiometric composition of Cu2ZnSnS4, the efficiency drops dramatically.
 Fig. 7  Composition dependent solar cell device efficiency chart. 
To have a better understanding of the composition effect, we performed ICP-OES on the aqua regia digested CZTS/TNR film samples, and plotted the composition dependent efficiency contour in Fig. S12a.† The contour has been divided into five regions according to the ratio range of Cu/Zn. When the tin content is kept optimal, Cu poor zinc rich (Cu/Zn ∼ 1.4–1.9) sensitized films fall into the efficiency “hot” zone, while too much copper will lead to a dramatic efficiency decrease. This is explained by the 785 nm laser excited Raman spectra of the five different groups shown in Fig. S12b to S12f.† For the copper-rich, zinc-poor composition, their Raman spectra always show an almost pure CZTS crystalline phase, while when it gets closer to the stoichiometric, another peak centered at ∼318 cm−1 shows up and gets strengthened when the composition becomes copper-rich. This peak is identified to belong to the undesirable copper tin sulfide (CTS)32 secondary phase. Therefore, a copper-poor zinc-rich composition is still preferred in our CZTS/TNR structure as it can prevent the formation of CTS impurity.
Electron microscopy analysis of the CZTS/TiO2 heterostructure
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to study the morphology features of the CZTS/TNR electrode. Fig. S13† shows the low-magnification SEM images of pure TNR (Fig. S13a and b†) and the CZTS/TNR composite film (Fig. S13c and d†). As an atomic number contrast sensitive technique, BSE images can distinguish the phase separation with high resolution. In Fig. S13b† the contrast is homogeneous, indicating a pure TiO2 phase for the TNR film, while in Fig. S13d† it is much brighter on the gap/edge of the nanorods, indicating a different phase with a higher average atomic number being coated. This higher contrast phase could be CZTS due to its much higher overall atomic number than TiO2. High resolution SEM images of the 4-face elongated nanorods are shown in Fig. 8, where detailed morphology features of this brighter phase are revealed. From Fig. 8a and b we can see clearly the CZTS nanocrystallites to have preferentially grown along the meeting edge of neighboring nanorods as dictated by the classical “terrace-step-kink” surface crystallization model.33Via the higher zoom-in views provided in Fig. 8c and d we see the CZTS nanocrystallites to have grown to a few to tens of nanometers in size. It seems the solution coating method favors multiple nucleation events along the meeting edge of neighboring nanorod planes hence the appearance of CZTS coating as an assembly of inter-connected nanoparticles bonded to TNR film ridges.
 Fig. 8  (a, c) SEM secondary electron (SE) and (b, d) backscatter electron (BSE) images of angled view CZTS nanocrystallites coated on the TNR film. 
In order to confirm the brighter BSE phase to be CZTS, EDS was performed. As shown in Fig. 9, Cu, S, Zn and Sn are found to have the same spatial distribution with those high contrast nanocrystallites. Therefore, the film is proven to be constituted of CZTS nanocrystallites (a few to tens of nanometers) deposited on TiO2 nanorods (hundreds of nanometers) as we proposed. Furthermore, we applied the focused ion beam (FIB) method to prepare a cross-section that was characterized by SEM as shown in Fig. S14.† An overlayer of conductive carbon was deposited on top of the film to facilitate FIB cutting as is evident in Fig. 10b. In general the nanorods are slightly tilted and well aligned on the FTO substrate, and the small nanoparticles with a higher BSE contrast are visibly located on the edge of each rod. A mixed EDS mapping was also performed and depicted in Fig. 11a, where the orange colour represents S, blue represents Ti and bright yellow represents Sn. Hence we can clearly see the uniform distribution of S on the TNR scaffold. Sn is mainly concentrated on the substrate as it is the composition of the FTO layer. From the individual element maps in Fig. S15,† Cu, Zn, Sn and S are concentrated at the same location, meaning S can be used to represent CZTS in Fig. 10a.
 Fig. 9  EDS maps of CZTS nanocrystallites coated on the TNR film. 
 Fig. 10  (a) EDS mixed map and (b) SEM image of the FIB prepared CZTS/TNR cross section. 
 Fig. 11  (a, b, c) High resolution bright field TEM images of CZTS nanocrystallites on TNR; insets show the highly magnified area of CZTS crystallites with a marked interplanar lattice distance; and (d) low magnification image of the CZTS/TNR structure with the SAED pattern shown as the inset. 
Detailed nanoscale features of the CZTS deposit on TNR are further revealed with high-resolution TEM images in Fig. 11. Three different locations where the nanorod coexists with CZTS crystals were selected. The good physical contact can be seen in all cases between CZTS and TNR, which could indicate a clear pathway for the generated photoelectrons. The interplanar lattice distance of all three crystallites in these images is of a similar value of ∼0.31 nm, which represents the dominant kesterite CZTS (112) plane. Fig. 11d shows a low magnification TEM image of two stand-alone nanorods coated with CZTS crystallites. The inset shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) image from this region where the bright dots correspond to the diffraction pattern of the rutile phase of which the nanorods are made.
Two layer coating and surface etching
So far we have demonstrated the effectiveness of the solution coating method in preparing well-distributed CZTS nanocrystallites throughout the TNR network with a reasonable photovoltaic response. To improve light absorption by the photoelectrode and hence its PV performance, we performed a “double layer” coating procedure aiming at higher CZTS loading onto the TNR network. To this end after spin coating, we subjected the film to a short duration (5 min) pre-annealing step at 600 °C (10 °C min−1 ramping rate with the presence of S and Sn powder) under a Sn/S inert atmosphere, and then applied another solution coating layer followed by regular annealing at 600 °C for 30 min. This strategy proved effective as we can deduce from Fig. 12 and Table 4 data, where 1L stands for the one layer coated photoanode and 2L NE means a “double layer” coated photoanode without additional treatment. Double layer coating with intermittent annealing led to significant enhancement in the photocurrent density (from 4.2 mA cm−2 to 6.3 mA cm−2) that matches the enhanced light absorption and EQE spectral response in correspondence to increased CZTS loading. Meanwhile there was no improvement in Voc or FF. Hence the improved efficiency from 0.41% to 0.56% (Table 4) can be solely attributed to the double-layer's enhanced light absorbing ability.
 Fig. 12  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) IPCE spectra of one-layer and two-layer spin-coated/annealed CZTS/TNR photoanodes with different acidic surface treatments. Inset of (b) shows the light absorption spectra of CZTS after excluding the TNR. 
Table 4 Solar cell performance of CZTS/TNR photoanodes prepared following different protocols




Photoanode
Efficiency (%)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)




1L
0.41
39.3
4.2
247


2L NE
0.56
35.1
6.3
253


2L E-1 h
0.63
35.0
7.0
261


2L E-5 h
0.67
37.0
7.1
256


2L E-18 h
0.67
35.7
7.3
259




As our solution deposition approach aimed at a copper-poor zinc-rich composition CZTS nanocoating, there is risk of some ZnS co-deposition as impurity, which could cause photocurrent loss as it forms “cold” spots.34 To ensure the removal of such ZnS spots, the film was subjected to HCl etching initially developed by Fairbrother et al.35 and lately applied by our group into the CZTS–TiO2 mesoporous film.14 Four groups of photoanode samples were post-treated with 4 M HCl solution for variable times (0 h, 1 h, 5 h and 18 h) and named as 2L NE, 2L E-1 h, 2L E-5 h and 2L E-18 h. Results in Fig. 12 show an enhancement of their photocurrent density. According to Table 4, the Jsc increases to over 7 mA cm−2 after only 1 h HCl etching and the efficiency is improved to 0.63%. There was no noticeable improvement after etching for a longer time and neither deterioration proving HCl treatment for 1 h to be sufficient. From XPS high resolution core line spectroscopy in Fig. S16,† as we expected, there is a sharp decrease of the Zn and S 2p signal after 1 h etching while not much change was found for Cu. Surprisingly, a significant decrease of the Sn peak after etching and a slight O signal reduction on the left shoulder of its main peak can be noticed. The reduced oxygen shoulder is attributed to the Sn–O bond as discussed before. Therefore, we conclude that HCl can also help to reduce the SnO2 impurity once formed. Furthermore, we have also tried to apply another layer of coating followed by 5 h HCl etching (3L E-5 h) in order to increase the light absorption of the photoanode. Although the Jsc of the device slightly increased (Fig. S17a†) as well as the EQE and light absorption (Fig. S17b†), the FF has been greatly reduced which leads to no net gain of efficiency. We conclude this to be due to the subsequently increased interface recombination as more CZTS is introduced. Therefore, a careful study of the CZTS–TiO2 interface becomes important to enable the design of fully functioning devices.
Band alignment of CZTS nanocoating and rutile TiO2 nanorods
The CZTS/TNR photoanode design aims at injecting the photogenerated electrons from light absorbing CZTS nanocrystallites to TiO2 nanorods; this one-direction path is only feasible when the conduction band bottom energy level of CZTS is higher than that of rutile.36 Previous studies have reported a positive injection overpotential when the energy levels of the conduction band of the pure CZTS and TiO2 are in the equilibrium state.1,3,15 However, an important fact that has not been assessed is the energy band re-alignment taking place after a new interface is formed. Also, different synthesis/deposition/annealing methods could lead to different energy band structures, hence the experimental investigation of the CZTS/TNR interfacial energy band alignment was undertaken. Here, we report the use of high-resolution XPS to determine the band offsets of the CZTS/TNR interface based on core level shifts, adopting the method by Scanlon et al.37 The binding energy difference between the Ti 2p3/2 core line and the valence band was first determined in samples of pure rutile nanorods on FTO glass, and the same was done for Cu 2p3/2 in as-prepared CZTS. Furthermore, the core-line offset was determined by the peak position difference of Ti 2p3/2 and Cu 2p3/2 for the CZTS/TNR composite. Details are provided in the ESI.†
The XPS-determined band offset of the CZTS/TNR interface in shown in Fig. 13. The positive overpotential of CZTS to TNR is beneficial in supplying enough driving force to facilitate electron injection from CZTS to TNR. However, the conduction band of TiO2 is too close to the valence band of CZTS. This unfavorable alignment could induce significant open-circuit voltage deficit,36 which explains the low Voc being obtained in this study. Also, the injected photoelectron in the conduction band of rutile could be easily re-captured by the holes left in CZTS with this band structure. Therefore, proper interface engineering/passivation is required for the full potential of the CZTS/TNR heterostructure in optoelectronic applications to be realized, which will be addressed in the next section.
 Fig. 13  Band alignment of CZTS and the TNR interface using XPS. 
Solid state device and interface
As we have stated in our previous work, the stability/compatibility of CZTS in contact with the I−/I3− electrolyte is an open question, in fact, this polar solvent electrolyte designed for dye-sensitized solar cells has been found to be corrosive to many light absorber materials like inorganic quantum dots38 and perovskites,39 causing a rapid deterioration to the device performance. Therefore, a solid state electrolyte or hole transfer material (HTM) is preferable. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-p-dimethoxy-phenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) has been used in solid state dye-sensitized solar cells and the recent impressive perovskite solar cells, and hence is selected to be tested in the present system too (with gold as back contact). Firstly, we have re-investigated the HCl etching effect by fabricating the electrode after a 5 h acid treatment named “TNR-CZTS-E”. The photovoltaic response can been seen in Fig. 14a, where nearly identical J–V curves were measured for TNR-CZTS and TNR-CZTS-E. Though a slight increase of photocurrent after HCl treatment concords with the result from the liquid state device (Table 5), it is too small to have an impact on the overall conversion efficiency (∼0.75%), indicating that impurities like ZnS and SnO2 are not interfering when the spiro-OMeTAD solid state electrolyte is used in lieu of the liquid one.
 Fig. 14  Characteristics of three all-solid-state TNR-CZTS devices: (a) J–V curves, (b) recombination resistances (Rrec), (c) chemical capacitances (Cμ), and (d) electron lifetimes extracted from EIS Nyquist plots under reverse bias 0.1 V–0.5 V; (e) open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) plots and (f) extracted electron lifetimes during the dynamic process. 
Table 5 Solar cell performance of solid-state devices




Photoanode
Efficiency (%)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)




TNR-CdS-CZTS
2.00
46.2
13.9
312


TNR-CZTS
0.74
44.5
7.8
213


TNR-CZTS-E
0.75
43.9
8.1
210




The above TNR-CZTS and TNR-CZTS-E device results featuring the spiro-OMeTAD solid electrolyte are encouraging by comparison to the corresponding liquid junction device (0.75% vs. 0.67% efficiency). However, the performance of this proof-of-concept device is still far from being satisfactory. The XPS characterization (Fig. 13) demonstrated an unfavorable energy band position at the TiO2/CZTS interface. Thus we decided to introduce a buffer layer at the interface to overcome losses due to high impedance. In analogy to CZTS thin film solar cells, where CdS is used for this purpose we also chose to test this buffer in order to facilitate charge transfer and reduce interface recombination.40 CdS was applied by chemical bath deposition on TNR before the coating of the latter with the CZTS precursor layer. The complete device architecture is depicted in Fig. S21†. The solar cell made with the TNR-CdS-CZTS photoelectrode showed a significant improvement in both Jsc and Voc, leading to an overall energy conversion efficiency of 2.0% (Table 5). To further verify that the performance differences among the three devices arise at the TNR/CZTS interface, we carried out EIS analysis on them under dark conditions. The Nyquist plots under a bias of 0.1 V–0.5 V are shown in Fig. S22,† while the equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. S2† is used to extract the recombination resistances (Rrec) presented in Fig. 14b. The significantly enhanced Rrec due to the introduced CdS buffer layer, as can be directly deduced from Fig. S22e,† is believed to contribute to the reduced recombination rate and hence the improved photovoltaic performance. The reduced dark current in Fig. S22a† also confirms the improved device quality after the introduction of the buffer layer. Consequently, the electron lifetime (τ = RrecCμ) has been extended – as there is no apparent change of the chemical capacitance (Cμ), leading to a better functioning device. A similar trend was obtained with the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements (Fig. 14e and f), reconfirming the validity of the EIS results. The devices of TNR-CZTS and TNR-CZTS-E showed almost the same value of τ from EIS and an identical trend of OCVD, which means HCl etching (or removal of the ZnS and SnO2 impurities) has almost no impact on the recombination process of these solid-state devices.
IPCE measurements were also made to understand the origin of the observed Jsc improvement. As it can be seen in Fig. 15, different IPCE profiles were found after adding the CdS buffer layer. We propose that the reduced interfacial recombination rate/increased electron lifetime leads to more an efficient charge transfer/collection process, which contributes to the greatly improved EQE value in the visible range. However, for the CdS containing device, a noticeable difference can be seen at the 420–460 nm wavelength where a lower EQE is found and a sharp increase occurs afterwards. This efficiency loss in the short wavelength range is attributed to the CdS window layer which blocks part of light that should have been absorbed by CZTS.41 To further verify this effect, the light absorption spectra of both CZTS and CdS-CZTS were captured and are shown in Fig. S22f,† where extra light absorption is seen in the short wavelength range (420–460 nm) after CdS deposition in comparison with the film of CZTS alone (in both cases the contribution of TiO2 was subtracted), agreeing well with the range of inefficient photon–electron conversion from EQE measurement. Therefore, though the CdS layer helps to largely reduce interface recombination, its visible light absorbing property partially affects the amount of photons captured by CZTS. From 500 nm to 700 nm where most energy of the solar spectrum is contained, Fig. S22f† shows almost the same light absorption for the photoanodes with and without the CdS layer; this suggests that the enhanced EQE of the TNR-CdS-CZTS sample in this range can be attributed to more efficient electron injection/collection instead of any optical benefits from CdS itself. Another noteworthy phenomenon is the spectrum broadening of both IPCE and optical absorption after incorporating CdS, leading to a narrowing of the absorber bandgap from 1.51 eV to 1.37 eV. According to a previous study, it is reasonable to attribute this result to the partial Cd substitution of Zn during the thermal treatment.41,42 This cation substitution is found to lower the bandgap of CZTS having as a consequence improved photocurrent generation by extending the light absorption range to nearly the infrared region.
 Fig. 15  External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement of the three solid-state devices and photographic images of the complete TNR-CZTS devices with (right) and without (left) the CdS buffer layer. 
In summary, the CdS layer is proven to effectively reduce the interface recombination and broaden the light absorption range, enabling the solid state functioning device to yield an efficiency of 2%.
Conclusion
In this work, we have developed a direct solution spin-coating method combined with controlled annealing to directly grow CZTS nanocrystallites on a TiO2 nanorod (TNR)-structured film investigated as photoanodes. The homogeneous composition of CZTS nanocoating and its uniform spatial distribution within the TNR forest film demonstrates the superiority of this homogenous solution deposition method. We have sought to improve the PV performance of the CZTS/TNR photoanodes in a liquid junction sensitized cell configuration by studying in depth the effects of rutile nanorod growth, annealing temperature and time, composition, double layer coating, HCl etching, and eventually realized the solid state device via applying spiro OMeTAD as a hole transfer material. Furthermore, we have performed the first experimental study of the band alignment of CZTS and the rutile interface via XPS, which provides valuable insight as regards to the possible reason for the significant Voc deficit. In light of this insight, we tested CdS as a buffer layer aiming to significantly suppress interfacial recombination. In conclusion, this work via the systematic examination of processing and nanoscale heterostructure effects on the semiconductor-sensitized photoanode, has achieved a raise in the device conversion efficiency from an initial ∼0.1% to ∼2.0%, providing a valuable reference for the further development of CZTS–TiO2 optoelectronic devices.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Funding sources
This research was funded via a strategic project grant from the Natural Sciences & Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by NSERC through a strategic project grant and sponsored by Targray Technology International, 5N Plus, and CIS Scientific. The authors would like to thank Mr Nicolas Brodusch for the help with Hitachi SU-8230 to get SEM images and the EDS maps, Mr Andrew Golsztajn and Mr Ranjan Roy for the help with ICP-OES analysis, Dr Samir Elouatik for the assistance with a Raman Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer, and Dr Xuedong Liu for the assistance with TEM.
References
Y. Wang, C. X. Li, X. J. Yin, H. Wang and H. Gong, Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) Application in TiO2 Solar Cell as Dye, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2(7), Q95–Q98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, J. Wu, G. Di and G. Li, Nanostructured solar cell based on solution processed Cu2ZnSnS4 nanoparticles and vertically aligned ZnO nanorod array, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8(12), 971–975 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bai, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, Y. Meng and S. Wu, Quaternary Cu2ZnSnS4 quantum dot-sensitized solar cells: Synthesis, passivation and ligand exchange, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Romanyuk, C. M. Fella, A. R. Uhl, M. Werner, A. N. Tiwari, T. Schnabel and E. Ahlswede, Recent trends in direct solution coating of kesterite absorber layers in solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119(0), 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Device Characteristics of CZTSSe Thin-Film Solar Cells with 12.6% Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4(7), 1301465 CrossRef .
S. G. Haass, M. Diethelm, M. Werner, B. Bissig, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, 11.2% Efficient Solution Processed Kesterite Solar Cell with a Low Voltage Deficit, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(18), 1500712 CrossRef .
C. M. Fella, A. R. Uhl, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Cu2ZnSnSe4 absorbers processed from solution deposited metal salt precursors under different selenization conditions, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209(6), 1043–1048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Zong, H. Zheng, H. Wang, J. Liu, H. Yan and M. Zhu, Ethylene glycol-based dip coating route for the synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film, Mater. Lett., 2013, 92, 195–197 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, M. Oonuki, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, thin film solar cells prepared by non-vacuum processing, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93(5), 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischereder, T. Rath, W. Haas, H. Amenitsch, J. Albering, D. Meischler, S. Larissegger, M. Edler, R. Saf, F. Hofer and G. Trimmel, Investigation of Cu2ZnSnS4 Formation from Metal Salts and Thioacetamide, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(11), 3399–3406 CrossRef CAS .
K. Masato, T. Kunihiko, M. Katsuhiko and U. Hisao, Fabrication of Three-Dimensional-Structure Solar Cell with Cu2ZnSnS4, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51(10S), 10NC33 CrossRef .
S.-N. Park, S.-J. Sung, J.-H. Sim, K.-J. Yang, D.-K. Hwang, J. Kim, G. Y. Kim, W. Jo, D.-H. Kim and J.-K. Kang, Nanostructured p-type CZTS thin films prepared by a facile solution process for 3D p-n junction solar cells, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(25), 11182–11189 RSC .
L. Dongwook and Y. Kijung, Solution-processed Cu2ZnSnS4 superstrate solar cell using vertically aligned ZnO nanorods, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25(6), 065401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang and G. P. Demopoulos, Nanoscale Photo-Absorbing Kesterite Grown on Anatase Mesoscopic Films by Sequential Binary Chalcogenide Solution Deposition-Exchange, Annealing, and Etching, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16(7), 3618–3363 CAS .
Z. Wang and G. P. Demopoulos, Growth of Cu2ZnSnS4 Nanocrystallites on TiO2 Nanorod Arrays as Novel Extremely Thin Absorber Solar Cell Structure via the Successive-Ion-Layer-Adsorption-Reaction Method, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(41), 22888–22897 CAS .
F. Liu, C. Yan, J. Huang, K. Sun, F. Zhou, J. A. Stride, M. A. Green and X. Hao, Nanoscale Microstructure and Chemistry of Cu2ZnSnS4/CdS Interface in Kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(15), 1600706 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, B. Liu, W. Qiu, J. Zhang, S. Ran, H. Huang, J. Xu, H. Han, D. Chen and G. Shen, Transferable and Flexible Nanorod-Assembled TiO2 Cloths for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Photodetectors, and Photocatalysts, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(10), 8412–8419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. B. Akram, S. Javed, M. Islam, M. Mujahid and A. Safdar, Arrays of CZTS sensitized ZnO/ZnS and ZnO/ZnSe core/shell nanorods for liquid junction nanowire solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 121–128 CrossRef .

  (a) J. Just, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, R. Frahm, S. Schorr and T. Unold, Determination of secondary phases in kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films by x-ray absorption near edge structure analysis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99(26), 262105 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Hou, H. Azimi, N. Gasparini, M. Salvador, W. Chen, L. S. Khanzada, M. Brandl, R. Hock and C. J. Brabec, Low-Temperature Solution-Processed Kesterite Solar Cell Based on in Situ Deposition of Ultrathin Absorber Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(38), 21100–21106 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. M. Fella, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Technological status of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin film solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119(0), 276–277 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Ran, B. Liu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Multilayer TiO2 nanorod cloth/nanorod array electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells and self-powered UV detectors, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(11), 3350–3358 RSC .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Boosting Power Conversion Efficiencies of Quantum-Dot-Sensitized Solar Cells Beyond 8% by Recombination Control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(16), 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Elouatik and G. P. Demopoulos, Understanding the phase formation kinetics of nano-crystalline kesterite deposited on mesoscopic scaffolds via in situ multi-wavelength Raman-monitored annealing, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(42), 29435–29446 RSC .

  (a) 
            G. Socrates, Infrared and Raman characteristic group frequencies: tables and charts, Wiley, Chichester, New York, 3rd edn,  2001, p. xv, 347 p Search PubMed ; 
  (b) U. Anthoni and P. H. Nielsen, A study of the Raman spectrum of thioacetamide single crystals using the possible 13C and 15N substituted species, J. Mol. Struct., 1984, 116(1), 175–187 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353(6346), 737–740 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, Growth of Oriented Single-Crystalline Rutile TiO2 Nanorods on Transparent Conducting Substrates for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(11), 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Todinova, J. Idígoras, M. Salado, S. Kazim and J. A. Anta, Universal Features of Electron Dynamics in Solar Cells with TiO2 Contact: From Dye Solar Cells to Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(19), 3923–3930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and J. Bisquert, Determination of the Electron Lifetime in Nanocrystalline Dye Solar Cells by Open-Circuit Voltage Decay Measurements, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4(8), 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi and X. Dong, Coupled analysis of steady-state and dynamic characteristics of dye-sensitized solar cells for determination of conduction band movement and recombination
parameters, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(1), 299–306 RSC .
J. J. S. Scragg, L. Choubrac, A. Lafond, T. Ericson and C. Platzer-Björkman, A low-temperature order-disorder transition in Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(4) CrossRef CAS  , 041911.
M. Dimitrievska, A. Fairbrother, X. Fontané, T. Jawhari, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo and A. Pérez-Rodríguez, Multiwavelength excitation Raman scattering study of polycrystalline kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(2), 041911 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, D. C. Alsmeyer and R. L. McCreery, Raman spectroscopy of carbon materials: structural basis of observed spectra, Chem. Mater., 1990, 2(5), 557–563 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Feng, H. Cui, F. Liu, X. Hao, G. Conibeer, D. B. Mitzi and M. Green, The current status and future prospects of kesterite solar cells: a brief review, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24(6), 879–898 Search PubMed .
V. M. Dzhagan, A. P. Litvinchuk, M. Kruszynska, J. Kolny-Olesiak, M. Y. Valakh and D. R. T. Zahn, Raman Scattering Study of Cu3SnS4 Colloidal Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(47), 27554–27558 CAS .

  (a) S. Bustingorry and P. M. Centres, Relaxation of surface steps after thermal quenches: A numerical study within the terrace-step-kink model, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 2011, 84(1), 011613 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Larsen, K. Bechgaard and S. L. S. Stipp, The effect of the Ca2+ to activity ratio on spiral growth at the calcite surface, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2010, 74(7), 2099–2109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. K. Burton, N. Cabrera and F. C. Frank, The Growth of Crystals and the Equilibrium Structure of their Surfaces, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1951, 243(866), 299–358 CrossRef .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Strategic review of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in kesterite CZTS-Se solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(11), 3134–3159 CAS .
A. Fairbrother, E. García-Hemme, V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontané, F. A. Pulgarín-Agudelo, O. Vigil-Galán, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, Development of a Selective Chemical Etch To Improve the Conversion Efficiency of Zn-Rich Cu2ZnSnS4 Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(19), 8018–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Roelofs, T. P. Brennan and S. F. Bent, Interface Engineering in Inorganic-Absorber Nanostructured Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(2), 348–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Band alignment of rutile and anatase TiO2, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(9), 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. D. Veal, P. D. C. King, S. A. Hatfield, L. R. Bailey, C. F. McConville, B. Martel, J. C. Moreno, E. Frayssinet, F. Semond and J. Zúñiga-Pérez, Valence band offset of the ZnO/AlN heterojunction determined by x-ray photoemission spectroscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(20), 202108 CrossRef .
L. Li, X. Yang, J. Gao, H. Tian, J. Zhao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Highly Efficient CdS Quantum Dot-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on a Modified Polysulfide Electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(22), 8458–8460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Perovskite solar cells: an emerging photovoltaic technology, Mater. Today, 2015, 18(2), 65–72 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Haight, A. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, B. Shin, M. Copel, M. Hopstaken and D. B. Mitzi, Band alignment at the Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4/CdS interface, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98(25), 253502 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. P. Suryawanshi, G. L. Agawane, S. M. Bhosale, S. W. Shin, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, CZTS based thin film solar cells: a status review, Mater. Technol., 2013, 28(1–2), 98–109 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tajima, M. Umehara, M. Hasegawa, T. Mise and T. Itoh, Cu2ZnSnS4 photovoltaic cell with improved efficiency fabricated by high-temperature annealing after CdS buffer-layer deposition, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25(1), 14–22 CAS .
Z. Su, J. M. R. Tan, X. Li, X. Zeng, S. K. Batabyal and L. H. Wong, Cation Substitution of Solution-Processed Cu2ZnSnS4 Thin Film Solar Cell with over 9% Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(19), 1500682 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01422hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Three-dimensional schematic depiction of (a) the vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods (TNR) grown on a FTO glass substrate, (b) the film after coating TNR with CZTS precursor solution and (c) after annealing to form CZTS crystallites on TNR; (d) photograph of the CZTS precursor solution and (e) the CZTS coated TNR film after annealing.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Working principle of a TNR@CZTS sensitized solar cell device. (b) J–V, (c) EQE, and (d) Raman results (785 nm laser) of CZTS/TNR photoanodes annealed at different temperatures.	 

350 °C 30 min	0.03	28.4	1.31	88
400 °C 30 min	0.05	32.3	1.44	113
450 °C 30 min	0.1	34.8	1.87	161
500 °C 30 min	0.1	32.9	2.18	140
550 °C 30 min	0.1	32.1	2.87	107

 	Fig. 3  SEM cross section and top view (inset) images of TNR films grown at different hydrothermal conditions noted as: (a) TNR 1, (b) TNR 2, (c) TNR 3, (d) TNR 4 (refer to Table 2 for preparation conditions).	 

TNR 1	0.04 M	18%	8 h	∼1.5 μm	0.18%
TNR 2	0.075 M	18%	6 h	∼1.5 μm	0.25%
TNR 3	0.15 M	18%	2 h	∼1.5 μm	0.1%
TNR 4	0.15 M	18%	6 h	∼2.5 μm	0.03%

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves, (b) shunt resistance, (c) Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectra measured under 0.2 V bias, and (d) electron lifetimes extracted from open-circuit-voltage decay (OCVD) curves for different CZTS/TNR sensitized solar cells with TNR synthesized under different hydrothermal growth conditions.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of TNR 2 based CZTS sensitized films annealed at 550 °C and 600 °C for 30 min and (b) their IPCE and (c) Raman spectra at 785 nm laser excitation. (d) High resolution spectrum fitting of the Raman spectrum of the 600 °C annealed film; (e) Raman spectra at 514 nm laser excitation; (f) XPS depth profile of the CZTS/TNR film annealed at 600 °C for 30 min showing only Cu, Zn, Sn and S.	 

550 °C 30 min	0.25	34.5	3.69	195
600 °C 30 min	0.42	37.2	4.47	250

 	Fig. 6  XPS quantitative analysis of the CZTS/TNR film (annealed at 600 °C) surface by (a) calculating the annealing temperature dependent ratio of all the other elements to titanium and (b) the annealing temperature dependent composition change of CZTS.	 

 	Fig. 7  Composition dependent solar cell device efficiency chart.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a, c) SEM secondary electron (SE) and (b, d) backscatter electron (BSE) images of angled view CZTS nanocrystallites coated on the TNR film.	 

 	Fig. 9  EDS maps of CZTS nanocrystallites coated on the TNR film.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) EDS mixed map and (b) SEM image of the FIB prepared CZTS/TNR cross section.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a, b, c) High resolution bright field TEM images of CZTS nanocrystallites on TNR; insets show the highly magnified area of CZTS crystallites with a marked interplanar lattice distance; and (d) low magnification image of the CZTS/TNR structure with the SAED pattern shown as the inset.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) IPCE spectra of one-layer and two-layer spin-coated/annealed CZTS/TNR photoanodes with different acidic surface treatments. Inset of (b) shows the light absorption spectra of CZTS after excluding the TNR.	 

1L	0.41	39.3	4.2	247
2L NE	0.56	35.1	6.3	253
2L E-1 h	0.63	35.0	7.0	261
2L E-5 h	0.67	37.0	7.1	256
2L E-18 h	0.67	35.7	7.3	259

 	Fig. 13  Band alignment of CZTS and the TNR interface using XPS.	 

 	Fig. 14  Characteristics of three all-solid-state TNR-CZTS devices: (a) J–V curves, (b) recombination resistances (Rrec), (c) chemical capacitances (Cμ), and (d) electron lifetimes extracted from EIS Nyquist plots under reverse bias 0.1 V–0.5 V; (e) open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) plots and (f) extracted electron lifetimes during the dynamic process.	 

TNR-CdS-CZTS	2.00	46.2	13.9	312
TNR-CZTS	0.74	44.5	7.8	213
TNR-CZTS-E	0.75	43.9	8.1	210

 	Fig. 15  External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement of the three solid-state devices and photographic images of the complete TNR-CZTS devices with (right) and without (left) the CdS buffer layer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01422h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
