Soft interfaces within hybrid perovskite solar cells: real-time dynamic tracking of interfacial electrical property evolution by EIS   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC01770D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01770D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8294-8302Soft interfaces within hybrid perovskite solar cells: real-time dynamic tracking of interfacial electrical property evolution by EIS†

        
          
            Yulin 
            Feng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiming 
            Bian
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Shi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minhuan 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yantao 
            Shi
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams (Ministry of Education), School of Physics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: jmbian@dlut.edu.cn
Received 
      2nd April 2019
    , Accepted 3rd June 2019First published on 5th June 2019AbstractDespite the significant increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) achieved recently, the fundamental physics behind some of the photovoltaic anomalies in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is rarely investigated. The interfaces within PSCs, especially the two key interfaces related to the perovskite (electron transport layer/perovskite and perovskite/hole transport layer), play a vital role in their overall performance and stability since they are especially susceptible to external stimuli. Herein, high efficiency planar PSCs were fabricated, and the property evolution of the above-mentioned two key interfaces was real-time dynamically traced via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The results indicate that the two interfaces under a small bias are variable, and even last for hours due to ion migration within the PSCs. Specifically, the charge transfer resistance of the two interfaces and the bulk charge transport resistance of the perovskite layer continually increased, while their capacitances (interfacial and dielectric) displayed non-linear changes. Subsequently, ion accumulation occurred at the two interfaces due to electromigration, and a gradual variation in the dielectric property of the perovskite layer was observed at a definite stage and reached a steady state finally. Interestingly, the impedance characteristics could recover within hours after the bias was removed, indicating that ion migration is reversible within PSCs. Therefore, the “soft interface” mechanism was proposed to well elucidate the unique attributes of PSCs. These findings provide novel and deep insight into the unique interfacial properties within PSCs, which advances our understanding of the underlying physical mechanism in photovoltaics.
Introduction
In recent years, all-solid-state organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved incredible progress in power conversion efficiencies (PCE), which surged from 9.7% to over 23%, and thus have attracted attention from both academia and industry.1 In contrast to silicon and other common inorganic compound light-absorbers employed in solar cells, such as CdTe, GaAs, CIGS and CZTS, the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite (HOIP) is a type of mixed ionic-electronic conductor, consisting of both covalent and ionic bonds.2,3 Therefore, HOIPs can be viewed as a class of “soft materials” with mutable characteristics due to ion migration, polarization, etc., which have significant effects on carrier transport and interfacial charge transfer within PSCs.3 Ion migration in HOIPs has become a hot research topic in recent years, and thus far, a consensus on many basic issues has been reached. For example, activation energies for the motion of anion and cation vacancies have been experimentally measured or calculated to be 0.08–0.58 eV and 0.46–0.84 eV, respectively.4,5 Thus, it has been proven that the motion of cation vacancies, such as MA (MA = methylammonium) or Pb, is a slower process compared to that of halide anions, which may be responsible for the slow response inherent to perovskites, with typically calculated migration times in the order of tens of milliseconds to minutes.4,6
The two key interfaces related to the perovskite in PSCs, the electron transport layer (ETL)/perovskite and perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL), play a decisive role in charge extraction and energy conversion, which can be termed “soft interfaces” because their characteristics are mutable as a consequence of ion migration in bulk perovskite.7–10 Under an applied electric field or other stimuli, halide anions and organic cations can migrate and accumulate at the interfaces and further induce the generation of an electric field across the perovskite film, which hinders charge separation.5,11–13 Li et al. reported that the migration of iodide ions/interstitials driven by an external electric bias led to a shift in the work function of the two electrodes, and the interfacial barriers caused by this modulation is responsible for the current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis in PSCs.14 Meanwhile, using first-principle computational analyses, Angelis et al. concluded that the negatively charged defects (e.g. MA vacancies) close to the ETL can modify the electronic state of perovskite, and thus is detrimental for charge extraction and contributes to J–V hysteresis in PSCs.4 Since the emergence of PSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been demonstrated to be a powerful analysis technique to study the interfacial charge transfer attributes of PSCs, and some unique phenomena such as hysteresis and negative capacitance can also be well explained and understood using EIS.15–17 Especially, meaningful information can be achieved for interfacial charge transfer, recombination and ion migration through proper equivalent circuit models in EIS, as demonstrated by Bisquert et al.11,18 However, no investigation has been reported on the interface evolution in planar PSCs by real-time dynamic tracking with EIS.
Herein, high-efficiency planar PSCs were fabricated, and the perovskite-related interfacial property evolution under an external bias was real-time dynamically traced via EIS. It was found that the perovskite layer and the related two contact interfaces varies in electronic properties (compared to that of non-perovskite architectures and silicon devices) when stimulated by an external bias. The results indicated that the charge transfer resistance of the two soft interfaces, the bulk charge transport resistance and the capacitances continually changes. The ion accumulation at the soft interfaces and the dielectric property of the perovskite varied at a definite stage and finally reached a steady state. Moreover, the interfacial property of the soft interfaces could recover after several hours of relaxation, indicating that ion migration is reversible within PSCs. Therefore, the “soft interface” mechanism was proposed to well elucidate the unique attributes of PSCs. These findings will definitely deepen the understanding of the unique interfacial properties within PSCs, which is extremely important for the further development of photovoltaics.
Results and discussion
In this study, planar PSCs were fabricated with the structure of SnO2:F (FTO) glass/SnO2 (ETL)/(FA0.85MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 mixed perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD (HTL)/Ag. A schematic diagram of the completed planar PSCs and their typical J–V performance are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), where the impressive PCE of 19.67% was achieved. A comprehensive photovoltaic analysis of similar PSCs device was systematically performed in our previous reports.7,9,19 EIS was adopted for analyzing the electron-transfer kinetics and interfacial dynamics processes of PSCs by capturing the modulated current in response to a small amplitude-modulated voltage stimulus.16,20 For data handling and description, the equivalent circuit was established to represent the internal resistive and capacitive elements, which are related to the electronic/ionic responses selectively occurring at different frequency ranges. We mainly analyzed the electrical property evolution of PSCs in the dark and under different bias conditions, which induced both functional and structural transformations in the hybrid PSCs, and the internal mechanism in PSCs can be clearly reflected.5,13,21 First, the evolution of the intrinsic characteristics of the PSC under 0 V was checked with five consecutively measured Nyquist plots, as shown in Fig. 1a. It can be found that the Nyquist plots mainly consist of two parts, an arc at high frequency (>104 Hz) followed by a large arc, nearly a straight line at low frequency. Generally, the high frequency response is related to the bulk properties of the perovskite, while the response at low frequency (<102 Hz) correlates with the interfacial processes such as electrical polarization and accumulation of charges and ions at the selective contacts.20,21 Evidently, the five plots coincide well at both high frequency and low frequency, indicating that there was almost no variation in the electrical characteristics of the PSC when no bias was applied. Then, we changed the scale of the bias to illustrate the impact of bias on the electrical properties of PSCs. Fig. 1b and c demonstrate the Nyquist plots of the PSCs, which were measured consecutively for ten cycles under a bias of 0.3 V and 0.6 V. For the plots obtained under a bias of 0.3 V, the diameter of the first arc in the high frequency region barely changed during the consecutive test, while the span of the second arc increased continually. Generally, the arc diameter in Nyquist plots can qualitatively describe the resistance corresponding to a definite element in the device. From Fig. 1b and c, it can be concluded that the resistance of the charge transport within the perovskite layer had little change, while there was a consecutive increase in the interfacial-related resistance under 0.3 V bias. Consequently, an internal electric field within the PSCs was established as a result of the bias driving ion migration and accumulation at the two interfacial contacts of ETL/perovskite and HTL/perovskite. This internal electric field further led to an increase in interfacial recombination and interfacial charge transfer resistance, while the ion migration under such a small bias had little effect on charge transport. This implies that the bulk property of the perovskite is relatively more stable, while the interfacial property can be easily affected by a small bias, which will last for at least tens of minutes. A similar variation was also observed in the case of a larger forward bias of 0.6 V. However, different from that observed in the case using 0.3 V, the first arc in the plots under 0.6 V became gradually enlarged, suggesting that a larger bias has a more obvious influence on the bulk property of the perovskite. The evolution of the interfacial property during EIS measurement is considered to be proof of the “soft property” in PSCs. Furthermore, a comparison between “soft” and “hard” materials was made to confirm that the “soft property” originated from the PSCs. Fig. 1d shows the Nyquist plots of a commercial silicon photocell measured sequentially for 5 times under 0 V, 0.1 V, and 0.4 V forward bias, which was selected as a typical hard material, and the inset of Fig. 1d shows a magnified view of the high frequency zone. The Nyquist plots for the Si cell nearly overlapped under a definite bias, which indicates that the electrical property of Si cell does not change under the stimulation of an external bias. Therefore, based on the above analysis, we can conclude that the use of perovskite as the active layer endows PSCs with soft interfaces, and their electrical property can be easily tuned by an external electrical field.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) Nyquist plots of the planar PSC measured in the dark and under 0 V, 0.3 V and 0.6 V bias, respectively (the inset shows an enlarged image of the high frequency zone). (c) Magnified view of (b) in the high frequency region. (d) Nyquist plots of the Si cell measured in the dark and under 0 V, 0.1 V and 0.4 V bias (the inset shows an enlarged version of the plot measured under 0.4 V). 
Thus far, we cannot preclude the effect of other functional layers on this peculiar phenomenon, i.e., the evolution of electrical property. Subsequently, three specific devices including FTO/Ag, FTO/ETL/Ag, and FTO/HTL/Ag were fabricated and investigated via EIS to further elucidate whether or not the electrical property of other non-perovskite functional layers is mutable under an external bias. The diagrams of the non-perovskite structures and their EIS results under an external bias are displayed in Fig. S2a–c (ESI†), respectively. It is clearly shown that the patterns in Fig. S2a and b (ESI†) are five nearly overlapping straight lines, suggesting that the FTO, ETL (SnO2 compact layer) and Ag metal contact have good ohmic contact with each other and their interfacial property remains stable under an external bias. It should be mentioned that the feature of a slight inductive element detected by EIS in these architectures is probably caused by the tested wire. In Fig. S2c (ESI†), the plots with different diameters under 0 V, 0.1 V and 0.2 V bias reveal that the FTO/HTL/Ag architecture behaves like a diode (p–n junction), which exhibited no evolution under the consecutive stimulation of an external bias. The three non-perovskite architectures in Fig. S2 (ESI†) had no evolution of their interfacial property, as observed in a complete PSC device, which therefore confirms that the perovskite layer and its related two interfaces are the origin of the peculiar phenomenon of property evolution. Hence, the interfaces of ETL/perovskite and HTL/perovskite can be termed as soft interfaces, and their properties are mutable under external stimuli such as bias.
To gain deeper insights into the evolution behaviour of the interfacial electrical properties, long-time consecutive and repeated EIS measurements over 100 min were carried out in the dark and under a bias of 0.6 V. The responses at high and low frequency both exhibited consecutive variations, and particularly, the variation in the Nyquist plots in the low frequency region was more obvious. Furthermore, the evolution process continued even after 20 consecutive tests, suggesting that the impact of an external bias on the interfacial and bulk properties of PSC has a long duration exceeding 100 min. The response in the low frequency range in EIS measurement usually implies slow dynamic processes with a long characteristic time, including ionic motion processes, accumulation of charges at the interfaces, and surface polarization.17,18,22 Ion migration is the primary process for the consequent other slow dynamic processes. These processes may not occur concurrently in PSCs, and they need enough time to gradually proceed, as shown in our interfacial property evolution.17,22 Hence, the interfacial property evolution demonstrated by the Nyquist plots in the low frequency region indicates that the ions (especially the halide anions) in the perovskite layer may migrate and accumulate at the interfaces, which will lead to the formation of an internal electric field due to the concentration gradient of migrated ions. To differentiate it from the built-in electric field commonly observed in conventional heterojunctions (which is usually related to the work function offset when two different semiconductors/metals are in contact), herein, this internal electric field in the halide perovskite was denoted as Vionic. Since cations and anions migrate and accumulate at the opposite interfaces constantly under the stimulation of a forward bias, the magnitude of Vionic will evolve dynamically until it reaches a steady state. Consequently, this dynamically growing Vionic weakens the effect of the bias and increases the interfacial charge transfer resistance. This explanation was verified by the increase in the arc diameters in the low frequency region. From the C–F (capacitance–frequency) results shown in Fig. 2d–f, it can be found that the capacitance kept changing during the long duration of external bias, especially in the low and high frequency regions, which is consistent with the Nyquist plots in Fig. 2a. The capacitance in the low frequency region corresponds to the interfacial capacitance related to the accumulated charges at the interfaces, while the high frequency region is associated with the bulk property of the perovskite layer dominated by dipolar dielectric polarization (∼105 Hz).23 Hence, we suggest that the stimulation of bias has a huge effect on the interfacial and bulk properties related to perovskite.
 Fig. 2  (a) Nyquist plots and the corresponding fitting results of the PSC under 0.6 V bias measured for 20 cycles repeatedly. (b and c) Enlarged version of the high frequency zone of the Nyquist plots in (a). (d) C–F plots and the corresponding fitting results of the PSC under 0.6 V bias measured for 20 cycles repeatedly, and inset is the illustration of the equivalent circuit. (e and f) Enlarged versions of the high and low frequency zones of C–F in (d), respectively. 
To demonstrate the evolution of the interfacial properties more clearly, the Nyquist plots in Fig. 2a were well fitted by a universally accepted equivalent circuit, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2d.24–26 As can be seen in Fig. 2, the fitting results matched well with both the Nyquist and C–F plots, validating the good applicability of this equivalent circuit, which contains three resistance components (Rs, R1, and R2) and two capacitance components (Cs and Cg), as shown in Fig. 3b–f. According to previous works, Rs is the resistance related to the ohmic contacts and tested wires, R1 and Cs account for the paraments related to the soft interfaces of perovskite, which are mainly read in the low-frequency range and R2 and Cg are associated with the intrinsic paraments in the perovskite layer, which correspond to the high-frequency region.25,27 The detailed fitting results versus test number (evolution time) and direct current of each EIS are displayed in Fig. 3 and Fig. S3 (ESI†). Generally, the direct current density of a PSC is a sum of the ionic and electron partial current density: namely jtotal = jionic + jelectronic.3 The exponential decrease in direct current density indicates that the charge transfer in the PSC kept deteriorating due to the consecutive evolution of the “soft interfacial property” of the PSC under a bias. Thus, it can be inferred that jionic and jelectronic both decrease as Vionic and the interfacial barrier are gradually strengthened by the charge accumulation at the interfaces, which is a long process; therefore, the steady-state can hardly be reached even after 20 measurement cycles. Rs as a pure resistance exhibited a little increment with the test number, as shown in Fig. 3b. In general, the series resistance is influenced by external conditions, such as test wires. However, we did not change the test wires and the external environment in the repeated EIS tests with only a continuous forward bias. Hence, the change in the series resistance should be related to the physical process in the PSC caused by the forward bias, such as ion accumulation at the contacts, which has been reported for the same reason.25 The interfacial resistance R1 is related to the charge transfer at the interfaces, as shown in Fig. 3c. R1 was enhanced drastically by more than 700% after 20 measurement cycles, indicating that the electrical properties of the soft interfaces are easily affected by an external bias, resulting in deteriorated charges transfer. In the work reported by Zarazua et al., the surface recombination resistance, Rrec, was expressed as:26 (1)where, J is the recombination current, which approximates the direct current, and Rrec also equals the total of R1 and R2. In our case, R1 was much larger than R2. Thus, R1 is approximately equal to Rrec. As R1 increased, J gradually decreased, which corresponds to the variation tendency of the direct current, as shown in Fig. S3a (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Direct current of EIS under 0.6 V bias as a function of measurement cycle. Extracted parameters from EIS fitting results as a function of measurement cycle, corresponding series resistance Rs (b), interfacial resistance R1 (c), transport resistance of perovskite R2 (d), interfacial resistance Cs (e), and dielectric capacitance Cg (f). 
The interfacial capacitance, Cs, showed an analogous exponential decay, as shown in Fig. 3e. We suppose that many physical processes concurrently occur at soft interfaces. Due to the electromigration and accumulation of ions, the soft interfaces have persistent charge arrangement and their energy level changes as a consequence, which probably decreases the surface potential and leads to electrode polarization. These dynamic processes lead to a drastic increase in R1. Considering the complexity of soft interfaces, we suppose that Cs is primarily concerned with the interfacial accumulation capacitance. The main assumption is a distinction of the bias, V, the built-in potential, Vbi, the internal electric field, Vionic, due to the migrated ions and the interfacial surface potential, Vs, which can be determined from the following relation: Vs = V − Vbi − Vionic(2)and the Cs is (3)where, Qs is the surface charges, which can be approximated17 as: (4)in terms of the elementary charge, q, thermal energy, kBT, and a general exponent γ. From above formulas, Cs is exponential with Vs. In our measurement, V was a constant value (0.6 V) and Vbi is usually related to the work function offset; therefore, Vs is inversely proportional to Vionic, which will constantly increase with ionic migration. Therefore, Cs will diminish exponentially, which is consistent with our fitting results. For the curve in Fig. S3c (ESI†), there are apparently two different slopes, which can be a sign for the migration of cations and anions. Additionally, we calculated the low frequency relaxation time, τ1, versus test number, where τ1 = R1 × Cs, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†).26,28τ1 is in the scale of seconds, which is consistent with the timescale of slow ion dynamics.5,17,29 The continually increased τ1 is related to the ion migration. With a gradual increase in migrated ions, subsequent ion movement will become increasingly difficult, causing an increase in the relaxation time. The transport resistance, R2, in the perovskite also slowly increased (enhanced by 35.1%), as shown in Fig. 3d and Fig. S3b (ESI†). Ion migration has been suggested as a factor contributing to unusual behaviour, including current–voltage hysteresis and a giant dielectric response at low frequency, but the effect on the perovskite layer is complicated. We suppose that when ion migration occurs under a bias, the density of defects and the content of impurities increase during this process.14,30–33 The defects and impurities affect the carrier mobility in the perovskite based on the equation , where q is the elementary charge, m is the effective mass of charges, μ is the carrier mobility, and Nl is the content of impurities.34
The increased defects and impurities impeded the charge transport in the perovskite layer and reduced the carrier mobility, including both electronic mobility (μn) and hole mobility (μp), finally leading to an increase in R2.14,35–37 From our results, it can be suggested that the migrated ions produce new defects in the perovskite layer and these defects block the charge transport in the perovskite and decrease the carrier mobility.
The variation in the dielectric capacitance, Cg, is shown in Fig. 3f, which accounts for the sum of the dielectric contribution of each layer between the metallic electrodes.24,25 Here, the contribution of the other layers to the capacitance evolution can be eliminated.38 Therefore, Cg can be simplified as follows: (5)where, d is the thickness of the perovskite layer and εr is the dielectric constant relative to the perovskite. As shown in Fig. S3d (ESI†), Cg is almost constant when the current was high, while it suddenly had a sharp increment when the current decreased to the steady situation. Cg can be ascribed to diverse dipolar mechanisms, as previously reported: CH3NH3+ or PbI6 octahedra reorientation, and cooperative ionic off-centering.22–24 Based on the above analysis, it is thought that ion migration changes the cooperative ionic off-centering and CH3NH3+ reorientation, leading to an increment in εr and Cg.
As discussed above, the electrical properties evolution of the “soft interfaces” stems from the ionic migration and interfacial charge accumulation under external bias stimulation, and the gradually increased Vionic will offset the bias impact until it reaches a steady-state. If ions are already present at the two contact interfaces, a further increase in the local ion concentration will be hindered since there are fewer available sites for ions to move.11 The caused us to wonder whether or not there is a limit or reversibility for such evolution. Thus, we prolonged the testing time by conducting 55 measurement cycles, which took 4.8 h in total. The Nyquist plots from our consecutive tests are shown as a three-dimensional diagram in Fig. 4a, from which the evolution can be observed clearly. More importantly, evolution termination appeared at around the 45th test, while the Nyquist plot no longer changed for the overall frequencies in the last eleven cycles (45th–55th), as shown in Fig. 4b. The above results further indicate that the evolution of the electrical properties of the soft interfaces under a bias reaches a steady state after a few hours. We infer that upon reaching this steady state, Vionic will reach a maximum and then offset the impact of external impact totally, and ionic migration will hardly occur as a consequence. Subsequently, the external bias was removed to check whether the interfacial properties could be recovered. As shown in Fig. 4c, not only the former 55 consecutive tests (Fig. 4a) under a bias, but also the latter tests reflecting the recovery process are involved. From Fig. 4d we can see that with an increase in storage time, the plots were gradually restored to the initial state. The one tested after 420 min storage coincides well with the 1st plot. Thus, we can conclude that the evolution of the electrical properties of the soft interfaces is reversible, implying that the migrated ions may possibly be restored to their initial state when the external bias is removed. The relaxation of this evolution has a time-scale of hours.
 Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots of PSC measured for 55 times repeatedly under 0.6 V bias exhibited in a three-dimensional pattern. (b) Extracted Nyquist plots from the 45th–55th measurement from (a) (inset shows an enlarged view of the high frequency zone). (c) Nyquist plots of PSC measured for 55 times repeatedly under 0.6 V and the recovery process in dark conditions, where R indicates the recovery process and following number means the interval time. (d) Enlarged view of the high frequency zone of the recovery process. 
Here, we use the fitting data to demonstrate the recovery process, as shown in Fig. 5b–f. First, we can clearly observe the emergence of the steady state under a bias, and then, all parameters including the direct current, resistance (Rs, R1 and R2) and capacitance (Cs and Cg) recovered after a long time. Also, the parameters versus direct current recovered and nearly returned to the initial state, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The results suggest that there are no irreversible chemical reactions or other irreversible processes in the evolution process caused by the external bias. Also, the relaxation time, τ1, is in the time-scale of second. When τ1 reached 10 s, it began to remain constant, reflecting that the ions in the devices are in the steady state (Fig. S6, ESI†). A schematic illustration is presented here to further elucidate our viewpoint, where Fig. 6 shows the impact of bias on ionic migration. When no bias is applied, the cations, anions, electrons and holes are evenly distributed without unbalanced ionic charges across the perovskite layer.39 During the EIS test, cations and anions are driven by the electric field to move towards opposite electrodes, producing a Vionic between ions at opposite interfaces, which gradually increases as more and more electromigrated ions accumulate at the two contact interfaces. As a result, band bending near the two contacts occurs, and meanwhile, part of the electric field is screened in the bulk of the perovskite.40 In the meantime, ion migration causes cooperative ionic off-centering and CH3NH3+ reorientation. The cooperative ionic off-centering and CH3NH3+ reorientation are dipolar mechanisms, which have an effect on the dielectric constant in perovskite, and an increment in the dielectric constant will lead to an increase in Cg. Hence, ion migration will influence Cg, which is consistent with our fitting data for Cg. We used a color change to represent this process from yellow to pink, as shown in Fig. 6. With an increase in the number of test cycles under a bias, the concentration gradient of ions near the two contact interfaces increases notably, and thus the back diffusion of ions is promoted.39 These two movement tendencies driven by different factors finally cancel each other, and as a consequence, the band bending reaches a limit and a steady state emerges in the EIS measurement. This steady state ‘‘freezes’’ the charge distribution, and the electrical parameters remain unchanged. When the external bias is removed, the ions slowly diffuse back under the effect of the concentration gradient at the two contact interfaces. The slow relaxation process of ion migration governs the dynamics of electrons and holes and the Vionic gradually decreases also. Additionally, without the bias effect, the ionic off-centering and CH3NH3+ reorientation will slowly return to their equilibrium position. Hence the permittivity will return to the primary state. The charges rearrange and become evenly distributed across the perovskite layer after long-time relaxation for hours. We tested four other PSCs (with the same cell configuration as that in the above discussion) under the same conditions. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), the Nyquist plots of the four PSCs demonstrate similar EIS evolution processes under a constant bias, and they all recovered to the initial statement after the bias was removed. Hence, we can conclude that the evolution of the soft interfaces is a common phenomenon.
 Fig. 5  Blue lines indicate the EIS test under a bias, while the red lines represent the recovery, process where the bias was removed. (a) Stable current of EIS under 0.6 V bias. (b–f) Fitting results of EIS under 0.6 V bias, including the series resistance, Rs (b), interfacial resistance, R1 (c), transport resistance of perovskite, R2 (d), interfacial resistance, Cs (e), and dielectric capacitance, Cg (f). 
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electrical property evolution in a PSC under a bias and after removing the bias, where the cations and anions are red and green, respectively. 
Conclusions
In summary, high efficiency planar PSCs were fabricated, and the interface property evolution was real-time dynamically traced via EIS. The results indicated that the two key interfaces related to perovskite, i.e., ETL/perovskite and perovskite/HTL, can be termed as “soft interfaces” since they are especially susceptible to an external bias due to ion migration in the perovskite layer. The electrical property evolution of the “soft interfaces” in PSCs lasted for hours under a small bias, including the interface charge transfer resistance, bulk charge transport resistance and capacitances. More interestingly, the impedance characteristics could recover in the order of hours after the bias was removed, indicating that ion migration and polarization are reversible within PSCs. Accordingly, a physical mechanism was proposed to well elucidate the unique “soft interface” attributes in PSCs. These findings provide novel and deep insight into the unique interfacial charge transfer and corresponding interfacial engineering within PSCs, which advances our understanding of the underlying physical mechanism of this new type photovoltaics.
Experimental
Device fabrication
The planar PSCs were fabricated with the structure of SnO2:F (FTO) glass/SnO2 (ETL)/(FA0.85MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 mixed perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD (HTL)/Ag. Detailed information about the materials and device fabrication procedures was presented in our previous reports.7,9,19 For the PSC devices, a mixed precursor solution was prepared, which was deposited through an anti-solution approach from a solution containing PbI2 (1.1 M), FAI (1 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.2 M) in a mixture DMF and DMSO (4:1, volume ratio), and chlorobenzene was used as the anti-solvent.19,41 The perovskite and HTL layers were fabricated in a nitrogen-filled glovebox to avoid exposure to the ambient atmosphere. The device efficient area was 0.10 cm2, which was determined from the overlap of the FTO substrate and the Ag contact. The non-perovskite structures including FTO/Ag, FTO/ETL/Ag and FTO/HTL/Ag were prepared using the same procedures. Silicon cells with an efficient area of 0.16 cm2 were purchased from Shenzhen Kebi-Electronic Technology Co., Ltd.
Characterization
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs were gauged using a Keithley 2450 source meter under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2, Solar 3A, Newport) at a scanning rate of 0.1 V s−1 and the light intensity was calibrated using a standard Si photodiode. The active area of the PSC was fixed at 0.07 cm2, as defined by the mask area, to ensure accurate PCE measurement. EIS measurements were performed using an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Zahner, Germany) under different bias with a 10 mV amplitude slight AC perturbation, ranging from 0.1 Hz to 2 MHz in the dark and under low humidity (∼35%). Here, it should be noted that our measurements were carried out by repeatedly recording the Nyquist plots (5 min operating time and 15 s interval time for one single test, and under the interval time, the PSC also had a forward bias) under constant ambient conditions (∼20 °C temperature and ∼35% humidity).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by NSFC (51872036, 51773025), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (DUT18LK48, DUT18ZD208). Dalian science and technology innovation fund (2018J12GX033).
Notes and references
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019 DOI:10.1038/s41566-019-0398-2 .
T. Q. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. B. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. L. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706576 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118 RSC .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Game, G. J. Buchsbaum, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and A. I. Kingon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606584 CrossRef .
Y. Lv, Y. Shi, X. Song, J. Liu, M. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Feng, S. Jin and C. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Bian, Y. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Shi, S. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Feng, L. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Liu and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17882 RSC .
T. Hellmann, M. Wussler, C. Das, R. Dachauer, I. El-Helaly, C. Mortan, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019 10.1039/c8tc06332j .
W. Peng, C. Aranda, O. M. Bakr, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1477 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Courtier, J. M. Cave, J. M. Foster, A. B. Walker and G. Richardson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019 10.1039/c8ee01576g .
S. Y. Luchkin, A. F. Akbulatov, L. A. Frolova, M. P. Griffin, A. Dolocan, R. Gearba, D. A. V. Bout, P. A. Troshin and K. J. Stevenson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kießling, A. Köhler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pitarch-Tena, T. T. Ngo, M. Valles-Pelarda, T. Pauporte and I. Mora-Sero, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1044 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, I. H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ravishankar, O. Almora, C. Echeverria-Arrondo, E. Ghahremanirad, C. Aranda, A. Guerrero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, A. Zaban, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Smith, C. L. C. Ellis, H. Javaid, L. A. Renna, Y. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Bag and D. Venkataraman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, J. Bian, M. Wang, S. Wang, C. Zhang, Q. Dong, B. Zhang and Y. Shi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 107, 74 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zolfaghari, E. Hassanabadi, D. Pitarch-Tena, S. J. Yoon, Z. Shariatinia, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and I. Mora-Sero, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 251 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, E. A. Alharbi, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7799 RSC .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, L. Collins, J. Zhang, P. Y. Lin, M. Ahmadi, S. Jesse and B. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Correa-Baena, S. H. Turren-Cruz, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt, C. Aranda, L. Shooshtari, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 681 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazua, G. F. Han, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, M. Kulbak, A. Zohar, M. Valles-Pelarda, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and I. Mora-Sero, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2007 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, I. H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, A. Guerrero, Y. Zhong, A. Graser, C. A. M. Luna, J. Kohler, J. Bisquert, R. Hildner and S. Huettner, Small, 2017, 13, 1701711 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, W. Tress, K. Domanski, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, T. J. Jacobsson, M. E. Calvo, A. Abate, M. Gratzel, H. Miguez and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. A. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics and Devices,  1992 Search PubMed .
M. Samiee, S. Konduri, B. Ganapathy, R. Kottokkaran, H. A. Abbas, A. Kitahara, P. Joshi, L. Zhang, M. Noack and V. Dalal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 153502 CrossRef .
Y. B. Nian, J. Strozier, N. J. Wu, X. Chen and A. Ignatiev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 146403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, M. García-Rosell, S. Ravishankar, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and O. Almora, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702772 CrossRef .
P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, M. García-Rosell, S. Ravishankar, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and O. Almora, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702772 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. C. Chiu, Y. Du, J. L. Barreda, F. Perez-Orive, B. Ma, P. Xiong and H. Gao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Nemnes, C. Besleaga, V. Stancu, D. E. Dogaru, L. N. Leonat, L. Pintilie, K. Torfason, M. Ilkov, A. Manolescu and I. Pintilie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. Shao, Y. Yan, Q. Dong, J. Liu, B. Hu, S. Jin and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8860 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01770dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) Nyquist plots of the planar PSC measured in the dark and under 0 V, 0.3 V and 0.6 V bias, respectively (the inset shows an enlarged image of the high frequency zone). (c) Magnified view of (b) in the high frequency region. (d) Nyquist plots of the Si cell measured in the dark and under 0 V, 0.1 V and 0.4 V bias (the inset shows an enlarged version of the plot measured under 0.4 V).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Nyquist plots and the corresponding fitting results of the PSC under 0.6 V bias measured for 20 cycles repeatedly. (b and c) Enlarged version of the high frequency zone of the Nyquist plots in (a). (d) C–F plots and the corresponding fitting results of the PSC under 0.6 V bias measured for 20 cycles repeatedly, and inset is the illustration of the equivalent circuit. (e and f) Enlarged versions of the high and low frequency zones of C–F in (d), respectively.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Direct current of EIS under 0.6 V bias as a function of measurement cycle. Extracted parameters from EIS fitting results as a function of measurement cycle, corresponding series resistance Rs (b), interfacial resistance R1 (c), transport resistance of perovskite R2 (d), interfacial resistance Cs (e), and dielectric capacitance Cg (f).	 
Vs = V − Vbi − Vionic	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots of PSC measured for 55 times repeatedly under 0.6 V bias exhibited in a three-dimensional pattern. (b) Extracted Nyquist plots from the 45th–55th measurement from (a) (inset shows an enlarged view of the high frequency zone). (c) Nyquist plots of PSC measured for 55 times repeatedly under 0.6 V and the recovery process in dark conditions, where R indicates the recovery process and following number means the interval time. (d) Enlarged view of the high frequency zone of the recovery process.	 

 	Fig. 5  Blue lines indicate the EIS test under a bias, while the red lines represent the recovery, process where the bias was removed. (a) Stable current of EIS under 0.6 V bias. (b–f) Fitting results of EIS under 0.6 V bias, including the series resistance, Rs (b), interfacial resistance, R1 (c), transport resistance of perovskite, R2 (d), interfacial resistance, Cs (e), and dielectric capacitance, Cg (f).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electrical property evolution in a PSC under a bias and after removing the bias, where the cations and anions are red and green, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01770d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
