Atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals: electronic structure regulation and energy device construction  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60231A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60231A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 530-546Atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals: electronic structure regulation and energy device construction

        
          
            Yongfu 
            Sun
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Gao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *
      Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, P.R. China. E-mail: yxie@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-551-63606266;   Tel: +86-551-63603987
Received 
      3rd July 2013
    First published on 14th October 2013AbstractAtomically-thick two-dimensional crystals can provide promising opportunities to satisfy people's requirement of next-generation flexible and transparent nanodevices. However, the characterization of these low-dimensional structures and the understanding of their clear structure–property relationship encounter many great difficulties, owing to the lack of long-range order in the third dimensionality. In this review, we survey the recent progress in fine structure characterization by X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy and also overview electronic structure modulation by density-functional calculations in the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals. In addition, we highlight their structure–property relationship, transparent and flexible device construction as well as wide applications in photoelectrochemical water splitting, photodetectors, thermoelectric conversion, touchless moisture sensing, supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries. Finally, we outline the major challenges and opportunities that face the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals. It is anticipated that the present review will deepen people's understanding of this field and hence contribute to guide the future design of high-efficiency energy-related devices.
Yongfu Sun
Yongfu Sun received his BS degree in the Department of Chemistry at Anhui University (2006) and PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2011). After that he has worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory. In 2013, Dr Sun joined the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale as a research associate professor. His current interests include the theoretical computation, controllable synthesis, fine structure characterization, device assembly and energy-related applications of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
Shan Gao
Shan Gao received his BS degree in chemistry from West Anhui University, China, in 2011. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Yi Xie. His current interests include the synthesis and characterization of nanostructures, especially two-dimensional inorganic graphene analogues and their applications in energy storage and conversion.
Yi Xie
Yi Xie received her BS degree from Xiamen University (1988) and a PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC, 1996). She is now a Principal Investigator of Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and a full professor of the Department of Chemistry, USTC. She was appointed as the Cheung Kong Scholar Professor of inorganic chemistry in 2000, also a recipient of many awards, including the Chinese National Nature Science Award (2001 and 2012), China Young Scientist Award (2002), China Young Female Scientist Award (2006) and IUPAC Distinguished Women in Chemistry/Chemical Engineering Award (2013). Her research interests are cutting-edge research at four major frontiers: solid state materials chemistry, nanotechnology, energy science and theoretical physics.

Key learning points
(1) Summary of the unprecedented functionalities and the difficulties in characterizing atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(2) Comprehensive overview of the fine structure characterization by X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(3) Systematic survey of the electronic structure modulation by density-functional calculations in the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals.
(4) A detailed highlight of the structure–property relationship in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(5) Systematic summary of the transparent/flexible device construction of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals as well as their wide applications in energy storage and conversion.

1. Introduction
Two-dimensional crystals, with atomic or molecular thickness and infinite planar lengths, are a conceptually-new class of materials, which provide promising opportunities to satisfy people's requirement of next-generation flexible and transparent nanodevices.1,2 These brand-new materials can bridge the microscopic superior optical, electronic, and magnetic features with the macroscopic ultrathinness, flexibility and transparency, thus definitely achieving a maximum functionality with a minimized size. In particular, along with the discovery of graphene, atomically-thick inorganic two-dimensional crystals have increasingly attracted fundamental research interest owing to their fascinating properties and enormous applicability in areas ranging from electronics to catalysis.3–6 For example, atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe and SnS crystals show 2 orders of magnitude higher solar water splitting activity compared with their bulk counterparts,3,7 while ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals display highly efficient supercapacitor performances and touchless moisture sensing.8,9 It is well-known that the anisotropic layered bulk materials have emerged as the most effective precursors for fabricating two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness. That is to say, thanks to the weak van der Waals interaction between layers, the anisotropic layered materials could be easily exfoliated into the corresponding atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals through chemical exfoliation or mechanical exfoliation strategies.2,10–13 By contrast, for the non-layered compounds, the hard breakage of strong in-plane bonds and the lack of intrinsic anisotropic growth driving force leads to the synthesis of their atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals being a great challenge. To address this issue, several methods such as the versatile lamellar hybrid intermediate strategy,3 oriented attachment strategy14,15 and intercalation–deintercalation strategy16 have been developed to fabricate atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with a non-layered structure, which greatly expands their species and hence brings on a series of unprecedented excellent properties.
Up to now, the studies toward the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals have mainly focused on the synthetic methodologies, while the characterization of these low-dimensional structures and the understanding of their clear structure–property relationship have been very limited. Although X-ray diffraction (XRD) has been demonstrated to be a well-established technique in the field of structural investigations for decades, it is still not sufficient to precisely characterize the low-dimensional materials, especially for the two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness. This is mainly ascribed to the fact that the XRD technique is based on the long-range order of atomic positions in a crystal, while the lack of long-range order in the third dimension, means it is unable to identify the spatial atomic distribution in the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals. Intriguingly, thanks to the deep penetration of X-rays and the ability to identify atomic species, X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (XAFS) is a powerful element-specific tool to investigate the local atomic geometry and the chemical state of the atoms of one specific element in almost any type of substance.17,18 It is particularly suitable for studying the materials that lack long-range order such as nanomaterials, amorphous materials, highly disordered solids or even liquids. In effect, systematic XAFS studies could indeed disclose the atomic structural variations in ultrathin two-dimensional crystals compared with their three-dimensional bulk counterparts.3,16,19–21 In other words, upon reducing the dimensionality from three-dimensional bulk counterparts to two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness, synchrotron radiation XAFS studies show that their surface coordination numbers are decreased and bond lengths are elongated/contracted, while their disorder degrees are increased, which verify the presence of surface structural distortion. Obviously, the different local atomic arrangements could result in distinct electronic structures, which hence lead to many exciting applications by reason that the electronic structures are considered as the most effective bridge between the microscopic structure and macroscopic properties.22 For example, the exotic electronic structure usually enables the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals to possess a variety of novel properties such as superconductivity, half-metallicity and topological insulator.15,23,24 Therefore, it is very important for understanding and manipulating the electronic structure of the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals, with efforts to guide their controllable synthesis and bring a wealth of unprecedented physicochemical properties.
In the present review, the unprecedented functionalities and promising applications of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals are described first, and then the difficulties and challenges in characterizing their low-dimensional structures are discussed. Subsequently, we summarize the latest efforts toward addressing these limitations in order to uncover the structural features of the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals. Also, we survey the synchrotron radiation XAFS technique to disclose the atomic structure changes, and also describe the density-functional theory (DFT) calculations to study the electronic structure modulation of the two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness. In addition, we highlight their structure–property relationship, transparent and flexible device construction as well as wide applications in photoelectrochemical water splitting, photodetectors, thermoelectric conversion, touchless positioning interfaces, supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries. Finally, we also outline the major challenges and opportunities facing the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals. The advances discussed here will broaden people's understanding of this field and hence help to guide the future design of high-efficiency energy-related devices.
2. Importance and necessity of fine structure characterization for atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals
Despite the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals always bring about a wealth of innovative properties and fascinating applications, the characterization of these low-dimensional structures and the evaluation of their clear structure–property relationship encounter many great difficulties. As is well-known, XRD is a non-destructive technique that analyzes the average bulk structure of long-range ordered materials. Thus, for the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals without long-range order in the third dimension, the XRD technique can not determine the spatial distribution of real atoms. Fortunately, synchrotron radiation XAFS is based on the short-range effect of several nearest neighbor coordination shells of the absorbing atoms; in other words, the synchrotron radiation XAFS does not depend on the crystal structure and can easily give the coordination number, bond length and disorder degree of the atoms surrounding the element whose absorption edge is being examined.17,18
It is known that when a X-ray travels through matter, part of it will be absorbed. If the X-ray is absorbed by a core-level electron of one absorbing atom, a photoelectron will be excited and goes away from this atom. The excited photoelectron will be scattered back to the absorbing atom via the electrons of its neighboring atom. The interference between the excited and scattered photoelectron waves can thus give birth to the oscillation in the X-ray absorption coefficient and this is the origin of synchrotron radiation XAFS.25 Note that XAFS has several clear-cut advantages such as element-specificity, sensitivity to the chemical state and short-range order (typically several Å). It can immediately identify the bond distance, coordination number and species of the atoms surrounding the absorbing atoms. Also, the XAFS distance determination can be accurate to about 0.01 Å or better, and such sensitivity to the short-range order enables it to effectively detect the local structure for a variety of systems, such as crystalline or amorphous solid, liquid or even gas state. Benefiting from these unique advantages, the synchrotron radiation XAFS could play a crucial role in studying low-dimensional materials, which is a pretty useful supplement to the XRD technique.
2.1 Structural characteristics of atomically-thick two-dimensional layered crystals
It is noticeable that controllable exfoliation of layered compounds has been regarded as the exclusive way to obtain atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals. This is mainly ascribed to the planar anisotropy and weak van der Waals interaction between their layers. Under the effect of external forces, the layered compounds can be easily cleaved along the layer plane, which inevitably results in the loss of the interplanar interaction from the adjacent layers. Then, does the lost interplanar interaction bring obvious change on the intra-layer structure of the exfoliated atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals?
To address the above fundamental issue, synchrotron radiation XAFS analysis has been carried out on the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with layered structures. For example, in the case of 5-atom-thick two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals exfoliated from bulk Bi2Se3via an intercalation–exfoliation strategy (Fig. 1A–D), the synchrotron radiation XAFS was applied to study their structural characteristics. The least-squares fittings for the Bi L3-edge and K-edge XAFS data showed that the Bi–Se and Se–Bi distances in ultrathin two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals were slightly elongated and their disorder degrees were obviously increased, while their coordination numbers were slightly reduced compared to that of their bulk counterpart (Fig. 1E–G). This indicated that the exfoliation process did not damage the structure of two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms, but resulted in a slight intra-layer structural distortion, which helped to minimize the surface energy and hence gained outstanding structural stability.20 Also, another typical example was the freestanding two-dimensional SnS2 crystals with a thickness of 3 atoms, which were synthesized through a scalable liquid-exfoliation strategy. The corresponding XAFS analysis disclosed that the interatomic distances and disorder degrees of Sn–S and Sn–Sn coordinations in the exfoliated ultrathin two-dimensional SnS2 crystals were apparently elongated, while their coordination numbers were slightly decreased, compared to that of the layered bulk SnS2. This intra-layer structural distortion enabled the ultrathin SnS2 crystals to minimize the surface energy and hence guaranteed much improved structural stability.19 Notably, apart from characterizing the layered materials with weak van der Waals force between the layers, synchrotron radiation XAFS was further utilized to investigate the structural features of the quasi-layered materials with layers linked by strong covalent bonds. Taking the ultrathin quasi-layered VO2(B) crystals fabricated by a room-temperature lithium intercalation–deintercalation strategy as an example,26 synchrotron radiation XAFS was adopted to investigate their fine structure. The corresponding XAFS studies revealed that the average bond lengths of nearest V–O and V–V pairs for the exfoliated two-dimensional VO2(B) crystals were elongated, and the overall lattice was expanded, thus showing a more symmetric structure compared with the bulk counterpart. The highly symmetric surface structure contributed to decrease the surface energy of the two-dimensional VO2(B) crystals and hence leaded to their exceptional structural stability. Therefore, upon the exfoliation of three-dimensional layered/quasi-layered bulk materials into ultrathin two-dimensional crystals, synchrotron radiation XAFS analysis disclosed that the loss of the neighboring layer did not render a remarkable change on the monolayer structure, but resulted in a slight intra-layer structural distortion, which contributed to reduce the surface energy of the ultrathin two-dimensional layered crystals and hence render them with exceptional structural stability.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic intercalation–exfoliation strategy for exfoliating three-dimensional layered Bi2Se3 into [001]-oriented freestanding two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms. (B) Atomic force microscopy image and (C) the corresponding height profile for the freestanding two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals. (D) Unit cell structure of rhombohedral Bi2Se3. (E) Bi L3-edge and Se K-edge extended XAFS oscillation function k2χ(k) and (F) the corresponding Fourier transforms, the red and blue lines stand for two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals and bulk counterpart. (G) Structural model of two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Structural characteristics of atomically-thick two-dimensional non-layered crystals
It is well-established that the difficulty in the bond-cleavage of non-layered compounds and the lack of intrinsic driving force for their two-dimensional anisotropic growth lead to the synthesis of their atomically-thin two-dimensional crystals being a great challenge. To greatly expand the species of two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness, a new versatile lamellar hybrid intermediate strategy was developed to fabricate atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with a non-layered structure (Fig. 2A). Taking the non-layered ZnSe with a zinc-blend structure as an example, a lamellar hybrid (Zn2Se2)(pa) (pa stands for n-propylamine) intermediate was initially synthesized, and then exfoliated into hybrid ZnSe-pa two-dimensional crystals, and finally the clean two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms were obtained through removing the pa molecules (Fig. 2B).3 Thus, a very important question arises: how can the atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with many dangling bonds be stable at ambient conditions? To interpret the stability of clean atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with non-layered structures, synchrotron radiation XAFS measurements at both Zn and Se K-edges (Fig. 2C and D) were performed. The XAFS curve-fitting results showed that the coordination between Zn atoms and pa molecules resulted in the slight expansion of surface Zn–Se bond-lengths, while the next nearest Zn–Zn distances were eminently contracted and the Se–Se distances were obviously elongated, compared with the values of bulk ZnSe (Fig. 2E). This implied an apparent surface distortion in the exfoliated two-dimensional ZnSe-pa crystals. Notably, the finally obtained clean two-dimensional ZnSe crystals still preserved the surface distortion, which in turn contributed to reduce their surface energy and hence definitely determine their superior structural stability. Also, another typical non-layered compound was the monoclinic VO2(M), in which all VO6 octahedra was linked by sharing an edge along the a-axis to form chains, and the chains were then interlinked by sharing corner oxygen atoms to form a VO2(M) three-dimensional framework. Recently, its ultrathin two-dimensional crystals were fabricated by a structural phase transition-assisted intercalation–deintercalation strategy and then their atomic structure was also carried out by XAFS measurement.16 The least-squares fitting for the V–O and V–V bond lengths implied the structural transition from monoclinic to rutile phases, in which the structural distortion toward higher symmetry could be mainly ascribed to their atomic thickness and high fraction of surface atoms. In addition, the higher surface symmetry indicated that the surface was closer to the metallic state compared with the interior, by reason that the fitting V–V distance (2.99 Å) was close to the critical distance (2.94 Å) that was required to cause the itinerant electronic behavior; meanwhile, the effects of quantum confinement at small thicknesses of ultrathin two-dimensional VO2(M) crystals may also give rise to a new electronic state. Accordingly, the unique surface distortion along with the quantum confinement in the thickness made the ultrathin two-dimensional VO2(M) crystals display an excellent electronic structure of half-metallicity. More importantly, the synchrotron radiation XAFS characterization could not only supplement the XRD technique to give the information such as bond lengths, coordination number and disorder degree for the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals, but also help to understand the hybrid interactions between the two-dimensional crystals and other material systems. It was known that the organic ligand preferably adsorbed at the specific metal sites and the distinct interaction behaviors could lead to different kinds of inorganic–organic nanohybrids. Based on this principle, a universal in-plane coassembly strategy was proposed to fabricate transition-metal chalcogenide–alkylamine hybrid two-dimensional crystals with an atomic thickness. As an example, the calculated adsorption energy revealed that the oleylamine molecules tended to adsorb on the corner sites and side surface sites of the two-dimensional Co9S8 crystals, which facilitated the in-plane coassembly process for the final atomically-thick two-dimensional hybrid materials instead of the conventional inorganic–organic hybrid two-dimensional crystals that were generally attained by the layer-by-layer alternate assembly of the inorganic and organic components. Meanwhile, the XAFS measurement demonstrated the presence of Co–N coordination, which provided direct evidence for the adsorption of oleylamine on the Co atoms in the hybrid two-dimensional crystals. In addition, the distorted Co–S and Co–Co distances revealed by XAFS ensured excellent stability of the atomically-thick two-dimensional Co9S8-oleylamine crystals.21 Consequently, for the synthetic atomically-thick two-dimensional non-layered crystals, synchrotron radiation XAFS studies illustrated that their surface bond distances were remarkably elongated/contracted and their disorder degrees were apparently increased, suggesting their obviously distorted structure. Such significant surface structural distortion helped to decrease the surface energy of ultrathin two-dimensional non-layered crystals and hence enabled them to be stable under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 2  (A) A general lamellar hybrid intermediate strategy for synthesizing clean and freestanding atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with a non-layered structure. (B) Atomic force microscopy image with an average thickness of 0.91 nm. (C) Zn and Se K-edge extended XAFS oscillation function kχ(k) and (D) the corresponding Fourier transforms. (E) Structural model of atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals viewed along the (110) plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
3. Electronic structure regulation of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals
The electronic structure is closely related to the electronic interactions in the given crystal lattices, while the structural lattice variations would strongly affect the carrier concentration, carrier mobility, band gap width and electrical conductivity. In other words, the variations of atomic structure can induce changes in the electronic structure parameters and hence result in dramatic changes in their intrinsic optical and electrical properties, thus entailing their superior energy-related applications such as lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, photoelectric and thermoelectric conversion. In this case, thanks to the dramatic atomic structural variations, the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could serve as an ideal material platform for investigating the electronic structure modulation and structure–property relationship.
3.1 Pristine atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals have increased densities of states near the Fermi level
To study the electronic structure of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals, DFT calculations were carried out based on their atomic structural parameters obtained by synchrotron radiation XAFS. Taking the synthetic two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms as an example, XAFS studies clearly revealed that the surface Zn–Se–Zn bond angle of ZnSe single-layers displayed a significant compression of 7.0° from the bulk value of 109.5° on account of the expanded nearest Zn–Se bond length and contracted next nearest Zn–Zn distance. By contrary, their surface Se–Zn–Se bond angle was stretched by 2.5°. Such obvious surface distortion of atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals would significantly influence their electronic properties, and therefore their DFT calculations were performed based on the atomic structural parameters obtained by XAFS. As shown in Fig. 3A, the obtained densities of states (DOS) disclosed that the atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals displayed obviously increased densities of states at the edge of conduction band, while the DOS of the bulk counterpart exhibited a very low tail at the conduction band minimum. The enhanced DOS could contribute to their excellent electronic properties, verified by their lower charge transfer resistance, thus ensuring a high carrier migration rate. As a result, the synchrotron radiation XAFS and first-principles calculation demonstrated that the surface distortion endowed the atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with excellent structural stability and a unique electronic structure.3 Also, in the case of two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms, the least-squares fittings for the Bi L3-edge and K-edge XAFS data achieved the quantitative structural parameters around Bi and Se atoms of the two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms and the bulk counterpart, in which the surface disordering of two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals can be clearly observed. To investigate their electronic structure variations, the first-principles calculations were conducted according to the atomic parameters obtained by synchrotron radiation XAFS. The calculated DOS for the two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms displayed eminently increased DOS at the conduction band minimum compared to the bulk counterpart. The enhanced DOS would reasonably render them with higher carrier mobility and sequentially contributed to their outstanding electrical properties, which was further demonstrated by their over 2 times higher electrical conductivity than its bulk counterpart, thus strongly pointing to the fascinating superiority of their two-dimensional structure with atomic thickness.20 Moreover, in the case of ultrathin two-dimensional Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 crystals fabricated by a substitutional solid solution based exfoliation method,27 their DOS was calculated based on the Ti3SiC2 crystal structure with 1/4 Si atoms substituted by Al atoms. The calculated DOS for the ultrathin two-dimensional Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 crystals and bulk counterpart revealed that both of them showed metallic characteristics, implying that the partial substitution of Si with Al atoms in the Ti3SiC2 crystal did not change its intrinsic metallic properties. As is well-known, the number of electrons at the edge of the occupied state is crucial to the metallic property. The calculated results revealed that the ultrathin two-dimensional Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 crystals possessed 4.96 electrons in the area of Ef − E ≤ 10kBT (kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature), larger than 3.76 electrons for the bulk counterpart, which was further confirmed by their corresponding charge density wave. The increased densities of states for the ultrathin two-dimensional Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 crystals could be attributed to the formation of numerous dangling silicon bonds during the exfoliation process. As a result, the DFT calculations clearly demonstrated the obviously enhanced densities of states near the Fermi level of the pristine ultrathin two-dimensional crystals, showing promising signs for electronic and optoelectronic device applications.
 Fig. 3  (A) The calculated DOS for 4-atom-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals and bulk ZnSe, inset yellow shadow denotes the increased densities of states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Crystal structure of ultrathin two-dimensional hydric TiS2 crystals and (C) their temperature-dependent electrical resistivity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Scheme for the formation of ultrathin two-dimensional LiVO–graphene crystals, and (E) the electron transfer process between the graphene layer and the VO layer, the DOS of the graphene pz orbital for graphene and electron-transfer mechanism within the Marcus–Gerischer theory in different conditions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.2 Hydrogen-incorporated atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals showing higher electrical conductivity
Despite the conceptually new atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals play an increasingly crucial role in next-generation electronics, the relatively low electrical conductivity of most of the ultrathin two-dimensional inorganic crystals severely hampered their widespread application in constructing nanodevices. To address this issue, a new pathway was highlighted to significantly improve the conductivity through incorporating the lightest atom (H+) into the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals. As an example, structural analysis gave us inspiration that titanium disulfide would be a new catalogue of the high conductivity materials, owing to the weak van der Waals interactions between the S–Ti–S layers and the presence of two valence states of Ti in plane. Upon the injection of extra electrons, the S–Ti–S framework would still be stable without structural destructions, thus favoring high conductivity (Fig. 3B). Thus, two-dimensional hydrogen-incorporated TiS2 crystals with less than five atomic layers were successfully fabricated through an efficiently chemical exfoliation strategy, in which the incorporation of hydrogen can be tuned with different concentrations.28 The hydrogen incorporation brought extra electrons into the S–Ti–S layers, which contributed to enhance the electron–electron correlations in the two-dimensional lattice framework and hence guaranteed significantly increased conductivity. As depicted in Fig. 3C, the assembled thin films of the as-obtained ultrathin two-dimensional hydric TiS2 crystals exhibited an extremely high electrical conductivity of 6.76 × 104 S m−1 at 298 K. This value was not only superior to that of indium tin oxide (1.9 × 104 S m−1), but was also higher than the values for the assembled thin films of graphene (5.5 × 104 S m−1) and atomically-thick two-dimensional VS2 crystals (5.0 × 102 S m−1). It is anticipated that the electronic structure regulation by hydrogen incorporation would be a powerful tool for tuning the electrical properties in the two-dimensional material systems.
3.3 Atomically-thick two-dimensional crystal hybrids with graphene possessing optimized electron transport
As is well-known, graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms, is one of the most promising materials to trigger breakthroughs in the electronics industry. It possesses an electron mobility of 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1, more than twice that of the highest mobility conventional semiconductor.29 This makes graphene a wonderful candidate material for fabricating hybrid electronic devices. In this regard, the atomically-thick inorganic–graphene alternately intercalated two-dimensional crystals could serve as excellent platforms to optimize the electron transport property. As an example, a lithium vanadate–graphene intercalated compound was initially synthesized, in which the layers of lithium vanadate were alternately intercalated with graphene.30 The nanohybrids were then exfoliated into two-dimensional hybrid lithium vanadate–graphene crystals with a few atoms thickness (Fig. 3D). This exfoliated ultrathin lithium vanadate–graphene crystals exhibited a representative structure similar to the micro-lithium ion battery with the lithium vanadate layer as the cathode electrode and graphene layer as the anode electrode. The calculated electronic structure of lithium vanadate–graphene with different Li ion positions showed that the carrier type of the graphene layer could be easily altered by rocking the embedded Li ions back and forth under the external electric field, which thus offered a new pathway for electrical modulation (Fig. 3E). In addition, apart from the above hybrid two-dimensional crystals containing Li ions, other inorganic–graphene two-dimensional crystals with an alternately intercalated structure can also optimize the electron transport property. For example, if the β-Ni(OH)2 could be alternately hybrid with graphene, the conducting graphene layers between the β-Ni(OH)2 layers could act as electron “superhighways”, which allowed for fast electron transfer and hence promoted the high-rate electrochemical performances. Based on this concept, ultrathin two-dimensional β-Ni(OH)2–graphene nanohybrids with alternating layer-by-layer stacking structure were also fabricated via a convenient one-step solvothermal approach.31 After sequential processes such as appropriate exfoliation, vacuum-filtrated reassembly and transfer onto a gold-coated PET sheet, a β-Ni(OH)2–graphene nanohybrid based flexible electrode was obtained and displayed superior electrochemical performances. Moreover, in the case of MnO2–graphene alternately intercalated two-dimensional crystals, the introduction of graphene could bring additional interfaces at the hybrid interlayer areas and provide more electrochemically active surfaces for absorption–desorption of electrolyte ions, which contributed to facilitate the charge transport during the following electrochemical reaction processes. In addition, the hybrid with graphene helped to tailor the distance between the ultrathin two-dimensional MnO2 crystals and hence open up the interlayer space to allow for more electrolyte ions to penetrate efficiently into the hybridized film. Thus, a novel hybrid nanostructure of ultrathin two-dimensional MnO2–graphene nanohybrids was synthesized through a continent liquid strategy,32 while the electrochemical measurement indeed demonstrated their greatly improved planar supercapacitor performances. Briefly, a new pathway was put forward to tailor the electronic structure of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals through their hybrid with graphene, holding promise for constructing efficient electronic devices.
4. Electronic structure–property relationship and device construction of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals
As is well-known, electronic structure is the most obvious and useful link between the structure and properties of any solid material.22 Thus, an in-depth understanding of the electronic structure is beneficial for the design and synthesis of functional materials with controllable properties. For example, the intrinsic electrical property is strongly correlated with the electronic structure and the regulation of electronic structure provides an effective pathway to control the electrical properties, while the tunable electrical properties show prospective signs for applications in energy storage including supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries, and energy conversion such as photoelectric devices and thermoelectric devices.3,8,20,32,33 It is noticeable that the exfoliation of three-dimensional bulk materials into ultrathin two-dimensional crystals inevitably introduces significant changes on their atomic structure, owing to the quantum confinement in the atomic thickness. In other words, the quantum confinement effect can alter the atomic structure of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals, which has been reflected by synchrotron radiation XAFS studies. In this regard, the XAFS data fitting results demonstrate that the loss of the neighboring layer in the layered compounds leads to a slight intra-layer structural distortion, while there are obviously distorted surface bond distances and bond angles in the exfoliated ultrathin two-dimensional non-layered crystals. Apparently, the ultrathin thickness and the surface distortion of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could cause an eminent effect on their electronic structure. In addition, a recent study shows that defect structure in ultrathin two-dimensional crystals can also contribute to tune their electronic structure and hence promote their physicochemical properties. For example, as the thickness of the BiOCl nanosheets reduces to the atomic scale, positron annihilation spectrum, which is a powerful tool to detect the defects in functional materials, demonstrates that the predominant defects change from isolated defects to triple vacancy associates.34 The triple vacancy associates in the ultrathin BiOCl sheets strongly affect their electronic structure including band gap width and conduction band minimum, which help to enhance the separation and transport of photoexcited electron–hole pairs and hence greatly promotes their solar-driven photocatalytic activity. Therefore, the atomic thickness, surface distortion and defect structure of the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals would play an important role in tailoring their electronic structure and hence affect their fascinating applications in energy storage and energy conversion.
4.1 Effect of exotic electronic structure on the physical properties
As is known, thermoelectric materials can directly generate electricity from untapped waste heat of various sources such as factories, computers, automobiles and even human bodies, which thus affords a clean and efficient way to solve the global energy and environmental crisis.35,36 The efficiency of a thermoelectric device depends on the material's dimensionless thermoelectric figure of merit ZT = σS2T/κ, where σ, S, κ and T are the electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, thermal conductivity and absolute temperature. Optimizing ZT is a significant challenge in materials science because it requires a decoupling of σ, S and κ, which are unfavorably interdependent according to the Wiedemann–Franz law. Recently, atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals were proposed as an excellent platform to fully optimize the thermoelectric parameters. The designed geometry possessed many clear-cut advantages in increasing the electrical conductivity and the Seebeck coefficient along with reduced thermal conductivity (Fig. 4A). It is striking to note that both the calculated and experimental results in previous semiconductors have demonstrated that their atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could display obviously enhanced densities of states at the edge of their valence or conduction band,3,19,20 thus endowing them with increased electrical conductivity. Moreover, the atomic thickness would render the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with two-dimensional electron gas, which contributes to improve their Seebeck coefficient. Meanwhile, the potential barriers at the numerous interfaces and boundaries of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could filter out the low-energy carriers and transmit the high-energy carriers, thus leading to a further increased Seebeck coefficient. In addition, the grain boundaries and interfaces also allowed for the selective scattering of mid/long wavelength photons rather than electrons, and hence guaranteed the reduced thermal conductivities with a minimal detrimental effect on the electrical properties. Furthermore, the surface distortion in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals, revealed by the synchrotron radiation XAFS, favored efficient scattering of short wavelength phonon and hence acquired decreased thermal conductivities. Taking the synthetic two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms as an example, they were thus fabricated into a ultrathin two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals-based composite device through a cold compaction–sintering method, in order to fully optimize the thermoelectric parameters.20 The thermoelectric measurements revealed that the ultrathin Bi2Se3-based composite device exhibited a ZT up to 0.35 at 400 K, which was 8 times higher than that of the bulk counterpart (Fig. 4B–E). Moreover, light absorption enhancement in atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals has also been found as a common phenomenon and it is closely correlated with their peculiar electronic structure. For example, in the case of ultrathin two-dimensional g-C3N4 crystals with a size distribution ranging from 70 to 160 nm and a height of ∼2.5 nm which was prepared by a green liquid exfoliation route from bulk g-C3N4 in water,14 their calculated DOS displayed an obvious increase of DOS at the conduction band edge with respect to the bulk counterpart, indicating that the atomically-thick two-dimensional g-C3N4 crystals possessed more charge carriers and thus implied their improved photoresponsivity.19 In fact, compared with the bulk g-C3N4, the ultrathin two-dimensional g-C3N4 crystals possessed enhanced photoabsorption and photoresponse, which not only promoted the intrinsic photocurrent and photocatalytic activity but also led to the extremely high photoluminescence quantum yield up to 19.6%. Furthermore, the electrochemical properties such as the lithium-ion battery performance are also related to the unique electronic structure of the two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness. Taking the synthetic ultrathin two-dimensional Co3O4 crystals with a thickness of 1.5 nm as an example,33 their coin cell device showed a very high and stable reversible capacity of 1291.2 mA h g−1 with 0.23% loss per cycle. Also, it was found that the ultrathin Co3O4 crystals-based coin cell device still possessed the excellent lithium storage performance at fast charging, i.e. it exhibited 812.8 mA h g−1 retention with 0.58% capacity loss per cycle at the high 1 C rate, which was much higher than that of the Co3O4 nanoparticles and bare Co3O4. Accordingly, the atomic structural variations in atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could effectively modulate their electronic structure and hence greatly promote their intrinsic physicochemical properties.
 Fig. 4  (A) Exfoliation of three-dimensional bulk materials into two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness in order to fully optimize the thermoelectric parameters. Temperature-dependent (B) electrical conductivity, (C) thermal conductivity, (D) Seebeck coefficient and (E) figure of merit for the ultrathin two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals-based composite and bulk counterpart. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the peculiar electronic structure of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals can not only enhance their intrinsic properties but also bring unprecedented promising properties. One of the most typical example is the half-metallicity in ultrathin two-dimensional crystals,37,38 which just rests on the theoretically predicated level before the recent progress on the two-dimensional Co9Se8 crystals.15 For the ultrathin two-dimensional Co9Se8 crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms synthesized via a two-dimensional oriented attachment mechanism, their calculated DOS revealed that the spin-down states had a band gap of ∼1.5 eV and the spin-up states were gapless, suggesting the half-metallic nature of the atomic-thick two-dimensional Co9Se8 crystals (Fig. 5A–C). By contrast, the spin-polarized DOS of bulk Co9Se8 showed a semiconductor feature (Fig. 5D). In addition, over the temperature range of 380–180 K, the measured resistivity for the ultrathin two-dimensional Co9Se8 crystals changed by a factor of only ∼2.3. This was much different from the typical semiconducting behavior, by reason that the magnitude of the resistivity of a typical semiconductor should vary by several orders over a large temperature span. Thus, the obtained resistivity did not strongly demonstrate the ultrathin two-dimensional Co9Se8 crystals to be semiconducting and alternately reflected their half-metallic nature. Although there was no experimental evidence to directly demonstrate the half-metallicity in ultrathin two-dimensional crystals on account of the limited experimental conditions, the present experiment gave an important result that most approached to the direct experimental evidence. More intriguingly, a similar result appeared in the synthesized ultrathin two-dimensional VO2(M) crystals,16 while the XAFS studies and first-principles calculations revealed that the half-metallic nature could be ascribed to their unique surface distortion and quantum confinement in the atomic thickness. Besides the unexpected half-metallicity, the ultrathin two-dimensional VO2(M) crystals also displayed the desired thermal-induced structural phase transition as their bulk counterpart. Such structural variation could not only be identified by the synchrotron radiation XAFS, but also could be further verified by the temperature-dependent far-IR spectroscopy. Furthermore, another new phenomenon was also observed in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals: there was an exciting transition from an indirect band gap in the bulk materials to a direct gap in the ultrathin two-dimensional semiconducting crystals, e.g. bulk MoS2 possessed an indirect band-gap of 1.3 eV, while the monolayer MoS2 had a direct gap of 1.8 eV.39 In addition, the direct band gap in monolayer MoS2 crystals also resulted in formation of photoluminescence, which enabled their promising applications in many optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 5  (A) Side view of the unrelaxed (top) and relaxed (bottom) four-atomic-layer Co9Se8 slab structure. (B) Structural differences between the unrelaxed and relaxed slab models. (C) Calculated DOS of the relaxed Co9Se8 slab. The DOS above zero corresponds to the spin-up states, and the other corresponds to the spin-down states. (D) DOS of bulk Co9Se8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Combination of exotic electronic structure and two-dimensional transparency for constructing transparent devices
In recent years, transparent devices have received considerable attention owing to their potential applications in fields such as transparent displays, transistors and supercapacitors.40,41 In spite of these fascinating applications, the conventional transparent materials still have limitations. Therefore, it is highly desirable and challenging to pursue alternative transparent materials which can potentially exhibit better physical properties. Atomically-thin two-dimensional crystals have emerged as the promising candidates for transparent electronic and optoelectronic applications. In addition to possessing high transparency arising from atomic thickness, the fascination of ultrathin two-dimensional crystals also comes from their huge surface area and large fraction of uncoordinated dangling bonds for enhancing light harvesting and promoting physicochemical reactions.

4.2.1 Transparent photoelectrochemical device. 
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting could provide a clean and renewable pathway to overcome the limited supply of fossil fuels and greenhouse effect by splitting water into H2 and O2.42–44 The PEC cell is usually based on a semiconductor photoelectrode and a metal counter electrode. The semiconductor photoelectrode can convert the incident photons to electron–hole pairs, which are spatially separated from each other under an external electric field. The photogenerated electrons are transported to the metal counter electrode via the external wire and reduce water to hydrogen gas, while the photogenerated holes are swept toward the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and then oxidize water to oxygen gas. In addition to possessing a free and unlimited supply of solar energy and water, the fascination of PEC water splitting also comes from the environmentally benign reactions in nearly neutral conditions without generating polluted byproducts such as carbon dioxide. However, the low efficiency and poor stability still hinder its practical applications. Therefore, it is highly desirable to design and synthesize revolutionary materials, with efforts to achieve highly efficient PEC water splitting properties.
Notably, just as graphene rocked the world of chemistry in 2004, the atomically-thin two-dimensional crystals may represent the ideal architectures for highly efficient PEC performance (Fig. 6A–C).3,19 The huge specific surface area favors for harvesting more visible light, while the photo-absorption is usually limited by the light transmittance and reflection at the numerous grain boundaries of bulk or nanosized particles. Also, the truly atomic thickness and the two-dimensional conducting paths help them to gain fast carrier transport in the transparent photoelectrodes associated with a greatly reduced recombination rate, according to the diffusion formula of t = d2/k2D (d is the particle size, k is a constant, D is the diffusion coefficient of electron–hole pairs). Moreover, benefiting from the intimate contact with the substrate and high interfacial contact area with the electrolyte, the peculiar configuration allows for fast interfacial charge transfer and electrochemical reactions as well as low corrosion rates. As such, through a spin-assisted layer-by-layer assembly strategy, a transparent thin film device consisting of the synthetic two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms was fabricated for testing their water photoelectrolysis properties. Upon irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp, the transparent photoelectrode comprising of ultrathin two-dimensional ZnSe crystals exhibited a photocurrent density up to 2.14 mA cm−2, roughly 195 times higher than their bulk counterpart (Fig. 6D). As illustrated in Fig. 6E, their photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) had a value of 42.5% at 300 nm, which was strikingly higher than that of bulk ZnSe (0.25%). It is noticeable that the photoconversion efficiency of 42.5% is much higher than that of most existing reports. Moreover, compared with the striking color change and large I–t fluctuations occurring in bulk ZnSe, the transparent photoelectrode comprising of ultrathin two-dimensional ZnSe crystals displayed negligible variations after even 3600 s irradiation, strongly highlighting their outstanding stability.3
 Fig. 6  (A and B) Advantages of using two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms vs. bulk ZnSe deposited on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass as the photoelectrodes for solar water splitting (pa stands for n-propylamine). (C) Working mechanism of a PEC device for solar hydrogen production using atomically-thin two-dimensional ZnSe crystals as the photoelectrode. (D) Photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves under chopped 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (E) IPCE at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
Despite the significantly improved PEC water splitting performance for the atomically-thin two-dimensional ZnSe crystals, the relatively wide band gap unfortunately limits them to only responding to the ultraviolet irradiation which accounts for only 4% of the incoming total sunlight. In view of better utilization of solar energy, it is highly necessary to develop visible-light-responsive PEC material systems, owing to the fact that visible light contributes to about 43% of the solar spectrum. In this case, 3-atomic-thick two-dimensional SnS2 crystals with a band gap of about 2.29 eV were synthesized and then they were fabricated into a transparent film photoelectrode by a spin-assisted layer-by-layer assembly strategy.19 Under visible light irradiation, the ultrathin two-dimensional SnS2 crystals-based transparent photoelectrode yielded a photocurrent density up to 2.75 mA cm−2, over 70 times higher than that of its bulk counterpart. Also, their transparent photoelectrode displayed a visible light conversion efficiency of 38.7%, much better than that of most existing reports, strongly demonstrating the superiority of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals in promoting PEC water splitting. Moreover, in another case of the synthetic all-surface-atomic SnS sheets,7 their transparent photoelectrode exhibited an IPCE of 67.1% at 490 nm, much higher than the efficiencies of other visible-light-driven water splitting. A photocurrent density of 5.27 mA cm−2, 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of its bulk counterpart, was also achieved for the all-surface-atomic SnS sheets-based photoelectrode. In a word, the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals could serve as the most promising candidates for constructing transparent photoelectrodes, thus paving the way for future applications in transparent optoelectronic devices.


4.2.2 Transparent touchless sensing device. 
Transparent touch sensing devices are more intuitive and easier than the traditional input devices such as mouse and other pointing devices, in which the capacitive and resistive electrical stimuli can be effectively detected by direct contact with applied pointers. To realize the longer range manipulation, pursuing new stimulus signals is of great importance from both a scientific and industrial perspective. In this respect, moisture is an attractive candidate for a long-range signal source, because the spatial distribution of moisture can directly reflect the original position information of target objects. Despite the excellent advantages in touchless sensing moisture, the relatively low sensitivity and responding speed of traditional moisture detectors unfortunately hamper their practical applications. In this case, ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals were synthesized and then were fabricated into a transparent thin film device through a suction filtrating strategy (Fig. 7A and B), in efforts to achieve quick moisture responsiveness.9 From the systematic characterizations of the sensitivity, response kinetics and cycling performance, it was found that the electric conductivity of this sensing device was highly sensitive to the environmental humidity, in which the resistance changed almost two orders of magnitude from the relative humidity of 0% to that of 100% (Fig. 7C and D). Also, their sensitivity reached as high as 30, which was superior to that of carbon nanotubes. Moreover, the response and recovery time (under a stimulus of 90% relative humidity) for our moisture sensing device in Fig. 7E were only 30–40 s and 12–50 s, respectively, which were much shorter than that of the previously reported SnO2 nanowire humidity sensor (120–170 and 20–60 s). A pulse-stimuli experiment revealed the fast response and short recovery time of the sensor, both of which were important parameters for electronic applications. By contrast, there was no obvious change in the I–t curves of the bulk VS2-based sensing device through alternating the on/off stimulus of moisture, suggesting the irresponsiveness toward the change of relative humidity (Fig. 7F). Notably, the irresponsiveness in the bulk VS2-based sensing device could be ascribed to the lack of active grain interval to absorb water molecules, while the layer-by-layer overlapping feature of the ultrathin two-dimensional materials could afford numerous interlayer intervals around a two-dimensional crystal with atomic thickness. Thus, the layer-by-layer assembly of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals contributed to increase the active edge sites and hence ensure the ultrahigh sensitivity to moisture. Therefore, benefiting from the high transparency and other advantages such as exotic electronic structure, the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals can be widely used in the construction of various transparent electronic devices.
 Fig. 7  (A and B) The flat and bent states of the ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals-based touchless sensing device. (C) I–V behaviors measured under different RH values. (D) The derived RH-dependent resistance changes. Inset gives the magnified curve of the low RH region from 0% to 50%. (E) The cycling behavior and recovery time under fast pulse moisture stimuli by rapidly turning on/off the fast-flowing humid gas (10% RH). (F) Time-resolved dynamic tests of the sensing devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 John Wiley. 

4.3 Combination of exotic electronic structure and two-dimensional flexibility for constructing flexible devices
Flexible devices represent a category of devices that have recently experienced strong market growth owing to their advanced characteristics and fascinating applications in diverse fields such as flexible displays, flexible solar cells, electronic paper and implantable medical devices.45 The flexibility enables the device to be bent, folded, or rolled while still operating; more importantly, reshaping them into other architectures still does not cause adverse effects on the device performances. Thus, benefiting from the microscopic compressibility and macroscopic extensibility, the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals can be fabricated into flexible devices with widespread applications in photovoltaics, photodetectors, flat panel displays and touch screens.

4.3.1 Flexible photodetector devices. 
The working principle for photodetectors is the well-known photoelectric effect, in which electrons are emitted from solids, liquids or gases when they absorb energy from light. Photodetectors have been widely utilized in many commercial applications, such as secure space-to-space communications, pollution monitoring, flame sensing, water sterilization and early missile plume detection.46 All the above applications require very sensitive devices with a high signal-to-noise ratio and a high response speed. In addition, flexible photodetectors have recently attracted enormous interest by reason that they can satisfy people's requirements for portability and ultrathinness in high-level integrated electronic systems. In this regard, two-dimensional non-layered CuInSe2 crystals with a thickness down to 2 nm were synthesized via a self-sacrificial template-directed strategy and then they were fabricated into a flexible photodetector on the transparent and flexible PET film (Fig. 8A).47 The as-obtained heterogeneously integrated photodetectors showed fast photoresponse, in which the photoresponse time of 1.7 s was much shorter than that of the previously reported CuInSe2 nanocrystal-based photodetectors. Also, under the illumination of a 455 nm laser, the flexible photodetector exhibited a conductance increase of approximately two orders of magnitude at an illumination intensity of 18 mW cm2 (Fig. 8B). Moreover, the dynamic response tests in Fig. 8C and D revealed the negligible variation of photoelectric properties, suggesting that the severe bending could not damage the responsiveness of the overall flexible device. As a result, thanks to the ultrathin thickness, high flexibility and huge specific surface area, the atomically-thin two-dimensional crystals hold great promise for constructing flexible and high-efficiency optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the ultrathin two-dimensional CuInSe2 crystals-based photoresponse device. (B) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (C) The on/off switching of the heterogeneous device under flat and bent states. (D) Magnified plots of the circled area in (C), inset: the digital photos of the flat and bent states of the photoresponse device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.3.2 Flexible supercapacitor device. 
The operating principle of supercapacitor is similar to that of a battery: pairs of electrodes are separated by an ionic conductive, yet electrically insulating, separator. Supercapacitors can bridge the gap between capacitors and rechargeable batteries.48 They allow for energy densities greater than those of conventional capacitors and power densities greater than those of batteries. The use of supercapacitors allows us to charge our electronic devices faster and for a longer period of time.
In view of fascinating applications of the supercapacitors, ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals were successfully obtained by a unique ammonia-assisted strategy and then fabricated into a flexible supercapacitor via a vacuum-filtration method.8 Note that the two-dimensional metallicity could be benefiting from the electron–electron correlations among the in-plane vanadium atoms, resulting in a metallic graphene-like material of VS2. Thanks to the flexibility and planar metallic nature of ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals, a flexible and highly c-oriented VS2 thin film device with a high conductivity and a high specific area was fabricated through vacuum filtration of the as-exfoliated products. The ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals-based thin film device, serving as the flexible in-plane supercapacitor electrode, exhibited a specific capacitance as high as 4760 μF cm−2 and an excellent cycling behavior even after 1000 charge–discharge cycles (Fig. 9A–C). Moreover, to further enhance the supercapacitor performances, a novel hybrid nanostructure composed of ultrathin two-dimensional crystals was designed and fabricated into a flexible planar supercapacitor. As an example, in the case of ultrathin two-dimensional MnO2–graphene nanohybrids, they not only brought about more electrochemically active surfaces for absorption–desorption of electrolyte ions, but also introduced additional interfaces at the hybrid interlayer areas to facilitate charge transport during the charging–discharging process (Fig. 9D). These advantages helped to achieve the impressive electrochemical performances with a high specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and excellent cycling performance with capacitance retention of 92% after 7000 charge–discharge cycles (Fig. 9E and F).32 Furthermore, in the addition to transition metal oxides and sulfides, transition metal hydroxides have also been successfully utilized to fabricate flexible all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitors. Taking the ultrathin two-dimensional β-Ni(OH)2–graphene nanohybrids with alternating layer-by-layer stacking structure as an example,31 they were fabricated into a flexible all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitor by a vacuum-filtrated reassembly and transferred onto gold-coated polyethylene-terephthalate sheets (Fig. 9G). The flexible supercapacitor exhibited a specific capacitance of 3304 μF cm−2 (i.e. 660.8 F cm−3) at a current density of 0.1 A m−2, which was nearly 1.7 times than that of graphene-based supercapacitor (394 F cm−3). Also, the device displayed a high specific capacitance of 660.8 F cm−3 with negligible degradation even after 2000 cycles, representing the best record for all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitors (Fig. 9H). It is notable that the all-solid-state nature along with the ultraflexibility and superior electrochemical performance makes our fabricated device an attractive candidate for power sources in portable electronics. Therefore, owing to the atomic thickness, high conductivity and flexibility, the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals are of great interest for applications in next-generation flexible electronics.
 Fig. 9  (A) Planar ion migration pathways for the ultrathin two-dimensional VS2-based in-plane supercapacitor; (B) galvanostatic cycling behavior and (C) cycle life. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Ultrathin two-dimensional δ-MnO2–graphene thin film planar supercapacitor, (E) comparison of specific capacitance values for the hybrids- and graphene-based supercapacitors and (F) capacitance retention (blue) and coulombic efficiency (red) of the planar supercapactior device over 7000 charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (G) Scheme of the ultraflexible all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitor and its advantages for electrochemical performance; (H) cycling stability of ultrathin β-Ni(OH)2–graphene all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 

5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we mainly addressed the fine structure characterization, electronic structure regulation, and energy device construction of the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals. We gave an overview of the synchrotron radiation XAFS technique to disclose the atomic structure variations in the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals, and we also surveyed the DFT calculations to investigate the electronic structure modulation in pristine and hydrogen-incorporated atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals as well as their hybrid with graphene. In addition, we comprehensively highlighted their structure–property relationship and first disclosed that the electronic structure of ultrathin two-dimensional crystals played a crucial role in affecting their physicochemical properties, while the electronic structure can be tailored by the atomic thickness, surface distortion and defect structure. More importantly, we highlighted their transparent and flexible device construction and outlined their promising applications in energy storage/conversion field including PEC water splitting, photodetectors, thermoelectric conversion, touchless positioning interfaces, supercapacitors and lithium ion batteies. In brief, our systematic works may only be the tip of the iceberg on the study of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals, while their other innovative properties are urgently waiting to be explored; also, our sustained research efforts in this field will enrich the development of two-dimensional inorganic solid chemistry, and also provides new principle and material systems for the design, assembly and applications of novel high-performance energy-saving thin film devices.
In spite of the considerable progress in structural characterizations and energy device construction for the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals, there is still large space for further improvement. As is well-known, the species of ultrathin inorganic two-dimensional crystals are mainly concentrated on the metal oxides and sulfides, and thus further efforts are needed to widen the range of their chemical compositions. In addition, more attention should be given to control the exfoliation of the layers and fabricate their hybrid structure with graphene, with the ultimate aim to manipulate the atomic/electronic structure and physicochemical properties of the ultrathin inorganic two-dimensional crystals. Also, there is an urgent need to develop more effective strategies for fabricating thin film devices of the ultrathin inorganic two-dimensional crystals and their hybrid structure with graphene, in which the ordered assembly mechanism of the thin film devices needs to be established in detail. More importantly, an in-depth insight into the quantitative or semi-quantitative relationship between structure/composition and performance of the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals is of high importance, which can provide a theoretical foundation to fabricate high-performance flexible and transparent energy-related devices. It is anticipated that further studies on the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals will lead to more exciting results and eventually provide a major boost for the commercialization of advanced energy devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2009CB939901), the National Nature Science Foundation (21331005, 11079004, 90922016, 21201157, 11321503), and the Chinese Academy of Science (XDB01020300).
References
R. F. Service, Science, 2009, 324, 875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, Z. H. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. H. Liu, J. Y. Piao, T. Yao, C. Z. Wu, S. L. Hu, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, Z. H. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. H. Liu, F. C. Lei, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300611 .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Z. Wu, L. L. Peng, C. W. Lin, S. L. Hu, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, L. L. Peng, C. Z. Wu, X. Sun, S. L. Hu, C. W. Lin, J. Dai, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neil, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriary, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. Mccomb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. Mcgovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Feerari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Teweldebrhan, V. Goyal and A. A. Balandin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. J. Zhang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, J. Y. Zhao, B. C. Pan, M. G. Kong, J. Chen and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, L. Liu, C. Xiao, X. D. Zhang, Q. H. Liu, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, Z. H. Sun, Y. Y. Li, Z. Y. Pan, H. Wei, Y. Xie, M. Nomura, Y. Niwa, W. S. Yan, Z. Y. Wu, Y. Jiang, Q. H. Liu and S. Q. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, X. D. Zhang, Z. H. Sun, S. J. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, Y. Xie, C. Z. Wu, X. Yuan, W. Q. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu, G. Q. Pan, F. C. Hu, L. H. Wu, Q. H. Liu and S. Q. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 226405 CrossRef .
Y. F. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Z. H. Sun, Q. H. Liu, Q. Liu, F. C. Lei, T. Yao, J. F. He, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Q. H. Liu, Z. H. Sun, C. Xiao, C. Z. Wu, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, Q. H. Liu, L. J. Meng, H. Wang, W. T. Bi, Y. H. Peng, T. Yao, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Wu, F. Feng and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5157 RSC .
S. S. Hong, W. Kundhikanjana, J. J. Cha, K. Lai, D. S. Kong, S. Meister, M. A. Kelly, Z. X. Shen and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Staley, J. Wu, P. Eklund, Y. Liu, L. J. Li and Z. Xu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 184505 CrossRef .

          D. C. Koningsberger and R. Prins, X-ray Absorption: Principles, Applications, Techniques of EXAFS, SEXAFS and XANES, Wiley, New York,  1988 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, T. Yao, X. G. Tan, Q. H. Liu, Z. Q. Wang, D. C. Shen, Z. H. Sun, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Small, 2012, 8, 3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, J. G. Xu, H. Wang, J. J. Zhang, H. B. Yan, B. C. Pan, J. F. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lin, X. J. Zhu, J. Feng, C. Z. Wu, S. L. Hu, J. Peng, Y. Q. Guo, L. L. Peng, Y. J. Zhao, J. L. Huang, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Angrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. Zhu, X. M. Qin, X. Sun, W. S. Yan, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1246 Search PubMed .
J. F. Xie, X. Sun, N. Zhang, K. Xu, M. Zhou and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Peng, X. Peng, B. R. Liu, C. Z. Wu, Y. Xie and G. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhu, L. F. Bai, Y. F. Sun, X. D. Zhang, Q. Y. Li, B. X. Cao, W. S. Yan and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5241 RSC .
M. L. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. J. Fan, R. An, Q. M. Cheng, J. F. Xie, M. Zhou, B. J. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mehta, Y. L. Zhang, C. Karthik, B. Singh, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-tasciuc and G. Ramanath, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohta, S. Kim, Y. Mune, T. Mizoguchi, K. Nomura, S. Ohta, Y. Nakanishi, I. Y. Kuhara, M. Hirano, H. Hosono and K. Koumoto, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Nature, 2006, 444, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Kan, W. Hu, C. Y. Xiao, R. F. Lu, K. M. Deng, J. L. Yang and H. B. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Chen, G. Z. Shen, H. Chen, Y. G. Ha, C. Wu, S. Sukcharoenchoke, Y. Fu, J. Liu, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Shen, J. Xu, X. F. Wang, H. T. Huang and D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. M. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, M. Vosguerichian and Z. N. Bao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1727 RSC .
K. W. Liu, M. Sakurai and M. Aono, Sensors, 2010, 10, 8604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Bi, M. Zhou, Z. Y. Ma, H. Y. Zhang, J. B. Yu and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9162 RSC .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Yongfu Sun
	Yongfu Sun received his BS degree in the Department of Chemistry at Anhui University (2006) and PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2011). After that he has worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory. In 2013, Dr Sun joined the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale as a research associate professor. His current interests include the theoretical computation, controllable synthesis, fine structure characterization, device assembly and energy-related applications of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.

Shan Gao
	Shan Gao received his BS degree in chemistry from West Anhui University, China, in 2011. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Yi Xie. His current interests include the synthesis and characterization of nanostructures, especially two-dimensional inorganic graphene analogues and their applications in energy storage and conversion.

Yi Xie
	Yi Xie received her BS degree from Xiamen University (1988) and a PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC, 1996). She is now a Principal Investigator of Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and a full professor of the Department of Chemistry, USTC. She was appointed as the Cheung Kong Scholar Professor of inorganic chemistry in 2000, also a recipient of many awards, including the Chinese National Nature Science Award (2001 and 2012), China Young Scientist Award (2002), China Young Female Scientist Award (2006) and IUPAC Distinguished Women in Chemistry/Chemical Engineering Award (2013). Her research interests are cutting-edge research at four major frontiers: solid state materials chemistry, nanotechnology, energy science and theoretical physics.

Key learning points
(1) Summary of the unprecedented functionalities and the difficulties in characterizing atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(2) Comprehensive overview of the fine structure characterization by X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(3) Systematic survey of the electronic structure modulation by density-functional calculations in the ultrathin two-dimensional crystals.
(4) A detailed highlight of the structure–property relationship in the atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals.
(5) Systematic summary of the transparent/flexible device construction of atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals as well as their wide applications in energy storage and conversion.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic intercalation–exfoliation strategy for exfoliating three-dimensional layered Bi2Se3 into [001]-oriented freestanding two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms. (B) Atomic force microscopy image and (C) the corresponding height profile for the freestanding two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals. (D) Unit cell structure of rhombohedral Bi2Se3. (E) Bi L3-edge and Se K-edge extended XAFS oscillation function k2χ(k) and (F) the corresponding Fourier transforms, the red and blue lines stand for two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals and bulk counterpart. (G) Structural model of two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals with a thickness of 5 atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) A general lamellar hybrid intermediate strategy for synthesizing clean and freestanding atomically-thick two-dimensional crystals with a non-layered structure. (B) Atomic force microscopy image with an average thickness of 0.91 nm. (C) Zn and Se K-edge extended XAFS oscillation function kχ(k) and (D) the corresponding Fourier transforms. (E) Structural model of atomically-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals viewed along the (110) plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The calculated DOS for 4-atom-thick two-dimensional ZnSe crystals and bulk ZnSe, inset yellow shadow denotes the increased densities of states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Crystal structure of ultrathin two-dimensional hydric TiS2 crystals and (C) their temperature-dependent electrical resistivity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Scheme for the formation of ultrathin two-dimensional LiVO–graphene crystals, and (E) the electron transfer process between the graphene layer and the VO layer, the DOS of the graphene pz orbital for graphene and electron-transfer mechanism within the Marcus–Gerischer theory in different conditions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Exfoliation of three-dimensional bulk materials into two-dimensional crystals with atomic thickness in order to fully optimize the thermoelectric parameters. Temperature-dependent (B) electrical conductivity, (C) thermal conductivity, (D) Seebeck coefficient and (E) figure of merit for the ultrathin two-dimensional Bi2Se3 crystals-based composite and bulk counterpart. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Side view of the unrelaxed (top) and relaxed (bottom) four-atomic-layer Co9Se8 slab structure. (B) Structural differences between the unrelaxed and relaxed slab models. (C) Calculated DOS of the relaxed Co9Se8 slab. The DOS above zero corresponds to the spin-up states, and the other corresponds to the spin-down states. (D) DOS of bulk Co9Se8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A and B) Advantages of using two-dimensional ZnSe crystals with a thickness of 4 atoms vs. bulk ZnSe deposited on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass as the photoelectrodes for solar water splitting (pa stands for n-propylamine). (C) Working mechanism of a PEC device for solar hydrogen production using atomically-thin two-dimensional ZnSe crystals as the photoelectrode. (D) Photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves under chopped 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (E) IPCE at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A and B) The flat and bent states of the ultrathin two-dimensional VS2 crystals-based touchless sensing device. (C) I–V behaviors measured under different RH values. (D) The derived RH-dependent resistance changes. Inset gives the magnified curve of the low RH region from 0% to 50%. (E) The cycling behavior and recovery time under fast pulse moisture stimuli by rapidly turning on/off the fast-flowing humid gas (10% RH). (F) Time-resolved dynamic tests of the sensing devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the ultrathin two-dimensional CuInSe2 crystals-based photoresponse device. (B) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (C) The on/off switching of the heterogeneous device under flat and bent states. (D) Magnified plots of the circled area in (C), inset: the digital photos of the flat and bent states of the photoresponse device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Planar ion migration pathways for the ultrathin two-dimensional VS2-based in-plane supercapacitor; (B) galvanostatic cycling behavior and (C) cycle life. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Ultrathin two-dimensional δ-MnO2–graphene thin film planar supercapacitor, (E) comparison of specific capacitance values for the hybrids- and graphene-based supercapacitors and (F) capacitance retention (blue) and coulombic efficiency (red) of the planar supercapactior device over 7000 charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (G) Scheme of the ultraflexible all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitor and its advantages for electrochemical performance; (H) cycling stability of ultrathin β-Ni(OH)2–graphene all-solid-state thin-film supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
