Surface tuning for oxide-based nanomaterials as efficient photocatalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60176E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60176E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9509-9549Surface tuning for oxide-based nanomaterials as efficient photocatalysts

        
          
            Liqiang 
            Jing
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guohui 
            Tian
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Honggang 
            Fu
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Material Chemistry, Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, School of Chemistry and Materials Science, Heilongjiang University, Harbin 150080, P.R. China. E-mail: fuhg@vip.sina.com
Received 
      31st May 2013
    First published on 19th September 2013AbstractDue to the increasingly polluted environment and the gradual depletion of fossil fuel reserves, the development of renewable technologies for environmental remediation and energy production is highly desirable. Over the past decades, oxide-based semiconductor photocatalysis has attracted much attention. On various frontiers for efficient photocatalysis, surface-tuning strategies for synthesis and modification of oxides on the nanometer scale have progressed at a fast pace. Hence, it is of significance to review recent advances in the development of surface tuning for oxide-based nanomaterials as activity-enhanced photocatalysts. In this review, special emphases, especially for recent advances in our group, are given to surface tuning of novel nanocrystallites for high thermal stability, hierarchical structure assembly, heterojunctional nanocomposites and high-energy-facet exposure, along with effective testing tools for photogenerated charge properties at the surfaces and/or interfaces. This is of great significance for fields related to energy and environment from scientific and engineering viewpoints.
Liqiang Jing
Liqiang Jing obtained his PhD degree in 2003 from Harbin Institute of Technology, China. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University as a faculty staff member, and became a full professor of Physical Chemistry in 2006. His research fields include photofunctional nanomaterials, semiconductor photocatalysis, and photogenerated charge properties. He has published more than 70 peer-reviewed papers with over 1600 citations.
Wei Zhou
Wei Zhou received his PhD degree in 2009 from Jilin University, China. Afterwards, he joined Prof. Honggang Fu's group at Heilongjiang University, and currently is an associate professor. His research interests include mesoporous materials, semiconductor oxide-based nanomaterials, and their application in photocatalysis.
Guohui Tian
Guohui Tian received his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry at Heilongjiang University, China, in 2008. Afterwards, he became a faculty staff member at Heilongjiang University. Currently, he is an associate Professor. His main interests are involved with photocatalytic materials for solar energy conversion and environmental purification.
Honggang Fu
Honggang Fu received his BSc in 1984 and MSc in 1987 from Jilin University, China. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University as an assistant professor. In 1999, he received his PhD degree from Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He became a full professor in 2000. Currently, he is also Cheung Kong Scholar Professor. His interests focus on oxide-based semiconductor nanomaterials for solar energy conversion and photocatalysis, and crystalline carbon-based nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage, including their design and synthesis, physical and chemistry properties. Up to now, he has published over 200 SCI papers as corresponding author with over 3000 citations.
1. Introduction
With industrialization and population growth, the environmental contamination caused by organic pollutants, along with the rapid increase in greenhouse gas emissions, is becoming an increasing problem around the world.1,2 In the past decades, conventional biological and physical treatment methods (adsorption, ultrafiltration, coagulation, etc.) have been the mainstream techniques to remove pollutants from water and the atmosphere.3,4 Nevertheless, the decontamination of many emerging anthropogenic organic pollutants requires novel techniques to chemically transform them into non-hazardous compounds. These techniques should be efficient enough to remove the organic pollutants rapidly.
In addition to the environmental issue, energy considerations have greatly attracted attention.5,6 There have been many projections on the future depletion of the fossil fuel reserves.7,8 Thus, the development of renewable technologies for environmental remediation and energy production is highly desired. Ideally, these desired technologies should be inexpensive and “green”, that is, the used chemical reagents, energy source and catalysts should be abundant, cheap, and environmentally friendly, and no secondary pollution should take place. Interestingly, semiconductor photocatalysis as an emerging technique, which considerably meets the requirements for the current issues on environment and energy, has been widely regarded as a great potential technique in the future.9,10 Naturally, it is of substantial importance to carry out work related to semiconductor photocatalysis. The importance of this field is exemplified by a simple search in the web of science database using the terms “photocatalysis”; more than 1000 publications per year can be found from 2003.
It is widely accepted that semiconductor photocatalysis has emerged as one of the most promising technologies because it represents an easy way to utilize the energy of solar light, abundantly available everywhere in the world.11,12 Potential applications of photocatalysis are found mainly in four aspects: (i) photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants,13,14 (ii) photocatalytic water splitting to produce H2 and O2,15–18 (iii) photocatalytic reduction of CO2,19–21 and (iv) photocatalytic synthesis for organic substances.22,23 From the point of view of semiconductor photochemistry, the role of photocatalysis is to initiate or accelerate specific reduction and oxidation reactions on the surfaces of irradiated semiconductors. Among the used heterogeneous semiconductors, such as TiO2,24,25 ZnO,26,27 SrTiO3,28,29 WO3,30,31 Fe2O3,32,33 GaN,34,35 Bi2S3,36,37 CdS38,39 and ZnS,40,41 the oxide-based ones are most ideal because of their stability, cheapness, high activity and environmental compatability.
In principle, a semiconductor can act as a photoactive material for charge-transfer processes due to its electronic structure, in which the highest occupied energy band, the valence band (VB), and the lowest-occupied energy band, the conduction band (CB), are separated by a band gap, i.e. a region of forbidden energies.42 When the energy of the incident photons matches or exceeds the bandgap of a semiconductor, photoexcitation of electron–hole pairs take place, consequently inducing reduction and oxidation reactions by photogenerated electrons and holes on the surfaces, respectively.43 Initially, the energy of the incident photons is stored in a semiconductor by photoexcitation, and it is then converted into chemical form by a series of electronic processes and surface–interface reactions.44 In general, there are three kinds of efficiencies mainly influencing the final photocatalytic performance of a semiconductor photocatalyst, including optical absorption, photogenerated charge separation, and carrier-induced surface reaction. Since surface properties would greatly affect the above three processes, it is clear that the properties of a semiconductor at a surface and/or interface are very important for efficient photocatalytic reactions. Hence, it is of great importance to carry out investigations on surface control for efficient photocatalytic processes by utilizing solar energy from the scientific and engineering points of view.
The nanoscale is an active recent area of study owing to unusual physicochemical properties. To improve the photocatalytic activity of a semiconductor, a widely employed strategy is to decrease its particle size so as to increase the surface area, even to the nanosize scale.45 However, for nanosized semiconductor particles, they are usually characterized by many surface defects, which is usually unfavorable for photogenerated charge separation.46 This might greatly limit the photoactivity improvement of a nano-sized semiconductor. Owing to this, several surface tuning strategies for oxide-based nanomaterials as efficient photocatalysts have been successfully developed. The keys of these strategies are to choose suitable functional molecules to initiate surface binding, or surface induction, or surface deposition, or surface modification agents to alter surface structures and surface properties of semiconductor crystallite units.
In recent years, there have been several published reviews on photocatalysis. For examples, Chen et al.47 reviewed the unique mechanistic characteristics, and the constitution of photodegradation systems and their performance are described, along with the involved radical reactions during the degradation. Kubacka et al.48 reviewed advanced nanoarchitectures for solar photocatalytic applications, and emphasis is on the influence that morphological variables, e.g. primary particle size but also particle shape as well as secondary particle size, surface area and porosity, all have on photocatalytic activity. Osterloh et al.43 reviewed inorganic nanostructures for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic water splitting, and focussed on transition metal oxides with special emphasis of Fe2O3. Tong et al.49 reviewed nano-photocatalytic materials, focusing on the scientific and technological possibilities offered by photocatalytic materials. As seen from the published reviews, nanoparticle surface-tuning strategies for efficient photocatalytic processes have not been reviewed up to now.
In this review, mainly based on our previous studies, we have attempted to review the recent advances on the nanoparticle surface-tuning strategies for high thermal stability, hierarchical structure assembly, heterojunctional nanocomposites, and high-energy-facet exposure of nanosized oxides as efficient photocatalysts for degrading organic pollutants and splitting water to produce H2, and on effective testing methods for photogenerated charge properties at the constructed surfaces and/or interfaces, as depicted in Fig. 1. One can clearly see from Fig. 1 that there are main features related to nano unit-surface tuning routes for efficient oxide-based photocatalysts in the review and their close relationships with current testing tools. As is widely accepted, it is beneficial to investigate photogenerated charge properties, aiming to reasonably guide how to design efficient photocatalysts. Hence, the review is organized into seven sections, first, the introduction, second to fifth for surface tuning strategies, the sixth for experimental methods for photogenerated charge properties, and finally the conclusion and outlook. Obviously, it is of great significance for fields related to energy and environment, and thus the review on surface tuning for oxide-based nanomaterials as efficient photocatalysts would appeal to wide communities with interests in chemistry, materials, environment, energy and physics.
 Fig. 1  Tree-like structural schematic of surface tunning routes for efficient oxide-based photocatalyst in the review. 
2. Surface binding for high thermal stability of TiO2
Among various photocatalysts, TiO2 is considered as the most promising and suitable material because of its superior photocatalytic activity, chemical stability, low cost and nontoxicity.50 Therefore, we take TiO2 for example in this section to review the surface tuning strategies for obtaining high thermal stability. The photocatalytic performance of TiO2 is primarily determined by its physicochemical properties, such as crystal structure, particle size, surface area, surface state and crystallinity.51,52 Proper control of these properties, especially for crystal structure and surface area, in the preparation of nanosized TiO2 represents some of the key issues in this area. It is widely accepted that the crystal phase has been found to be a critical parameter in determining the suitability for particular applications. At ambient pressures and temperatures, the rutile phase is the thermodynamically stable phase of TiO2, anatase and brookite are thermodynamically metastable, and can be easily transformed into the stable rutile phase when treated at high temperature. Compared with anatase and rutile, the brookite phase is the least studied in many aspects of its properties, mainly because of difficulties in preparing significant quantities of good quality material.53 Recently, the successful design of preparing high-purity brookite TiO2 has led to an increasing interest in the physicochemical properties and in possible applications of this TiO2 polymorph.54,55 In fact, in the catalytic area, cognition of the photocatalytic activity of brookite TiO2 is highly controversial. Some reports indicate that brookite is inactive toward degradation of dyes, but others conclude that brookite is more reactive than anatase and rutile in terms of unit specific surface area.56 These studies, to some extent, might cause confusion about the origin of the activity. However, anatase usually shows the highest photocatalytic activity among the three crystal phases of TiO2. Generally speaking, nano-sized TiO2 is characterized by large surface areas, small particle size and abundant surface defects. Large surface area and small particle size can provide large surface active sites for photocatalytic reaction, guaranteeing good accessibility and contact with organic pollutant molecules. As naturally expected, all of these properties are beneficial for photocatalysis.57 However, too many surface defects are unfavourable for photogenerated charge separation and then decrease the photocatalytic activity. Hence, excess surface defects on nano-sized oxide semiconductor surfaces must be considered in photocatalysis. It is critical to improve the crystallinity of anatase TiO2 for efficient photocatalysis by reducing surface defect sites as recombination centers for electron–hole pairs.58,59 Thermal treatment is an effective approach to enhance the crystallinity and tune surface defects at an appropriate content. However, high-temperature thermal treatment often gives rise to nanoparticle growth and agglomeration with severe surface area decrease and undesired phase transformation from anatase to rutile.60,61 As a result, photocatalytic activity is greatly decreased. Therefore, low thermal stability makes nanocrystallization insignificant, so it is a great challenge to obtain stable anatase TiO2 nanoparticles with high crystallinity and meanwhile retain large surface area and small nanoparticle size via a facile approach.62 Taking into consideration the important role of surface states, it is essential to develop synthetic approaches that allow for a systematic selection of the crystallinity, crystalline phase and nanoparticle size.
In addition to TiO2 nanoparticles, ordered mesoporous TiO2 has been widely used in potential application fields of catalysis, nanoreactors and gas sensors, due to large surface area and ordered pore networks.63,64 During the development of photocatalysis for mesoporous TiO2, crystallinity was found to be one of the most important factors, which is directly related to the calcination temperature. In general, high crystallinity requires high calcination temperature. High crystallinity leads to less surface defects, which is in favor of improving the photocatalytic performance.65,66 However, the thermal treatment of typical mesoporous TiO2, employed to transform the pore walls from amorphous to crystalline nature usually leads to undesirable grain growth and a total collapse of the ordered mesoporous network during the high-temperature calcination process, which greatly influences the photocatalytic activity.67 Therefore, the low thermal stability becomes a bottleneck for practical applications of mesoporous TiO2.
In order to improve the stability and control surface defects, in the past decades, many strategies have been attempted to improve the thermal stability of anatase TiO2,68–73 such as metal ion doping and surface binding. For this, solutions based on nanoparticle surface binding to enhance thermal stability so as to improve crystallinity and retain large surface area, and recent relative advancements, especially for our ideas, are discussed and reviewed. The current interests in TiO2 for advanced photocatalytic applications have prompted a number of studies to investigate the surface properties since photocatalytic reactions occur at the surfaces of nanoparticles.50 In the synthetic process of TiO2, surface chemistry has been proved to exert a significant influence on the phase stability of TiO2 nanoparticles according to a thermodynamic model based on surface free energies and surface tensions obtained from first principles calculations.74,75 Studies showed the phase transition exhibited a definite dependence on the ratio of O to H atoms in surface adsorbates but also (as a consequence of this dependence) the possibility existed for reversible, surface chemistry induced phase transitions in pre-grown nanoparticles.76,77 It was also found that anatase nanoparticles were stabilized by surface adsorbates containing a large fraction of hydrogen, whereas rutile nanoparticles were stabilized by surface adsorbed oxygen. Empirically, an exponential expression was found to relate the phase transition size with the fraction of hydrogen present on the surfaces.78,79 Hence, the anatase-to-rutile phase transition was affected by the surface chemistry. The stability of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles is expected to be improved by surface binding. Up to now, there are several substances used as binding agents, e.g., other oxide, non-metal and redox-inert anions.
2.1 Oxide binding
Up to now, semiconductor oxide introduction has been widely used as an effective method to stabilize anatase TiO2 and improve its photocatalytic activity. The main function of the other semiconductor oxide is to avoid the direct contacts among the preliminary TiO2 particles and then to suppress the growth of TiO2 particles. Jing et al. previously prepared La modified highly stable anatase TiO2, and it was demonstrated that La3+ did not enter into the crystal lattices of TiO2 but uniformly dispersed on the surfaces of TiO2 in the form of La2O3 nanoparticles with small size.80 The anatase TiO2 covered with highly dispersed La2O3 could retain its anatase phase both in bulk and in surface region even after high-temperature calcination. Afterwards, Zhang et al. also prepared La2O3-covered TiO2 and studied the effects of the covered La2O3 on the phase transformation of TiO2 from anatase to rutile by means of visible (UV) Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 2).81 The results indicated that the crystalline phase in the surface region was usually different from that in the bulk during the phase transformation of TiO2, and anatase phase in the surface region could remain at relatively higher temperatures than in the bulk. This study was consistent with the phase stability mechanism.82–84
 Fig. 2  Proposed scheme for the phase transformation of TiO2 with increasing calcination temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. 
Recently, our group found the surface modification with mesoporous SiO2 greatly enhances the thermal stability of the nanocrystalline anatase TiO2, even still with a main anatase phase after calcination at 900 °C.85 It is favorable for TiO2 to increase its anatase crystallinity by the high-temperature post-treatment with nearly-unchanged nanoparticle size. As a result, mesoporous SiO2-modified TiO2 treated at high temperature exhibits high photocatalytic activity for degrading pollutants. This is attributed to its improved photogenerated charge separation based on the steady-state surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SS-SPS) responses. Fig. 3A shows the SPS responses of mesoporous SiO2-modified TiO285 treated at different temperatures. For all the TiO2 samples, an obvious SPS response, with a SPS peak at about 345 nm, is found at the wavelength range from 300 to 375 nm, attributed to the electronic transitions from the valence band to conduction band (O2p → Ti3d) on the basis of its band structure. One can note that the SPS response gradually becomes strong with increasing the thermal treatment temperature, mainly attributable to the increase in the anatase crystallinity. The high crystallinity would lead to the decrease in the defect amounts, which is favorable for charge separation and transportation. The strong SPS response indicates high charge separation so as to greatly increase the photocatalytic activity. Similar trends could also be observed for phosphate-modified TiO2 systems (Fig. 3B) and are discussed in the following part. This study provides a novel route for fabricating high performance nanosized TiO2-based photocatalysts, and the increased thermal stability of the nanocrystalline anatase with high activity will expand the application areas of TiO2, such as coating materials of ceramic tiles with self-cleaning function. Hence, it is demonstrated that surface binding of other semiconductor oxide is an effective approach to enhance the thermal stability of TiO2.
 Fig. 3  SPS responses of mesoporous SiO2-modified (A) and phosphate-modified (B) TiO2 treated at different temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85 and 94. 
2.2 Carbon binding
In comparison with semiconductor oxide binding, carbon binding is another efficient approach to increase the thermal stability of TiO2 and then improve the charge separation in photocatalysis.86,87 The presence of a thin carbon layer on the surfaces of TiO2 nanoparticles acts as a barrier to avoid their direct contact, inhibiting crystal growth and anatase-to-rutile phase transformation. This leads to a higher thermal stability compared to the unbound TiO2. Moreover, the electronic contacts between semiconductor and carbon layer could contribute to an effective separation of electron–hole pairs, minimizing the energy-dissipating electron–hole recombination so as to be favourable for high photocatalytic activity under UV irradiation. Zhao et al. prepared a series of ultra-stable ordered mesoporous TiO2 samples with highly anatase crystalline frameworks.88,89 In the study, they prepared highly ordered mesoporous carbon–TiO2 nanocomposites with crystalline glass frameworks via organic–inorganic–amphiphilic co-assembly followed by in situ crystallization technology.88 The presence of an amorphous carbon phase acted as a glue binding on the surface of TiO2 nanocrystals and could improve the thermal stability of the mesostructure up to 700 °C (Fig. 4). The carbon–TiO2 nanocomposites showed good photocatalytic activity for the photodegradation of Rhodamine B in an aqueous suspension, which may be attributed to the highly crystallized frameworks and high adsorptive capacity arising from the high surface area (up to 465 m2 g−1) and large uniform pore size (∼4.1 nm). In another study, the surfactant templates (triblock copolymers) were first carbonized via heating to 350 °C in N2 to obtain rigid carbon on the surfaces of mesochannels.89 Subsequently, the tubular carbon formed could support and stabilize the TiO2 frameworks of the mesostructure during the high-temperature crystallization. The mesoporous TiO2 materials after calcination at a high temperature (550 and 650 °C in N2 and then at 450 °C in air to burn out the carbon) showed highly ordered 2D hexagonal mesostructure, and their frameworks were fully crystalline by the connection of anatase nanocrystals. As expected, the developed strategy is feasible and generally applicable to prepare other thermally stable and ordered mesoporous metal oxides with highly crystalline frameworks.
 Fig. 4  (A–C) TEM and (D and E) HRTEM images of mesoporous carbon–titania nanocomposites (30C-70TiO2-450 and 30C-70TiO2-600) calcined at 450 (A and B) and 600 °C (C–E), viewed from the [110] (A, C and D) and [001] (B and E) directions. Insets are the SAED patterns and EDX analysis taken at the same area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. 
2.3 Inorganic acid anion binding
Although semiconductor surface binding can significantly improve the stability of anatase TiO2, there also have challenges to obtain uniformly dispersed binding layers on the surfaces of TiO2 with high dispersibility. Thus, the major drawback of the method is that the secondary impurity phase formation will affect phase purity, reduce the photocatalytic activity and limit the scope of application of TiO2. In the quest to optimize the method of surface binding, several research paths have been pursued. One methodology, central to current research, considers the acquisition of pure anatase phase TiO2 with high stability. This should facilitate the extension of TiO2 application scope. In this case, surface binding of TiO2 with inorganic non-metal anions has attracted much attention due to the inexistence of an impurity phase and the ability to improve photocatalytic performance. The key is to select appropriate surface binding agents with strong ability to link to the nanoparticle surfaces and enhance the thermal stability, such as F−, [PO4]3− and [SO4]2− ions.90–93 Phosphate anions are known to strongly adsorb onto the surfaces of TiO2 by substituting surface hydroxyl groups, greatly influencing the interfacial and surface chemistry of TiO2. The influence mechanism of phosphate binding on the phase transformation was also studied by a few groups.90–92 It is generally thought that the phosphorus is incorporated into the framework of TiO2 surface by forming Ti–O–P bonds. The presence of an amorphous titanium phosphate wall between the TiO2 crystalline grains acts as a mass diffusion barrier so as to inhibit TiO2 crystal growth and phase transformation during calcination. Similar results are also obtained for the sulfate modification. In addition, the negative electrostatic field formed in the surface layers of TiO2 after modification with the inorganic acids would be favourable for the separation of photogenerated charges, which can be proved from the SPS characterization (Fig. 3B).94
2.4 Amine and ammonia surface binding
Similar to the surface binding of TiO2 with inorganic acid anions, an alternative route via post-treatment of uncalcined initial TiO2 nanoparticles with organic amines or inorganic ammonia was developed. Notably, it exhibits several unique advantages in fabricating highly stable anatase TiO2, to retain the pure phase, morphology and structure. Recently, organic amine binding has been adopted by our group as an effective surface binding agent to improve the thermal stability of TiO2 with bicrystalline (anatase and brookite) framework.95 In that work, the primary bicrystalline (anatase and brookite) TiO2 was first prepared from the hydrothermal process. Then the surfaces of the synthesized primary TiO2 nanoparticles were induced by ethylenediamine (EN) solution in the refluxing process since is a strong interaction between EN and the surface of TiO2 nanocrystals. Thus, the obtained TiO2 nanoparticles showed high dispersion and very low agglomeration, so that it would effectively inhibit intimate contacts of the resulting nanocrystals. As a result, the thermal stability was obviously enhanced, and the metastable two-phase (anatase and brookite) compositions were both well retained without the existence of the rutile phase after thermal treatment at a temperature as high as 800 °C, simultaneously retaining small particle size and large surface area. Therefore, it can be found that organic amine binding treatment can also inhibit the phase transition from brookite to rutile. Using this method, our group also prepared hierarchical anatase TiO2 porous nanopillars with enhanced stability, and highly stable N-doped TiO2 nanoparticles with significant visible light photocatalytic activity.72,96 As expected, similar effects of inorganic ammonia are also found by our and other group's studies.72,97,98
Following this breakthrough, extensive efforts were made in the preparation, modification and application of ordered mesoporous TiO2 with high stability. Generally speaking, for mesostructured TiO2, after removal of the template by thermal decomposition or extraction, the walls of these mesostructured phases still remained pure amorphous TiO2 or amorphous TiO2 with a small amount of crystalline anatase nanobuilding blocks. Hence, a further thermal treatment can transform the walls from amorphous TiO2 to the more desirable anatase phase, which usually results in a total collapse of the pore system. In our study, EN species was used to protect the mesophase structure of TiO2 primary particles under refluxing conditions.99 This was because EN, a strong alkali with two primary amine groups, which when protonated has two positive charges, can readily bind to surfaces of mesoporous TiO2 primary particles with negative charges in the reflux process, leading to the formation of well-defined and stable mesostructured hybrids (Fig. 5). Since the integrated mesoporous structure could be maintained after being calcined at high temperature, an ordered mesoporous anatase TiO2 with remarkably high thermal stability and crystallinity (Fig. 6) was ultimately formed. The surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPS) results confirmed that the sample after calcination at 700 °C (M700) exhibits the strongest photovoltage intensity, indicating the highest separated efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the longest excitation, and thus favoring improvement of the photocatalytic activity. This fact is consistent well with M700 possessing the best photocatalytic performance. The breakthrough of synthetic methodologies for TiO2-based photocatalysts with high thermal stability provided opportunities to tune their photocatalytic, chemical and other specific properties. In these up-to-date cases, highly stable TiO2 with high crystallinity, large surface area and small particle size have already shown exciting promise for polluted water or gas treatment as ceramic membrane substrates or catalysts.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations for the fabrication of mesoporous anatase TiO2 with remarkably high thermal stability and improved crystallinity. EISA: evaporation-induced self-assembly; EN: ethylenediamine. (I) Liquid crystal mesophase network; (II) stable mesophase framework of mesoporous TiO2 primary particles for encircling with EN species; (III) magnification of EN species bound on the mesophase structure; (IV) ordered mesoporous TiO2 with high thermal stability and crystallinity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. 
 Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM images of mesoporous anatase TiO2 at different calcination temperatures. (a) M350; (b) M500; (c and e) M700; (d and f) M800. The inset of (c) and (d) are selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for M700 and M800, respectively (anatase: d101 = 0.35 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. 
3. Surface induction for hierarchical structure assembly
The relationship between structure and property is one of the central issues in materials chemistry. In recent years, hierarchical structures have drawn great attention for their superior photocatalytic performance in comparison with conventional nanocrystallites due to the synergetic effects of different dimensional levels, high surface-to-volume ratios and permeability.100 At present, hierarchical microstructures of inorganic materials with well-defined physical properties are generally synthesized by the bottom-up and top-down approaches.101 In particular, solution-based bottom-up routes for the preparation of hierarchical nanostructures are considered promising compared to the physical and chemical vapor deposition routes due to gentle synthesis conditions, ease of operation, and the possibility of large-scale production. For the bottom-up routes, nano-assembly represents an important aspect of nanotechnology and provides a feasible and low-cost approach for the fabrication of hierarchical nanostructures using nanocrystalline building blocks.102 The hierarchical assembly of solution-based nanobuilding blocks into various dimensional nanostructures with excellent properties has been reported in recent years.103
For the solution-based bottom-up route, the “Ostwald ripening process” is usually used to explain how a crystal is formed. The anisotropic growth of particles could also be favored in various systems. These systems are characterized by significant solubility of the crystals in the liquid medium, which allows for surface induction and diffusion, and generally initially results in spherical particles. Meanwhile, the so-called “oriented attachment” growth route is often used in assembling solution-based nanobuilding blocks into various dimensional nanostructures. In this process, secondary mono-crystalline particles can be obtained through attachments of primary particles in an irreversible and highly oriented fashion.104 These processes seem very promising as routes for the preparation of complex-shaped nanostructures using primary nanocrystallites themselves as building units, the bigger particles are grown from small primary building units through the Ostwald ripening process or oriented attachment mechanism. The driving force for these spontaneous processes is the substantial reduction in the surface free energy from the thermodynamic viewpoint. In these spontaneous processes, surface induction plays an important role, and can induce the formation of specific structures and morphologies.
For the hierarchical nanostructures, control of the porosity, and/or the pore size, distribution, shape, interconnectivity and organization, are necessary to achieve the rational design for photocatalytic application. Among the solution-based bottom-up routes, hydrothermal and solvothermal methods have received a large amount of interest in regard to creating hierarchical structures because of the control over the particle size, shape, crystal structure and other parameters.101,105 In the reaction process, the initial nuclei are often used as building units under suitable solution conditions such as alkali solution system. In this condition, the surface of the building units is first modified in the solution; subsequent self-assembly, or “growth-then-assembly” process could then induce the formation of hierarchical micro-/nanostructures.
In this part, along with TiO2 and ZnO, being probably the two most broadly studied metal oxides, other oxides such as bismuth oxyhalides BiOX (X = F, Cl, Br and I) and Bi2W(Mo)O6 will be reviewed with respect to their lower periodicity–irregular systems and integration of these into higher organized hierarchical architectures via surface induction. Meanwhile we also discuss the energetic aspects of attempts to enhance the photocatalytic activity by engineering the interactions between building blocks or by designing the configuration of assemblies of building blocks.
3.1 TiO2
In the past few years, TiO2, as one of the most widely studied nanomaterials, has attracted great attention for potential applications in diverse areas such as catalysis, photocatalysis and water treatment. Although TiO2 nanopowders can be readily prepared, the hierarchically porous architecture of TiO2 is an important feature since the combination of high surface area with light scattering and highly efficient medium diffusion of the micro-/nanostructures offer distinct advantages. During the synthetic process of TiO2 hierarchical structures, the properties (such as morphology and structure) of the Ti sources are very important. In the past couple of years, zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) Ti sources have been widely used as titanium sources to fabricate TiO2 hierarchical structures. An important step towards the integration of low-dimensional nanostructures into high organized hierarchical structures is the ability to grow or arrange these nanostructures in a defined manner. In the reaction process, the surface/interface induction of Ti sources by the reaction solution plays an important role, greatly influencing the crystal growth and assembly of the formed nanoobjects. In the reaction system, some special materials, such as H2O2,106,107 or alkali solutions.108 were adopted to induce the growth and assembly of low-dimensional nanostructures to form hierarchical TiO2 with different morphologies. Moreover, reaction temperature, reaction time and other reaction conditions can be controlled to modify the growth processes and to tune the parameters (such as control of the porosity, shape, interconnectivity, etc.), which are the influencing factors of photocatalysts for the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants.
Recently, Chen et al. constructed three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical spheres from spontaneous assembly of large ultrathin anatase TiO2 nanosheets with nearly 100% exposed (001) facets (Fig. 7).109 In their solvothermal synthetic system, the presence of diethylenetriamine (DETA) could effectively stabilize the high-energy (001) surfaces and induce the 2D lateral growth of such facets, and finally assembly into different hierarchical architectures. Notably, the surface induction assembly strategy for 1D nanostructures greatly improves their electrochemical and photocatalytic performance. Since 1D TiO2 nanostructures can provide enhanced charge transfer facilitated by retarding the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, 3D hierarchical structured TiO2 nanostructures comprised of 1D TiO2 units such as nanorods (nanowires) have been widely studied and showed enhanced photocatalytic performance.110 Zhao et al. synthesized pure brookite TiO2 nanoflowers consisting of single crystalline nanorods using a facile one-step hydrothermal process following the Ostwald ripening rule.111 In this system, the surface induction of NH3 and NaCl with appropriate conditions could assemble single crystalline nanorods into brookite TiO2 nanoflowers, meanwhile inhibiting the appearance of anatase.
 Fig. 7  (A and B) FESEM images and (C and D) TEM images of as-prepared anatase TiO2 NSHSs. (E) EDX analysis of the anatase TiO2 NSHSs. The Pt signal arises from the Pt coating during sample preparation. (F) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of the as-prepared anatase TiO2 NSHSs. The inset shows the pore size distributions calculated using the BJH method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. 
In recent years, interfaces between the surfaces of solid and liquid or gas possess many interesting properties and find applications in different fields, and can be used for the synthesis of nanostructured materials. In liquid solution, the nanoparticles are highly mobile, and so can easily reach equilibrium on self-assembly at the interface by surface induction control of interfaces.111–114 The liquid–liquid (aqueous–organic) soft interface between two immiscible liquids is being proven to offer an important path to assemble nanoparticles. Recently, Xu et al. demonstrated that the growth and assembly of TiO2 nanorods into hierarchical spheres could be realized at the soft interface between water and chloroform in one-pot.100 In this system, the preformed TiO2 nanoparticles would enter the emulsions and/or stay at the interfacial surfaces of the emulsions. These TiO2 nanoparticles at the interfacial region of the emulsions could stabilize these emulsions and subsequently serve as the sites for the growth of TiO2 nanorods in the emulsions or on the interface of the emulsions. With the growth of nanorods, the nanorods were self-assembled into hierarchical architectures with aligned orientation in order to minimize surface energy.
Ostwald ripening is thought as another effective strategy to prepare hierarchical TiO2 such as hierarchical flowers and hollow nanospheres via hydrothermal solvothermal routes. In this process, large crystallites are essentially immobile while the smaller ones undergo mass relocation through dissolving and regrowing by surface induction, which creates the interior space within the original aggregates. This solid–solution–solid process has been recently applied to fabricate a range of different hollow oxide nanostructures.115,116 Recently, Tian et al. prepared TiO2 hierarchical flowers (Fig. 8) and TiO2 thorny tubes in the solvothermal system containing ethanol and glycerol using different titanium sources.117,118 It was found that the morphology of the titanium source was critical to the final morphology. Moreover, the reaction of glycerol with precursor occurred from the surface to the interior of the precursor via Ostwald ripening, and the surface morphology, distribution, shape and interconnectivity of the precursors can be easily controlled by the reaction conditions such as reaction temperature and reaction time. The obtained hierarchical TiO2 samples showed enhanced photocatalytic activity compared with P25. It is expected that the general strategy and design principles described here will open new avenues in developing novel materials with enhanced properties for photocatalytic applications. Compared with hierarchical solid spheres, the hierarchical oxide materials with hollow structure possess generally interstitial spaces available among these crystallites, which can provide communicable channels for chemicals travelling between the inner space of the hierarchical semiconductor material and the outer space of solution.119–121 Meanwhile, the hollow structure of this type potentially can be used as nanoreactors for selective chemical reactions. Bian et al. have carried out much work to synthesize hierarchical TiO2 spheres with tunable hollow and yolk–shell structure in the solvothermal alcoholysis of TiOSO4 in mixtures of ethanol and glycerol.122,123 The as-created sphere-in-sphere structure endowed the spheres with greatly enhanced photocatalytic activity, which was attributed to multiple reflections of UV light within the sphere interior voids.
 Fig. 8  SEM images at different magnifications of the precursor obtained from 24 h solvothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. 
Recently, hierarchical porous (meso–macroporous) TiO2 film materials have attracted great attention because of their different nanometer-sized pores, large surface areas, and their ability to be easily fixed, recycled and reused.124,125 In the synthesis of hierarchical mesoporous–macroporous inorganic oxide-based materials, self-assembled molecular aggregates or supramolecular assemblies are generally employed as the structure-directing agents of mesostructures. Meanwhile, some large-sized substances, such as colloidal crystals, polymer foams, bio-celluloses, emulsions, vesicles, inorganic salt and ice crystals, are added in the synthesis to direct the creation of macroporous structures. Kimura et al. prepared TiO2 hierarchical porous films using Pluronic F127 as surfactant template and using the polymer particle templating route to generate macropores because of the better control in terms of size and amount of macropores.126,127 Careful control of the phase separation in the synthesis gel and self-generation process can also be applied to fabricate the hierarchical porous structures. In these methods, the surface induction of anchoring groups plays an important role in the synthetic process.128
3.2 ZnO
Zinc oxide (ZnO), as one of the most important semiconductor photocatalysts, has attracted considerable interests because of its high photosensitivity.129 Compared to mono-morphological structures, ZnO with complex hierarchical structures, such as dandelion-like, flower-like and sea-urchin shaped, have been demonstrated to show enhanced photocatalytic performance.130–132 Among the various ZnO synthesis approaches, solution-phase methods are very attractive and popular because they can be performed with good productivity without using any rigorous conditions or sophisticated instrumentation. Among these, hydrothermal–solvothermal processes have been successfully employed to produce ZnO hierarchical structures by assembling ZnO nanoscaled building blocks, such as nanoplates, nanorods and nanoparticles.133–135 The reactions involved in these techniques are the hydrolysis of zinc precursors under alkaline condition to form ZnO. In these reaction processes, the growth of differently shaped ZnO nanostructures largely depends on the relative stability of the crystal faces of the growing nanostructures. As usual, the externally added surfactants or capping agents can stabilize particular crystal facets by surface induction so as to alter the growth rates in different crystal planes, resulting in the formation of anisotropic ZnO nanostructures.136–138 In the study of Zhao et al., precursor nanoslices, produced during hydrothermal route, served as the nucleation site of the nanobranches, and the subsequent surface induction led to each nanobranch growing along its [0001] direction. To reduce the interfacial strain, the nanobranch plane was nearly parallel to the trunk plane, and formed unique nanotree ZnO arrays with high photocatalytic activity.139 An ionothermal process was also employed to synthesize hierarchical structures of ZnO with diverse morphologies.140 In general, metal-containing ionic liquids acted both as solvents and as metal precursors in the ionothermal process. The highly homogeneous growth environment can allow facile control and provide unique methodologies to control growth conditions. The formed ZnO nuclei can be prevented to aggregate by in situ capping reagents during the growth process. In the study of Zhu et al.140 the properties of added alkylamine, such as the chain length, could affect the final morphology of ZnO. Long chain alkylamines, such as octylamine, could act as surfactants to stabilize ZnO nanoparticles via the minimization of the surface energy and blockage of the ion diffusion. This unique interfacial interaction resulted in formation of monodispersed nanoparticles with hierarchical structures.
For the synthesis of hierarchical structures, a facile and low-temperature method without using toxic reagent sources and organic additives as structure directing agents to design ZnO hierarchical structures is always desirable and practical.141,142 In Sun's study, both OH− ions and sufficient Zn2+ ions supplied by zinc foil could stabilize the surface charge and the structure of the specific crystalline plane of ZnO, which could modify the growth kinetics of ZnO significantly.143 Consequently, 2D nanosheets with {100} planes as the surface were obtained. When the concentration of KOH increased, the surface of initial large scale 2D sheets was etched, resulting in the decrease in the dimensions of the sheet surface. The relatively small nanosheets assembled into a multilayer and network structure because of the decrease of the system energy, resulting in the formation of hierarchical ZnO sheet flowers. Recently, Li et al. prepared highly photocatalytically active ZnO hierarchical microstructures with uniform flower-like morphology (Fig. 9) via a template- and surfactant-free low-temperature (80 °C) aqueous solution route based on a fast nucleation-oriented and interlaced growth process.144 Our group recently synthesized ZnO particles with various morphologies through a facile solution-based route.145 The obtained complex Zn–ethylene glycol (EG)–CH3COO− precursors could transform into ZnO in water with no need of additional alkali as it was reactive towards water. In the route, surface modification can tune the balance of nucleation and growth process of the precursor, and so easily control the microstructure of ZnO crystals.
 Fig. 9  FESEM images and XRD pattern of the ZnO product prepared by the solution reaction of 2.0 mmol of ZnCl2 and 10.0 mmol of NaOH at 80 °C for 24 h: (a) panoramic FESEM image; (b and c) magnified FESEM images; (d) XRD pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. 
Recently, Shi et al. prepared ZnO hierarchical microstructures at room temperature using ultrarapid sonochemistry.146 In the nonequilibrium synthesis system, thicker, porous and coarse crystallized ZnO sheets were first constructed via oriented attachment of small-sized nanocrystals. After reconstruction, ultrathin, integrated and monocrystalline nanosheets were obtained. The formation was much more sophisticated because repeated and parallel heterogeneous oriented attachments with reconstructions dominated the final morphologies of the hierarchical microstructures (Fig. 10). The assembling densities and orientations of the nanosheets on the hierarchical microstructures also varied significantly; the ionic concentration was very important in shaping and aligning these nanosheets on hierarchical microstructures, including their integrity (or porosity), spatial orientation, and assembling density.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the formation for ZnO nanosheets and hierarchical structure via oriented attachment of small-sized nanocrystals and reconstruction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. 
3.3 BiOX (Cl, Br, I)
Recently, bismuth oxyhalides BiOX (X = F, Cl, Br and I) have received wide attention due to their high photocatalytic activity. Until now, several methods have been reported for the preparation of BiOX micro/nanostructures, such as a hydrothermal (solvothermal) process at high temperature.147,148 Although the detailed mechanism of the assembled BiOX hierarchical structure in the solution reaction system is unclear, it is generally accepted that the formation of the hierarchical structure is a combination of Ostwald ripening and self-assembly process. At first, numerous tiny crystalline nuclei appeared in the presence of water or organic solvent (such as polyols) solution at a relatively high temperature and auto-generated vapor pressure. The fresh tiny nuclei grew up and aggregated to minimize their surface area through Ostwald ripening. As is known, bismuth oxyhalides (BiOX, X = F, Cl, Br and I) possess a structure of alternate [Bi2O2]2+ sheets and X slabs.149,150 Then, with proceeding growth, these crystalline nuclei easily grew into 2D nanosheets based on their inner crystallographic orientation. Finally, these individual building blocks could further change into hierarchical nanostructures through oriented-attachment and self-assembly.
In order to synthesize desired BiOX hierarchical structures, some structure directing agents are usually introduced in the reaction system and EG is often applied to prepare the hierarchical bismuth oxyhalides. In the synthetic route, EG could coordinate with metal ions to form alkoxides. The formation of alkoxides sharply decreased the free Bi3+ concentration in the solution, resulting in a relatively slow formation rate of BiOX. Compared to the fast nucleation and aggregation growth in aqueous solution, the nanocrystals aggregated in EG solution are slower reacting due to fewer surface hydroxyls and greater viscosity caused by the EG surface induction, thus allowing the nanocrystals to rotate adequately to find the lowest energy configuration interface and form perfectly oriented assemblies. For example, Zhang et al. prepared hierarchical BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) microspheres with high photocatalytic activity using EG as solvent.149,151,152 Recently, it has been shown that ionic liquids act not only as solvents and templates but also as source materials. Ionic liquids can induce the BiOX nuclei produced on the surfaces of ionic liquid micelles to further aggregate and grow, and then self-assemble into hierarchical structures.153 Xia et al. prepared BiOI hierarchical hollow microspheres through an EG assisted solvothermal process in the presence of ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide ([Bmim]I).153 The enhanced photocatalytic activities of BiOI hollow microspheres could be ascribed to its energy band structure, high BET surface area, high surface-to-volume ratio, and light absorbance. Wang et al. presented the synthesis of BiOI hierarchical nanoflakes with enhanced photocatalytic activity by in situ modification of an ionic liquid [Bmim]I (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide) in water.154 In this system, the ionic liquid [Bmim]+ cations could be adsorbed on the (001) plane of BiOI via the coulomb coupling force with iodine to effectively inhibit crystallite growth in the [001] direction and induce the formation of BiOI hierarchical nanoflakes.
In addition to the examples above, the presence of organic functional molecules can also induce the anisotropic growth of the BiOX nuclei and promote the formation of hierarchical architectures. Peng et al. reported the controlled synthesis of BiOCl hierarchical self-assemblies under facile polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP)-mediated hydrothermal conditions and demonstrated their high photocatalytic properties.155 In this system, PVP could act as a potential crystal face inhibitor to encourage the formation of oriented nucleation, thereby leading to the construction of anisotropic growth of nanoplates. Moreover, the PVP stabilizer adsorbed onto the surfaces of the BiOCl nanoparticles could cause steric hindrance and induce the formation of hierarchical architectures from individual nanoplates as PVP has multiple coordinating sites. Recently, alloyed compounds containing more than one type of halogen, such as BiOClxBr1−x and BiOBrxI1x, were noticed to be even more effective than the corresponding pure forms.156–158 The structure of these oxyhalides comprises a layer of [Bi2O2]2+ slabs interleaved by double slabs of halogen atoms. The unique catalytic properties of these materials were attributed to the high dipole moment within most of the BiOX crystals, the indirect band gaps, high redox potential of the holes, low electron–hole recombination rates, and the easy formation of O vacancies.
3.4 Bi2W(Mo)O6
Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6, bismuth-based ternary metal oxide photocatalysts, are the simplest members of the Aurivillius oxide family, usually exhibiting excellent photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation.159,160 Hence, many efforts have been made to synthesize nanosized Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 to improve their photocatalytic activity.161–163 It has been reported that fabrication of Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 under hydrothermal conditions is a suitable method for promoting anisotropic crystal growth and for producing rectangular platelets.164 Crystals of Bi2WO6 are composed of accumulated layers of corner-sharing WO6 octahedral (WO4)2− sheets and bismuth oxide (Bi2O2)2+ sheets.163,164 In the normal hydrothermal process, the use of an excess amount of a tungstate precursor and acidic conditions are necessary.165 In order to well control the growth and to assemble the formed nanoplates or nanoparticles into hierarchical architectures, some additional materials were often used by some groups as surface structure directing agents to induce the formed building units to orient growth and form hierarchical architectures. In recent studies, triblock Pluronic P123, PVP and EG were usually employed.163–166 To reduce the synthesis time, facile microwave-assisted hydrothermal routes were explored to prepare hierarchical Bi2WO6 since microwave heating could supply an economical and energy-efficient way to achieve rapid heating, faster kinetics, homogeneity, higher yield, and better reproducibility.167,168
Because hierarchical hollow spheres possess large surface area, porous structure and exhibit an excellent photocatalytic activity, some methods have been used to prepare Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 hierarchical hollow structures.169 A template method, especially for the soft template synthesis, was an effective route to prepare hollow structures. Surface structure directing agents were generally used to stabilize and induce the formed building blocks to orient aggregation/attachment. Wu et al. prepared Bi2WO6 hollow nanospheres using a sacrificial templates approach by converting the reaction medium from aqueous solution to a mixed solvent of water and ethanol.170 The introduction of surface induction capping agents in reaction system can also be favourable to prepare Bi2WO6 hierarchical hollow spheres without using templates.171 Wu et al. prepared bismuth tungstate hierarchical nest-like structures built by higher ordered nanoplate alignment by a facile and economical method in the presence of PVP.165 The crystal anisotropy and the face-inhibitor function of PVP played important roles in the formation of nest-like structures. The free polymer molecules preferentially absorbed on the primary nanoplates and functioned as potential crystal face inhibitors in the system, which formed polymer interlayers on the nanoplates and benefited the formation of oriented nucleation, further inducing the construction of hierarchical nestlike structures built of well-ordered and oriented nanoflakes (Fig. 11). Recently, our group prepared hierarchical flower-like Bi2MoO6 hollow spheres with high visible-light photocatalytic performance.172 In this reaction system, EG acted as a coordination agent to induce these aggregated nanoparticles on the surfaces of microspheres as seeds to grow into 2D plate-like structures for highly intrinsic anisotropic properties of Bi2MoO6 (Fig. 12), and then the internal part of the solid microsphere gradually dissolved and recrystallized. Finally, hierarchical flower-like Bi2MoO6 hollow spheres were formed because of mass diffusion and Ostwald ripening. The obtained Bi2MoO6 hierarchical hollow spheres displayed superior photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation compared with other morphological products.
 Fig. 11  Representative SEM and TEM images of Bi2WO6 hierarchical nest-like structures: (a) low magnification SEM, (b and c) high magnification SEM, (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM. Inset is the corresponding ED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. 
 Fig. 12  SEM (a and b) images of the Bi2MoO6 sample obtained from 20 h solvothermal reaction; SEM (c and d) and TEM (e and f) images with different magnification of the calcined Bi2MoO6 sample obtained from 20 h solvothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. 
Up to now, great success has been achieved in hierarchical architecture assembly, and hierarchical architectures from multidimensions to hollow architectures with various morphologies such as spheres, tubes and membranes have been prepared successfully. Nevertheless, the previous reports are mainly limited to the primary self-assembly process. The future design of tailored hierarchical architectures lies in the selective modification of the primary assemblies with recognizable interactions. It could be argued that a major challenge for nanoparticle assembly is the lack of metrology to characterize the kinetics and structures in situ during the assembly process. Meanwhile, the main issue remains the control of the porosity, distribution, shape and interconnectivity. Achieving a fine control of all these properties is clearly a challenging goal. Meanwhile, how to synthesize the desired hierarchical architectures according to the demand of photocatalytic application is still a challenge. Therefore, further work is needed to achieve the rational design of hierarchically structured materials in photocatalytic applications.
4. Surface deposition for heterojunctional nanocomposites
In general, a valuable photocatalyst should have a wide enough bandgap to provide energetic electrons, high-efficiency separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes, and also substantial inhibition towards photocorrosion. Furthermore, a small enough bandgap to allow for efficient absorption overlap with the solar spectrum is also necessary for the photocatalyst to effectively utilize solar energy. However, any kind of single component photocatalyst is unlikely to satisfy all the above-mentioned critical requirements. Fortunately, heterojunctional composites with multiple integrated functional components could combine the advantages of different components to overcome some drawbacks of single-component photocatalysts. Therefore, the construction of heterojunctional composites seems to be particularly important. The principle for constructing heterojunctional composites should satisfy the following requirements: (1) improved separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes, (2) enhanced light absorption including UV and visible light, (3) increased stability. In particular, it is of great importance to solve the surface and/or interface deposition in order to obtain efficient heterojunctional composites.
The surface properties and structure of semiconductor oxides should be thoroughly considered before constructing heterojunctional composites. Large surface area is crucial for photocatalytic process because it will offer more active sites. A high quality interface with effective contacts is important for reducing the interface recombination and Fermi level pinning. Moreover, the optimal band gap and band edge alignment should also be considered, since the relative energy level at the heterojunctional interface determines the direction and efficiency of the separation and transportation of photogenerated charge carriers. Based on the above consideration, the fabrication of heterojunctional composites should consider the above factors and choose suitable materials to couple them in order to achieve efficient and stable photocatalysts. According to literature, along with our works, we review and classify the recent progress on the heterojunctional composite photocatalysts.
4.1 Metal–oxide heterojunctional composites
The metals play important roles on improving the photocatalytic performance in metal–semiconductor oxide heterojunctional composites. The formation of a Schottky barrier via Fermi level equilibration between metals and semiconductor oxides, and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effects are the obvious benefits (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for metal–oxide heterojunctional composites under UV light (a) and visible light irradiation (b). 
First, due to the existence of the Schottky barrier, the equilibrium alignment of the Fermi level for metal and semiconductor oxide forms a built-in electric field near the interface, which is in favor of the separation of photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 13a).173–175 In principle, the Schottky efficiency is governed by the difference in work function of metals and the conduction band for semiconductor oxides. For example, Su et al. prepared Au–TiO2 heterojunctional composites via a sol-immobilization route, and found that Au nanoparticles not only played a role in capturing photogenerated electrons, but also were strongly involved in the photocatalytic reaction mechanism.173 Utilizing poly(vinyl alcohol) as a protective ligand, the controllable metal identity and size of Au–TiO2 composites were obtained and exhibited excellent long-term photoactivity due to the formation of Schottky junctions. Gu et al. fabricated dendrite-like ZnO@Ag heterostructure nanocrystals via a two-step chemical method, which was composed of single-crystal Ag nanowires as trunks and highly dense (0001) oriented ZnO nanorods as branches.174 They exhibited good photocatalytic activity, implying that the Ag/ZnO interfaces promoted the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
However, these methods were largely based on that noble metals deposited on the surface of semiconductor oxides in a simple manner, and thus, the interface combination was not close enough and an efficient Schottky junction was not formed, so the improvement of photocatalytic performance was limited. Considering these issues, the surface or interface tuning of semiconductor oxides should be conducted in order to form an efficient Schottky junction. The surface deposition and morphology control of semiconductor oxides were considered to satisfy the requirements.176 For example, Xiao prepared well-defined M/TiO2 (M = Au, Ag, Pt) nanoring/nanotube (T-NRNT) heterostructures by a two-step anodization combined with a layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly route.177 Notably, the TiO2 nanotube arrays after the first anodization included disordered or bundled arrays, which was ascribed to the corrugated surface of Ti foil. Then, after the surface deposition of TiO2 nanotube arrays, the M/TiO2 heterostructures were attained via the LBL self-assembly technique, which exhibited promising photocatalytic performance due to the efficient heterojunctions, in favor of the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Moreover, Xi et al. reported a facile method for direct growth of noble-metal particles on WO3 (Fig. 14) through an in situ redox reaction between weakly reductive WO2.72 and oxidative metal salts in aqueous solution, and showed significantly enhanced photocatalytic activities under visible-light irradiation.178 The in situ growth of Ag, Au, Pt nanoparticles on 3D urchin-like WO3 nanostructures required no other reducing agents, stabilizing agents, or pretreatment of the precursors, offering a practical method for controlled synthesis of metal–semiconductor oxide heterojunctional nanomaterials. Therefore, these hierarchical structures were ideal host materials for fabricating heterojunctional materials. Furthermore, mesoporous structures should be paid more attention, which could offer excellent hosts. For example, Li et al. prepared mesoporous Au–TiO2 heterogeneous composites by a one-step method, and showed enhanced photocatalytic activity obviously.179
 Fig. 14  TEM images of WO3 architectures loaded with larger-sized metal particles: (a) Pt/WO3 (1.7 wt%, 3.5 nm); (b) Pt/WO3 (2.1 wt%, 5 nm); (c) Ag/WO3 (1.8 wt%, 3 nm); (d) Au/WO3 (2.6 wt%, 5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. 
In order to further improve the direct contact between noble metals and mesoporous TiO2, utilizing highly thermally stable mesoporous TiO2 (HTSM-TiO2) as host, our group fabricated ordered mesoporous Ag–TiO2 composites via a vacuum-induced assistant method.180 Due to the high crystallinity of HTSM-TiO2, the surface defects decreased obviously. Then, the efficient Schottky junction could be formed on the surface of pore walls for HTSM-TiO2, which was advantageous for the separation of photogenerated carriers, and was further confirmed via the surface photovoltage spectroscopy. Thus, the photocatalytic performance was enhanced obviously under UV irradiation. Furthermore, the mesoporous Ag–TiO2 composites also exhibited visible light photocatalytic activity due to the SPR effect of Ag clusters in the channels of mesoporous TiO2.
Second, the SPR of noble metals could be described as the resonant photon-induced collective oscillation of valence electrons, established when the frequency of photons matches the natural frequency of surface electrons oscillating against the restoring force of positive nuclei, which then would transfer to semiconductor oxides, and thereby enhance the absorption and photocatalytic activity of the nearby semiconductor oxides (Fig. 13b).181 The resonant photon wavelength varies with different metals. As is well known, the frequency of the surface plasmon absorption is strongly dependent on the size and morphology of the metals. Au, Ag and Pt have been widely investigated for improving the photocatalytic performance of various semiconductor oxides.182–184 Among them, Ag and Au with tunable plasmonic resonance frequencies in the visible light region are the most commonly used metals.
In general, there are three non-mutually exclusive energy-transfer mechanisms by which the SPR could enhance the concentration of photogenerated charge carriers, and therefore photocatalytic reactions, in a nearby semiconductor.181
(i) Charge inject mechanism (CIM). Charge carriers are directly injected from excited plasmonic-metal nanostructures into the semiconductor surface. The metallic plasmonic nanoparticles are similar to dye sensitization, acting to absorb resonant photons and transfer energetic photogenerated charge carriers, formed in the process of the SPR excitation, to the semiconductor. This mechanism is suitable for composites where the plasmonic nanoparticles and semiconductor are in direct contact with each other, allowing a rapid transfer of photogenerated charge carriers. For example, Su et al. fabricated Ag–TiO2 nanoheterostructures via a novel and straightforward protocol combining an electrospinning technique and a solvothermal process, and showed excellent visible light photocatalytic activity.185 Visible light generates the photoexcited state of the Ag nanoparticles based on SPR. Then the photoexcited electrons were injected into the TiO2 bulk. Meanwhile, the oxidized Ag nanoparticles abstracted electrons from a donor. In addition, Zheng et al. synthesized visible-light plasmonic photocatalysts M@TiO2 (M = Au, Pt, Ag) via a facile in situ method.186 At first, the surface tuning of TiO2 was performed. The TiO2 powder was dispersed in absolute ethanol and irradiated by UV, and some Ti3+ ions were generated on the surface of TiO2. Subsequently, after the addition of noble metal salt in the dark, the reduced metal nanoparticles deposited on the surface of TiO2. This Ti3+-ion-assisted synthesis led to a homogeneous and efficient depositing of noble-metal nanoparticles on the surface of TiO2 particles, which allowed photocatalytic reactions to take place on the whole TiO2 surface, using visible light effectively by SPR of noble metals.
(ii) Near-field electromagnetic and scattering mechanisms (NFESM). If a semiconductor and plasmonic metal are separated from each other by thin, non-conductive spacers, preventing any direct charge exchange between the two building blocks, radiative energy transfer from the metal SPR to the semiconductor could take place through near-field electromagnetic and resonant photon-scattering, which is based on the interaction of the semiconductor with the strong SPR-induced electric fields localized nearby at the metallic nanostructure.181 It is worthwhile to note that some resonant photons that are not absorbed by the semiconductor could be scattered by the nanostructure, effectively giving those photons many passes through the system. For example, Ingram et al. prepared Ag and Au–N-TiO2 composites, where metal nanostructures were coated with non-conducting organic stabilizer molecules PVP, and found a dramatic increase in the photocatalytic reaction rate.187 The enhancement was ascribed to the formation of intense electric fields at the Ag or Au particle surfaces, which increased the rate of formation for electron–hole pairs at the nearby N-TiO2 particle surface. In this system, the presence of the organic layer prevented direct electron transfer. Meanwhile, energy was transferred from the metals to semiconductor in a radiative process, increasing the overall concentration of photogenerated charge carriers. In order to fabricate more efficient heterojunctional composites, the modification of the surface for semiconductor oxides is necessary. For example, Cao et al. prepared Au–BiVO4 heterojunctional nanostructures through in situ growth of Au nanoparticles on BiVO4 microtubes and nanosheets via a cysteine-linking strategy.188 The growth of Au on the surface of BiVO4 was facilitated in the presence of L-cysteine, which could bind to the surface of BiVO4 through its carboxylate group. After the surface modification of BiVO4, when HAuCl4 was subsequently added and reduced, the produced gold atoms could be captured by L-cysteine on the BiVO4 surface through Au–S bonding, then the gold atoms served as nucleation sites for further in situ growth on BiVO4 surfaces. The close coupled heteronanostructures showed excellent photocatalytic performance due to the efficient charge transfer by the SPR.
(iii) Plasmonic heating mechanism (PHM). The localized heating of noble metal nanostructures is due to non-irradiation decay of metal surface plasmons into phonon modes.189 The excitation of surface plasmons may induce the formation of hot electrons, which have energies that are sufficient to initiate photochemical reactions at the metal/semiconductor interface.190 However, the effect of the plasmonic heating could be excluded for water splitting because the required energy was much higher than the thermal energy of the generated plasmonic heating.191 Some heterogeneous catalysis and biological or medical applications could be mediated by the plasmonic heating mechanism.192,193 The detailed discussion of this mechanism is available in some comprehensive reviews.181,194,195
On the whole, for metal–oxide heterojunctional composites, all three mechanisms could play a role, subject to the above discussed constraints associated with optical properties. These mechanisms could complement each other and further elucidate the role of plasmons in photocatalysis.
4.2 Semiconductor–oxide heterojunctional composites
Semiconductor–oxide heterojunctions represent another strategy to enhance the photocatalytic activity, which usually includes wide–wide bandgap semiconductor heterojunctions and wide–narrow bandgap semiconductor heterojunctions. Here, the semiconductors mainly include semiconductor oxides and semiconductor sulfides. As for the wide bandgap semiconductor, the interface of two different semiconductors with different band levels could form a built-in potential easily, such as p–n junctions, which can promote the separation and transportation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Upon light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor with more negative conduction band will flow into the other one with the lower conduction band. Meanwhile, the photogenerated holes from the semiconductor with a lower valence band will jump to the one with a higher valence band (Fig. 15). The band offset can efficiently promote the charge separation, and inhibit the charge recombination, and thus enhance the photocatalytic performance. In general, the fabrication of semiconductor–oxide hierarchical heterojunctions includes two steps: the main materials are firstly prepared to act as hosts, and then the second component is controlled to grow on the surfaces of support materials by surface deposition to fabricate the semiconductor–oxide heterojunctions. The most important criteria for the preparation of two-component hierarchical oxide materials are the surface controlled growth of the second component since the controlled growth of the second component can guarantee the good distribution on the main solid body and then induce the formation of effective heterojunctions. For example, Lin et al. prepared NiO–TiO2 p–n nanojunctions by assembling p-type semiconductor NiO nanoparticles on n-type TiO2 nanobelts.196 First, surface-coarsened H2Ti3O7 nanobelts were prepared by an acid-assisted hydrothermal approach, whose coarsened surface favored the growth of NiO. Then, NiO–TiO2 p–n nanojunction-based heterostructures were obtained through a chemical-solution-deposition–decomposition process. A large number of efficient p–n nanojunction heterostructures on the surface of the surface-coarsened TiO2 nanobelts were formed finally. The p–n heterojunctions exhibited excellent photocatalytic performance compared to that of common TiO2 nanobelts, due to the larger number of abundant photocatalytic-active surfaces in the surface-coarsened nanobelts, which increased photo-absorption and the production of charge carriers. Therefore, the effective surface tuning to obtain coarsened surface was the key factor to obtain a large number of p–n heterojunctions. Moreover, the hierarchical p–n heterojunctions were also excellent candidates because of their large surface area. For example, Yu et al. prepared hierarchical porous flowerlike p–n junction NiO–TiO2 photocatalysts.197 Hierarchical flowerlike β-Ni(OH)2 superstructures composed of intermeshed nanoflakes were used as hosts, the TiO2 nanoparticles could be homogeneously deposited on the surface of NiO superstructures by using the strong interaction between β-Ni(OH)2 and Ti sources, and formed effective NiO–TiO2 p–n junction superstructures, which showed high photocatalytic activity due to formation of hierarchical porous structures, dispersion of TiO2 particles on the surface of NiO superstructures, and production of p–n junctions.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for wide–wide bandgap heterojunction under UV light (a) and wide–narrow bandgap heterojunction under visible light irradiation (b). 
Recently, our group prepared bifunctional mesoporous TiO2 (meso-TiO2)–α-Fe2O3 heterojunctional composites by impregnation of Fe3+ into meso-TiO2 followed by calcination at 300 °C (Fig. 16), which possessed synergy of the photocatalytic ability of meso-TiO2 for oxidation of highly toxic As(III) to low-toxic As(V) and the adsorption performance of α-Fe2O3 for As(V).198 Meso-TiO2 played multiple roles, where meso-TiO2 not only acted as a supporter, but also acted as a dispersant of α-Fe2O3. The uniform dispersion of α-Fe2O3 in the holes and on the surface of meso-TiO2 was desirable for the formation of heterojunctions and efficient arsenite adsorption. Because of the interfacial effect between meso-TiO2 and α-Fe2O3, the special surface property was more advantageous to the adsorption and photo-oxidation.
 Fig. 16  TEM and HRTEM images of mesoporous TiO2 powders (A and B) and meso-TiO2–α-Fe2O3 composites (C and D) after calcination at 300 °C. The insets of panels B and D are the corresponding Fourier transform. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. 
Moreover, a seed-induced growth approach is also an effective strategy to fabricate heterojunctional nanostructures. For example, Lei et al. prepared flowerlike ZnO nanorods grafted on vertically aligned TiO2 nanotubes by a feasible seed-induced hydrothermal reaction, the grafted ZnO nanorods could serve conveniently as favorable hole channels and receptors for the efficient separation of photoelectrons and holes.199
As for narrow bandgap semiconductor oxides, the semiconductor oxides with smaller bandgap could sensitize the coupled semiconductor oxides with larger bandgap. The conduction band edge of the sensitizer materials must be higher than large bandgap semiconductor oxides in order to achieve efficient electron transfer (Fig. 15b).200–203 For example, Zou et al. prepared a ZnO–V2O5 core–shell heterojunctional lollipop-like nanoarray (Fig. 17) by a two-step synthesis route through combined hydrothermal growth and magnetron sputtering, then annealing under oxygen ambient atmosphere.202 The composites possessed superior photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation due to the formation of heterojunctions. In addition, hierarchical heterostructures have also received attention. For example, Zhang et al. prepared one-dimensional Bi2MoO6–TiO2 hierarchical heterostructures with different secondary Bi2MoO6 nanostructures grown on primary TiO2 nanofibers via a combination of electrospinning and a solvothermal technique.204 Utilizing the surface interaction and precursor concentration adjusting, two different morphologies of Bi2MoO6–TiO2 heterostructures with Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles and nanosheets were successfully grown on the surface of TiO2 nanofibers, and formed efficient heterojunctions.
 Fig. 17  (a and b) SEM cross section and top surface images for V2O5–ZnO core–shell structure after annealing at 500 °C in O2. (c and d) HRTEM images and electron diffraction for ZnO and V2O5, respectively, in the lollipop structure. (e) EDX spectrum for the annealed sample. (f) Schematic showing the growth mechanism of lollipop through annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. 
In addition, coupled with the additional properties of semiconductor materials, such as adsorption, and magnetism, multi-functional photocatalysts can be fabricated simultaneously. For example, Mou et al. prepared magnetic γ-Fe2O3–TiO2 Janus hollow bowls by constructing a precursor solution pair with different gelation rates during the solvent evaporation process, which had a transition layer of Fe3+-doped-TiO2 between γ-Fe2O3 and TiO2 phases, and showed an efficient visible-light photocatalytic activity and convenient magnetic separation for water purification because of the unique heterostructure as well as excellent magnetic properties.205
In order to form efficient heterojunctions, Buonsanti et al. demonstrated a seeded-growth approach to fabricate topologically controlled magnetic-semiconductor heterodimer hybrid nanocrystals that individually comprised a single spherical FexOy domain epitaxially grown at either one apex or any location along the longitudinal sidewalls of one rod-like TiO2 section in a hot surfactant environment (Fig. 18).206 The different hybrid nanocrystal architectures were concluded to be almost equivalent in terms of surface–interface energy balance associated with their formation. The spatial inhomogeneity of the chemical potential environment around the seeds could play a role in accentuating their anisotropic reactivity beyond constraints imposed by insurgence of TiO2/FexOy interfacial strain.
 Fig. 18  Phase-contrast HRTEM study of hybrid nanocrystals comprised of asymmetrically FexOy-tipped TiO2 nanorods. HRTEM images (a, g, o) of matchstick-like hybrid nanocrystals that incorporate TiO2 and FexOy in different relative arrangements. FFTs (b, c, h, i, p, q) calculated from the regions enclosed by the blue and the red boxes in panels a, g, o, respectively. (d, l, r) Joint diffractograms obtained by merging the FFTs in panels b, c, h, i, and p, q, respectively, each traced by a different color. (e, m, s) Magnified views of the matchstick head regions corresponding to the heterostructures in panels a, g, and o, respectively. False-color crystal-phase amplitude maps (f, n, t) obtained by HRTEM contrast analysis of the images in panels a, g, o, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. 
To realize the magnetic separation of the suspended particulate catalysts, Li et al. reported a facile “hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization” route to synthesize Fe3O4@titanate yolk–shell microspheres (Fig. 19) with ultrathin nanosheet assembled double-shell structure.207 During hydrothermal treatment in an alkaline solution, the SiO2 interlayer was first etched, followed by concurrent but separate TiO2 layer-etching and epitaxial titanate nanosheets-growth. In this case, the SiO2 layer not only promoted the coating of outer TiO2, but also acted as a template for the first cavity. The TiO2 layer provided two interfaces for the nucleation and discrete space for simultaneously self-assembled nanosheets-growth along opposite directions, and in situ acted as a template for the second cavity. The as-prepared microspheres possessed a uniform size, tailored shell structure, good structural stability, versatile ion-exchange capability, high surface area, large magnetization, and exhibited a remarkable catalytic performance.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the “hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization” strategy for the formation of the Fe3O4@titanate double-shelled yolk–shell microspheres. TEM images of a single sphere synthesized at 150 °C with hydrothermal treatment time: (b) 0 min, (c) 20 min, (d) 2 h, (e) 12 h and (f) 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. 
4.3 Oxide–carbon heterojunctional composites
Due to the special electronic character of graphitic carbon materials, semiconductor oxide–carbon heterojunctional composites photocatalysts have been paid more attention recently. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene are the most usually used carbon materials. Various CNTs- and graphene-based heterojunctional composite photocatalysts, which could realize the effective separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, were fabricated via different strategies and enhanced photocatalytic performance obviously (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for oxide–CNTs (a) and oxide–graphene heterojunctions (b) under UV and visible light irradiation. 
CNTs possess many unique properties: (1) large electron-storage capacity, which could accept photogenerated electrons from semiconductor oxides in heterogeneous composites, (2) extension of the excitation wavelength to the visible light region, acting as photosensitizers, (3) high specific surface area, which could increase the adsorption of reactants. Therefore, fabricating semiconductor oxide–CNTs heterojunctional composites would realize the efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 20a). Initially, Yao et al. prepared TiO2–CNTs composites via a simple mechanical mixing, and reduced charge recombination and enhanced photoreactivity.208 However, the interface contact between them was not effectively intimate. Therefore, surface tuning was necessary for fabricating efficient interface coupling in order to separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs effectively.209–211 Subsequently, Yang et al. prepared TiO2–CNTs heterojunctional composites via a hydrothermal method.203 The CNTs were surface functionalized firstly in order to effective couple TiO2, and thus obtain high-efficiency heterojunctional photocatalysts, which extended the adsorption edge to the visible light region. In order to fabricate more efficient heterojunctions, our group prepared bonded TiO2–CNTs heterojunctional composites via forming similar ester bonds through hydrothermal method, which were fabricated the efficient transfer channels for photogenerated electrons and thus, increased the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers.210
Graphene has also been paid much attention in the photocatalytic area during the past several years. Graphene possesses many unique properties due to its special 2D sp2-hybridized carbon structure, such as large specific surface area, high intrinsic electron mobility and good mechanical strength. Therefore, it is an excellent candidate for fabricating semiconductor oxide–graphene heterojunctional composite photocatalysts (Fig. 20b). For example, our group prepared TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites by in situ growth of TiO2 in the interlayer of inexpensive expanded graphite under solvothermal conditions (Fig. 21).212 A vacuum-assisted technique combined with the use of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide played a key role in the fabrication of such composites. They showed high photocatalytic activity in comparison with Degussa P25, which was attributed to the increased charge separation, improved light absorbance, and high adsorptivity for pollutants. In addition, many other efforts have also been devoted to growing TiO2 nanostructures on graphene through in situ or one-pot strategies. The usually used Ti precursors included TiF4, TiCl4, titanium(IV) ammonium oxalate and tetrabutyl titanate.213–216 Particularly, the UV-assisted photocatalytic reduction of graphite oxide using TiO2 nanoparticles, and the redox reaction between Ti3+ and graphene oxide were also adopted to form the TiO2–graphene composites via tuning the surface structure.217–219
 Fig. 21  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM images (b and d) of TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. 
Moreover, other oxide–graphene heterojunctional composites were also obtained via various strategies. For example, our group prepared ZnO–graphene heterojunctional composites by a facile solvothermal method, in which the Zn–EG–Ac complex, graphitic oxide (GO) and ethanol were selected as the Zn precursor, graphene precursor and solvent respectively (Fig. 22).220 The Zn–EG–Ac with plenty of functional groups could interact with the functional groups (–COOH, –OH) on GO, and thus transform in situ on GO into well-dispersed ZnO without the need of additional alkali. The Zn–EG–Ac precursor was crucial for the formation of the small-sized and well-dispersed ZnO on graphene. The obtained ZnO–graphene heterojunctional composites showed good photocatalytic performance, which was ascribed to the strong interaction between ZnO and graphene in the composites due to the good dispersion of ZnO nanoparticles and their good combination with graphene. In addition, narrow bandgap semiconductor oxide–graphene heterojunctional composites were also fabricated successfully, such as ZnWO4–graphene, Ag3PO4–graphene, etc.221,222
 Fig. 22  SEM (a), TEM (b and c) and HRTEM images (d) of ZnO–graphene heterogeneous composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. 
From the above points, the enhanced photocatalytic performance of semiconductor oxide–graphene heterojunctional composites should be ascribed to the following factors: (1) enhanced charge separation and transfer efficiency due to the formation of the heterojunction, (2) extension of light absorption to the visible light region, (3) increased absorption of reactants and products due to the large surface area. In summary, the semiconductor oxide–crystalline carbon materials showed improved photocatalytic performance and the formation of heterojunctions between them played crucial roles.
4.4 Multi-component oxide-based heterojunctional composites
Compared to single- or two-component semiconductor oxide photocatalysts, multiple functional components could offer more benefits for promoting the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and extending the light absorption range, and also other additional properties. Integration of multiple semiconductors with suitable architectures would provide more opportunity than a single material to attain high-efficiency photocatalysts. For example, Barreca et al. prepared CuxO–TiO2–Au (x = 1, 2) heterojunctional composites by chemical vapor deposition and radio frequency-sputtering under mild conditions.223 The functionalization with Au nanoparticles via radio frequency-sputtering led to nanomaterials with a controllable dispersion of Au nano-aggregates and an intimate contact between the three components, which resulted in the efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Our group prepared hierarchical Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 heterogeneous composites by using prepared hierarchical flower-like Bi2MoO6 hollow spheres as a supporting material (Fig. 23).224 The distinct and coherent interfaces between the continuity of the lattice fringes of the metallic Ag, AgBr and Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles indicated the formation of heterojunctions, which could improve charge separation and efficient electron transfer within the hybrid structure. The hierarchical Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 composite exhibited higher photocatalytic activity than both photocatalysts containing single visible light-active components and crushed Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles, which was attributed to the formation of effective nanojunctions, leading to low recombination rates of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. This was further confirmed by the transient photovoltage technique. The presence of double visible-light-active components in the Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 nanojunction system further broadened the visible-light photoresponse region. Ag in the Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 nanojunction system acted as storage and/or recombination centers for conductor band electrons of Bi2MoO6 and valence band holes of AgBr, and contributed to the enhancement of interfacial charge transfer and separation.
 Fig. 23  (left) SEM (a and b), TEM (c) and HRTEM images (d) of Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 heterojunctional composites, (right) schematic diagram of the charge separation under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. 
Similarly, taking thorny anatase TiO2 tubes as hosts, our group also prepared multi-component Ag–AgBr–TiO2 tubular heterojunctional composites which showed excellent simulated solar-light photocatalytic performance (Fig. 24).118 From Fig. 24, we observe a distinct and coherent interface between the continuity of lattice fringes of the metallic Ag, AgBr and TiO2 nanoparticles, indicating the formation of heterojunctions, which could benefit better charge separation and efficient electron transfer within the hybrid structure compared with binary composites and TiO2.
 Fig. 24  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of multi-components Ag–AgBr–TiO2 tubular heterojunctional composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. 
In addition, graphene-based multiple functional components heterojunctional composites were also fabricated in order to make the best use of the excellent property of graphene and form more efficient multiple heterojunctions.225–227 Recently, our group fabricated Ag–Ag3PO4–graphene triple heterostructure composites (Fig. 25) by the redox reaction between Ag+ and the surface modified graphene in situ.225 The Ag–Ag3PO4 nanoparticles dispersed well on graphene because of graphene's ideal two-dimensional structure. The heterostructure composites demonstrated improved structural stability, which could effectively protect Ag3PO4 against photocorrosion. The excellent visible light photocatalytic performance of the triple Ag–Ag3PO4–graphene heterojunctions indicated the efficient separation and transfer of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which was further revealed by surface photovoltage spectroscopy.
 Fig. 25  SEM (a), TEM (b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of Ag–Ag3PO4–graphene triple heterostructure composites, the schematic diagram of the charge separation and photocatalytic process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. 
5. Surface modification for high-energy-facet exposure
Since the photocatalytic reactions mainly take place on the surfaces of semiconductor oxides, nanoparticle surface structure would play critical roles in photocatalysis, especially for exposed high-energy crystal facets. However, crystal facets with high reactivity usually diminish rapidly during the crystal growth process as a result of minimizing surface energy.228 The highly reactive facets with high surface energy are thermodynamically unstable, while most available semiconductor oxide crystals are dominated by thermodynamically stable facets with low surface energy. It is well known that different facets of a single crystal exhibit distinctive physicochemical properties.229 Therefore, it is of great importance to conduct the surface modification of semiconductor oxides for obtaining the highly reactive facets so as to further improve the photocatalytic performance, whether for single-component oxides or heterojunctional composites. Fortunately, several semiconductor oxide crystals and composites with exposed high-reactive facets have been reported through surface modification and indeed exhibited enhanced photocatalytic performance, especially for 001-facet-exposed anatase TiO2.230–233 The mechanism for the high photocatalytic performance of the exposed high-reactive facets were also investigated systematically. Hence, the typical semiconductor oxides and composites with exposed high-energy facets are summarized in this section.
5.1 TiO2
The average surface energies of anatase TiO2 for {001}, {100} and {101} are 0.90, 0.53 and 0.44 J m−2, respectively.234,235 Obviously, the {101} facet for anatase TiO2 is the most stable, whereas the {001} facet is the highest reactive facet. Under equilibrium conditions, natural and synthetic anatase TiO2 crystals are normally enclosed by energetically favorable {101} facets rather than the more reactive {001} facets, due to the low surface energy for the former.236 In general, {001} facets with high surface energies diminish quickly during the crystal growth process for the minimization of the total surface energy. A general approach for tuning the surface energy is to grow the crystal in the presence of adsorbing species that interact differently with the different crystalline facets.237 Dynamic solvation processes and selective adhesion effects of specific modification could occur on the crystal surfaces.238 Therefore, the formation of anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} facets is possible.
Yang et al. successfully synthesized anatase TiO2 single crystals with a large percentage (47%) of {001} facets using hydrofluoric acid (HF) as a morphology controlling agent via a facile hydrothermal route (Fig. 26).239 They carried out a systematic investigation of 12 non-metallic atoms X (where X could represent H, B, C, N, O, F, Si, P, S, Cl, Br or I) based on first-principles calculations, and found that among the 12 X-terminated surfaces and the clean surfaces, termination with F atoms not only yielded the lowest value of surface energy for both the {001} and {101} facets, but also resulted in {001} facets that were more stable than {101} facets. Hence, F was chosen as a modifier agent for surrounding their surfaces, indicating that the surface modification of semiconductor oxide could determine the final crystal structure. Since then, tremendous efforts have been devoted to preparing high-reactive anatase TiO2 crystals with exposed {001} high-energy facets. The percentage of the exposed {001} high-energy facets was controllably synthesized from 10 to even 100%.240–243
 Fig. 26  Bright-field TEM image (a) and the square-symmetric selected-area electron diffraction pattern (b) of a representative anatase single crystal recorded along the [001] axis. Inset is a [001]-projected geometrical model of anatase single crystals. HRTEM image (c) recorded from another anatase single crystal with [001] orientation and fast-Fourier-transform-filtered TEM image (d) recorded from the dotted rectangular area in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. 
Initially, F-containing species were employed as the capping reagents to release F− ions for stabilizing the {001} facets.244–248 Various shaped anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} high-energy facets were prepared via different strategies. Usually, the syntheses of anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} high-energy facets were performed in aqueous and nonaqueous liquid phases. For example, Han et al. prepared sheet-like anatase TiO2 with exposed highly reactive {001} facets as the top and bottom surfaces (Fig. 27) via a simple hydrothermal route using tetrabutyl titanate as a source and 47% HF solution as the solvent.238 As seen, the percentage of {001} facets in the sheets was ∼89% with optimising the HF amount and reaction temperature. The rectangular TiO2 nanosheets showed excellent photocatalytic efficiency, far exceeding that of commercially available Degussa P25, due to the exposed high percentage of {001} facets. Liu et al. presented hollow TiO2 microspheres composed of anatase polyhedra with ca. 20% exposed {001} facets through a fluoride mediated self-transformation method.239 In addition to HF often used as the surface modifier, the exploration of other suitable modifiers to obtain anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} facets with high efficiency is still a great challenge.
 Fig. 27  XRD and TEM images of TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. 
Several solvothermal methods to prepare anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} high-energy facets have been successfully developed in the absence of HF.249–252 Alcohol or ionic liquid (IL) are usually chosen as suitable candidates.253–255 They could play two important roles as both capping agents and solvents. For example, Yang et al. reported a new solvothermal method using 2-propanol as a synergistic capping agent and reaction medium together with HF to synthesize high-quality anatase TiO2 single-crystal nanosheets (SCNSs) with 64% of {001} facets (Fig. 28), which displayed superior photoreactivity (more than 5 times) compared to P25.253 It was suggested that there is a synergistic functionality of chemisorbed F to lower the {001} surface energy and enhance this stabilization and act as protective capping agent, as being responsible for the formation of anatase TiO2 SCNSs. Moreover, IL could be employed to modify the surface and protect the high-active facets, especially for tetrafluoroborate-based ILs.254 For example, Zhao et al. prepared anatase TiO2 nanocuboids enclosed by active {001} facets using acetic acid (HAc) as the solvent and the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([bmim][BF4]) as the capping agent, which exhibited considerably enhanced photocatalytic activity owing to the wholly exposed active {001} facets.255 And also, some amines have been successfully employed to modify the surface and selectively stabilize {001} facets of anatase TiO2 nanocrystals, such as oleylamine and diethylenetriamine109,256–258 D'Arienzo et al. synthesized anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} facets using oleylamine and oleic acid as a capping agent.257 Wu et al. reported a facile nonaqueous synthetic route to prepare anatase nanosheets with exposed {001} facets and high-quality rhombic-shaped anatase nanocrystals with a large percentage of exposed {010} facets, which was achieved by combining the use of amine capping agents and adventitious water in a nonaqueous alcohol reaction medium.258 As expected, under similar conditions for the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange, {001}-exposed and {010}-exposed TiO2 exhibited better photocatalytic performance than that of P25. Therefore, it is feasible to select F-containing species, amines and ILs acting as surface modifiers to stabilize the high-energy facets of anatase nanocrystals. In addition, the exposure of other high-energy facets of anatase nanocrystals, besides {001} facets, such as {010}, {100}, {111} and {116} ones, were also reported via surface modification.259–264
 Fig. 28  TEM images of anatase TiO2 single-crystal nanosheets with {001} facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253. 
5.2 Other oxides
Similarly, the exposure of high-energy facets for other semiconductor oxides could also be achieved via surface modification or controlled conditions. Since the discovery of the {001} facets of anatase TiO2, the fabrication of high-energy facet-exposed oxides has been paid much attention in recent years due to the desired high photoactivity. As a novel visible photocatalyst Ag3PO4 has drawn great attention recently. Theoretical calculations suggested that Ag3PO4 with {110} facets could exhibit a higher surface energy than {100} planes, which might contribute significantly to the enhanced photocatalytic activity. For this, Bi et al. prepared single-crystalline Ag3PO4 rhombic dodecahedrons with only {110} facet exposure and cubes bounded entirely by {100} facets through simply controlling silver acetate and silver ammine complex without using any capping agents.265 It was demonstrated that rhombic dodecahedrons with exposed {110} facets exhibited much higher activities than cubes with exposed {100} facets, primarily ascribed to the higher surface energy of {110} facets (1.31 J m−2) than that of {100} facets (1.12 J m−2). Therefore, high-energy facet-exposed Ag3PO4 could be easily obtained through controlling acetate and ammine to accomplish surface modification.
BiVO4, with a narrow band gap of 2.4 eV, is also an important visible-light-responsive photocatalyst and has been widely used in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. The fabrication of high-energy facet-exposed BiVO4 is of great importance to further improve the photocatalytic performance. Xi et al. prepared well-defined monoclinic bismuth vanadate (m-BiVO4) nanoplates with exposed {001} facets by a facile hydrothermal route (Fig. 29), without using any template or organic surfactant.266 The pH value of the solution played an important role in the formation of the monoclinic BiVO4 nanoplates with exposed {001} facets. The as-prepared m-BiVO4 nanoplates exhibited greatly enhanced activity in the visible-light photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants, ascribed to the exposed high-energy {001} facets.
 Fig. 29  (a and b) Low- and high-magnification FESEM images of the m-BiVO4 nanoplates. (c) Low-magnification TEM image of the m-BiVO4 nanoplates. (d) HRTEM image of the m-BiVO4 nanoplate. (e) The SAED pattern recorded from the white framed area indicated in (c). (f) Schematic illustration of the crystal orientation of the nanoplate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266. 
Recently, Jiang et al. prepared BiOCl single-crystalline nanosheets with exposed {001} and {010} facets selectively via a facile hydrothermal route.267 The percentage of {001} and {010} facets was estimated from the geometric calculation to be ca. 80 and 73%, respectively. The facet control could be easily realized by surface modification through controlling the pH of the solution via addition of NaOH. As a result, the resulting BiOCl single-crystalline nanosheets with exposed {001} facets exhibited high photocatalytic activity.
In addition, as widely used visible light photocatalysts, iron oxides have been paid much attention in recent years due to their special photocatalytic and magnetic properties. Thereinto, Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 are the most usually used photocatalysts. From a crystallographic point of view, magnetite is a ferromagnetic iron oxide having a cubic inverse spinel structure with oxygen anions forming a face-center-cubic closed packing, and the general sequence of surface energies is as follows: γ{111} < γ{100} < γ{110}.268 Therefore, the fabrication of Fe3O4 with active basal surfaces ({110}) is significant for photocatalysis. Geng et al. prepared well-defined single-crystalline Fe3O4 microrhombic dodecahedra possessing active basal surfaces ({110}) through hydrothermal process.269 The highly active facet could be easily obtained by adjusting the pH values between 8 and 10. Recently, Yin et al. prepared unusual tetrakaidecahedral and oblique parallelepiped iron oxide nanocrystals with exposed high-index facets with the assistance of the viscous macromolecule sodium carboxymethyl cellulose to protect the high energy facet, exhibiting excellent magnetic performance at low temperature.270
5.3 Oxide composites
Although the photocatalytic performance of the exposed high-energy facets for semiconductor oxides is obviously improved, the rapid photogenerated electron–hole recombination rate of semiconductor oxides (an intrinsic drawback) is not essentially improved. Therefore, a favorable substrate to overcome this barrier is demanded urgently. Fortunately, according to the discussion of the above section, the fabrication of heterojunctional composites seems to provide particularly suitable strategies to enhance the photocatalytic performance. Noble metals, which could form a Schottky barrier via Fermi level equilibration between metals and semiconductor oxides, could grow on the exposed high-energy facets for orientation and form special heterojunctions between the noble metal and high-energy facet, which will result in efficient electron transfer channel and thus, improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole effectively.271,272 For example, Yu et al. fabricated Pt/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets by a simple hydrothermal route in a Ti(OC4H9)4–HF–H2O mixed solution followed by a photochemical reduction deposition of Pt nanoparticles on TiO2 nanosheets under UV light (λ < 400 nm) irradiation (Fig. 30).271 The surface of the fluorinated TiO2 nanosheets favored deposition of Pt nanoparticles and the heterojunctional composites exhibited much higher photocatalytic activity than Degussa P25 and pure TiO2 nanoparticles prepared in pure water due to the synergistic effect of surface fluorination and exposed {001} facets.
 Fig. 30  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM (b and d) images of TiO2 nanosheets (a and b) and Pt/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets (c and d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 271. 
As a favorable conductive substrate, graphene has received much attention recently, especially the close contact between graphene and high-energy facets would be in favor of the separation for photogenerated carriers to a large extent. Then, various strategies to modify the high-energy facets of semiconductor oxides are developed in order to fabricate efficient heterojunctional composite photocatalysts with graphene.273–278 For example, Wang et al. reported high-quality anatase ultrathin TiO2 sheets (about 1 μm), mainly dominated by {001} facets, grown on graphene nanosheets by a simple one-pot solvothermal synthetic route (Fig. 31) and exhibited enhanced photocatalytic performance under visible-light irradiation, suggesting the photogenerated electrons in TiO2 preferred transferring to graphene efficiently.273 As a consequence, the electron transfer via Ti–O–C between TiO2 and C interaction greatly retarded the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers and prolonged the carrier lifetime, thus contributing to the enhancement of photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 31  SEM image of anatase TiO2 sheets on graphene (inset is a single nanosheet schematic morphology) (a). TEM image of anatase TiO2 sheets on graphene (b). Enlarged TEM image of the TiO2–graphene sheet (c). The HRTEM image of TiO2 sheet (the inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern) (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. 
Furthermore, in order to form more and efficient heterojunctions between exposed TiO2 {001} high-energy facets and graphene, decreasing the size of TiO2 nanosheets and modifying the surface of graphene are necessary. Thus, our group prepared TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites with exposed TiO2 {001} high-energy facets by HF and methanol joint assisted solvothermal reactions (Fig. 32).276 Graphite was first oxidized to graphite oxide through Hummers' method in order to increase the surface groups for efficient coupling with TiO2. Indeed, the electron transfer between TiO2 and graphene greatly retarded the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers and prolonged electron lifetime based on surface photovoltage spectroscopy, which contributed to the enhancement of photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 32  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM images (c–e) of TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites with exposed TiO2 {001} high-energy facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. 
In addition, multiple functional components coupled with the exposed high-energy facets for oxides were also fabricated and exhibited enhanced photocatalytic performance and additional properties. For example, Qi et al. prepared CdS-sensitized Pt/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets by photochemical reduction deposition of Pt nanoparticles on TiO2 nanosheets and chemical bath deposition of CdS on Pt/TiO2 nanosheets successively.279 The CdS-sensitized Pt/TiO2 nanosheets showed higher photocatalytic performance than that of CdS-sensitized Pt/P25, which could be attributed to the combined effect of several factors including the presence of exposed {001} facets, surface fluorination and high specific surface area. Considering the difficult separation of photocatalysts, magnetic separability is important for practical applications. Shen et al. prepared a sandwich-structured Fe3O4/SiO2/Au/TiO2 photocatalyst with exposed {001} facets for TiO2 by combining the versatile sol–gel process, electrostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly and interfacial growth synthesis through a multistep approach involving the conformal coating of Fe3O4 particles with SiO2, Au nanoparticles, and finally introducing TiO2 layers using the hydrothermal method.280 The composites showed magnetic separability, selective absorption and photocatalysis activity, and high efficiency, in catalyzing the decomposition of organic compounds under illumination of visible-light and simulated sunlight, which was attributed to the combination of plasmonic metal decoration of TiO2 nanocrystals with exposed {001} facets.
6. Testing methods for photogenerated charge properties at surface and/or interface
Nano-sized oxide semiconductors have attracted significant interest due to their potential applications in solar energy conversion and heterogeneous photocatalysis.5,281–284 As described previously, it is naturally expected that the properties of photogenerated charges, including generation, separation, transfer and recombination processes, of a semiconductor at a surface and/or interface are very important for efficient photocatalytic reactions, especially for a surface-tuned nano-sized oxide-based one.44,285 In other words, the performance of an oxide semiconductor is largely based on how much the electronic structure and charge-transfer behaviour at the surface and/or interface is understood. Therefore, it is of significance to review effective testing methods for photogenerated-charge properties so as to clearly reveal the main factors influencing photocatalytic activity and to reasonably design and synthesize high-activity nanomaterials. Unfortunately, the related reviews are not too up to date. Widely-employed testing methods involve transient and steady-state techniques. Measurement of charge transfer behaviour is more efficient by combination of a steady-state technique with a transient technique.
6.1 Steady-state techniques
Since photoluminescence spectroscopy (PLS), photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS), and surface photovoltage (SPV) are three kinds of common photophysical phenomena, and it is understandable that they can reflect the properties of photogenerated charges, and there are certain intrinsic relationships among PLS, PAS, SPV and photocatalysis. The steady-state techniques mainly include PLS, PAS and surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPS),286–288 especially the latter. Compared to PLS and PAS, the SPS method is more effective. In the last decade, our group has carried out a substantial amount of work by using PLS and SPS methods for photogenerated charge properties,284,289–293 and completed review papers. Herein, we will focus on the recent achievements on SPS methods. In particular, we have further described an atmosphere-controlled SPS system,294 by which photogenerated charge properties are explored deeply.
The SPV method is a well-established contactless technique for the characterization of solid semiconductors, which relies on analyzing illumination-induced changes in surface voltage. For several decades, it has been used as an extensive source of surface and bulk information on various semiconductors and their interfaces. Many researchers realized that it is a powerful tool for semiconductor characterization at surface/interfaces. Moreover, the SPS method as a rapid and non-destructive monitor, is more sensitive than X-ray photoelectron or Auger spectroscopy, widening its applications. This technique has been successfully employed for the study of the charge transfer in photostimulated surface interactions, dye sensitization processes, and photocatalysis. By means of SPS method, Lenzmann et al.293 gave an indication for electronic injection from higher excited dye states to several kinds of semiconductor nanocrystalline photoanodes, and Zhao et al.295 carried out a study of quantum confinement properties of photogenerated charges in ZnO nanoparticles. Moreover, a field-induced SPV technique is developed, favourable to investigate surface states and photoelectric properties of solid semiconductors.287,296 Interestingly, a photogenerated interfacial charge transfer mechanism would be suggested on the basis of SPS results, providing powerful supports to design and synthesize high-performance nanomaterials. Therefore, it is meaningful to discuss the basic principles, measurements and applications of the SPS method, especially for recent advancements.

6.1.1 Principle and measurement of SPS method. 
In general, after a semiconductor receives photons of appropriate energy, the absorbed photons induce the formation of free charge carriers by creating electron–hole pairs in the vicinity of the surface and/or interface, and or by releasing captured charge carriers at the surface states. Thus, a significant amount of charge may transfer in opposite directions under the built-in electric field so that a net surface charge change would take place. In other words, the surface potential barrier, VS, changes. The difference (ΔVS) between the surface potential barriers in the light and that in the dark is defined as the SPV signal. There are two common kinds of transitions of photo-excited electrons mainly contributing to the surface photovoltage, including band-to-band and trap-to-band ones. Band-to-band transitions are the transitions by which electron–hole pairs are generated by promoting the electrons from the valence to the conduction band if the semiconductor receives photons with energies greater than that of the material's bandgap, and trap-to-band ones are involved with the surface states.288 The probability of band-to-band absorption is typically several orders of magnitude larger than that of trap-to-band one under super-bandgap illumination in a semiconductor, so that the effects of the trap-to-band transitions on the SPV is usually negligible.
In the case of an n-type semiconductor, the built-in electric field existing across the space charge region drives photo-generated holes toward the surface or interfacial region and electrons toward the interior of material or the bulk,288 while the reverse process takes place at a p-type semiconductor. Hence, the transfer and separation processes of the charge carriers result in the redistribution of surface charges under illumination so as to produce the surface photovoltage response, and the SPV signal mainly depends on the photogenerated charge separation. In addition, charge separation might result from diffusion processes of photogenerated charges. For a nano-sized material, its band bending like in a bulk semiconductor would not occur due to the limited size. In this case, the SPV response should mainly originate from the photogenerated charge separation via the diffusion process since the built-in electric fields are neglected. Compared with the charge separation via the built-in electric field, the diffusion processes contributes to a low SPV signal.
Steady-state surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SS-SPS) is measured with a photovoltage cell, mainly consisting of two indium tin oxide (ITO) glass electrodes, as shown in Fig. 33. During the SPS measurement, the powder sample is sandwiched between two ITO glass electrodes. For the outer electric field-induced SPS (EFISPS), an external bias is applied to the two sides of the sample by ITO electrodes and is regarded as positive when the side under illumination is connected to a positive electrode. When a direct current electric field is applied to the sample, the built-in electric field of the sample surface is influenced, so that the mobile direction and diffusive distance of photoinduced charge carriers are varied. In addition, it is understandable that the different atmospheres would affect the built-in electric field of the sample surface and surface states, further altering the SPS response. Hence, the SPS technique can provide more useful information about the photoinduced charge properties of the semiconductor surface/interface, especially with application of an external electric field along with a controlled atmosphere. In recent years, the SPS method as an effective tool has been well employed to reveal the photoinduced charge properties of surface-tuned oxide-based surfaces/interfaces.287,289–292,295,296
 Fig. 33  Schematic of a photovoltage cell for SS-SPS measurement. 


6.1.2 Application of SPS method. 
For phosphate-modified oxides. 
Surface modification may have obvious influence on the photocatalytic processes by altering the charge transfer pathways occurring at the surfaces of TiO2. The modification of TiO2 by inorganic nonmetal redox-inert anions, such as F−, PO43− and SO42−,297–300 has attracted remarkable attention due to their ability in improving photocatalytic activity of TiO2 for degrading organic pollutants under ultraviolet illumination. Especially, widely present phosphate anion, is known to adsorb strongly on the surfaces of TiO2 by substituting adsorbed surface hydroxyl groups,291 greatly influencing the interfacial and surface chemistry of TiO2. An operation mechanism for phosphate modification has been suggested by Zhao et al.,91 which is involved with an anion-induced negative electrostatic field in the surface layers of TiO2 in an aqueous system. Notably, the suggested mechanism would not be suitable for the gas-phase photocatalytic reactions since the anion-induced negative electrostatic field could not be formed on the surfaces of phosphate-modified TiO2. Interestingly, a new reasonable mechanism related to increased O2 adsorption is suggested based on SS-SPS responses (Fig. 34). For unmodified and phosphate-modified surfaces,291 it is confirmed from Fig. 34 that, the higher is the O2 content, the stronger is the SPS response. This demonstrates that phosphate modification does not change the SPS attributes of TiO2. However, it could greatly influence the SPS intensity of TiO2 either in O2 or in air. One can see that the modification with an appropriate amount of phosphate enhances the SPS response of TiO2 under aerobic atmosphere, indicating that the separation of photogenerated charges of TiO2 is obviously improved. The improved separation should result from the fact that the phosphate modification promotes the photogenerated electrons captured by the adsorbed O2 on the basis of SPS attributes of TiO2.
 Fig. 34  SS-SPS responses. A (T) and B (0.1 P-T) in different O2-content atmospheres. T means TiO2, and xP-T is the phosphate-modified T, in which x is the concentration of sodium orthophosphate solution used. C (in air) and D (in O2) for different phosphate-modified TiO2. Concentration (mol L−1) of sodium orthophosphate solution used: (a) 0, (b) 0.05, (c) 0.1, (d) 0.3 and (e) 0.5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 291. 
For phosphate-modified nanocrystalline Fe2O3, similar SPS results are also obtained.292 It is demonstrated that the visible photocatalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 for degrading liquid-phase phenol and gas-phase acetaldehyde is enhanced greatly after modification with an appropriate amount of phosphate. Hence, it is concluded that the enhanced activity is attributed to the increased charge separation by promoting photogenerated electrons captured by adsorbed O2 mainly by means of the atmosphere-controlled surface photovoltage spectra.
For 001-facet-exposed anatase TiO2. 
Is it true that the exceptional photocatalytic activity of 001-facet-exposed TiO2 is attributed to its high-energy surfaces? What are the roles in the photocatalysis for the residual fluoride of 001-facet-exposed TiO2? Nanocrystalline anatase TiO2 with different percentage of exposed (001) facets has been controllably synthesized by a hydrothermal process using HF as a morphology-directing agent.301 It is shown that the percentage of (001)-facet exposure is tuned by increasing the amount of used HF, and meanwhile the amount of residual fluoride in the as-prepared TiO2 is gradually increased. As the percentage of (001) facets is increased, the corresponding TiO2 gradually exhibits much higher photocatalytic activity for degrading colourless pollutants. However, the photocatalytic activity would obviously decrease when the residual fluoride is washed off with NaOH solution. By comparing F-free 001-facet-exposed TiO2 with F-residual sample, it is concluded that the exceptional photocatalytic activity of as-prepared 001-facet-exposed TiO2 depends mainly on the residual hydrogen fluoride linked to the surfaces of TiO2via the coordination bonds between Ti4+ and F−, as well as slightly on the high-energy 001-facet exposure, mainly by means of atmosphere-controlled surface photovoltage spectra. As shown in Fig. 35, the F-free TiO2 exhibits an unexpected weak SPS response in air compared with the corresponding F-residual one. This demonstrates that the residual fluoride should play a dominant role in the photogenerated charge separation processes of TiO2, leading to high photocatalytic activity. In addition, it is confirmed that an appropriate percentage of (001)-facet exposure is favorable for the increased charge separation of F-free TiO2. This implies that the residual fluoride and the high-energy facet exposure have different-degree effects on the photogenerated charge separation.301
 Fig. 35  Intensities of SPS peak at 350 nm of resulting F-residual TiO2 and its corresponding F-free sample (A), and their photocatalytic degradation rates of gas-phase acetaldehyde and liquid-phase phenol (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 301. 
For nano-sized rutile TiO2. 
Compared with anatase TiO2, rutile possesses several advantages, such as high chemical stability, narrow band gap and high refractive index, implying that it might be a promising photocatalyst material. For this, nanosized rutile TiO2 has been successfully synthesized by a hydrochloric acid-modified hydrothermal process.290 It is widely accepted that the formation of rutile phase in TiO2 mainly depends on the role of chlorine anions in the synthesis,302 so that a certain amount of residual chloride would exist on the surfaces of the resulting nanocrystalline rutile TiO2. To further disclose the effects of the residual chloride on photogenerated charge separation of nanosized rutile, SS-SPS responses are measured as shown in Fig. 36. Noticeably, the SS-SPS response gradually becomes strong with increasing rutile content. This is obviously different from the SPS orders of TiO2 samples prepared by the common thermal treatment method, for which the anatase-based samples usually show stronger SPS responses than the rutile-based ones, while the pure rutile always exhibits a weak SPS response. Moreover, it displays an obvious SS-SPS response in the absence of oxygen and its SPS intensity gradually becomes weak with increasing oxygen concentration. This is completely different from that of the anatase TiO2. Thus, it is deduced that the residual chloride could effectively capture the photoinduced holes, promoting the photoinduced electrons to diffuse to the surface of the used electrode to contribute to the marked SPV signal. Unexpectedly, the as-prepared rutile TiO2 displays low activity in the photodegradation of colourless liquid-phase phenol and gas-phase acetaldehyde. Based on the SS-SPS responses, it is suggested that the enhanced activity for degrading coloured dyes is mainly attributed to the residual chloride that could promote the dye adsorbed on the surfaces of TiO2, consequently accelerating the photosensitization oxidation reactions of the dye molecules, whereas the low activity for degrading colourless pollutants results from the photogenerated electrons weakly captured by the adsorbed oxygen.
 Fig. 36  SPS responses of DS0 (0), DS1.0 (11.2), DS1.8 (88.3), DS2.0 (100) and DS2.5 (100) TiO2 samples (numbers in parentheses indicate the rutile content percentage in the resulting TiO2), Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. 

6.2 Transient-state techniques
The transient-state techniques, also called time-resolved ones, including photocurrent and photovoltage measurement, infrared and visible absorption, and microwave conductivity are powerful tools to investigate the photogenerated charge properties, especially for surface photovoltage, optical absorption and microwave conductivity. Herein, transient-state surface photovoltage measurement, transient-state absorption spectra, and time-resolved microwave conductivity method (TRMC) are reviewed, mainly concerned with the method principle and its application.

6.2.1 Transient-state surface photovoltage (TS-SPV) response. 
For the TS-SPV response, this reflects charge carrier lifetime as well as photogenerated charge separation.295,303,304 Compared with the SS-SPS response, the TS-SPV one is much more efficient to reveal the properties of photogenerated charges of semiconducting solid materials.304 As depicted in Fig. 37, a TS-SPV measurement equipment mainly consists of a laser, photovoltage cell, amplifier and digital phosphor oscilloscope. It is well known that, when electron–hole pairs are generated in the space charge region of a semiconductor particle, they would be immediately separated under a built-in electric field, leading to a fast SPV component (<10−5 s). For the n-type semiconductor, its built-in electric field is from the inner to the outer direction in air.303 Therefore, its SPV signal should result from the charge enrichment of positive holes at the surfaces. However, the diameter of a semiconductor nanoparticle is too small to build up a wide space-charge region, usually resulting into a weak fast SPV signal. Besides the built-in electric field, the charge separation is influenced by the carrier diffusion process, mainly contributing to the slow photovoltage response (>10−4 s). Since the presence of O2 is favourable to capture photogenerated electrons, it is expected that the diffusion of the positive holes from the interior to the surfaces is much faster than that of negative electrons in air. Thus, it is deduced that n-type semiconductors should display a positive SPV response via the carrier diffusion process and/or the built-in electric field.
 Fig. 37  Schematic of the TS-SPV measurement equipment. 
For an appropriate amount of phosphate-modified Fe2O3, its SS-SPS response is strong compared to the unmodified one, indicating the high photogenerated charge separation. This is further supported by the TS-SPV response.292 It is seen that the phosphate modification leads to an increased TS-SPV response, implying that the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers is prolonged.
In addition to the surface modification, the construction of a heterojunctional composite is often employed to promote photogenerated charge separation.305–307 It is highly desired to investigate the properties of photogenerated charges for a heterojunctional composite in detail. In general, the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 could be enhanced by compounding a certain amount of graphene so as to effectively promote transfer and separation of photogenerated electrons,308 which is proved by the TS-SPV responses as shown in Fig. 38. It is seen that pure reduced graphene oxide (RGO) exhibits almost no photovoltage response, while for anatase TiO2, only a very low photovoltage response (0.03 mV) was observed. Interestingly, after the integration of anatase TiO2 with RGO, its photovoltage response significantly increased to 0.16 mV, which is ∼5 times higher than that of anatase TiO2. This demonstrates that once the anatase TiO2 is excited, the photoinduced electrons will transfer from anatase TiO2 into RGO, while the holes are left in anatase TiO2. Through the electron transfer processes, the electron–hole pairs generated in the excited anatase TiO2 could be efficiently separated, thus resulting in the improved photovoltage response of RGO–anatase TiO2 nanocomposite. Compared with anatase TiO2, the other characteristic of the photovoltage response of RGO–anatase nanocomposite is that its mean lifetime of electron–hole pairs is prolonged from ∼10−7 s to ∼10−5 s. This implies that the integration of RGO with anatase TiO2 would greatly retard the recombination of electron–hole pairs in the excited anatase TiO2.
 Fig. 38  TS-TPV responses of RGO, anatase TiO2 and RGO–anatase TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. 
However, it has seldom been reported to improve the photocatalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 by using graphene. Similar to TiO2, is this also true for Fe2O3? This is confirmed by means of the TS-SPV responses, along with the SS-SPS ones, as shown in Fig. 39. It is observed that the SPS response of Fe2O3 mainly originates from the photogenerated charge separation via the diffusion process in the presence of O2 by capturing photogenerated electrons.309
 Fig. 39  SS-SPS (A) and TS-SPV (B) responses. F means Fe2O3, 3 in 3G-F is the mass content percentage of used graphene, and 1.0 in 1.0PG-F is the concentration of used phosphoric acid and P means phosphate functionalization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309. 
Notably, the SS-SPS response of α-Fe2O3 is enhanced after an appropriate amount of graphene is coupled, especially for graphene functionalized with an appropriate amount of phosphoric acid. According to the SS-SPS principle, the strong SPS response corresponds to high photogenerated charge separation. If the amount of used graphene is too much, it would be unfavorable for the optical absorption of α-Fe2O3 so as to lower its SPS response. In addition, an excess amount of used phosphoric acid would be unfavorable to transport charge so as to decrease the SPS response of the resulting composite. As expected, it is confirmed based on the TS-SPV responses that the photogenerated charge separation in air of Fe2O3 is greatly improved by coupling an appropriate amount of graphene, un-functionalized or functionalized with phosphoric acid, along with prolonged lifetime.
By means of the SS-SPS responses (Fig. 40), especially along with the TS-TPV ones in air, it is clearly demonstrated that the as-synthesized AgBr–TiO2 nanoheterostructured nanocomposites by a simple microemulsion-like chemical precipitation method display effective photogenerated charge transfers between AgBr and TiO2, leading to high charge separation,296 so that the high photocatalytic activity for degrading liquid-phase aqueous phenol solution and gas-phase acetaldehyde under either UV-visible or visible irradiation is improved greatly.
 Fig. 40  SS-SPS (A) and TS-SPV (B) responses. TiO2 (a), AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–W) prepared in the transitional water system (b), and AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–MEL) prepared in the microemulsion-like system (c), and AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–MM) prepared by mechanical mixing (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. 
Similar to the AgBr–TiO2 nanocomposite, the photoinduced charge transfer properties of the ZnO/BiOI heterostructures were systematically investigated by SS-SPS and TS-SPV techniques (Fig. 41).310 It is seen that a quite weak SPV response in the UV light range is observed for pure ZnO, whereas an apparent SPV response ranging from 300 to 700 nm is observed for pure BiOI. Notably, the observed SPV response is significantly strengthened in the ZnO/BiOI heterostructure (ZB-1), indicating that the improved separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs is achieved by coupling of ZnO and BiOI. Unlike the case for pure BiOI, the TS-TPV response of ZB-1 clearly displays two processes with response times of 10−7–10−5 and 10−5–10−3 s. More significantly, the carrier lifetime for the ZnO/BiOI heterostructure become much longer than that of BiOI. These features of ZnO/BiOI are attributed to the heterojunctions formed at the interface between BiOI and ZnO. This is responsible for the high photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 41  TS-SPS spectra (A) and TS-SPV responses (B) of pure BiOI, pure ZnO and ZnO/BiOI heterostructure ZB-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310. 


6.2.2 Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS). 
Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) uses short pulses of light to irradiate solid oxide semiconductors, and the kinetics of the reactive intermediates that are formed following excitation can then be monitored by examining the change in absorption at a chosen wavelength in the UV, visible and infrared regions.281–285,311,312 As described in Fig. 42, generally speaking, a laser is used as a pulse excitation resource, and a tungsten or xenon lamp provides the probe light. For controlling the intensity of the used laser, optical filters are placed between the light guide and the sample. The wavelength of probe light is controlled by monochromators in front of and behind the film sample. The photocurrent from the detectors is magnified by an amplifier system to extract the transient signal. The signal is recorded with a digital oscilloscope and transferred to a computer for analysis. It is well known that TAS is an effective tool to investigate the dynamics of relaxed photoholes and photoelectrons of semiconductors, respectively, which is crucial to clearly understand the important factors influencing the final photocatalytic and/or photoelectric performance.281,285
 Fig. 42  Schematic of the TAS measurement equipment. 
This technique has well been used to study both doped and undoped nanocrystalline-TiO2 (nc-TiO2). Bahnemann et al.313 and Furube et al.314,315 reported fingerprints for photogenerated electrons and holes in nc-TiO2, and carried out detailed studies of the absorption spectra of these species at a range of pH values. Ultrafast TAS has been used to monitor the initial processes following the excitation of nc-TiO2. In nc-TiO2 the surface trapping of holes and electrons was found to occur within the ca. 200 fs duration of the excitation laser pulse.281 The absorption maxima for surface trapped electrons and holes have been shown to lie at ∼800 and ∼450 nm,281,282 respectively. In the absence of chemical scavengers recombination of the trapped electrons and holes can occur. Studies using high intensity excitation noted that electron–hole recombination occurred primarily on the nanosecond time scale in nc-TiO2 with over 80% of charge carriers decaying in 200 ns.282,313 However, TAS studies carried out at lower excitation densities, closer to intensities of one sun, have shown that the electron–hole recombination rates decreased with decreasing laser intensity and that recombination under these conditions occurs primarily on the microsecond time scale.281 The strong dependence of electron–hole lifetime on the laser intensity has been proposed to be due to an exponential tail of localized intraband trap states. In the absence of electron scavengers the presence of liquid water does not change the hole lifetime, indicating that water oxidation is occurring at a slower rate than electron–hole recombination.
Tang et al.281 showed that the photogenerated hole lifetime in TiO2 is a strong determinant of the ability of TiO2 to split water based on the TAS measurements in the presence of exogenous scavengers. As seen in Fig. 43, the photoholes and photoelectrons have identical dynamics attributed to natural recombination without any other quenching in pure TiO2, which obeys a power law corresponding to a trapping–detrapping effect. Using Ag+ as an electron scavenger, the transient decay of holes resulting from reaction between holes and water is very slow, in which the hole half-lifetime is 0.27 s, much longer than that for Pt as electron scavenger, suggesting that O2 production takes place on a time scale of a second. In addition, spectra monitored at 800 nm ascribed to electron absorption implies less ability of trapping electron by Pt compared with Ag+.
 Fig. 43  TAS temporal profile. (A) Photoholes (TiO2 (h+)) and photoelectrons (TiO2 (e−)) in nc-TiO2 film after band-gap excitation with laser intensity of 350 μJ cm−2 in argon atmosphere. The inset is a log–log plot, and the gray line is a fitting to the plot. (B) TiO2 (h+) (solid line) and TiO2 (e−) (dotted line) with Ag+ (traces a and d) and Pt (traces b and c) as the electron scavengers. The black line (trace a) is the fit to the hole kinetics using Ag ions as electron scavenger. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. 
The mechanism of photochemical water splitting on nc-TiO2 is not fully understood. For this, the application of a positive potential to a nc-TiO2 film is shown to lead to the formation of long-lived holes which oxidize water on the millisecond time scale,282 as shown in Fig. 44. As the potential of nc-TiO2 increases from −0.9 to −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, the lifetime and yield of the holes is increased. At potentials greater than −0.5 V no significant changes in the TAS signal of the holes are observed, which is in agreement with the observed plateau of the photocurrent at potentials greater than −0.5 V. The increase in long-lived photoholes with applied potential is assigned to the removal of photoelectrons through the external circuit, lowering the quantity of electron–hole recombination. It is demonstrated that the long-lived photoholes go on to generate O2, and that there are no major branching inefficiencies in the catalysis itself, which appears to be operating at efficiencies close to 100%.
 Fig. 44  TAS decay traces of the hole. (A) On nc-TiO2 recorded at 460 nm following the UV excitation of nc-TiO2 in 0.05 M NaOH at −0.9 (black), −0.8 (red), −0.7 (green), −0.5 (blue) and 0 V (cyan) vs. a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. (B) In nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 electrodes measured in a complete PEC cell. In 0.1 M NaOH under negative applied bias of −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (blue curve) and under positive applied bias of +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (black curve). Upon the addition of methanol in the positive bias condition (red curve), the faster decay indicates the oxidation of this substrate by photoholes. All decays are obtained upon laser excitation at 355 nm and probing at 580 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. 
Similar to TiO2, the appearance of a long lived transient signal in Fe2O3 under positive applied bias is strongly indicative of the formation of long lived holes which have avoided rapid recombination.312 The faster decay of this long lived signal in the presence of methanol indicates that the transient lifetime is determined by surface oxidation kinetics, confirming the assignment of this signal to surface active holes. Notably, the faster kinetics in the presence of methanol is consistent with the relatively facile oxidation of methanol compared to water. Hence, the formed long-lived holes are responsible for the increased photocurrent of Fe2O3. In addition, Fig. 45 shows the amplitude of the long-lived hole signal (monitored at 200 ms and 575 nm) against the photocurrent measured at +0.4 VSSC for different Fe2O3 photoanodes.312 One can see that there is a clear common correlation between the amplitude of the long-lived photogenerated hole signal and the photocurrent density. This correlation provides further evidence for the importance of long-lived holes in driving water photo-oxidation, and indicates that this correlation is generic to a broad range of hematite photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 45  Correlation of long-lived photo-hole population (as measured by the amplitude of the TA decay at 200 ms) with photocurrent at +0.4 VSSC, both under 355 nm illumination for various hematite photoanodes under EE (front-side) and SE (back-side) illumination. The best-fit straight line has an intercept of 0.001(4) mΔOD and gradient of 0.19(4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. 
WO3 is a widely studied photoanode for the oxidation of water,316,317 and TAS is also employed to identify the spectra of photogenerated electrons and holes on WO3. By measuring the decay of photoholes on the milliseconds to seconds time scale in the presence of an electron scavenger, a lower limit is provided for the required lifetime of holes for water oxidation on WO3, and the rate of electron–hole recombination on WO3 is found to be nonlinear with excitation intensity.318
Cobalt phosphate (Co–Pi) has been shown to be an effective electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution that can self-assemble onto electrode surfaces from phosphate-buffered solutions containing Co2+.283,319 Similarly, Co–Pi can also enhance the efficiency of water photooxidation when coupled with a range of metal oxide photoelectrodes, including ZnO,320 WO3,321 and α-Fe2O3.273,319,322 Photoelectrochemical studies of α-Fe2O3/Co–Pi photoelectrodes have indicated that this increased photoanode efficiency results from lower recombination losses, most typically attributed to the improved water oxidation kinetics.283 However, direct studies of the kinetics of either recombination or oxidation processes for such composite photoelectrodes are meaningful. As shown in Fig. 46, for the bare α-Fe2O3 electrodes, a relatively fast (microsecond) power-law decay was observed, assigned to the bimolecular recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. The rapid recombination dynamics is fast in comparison with water oxidation by photogenerated holes on hematite photoanodes, leading to the observed negligible water oxidation on such photoelectrodes without the application of a positive electrical bias. Interestingly, the addition of Co–Pi dramatically increased the lifetime of the transient by more than three orders of magnitude, with t1/2 increasing from ∼15 μs in the bare film to ∼30 ms in the composite. This clearly indicates that the deposition of Co–Pi results in a substantial retardation of e–h recombination relative to the bare α-Fe2O3 film.
 Fig. 46  TA decays of Nb-doped α-Fe2O3 (a) before and (b) after 300 s electrodeposition of Co–Pi. Decay traces were recorded after UV laser excitation (355 nm, 200 μJ cm−2, 0.33 Hz) and probed at 580 and 900 nm, within the absorption band of α-Fe2O3 photoholes. All measurements were performed on isolated films in 0.1 M KPi buffer (pH 7) under EE illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283. 
Since the mechanism related to the modified phosphate is poorly understood, due to a lack of direct evidence, it is meaningful to carry out the study on the dynamic processes of photogenerated charges in the modified nc-TiO2 films mainly by means of TAS spectra. As seen from Fig. 47,285 the photogenerated holes of the un-modified TiO2 film exhibit the same dynamic decay process (t50% ≈ 2 μs, the time for concentration of charge carriers to decrease by half of its initial value) as its photogenerated electrons in oxygen-free pH 7 water, while the photogenerated holes of the phosphate modified film display a little faster dynamic decay process than its photogenerated electrons, and also, the photogenerated charges of the modified film have much longer lifetime than those of the un-modified one. Compared with TiO2 film, the phosphate-modified one exhibits long-lifetime photogenerated charge carriers (t50% ≥ 5 μs), implying that the separation of photogenerated charges of TiO2 is enhanced by phosphate modification. These differences are attributed to the surface-carried negative charges of nc-TiO2 resulting from the phosphate groups (–Ti–O–P–O−). Hence, the prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charges attributed to the formed negative electrostatic field in the surface layers is responsible for the increase in the activity for photoelectrochemical water splitting.
 Fig. 47  Temporal profile of TAS of photoelectrons and photoholes of TiO2 film and phosphate-modified films in pH 7 water in the absence of O2 (inset shows surface carried charges of TiO2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. 
Moreover, the photogenerated electrons in the un-modified TiO2 film display shorter lifetime in O2 than in argon by 3 μs, implying that the process by which the photoelectrons are captured by the adsorbed O2 is competitive to the recombination between photogenerated electrons and photoholes. This leads to the long-lifetime photogenerated holes in TiO2 film.284 Noticeably, the photogenerated electrons of phosphate-modified film exhibit much shorter lifetime (t50% = 8 μs) in O2 relative to unmodified film, while its photogenerated holes do not show a long lifetime. It is clearly demonstrated that the phosphate modification greatly accelerates the decay dynamics of the photogenerated electrons of nc-TiO2 in O2. This is responsible for the improved charge separation and enhanced photocatalytic activity of TiO2.
Plasmon-based photocatalysis systems are attracting much attention in recent years.323–325 To study plasmon-induced charge-transfer mechanisms between excited gold nanoparticles and TiO2, ultrafast visible-pump–infrared-probe femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy was used to explore charge separation and recombination dynamics in gold–TiO2 nanoparticle systems.323,324 Electron transfer from gold nanoparticles to the conduction band of TiO2 was observed by the transient absorption of electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 at 3440 nm after optical excitation of the surface plasmon band of gold nanoparticles at 550 nm. It was found that electron injection was completed within 50 fs and the electron injection yield reached 20–50%. The charge recombination decay within 1.5 ns was non-exponential and was strongly dependent on the particle diameter of TiO2. Larger TiO2 particles resulted in longer charge recombination times because of the longer diffusion length of electrons in TiO2 particles.326


6.2.3 Time-resolved microwave conductivity method (TRMC). 
After pulse laser excitation of charge carriers, holes which escape band-gap recombination are transferred to the sorbed electron donor trans-decalin within ns. Thus, the TRMC signals are due to electrons remaining in the semiconductor lattice after hole transfer.327 Thus, it can reflect the carrier information, such as carrier generation efficiencies, carrier mobilities, trapping processes, and the lifetime of free carriers.327–329 In general, a TRMC measurement equipment mainly consists of a pulsed laser, sample holder, microwave source, microwave detector and digitizing scope. After the pulsed laser excites the sample, microwaves from the source pass through the sample, and then impact on the PIN diode detector, transforming the incident microwave power into a voltage for input to the oscilloscope. The absorbed microwave power is directly proportional to the conductivity of the sample,330 which depends on the carrier properties.
As an effective testing tool, TRMC has been exploited to investigate the electronic properties of semiconductors, especially for electron injection efficiencies. Katoh et al.331 have evaluated the electron injection efficiency in the dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 films with different primary particle sizes (20 and 300 nm). Piris et al.332 studied the charge injection following photoexcitation of CdS domains grown on nanoporous ZrO2 and TiO2. It was demonstrated that mobile charge carriers were generated with a low yield following photoexcitation of CdS grown on ZrO2, and that illumination of CdS domains grown on TiO2 resulted in very efficient electron injection into the TiO2 nanoparticles, producing long-lived charge carriers.
In addition to the electron injection, TRMC is also exploited to study the trapping processes in doped semiconductors. Katoh et al.333 studied the charge separation and trapping processes in N-doped TiO2 (N-TiO2) photocatalysts. It was confirmed that the trapping rate increased with N-doping due to the increase in oxygen vacancies, and the trapping rate increased markedly when Cu was loaded onto the photocatalysts, and this increase indicated a rapid electron transfer to Cu co-catalyst. Carneiro et al.334 showed an result of increasing crystal quality of the anatase phase induced by calcination, as derived from the TRMC measurements, implying the rational design of improved photocatalysts.

7. Conclusion and outlook
The last decade has seen an increase in research activity on nanostructured semiconductor photocatalysis systems for environmental purification and energy production. It is apparent that the photocatalytic performance of a semiconductor oxide is ultimately determined by its intrinsic material parameters, i.e. by its band structure, chemical composition, crystal phase, morphology and microstructure. This review has covered several interesting and important aspects of nanostructured oxides as efficient photocatalysts by surface/interface tuning of preliminary nanocrystallites, especially for high thermal stability, hierarchical structure assembly, heterojunctional nanocomposite, and high-energy-facet exposure, and testing methods for photogenerated charge properties at surface and/or interfaces, with particular emphasis on recent advancements. The surface-tuning approach has been shown to significantly improve the photocatalytic performance by changing charge carrier lifetime, photogenerated charge separation, and reactive pathways. For many metal oxides, weak conductivity, high defect concentration, and short carrier lifetimes are important questions that limit greatly the photocatalytic performance. As discussed above, the shortcomings could be solved to a certain degree by surface- and/or interface-tuning strategies of the preliminary nanocrystalline oxide.
The breakthrough of synthetic methodology for TiO2-based photocatalysts with high thermal stability via surface binding methods has provided opportunities to greatly improve photocatalytic performance. In those cases, highly stable TiO2 with high crystallinity, large surface area and small nanoparticle size have already shown exciting promise for polluted water or gas treatment as photocatalytic ceramic membranes or nanopowders. In particular, the obtained TiO2-based porous nanomaterials with high thermal stability would provide important conditions to construct effective-contacted nanocomposites as highty efficient photocatalysts. Expectedly, the studies on TiO2-based photocatalysts with high thermal stability are still in its early stages, with a number of challenges to overcome in the years ahead. In fact, it is still difficult to fabricate high-quality TiO2 with high thermal stability that satisfies all the requirements of different specific applications, e.g., non-agglomerated state, controlled crystal size and tunable phase content, and large-scale and low-cost synthetic processes of these materials are still highly desirable. In addition, great success has been achieved in hierarchical architectures by surface-inducing self-assembly processes, and various hierarchical architectures from multidimensional to hollow with different morphologies such as spheres, tubes and membranes, have been successfully prepared. Nevertheless, the previous reports are mainly limited to primary self-assembly processes. The future design of tailored hierarchical architectures lies in the selective modification of the primary assemblies with recognizable interactions. It could be argued that a major challenge for nanocrystallite assembly is the lack of metrology to characterize the kinetics and structures in situ during the assembly processes. Further work is needed to achieve the rational design of hierarchically structured nanomaterials in photocatalytic applications.
Although various heterojunctional composites have been achieved via surface deposition strategies, the synthetic process usually is complicated. Hence, simple fabrication of effective-contacted heterojunctional nanocomposites as efficient photocatalysts is still a challenge for practical applications. Moreover, the in situ detection of heterojunctional formation is also desired, in order to reveal the essential factors for heterojunctional formation. It is necessary to reasonably design high-activity novel heterojunctional nanocomposite photocatalysts. It is demonstrated clearly that the strategies for fabricating semiconductor oxide nanocrystallites with exposed high-energy facets through surface modification are clearly feasible, corresponding to effective photocatalytic reactions. Thus, it is clear that crystal facet engineering not only is an exciting direction to pursue for highly active new generation photocatalysts, but also offers opportunities to investigate the intrinsic relationships between the surface properties, photogenerated charge properties and photocatalytic performances in detail. Considering the complicated procedures and the corrosive protectors for generation of exposed high-energy facets used at present, novel and environmental friendly strategies via surface modification to realize high-performance nano-sized semiconductor oxides with exposed high-energy facets are still great challenges in the near future.
Controlled synthesis of nano-sized oxides as efficient photocatalysts is accomplished by the surface- and/or interface-tuning strategies of preliminary nanocrystallites. However, it is crucial for rational design and further synthesis to understand the effects of the composition and structure of prepared nano-sized oxides on the photogenerated charge properties. For this, several important testing methods, mainly involving SS-SPS, TR-SPV and TAS, have been extensively employed. However, detailed charge separation processes on different conditions are still needed to be explored. Thus, it is much desired to develop condition-controlled testing methods, along with ultrafast detection. Currently, the TAS method mainly depends on visible absorption. Since the characteristic absorption of excited charge carriers of oxides usually centers on the near-infrared and even mid-infrared regions, it is required to carry out the detailed studies on the wide-range-optical transient absorption.
In particular, the complex nature of photocatalytic systems for environmental purification and energy production further requires combined experimental and theoretical studies at the advanced level for efficient solar energy utilization. A substantial breakthrough in efficiency requires a clear understanding of the surface–interface processes at the atomic level. In situ observations, such as Raman, STM and synchrotron radiation techniques, are highly desirable to obtain a true picture of surfaces and/or interfaces in action, and theoretical materials design and photocatalytic process simulations should take into account the surface–interface reactions of photogenerated charge carriers. These highly-desired surface- and/or interface-tuning strategies would also require high precision in the synthesis/assembly of oxide-based nanomaterials, especially for several-component systems. This includes better control of surface and/or interfaces, so that the energy loss processes arising from the increased interfacial areas would be minimized. Moreover, powerful experimental methods for photogenerated charge properties, especially on-line and ultrafast processes, should be developed for clearly disclosing the key factors influencing photocatalytic performance. In addition, it is worth noting that the well-developed surface-tuning strategies also would be applicable to other non-oxide photocatalyst systems, such as sulfide and g-C3N4.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the supports of this research by the Key Program Projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21031001), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91122018, 51272070, 21071048, 21101060, 21376065), the Program for Innovative Research Team in Chinese Universities (IRT1237), the Cultivation Fund of the Key Scientific and Technical Innovation Project, Ministry of Education of China (No. 708029), and the Special Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20112301110002, 20122301110002, 20112301120002).
References
J. E. Elliott and K. H. Elliott, Science, 2013, 340, 556–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Tsao, J. E. Campbell, M. Mena-Carrasco, S. N. Spak, G. R. Carmichael and Y. Chen, Nat. Clim. Change, 2011, 2, 53–57 CrossRef .
H. Nakamura, Anal. Methods, 2010, 2, 430–444 RSC .
K. C. Kemp, H. Seema, M. Saleh, N. H. Le, K. Mahesh, V. Chandra and K. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3149–3171 RSC .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
S. Y. Lee, K. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H. R. Jung, H. C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Palmisano, E. Garcia-Lopez, G. Marci, V. Loddo, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7074–7089 RSC .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
K. Rajeshwar and N. R. de Tacconi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1984–1998 RSC .
H. Tada, M. Fujishima and H. Kobayashi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4232–4243 RSC .
S. Josset, N. Keller, M. C. Lett, M. J. Ledoux and V. Keller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 744–755 RSC .
R. T. Koodali and D. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 608–614 CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654–5671 RSC .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Alvarez-Galván, J. A. Villoria de la Mano, S. M. Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865–1882 CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 CAS .
K. Shimura and H. Yoshida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2467–2481 CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217–9233 CAS .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745–758 CAS .
J. Schneider, H. Jia, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2036–2051 RSC .
L. Yuliati and H. Yoshida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1592–1602 RSC .
J. M. Narayanam and C. R. Stephenson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 102–113 RSC .
M. D. Hernández-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suárez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 Search PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Kiyonaga and S. Naya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1849–1858 RSC .
J. Huang, Z. Yin and Q. Zheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3861–3877 CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, X. Chen, Y. H. Leung and A. Man Ching Ng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6526–6535 RSC .
S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. Cao, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kienzle and L. D. Marks, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7833–7839 RSC .
C. A. Bignozzi, S. Caramori, V. Cristino, R. Argazzi, L. Meda and A. Tacca, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2228–2246 RSC .
X. Liu, F. Wang and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7894–7911 RSC .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682–6702 CAS .
A. Y. Polyakov, S. J. Pearton, P. Frenzer, F. Ren, L. Liu and J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 877–887 RSC .
Y. Jiang, H. Jia, W. Wang, L. Wang and H. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2625–2629 CAS .
L. Cademartiri, G. Guerin, K. J. Bishop, M. A. Winnik and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9327–9334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, C. Hu, S. Wang, Y. Xi and K. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5515–5520 CAS .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 168–187 RSC .
A. Efrati, O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9258–9266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feigl, S. P. Russo and A. S. Barnard, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4971–4980 RSC .
G. Zhu, S. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Ma and X. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15605–15612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shand and J. A. Anderson, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 879–899 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 663–672 CrossRef CAS .
T. Froschl, U. Hormann, P. Kubiak, G. Kucerova, M. Pfanzelt, C. K. Weiss, R. J. Behm, N. Husing, U. Kaiser, K. Landfester and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5313–5360 RSC .
C. Vericat, M. E. Vela and R. C. Salvarezza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3258–3268 RSC .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernández-García and G. Colón, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pinna and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5292–5304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Grosso, G. J. de A. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, F. Cagnol, C. Sinturel, A. Bourgeois, A. Brunet-Bruneau, H. Amenitsch, P. A. Albouy and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4562–4570 CrossRef CAS .
P. Si, S. J. Ding, J. Yuan, X. W. (David) Lou and D. H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7617–7626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Liu, H. L. Zhao, J. M. Andino and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1817–1828 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kandiel, A. Feldhoff, L. Robben, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2050–2060 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Katsumata, Y. Ohno, K. Tomita, T. Taniguchi, N. Matsushita and K. Okada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4846–4852 CAS .
X. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Q. Liu, M. Haruta and W. Shen, Nature, 2009, 458, 746–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mukherjee, T. Chakrabarti, E. Ashok Anumol, T. A. Abinandanan and N. Ravishankar, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2700–2706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ni, L. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Guan, S. Yang and K. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4223–4227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, D. Han, D. Ma, H. Liang, L. Liu and Y. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 291–295 CAS .
S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Jiang and Y. X. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 6224–6228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, T. Wang and Y. X. Wu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4441–1446 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Tsung, J. Fan, N. Zheng, Q. Shi, A. J. Forman, J. Wang and G. D. Stucky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8682–8686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yue, C. Randorn, P. S. Attidekou, Z. Su, J. T. S. Irvine and W. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2826–2833 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Koparde and P. T. Cummings, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1620–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Bass, D. Grosso, C. Boissiere and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7882–7897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wang, H. Li, S. Yin and T. Sato, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1583–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali Ahmad, B. Prelot, F. Dufour, O. Durupthy, A. Razafitianamaharavo, J. M. Douillard, C. Chaneac, F. Villiéras and J. Zajac, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4459–4469 CAS .
J. B. Ma, B. Xu, J. H. Meng, X. N. Wu, X. L. Ding, X. N. Li and S. G. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2991–2998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Zhou, T. Y. Zeng, Z. M. Cheng and W. K. Yuan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 883–890 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, S. Xin, O. Yang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CAS .
G. H. Tian, L. Q. Jing, H. G. Fu and C. G. Tian, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 161, 1122–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, K. Pan, D. J. Wang, W. Zhou, Z. Y. Ren and H. G. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 3740–3745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. D. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Tian, K. Pan, H. G. Fu, L. Q. Jing and W. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 166, 939–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugimoto, X. Zhou and A. Muramatsu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 252, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugimoto and X. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 252, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Barnard and L. A. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, R. L. Penn, R. J. Hamers and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4656–4662 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Jing, X. J. Sun, B. F. Xin, B. Q. Wang, W. M. Cai and H. G. Fu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 3375–3382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. J. Li, Z. C. Feng, J. Chen and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 927–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Gribb and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1997, 82, 717–728 CAS .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3481–3487 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1998, 83, 1077–1082 CAS .
C. H. Kang, L. Q. Jing, T. Guo, H. C. Cui, J. Zhou and H. G. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1006–1013 CAS .
L. W. Zhang, H. B. Fu and Y. F. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2180–2189 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Huang, D. Gu, D. Y. Zhao and R. A. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1760–1767 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Liu, Y. J. Ren, Y. F. Shi, F. Zhang, L. J. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1140–1146 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 9977–9981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. O. Gopal, H. H. Lo, T.-F. Ke, C. H. Lee, C. C. Chou, J. D. Wu, S. C. Sheu and S. C. Ke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16191–16197 CAS .
D. Zhao, C. C. Chen, Y. F. Wang, H. W. Ji, W. H. Ma, L. Zang and J. C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5993–6001 CAS .
J. C. Yu, L. Z. Zhang, Z. Zheng and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2280–2286 CrossRef CAS .
G. Colón, J. M. Sánchez-Espana, M. C. Hidalgo and J. A. Navîo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 179, 20–27 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Q. Jing, X. Qin, Y. B. Luan, Y. C. Qu and M. Z. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 3340–3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Tian, H. G. Fu, L. Q. Jing, B. F. Xin and K. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3083–3089 CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou, K. Pan, C. G. Tian, Z. Y. Ren, Y. Z. Dong and H. G. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9205–9212 RSC .
K. Cassiers, T. Linssen, M. Mathieu, Y. Q. Bai, H. Y. Zhu, P. Cool and F. Etienne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3713–3721 CrossRef CAS .
E. Beyers, P. Cool and F. V. Etienne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10081–10086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, F. F. Sun, K. Pan, G. H. Tian, B. J. Jiang, Z. R. Ren, C. G. Tian and H. G. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1922–1930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, F. L. Jia, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1216–1219 CAS .
Y. X. Tang, P. X. Wee, Y. K. Lai, X. P. Wang, D. G. Gong, P. D. Kanhere, T.-T. Lim, Z. L. Dong and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2772–2780 CAS .
I. E. Rauda, R. Buonsanti, L. C. Saldarriaga-Lopez, K. Benjauthrit, L. T. Schelhas, M. Stefik, V. Augustyn, J. Ko, B. Dunn, U. Wiesner, D. J. Milliron and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6386–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Petkovich and A. Stein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3721–3739 RSC .
Q. Zhang, S. J. Liu and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 191–207 RSC .
X. Yu, H. M. Xu, L. Xin, X. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, B. J. Li, W. X. Zhao and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6175–6182 CAS .
C. X. Wang, L. W. Yin, L. Y. Zhang, Y. X. Qi, N. Lun and N. N. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12841–12848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Mao, M. Kanungo, H. B. Tirandai and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 702–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bae, Y. Yoon, W. S. Yoon, J. Moon, J. Kim and H. Shin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1581–1587 CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, Q. L. Li, J. J. Fan and B. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9161–9163 RSC .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, Q. W. Huang and J. Q. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5115–5117 RSC .
Y. Lin, H. Skaff, T. Emrick, A. D. Dinsmore and T. P. Russell, Science, 2003, 299, 226–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. W. Dryfe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1869–1883 RSC .
A. Boker, J. He, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1231–1248 RSC .
Y. Chang, J. J. Teo and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1074–1079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Small, 2005, 1, 566–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, W. Zhou, K. Pan, C. G. Tian, X. R. Huang and H. G. Fu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2994–3000 RSC .
G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, H. L. Bao, X. Y. Meng, K. Pan, W. Zhou, C. G. Tian, J. Q. Wang and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2081–2088 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. D. Sun, C. S. Liao and C. H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2002, 262–263 RSC .
Q. Peng, Y. J. Dong and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3027–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3492–3495 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, J. G. Wang, S. X. Xiao, C. Nuckolls and H. X. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2325–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Li, Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Plinio, M. Luca and J. A. A. Galo, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2501–2509 CrossRef .
M. C. Fuertes and G. J. A. A. SolerIllia, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2109–2117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimura, N. Miyamoto, X. Meng, T. Ohji and K. Kato, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 1486–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, T. Kimura, T. Ohji and K. Kato, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1894–1900 RSC .
Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 663–677 RSC .
Y. Hong, C. G. Tian, B. J. Jiang, A. P. Wu, Q. Zhang, G. H. Tian and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5700–5708 CAS .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. Mckenzie, M. J. Mcdermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. F. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joo, B. Y. Chow, M. Prakash, E. S. Boyden and J. M. Jacobson, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 596–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Cho, J. Jang, S. Lee and K. Lee, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14255–15262 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Y. L. Hu, C. Pelligra, C. H. Chen, L. Jin, H. Huang, S. Sithambaram, M. Aindow, R. Joesten and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2875–2885 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel and M. A. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2826–2833 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, W. Dong, M. KeeterBrewer, S. Konar, R. N. Njabon and Z. R. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10960–10968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. Mckenzie and M. J. J. Mcdermott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12954–12955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Sounart, J. Liu, J. A. Voigt, M. Huo, E. D. Spoerke and B. Mckenzie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15786–15793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Zhao, X. Y. Li, J. G. Zheng, X. F. Yang, F. L. Zhao, K. S. Wong, J. Wang, W. J. Lin, M. M. Wu and Q. Su, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1197–1199 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Zhu, J. F. Huang, Z. W. Pan and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4473–4477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raula, M. H. Rashid, T. K. Paira, E. Dinda and T. K. Mandal, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8769–8782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Yan and D. F. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11076–11080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Sun, Y. L. Yu, J. Luo, M. Ahmad and J. Zhu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8626–8632 RSC .
B. Li and Y. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 890–896 CAS .
C. G. Tian, W. Li, Q. Zhang, K. Pan and H. G. Fu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 1283–1289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Shi, C. Zhu, L. Wang, C. Y. Zhao, W. Li, K. K. Fung, T. L. Ma, A. Hagfeldt and N. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1000–1012 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Khalil, V. Uvarov, S. Fronton, I. Popov and Y. Sasson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11004–11012 Search PubMed .
L. W. Zhang, T. G. Xua, X. Zhao and Y. F. Zhua, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 98, 138–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. J. Shi, J. Lin, D. F. Chen, J. M. Gao, Z. X. Huang, X. X. Ding and C. C. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2937–2941 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fang, L. Chen and L. M. Wu, Chin. J. Struct. Chem., 2009, 28, 1399–1406 CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Ai, F. Jia and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 747–753 CAS .
Y. Q. Lei, G. H. Wang, S. Y. Song, W. Q. Fan, M. Pang, J. K. Tang and H. J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3273–3278 RSC .
J. X. Xia, S. Yin, H. M. Li, H. Xu, Y. S. Yan and Q. Zhang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1200–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Wang, K. J. Deng and L. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14300–14308 CAS .
S. J. Peng, L. L. Li, P. N. Zhu, Y. Z. Wu, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Ramakrishna and Q. Y. Yan, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. J. Son, J. Lu, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M. H. Ehangbo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9342–9349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Jia, F. M. Wang, F. Xin and B. Q. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 6688–6694 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gnayem and Y. Sasson, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, E. Antonova, W. Benschb and G. R. Patzke, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2412–2417 RSC .
F. Amano, K. Nogami and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1536–1542 CAS .
D. K. Ma, S. M. Huang, W. X. Chen, S. W. Hu, F. F. Shi and K. L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4369–4374 CAS .
S. J. Liu, Y. F. Hou, S. L. Zheng, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4124–4130 RSC .

  (a) Z. Q. Li, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 498–508 RSC ; 
  (b) L. S. Zhang, W. Z. Wang, L. Zhou and H. L. Xu, Small, 2007, 3, 1618–1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Amano, K. Nogami, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9320–9326 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu, X. T. Huang and G. Y. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1350–1355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. Duan, Y. Zheng and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12866–12871 CAS .
D. Q. He, L. L. Wang, H. Y. Li, T. Y. Yan, D. J. Wang and T. F. Xie, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4053–4059 RSC .
G. S. Li, D. Q. Zhang, J. C. Yu and M. K. H. Leung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 4276–4281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Cao, L. Zhang, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 306–311 RSC .
M. Shang, W. Z. Wang and H. L. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 991–996 CAS .
D. X. Wu, H. T. Zhu, C. Y. Zhang and L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7250–7252 RSC .
X. J. Dai, Y. S. Luo, W. D. Zhang and S. Y. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3426–3432 RSC .
G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, W. Zhou, K. Pan, Y. Z. Dong, C. G. Tian and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 887–892 RSC .
R. Su, R. Tiruvalam, Q. He, N. Dimitratos, L. Kesavan, C. Hammond, J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, R. Bechstein, C. J. Kiely, G. J. Hutchings and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6284–6292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu, C. Cheng, H. Huang, T. Wong, N. Wang and T. Y. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3278–3285 CAS .
E. Grabowska, A. Zaleska, S. Sorgues, M. Kunst, A. Etcheberry, C. Colbeau-Justin and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1955–1962 CAS .
A. Primo, T. Marino, A. Corma, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6930–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6538–6540 RSC .
G. Xi, J. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6508–6511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. Huo, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4538–4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, W. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Qu, C. Tian, K. Pan, G. Tian and H. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1354–1358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14526–14533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Su, L. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang and C. Shao, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3989–3999 RSC .
Z. Zheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079–9087 RSC .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cao, Z. Yin, J. Barber, F. Y. C. Boey, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 418–423 CAS .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211–13241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Chen, S. Kerman, P. Neutens, L. Lagae, G. Groeseneken, T. Stakenborg and P. V. Dorpe, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1724–1729 CAS .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Adleman, D. A. Boyd, D. G. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Croissant and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7628–7631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, J. Shen, R. Wang, J. Cui, W. Zhou, P. Hu, D. Liu, H. Liu, J. Wang, R. I. Boughtonc and Y. Yue, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5106–5113 RSC .
J. Yu, W. Wang and B. Cheng, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 2499–2506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, H. Fu, K. Pan, C. Tian, Y. Qu, P. Lu and C. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19584–19589 CAS .
Y. Lei, G. Zhao, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Tong and T. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19067–19076 CAS .
M. Wang, L. Sun, Z. Lin, J. Cai, K. Xie and C. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1211–1220 CAS .
J. H. Yun, Y. H. Ng, S. Huang, G. Conibeer and R. Amal, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11288–11290 RSC .
C. W. Zou, Y. F. Rao, A. Alyamani, W. Chu, M. J. Chen, D. A. Patterson, E. A. C. Emanuelsson and W. Gao, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11615–11620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, R. T. Zhai, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, R. H. Wang, K. Pan, C. G. Tian and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6961–6968 CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Shao, J. Mu, Z. Zhang, Z. Guo, P. Zhang and Y. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 605–612 RSC .
F. Mou, L. Xu, H. Ma, J. Guan, D. Chen and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4650–4657 RSC .
R. Buonsanti, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, F. Gozzo, M. Garcia-Hernandez, M. A. Garcia, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2437–2464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. H. Deng, Z. X. Wu, X. F. Qian, J. P. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Gu, F. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15830–15833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, G. Li, S. Ciston, R. M. Lueptow and K. A. Gray, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4952–4957 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Yang, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1156–1164 CAS .
W. Zhou, K. Pan, Y. Qu, F. Sun, C. Tian, Z. Ren, G. Tian and H. Fu, Chemosphere, 2010, 81, 555–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. An, J. Chen, X. Nie, G. Li, H. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5988–5996 CAS .
B. Jiang, C. Tian, W. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Xie, Q. Pan, Z. Ren, Y. Dong, D. Fu, J. Han and H. Fu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8379–8387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. A. S. Shah, A. R. Park, K. Zhang, J. H. Park and P. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3893–3901 Search PubMed .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamegawa, D. Yamahana and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15049–15053 CAS .
H. J. Zhang, P. P. Xu, G. D. Du, Z. W. Chen, K. Oh, D. Y. Pan and Z. Jiao, Nano Res., 2010, 4, 274–283 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, N. J. Bell, A. Kudo and R. Amal, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 353–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Zhang, Z. G. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
Q. Zhang, C. Tian, A. Wu, T. Tan, L. Sun, L. Wang and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11778–11784 RSC .
X. Bai, L. Wang and Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2769–2778 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, H. Cui, Y. Li, J. Qin, R. Zhang and H. Tang, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barreca, G. Carraro, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, O. I. Lebedev, A. Parfenova, S. Turner, E. Tondello and G. V. Tendeloo, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6409–6417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, Y. Chen, X. Meng, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, K. Pan, C. Tian, Z. Ren and H. Fu, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, C. Tian, W. Li, Q. Feng, Q. Pan and H. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1359–1367 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. A. S. Shah, K. Zhang, A. R. Park, K. S. Kim, Na. G. Park, J. H. Park and P. J. Yoo, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5093–5101 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Nguyen, H. G. Cha and Y. S. Kang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3947–3953 CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Ma, Y. Li, H. Ji, C. Chen, H. Zhu and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3188–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Roy, Y. Sohn and D. Pradhan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2532–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2219–2223 RSC .
P. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, T. An, H. Yang, Z. Tang, W. Cai and H. Zhao, Small, 2012, 8, 3664–3673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 65, 119901 CrossRef .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, J. Wang, H. Cheng, Y. Du and X. Han, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6978–6980 RSC .
A. Selloni, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 613–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Fang, X. H. Yang, H. Zhu, Z. Li, H. Zhao, X. Yao and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22082–22089 RSC .
J. Wang, Z. Bian, J. Zhu and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1296–1302 CAS .
J. Miao and B. Liu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1222–1226 RSC .
A. S. Ichimura, B. M. Mack, S. M. Usmani and D. G. Mars, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2324–2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Wang, F. Lv, S. Xiao, C. Nuckolls and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4719–4721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, G. Li, H. Li and Y. Lu, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 26–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Z. Sun, H. Zhao, M. Zheng, P. Du, J. Zhao and H. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21965–21971 RSC .
M. H. Jung, M. J. Chu and M. G. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5016–5018 RSC .
J. W. Shiu, C. M. Lan, Y. C. Chang, H. P. Wu, W. K. Huang and E. W. G. Diau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10862–10873 CAS .
X. Han, B. Zheng, J. Ouyang, X. Wang, Q. Kuang, Y. Jiang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 2538–2542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, G. Li, X. Yang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4381–4383 RSC .
X. Zhao, W. Jin, J. Cai, J. Ye, Z. Li, Y. Ma, J. Xie and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3554–3563 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dinh, T. D. Nguyen, F. Kleitz and T. O. Do, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3737–3743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D’Arienzo, J. Carbajo, A. Bahamonde, M. Crippa, S. Polizzi, R. Scotti, L. Wahba and F. Morazzoni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17652–17661 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wu, C. Guo, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563–17567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, X. Wu, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8361–8363 RSC .
J. Li, K. Cao, Q. Li and D. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 83–85 RSC .
W. Yang, Y. Wang and W. Shi, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 230–234 RSC .
F. Li, J. Xu, L. Chen, B. Ni, X. Li, Z. Fu and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 225–228 CAS .
Y. Jiao, C. Peng, F. Guo, Z. Bao, J. Yang, L. Schmidt-Mende, R. Dunbar, Y. Qin and Z. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6405–6409 CAS .
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bi, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, J. Cao and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6490–6492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893–1895 RSC .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Xiao and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1153–1175 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Geng, J. Z. Ma and J. H. You, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1443–1447 CAS .
J. Yin, Z. Yu, F. Gao, J. Wang, H. Pang and Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6328–6332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, L. Qi and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13118–13125 CAS .
X. W. Liu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9100–9104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Wang, D. H. Wang, W. G. Qu, L. Q. Lu and A. W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19893–19901 CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Wen, L. Du, W. Zeng, Y. Shi, F. Zhang, G. Zhu, X. Xu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7484–7491 RSC .
L. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 613–620 RSC .
B. Jiang, C. Tian, Q. Pan, Z. Jiang, J. Q. Wang, W. Yan and H. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23718–23725 CAS .
L. Gu, J. Wang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, L. Liu and X. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3085–3093 CAS .
N. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wen, Z. Tang, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1504–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qi, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 8915–8923 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13341–13347 RSC .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Cowan, J. Tang, W. Leng, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4208–4214 CAS .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jing, Y. Cao, H. Cui, J. R. Durrant, J. Tang, D. Liu and H. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10775–10777 RSC .
L. Jing, J. Zhou, J. R. Durrant, J. Tang, D. Liu and H. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6552–6558 CAS .
L. Jing, Y. Qu, B. Wang, S. Li, B. Jiang, L. Yang, W. Fu, H. Fu and J. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1773–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jing, H. Fu, B. Wang, D. Wang, B. Xin, S. Li and J. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 62, 282–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jing, X. Sun, J. Shang, W. Cai, Z. Xu, Y. Du and H. Fu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 133–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, L. Jing, J. Zhou, J. Lin and H. Fu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 176, 139–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luan, L. Jing, Q. Meng, H. Nan, P. Luan, M. Xie and Y. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17094–17100 CAS .
Y. Cao, L. Jing, X. Shi, Y. Luan, J. R. Durrant, J. Tang and H. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8530–8536 RSC .
W. Sun, Q. Meng, L. Jing, D. Liu and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1358–1365 CAS .
F. Lenzmann, J. Krueger, S. Burnside, K. Brooks, M. Grätzel, D. Gal, S. Rühle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6347–6352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, D. Wang, Q. Zhao, M. Yang and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3202–3206 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, T. Xie, L. Peng, Y. Lin, P. Wang, L. Peng and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17136–17145 CAS .
W. Wang, L. Jing, Y. Qu, Y. Luan, H. Fu and Y. Xiao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 243, 169–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS .
L. Körösi, S. Papp, I. Bertóti and I. Dékány, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4811–4819 CrossRef .
L. Lin, W. Lin, J. L. Xie, Y. X. Zhu, B. Y. Zhao and Y. C. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 75, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Samantaray, P. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 198, 277–287 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luan, L. Jing, Y. Xie, X. Sun, Y. Feng and H. Fu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1378–1385 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and L. Gao, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 967–971 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, T. Xie, Y. Lu, H. Fan and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 8033–8041 RSC .
H. Fan, T. Jiang, H. Li, D. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhai, D. He, P. Wang and T. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2425–2430 CAS .
T. Jiang, T. Xie, L. Chen, Z. Fu and D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2938–2944 RSC .
T. Jiang, T. Xie, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Peng, H. Li and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15476–15481 RSC .
D. He, L. Wang, D. Xu, J. Zhai, D. Wang and T. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3167–3171 CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Zhai, D. Wang and S. Dong, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1640–1645 RSC .
L. He, L. Jing, Z. Li, W. Sun and C. Liu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7438–7444 RSC .
J. Jiang, X. Zhang, P. Sun and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20555–20564 CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 CAS .
D. W. Bahnemann, M. Hilgendorff and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4265–4275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamaki, A. Furube, M. Murai, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 416–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yoshihara, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Tamaki, M. Murai, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 CAS .
R. Saito, Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3833–3835 RSC .
F. M. Pesci, A. J. Cowan, B. D. Alexander, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1900–1903 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1686–1693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, A. Furube, M. B. Mohamed, T. Asahi, H. Masuhara and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 945–955 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 110, 136–142 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gu, T. Ye, J. D. Simon, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1765–1771 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, A. Furube, K. Yamamoto, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6454–6462 CAS .
T. Martin, H. Herrmann, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 3315–3322 RSC .
T. Martin, H. Herrmannt and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 3323–3330 RSC .
C. A. Emilio, M. I. Litter, M. Kunst, M. Bouchard and C. Colbeau-Justin, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kunst and G. Beck, J. Appl. Phys., 1986, 60, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Huijser, K. Hara, T. J. Savenije and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10741–10746 CAS .
J. Piris, A. J. Ferguson, J. L. Blackburn, A. G. Norman, G. Rumbles, D. C. Selmarten and N. Kopidakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7742–7749 CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, K. Yamanaka and T. Morikawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3261–3265 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Carneiro, T. J. Savenije, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 327–332 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Liqiang Jing
	Liqiang Jing obtained his PhD degree in 2003 from Harbin Institute of Technology, China. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University as a faculty staff member, and became a full professor of Physical Chemistry in 2006. His research fields include photofunctional nanomaterials, semiconductor photocatalysis, and photogenerated charge properties. He has published more than 70 peer-reviewed papers with over 1600 citations.

Wei Zhou
	Wei Zhou received his PhD degree in 2009 from Jilin University, China. Afterwards, he joined Prof. Honggang Fu's group at Heilongjiang University, and currently is an associate professor. His research interests include mesoporous materials, semiconductor oxide-based nanomaterials, and their application in photocatalysis.

Guohui Tian
	Guohui Tian received his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry at Heilongjiang University, China, in 2008. Afterwards, he became a faculty staff member at Heilongjiang University. Currently, he is an associate Professor. His main interests are involved with photocatalytic materials for solar energy conversion and environmental purification.

Honggang Fu
	Honggang Fu received his BSc in 1984 and MSc in 1987 from Jilin University, China. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University as an assistant professor. In 1999, he received his PhD degree from Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He became a full professor in 2000. Currently, he is also Cheung Kong Scholar Professor. His interests focus on oxide-based semiconductor nanomaterials for solar energy conversion and photocatalysis, and crystalline carbon-based nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage, including their design and synthesis, physical and chemistry properties. Up to now, he has published over 200 SCI papers as corresponding author with over 3000 citations.

 	Fig. 1  Tree-like structural schematic of surface tunning routes for efficient oxide-based photocatalyst in the review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Proposed scheme for the phase transformation of TiO2 with increasing calcination temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81.	 

 	Fig. 3  SPS responses of mesoporous SiO2-modified (A) and phosphate-modified (B) TiO2 treated at different temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85 and 94.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A–C) TEM and (D and E) HRTEM images of mesoporous carbon–titania nanocomposites (30C-70TiO2-450 and 30C-70TiO2-600) calcined at 450 (A and B) and 600 °C (C–E), viewed from the [110] (A, C and D) and [001] (B and E) directions. Insets are the SAED patterns and EDX analysis taken at the same area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations for the fabrication of mesoporous anatase TiO2 with remarkably high thermal stability and improved crystallinity. EISA: evaporation-induced self-assembly; EN: ethylenediamine. (I) Liquid crystal mesophase network; (II) stable mesophase framework of mesoporous TiO2 primary particles for encircling with EN species; (III) magnification of EN species bound on the mesophase structure; (IV) ordered mesoporous TiO2 with high thermal stability and crystallinity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM images of mesoporous anatase TiO2 at different calcination temperatures. (a) M350; (b) M500; (c and e) M700; (d and f) M800. The inset of (c) and (d) are selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for M700 and M800, respectively (anatase: d101 = 0.35 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A and B) FESEM images and (C and D) TEM images of as-prepared anatase TiO2 NSHSs. (E) EDX analysis of the anatase TiO2 NSHSs. The Pt signal arises from the Pt coating during sample preparation. (F) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of the as-prepared anatase TiO2 NSHSs. The inset shows the pore size distributions calculated using the BJH method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images at different magnifications of the precursor obtained from 24 h solvothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 9  FESEM images and XRD pattern of the ZnO product prepared by the solution reaction of 2.0 mmol of ZnCl2 and 10.0 mmol of NaOH at 80 °C for 24 h: (a) panoramic FESEM image; (b and c) magnified FESEM images; (d) XRD pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the formation for ZnO nanosheets and hierarchical structure via oriented attachment of small-sized nanocrystals and reconstruction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146.	 

 	Fig. 11  Representative SEM and TEM images of Bi2WO6 hierarchical nest-like structures: (a) low magnification SEM, (b and c) high magnification SEM, (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM. Inset is the corresponding ED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM (a and b) images of the Bi2MoO6 sample obtained from 20 h solvothermal reaction; SEM (c and d) and TEM (e and f) images with different magnification of the calcined Bi2MoO6 sample obtained from 20 h solvothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for metal–oxide heterojunctional composites under UV light (a) and visible light irradiation (b).	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM images of WO3 architectures loaded with larger-sized metal particles: (a) Pt/WO3 (1.7 wt%, 3.5 nm); (b) Pt/WO3 (2.1 wt%, 5 nm); (c) Ag/WO3 (1.8 wt%, 3 nm); (d) Au/WO3 (2.6 wt%, 5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 178.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for wide–wide bandgap heterojunction under UV light (a) and wide–narrow bandgap heterojunction under visible light irradiation (b).	 

 	Fig. 16  TEM and HRTEM images of mesoporous TiO2 powders (A and B) and meso-TiO2–α-Fe2O3 composites (C and D) after calcination at 300 °C. The insets of panels B and D are the corresponding Fourier transform. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) SEM cross section and top surface images for V2O5–ZnO core–shell structure after annealing at 500 °C in O2. (c and d) HRTEM images and electron diffraction for ZnO and V2O5, respectively, in the lollipop structure. (e) EDX spectrum for the annealed sample. (f) Schematic showing the growth mechanism of lollipop through annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202.	 

 	Fig. 18  Phase-contrast HRTEM study of hybrid nanocrystals comprised of asymmetrically FexOy-tipped TiO2 nanorods. HRTEM images (a, g, o) of matchstick-like hybrid nanocrystals that incorporate TiO2 and FexOy in different relative arrangements. FFTs (b, c, h, i, p, q) calculated from the regions enclosed by the blue and the red boxes in panels a, g, o, respectively. (d, l, r) Joint diffractograms obtained by merging the FFTs in panels b, c, h, i, and p, q, respectively, each traced by a different color. (e, m, s) Magnified views of the matchstick head regions corresponding to the heterostructures in panels a, g, and o, respectively. False-color crystal-phase amplitude maps (f, n, t) obtained by HRTEM contrast analysis of the images in panels a, g, o, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the “hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization” strategy for the formation of the Fe3O4@titanate double-shelled yolk–shell microspheres. TEM images of a single sphere synthesized at 150 °C with hydrothermal treatment time: (b) 0 min, (c) 20 min, (d) 2 h, (e) 12 h and (f) 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of photogenerated charges transfer for oxide–CNTs (a) and oxide–graphene heterojunctions (b) under UV and visible light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 21  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM images (b and d) of TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM (a), TEM (b and c) and HRTEM images (d) of ZnO–graphene heterogeneous composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220.	 

 	Fig. 23  (left) SEM (a and b), TEM (c) and HRTEM images (d) of Ag–AgBr–Bi2MoO6 heterojunctional composites, (right) schematic diagram of the charge separation under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224.	 

 	Fig. 24  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of multi-components Ag–AgBr–TiO2 tubular heterojunctional composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 25  SEM (a), TEM (b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of Ag–Ag3PO4–graphene triple heterostructure composites, the schematic diagram of the charge separation and photocatalytic process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225.	 

 	Fig. 26  Bright-field TEM image (a) and the square-symmetric selected-area electron diffraction pattern (b) of a representative anatase single crystal recorded along the [001] axis. Inset is a [001]-projected geometrical model of anatase single crystals. HRTEM image (c) recorded from another anatase single crystal with [001] orientation and fast-Fourier-transform-filtered TEM image (d) recorded from the dotted rectangular area in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 239.	 

 	Fig. 27  XRD and TEM images of TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244.	 

 	Fig. 28  TEM images of anatase TiO2 single-crystal nanosheets with {001} facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a and b) Low- and high-magnification FESEM images of the m-BiVO4 nanoplates. (c) Low-magnification TEM image of the m-BiVO4 nanoplates. (d) HRTEM image of the m-BiVO4 nanoplate. (e) The SAED pattern recorded from the white framed area indicated in (c). (f) Schematic illustration of the crystal orientation of the nanoplate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266.	 

 	Fig. 30  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM (b and d) images of TiO2 nanosheets (a and b) and Pt/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {001} facets (c and d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 271.	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM image of anatase TiO2 sheets on graphene (inset is a single nanosheet schematic morphology) (a). TEM image of anatase TiO2 sheets on graphene (b). Enlarged TEM image of the TiO2–graphene sheet (c). The HRTEM image of TiO2 sheet (the inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern) (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 273.	 

 	Fig. 32  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM images (c–e) of TiO2–graphene heterojunctional composites with exposed TiO2 {001} high-energy facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic of a photovoltage cell for SS-SPS measurement.	 

 	Fig. 34  SS-SPS responses. A (T) and B (0.1 P-T) in different O2-content atmospheres. T means TiO2, and xP-T is the phosphate-modified T, in which x is the concentration of sodium orthophosphate solution used. C (in air) and D (in O2) for different phosphate-modified TiO2. Concentration (mol L−1) of sodium orthophosphate solution used: (a) 0, (b) 0.05, (c) 0.1, (d) 0.3 and (e) 0.5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 291.	 

 	Fig. 35  Intensities of SPS peak at 350 nm of resulting F-residual TiO2 and its corresponding F-free sample (A), and their photocatalytic degradation rates of gas-phase acetaldehyde and liquid-phase phenol (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 301.	 

 	Fig. 36  SPS responses of DS0 (0), DS1.0 (11.2), DS1.8 (88.3), DS2.0 (100) and DS2.5 (100) TiO2 samples (numbers in parentheses indicate the rutile content percentage in the resulting TiO2), Reprinted with permission from ref. 290.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic of the TS-SPV measurement equipment.	 

 	Fig. 38  TS-TPV responses of RGO, anatase TiO2 and RGO–anatase TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308.	 

 	Fig. 39  SS-SPS (A) and TS-SPV (B) responses. F means Fe2O3, 3 in 3G-F is the mass content percentage of used graphene, and 1.0 in 1.0PG-F is the concentration of used phosphoric acid and P means phosphate functionalization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309.	 

 	Fig. 40  SS-SPS (A) and TS-SPV (B) responses. TiO2 (a), AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–W) prepared in the transitional water system (b), and AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–MEL) prepared in the microemulsion-like system (c), and AgBr–TiO2 composite (AgBr–TiO2–MM) prepared by mechanical mixing (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 296.	 

 	Fig. 41  TS-SPS spectra (A) and TS-SPV responses (B) of pure BiOI, pure ZnO and ZnO/BiOI heterostructure ZB-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310.	 

 	Fig. 42  Schematic of the TAS measurement equipment.	 

 	Fig. 43  TAS temporal profile. (A) Photoholes (TiO2 (h+)) and photoelectrons (TiO2 (e−)) in nc-TiO2 film after band-gap excitation with laser intensity of 350 μJ cm−2 in argon atmosphere. The inset is a log–log plot, and the gray line is a fitting to the plot. (B) TiO2 (h+) (solid line) and TiO2 (e−) (dotted line) with Ag+ (traces a and d) and Pt (traces b and c) as the electron scavengers. The black line (trace a) is the fit to the hole kinetics using Ag ions as electron scavenger. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281.	 

 	Fig. 44  TAS decay traces of the hole. (A) On nc-TiO2 recorded at 460 nm following the UV excitation of nc-TiO2 in 0.05 M NaOH at −0.9 (black), −0.8 (red), −0.7 (green), −0.5 (blue) and 0 V (cyan) vs. a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. (B) In nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 electrodes measured in a complete PEC cell. In 0.1 M NaOH under negative applied bias of −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (blue curve) and under positive applied bias of +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (black curve). Upon the addition of methanol in the positive bias condition (red curve), the faster decay indicates the oxidation of this substrate by photoholes. All decays are obtained upon laser excitation at 355 nm and probing at 580 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282.	 

 	Fig. 45  Correlation of long-lived photo-hole population (as measured by the amplitude of the TA decay at 200 ms) with photocurrent at +0.4 VSSC, both under 355 nm illumination for various hematite photoanodes under EE (front-side) and SE (back-side) illumination. The best-fit straight line has an intercept of 0.001(4) mΔOD and gradient of 0.19(4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 312.	 

 	Fig. 46  TA decays of Nb-doped α-Fe2O3 (a) before and (b) after 300 s electrodeposition of Co–Pi. Decay traces were recorded after UV laser excitation (355 nm, 200 μJ cm−2, 0.33 Hz) and probed at 580 and 900 nm, within the absorption band of α-Fe2O3 photoholes. All measurements were performed on isolated films in 0.1 M KPi buffer (pH 7) under EE illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283.	 

 	Fig. 47  Temporal profile of TAS of photoelectrons and photoholes of TiO2 film and phosphate-modified films in pH 7 water in the absence of O2 (inset shows surface carried charges of TiO2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 285.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
