Photocatalytic materials: recent achievements and near future trends  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA13793G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13793G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2863-2884Photocatalytic materials: recent achievements and near future trends

        
          
            Fernando 
            Fresno
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Raquel 
            Portela
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Silvia 
            Suárez
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Juan M. 
            Coronado
          
          
        
      *d
aLaboratory for Environmental Research, University of Nova Gorica, Vipavska 13, 5000 Nova Gorica, Slovenia. E-mail: fernando.fresno@ung.si
bInstitute of Catalysis and Petrochemistry, CSIC, Environmental Catalytic Process Engineering, C/Marie Curie, 2, 28049 Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain
cPhotocatalytic Treatment of Pollutants in Air. CIEMAT, Avda. Complutense, 40, Building 42, 28040 Madrid, Spain
dThermochemical Processes Unit, IMDEA Energy Institute, Avenida Ramón de la Sagra, 3, Parque Tecnológico de Móstoles, 28935, Móstoles, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: juanmanuel.coronado@imdea.org;  Fax: +34 917371140;   Tel: +34 917371142
Received 
      21st September 2013
    , Accepted 25th October 2013First published on 28th October 2013AbstractResearch on photocatalytic materials has been a field in continuous expansion in the recent decades, as it is evidenced by the large number of articles published every year. So far, more than 190 different semiconductors have been assayed as suitable photocatalysts. To this figure, it is necessary to add the combinations with other functional materials or between different semiconductors, as well as their morphological modifications. Summing up the outcome of these different preparation strategies eventually leads to the enormous number of photocatalytic systems that have been reported in the scientific literature. Dealing with such an amount of information requires updated and educated guidance to select the most significant realizations, and it also calls for critical assessments on how the expectations are being fulfilled. This perspective article intends to assess the state of the art of photocatalysis with regard to materials and systems, considering the well-established results, but also the emerging aspects, and the envisaged new directions of this technology in the near future. In the first part, the most relevant achievements in this area, some of them already in the market while others still in development, will be reviewed according to the current understanding. The second part of the article is devoted to the most innovative and promising photocatalysts and related systems described in the open literature.Fernando FresnoFernando Fresno is currently a Research Associate in the Laboratory for Environmental Research and Assistant Professor in the School of Environmental Sciences at the University of Nova Gorica, Slovenia. He has conducted postdoctoral work at ICP-CSIC and CIEMAT, Spain. He got his PhD in Chemistry in 2006 from the Autónoma University of Madrid (UAM) while working at ICP-CSIC and the Inorganic Chemistry Department of UAM. He has worked as a visiting researcher at the Universities of Niigata (Japan) and Aberdeen (UK), and IRCELYON (France). His research interests focus on photocatalytic processes with emphasis on the synthesis of new, more efficient photocatalytic materials.Raquel PortelaRaquel Portela received her B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Engineering from Santiago de Compostela University, conducting her doctoral studies at Ciemat (Spain), with short stays at Buenos Aires University and Humbold-Universität zu Berlin. She worked as a postdoctoral researcher at LBNL (CA), Ciemat, IRCELYON (France), and, since 2011, the Institute of Catalysis of the Spanish National Research Council (ICP-CSIC). Her research activity has been focused on immobilized catalysts for gas phase reactions, studying the photodegradation of microorganisms and chemicals with TiO2-coatings and adsorbent–TiO2 hybrids, and more recently the application of in situ and operando spectroscopies to different reactions with shaped catalysts.Silvia SuárezSilvia Suarez obtained an Extraordinary Doctorate Award in Chemistry from the University of Alcala in 2002 while working at the Institute of Catalysis and Petrochemistry, ICP-CSIC (Madrid, Spain). She has had two research stays at University Catholic de Louvain La Neuve (Belgium) and the University of degli Study di Messina (Italy). In 2006 she moved to the Group of Photocatalytic Treatment of Pollutants in Air at CIEMAT-Madrid. In 2007 she gained a Ramon y Cajal contract as a researcher at CIEMAT. Her research interests are in the areas of environmental heterogeneous catalysis and chemical technology. The development of immobilized catalysts on different substrates, honeycomb structures, adsorbent–photocatalyst hybrids and reactor design are her principal research activities.Juan M. CoronadoJuan M. Coronado conducted his doctoral studies at the Institute of Catalysis (ICP-CSIC) and he received his Ph.D. in Chemistry from the Complutense University of Madrid in 1995. He spent two years as a postdoctoral fellow at Dundee University (UK) funded by a “Marie Curie” grant. He was also a visiting scholar at the University of Wisconsin and Pennsylvania State University in USA. In 2005, he got a position as a tenured scientist at CIEMAT and, in 2009 he was appointed as a senior researcher at IMDEA Energy Institute. Currently, his scientific activity is mainly devoted to the development of advanced catalysts for the production of more sustainable fuels using renewable resources.
1. Introduction
Photocatalysis is a highly appealing process with multiple applications, mainly in the fields of pollution removal and fuel production.1–4 A clear evidence of the attention gathered by this technology is the large number of articles published in this area every year, which exceeded 4600 reports in 2012. This growing interest is rooted in the possibility of employing sunlight, the paradigmatic renewable energy, to promote reactions under very soft conditions. In contrast to most industrial catalytic processes, which often require high temperature and elevated pressure, photocatalysis operates under basically ambient conditions provided that an adequate radiation source is available. This fact may have not only an important economic impact on several processes, but it also opens up new opportunities for autonomous systems such as self-cleaning surfaces, which can function with almost no maintenance. Unfortunately, the quantum yield of many photoactivated processes is frequently lower than 5%, and the energy efficiency is further limited due to the reduced overlap of the solar spectrum with the activation range of the most popular photocatalytic materials. Such a drawback is particularly evident in the case of benchmark TiO2, still the most widely used photocatalyst despite its broad bandgap, which limits the absorption of photons to the UVA-B range of the solar spectrum. Accordingly, a maximum of 6% of the energy of impinging sunlight can be harvested using this material.5,6 This clear disadvantage is the main motivation for the search for new, and more efficient photocatalysts, active under visible-light illumination.3
Over 190 different phases have been assayed as potentially suitable photocatalysts.7 Such remarkable diversity of materials, along with the inherent complexity of the photocatalytic reactions and the variety of operating conditions used, calls for a systematic analysis in order to guide the design and selection of the most adequate semiconductor for each specific use. With this aim, a few years ago the alternative photocatalysts to TiO2 were reviewed in connection with the main niches of application of this technology.3 At this point it seems opportune to evaluate the evolution of the research in these fields as to confirm or disregard the potential of the emerging photocatalytic phases. In contrast to the more systematic approach adopted in the previous contribution, this perspective article intends to assess the degree of progress and the current status of photocatalysis with respect to materials and systems. Then, the first part reviews the most relevant developments in the area, some of them close to the market as those based on TiO2, but some others still consolidating as potential alternative photocatalysts. In the second section, a selection of the most promising and innovative materials according to the current understanding is reviewed. The choice of these future photocatalysts is supported by the impact of the selected systems in the recent literature, which already shows a noticeable upward tendency in the number of articles and citations.
2. Present
In this section, a general panorama of the current development of photocatalytic materials is provided. This brief review begins with single phase semiconductors, follows with mixed bifunctional materials, and it finishes with a short outlook of the photocatalysts already in the market. The aim of this section is to determine, on the basis of the knowledge accumulated in the last decades, which materials or multicomponent systems, among the multitude of developments, can be taken as an already consolidated technology, or are more likely to become a real alternative in the short term.
2.1. From TiO2 to third-generation photocatalysts
An analysis of the published scientific literature indicates that research on photocatalytic materials and applications experiences a continuous exponential growth. TiO2 is still by far the most used photocatalyst; to this contributes the fact that it is employed in most research studies as the benchmark semiconductor, especially the commercial material Degussa-Evonik P25.1,4,5 During the 1990s, the predominance of TiO2 (mainly as anatase or anatase–rutile mixtures) in research papers devoted to photocatalysis continuously increased, as can be observed in Fig. 1. During the 2000s, however, the ratio of publications related to binary oxides reached a plateau, representing 60% of the materials investigated, with titania being one of the components in 80% of the cases. The interest in developing solar applications with semiconductors activated by visible light led many researchers to explore new materials, but the promising results obtained with doped-TiO2, the so-called “second-generation photocatalysts”, particularly with non-metals, maintained the expectations of improved TiO2-based photocatalysts.8
 Fig. 1  Yearly evolution of the titania predominance in the scientific literature on photocatalysis estimated as the percentage of articles devoted to TiO2 among those related to oxide semiconductors or out of the total. Source: Scopus. 
At the end of the 2000 decade, the preponderance of TiO2 started to decay slightly. However, attention is still being paid to new features of this oxide, such as crystal facet engineering, which are providing new means to tune the reactivity and selectivity,9,10 as it is further commented in Section 3.1. On the other hand, conceptually different dopant-free approaches are recently being proposed to promote sunlight absorption of titania. In this way, the modification of the semiconductor surface by introduction of disorder through partial hydrogenation or by formation of paramagnetic oxygen vacancies (Vo) has been reported more recently. Disorder-engineered black TiO2 nanocrystals exhibited a dramatic shift of the absorption edge to the near infrared. This modification leads to a substantial enhancement of solar-driven photocatalytic activity, not only for organic molecule degradation, but also for efficient hydrogen production. Pt-loaded black TiO2 with methanol as a sacrificial reagent produced 10000 μmol H2 g−1 h−1 under simulated solar radiation, with 24% energy conversion efficiency, and produced 100 μmol H2 g−1 h−1 when the radiation below 400 nm was cut-off. The catalytic activity was stable for up to 100 h of cyclic operation.11 Also dopant-free Vo-modified TiO2 prepared by a light-driven synthetic method presented visible light photocatalytic activity, as well as high thermal- and photostability. Under irradiation with λ > 400 nm, hydrogen evolved at a rate of 115 μmol h−1 g−1 from water using methanol as a sacrificial reagent and Pt as a co-catalyst.12 Besides, novel core–shell heterojunction photocatalysts activated by near-infrared (NIR) radiation have been prepared by coating titanium dioxide on Yb3+/Tm3+ co-doped YF3 nanocrystals. Upon NIR light absorption, the up-conversion material of the core emits UV radiation, which can further activate TiO2.13 The same approach has been explored with CdS on Yb3+/Tm3+-co-doped NaYF4, which emits visible radiation.14 However, at present, the up-conversion efficiencies in aqueous solution are generally less than 1%. Therefore, a significant enhancement of the yield will be required for these photoactive materials to have a significant impact on photocatalysis.
The more recent burst of alternative photocatalysts to TiO2 has been mainly fostered by the renewed interest in artificial photosynthesis processes, the advances in materials science, and the acknowledgment that the results that could be obtained by introduction of dopants into titania are strongly limited. Extending the spectral sensitivity of TiO2 to the visible range by doping inherently decreases the reactivity of the active sites, and therefore, it seems proved that with these modifications the photoactivity obtained under visible light is only a fraction of that obtained under UV radiation.15 Moreover, it is becoming increasingly clear that visible-light-active non-doped photocatalytic materials require the combination of multiple cations, and the search for the so-called “third-generation photocatalysts” with improved characteristics is underway. However, many visible-light active photocatalysts are tested using only visible radiation (λ > 400 nm), despite the fact that the sunlight spectrum contains a small fraction of UV light, and therefore additional comparison studies are required to identify the optimal alternatives for solar photocatalysis.
Despite the fact that there are still four times more research articles on TiO2, the number of publications devoted to other materials is steadily growing. In this way, the number of studies on ZnO, another historical photocatalyst, is very significant, and continues the exponential trend already pointed out in 2009.3,4 This is probably due to the fact that this oxide presents a photocatalytic activity close to that of TiO2, which can be further enhanced by forming a variety of nanostructures. Although this oxide suffers from significant photocorrosion, this process can be limited by controlling the pH, protecting the surface with additives, or favoring the growth of the most stable ZnO facets.4,16 However, the interest in the exploration of other photocatalytic materials is being equally redirected to improved non-oxidic compounds and to new visible-light-active mixed oxides (metallates) of Ti, W, Ni or Ta and cations with filled or partially filled orbitals in their outer shell which may hybridise with the oxygen 2p orbitals.3–5,17 Examples of those types of ions are 6s orbitals in Pb2+ and Bi3+, and 5s in Sn2+ or 4d in Ag+.2–4,17,18 Among non-oxidic materials, sulphides, initially discarded as a consequence of the poor stability under irradiation, are now among the most studied compounds. They have been reconsidered as feasible photocatalysts for particular applications using sacrificial agents to hinder photocorrosion, and metal sulphides can also be efficient co-catalysts, showing enhanced effects compared to noble metals in several systems. Nevertheless, these general tendencies should be modulated according to the different niche applications of photocatalysis, as it will be outlined in the next section.
2.2. Current state of photocatalytic applications
In the field of environmental remediation the irruption of new materials is not as important as in energy applications. TiO2 is still the predominant photocatalyst because no satisfactory alternative has been clearly identified. Numerous binary, ternary and quaternary compounds are effective for the photocatalytic degradation of different pollutants,19 but either the adsorption of the pollutant is too small to obtain an acceptable photocatalytic activity, or complete mineralization is not achieved. Regrettably, the photocatalytic activity evaluation by degradation of dyes, an extended practice, cannot be considered as a good reference for determining the visible light activity, and standard methods are rarely followed.6,20 Thus, it is difficult to decide whether or not there have been significant improvements in the last few years. Nevertheless, among the alternative photocatalysts proposed for organic pollutant degradation, Bi2WO6 should be mentioned, because it shows an activity comparable to that of anatase TiO2. However, the instability of this phase at low pH remains an important limitation for liquid phase applications.21
The research on NOx elimination by selective photocatalytic reduction or photodecomposition has experienced an enormous growth, but virtually all articles, patents and field tests employ TiO2-based materials.22 However, for the removal of volatile organic compounds, Ag-based solid solutions could be mentioned as promising materials. Chemically homogeneous β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 phases with orthorhombic symmetry possess a band-gap that can be continuously modulated from 2.19 to 2.83 eV by decreasing the Ga/Al ratio. Among them, β-AgAl0.6Ga0.4O2 was found to attain the best activity for isopropanol photodegradation, with a high 37.3% apparent quantum efficiency at 425 nm which was attributed to its optimized band structure.23 Similarly, perovskite (Ag0.75Sr0.25)(Nb0.75Ti0.25)O3 showed a good activity for acetaldehyde mineralization.24 Nevertheless, the economy of the overall process should be also evaluated when selecting a suitable photocatalyst. In this way, the use of expensive raw materials such as Ga or Nb, and the adoption of complex preparation methods should be avoided for pollution remediation in order to achieve a competitive cost of large scale treatment.
The possibility of reducing CO2 using sunlight in a process resembling plant photosynthesis is currently a subject of utmost interest. However, in order to achieve a really sustainable process the use of water molecules as electron donors is the optimal choice. Therefore, among others, the following reactions are expected: 2H2O (l) + CO2 (g) → CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g)(1) 2H2O (l) + CO2 (g) → CH3OH (l) + 3/2O2 (g)(2)
This process leads mainly to C1 molecules which can be subsequently used as fuels or chemical building blocks.
Since redox potentials of large band gap semiconductors are more suitable for the photocatalyzed CO2 reduction, again mostly TiO2-based photocatalysts have been investigated in this field.25
Even if the yields obtained with metal complexes could be higher than those with TiO2, besides being expensive and usually unstable under UV light, the consumption of a sacrificial electron donor is usually required (e.g. trimethylamine), whereas TiO2 allows the oxidation of inexpensive molecules (e.g. water) although at very low rate. The highest CH4 formation rate from CO2 photocatalytic reduction was reported in 2012 for nanofilms of Pt-coated one-dimensional TiO2 single crystals with controlled Pt particle size. At a mean Pt particle size of about 1 nm, a rate of 1361 μmol CH4 g−1 h−1 was obtained with H2O vapor under UV irradiation (λ = 250–388 nm), with a quantum yield of 2.4%.26 The extremely high efficiency of the Pt/TiO2 nanofilms, as shown in Fig. 2, was attributed to the synergistic effects of high surface area and single crystals and the efficient electron–hole separation by the Pt nanoparticles. However, the stability over time of the system must be further studied.
 Fig. 2  CO2 photoreduction with Pt/TiO2 nanofilms under UV radiation. (a) CH4 and CO yields and O2/N2 volumetric ratio as a function of irradiation time at the optimal Pt deposition time of 20 s. (b) CO and CH4 yields of commercial P25 TiO2 powder, pristine TiO2 films, and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. 
Efficient solar conversion of carbon dioxide and water vapor to methane and other hydrocarbons has been achieved using N-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays loaded with Pt and Cu as co-catalysts, where the wall thickness was low enough to facilitate effective carrier transfer to the adsorbed species. By using outdoor global radiation of AM 1.5, a rate of 7 μmol hydrocarbon g−1 h−1 has been obtained.27 In a recent study, a new type of heterostructured photocatalyst containing CdS or Bi2S3 and TiO2 nanotubes was proposed to solve both the instability problem of sulphides and the inefficiency of TiO2 to absorb visible light. The photocatalytic activity for reducing CO2 to CH3OH under visible light irradiation was assayed in a continuous-flow reactor and the obtained results show a good balance between the activity and the durability for heterostructured materials.28
Among the recent developments, it seems that the use of sensitizers able to harvest visible light is among the most promising research lines for solar fuel production. An interesting novel scheme represented in Fig. 3 gives CO as the reaction product at very high rate. This hybrid enzyme–TiO2 system, where TiO2 nanoparticles are modified with a Ru-based photosensitizer and the CO2-reducing enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase, reduces CO2 at a high rate of 250 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light.29 The enzyme, which contains a Fe–S cluster, bypasses the one-electron radical pathway catalyzing a controlled, two-electron reduction that is highly selective to CO. The oxidized photosensitizer observed in Fig. 3 is recovered by the sacrificial electron donor. Nevertheless, long term stability of the systems should be confirmed.
 Fig. 3  Representation of the CO2 to CO photoreduction system using the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase attached to RuP-modified TiO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. 
Additionally, the first visible-light-driven Z-scheme for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, also based on the use of sensitizers, has just been reported.30 A Ru(II) binuclear complex, (RuBLRu′), employed for CO2 reduction, is adsorbed on Ag-loaded TaON, the oxidation catalyst, and methanol is used as a reducing agent. The process is similar to the photosynthesis Z-scheme, and generates formic acid and formaldehyde as reduction and oxidation products, respectively.
Concerning photocatalytic H2 or O2 evolution from water, the number of papers describing sophisticated materials has continued to increase in recent years. Ideally this process proceeds following this simple reaction scheme: H2O (liquid) → H2 (gas) + 1/2O2 (gas)(3)
But more frequently sacrificial electron donors such methanol are used to boost the rate of hydrogen evolution according to: H2O (liquid) + CH3OH (aq.) → 3H2 (gas) + CO2 (gas)(4)
Some relevant examples of this process are summarized in Table 1. The remarkable results communicated in 2008 by Maeda and coworkers are proving to be difficult to be surpassed, especially for water splitting without sacrificial agents under visible radiation.3 Nevertheless, some recent advances in materials development deserve to be commented. Water oxidation is found to be more challenging than water reduction. More than 100 semiconductor photocatalysts are known for use in the reduction to H2, but much fewer for the oxidation to O2. WO3 and BiVO4 are well known oxidation catalysts, but the best results for O2 evolution under visible light irradiation until now have been obtained with the Ag3PO4 body-centred cubic structure, with an indirect band gap of 2.36 eV. An apparent quantum yield of 80% at 480 nm and of 90% at wavelengths longer than 420 nm has been obtained in the presence of AgNO3 as an electron scavenger.31 Furthermore, significant activity was also observed without any sacrificial reagent, or even using this material for the oxidation of organic pollutants. According to these results and electronic structure considerations, it is suggested that a good strategy to design new photoelectrodes or photocatalysts could be the engineering of binary oxides with narrow band gap, such as Ag2O, modified by the presence of p-block elements, such as P, and/or alkali or alkaline earth ions, thereby adjusting the band gap and the redox properties. On the other hand, excellent oxygen generation results have been obtained as well with (Zn/Cr) layered double hydroxides with a Zn/Cr atomic ratio of 4:2. The apparent quantum yield for oxygen generation was 60.9% at 410 nm and 12.2% at 570 nm.32
Table 1 Recent outstanding results of the photocatalysis for hydrogen production and CO2 photoreduction




Photocatalyst
Co-catalyst
Conditions
Activity
Ref.


Sacrificial agent
Lamp
Wavelength (nm)
H2 (μmol h−1 g−1)
QY (%)





a Methane.
b Total hydrocarbon production.
c Carbon monoxide.






H

2

production



CdS
Pt–PdS
S2−/SO32−
300 W Xe
420
29233
93

37



NiS/CdS






420


51.3

38



CdS–Ti–MCM-48
RuO2
Ethanol
—
Visible
2730
36.3

106



CdS–CdSe
Pt
Methanol
300 W Xe
450
40000
20

148



CuGa2In3S8
Rh
S2−/SO32−
300 W Xe
560


15

39



Hf–(Na,K)TaO3
None
Methanol
350 W Hg


256000



42



None
None
350 W Hg


49000



42



Sr–NaTaO3 mesocrystal
None
Methanol
350 W Hg


275000



43



H4Nb6O17






330


50

7



ZrO2–TaON and WO3
Pt
None
300 W Xe
420
150
6.3

45



LaTiO2N
CoOx




440


27.1

48



Black TiO2
Pt
Methanol
Solar simulator with a filter
>400
100



11





Pt
Methanol
Solar simulator
Solar spectrum
10000



11



BaZrO3–BaTaO2N






>660





44



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



CO

2

photoreduction










Products (μmol h

−1

g

−1

)







TiO2 (1D-crystals)
Pt


400 W Xe
250–388
1361a
2.4

24



TiO2 (nanotubes)
Pt/Cu


Solar light
Solar spectrum
7b



27



Dehydrogenase–TiO2
Ru_bipyridine complexes


W–halogen lamp
>420
250c

29





Many photocatalysts for H2 or O2 evolution, particularly those which are driven by visible-light, are inactive for overall water splitting in the absence of sacrificial reagents. Thus, an environmentally appealing option is the use of wastewater pollutants as sacrificial agents, because water purification and hydrogen production are combined in a single step.33 Additionally, in a recent study, a Z-scheme efficient under visible light irradiation without electron transfer chemicals has been proposed, which excludes the undesirable side reactions and the negative effects related to them. Aggregation of Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (H2 evolution) and BiVO4 (O2 evolution) particles by simple acidification provided the effective contact required for the electronic transfer to occur.34 However, inter-particle electron migration is probably the rate-determining step, and thus further improving the contact between the two catalysts could be an efficient means of enhancing the low quantum yield observed.
Sulphides have been found until now to be the most active photocatalysts for H2 evolution, although the problem of photocorrosion is only partially suppressed with the use of sacrificial agents. In the 2000s, as best results, it was found in S2−/SO32− solutions that nanostructured CdS with Pt co-catalyst gives a hydrogen evolution quantum yield of 60.3% at 420 nm,35 AgGaS2 with Rh co-catalyst gives 25% at 440 nm,36 and Rh-loaded CuInS2–AgInS2–ZnS solid solution gives a remarkable 7.4% at 520 nm. Furthermore, this last multicomponent photocatalyst can use visible light up to 700 nm.
In the last few years, new interesting sulphide-based systems have already been developed (see Fig. 4). So far, the best results have been obtained with CdS co-loaded with Pt and PdS (Pt–PdS/CdS) using sulphide and sulfite as sacrificial reagents. A quantum efficiency for H2 evolution of 93% has been achieved at 420 nm. Furthermore, the catalyst does not show deactivation after 100 h of operation. This finding points out the fact that the strategy of co-loading suitable dual co-catalysts, providing both oxidation and reduction sites, seems to be of considerable importance in the design of highly active photocatalytic systems for solar energy conversion.37 Additionally, highly active NiS/CdS prepared via a simple hydrothermal loading method has shown a remarkably high quantum efficiency for H2 evolution of 51.3% at 420 nm with lactic acid sacrificial solution in the absence of noble metals.38 Finally, layered metal sulphides of CuGa2In3S8 and AgGa2In3S8 (Eg = 1.91 eV and 2.27 eV, respectively) gave, with the assistance of Rh co-catalysts and S2−/SO32− as sacrificial electron donors, 15% apparent quantum yield for H2 evolution at 560 nm and 460 nm, respectively. As can be observed in Fig. 5, CuGa2In3S8 evolved H2 under irradiation at wavelengths as high as 680 nm.39
 Fig. 4  H2 generation rate and quantum efficiency obtained with CdS loaded with different co-catalysts. Percentages represent the quantum yields at 420 nm. Based on the results of ref. 37. 
 Fig. 5  Action spectra of H2 evolution from aqueous K2SO3–Na2S solutions over Rh-loaded (a) CuGa2In3S8 and (b) AgGa2In3S8. Reproduced from ref. 37. 
Among the non-sulphidic materials, mixed oxides and oxynitrides have shown the best performance for H2 evolution. Nevertheless, Ag2O, with a band gap of 1.2 eV, is scarcely used as a photoactive component (but frequently applied as a co-catalyst) owing to its instability under irradiation, although it has shown an interesting self-stabilization mechanism due to the Ag0 generated from its partial photodecomposition.40
The best activity reported for metallates has been usually obtained under UV irradiation. It can be mentioned that the exchange of potassium ions of the K4Nb6O17 interlayer with H+ has led to an enhanced photocatalytic activity, with 50% quantum efficiency at 330 nm.5 Another promising catalyst could be amorphous sodium tantalum oxide, which has achieved overall water splitting without any co-catalyst and can be synthesized using low-temperature methods.41 The most efficient photocatalysts, however, have been prepared by a novel molten-salt process. Hf-doped (Na,K)TaO3 nanocubes of 50 nm with enhanced activity and stability attained stoichiometric evolution rates of 49600 and 24600 μmol h−1 g−1 for H2 and O2, respectively, without any co-catalyst, or 256000 μmol h−1 g−1 for H2 production in aqueous methanol solutions.42 Prepared by a similar procedure, Sr–NaTaO3 mesocrystals obtained from nanocubes of 20–60 nm without using any organic additive exhibit an outstanding photocatalytic performance, evolving 275000 and 48900 μmol H2 h−1 g−1 from aqueous methanol and pure water, respectively. Their high porosity and preferred oriented direction with the formation of nanosteps have been related to the good performance of the mesocrystals. However, in this case the H2 to O2 ratio was not stoichiometric because of the peroxide species formed during the reaction.43 Additional advantages suggested for the molten salt preparation are its nontoxicity, recyclability, low-cost and high efficiency.
Oxynitrides have suitable band edge positions, small band gaps (<3 eV), and stability under irradiation. d0-type (oxy)nitrides are more interesting in terms of visible light-absorption than d10-ones. Direct splitting of pure water without any redox reagent using d0-(oxy)nitrides has yet to be accomplished, and although some of them serve in a Z-scheme for H2 or O2 evolution, the efficiency is still poor.44 With suitable modifications, appreciable enhancement of activity for H2 evolution was attained by ZrO2–TaON composites. The highest apparent quantum yield for a visible-light-driven overall water splitting system, 6.3% (150 μmol H2 h−1 g−1 at 420 nm), has been obtained with Pt-loaded ZrO2–TaON (reduction) and WO3 (oxidation) in a Z-scheme with IO3−/I− as the electron mediator,45 slightly higher than the previous record of 5.9% obtained at 420–440 nm with fine engineering of the d10-type oxynitride (Ga0.88Zn0.12)(N0.88O0.12) solid solution and using Rh2−xCrxO3 as the co-catalyst.46
Once the first successful results of overall water splitting with visible photons around 400–500 nm have been obtained, the development of photocatalysts with absorption over 600 nm is now pursued for a profitable solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion, because the solar spectrum presents a maximum around this wavelength. A quantum efficiency of ca. 30% at 600 nm and a 15% energy conversion efficiency, determined by energy balance,47 have been designated as critical values for practical applications. LaTiO2N, CaNbO2N, Ta3N5 and Sm2Ti2S2O5, with band gaps of ∼2 eV, are good candidates, but need further improvement of their photocatalytic activity. Single-crystalline meso- and macroporous LaTiO2N with earth-abundant cobalt oxide as a co-catalyst has obtained a quantum efficiency of 27%, which substantially exceeds the values reported for photocatalysts with a 600 nm absorption edge, but the activity was measured with irradiation at 440 nm.48 Among the solid solutions, BaZrO3–BaTaO2N evolved H2 and O2 individually under visible light with a wavelength longer than 660 nm, but the low efficiency obtained must be improved.49
Finally, it must be mentioned that the development and selection of suitable co-catalysts may determine the photocatalytic activity of advanced semiconductors for water splitting and CO2 reduction. Co-catalysts can provide reduction or oxidation active sites, catalyze the surface reactions, trap the charge carriers and suppress the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. Noble metals, transition-metal oxides and sulphides or even biomimetic hydrogenase can be applied as either reduction or oxidation co-catalysts,56 but the mechanisms of their functions are still ambiguous. The bimetallic and particle-size effects of co-catalysts, as well as the core–shell structure, have shown interesting possibilities in further improving the H2 evolution efficiency.57 Additionally, new electron mediators for Z-scheme photocatalytic systems are being proposed, such as the redox couples [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+ used along with Ru/SrTiO3:Rh and BiVO4 photocatalysts for the overall water splitting under visible light irradiation. When the Ru/SrTiO3:Rh suspension was isolated from the BiVO4 suspension using a membrane filter, H2 evolution proceeded separated from that of O2.58
As a result of being generally considered as a highly unselective process, the application of photocatalysis to synthetic procedures is probably the least widely discussed one. However, significant advances in photocatalysts utilization for green synthetic processes have been achieved in recent years.50 In this regard, a vast range of organic reactions have been assayed, including selective oxidation and reduction processes, as well as isomerization, and C–C and C–N bond formation reactions. As remarkable examples for their great synthetic importance, the selective oxidation of alcohols and the functionalization of hydrocarbons with oxygenated groups can be cited.3,4,50 Besides, size controlled selectivity has been demonstrated in the photocatalytic oxidation of chlorophenol titanosilicalite.51 However, in most of these processes the photocatalyst of choice is TiO2. To the best of the authors' knowledge, photocatalysis is the only route in which many of these transformations can take place under ambient conditions and it has been demonstrated that they may proceed with high selectivities, although the quantum yields are usually low.
As a final remark, it can be stated that progress in tailored synthesis has made it possible to design photocatalytic materials hierarchically assembled with controlled composition and well defined structure at the nano, meso and microscale. Solid-solutions and heterojunctions, with tunable electronic structures and slow electron–hole-recombination rates, are being proposed to minimize the implicit contradiction between wide visible-light absorption and adequate redox capability, especially for water splitting applications. Although obtaining single-phase semiconductors with large surface areas and high porosity still remains a desirable goal, nowadays the appeal of enhancing the textural properties is relatively lower than the interest in modifying their optoelectronic properties. In this respect, high-throughput methods for the synthesis and characterization of large libraries of photocatalytic materials may be of great help for the screening of multicomponent semiconducting materials and their optimization.52,53 A good example of this combinatorial technique is the use of inkjet printing for the preparation of multicomponent metal oxide photocatalysts.54
2.3. Composite photocatalysts
Adsorbent–Photocatalyst Hybrids (APHs) are bifunctional solids with adsorption and photocatalytic properties, which are a very promising kind of advanced materials (see Fig. 6). The synergy between these two capacities leads to composites endowed with superior catalytic activity and higher selectivity to the desired reaction products. The interface created between both phases can facilitate the transfer of species from the adsorbent sites to the semiconductor ones and vice versa. Then, not only the adsorbent acts as a traditional support, immobilizing and dispersing the active phase thereby increasing the surface area of the final solid, but it may also induce modifications in features such as the acid–base characteristics, the UV absorption spectrum of the semiconductor or the crystal growth. Furthermore, many adsorbents provide a hydroxyl rich surface, which may favour the photocatalytic process. Finally, the APHs final structure may help to achieve an easy recovery of the spent photocatalyst from the reaction medium, and different configurations have been explored for this purpose, such as fibres or spherical particles.55 These enhanced properties of the hybrids can be potentially applied to different photocatalytic reactions including hydrogen production, CO2 photoreduction, organic synthesis and abatement of pollutants in water and gas phase, including indoor air treatments.4
Traditionally, the research on these hybrid photocatalysts is focused on increasing the specific surface area and establishing fine control of the porosity in order to achieve tight control of the adsorption–diffusion processes. A key feature for the correct evaluation of the photocatalytic activity of these composite materials is the independent determination of adsorption at the temperature at which the photocatalytic reaction occurs. Otherwise, as both processes are simultaneous, the overall result could be misleading.
In their seminal work, Yoneyama et al.56,57 studied the role of porous solids with different adsorption capacities such as zeolites, activated carbon, silica and alumina for the photocatalytic degradation of propionaldehyde. They concluded that the mean adsorption constant is a good descriptor to identify the composite with the best photocatalytic performance. Nowadays, one of the principal challenges in this field is the understanding of the mechanism responsible for the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity which, for the most part, remains elusive. A better comprehension of these processes will allow the development of improved adsorbent–photocatalytic hybrid systems, specifically designed for individual processes by means of superior control of charge and mass transfer between both phases.
Carbonaceous materials with different structure and morphology,19,58 siliceous materials, including mesoporous silica (e.g. MCM-41, SBA-15, …) and zeolites,59–62 and suitable minerals63–65 are the most attractive materials for synthesizing adsorbent–photocatalytic composites. Conventional carbon-based compounds such as activated carbon66–68 and carbon black69,70 have been deeply studied. More advanced structures such as carbon nanofibers,71,72 carbon nanotubes,73–75 fullerenes,76–78 and graphene,79–81 and new morphologies such as nanohorns,82 nanopetals83(Fig. 6a) and nanowalls84 complete the scenario of this family of composite materials. A more detailed description of the future trends concerning graphene-based composites will be given in Section 3.2. The development of solids based on activated carbon and different semiconducting elements with photoactivity in the visible region has acquired special relevance.85 Thus, composites of activated carbon with Au–TiO2 for H2 production,86 or with ZnO/ZnS,87 CdS,88 ZnO89 and WO3/TiO290 for pollution removal are some of the systems recently reported in the literature.
Activated carbon fibres are promising adsorbents since they exhibit greater accessibility of the reactants to the microporosity than conventional activated carbon.88,91 The positive effect of the increased porosity has been reported by several authors as a way to achieve the deposition of larger quantities of the semiconductor phase and, therefore, the reduction of the diffusional limitations.92 This trend is not always fulfilled; for instance carbon foams prepared from coal tar pitch at atmospheric pressure showed photocatalytic activity for phenol degradation comparable to that of activated carbon, questioning the role of large surface area materials.93 Clearly, the surface area is relevant but it is not the only aspect to consider for the preparation of improved APHs. Engineering an appropriate porous network designed for each particular application will facilitate the migration of the target molecules to the active sites.
Carbon nanotubes are one-dimensional structures based on carbon layers with sp2 bonds rolled into cylindrical tubes that present two different configurations (Fig. 6b): single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). The tubular structure and the conductivity of the carbon sheets make them act as electron sinks hence improving the charge separation and hindering the recombination processes.94,95 Thus, it has been proposed that the role of this component is transferring electrons to the semiconductor and acting as a photosensitizer in the visible region, rather than dispersing the semiconductor or promoting adsorption.73 Taking into account the results already reported in the literature it is likely that the two proposed functions of carbon nanotubes (i.e. electron sinks and photosensitizers) can operate simultaneously. Recently this behaviour has been reported for CdS nanoparticles grafted onto three dimensional carbon nanotube sponge.96 The inner part of the carbon nanotubes behaves as an adsorbent whereas the CdS grafted onto the surface is responsible for the photocatalytic degradation of RhB under UV irradiation. On the other hand, Ag/AgX (X = Cl, Br, I) loaded carbon nanotube (CNT) composites have shown a remarkable improved photoactivity for the 2,4,6-tribromophenol (TBP) degradation in aqueous phase under visible light.97 This enhancement of the performance as compared with single phase AgX has been related to the decrease of the recombination rate by the effective electron transfer from photoexcited AgX and plasmon-excited Ag0 nanoparticles to CNTs.
 Fig. 6  APH composites; (a) titanium dioxide nanopetals induced by single wall carbon nanohorns;83 (b) TiO2 particles on carbon nanotubes;74 (c) Re complex in hierarchical mesoporous ZSM-5;103 (d) sepiolite:TiO2 photocatalysts.65 Reproduced from ref. 65, 83 and 103. 
The adsorption ability and the shape selectivity of ordered porous silica-based materials (zeolites and mesostructured silicas) make them excellent candidates to prepare APH.60,61,98 An important niche of application for these materials is the treatment of indoor air, where the presence of many different compounds at ppb concentration levels is a major concern. In this respect, Mo et al. have reported the benefits of mordenite–TiO2 systems for the elimination of toluene, which exhibit superior performance than pure TiO2 P25.99 The importance of the hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity balance for the final catalytic properties of the APH cannot be underestimated. Anpo et al.100 studied this effect by using zeolite Y for the elimination of toluene and benzene in gas phase. The target molecules are strongly adsorbed on H+ or Na+ centers of zeolites so that their diffusion towards the TiO2 active sites is hindered. On the other hand, the adsorption strength of these pollutants on hydrophobic zeolites is weaker so they can access more easily the TiO2 photocatalytic sites. The utilization of fluorine-containing silylation reagents such as triethoxyfluorosilane is an interesting approach for preparing hydrophobic silica materials yet maintaining their structure and thermal stability.101
Hierarchical zeolites with extended porosity to the mesopore range can avoid the problems associated with mass transfer limitations.102 The use of complexes of Ru, Re, Co or Ni dispersed on these aluminosilicates promotes CO2 reduction. In this sense, the combination of a molecular Re(I) catalyst, a Ru(bpy)32+ photosensitizer and an amine-based electron donor co-adsorbed on the mesopores of hierarchical ZSM-5 constitutes an interesting catalyst for CO2 photoreduction (Fig. 6c).103 In the field of water splitting under visible light, CdS particles104 and Bi2S3105 dispersed in zeolite Y have shown promising results. In a similar way, CdS particles have been incorporated into mesoporous Ti–MCM-48 and loaded with a RuO2 as co-catalyst. In this hybrid material hydrogen and oxygen are generated and photocorrosion is completely eliminated.106
Another strategy to improve the photocatalytic performance is the use of single-site photocatalysts where isolated moieties of transition metals are dispersed on a solid matrix; siliceous materials such as MCM-41 or SBA-15 are the perfect hosts for this purpose.3,4 Additionally, and although it is not a photocatalytic process in a conventional way, it is worth mentioning the role of basic zeolites and hydrotalcites in the transformation of methane to C1 oxygenates by deep UV photolysis in the presence of water and air.107 Irradiation produces the homolytic cleavage of surface hydroxyl groups, leading to silyloxyl radicals that react with methane to generate methyl radicals.
Some minerals found in abundance on the Earth's crust present remarkable advantages as adsorbents, such as large surface area and porosity and high concentration of hydroxyl groups. Usually these natural materials present an extremely reduced cost, which makes them suitable for practical applications, especially in the environmental field. Sepiolite,108,109 hydroxiapatite,110 clays such as halloysite,111 attapulgite112 and montmorillonite113 are some of the most used materials for photocatalytic applications.
With respect to the actual distribution of the adsorbent and the semiconductor, there are different views concerning whether a mere physical mixing or a more intimate contact, forming chemical bonds is required to improve the photocatalytic activity.2 For instance, Suárez et al.65 compared the performance of coated and incorporated sepiolite–titania composites in gas phase. These findings revealed the intimate contact between the adsorbent and the semiconductor (see Fig. 6d) as essential for the migration of the intermediate species of trichloroethylene degradation. The high concentration of surface OH groups present in the silicate facilitated the mineralization of trichloroethylene.114 An interesting approach to functionalize natural silicates is the creation of thiourea-surface groups, favoring the homogeneous distribution of semiconductor nanocrystals.113
Recently, a novel hybrid material based on porous microspheres of MgO–TiO2, prepared by spray pyrolysis, showed higher stability and ten times greater photocatalytic activity than bare TiO2 for photoreduction of CO2 to CO with water vapour.115 The role of MgO in CO2 adsorption in the presence of water vapour seems to be critical. One drawback of many APHs arises from their opacity, limiting the efficient use of photons. This negative aspect can be overcome by using biopolymer-based materials as alternative supports, which present high transparency and the possibility to induce extended porosity.116 In this context, it is worth highlighting the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity and selectivity of Pd–TiO2 by the introduction of a thin Nafion overlayer, an approach which has been used as well for the fixation of sensitizers due to the unique properties of this well-known perfluorinated polymer with sulfonated groups, which is a superacid and an excellent proton conductor. By using this composite photocatalyst a significant increase in the CO2 reduction efficiency was recently reported under both UV and solar light through enhancement of the proton-coupled multielectron transfer (PCET) reactions, intermediate stabilization, and inhibition of the product re-oxidation.117 This kind of modification opens up a new route for the improvement of photocatalysts. Finally, amongst the different key points to be considered for practical implementation of APHs at the industrial level, the use of commercially viable synthesis routes is crucial. In this respect, features such as the abundance and accessibility of the raw materials, the toxicity and environmental impact of the employed reactants should be taken into account. For example, in the case of siliceous materials, those prepared without structure directing agents such as mordenite or alkoxy-free synthesis routes should be chosen when possible.118 Moreover, new technologies to prepare materials from industrial or agricultural wastes119,120 or biotemplates such as yeast cells121 could contribute to produce porous solids at lower cost. The combination of different adsorbents is expected to generate highly efficient multifunctional composites with a wide application range. The final issue is the preparation of macroscopic structures such as pellets, cylinders or plates in order to ensure the recovery and easy removal of the photocatalysts from reaction media, preserving the properties of the original material.
2.4. Passive photocatalytic elements: self-cleaning, pollutant-abating and antifogging surfaces
When certain semiconductors are irradiated with light of the appropriate wavelength, the wettability of their surface is increased in such a way that water no longer forms droplets but a continuous film instead (see Fig. 7). In other words, under irradiation the contact angle of water on these surfaces drops to virtually 0°. This effect, known as photo-induced superhydrophilicity (PSH), is closely related to the photocatalytic activity in the sense that it originates from electron–hole pair formation, although not all the photocatalytically active materials present PSH behaviour and vice versa. Although the actual mechanism of PSH is not fully understood, a combined effect of the creation of oxygen vacancies, with concomitant generation of surface OH groups upon water adsorption, and photocatalytic elimination of surface organic impurities, has been proposed to account for most of the experimental results found in the literature.122
The combination of photocatalytic and PSH properties opens up a vast range of applications, from antifogging glass to antibacterial sanitary surfaces, through self-cleaning construction materials and even odour eliminating textile. Actually these developments represent the most commercially exploited aspect of photocatalysis. Nowadays, these photoactive coatings have reached a status of a mature market, especially regarding glass, metal and ceramic substrates. Self-cleaning glass and ceramic tiles, anti-fogging mirrors, and pollutant-abating paints, asphalts and cements based on this technology are today in the market.123 Soundproof highway walls with a photocatalytic coating for the elimination of NOx were constructed in Osaka, Japan, already in 1999.124 However, further development is still needed for the incorporation of a photocatalytic function in polymers or textiles, because, on the one hand, a high temperature treatment to attain a durable TiO2–subtrate linkage is not applicable and, on the other hand, the photocatalyst may degrade the organic substrate itself. In this last respect, an intermediate layer (i.e. SiO2 layer) may help overcome this drawback, although the manufacturing difficulty and cost increase accordingly.4 Although less explored, self-disinfecting surfaces for sanitary and food packaging applications are also very likely niches for this technology. Moreover, the PSH effect has been proposed as a way to cool down the surface of buildings and therefore reduce the energy consumption for air conditioning.125 Reversible superhydrophilic–superhydrophobic transitions on photocatalytic surfaces have been also suggested for applications such as fluid microchips, site-selective immobilization and offset printing.126 High surface roughness and PSH properties constitute an interesting combination for these transitions.127
Regarding active materials, the preeminence of TiO2 is even more acute in passive elements than in other applications of photocatalysis, with a minor contribution of alternative materials. Indeed, TiO2-based coatings account for more than 90% of the publications on this topic in the last 10 years, followed by ZnO with ca. 5% of the publications. No need to mention, virtually all the currently marketed products based on this technology use titania. However, applications of TiO2 for self-cleaning are limited to outdoor conditions, as it requires a significant level of UV irradiation. Thus, it is important to develop visible light active self-cleaning films for indoor applications. In this respect, non-metal (N, S, C) doping of titania is a classical strategy adopted for this purpose. N-doped TiO2 films have shown superhydrophilic behaviour under both indoor and purely visible-light-irradiation, with long-term maintenance of the superhydrophilic state in the dark. A water contact angle of 5° has been attained with such films, which is still higher than the virtually 0° that can be reached with TiO2 under UV irradiation. Low-level metal doping can also extend the response of titania to longer wavelengths while slowing down the hydrophilic-to-hydrophobic transition in the dark.122
Although ZnO shows both superhydrophilic and photocatalytic properties close to those of titania, as mentioned before it presents the drawback of anodic photocorrosion,3 which may hinder its application to passive elements due to limited stability. Nevertheless, its performance may be considerably enhanced when prepared in mono- or bi-dimensional shape-controlled structures, with some samples having shown better PSH and photocatalytic properties than commercial TiO2-containing surfaces.128 V2O5 has also been found to be superhydrophilic after UV-irradiation, especially when prepared with a hierarchical morphology,127 although its photocatalytic activity is considerably lower than that of TiO2. Some niobates, in the form of nanosheets, have also shown interesting PSH properties, with faster contact angle decrease and higher thermal resistance than TiO2 coatings.129,130 Nevertheless, the photocatalytic activity of these phases for pollutant degradation has not been thoroughly assessed.4
 Fig. 7  Glass substrates treated with self-cleaning coating and placed under real-life conditions, where a clear distinction between the coated (left) and the uncoated (right) surface is shown. Reproduced from ref. 131. 
From a practical point of view, the adherence of the photocatalyst layer to the substrates constitutes one of today's challenges for this technology, not only for activity and durability reasons, but also regarding potential noxious effects of eventual leaching of the photocatalyst nanoparticles.125 As mentioned earlier, high temperature annealing is generally used to attach the photocatalyst to inorganic substrates. This implies certain loss of activity and increased cost of production. In glass substrates, this activity decrease has been related to the diffusion of Na ions into the TiO2 layer.122 A thin silica inter-layer may prevent this to occur. Alternatively, transparent anatase films with high PSH and photocatalytic activity and good adherence have been deposited on glass substrates by wet chemical methods without the need for a high temperature treatment (Fig. 7).131 These low-temperature methods have also been successfully applied to polymer substrates,132 for which the formation of a functionalized organic layer may help improve the attachment of the photocatalyst layer to the organic substrate.133
Even though glass and tiles are probably the most common substrates for photocatalytic self-cleaning materials, it is also worth mentioning other outdoor applications such as building and pavement cementitious materials.134,135 The photocatalyst may be incorporated during the material manufacturing process, either as an additive, which is the case of most construction materials, or as a coating on the already conformed surface, which is more complicated but results in lower TiO2 consumption.4 In addition, the mechanical resistance of the coating is another key parameter to be considered. The optimal amount of photocatalyst and binder, their impact on the properties of the materials and their long-term performance and aesthetic durability should be further investigated, since, for example, carbonation may lead to deactivation in several months. In any case, these materials have been somewhat successfully applied. A celebrated example is the “Dives in Misericordia” church in Rome,136 built with photocatalytic concrete for self-cleaning purposes. Road building materials are also an interesting niche of application of semiconductor photocatalysis.134 The incorporation of anatase into the wearing layer, and the use of a double layered concrete with addition of the photocatalyst to the top layer are two of the possible strategies for this application in order to reduce the pollution by nitrogen oxides. Both standard laboratory tests and outdoor air quality assessments have given positive results in terms of NOx reduction in pilot projects. However non-desirable photooxidation of NO to NO2 has to be efficiently suppressed by improving the selectivity of the photocatalysts. Besides, further assessments of the durability of the photoactive coatings, as well as of their capability of abating other air pollutants (e.g. VOC), are necessary. Finally, secondary processes, such as the recently reported oxidation of atmospheric ammonia, present at the ppt level, on TiO2 should be also monitored.137
Regarding activity tests, although there exists an ISO procedure for the “determination of photocatalytic activity of surfaces in an aqueous medium by degradation of methylene blue”,138 the method presents some weaknesses for which improvements have recently been proposed.20 High-throughput measurements based on photocatalytic reduction of intelligent inks have also been suggested.139 However, dye-based methods should not be used for visible-light driven tests in which a dye-sensitized mechanism rather than a photocatalytic mechanism is likely to occur. In this respect, a viable alternative is based on the well-known hydroxylation reaction of terephthalic acid to yield the highly fluorescent 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid.140
3. Future trends
Despite the significant progress achieved by photocatalysis in the last decade, there are still important challenges ahead for the full development of this technology. Nevertheless, the obvious interest in the implementation of more sustainable processes, along with the vitality of the scientific community devoted to this topic, allows us to hope for a possibly long, but surely brilliant trajectory of photocatalysis in the way to maturity as a widespread technology. Assuming the significant uncertainty inherent to any prediction, three main trends can be outlined with a reasonable degree of confidence in the near future: (i) the fine control of increasingly complex nanoarchitectures, (ii) the use of novel non-oxidic materials and (iii) the hybridization with photovoltaic components in a single device. All these innovative approaches will be discussed in detail in the following sections.
3.1. Towards more complex nanoarchitectures
Tuning the size, shape and composition of semiconductor particles to improve their performance and widen their range of applications has attracted an extraordinary interest, and is currently a matter of intensive and extensive research with a high potential impact.4 The effect of primary particle (crystal) size on the photocatalytic properties of semiconductors has been known for more than a decade, although there is still a debate on specific aspects of this influence.6 It is quite widely accepted that nano-sized crystals are beneficial for photocatalytic activity down to a certain limit, not only because of their high surface-to-volume ratio, but also because of the modification of their physical and chemical properties compared to bulk materials. Therefore, it is possible to tune semiconductor properties, within certain limits, by means of fine control of the crystal dimensions, which is attainable by a variety of synthetic methods.5,141 Accordingly, nanocrystalline semiconductors are usually employed today for photocatalytic purposes and their preparation as nanostructured solids represents a basis for further improvement of photocatalysts' performance.
Not only the size, but also the crystal shape may affect the properties of a photocatalyst by defining the number of atoms at the surface and the facets exposed. One- or two-dimensional structures have a large fraction of atoms at their surface, making them interesting for (photo)catalytic applications.141 Moreover, quantum mechanical modeling has shown that the electronic structure and the band gap shift in nanosized titania particles strongly depend on their shape.142 One-dimensional nanostructures like rods, tubes, wires and fibers offer not only a high specific surface area, but also longer lifetimes and diffusion lengths of the photogenerated charge carriers. Hydrated titania nanotubes, for instance, have shown a promising photocatalytic performance, especially for gas-phase reactions.143 Moreover, their ion-exchange capacity can be exploited for functionalization or for obtaining different stoichiometries that may lead to visible light absorption.144 Electrochemical synthetic methods permit fine control of the growth of one-dimensional structures. Under suitable conditions, self-ordered arrays of TiO2 nanotubes can be fabricated by anodization of titanium foils. These arrays have shown a remarkable performance not only in photocatalysis, but also in gas sensing and photovoltaic applications. The fabrication of films with tunable wettability from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic (see Section 2.4) also appears as a very promising light-activated application of this type of structures.145 Regarding nanotubes with other compositions than TiO2, very recently first-principles calculations revealed that the electronic properties of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) nanotubes obtained by co-doping of GaN with Zn and O are chirality-dependent. The co-doping is easy along the radial direction for nanotubes with the armchair configuration, but the z direction is preferred for zigzag nanotubes, because the armchair GaN–ZnO interface is more stable.146 These nanotubes show a largely tunable band gap, as depicted in Fig. 9 (as low as 0.29 eV for armchair nanotubes and 1.78 eV for zigzag nanotubes), high carrier mobility, good band edge alignment and large sunlight exposed area. Therefore, it is expected that these nanomaterials may be synthesized efficiently by different methods.
 Fig. 8  Monoclinic BiVO4 nanoplates: (a) FESEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) SAED pattern of the area framed in image (b), and (d) comparative photocatalytic evolution of O2 from an AgNO3 solution. Adapted from ref. 154. 
 Fig. 9  Modification of the band gap in GaN nanotubes as a function of the doping concentration of ZnO, as obtained from DFT calculations. Taken with permission from ref. 146. 
The preparation of nanorods of CdS, with ZnSe and Pt nanoparticles sitting on opposite extremes,147 and Pt-tipped CdS rods with embedded CdSe seeds148 are good examples of the use of multicomponent nanomaterials, and they illustrate the degree of control over the nanoarchitecture of photocatalysts that can be achieved. In this spatially controlled nanoheterostructure, the holes are three-dimensionally confined in cadmium selenide, whereas the delocalized electrons are transferred to the metal tip. Consequently, the charge carrier separation is facilitated and back reactions minimized, obtaining a maximum apparent quantum yield for hydrogen production of 20% at 450 nm and an improved stability.
Nevertheless, despite their intrinsic value as landmarks of the advance of nanotechnology, and as model systems to gain further understanding of photoinduced processes, the hurdles of these finely tuned syntheses can be only justified from a practical point of view by a breakthrough in the photocatalytic performance, which in many cases still needs to be confirmed. Another important challenge for a wider use of these advanced materials is how to scale up the production in a cost effective way and reducing the consumption of expensive reagents.
The synthesis of nanocrystals with tailored exposed facets is currently attracting a great deal of interest as a novel strategy to improve the efficiency of photocatalysts, particularly TiO2. For this specific material, the stable {101} facets are usually mostly exposed at the surface, but their reactivity is lower than that of {001} facets.149 Accordingly, anatase crystals with the latter facets preferentially exposed should offer a better photocatalytic performance. The challenge is how to prepare this type of crystal without the use of capping agents that need to be eliminated afterwards by a thermal treatment, which would lead to surface reconstruction towards the more stable {101} facets.150 Nevertheless, the synthesis of anatase single crystals with a high ratio of reactive facets even after treatment at 600 °C has been reported using hydrofluoric acid.151 Theoretical calculations and indirect experimental data predict anatase {001} facets to be more active than {101} ones,149 but experimental results are sometimes contradictory, since higher activities have been also reported for {101}-dominated TiO2 samples.152 Furthermore, different roles have been assigned for these two types of facets on the basis of ESR results, the {001} ones mainly providing oxidation sites and the {101} ones involved as reduction site providers.153 Further evidence will therefore be required in order to assess the potential improvement of photocatalytic activity by controlled facet growth.
Apart from TiO2, the dependence of the photocatalytic activity on the exposed facets has been explored in BiVO4, Ag3PO4, BiOCl and layered niobate photocatalysts.150 In the specific case of the former, hydrothermal synthesis, without further thermal treatment, has allowed well defined monoclinic BiVO4 nanoplates with exposed {001} facets to be obtained, which has led to enhanced photocurrents and photocatalytic activities (Fig. 8).154 However, a recent study has reported that charge separation in monoclinic BiVO4 occurs in such a way that, as it was previously mentioned for TiO2, oxidation reactions occur preferentially on {110} facets while the {010} ones are more reactive for reduction reactions. This fact can be exploited for the selective photodeposition of oxidation and reduction co-catalysts, which has led to a superior photocatalytic water splitting activity compared to random co-catalyst deposition.155 The interesting UV-photocatalyst BiOCl has been reported to show a facet-dependent photocatalytic activity such that nanosheets with preferentially exposed {001} facets are more active than other orientations.156 This has been related to a higher formation of oxygen vacancies under irradiation in these oxygen rich planes.
In addition to facet engineering, the increasing control of preparation procedures allows the synthesis of complex heterostructures in the nanoscale. In this regard, a step forward in morphology control is represented by the preparation of hierarchical three-dimensional structures. Some of these structures, with multimodal or multiscale pores, have been reported to exhibit improved photocatalytic efficiency with respect to other morphologies. Hierarchically structured materials can provide large surface areas for reaction, interfacial transport, or dispersion of active sites at different length scales of pores, and shorten diffusion paths or reduce diffusion limitations. The combination of these properties with the above-mentioned facet control provides a vast potential for activity improvement not only in photocatalytic reactions,157 but also in other energy conversion and storage methods,158 such as dye-sensitized TiO2 solar cells.159 Other remarkable materials synthesized with this approach are ZnO160 and Fe2O3.161 A special and very promising type of hierarchical material would be represented by photocatalysts prepared with the structure of photonic crystals, i.e., in which the macroporous system is ordered with a periodicity in the range of wavelengths of light (UV, visible). The coupling of the photonic stopband of the photonic crystal structure with the band gap of the semiconductor increases the effective optical path length and thus an enhancement of the absorption is obtained.162 TiO2, WO3 and other semiconductors have been prepared in the form of inverse opals with photonic structure, with improved photocatalytic results.150 Similarly, mesoporous Bi2SiO5 in the form of hollow microspheres has been prepared by post-synthetic modifications of organo-silicas. This material, which is constituted by (Bi2O2)2+ layers inserted between (SiO4)2− tetrahedral units, shows higher activity than pure mesoporous Bi2SiO5, and comparable to that of TiO2 P25.163
Recent studies seek to imitate the structure and functionality of biological systems, using them as models for the design of photoactive materials. These structures intend to revolutionize the development of cost-effective photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical solar systems. For instance, devices inspired by the hierarchical structure of leaves are being developed in an effort to replicate the photosynthesis process. In these artificial photosynthetic systems, natural pigments (e.g. chlorophyll) are replaced by inorganic photocatalysts.164 This biomimetic concept is fundamentally different from the macroscopic devices called “artificial leafs”, which are further discussed in Section 3.3.165
3.2. New materials for enhanced performance and novel applications: from MOFs to carbon nitride
Among the diversity of materials proposed as photocatalysts in the last few years, three different types of solids are quickly gathering a great deal of interest. This is clearly illustrated in Fig. 10, which shows the recent uprising trend in the number of publications related to the photocatalytic applications of metal organic frameworks (MOFs), g-C3N4 and graphene, which despite being very different show as a common feature the formation of carbon-based networks. A detailed account of the most relevant characteristics of these promising photocatalysts is given in this section. Some remarkable examples of the photoactivity of these materials are collected in Table 2.
 Fig. 10  Yearly evolution of the number of articles related to photocatalytic applications of graphene, MOFs and g-C3N4. Source of the data: Scopus. 
Table 2 Some relevant photoactivity results obtaining with emerging photocatalysts




Photocatalyst
Process
Co-catalyst
Conditions
Ref.


Sacrificial agent
Lamp
Wavelength (nm)
Products (μmol h−1 g−1)
QY (%)





a Hydrogen.
b Formate ions.






H

2

production



Ti–MOF–NH2 (MIL-125)
Hydrogen production
Pt
Triethanolamine
Xe lamp
>420
367a



169



Ti–MOF–NH2 (MIL-125)
CO2 Photoreduction


Triethanolamine in acetonitrile
4 × 4W UV lamps
365
16, 3b



166



Graphene–Zn0.8Cd0.2S
Hydrogen production


S2−/SO3−
solar simulator
>420
1824a
23.4

180



g-C3N4
Hydrogen production


Trimethylamine
300 W Xe
>300
183a
5.8

40



C3N4−xSx
Hydrogen production


Trimethylamine
300 W Xe
450
136a
5.8

187



Graphene–C3N4
Hydrogen production
Pt
Methanol
350 W Xe arc lamp
>400
451a
2.6

39





MOFs constitute a large family of micro-mesoporous crystalline materials that can show extremely large surfaces areas (>5000 m2 g−1). The structure of these solids is constituted by metals or metal clusters connected by molecular building blocks. The flexibility in the selection of a variety of organic linkers, along with the number of possible metal clusters, confer to MOFs their highly tuneable characteristics. This enormous potential has not gone unnoticed in the photocatalytic field, and in the last few years a substantial number of articles have explored the photoactivation of these materials.166 In order to harvest sunlight it is necessary to include in the MOF lattice chromophores and charge separation centres, which are usually derived from dye molecules. An interesting example of how the characteristics of the MOF can be adapted to the photocatalytic application is the systematic variation of the band gap from 4.0 to 3.3 eV by selecting the structures of the linker groups.167 Another impressive example of the versatility of these materials is the possibility of performing enantioselective photocatalytic reactions. In this respect, assembling in the same crystalline network a photoactive moiety (nitrilotribenzoic acid) and a chiral entity (L- or D-proline derivatives) with Zn centres results in a MOF with a layered structure, Zn·BCIP, which acts as an asymmetric photoactive catalyst.168 This material, which is represented in Fig. 11, can achieve upon illumination the alkylation of aliphatic aldehydes with high yield (74%) and chiral selectivity (92% enantiomeric excess).
 Fig. 11  Crystal structure of Zn·BCIP1 showing the chiral catalytic moiety, L-proline derivative (blue) located in the cavities, the chromophores (gray), the removable protective moiety (green), and the metal centers (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 168. 
On the other hand, MOFs containing Zr, Ru or Al centres with different structures (e.g. Ui66) have also been evaluated for hydrogen generation using solutions of electron donors and, in some cases, electron acceptors such as methyl viologen.166 Stable hydrogen production using triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent has been achieved using amino-functionalized Ti(IV) MOF under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). In order to promote the photoactivity, this material also incorporates Pt nanoparticles as co-catalysts, which were loaded by photodeposition.169 Under these conditions a rather stable hydrogen evolution rate of about 366 μmol h−1 g−1 was measured in a 9 hour test. Similarly NH2–MIL-125(Ti) has been used for the reduction of CO2 to formate under visible irradiation in acetonitrile solution.170
Nevertheless, despite the significant advances described above, which have been achieved in a short time period, the use of MOFs as photocatalysts still requires significant additional improvements to become fully competitive. One important limitation of this kind of materials is their poor stability, in particular in the presence of water and intense radiation.166 Some MOF structures based on Zr4+, Ti4+, and Fe3+ with carboxylate linkers (e.g. UiOs, MIL-125, -101), or Zn2+ with imidazolate linkers (ZIFs), withstand aqueous solutions but long term studies are warranted. Furthermore, photocatalytic rates remain low in most of the cases, and the strong reliance on sacrificial agents for hydrogen generation and CO2 photoreduction can significantly delay practical progress. The huge potential of MOFs for tailoring new properties can overcome these limitations but most likely those developments will not be achieved in a short term. A possible exception could be the photoactivated synthesis of high-added-value chemicals such as optical isomers, where the use of specifically designed chiral MOFs may be unbeatable.
The recent discovery of graphene171 as a new allotropic form of carbon has generated a revolution in materials science due to its unusual properties, which are expected to result in futuristic electronic applications.172 Graphene is constituted by a single layer of carbon with a network of sp2 bonds. As a consequence it is endowed with a very high thermal conductivity (ca. 5000 W m−1 K−1), presents an excellent mobility of charge carriers at room temperature (about 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1), and shows an extremely high specific surface area. According to these remarkable properties, this material has been proposed as an ideal component to be used in a number of electronic devices such as transistors, solar cells, and supercapacitors.
Since the pioneering work by P.V. Kamat et al.,173 graphene has been incorporated for photocatalysis applications, usually as TiO2–graphene composites. Initially, photocatalysis was used for the reduction of graphene oxide to graphene in UV irradiated composites. Soon after, it was observed that graphene–TiO2 showed a significant enhancement of reactivity with respect to the unmodified oxide. In this respect, as much as a 4-fold increment of the degradation rate of dyes and organic pollutants has been reported for TiO2 modified by a small amount of graphene.81,174,175 The combination of graphene with different TiO2 nanostructures, such as nanorods,176 and the preparation of membranes with a hierarchical structure formed by graphene oxide and TiO2 microspheres177 have also shown improved performance with regard to the unmodified TiO2 structures. In particular, membranes containing graphene oxide show not only improved photodegradation rates but also better resistance to fouling and better mechanical properties. In these cases the optimal effect is attained with a proportion of graphene in the 1–2% range, which avoids excessive shielding of the semiconductor. The method of preparation of the composites significantly influences their efficiency, since a good contact between components must be ensured. Providing the adequate interaction, a similar promotion of the activity has been reported using other semiconductors, such as ZnO in dye degradation,178 or Zn0.8Cd0.2S in the production of hydrogen (in the absence of co-catalysts and using S2−/SO3− as sacrificial electron donors).179,180 In this latter case, an apparent quantum efficiency as high as 23.4% at 420 nm is achieved. More complex photocatalysts constituted by two semiconductors, MoS and TiO2, or SrTiO3 and BiVO4, supported on graphene layers also show enhanced charge separation.179 This effect depends essentially on the transference of photoelectrons to graphene, which in this way acts as an electron collector boosting charge separation. In addition, the incorporation of the carbon monoatomic sheets can increase the surface area of the composite favouring the adsorption of substrate molecules. An example is shown in Fig. 12, where a 20% decrease of the dye concentration occurs before turning on the light. Finally, graphene incorporation improves light absorption in a broad range,174 although it is not entirely clear if it results in efficient photoexcitation, because photocurrent action spectra of TiO2–graphene composites show only significant intensity for wavelengths lower than 400 nm.175
 Fig. 12  Photocatalytic degradation of the dye methylene blue over 1 wt% graphene on TiO2 nanosheets, pure TiO2 nanosheets, Evonik P25 TiO2, and no photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 174. 
Modification of semiconductors with other low dimensional forms of carbon in order to improve electron transference in composite photocatalysts has also been assayed. In this way, graphyne, which is another 2-D phase constituted by a network of sp and sp2 C–C bonds, has been incorporated to TiO2. These composites have been tested for methylene blue degradation and the removal rate is almost 1.5 times higher than that of TiO2–graphene.181 Nevertheless, it is important to note that composites of CdSe with other conventional carbon phases with high conductivity such as graphite also show an appreciable enhancement of hydrogen production under visible light illumination (λ < 420 nm).182 This fact calls for further investigation on the real role of graphene in photocatalytic processes.
Carbon nitrides are another type of material with interesting properties and great potential for photocatalytic applications. In particular, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) consists of melem units, which can be described as three fused triazine rings, forming a layered structure with semiconducting properties and a band gap of 2.7 eV.183 Electrochemical characterization has determined that the conduction band, constituted by C 2p orbitals, is located at pH 7 at −1.3 V with respect to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), while the valence band, formed by N 2p orbitals, is located at 1.4 V. According to these values, which are consistent with theoretical calculations, this material is adequate to accomplish water splitting and, indeed, it can produce hydrogen under visible light irradiation (λ >420 nm) using triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent.183–186 Although g-C3N4 is active even without co-catalysts, the loading of noble metals significantly improves the yield. The obtained rate is about 200 μmol h −1 g−1, which is still far from those reported for other carbon-free semiconductors. On the other hand, the kinetically less favourable photooxidation of water to produce oxygen on carbon nitride requires the incorporation of RuO2 and the use of Ag+ as an electron acceptor.184
The graphitic carbon nitride phase is stable under ambient conditions and does not hydrolyse in water. Indeed this material has been reused in several successive tests of hydrogen production, although in the presence of suitable electron acceptors (e.g. Ag+) some degradation occurs due to the photo-oxidation of N3− to N2.184 This fact can be a serious concern for certain applications and, accordingly, long term stability assays under different conditions may be necessary.
Graphitic carbon nitride can be prepared as a mesoporous material using a hard template method in order to increase the surface area, as shown in Fig. 13.185 This morphological modification has a clear impact on the photoactivity, as it leads to an increment of one order of magnitude in the hydrogen production rate. This is a consequence of better co-catalyst dispersion, better access to the reagents and, most likely, also to the enhanced light scattering, which may promote photon absorption. Another modification frequently applied to carbon nitride is the doping with sulphur to yield C3N4−xSx. This material retains the same lattice structure, but slightly widens its band gap (2.77 eV) and shifts the conduction band to higher energies, increasing the reduction potential of the photogenerated electrons.186 As a consequence, hydrogen evolution is about eight times faster on the sulphur-doped photocatalyst under visible light using Pt as a co-catalyst and in the presence of triethanolamine. Furthermore, in contrast to the undoped material, C3N4−xSx is able to degrade phenol under visible illumination (λ > 400 nm). Sulphur-modified carbon nitride with mesoporosity has been synthesized using SiO2 as a hard template. The resulting material shows an enhanced hydrogen yield with respect to the sulphur-free mesoporous carbon nitride, and it achieves a quantum efficiency of 5.8% at 440 nm.187
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM image of mesoporous g-C3N4, showing the network formed by tristriazine units. The electron diffraction rings (inset) reveal the partial crystallinity of the walls. (b) TEM image of bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 173. 
Similar to the case of graphene-containing photocatalysts, a small amount of g-C3N4 can be combined with a second semiconductor. In this respect, it has been shown that ZnO loaded with 3% of g-C3N4 acquires a significant photoactivity under visible light for the degradation of dyes, improvement also reflected in photocurrent measurements.188 Furthermore, carbon nitride incorporation stabilizes ZnO against photocorrosion. A different strategy was adopted in the design of a specific photocatalyst for the selective oxidation of benzene using hydrogen peroxide. In this case, Fe was introduced as a promoter of photo-Fenton reactions on g-C3N4.189 However, this material is not totally stable under reaction conditions and it showed some iron leaching. A combination of graphene with carbon nitride provides also very high activity for hydrogen production under visible light irradiation. Thus, with 1% of graphene a hydrogen production rate of 451 μmol h−1 g−1 can be reached under visible light illumination of a methanol solution.190
All these examples show the potential of carbon nitride as a low cost, non-toxic and versatile platform for the design of improved photocatalysts. Nevertheless, additional research effort is needed to catch up with the photoactivity rates achieved by the most successful oxide based semiconductors.
3.3. Artificial leaves: combining photocatalysis and photovoltaics
Although silicon is the semiconductor of choice for most photovoltaic (PV) cells, it has seldom been used in photocatalytic applications. The main reason is the significant corrosion of Si in aqueous solutions due to anodic oxidation. As a consequence, this material frequently requires a protective coating and, very often, an electrical bias when used in photochemical processes such as water splitting. However, the significant overlap of the silicon bad gap with the solar spectrum, along with its relatively low cost and lack of toxicity, still makes this semiconductor an appealing option for photochemical processes. Recently, silicon has been utilized as one of the main components in a novel concept of an unwired macroscopic device developed by Nocera et al., which has been denominated ‘artificial leaf’.165,191–193 This system, schematically shown in Fig. 14, consists of a multi-deck sandwich of semiconductors (n-Si; p-Si; p*-Si) and a coating of catalyst for either oxygen or hydrogen evolution with an ohmic contact between them. The silicon layers with different kinds of dopants can be photoactivated and, due to the difference of potential established, the photogenerated carriers are driven in opposite directions through the conductor, and then they can reach the catalysts. Once the whole device is immersed in a solution, it can split the water molecules upon illumination. The efficiency can be further improved by selecting the electrolyte (i.e. potassium nitrate or potassium borate) and the pH (slightly alkaline). This architecture with the n–p junction is similar to that of a conventional photovoltaic cell, but the photogenerated carriers are driven to the catalysts instead of an external circuit. The oxygen-evolving catalyst is based on a Co phosphate with a Co–O arrangement resembling that of cubane. On the other hand, the hydrogen evolving catalyst is formed by a NiMoZn alloy. Employing this dispositive, a solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency as high as 4.7% has been reported. More recently, a structure based on the same concept but with much more complex morphology, using TiO2 and Si nanowires, has been proposed for water splitting (in a 0.5 M H2SO4 solution) under simulated sunlight irradiation.194 In this system iridium oxide was used as a co-catalyst and deposited on the TiO2 nanowires, which were attached to much larger Si rods modified with Pt particles, forming a kind of nanoforest. This device is able to produce O2 and H2 at a constant rate in a 5 hour interval, but the energy conversion efficiency is modest: 0.12%.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of an artificial leaf with Co-based catalysts for oxygen evolution and a npp+− silicon junction separated by a conductive layer of tin-doped indium oxide (ITO). Reproduced from ref. 191. 
This promising type of unwired device has opened up a new route for innovation, which can exploit the accumulated experience with PV devices. In this respect, the development of more active co-catalysts may contribute to the success of these systems. As an example, bio-inspired metal moieties have guided the initial efforts but exploration of other catalytic active materials can be fruitful. Besides, scale up and long term stability of these devices should be further investigated.
4. Conclusions and perspective
Despite the fact that some photocatalytic applications, ranging from self-cleaning windows to portable depollution systems, are already in the market, it is clear that the development of materials with improved performance will continue to be a hot topic of research in the near future. The relatively good performance of inexpensive TiO2 ensures that this material will still dominate the scene in the short term, especially for low profit, massive applications, such as passive self-cleaning systems. Among the other classically used semiconductors, ZnO may be appropriate for some applications, but stability concerns will surely limit its options. Accordingly, this may be the right time to take advantage of all the accumulated knowledge of the last decades in order to push as much as possible the limits of the performance of TiO2 as a paradigmatic semiconductor. Blind chemical doping or small variation of the synthesis conditions of TiO2 most likely will not lead to a real breakthrough. Nevertheless, summing-up small improvements achieved by chemical, morphological and textural modifications of TiO2 has the potential to significantly improve the results in specific niches. Surely an integrated and more comprehensive use of the already published results is probably a more sensible route for success than repetitive attempts of improving the characteristics of TiO2 by time-consuming try-and-error.
In a similar way, APHs are very interesting bifunctional materials with huge potential for real-world decontamination processes, especially because they can reduce the possible emission of harmful by-products of the photo-oxidation. Furthermore, the preparation of these composites may benefit from the acquired experience and the variety of readily available cost-effective adsorbents. Accordingly, research priorities on TiO2 photocatalysis should put the emphasis on engineering the optimal systems and devices for exploiting the full potential of this semiconductor. In spite of that, some approaches for the modification of this oxide may require a more thorough investigation. In this way the recent report on the interesting properties of black TiO2 deserves additional attention as a potentially feasible way to boost the photoactivity. Furthermore, fine control of the morphology at multiple scales, from the nanostructure to the dimensions required for manufacturing devices, can still warrant additional research effort from a materials science point of view.
Regarding alternative photocatalytic materials, although the interest in some of them is clearly fading due to the unfulfilled promise of substantial improvements, there is no doubt that exciting new possibilities will arise in the near future. Although some groups have sensibly advocated the utilization of photoactive materials based on abundant elements such as Co or Fe, the use of expensive d0 and d10 ions of scarce elements such as Nb5+, Ta5+ or Ga3+ for artificial photosynthesis is not disregarded due to the high scientific reward of designing an efficient photocatalyst for these processes. In fact, the remarkable quantum yield achieved in the UV range using phases such as (Na,K)TaO3 will probably continue to stimulate the study of different kinds of metallates as very promising photocatalysts. Nevertheless, it is clear that achieving significant activity under visible light is one of the main challenges for the development of these materials. In this respect, the record rate of hydrogen generation in the absence of sacrificial agents and under visible illumination obtained with the (Ga0.88Zn0.12)(N0.88O0.12) solid solution modified with Rh2−xCrxO3 constitutes a very relevant landmark in the design of materials for water splitting.46 Furthermore, the investigation for the optimization of this system has highlighted the importance of co-catalysts for the efficient production of solar fuels. Attempts of controlling the interactions at the nanoscale of this active component with the semiconductor, surely, will continue to attract the attention of the scientists working in this field. On the other hand, although the use of sulphides cannot be dismissed due to the remarkable quantum yields obtained in hydrogen production, the dependence of these phases on sacrificial electron donors (e.g. S2−/SO3−) significantly limits their applicability on a large scale. Yet, combinations of different semiconductor phases, either in a Z-scheme with electron mediators or forming heterojunctions, will remain as an interesting approach for enhancement of the photoactivity.
The continuous exploration of new phases as potentially improved photocatalysts will most likely provide exciting results in the coming years. In this endeavour a more integrated use of theoretical and advanced experimental techniques will be, without any doubt, crucial for achieving a rapid and significant enhancement of the performance. In any case, it is expected that phases based on the elements of the p block such as AgPO4 will experience a significant development. Nevertheless, following the current tendency can be forecasted that the impact of photocatalysts based on carbon or organic–inorganic composites will rise more significantly. Considering the enormous flexibility of MOF structures it is not unlikely, they may play a significant role in the future but the instability and the modest yields obtained until now are not heartening. Similarly, semiconductors modified with enzymes or other complex biological molecules can play an interesting role under aerobic conditions but the instability will remain a significant barrier for most of the applications. On the other hand, although the structures of carbon nitrides and sulphides are not so diverse and they also suffer from instability under some circumstances they already present an interesting photoactivity. Most likely future development in this area will be rather relevant. Finally, the application of PV concepts to artificial photosynthesis is possibly one of the most promising approaches of the last times, although much more research on these devices is required, not only with regard to material development but also in connection with device engineering.
References
S. Malato, P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Maldonado, J. Blanco and W. Gernjak, Catal. Today, 2009, 147(1), 1–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Teoh, J. A. Scott and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 629–639 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hernández-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suárez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 Search PubMed .

Design of Advanced Photocatalytic Materials for Enegy and Environmental Applications, ed. J. M. Coronado, F. Fresno, M. D. Hernández-Alonso and R. Portela, Springer, London,  2013, ISBN. 2013978-1-4471-5060-2 Search PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ohtani, J. Photochem. Photobio., C, 2010, 11, 157–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, J. Liu, J. Su, F. Zuo, J. Chen and P. Feng, Chem.–Eur. J, 2013, 19, 2866–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qin, D. Zhang, D. Zhao, L. Wang and K. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2304–2306 RSC .
C. Li, F. Wang, J. Zhu and J. C. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 433–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673–677 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kislov, J. Lahiri, H. Verma, D. Y. Goswami, E. Stefanakos and M. Batzill, Langmuir, 2009, 25(5), 3310–3315 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(1), 35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernandez-García and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2012, 12(3), 1555 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Di Paola, E. García-López, G. Marcì and L. Palmisano, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 3–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mills, C. Hill and P. K. J. Robertson, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 237, 7–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Amano, K. Nogami, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9320–9326 CAS .
J. Lasek, Y.-H. Yu and J. C. S. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 14, 29–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ouyang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2724–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, N. Hoivik, K. Wang and H. Jakobsen, Sol. Energy
Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 53–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-N. Wang, W.-J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Liu, D. Luo, J. Li, Y. Huang, H. Li, Y. Fang, Y. Xu and L. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 180, 151–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132–2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda, K. Domen, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4596–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yi, J. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Cao, W. Luo, Z. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. U. G. Silva, Y. S. Bouizi, V. Fornés and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13833–13839 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Patsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Today, 2007, 124, 94–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536–17542 CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 110–117 CrossRef .
A. Kudo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 197–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhong and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7631–7633 RSC .
H. Kaga, K. Saito and A. Kudo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3779–3781 RSC .
X. Wang, S. Li, H. Yu, J. Yu and S. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J, 2011, 17, 7777–7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tüysüz and C. K. Chan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 116–123 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, G. Chen, Y. Li, R. Jin, Q. Wang and J. Pei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4052 CAS .
J. Sun, G. Chen, J. Pei, R. Jin, Q. Wang and X. Guang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5609–5614 RSC .
K. Maeda, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10537–10548 RSC .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2008, 254, 198–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, W. Mao and W. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 3644–3650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, A. Yamakata, K. Maeda, Y. Moriya, T. Takata, J. Kubota, K. Teshima, S. Oishi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8348–8351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matoba, K. Maeda and K. Domen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17(52), 14731–14735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Palmisano, E. García-López, G. Marcí, V. Loddo, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7074 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, N. Saito and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(23), 8304–8306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 197–210 RSC .
W. F. Maier, K. Stöwe and S. Sieg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6016–6067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Shen, R. Yang, S. Zou, X. Ji, L. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Zheng, S. Li, J. Fan and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5733–5739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Baek, J. W. Yoon, J. S. Hong and J. K. Suh, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 450, 222–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Takeda, T. Torimoto, S. Sampath, S. Kuwabata and H. Yoneyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 9986–9991 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, S. Ito, S. Kuwabata and H. Yoneyama, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1275–1281 CrossRef CAS .
R. Leary and A. Westwood, Carbon, 2011, 49, 741–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 3, 225–252 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aprile, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 769–783 RSC .
Y. Kuwahara and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2407–2416 RSC .
A. Corma and H. García, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1443–1459 RSC .
K. Rajeshwar and W. Chanmanee, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Q. Zhu, F. Zhou, X. Deng and F. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 235–236, 186–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suárez, J. M. Coronado, R. Portela, J. C. Martín, M. Yates, P. Ávila and B. Sánchez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5892–5896 CrossRef .
J. M. Herrmann, J. Matos, J. Disdier, C. Guillard, J. Laine, S. Malato and J. Blanco, Catal. Today, 1999, 54, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li Puma, A. Bono and J. G. Collin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 157, 209–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Ao and S. C. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 44, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Mao and H. S. Weng, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2012, 31, 306–317 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Liu, F. J. Xia, Y. M. Chen and G. Cui, Mater. Lett., 2012, 72, 5–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Herbig and P. Lobmann, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 359–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim and S. K. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 16–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, P. Serp, P. Kalck and J. L. Faria, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 235, 194–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. An, W. Ma, Z. Sun, Z. Liu, B. Han, S. Miao, Z. Miao and K. Ding, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1795–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, T. Xu, H. Fu, J. Zhao and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6234–6239 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4913–4928 RSC .
V. Krishna, D. Yanes, W. Imaram, A. Angerhofer, B. Koopman and B. Moudgil, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79, 376–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. R. Tang, X. Fu and Y. J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Pastrana-Martínez, S. Morales-Torres, S. K. Papageorgiou, F. K. Katsaros, G. E. Romanos, J. L. Figueiredo, J. L. Faria, P. Falaras and A. M. T. Silva, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 101–111 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Iijima, M. Yudasaka, R. Yamada, S. Bandow, K. Suenaga, F. Kokai and K. Takahashi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 309, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Battiston, M. Minella, R. Gerbasi, F. Visentin, P. Guerriero, A. Leto, G. Pezzotti, E. Miorin, M. Fabrizio and C. Pagura, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2470–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Quan, H. Yu and S. Chen, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1126–1132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Eliyas, L. Ljutzkanov, I. D. Stambolova, V. N. Blaskov, S. V. Vassilev, E. N. Razkazova-Velkova and D. R. Mehandjiev, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2013, 11, 464–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Matos, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 417–418, 263–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, J. Han, Y. Fu, Y. Song, C. Yu and X. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102, 417–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. Bai, A. Ren, B. Guo and C. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 3493–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pulido Melián, O. González Díaz, J. M. Dora Rodríguez, G. Colón, J. Araña, J. Herrera Melián, J. A. Navío and J. P. Peña, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 364, 174–181 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Sun, Y. K. Wang, R. X. Sun and S. Y. Dong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 115, 303–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Jo, S. H. Shin and E. S. Hwang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 191, 234–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Zhang, M. Ariyuki, H. Mishima, S. Higashimoto, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1998, 21, 621–627 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Velasco, B. Tsyntsarski, B. Petrova, T. Budinova, N. Petrov, J. B. Parra and C. O. Ania, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 843–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, J. C. Yu, C. Y. Chan, Y. K. Che, J. C. Zhao, L. Ding, W. K. Ge and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 61, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Krishna, S. Pumprueg, S. H. Lee, J. Zhao, W. Sigmund, B. Koopman and B. M. Moudgil, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2005, 83, 393–397 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Gui, C. Ji, P. Li, Z. Li, L. Zhang, E. Shi, K. Zhu, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu and A. Cao, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 265–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, J. Chen, G. Li, X. Nie, H. Zhao, P.-K. Wong and T. An, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6959–6967 CAS .
Y. Izumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 257, 171–186 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mo, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu and R. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 168, 276–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Takeuchi, M. Hidaka and M. Anpo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 237–238, 133–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori, Y. Matsumura and H. Yamashita, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 643–648 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Holm, E. Taarning, K. Egeblad and C. H. Christensen, Catal. Today, 2011, 168, 3–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Dubois, A. Petushkov, E. Garcia Cardona, S. C. Larsen and G. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 3, 486–492 CrossRef .
S. Y. Ryu, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18195–18203 CAS .
A. Abdi, A. Denoyelle, N. Commenges-Bernole and M. Trari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 2070–2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Peng, C.-M. Wu, J. Baltrusaitis, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and R. T. Koodali, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3221–3223 RSC .
F. Sastre, V. Fornés, A. Corma and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17257–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sánchez, A. I. Cardona, M. Romero, P. Avila and A. Bahamonde, Catal. Today, 1999, 54, 369–377 CrossRef .
P. Ávila, B. Sánchez, A. I. Cardona, M. Rebollar and R. Candal, Catal. Today, 2002, 76, 271–278 CrossRef .
M. R. Elahifard, S. Rahimnejad, S. Haghighi and M. R. Gholami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9552–9553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Papoulis, S. Komarneni, D. Panagiotaras, E. Stathatos, D. Toli, K. C. Christoforidis, M. FernÃ¡ndez-GarcÃa, H. Li, S. Yin, T. Sato and H. Katsuki, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132–133, 416–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Lv, W. Zhang, R. Li, H. Zhong, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 171, 294–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Nascimento, G. R. S. Andrade, E. C. Neves, C. D. E. S. Barbosa, L. P. Costa, L. S. Barreto and I. F. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 21992–22000 CAS .
T. L. R. Hewer, S. Suárez, J. M. Coronado, R. Portela, P. Avila and B. Sanchez, Catal. Today, 2009, 13, 302–308 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Zhao, D. Pitts and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3664–3666 RSC .
S. K. Papageorgiou, F. K. Katsaros, E. P. Favvas, G. E. Romanos, C. P. Athanasekou, K. G. Beltsios, O. I. Tzialla and P. Falaras, Water Res., 2012, 46, 1858–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, T. Seok and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6066–6070 CAS .
T. Iwasaki, M. Isaka, H. Nakamura, M. Yasuda and S. Watano, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 150, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmaruzzaman, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 327–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Artkla, W. Kim, W. Choi and J. Wittayakun, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 157–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, W. He, J. Ma, M. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Yan, X. Tian, X. Sun and X. Han, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 1893–1896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Dillert, D. Bahneman and M. Vormoor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7491 CAS .

          ObservatoryNANO, Briefing No. 10,  February 2011, http://www.observatorynano.eu Search PubMed .
M. Anpo, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 1265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and C. Poon, Build. Environ., 2009, 44, 1899 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Nishimoto and B. Bhushan, RSC. Adv., 2013, 3, 671 RSC .
H. S. Lim, D. Kwak, D. Y. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bekermann, A. Gasparotto, D. Barreca, A. Devi, R. A. Fischer, M. Kete, U. Lavrenčič Štangar, O. I. Lebedev, C. Maccato, E. Tondello and G. Van Tendeloo, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shibata, G. Takanashi, T. Nakamura, K. Fukuda, E. Yasuo and S. Takayoshi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 535 CAS .
K. Katsumata, S. Okazaki, C. E. J. Cordonier, T. Shichi, T. Sasaki and A. Fujishima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1236 CAS .
D. Verhovšek, N. Veronovski, U. Lavrenčič Štangar, M. Kete, K. Žagar and M. Čeh, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 329796 Search PubMed .
R. Portela, B. Sanchez, J. M. Coronado, R. Candal and S. Suarez, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 223–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fateh, A. A. Ismail, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10405 CAS .
E. Boonen and A. Beeldens, Eur. Transp. Res. Rev., 2013, 5, 79–89 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ballari and H. J. H. Brouwers, J. Hazar. Mater, 2013, 254–255, 406–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.italcementigroup.com/NR/rdonlyres/38BC84DA-6F1C-476B-A827-22E67B61AEC1/0/DivesinMisericordia_UK.pdf
        .
M. A. Kebede, M. E. Varner, N. K. Scharko, R. B. Gerber and J. D. Raff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(23), 8606–8615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ISO10678:2010, Fine ceramics, advanced technical ceramics – determination of photocatalytic activity of surfaces in an aqueous medium by degradation of methylene blue, ISO, Geneva,  2010 Search PubMed.
A. Kafizas, D. Adriaens, A. Mills and I. P. Parkin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 8367 RSC .
U. Černigoj, M. Kete and U. Lavrenčič Štangar, Catal. Today, 2010, 151, 46 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Auvinen, M. Alatalo, H. Haario, J.-P. Jalava and R.-J. Lamminmäki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8484 CAS .
M. D. Hernández-Alonso, S. García-Rodríguez, S. Suárez, R. Portela, B. Sánchez and J. M. Coronado, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 251 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Bavykin and F. C. Walsh, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 2009, 977 CrossRef .
A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2009, 2791 RSC .
Y. K. Lim, E. W. Keong Koh, Y. W. Zhang and H. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 323–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Acharya, R. S. Khnayzer, T. O'Connor, G. Diederich, M. Kirsanova, A. Klinkova, D. Roth, E. Kinder, M. Imboden and M. Zamkov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2919–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051–1054 CrossRef CAS .
A. Selloni, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa and M. Oshikiri, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Cao, J. G. Wang, F. J. Lu, D. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Huo, G. S. Li, H. X. Li and J. Zhu, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D'Arienzo, J. Carbajo, A. Bahamonde, M. Crippa, S. Polizzi, R. Scotti, L. Wahba and F. Morazzoni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893 RSC .
R. G. Li, F. X. Zhang, D. G. Wang, J. X. Yang, M. R. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. X. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, L. Zan, L. Tian, T. Peng and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6951 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Y. Fu and B. L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhu, D. Wu, Q. Li, H. Dong, J. Li, K. Jiang and D. Xu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11629 RSC .
H. Lu, S. Wang, L. Zhao, J. Li, B. Dong and Z. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4228 RSC .
J. Zhu, Z. Yin, D. Yang, T. Sun, H. Yu, H. E. Hoster, H. H. Hng, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 987 CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Sun, J. Xu, M. Shang and J. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 97–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Zhou, X. Li, T. Fan, F. E. Osterloh, J. Ding, E. M. Sabio, D. Zhang and Q. Guo, Adv. Mater., 22, 951 Search PubMed.
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gascon, M. D. Hernández-Alonso, A. R. Almeida, G. P. M. van Klink, F. Kapteijn and G. Mul, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1(12), 981–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, C. He, J. Wang, X. Peng, X. Li, Y. An and C. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14991–14999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, M. Saito, K. Mochizuki, M. Iwata, H. Higashimura, M. Anpo and M. Matsuoka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20848 CAS .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2012, 51, 3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A.
A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2(7), 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Wang, D.-H. Wang, W.-G. Qu, L.-Q. Lu and A.-W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19893–19901 CAS .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, Z. Liu, M. Tai, D. D. Sun and W. Ng, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 17–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and J. Phys, Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and J. Ru Gong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(9), 4584–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wen, Z. Tang, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(2), 1504–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Kim and H. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 530–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947 CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1681 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922–2929 CAS .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45(5), 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Cox, M. T. Winkler, J. J. H. Pijpers, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 532 CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(6), 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Fernando Fresno	Fernando Fresno is currently a Research Associate in the Laboratory for Environmental Research and Assistant Professor in the School of Environmental Sciences at the University of Nova Gorica, Slovenia. He has conducted postdoctoral work at ICP-CSIC and CIEMAT, Spain. He got his PhD in Chemistry in 2006 from the Autónoma University of Madrid (UAM) while working at ICP-CSIC and the Inorganic Chemistry Department of UAM. He has worked as a visiting researcher at the Universities of Niigata (Japan) and Aberdeen (UK), and IRCELYON (France). His research interests focus on photocatalytic processes with emphasis on the synthesis of new, more efficient photocatalytic materials.
Raquel Portela	Raquel Portela received her B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Engineering from Santiago de Compostela University, conducting her doctoral studies at Ciemat (Spain), with short stays at Buenos Aires University and Humbold-Universität zu Berlin. She worked as a postdoctoral researcher at LBNL (CA), Ciemat, IRCELYON (France), and, since 2011, the Institute of Catalysis of the Spanish National Research Council (ICP-CSIC). Her research activity has been focused on immobilized catalysts for gas phase reactions, studying the photodegradation of microorganisms and chemicals with TiO2-coatings and adsorbent–TiO2 hybrids, and more recently the application of in situ and operando spectroscopies to different reactions with shaped catalysts.
Silvia Suárez	Silvia Suarez obtained an Extraordinary Doctorate Award in Chemistry from the University of Alcala in 2002 while working at the Institute of Catalysis and Petrochemistry, ICP-CSIC (Madrid, Spain). She has had two research stays at University Catholic de Louvain La Neuve (Belgium) and the University of degli Study di Messina (Italy). In 2006 she moved to the Group of Photocatalytic Treatment of Pollutants in Air at CIEMAT-Madrid. In 2007 she gained a Ramon y Cajal contract as a researcher at CIEMAT. Her research interests are in the areas of environmental heterogeneous catalysis and chemical technology. The development of immobilized catalysts on different substrates, honeycomb structures, adsorbent–photocatalyst hybrids and reactor design are her principal research activities.
Juan M. Coronado	Juan M. Coronado conducted his doctoral studies at the Institute of Catalysis (ICP-CSIC) and he received his Ph.D. in Chemistry from the Complutense University of Madrid in 1995. He spent two years as a postdoctoral fellow at Dundee University (UK) funded by a “Marie Curie” grant. He was also a visiting scholar at the University of Wisconsin and Pennsylvania State University in USA. In 2005, he got a position as a tenured scientist at CIEMAT and, in 2009 he was appointed as a senior researcher at IMDEA Energy Institute. Currently, his scientific activity is mainly devoted to the development of advanced catalysts for the production of more sustainable fuels using renewable resources.

 	Fig. 1  Yearly evolution of the titania predominance in the scientific literature on photocatalysis estimated as the percentage of articles devoted to TiO2 among those related to oxide semiconductors or out of the total. Source: Scopus.	 
2H2O (l) + CO2 (g) → CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g)	(1)
2H2O (l) + CO2 (g) → CH3OH (l) + 3/2O2 (g)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  CO2 photoreduction with Pt/TiO2 nanofilms under UV radiation. (a) CH4 and CO yields and O2/N2 volumetric ratio as a function of irradiation time at the optimal Pt deposition time of 20 s. (b) CO and CH4 yields of commercial P25 TiO2 powder, pristine TiO2 films, and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representation of the CO2 to CO photoreduction system using the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase attached to RuP-modified TiO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29.	 
H2O (liquid) → H2 (gas) + 1/2O2 (gas)	(3)
H2O (liquid) + CH3OH (aq.) → 3H2 (gas) + CO2 (gas)	(4)




H

2

production

CdS	Pt–PdS	S2−/SO32−	300 W Xe	420	29233	93	
37

NiS/CdS	
	
	
	420	
	51.3	
38

CdS–Ti–MCM-48	RuO2	Ethanol	—	Visible	2730	36.3	
106

CdS–CdSe	Pt	Methanol	300 W Xe	450	40000	20	
148

CuGa2In3S8	Rh	S2−/SO32−	300 W Xe	560	
	15	
39

Hf–(Na,K)TaO3	None	Methanol	350 W Hg	
	256000	
	
42

None	None	350 W Hg	
	49000	
	
42

Sr–NaTaO3 mesocrystal	None	Methanol	350 W Hg	
	275000	
	
43

H4Nb6O17	
	
	
	330	
	50	
7

ZrO2–TaON and WO3	Pt	None	300 W Xe	420	150	6.3	
45

LaTiO2N	CoOx	
	
	440	
	27.1	
48

Black TiO2	Pt	Methanol	Solar simulator with a filter	>400	100	
	
11


	Pt	Methanol	Solar simulator	Solar spectrum	10000	
	
11

BaZrO3–BaTaO2N	
	
	
	>660	
	
	
44

 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

CO

2

photoreduction
	
	
	
	
	
Products (μmol h

−1

g

−1

)
	
	

TiO2 (1D-crystals)	Pt	
	400 W Xe	250–388	1361a	2.4	
24

TiO2 (nanotubes)	Pt/Cu	
	Solar light	Solar spectrum	7b	
	
27

Dehydrogenase–TiO2	Ru_bipyridine complexes	
	W–halogen lamp	>420	250c	
29


 	Fig. 4  H2 generation rate and quantum efficiency obtained with CdS loaded with different co-catalysts. Percentages represent the quantum yields at 420 nm. Based on the results of ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 5  Action spectra of H2 evolution from aqueous K2SO3–Na2S solutions over Rh-loaded (a) CuGa2In3S8 and (b) AgGa2In3S8. Reproduced from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 6  APH composites; (a) titanium dioxide nanopetals induced by single wall carbon nanohorns;83 (b) TiO2 particles on carbon nanotubes;74 (c) Re complex in hierarchical mesoporous ZSM-5;103 (d) sepiolite:TiO2 photocatalysts.65 Reproduced from ref. 65, 83 and 103.	 

 	Fig. 7  Glass substrates treated with self-cleaning coating and placed under real-life conditions, where a clear distinction between the coated (left) and the uncoated (right) surface is shown. Reproduced from ref. 131.	 

 	Fig. 8  Monoclinic BiVO4 nanoplates: (a) FESEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) SAED pattern of the area framed in image (b), and (d) comparative photocatalytic evolution of O2 from an AgNO3 solution. Adapted from ref. 154.	 

 	Fig. 9  Modification of the band gap in GaN nanotubes as a function of the doping concentration of ZnO, as obtained from DFT calculations. Taken with permission from ref. 146.	 

 	Fig. 10  Yearly evolution of the number of articles related to photocatalytic applications of graphene, MOFs and g-C3N4. Source of the data: Scopus.	 




H

2

production

Ti–MOF–NH2 (MIL-125)	Hydrogen production	Pt	Triethanolamine	Xe lamp	>420	367a	
	
169

Ti–MOF–NH2 (MIL-125)	CO2 Photoreduction	
	Triethanolamine in acetonitrile	4 × 4W UV lamps	365	16, 3b	
	
166

Graphene–Zn0.8Cd0.2S	Hydrogen production	
	S2−/SO3−	solar simulator	>420	1824a	23.4	
180

g-C3N4	Hydrogen production	
	Trimethylamine	300 W Xe	>300	183a	5.8	
40

C3N4−xSx	Hydrogen production	
	Trimethylamine	300 W Xe	450	136a	5.8	
187

Graphene–C3N4	Hydrogen production	Pt	Methanol	350 W Xe arc lamp	>400	451a	2.6	
39


 	Fig. 11  Crystal structure of Zn·BCIP1 showing the chiral catalytic moiety, L-proline derivative (blue) located in the cavities, the chromophores (gray), the removable protective moiety (green), and the metal centers (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 168.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photocatalytic degradation of the dye methylene blue over 1 wt% graphene on TiO2 nanosheets, pure TiO2 nanosheets, Evonik P25 TiO2, and no photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM image of mesoporous g-C3N4, showing the network formed by tristriazine units. The electron diffraction rings (inset) reveal the partial crystallinity of the walls. (b) TEM image of bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 173.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of an artificial leaf with Co-based catalysts for oxygen evolution and a npp+− silicon junction separated by a conductive layer of tin-doped indium oxide (ITO). Reproduced from ref. 191.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
