Electrochemistry of immobilised redox droplets: Concepts and applications  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B307326M View PDF VersionNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B307326M
(Invited Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 4053-4069Electrochemistry of immobilised redox droplets: Concepts and applicationsCraig E. Banksa, Trevor J. Daviesa, Russell G. Evansa, Geraldine Hignetta, Andrew J. Waina, Nathan S. Lawrencea, Jay D. Wadhawana, Frank Markenb and Richard G. Compton*aaPhysical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford, UK OX1 3QZ. E-mail: richard.compton@chemistry.oxford.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0) 1865 275 410;   Tel: +44 (0) 1865 275 413bDepartment of Chemistry, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire, UK LE11 3TUReceived 26th June 2003, Accepted 6th August 2003First published on 3rd September 2003AbstractThe use of microdroplet modified electrodes provides a simple methodology with which to study the biphasic electrochemistry of a plethora of species, encouraging the use of such techniques to mimic emulsion media. Furthermore, since the droplets may be miniaturised, this approach may assist in the field of biomimetic electrochemistry. For these reasons, this paper reviews the voltammetry of electrodes modified with electrochemically active droplets. The primary focus of the review is of unsupported droplets, where electron transfer processes occur at the three phase boundary, the base circumference of the individual droplets (of a volume range spanning nine orders of magnitude, going from microlitre to femtolitre volumes). The voltammetry of such systems is categorised via a semi-quantitative appreciation of the voltammetric characteristics. Finally, several topical examples illustrating the potential of application of this technology are described.1. IntroductionLiquid microdroplets are ubiquitous in both natural and artificial systems;1a clouds,1b,c rainbows,1d fog,1e and the emissions from fumaroles,1f are ensembles of tiny water droplets containing dissolved species (such as electrochemically active gases), living cells contain nanometre-sized vesicles:1g–j efficient storage media for the transport of a plethora of liquid species, such as neurotransmitters, pheromones etc., are merely a few examples in the world around us. In chemical systems, microdroplets are present as micelles in emulsion media (such as shampoos, etc.),1k during the course of liquid phase separations,1l,m and in phase transfer catalysis.1n This diverse utility of liquid microdroplets suggests that a wide variety of electrochemical phenomena, such as corrosion, demineralisation and leaching, etc., may occur within microdroplet environments. Accordingly, much work has been devoted over the last ten years, to understand electrochemistry in tiny environments,2,3 and cells.4,5There are essentially two types of strategy that may be employed to interrogate the electrochemistry of small droplets (or volumes). These are illustrated in Fig. 1. Most obviously, if small electrodes (working, reference and auxiliary) are employed, the nanovolume (or less) of interest can be electrolysed (sometimes completely) by touching the electrodes onto, or immersing them within, the drop, and electrochemistry undertaken within the small volume (see Fig. 1a).6,7 This technique requires the electroactive drops to be electrically conductive, and thus, may have to be supported by an added salt. The alternative route relies on modifying the surface of the working electrode either with a single drop, or with a (random) distribution of drops (see Fig. 1b). Provided the droplet material is sufficiently insoluble so that the droplets remain attached to the electrode, these droplet-modified electrodes may then be dipped into a conductive solution, and their redox characteristics examined; the droplets may not necessarily be electrochemically supported, as in Fig. 1b(ii) and (iii). For aqueous-based solutions, this methodology is thus limited to the study of oil-type droplets. However, it may be appreciated that this type of electrode may enable the close replication of electron transfer processes in both chemical (viz. aqueous emulsion systems, etc.) and natural systems (such as redox processes involving hydrophobic vitamins8). Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams illustrating various approaches to the electrochemical study of droplet-modified electrodes. (a) A single, conductive drop, where experiments are conducted only in the droplet deposit. (b) Biphasic approaches to the study of droplet-modified electrodes: (i) conductive droplet, where the deposit totally covers the electrode surface, (ii) and (iii) non-conductive deposits cannot be interrogated unless part of the electrode at the droplet edge is exposed (ii) single droplet, (iii) droplet array. Our aim in writing this review is to highlight the major results obtained to date in the voltammetry of electrode-immobilised oil microdroplets, with emphasis on the biphasic redox liquid chemistry pioneered by Marken and co-wokers9 on arrays of femtolitre volume droplets, and on the subsequent work developed by Scholz and co-workers on larger volume drops,10 and based on earlier work on the voltammetry at immobilised microparticles.11 Both approaches involve electrochemically unsupported oil phases. We will show how these three-electrode liquid|liquid experiments (i.e. one liquid-modified working electrode, one reference electrode and one auxillary electrode) may provide accurate thermodynamic data for ion transfer across aqueous|oil phase boundaries, in addition to permitting specific ion sensing, and in mimicking naturally-occurring redox phenomena. In this latter sense, this electrode methodology compares favourably with the modified carbon paste electrode work pioneered by Kuwana and French.12 Furthermore, electrochemical processes of redox liquids in the biphasic arrangement adopted by Webster and co-workers,9 and Scholz et al.10 are not necessarily the same as those that take place within the redox liquid alone,13,14 or when the redox liquid is immobilised in an electrode matrix, such as a redox-liquid ceramic carbon electrode,15 or in a carbon–epoxy electrode.16First, however, we briefly outline the methods and techniques used to modify electrodes with water-insoluble liquids.2. Strategies for the modification of electrode surfaces with organic liquidsWe commence by discussing the work done using electrodes modified with thin films of an organic liquid, and illustrate their applications. We then examine the techniques employed to immobilise smaller droplets (single and ensembles) on electrodes.2.1. Electrodes modified with liquid thin filmsFollowing on from his work three decades ago on electrochemistry in thin layers,17 Anson and co-workers18 were the first to modify a macroscopic edge plane pyrolytic graphite (epg) electrode with thin films (of average thickness ca. 30 μm) of nitrobenzene or benzonitrile, or similar, containing an electroactive compound, which is subsequently immersed into an aqueous electrolyte solution, see Fig. 2. Owing to the complete coverage of the electrode surface by nitrobenzene, the liquid thin layer films need to be supported with an electrolyte (usually an alkali-metal perchlorate salt or perchloric acid). The electroactive compound is often one that is insoluble in water, such as decamethylferrocene (as opposed to water-soluble ferrocene),18a or a porphyrin-type molecule.18b These immobilised thin layers are generally formed on polished and sonicated epg electrodes (essentially hydrophobic electrodes). Typically ca. 1 μL of organic liquid (nitrobenzene, benzonitrile, etc.) containing the redox-active regent (typically a solid dissolved in the organic liquid) is then transferred to the dry electrode surface using a syringe, whence it spreads rapidly across the surface (the deposit “wets” the surface), ultimately to produce a macroscopically uniform thin film (which may be thought to be an infinitely large droplet that contacts the electrode surface at an angle of zero). The electrode is then inverted and immersed into the aqueous solution. Note, the organic liquid may contain a pre-dissolved inert electrolyte (for example, tetrahexylammonium perchlorate), but this is not always necessary; it has been observed that unsupported nitrobenzene layers acquire ca. 1–3 mM sodium perchlorate from the aqueous phase.18b Fig. 2  Illustration of the Anson18 thin layer (ca. 30 μm) of nitrobenzene (NB) modifying an edge plane pyrolytic graphite electrode (epg) surface. Oxidation/reduction of the electroactive compound induces ion transport across the liquid|liquid interface, so as to preserve electroneutrality within the nitrobenzene or similar phase; most often electrochemically inert counter ions shuttle between the two phases during redox cycling, although as Koval and co-workers observed,19 this depends both on the hydrophobicity of the electro-generated ion and the electrolyte ions; even decamethyferrocinium ion was observed to leach into the aqueous phase in certain circumstances.19 Other groups readily applied this technology,20 the most significant application being the determination of ion transfer energies in the exact opposite scenario:20b that of immobilised water, and placed into an organic liquid solvent.20b Recently, Vagin and Karyakin,21 reported the use of polyphenothiazine (a redox active polymer known to be insoluble in water) as the nitrobenzene-based species, so as to ensure that the corresponding ion does not escape into the aqueous phase. In this way, Vagin and Karyakin observed that the oxidation of polyphenothiazine became easier (i.e. the oxidation peak moved to more negative potentials) with increasing hydrophobicity of the counter ion in the aqueous phase.21If the modified electrode is immersed into an aqueous phase containing a sparingly water-soluble species, such as cobalt(III)salen, it may partition into the organic phase in which it has greater solubility, and in which electrochemical conversion can occur, permitting the use of such modified electrodes to enhance electroanalytical sensistivity.18a Work of a similar nature was later reported by Dupont et al.22 using basal plane pyrolytic graphite (bppg) electrodes modified with thin layers of 1-methyl-3-(2,6-(S)-dimethylocten-2yl) tetrafluoroborate, a water-insoluble, and electrochemically inactive, room temperature ionic liquid (formed either after solvent evaporation of aliquots of the ionic liquid in a volatile solvent that had been pippetted onto the surface, or by gently covering the electrode surface with the ionic liquid). In this latter work, the immobilised phase is sufficiently conductive not to require the deliberate addition of supporting electrolyte. It was observed that the ionic liquid modified electrode acts as a “sponge” for specific species (such as aqueous ferricyanide and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-para-phenylenediamine22), whereas the presence of the thin ionic liquid layer blocked electron transfer at the electrode for other aqueous-based redox ions (such as hexaammineruthenium(III)22). These data have been recently confirmed by Bard and co-workers.23More recently, the electrocatalytic reduction of dioxygen to water via cobalt porphyrins dissolved in thin layers of nitrobenzene (or benzonitrile) on the surface of graphite electrodes immersed in aqueous acidic solutions has been examined.18f,h It was observed that the presence of the nitrobenzene film at the electrode enables a greater catalytic efficiency than compared with that for the cobalt porphyrin adsorbed on the surface of the graphite electrode.18h Furthermore, the rate of electrocatalysis was seen to be critically dependent on the amount of protons that partition into the nitrobenzene film from the adjacent aqueous solution;18g the protons consumed during oxygen reduction being replenished by proton transfer across the liquid|liquid interface, enabling further reduction of dioxygen.18fA final use of these electrodes, despite persuasive and fundamental criticism by Barker and Unwin,24 has been in the quantification of electron transfer rates across the water|nitrobenzene (or other hydrophobic liquid) interface, using electroactive compounds that reside in both phases, via the following scheme.  Ox1(NB)+e−⇌Red1(NB)(A) Red1(NB)+Ox2(aq)⇌Ox1(NB)+Red2(aq)(B) in which NB indicates a species dissolved in the nitrobenzene phase. In this approach, provided the diffusion of Ox2 in the aqueous phase is sufficiently fast so as to not be rate determining, and that its concentration is constant at its bulk value, the current–voltage curves are sigmoidal, suggesting that there is a steady-state concentration profile in the organic thin layer (provided the potential of the modified electrode is swept slowly).18b–e,24 The limiting current plateau (ilim) is thus governed by the diffusion of Ox1 and Red1 within the organic phase (giving rise to a current, idiff, given by the expression idiff=nFADOx1[Ox1]bulk/δ, where n is the number of electrons transferred, F is the Faraday constant, A is the electrode area, Dox1 is the diffusion coefficient of Ox1 within the organic thin film, [Ox1]bulk is the bulk concentration of Ox1 in the organic phase, and δ is the diffusion layer thickness (which at the slow scan rate employed is effectively the organic film thickness),18b–e,24 and by the rate of electron transfer across the liquid|liquid interface (giving rise to a current, iET, given by iET=kETFA[Ox1]bulk[Ox2]bulk, where [Ox2]bulk is the bulk solution concentration of Ox2 in the aqueous phase, and kET is the bimolecular rate constant for the biphasic electron transfer process).18b–e,24 The overall steady-state current observed may thus be evaluated using the expression:18,24,25 (1)At low concentrations of Ox1, the overall current is dominated by the rate of diffusion within the organic thin film; at high concentrations of Ox1, the inter-phase electron transfer rate dominates.18b Provided the concentration of Ox2 in the aqueous phase is in excess,24 specifically in the range:18d (2)in which t is the length of time for which ilim flows, eqn. (1) may be used to extract a value for kETvia linear plots of (ilim)−1 against ([Ox2]bulk)−1.18b,24 The expression given in inequality (2) arises so that (i) the observed limiting current is significantly smaller than the diffusion-only current (i.e. mass transport in the thin film is insignificant), and (ii) the concentration of the reactant in the aqueous phase at the liquid|liquid interface is not significantly decreased from its bulk phase value by the biphasic reaction (else mass transport in the aqueous phase will affect the observed response).18d It was found that for reversible electron transfer processes, a regular increase in rate is seen with increasing driving force (the difference in the formal potentials of the two redox couples in their respective phases and the Galvani potential difference present at the liquid|liquid interface18e); for irreversible reactions, changes in the overall driving force produces rate changes that not readily accountable.18e Nevertheless, the attraction for using this method as a means to extract electron transfer kinetic data is the inherent simplicity of the approach;18b alternative methods include the classical four-electrode approach,26a scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM),26b,c and microelectrochemical measurements at expanding droplets,26d,e and all requiring the use of more complex instrumentation and data analysis.We next explore the strategies that enable electrode surfaces to be modified with smaller liquid deposits. It should be noted that although many mercury-coated “thin film” electrodes are essentially of this type,27 it is not our intention to discuss electron transfer processes at those electrodes.2.2. Droplet-modified electrodesMany methods have been used to modify the surface of electrodes with oil droplets or arrays of these. Aoki et al.,28,29 Komorsky-Lovrić and co-workers,30,31 and Scholz and co-workers10,32–40 modified graphite electrodes (bppg or paraffin impregnated graphite rods) with single unsupported drops of a water-insoluble liquid containing an electroactive compound, via pipetting a 2–4 μL (typically ca. 0.5–3 mm diameter10,28–40) aliquot onto the electrode surface, and them immersed these into aqueous solution. The similarity of this system with that of Anson's is apparent.18i Inzelt undertook similar work using the redox liquid 3-methylthiophene as the organic liquid and electroactive species.41 Girault and co-workers transferred a single 10 μL aliquot of a supported aqueous solution containing iron(II) and iron(III) salts onto the surface of a platinum electrode prior to dipping this into a dichloromethane electrolyte.42 However, by far the most elegant method for immobilising single droplets on an electrode is via manipulation of the microdroplet using “optical tweezers”
(a laser trapping method) employed by Nakatani and co-workers.43 This system is illustrated in Fig. 3. In this approach, when a 1064 nm laser beam is focussed onto one oil droplet in an oil-in-water emulsion, it is optically trapped near the focal spot of the laser beam in the sample solution, the Brownian motion of the droplet being completely suppressed. The key to this “laser trapping manipulation method” is the refraction of the laser beam through the droplet. Thus, the momentum of the photons in the light beam prior to refraction, is different to that after refraction. Newton's second law requires conservation of the total momentum, and a force is exerted on the droplet in a direction opposing that of the momentum change. This force (over the entire area irradiated by the laser beam) is the “laser trapping force”. The force is directed to the focal spot of the laser beam in this case because the refractive index of the droplet (1.55 for nitrobenzene) is higher than that of the surrounding solution (1.3 for water), and the droplet is trapped in the vicinity of the focal point of the laser beam. Once the droplet makes contact with the electrode, its Brownian motion is completely frozen without the need for laser trapping, and electrochemical studies may be performed on single, micron-sized droplets. Nakatani and co-workers also illustrated an alternative method for immobilising picolitre-sized droplets on an electrode, using microcapillary injection and manipulation techniques.44 Fig. 3  General scheme of the laser-spectroscopy–electrochemistry system employed by Nakatani and co-workers43 for trapping droplets from emulsion media on electrodes carefully positioned in the focal plane of the objective lens. The xenon light source enables the absorption spectrum of the droplet to be simultaneously recorded by the photodector. From the above brief discussion, we may appreciate that the literature affords two forms of droplet-modified electrode: (i) droplets that completely cover the electrode (viz. the electrode and deposits are of comparable size, see Fig. 1b, panel (i)),42–44 and (ii) droplets that only partially block the electrode surface (the electrode is much bigger than the liquid deposit, see Fig. 1b, panel (ii)).10,28–41 It follows that, in the quest to constantly miniaturise systems, the first approach is limited by the electrode size, and experiments conducted so, are often undertaken using electrodes of micrometric dimensions. In addition, as in §2.1, the liquid deposits have to be electrochemically supported. In contrast, immobilised droplets that allow the surrounding electrode edge to be exposed (“naked”) have to be smaller than the electrode, and do not necessarily22 have to be electrically conducting (vide infra). This latter technique has been deployed for the study of very small droplets (down to femtolitre volumes45–49), in contrast to the picolitre volumes reported for the former method.44a Hereafter, we will focus on the work in which the electrode is only partially covered with the organic “oil”; interested readers are directed to the reviews and work by Nakatani43,44 for a comprehensive treatment of the other system.The major drawback in using electrodes that are partially blocked with a single microdroplet is that if the deposit is to small compared with the electrode size, the electrochemical signal (proportional to either the droplet area or radius (vide infra)) will be swamped by a large capacitative current (proportional to the electrode area). Hence, for single droplet electrochemistry, experiments are restricted by using small electrodes (such as microelectrodes) to study micon-sized droplets, and big electrodes to interrogate electron transfer processes at large droplets (typical volumes of a few microlitres). The “advantage” described in the preceding paragraph is not totally lost, it is merely conditioned. An elegant method for side-stepping this issue is to use an array (usually of the random variety) of small droplets sprinkled over the electrode. It is this approach that was pioneered by Marken and co-workers,9 and has subsequently been adopted in the work in our laboratories.There are various ways in which an array of microdroplets may be immobilised on a conductive solid substrate, the most obvious being the electrochemically-induced nucleation of mercury microdroplets on solid electrodes (such as iridium).27 To our knowledge, the first reported example of non-mercury liquid deposit ensembles electrochemically produced in situ, was by Dubois et al.50 At a platinum electrode in hexamethylphosphoric triamide containing ca. 25 mM water, reduction of the benzyltrimethylammonium cation causes benzyltrimethylammonium hydroxide to deposit. (This latter species complexes water and undergoes a Sommerlet–Hauser rearrangement.50) For electroactive oil droplets (consisting of redox liquids or inert organic liquids containing a dissolved electroactive solid), the most widely used method (and the only one considered in this review) involves the deposition of a solution of the oil onto the electrode surface, and then allowing the solvent (usually volatile, such as acetonitrile or dichloromethane) to evaporate off. Although this method was first employed by Heineman and colleagues51 for the deposition of n-butylferrocene onto glassy carbon electrodes, it is possible that this resulted in thin films, not droplets.52 Nevertheless, fifteen different water-immiscible redox liquids (“electroactive oils”) have been investigated in this manner (see Table 1),9,45–49,52–64 and several systems have been recently reported of solids dissolved in dissolved in electrochemcially-inert liquid micron-sized droplets.45,65–67 The physical and chemical requirements for such redox oils are that individual molecules contain a readily discernible redox moiety which provides a basis for the structure; the hydrophobic character is rendered by long n-alkyl chains attached to this substructure, so that the materials exhibit extremely low tendencies to crystallise or freeze into a solid glass. Furthermore, the resulting compound must be oxidised or reduced within the potential window of the electrolyte solution into which the microdroplet-modified electrode is placed. As a consequence of these requirements, the majority of the work has been undertaken using a para-phenylenediamine backbone that is tetra-N-alkylated (see Fig. 4a).9,45,46,48,49,53,55–63 The alkyl chains employed might, for example, possess a stereogenic centre, or a moiety to specifically “tag” another compound, enabling the particular recognition and potentially quantitative sensing of the latter.54 Compounds that fulfil the above conditions are not only restricted to those artificially synthesised in the laboratory; naturally-occurring lipophilic vitamins (such as vitamin K1,64 vitamin K2 and the various tocopherols), and other hydrophobic biological electron transfer agents (such as ubiquinones, plastocyanins, etc.) are amenable to electrochemical exploration via microdroplet modified electrodes, perhaps encouraging the use of this methodology as in vitro mimics for in vivo electron transfer processes.
Table 1 Table identifying redox liquids that have been studied voltammetrically as microdroplets immobilised on a bppg electrode

Electroactive oilReferencea Studied as single millimetric drop immobilised on a PIGE.N,N,N′,N′-Tetrahexyl-para-phenylenediamine9,45,46,48,49,53,55–60,62N,N,N′,N′-Tetrahexyl-meta-phenylenediamine55N,N,N′,N′-Tetrabutyl-para-phenylenediamine46,49,62N,N,N′,N′-Tetraheptyl-para-phenylenediamine46,49,62N,N,N′,N′-Tetraoctyl-para-phenylenediamine61–63N,N,N′,N′-Tetranonyl-para-phenylenediamine46,49,62N,N-Dibutyl-N′,N′-diethyl-para-phenylenediamine46N,N-Diethyl-N′,N′-dihexyl-para-phenylenediamine46N,N-Diethyl-N′,N′-diheptyl-para-phenylenediamine46N,N,N′-Trihexyl-para-phenylenediamine60N,N,N′,N′-Tetrakis(6-methoxyhexyl)-para-phenylenediamine55N1-[4-(Dihexylamino)phenyl]-N1,N4,N4-trihexyl-1,4-phenylenediamine543-methylthiophenea41n-Butylferrocene51,524-Nitrophenyl nonyl ether47Vitamin K164 Fig. 4  (a) The structure of the N,N,N′,N′-tetraalkyl-para-phenylenediamine (TRPD) redox oils employed in the work from our laboratories.9,45,46,48,49,53,55–63 Typically, R is large (larger than n-butyl). (b) Optical images illustrating microdroplets of THPD (R=n-hexyl), 101.7 nmol, deposited on a bppg electrode surface. The microdroplets are seen as dark, globular features. In the figure, the abscissa is 445 μm, while the ordinate axis is 309 μm long. (c) Schematic illustration indicating the effect on the voltammetry of a solution phase species by the presence of electroinactive “blocking” material. Very low coverage of blocking deposit, (i), yields responses almost identical to that of a naked electrode; higher coverages, (ii), causes the diffusion regime to become increasingly radial, with profound effects on the voltammetric response. It is evident that the electrochemical response of electrodes modified with random arrays of electroactive droplets will, in part, be dependent on the size and the distribution of the immobilised droplets. Further, since the droplets will likely form and adhere wherever the local surface energy is high,49 the nature of the electrode preparation (usually via grinding on ca. 18 μm grit silicon carbide paper) is important. It may also be appreciated that viewing these deposits requires powerful microscopes in combination with indirect stratagems. Marken and co-workers immobilised microdroplets of N,N,N′,N′-tetrahexyl-para-phenylenediamine (THPD) into the siliconised surface of a transparent indium tin oxide electrode (ITO), and viewed the surface directly using an optical microscope,9 Greene and co-workers,47,48 quantitatively imaged bppg electrodes covered with varying amounts of either THPD (see Fig. 4b) or 4-nitrophenyl nonyl ether (NPNE) using optical microscopy, and Wilkins et al.49 chose to observe the size and distribution of various THPD-modified electrodes via scanning electron microscopy (SEM), having first coated the cupola surface of immobilised individual microdroplets with metallic silver (para-phenylenediamines react with Ag+ ions in aqueous solution, precipitating silver at the site of reaction). It should be noted that atomic force microscopic measurements are not usually possible for these systems, owing to the movement of the microdroplets induced by the scanning tip. These measurements produced several striking observations: first, for low amounts of redox oil immobilised on the electrode surface (typically ∼5 nmol), the microdroplets appear almost monodispersed with a small average size (typically ∼2 μm radius or less, depending on the “blocking” oil),47–49 causing individual droplets to have volumes in the order of femtolitres.45–49 Second, increasing the amount of redox oil deposited on the electrode not only causes a greater density of droplets (causing the electrode to be effectively “shielded”), but also increases their average size, and the spread of droplet radii.47–49 However, droplet radii do not increase on continual addition ad infinitum; the droplet sizes tend to a limit, most probably due to the stability of the microdroplets at the radius value for which the surface tension (proportional to the square of the droplet radius) exactly counterbalances the edge tension (proportional to the droplet radius).47,48The microdroplets thus grow up to a stable size; further addition of oil leads to the formation of new droplets, increasing the fractional coverage of the modified electrode.47,48The above discussion hints at droplet modified electrodes behaving effectively as partially blocked electrodes.48,68 This is entirely true; the effect of the liquid deposit is to decrease the available naked electrode surface. Davies and colleagues48 have recently simulated the response of an electrode blocked by a random ensemble of THPD micodroplets (approximated as flat, circular discs, viz. a partially and non-uniformly blocked flush surface) to an aqueous-based redox couple that undergoes electrochemical transformation at the exposed parts of the electrode exclusively. Quantitatively, it was observed that the theoretical treatment of these systems as partially covered electrodes with varying droplet size and nearest-neighbour distances, predicts average droplet size distributions in good agreement with those visualised experimentally at a plethora of THPD droplet fractional coverages.48 One important aspect of the recognition of these droplet modified electrodes is that electron transfer kinetics at the naked parts of the electrode are apparently decreased by the presence of blocking material smear; the naked areas acquire progressively more microelectrode character (viz. convergent diffusion) as the coverage increases (see Fig. 4c).68c This has been shown to lead to larger effective solvent windows.47,64We now address voltammetric processes that may occur at electrodes partially covered with both single and random arrays of purposely unsupported electroactive droplets and immersed into inert aqueous electrolytes. This is covered in the next section; we will then illustrate the scope of these systems to topical applications via case examples (§4).3. Voltammetry at the electrode|redox droplet|aqueous electrolyte three phase boundaryIn this experiment, the droplet modified electrode (single droplet or array) is immersed into an aqueous electrolyte (where the droplet phase is insoluble) in which the reference and counter electrode reside. Voltammetric perturbation via sweeping the modified working electrode potential from an initial voltage (where no Faradaic process occurs) to one where Faradaic currents flow enables information regarding the thermodynamics of the electrochemical transformation, and the number of electrons (n) taken from (or discharged at) the electrode to be inferred from the peak potential and the area under the scan (specifically the integrated charge) respectively. For the accurate determination of n, the caveat is that the voltage sweep must be done slowly (typically at 10 mV s−1 or less) so that the induced diffusion layer ([πDRT/nFv]1/2≈90 μm for D=10−5 cm2 s−1 and a one electron process at 298 K) is greater than the (average) droplet size, causing the whole droplet to be oxidised. As with other cyclic voltammetric experiments, the reverse sweep yields information regarding the stability of the electrochemically transformed species, as do subsequent redox cycles.Even for a simple single electron oxidation/reduction, the observed currents are complex functions of many parameters, including surface and bulk droplet diffusion,46,49,58,59 migration of any charged species, the degree and kinetics of any electron hopping processes, volume changes (caused by counter ion insertion: vide infra), the build-up of density and viscosity gradients, possible Marangoni effects,55,58 ion pair formation,49 and iR losses. This last factor arises as a result of the droplet resistivity. In most electrochemical experiments, such resistances are counter-balanced by adding and inert electrolyte. In contrast, experiments at droplet-modified electrodes are almost exclusively undertaken using purposely unsupported organic phases. The primary reason for this is that it enables the site of electron transfer for any sized droplet (or microdroplet) to be specifically localised to the point of intersection (by which we mean contact) of all three phases (the so called “three phase boundary”). This is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5a, where the three phase boundary is ipso facto the base circumference of individual droplet deposits. In addition, by causing the electrochemical transformation to take place exclusively at this triple phase junction, we force the Faradaic current per droplet to be proportional to the droplet radius not area,28,29,69 and therefore at a location where the initial current density is high.57 Thus, for an electrode modified with microdroplets of an organic liquid, the peak current observed, in addition to the width of the voltammetric peak, gives us valuable information regarding the droplet distribution (vide infra). It is important to demonstrate the existence of electrochemical processes at this three phase boundary first, and it is this that we next review. Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the three phase boundary (alias triple phase junction) and the base circumference of the individual droplets. (b)
(i) Photograph of a microscopic image of THPD deposited on a siliconised ITO electrode and immersed into aqueous 1.0 M sodium perchlorate solution. The applied potential was stepped from −0.1 V to +0.4 V vs. SCE for 30 s (scale: abscissa 780 μm, ordinate 920 μm); (ii) SEM image of 4 nmol THPD deposited on a bppg electrode dipped into aqueous 0.1 M AgClO4 and potentiostatted at 0.0 V vs. SCE for 10 s (having previously been fully electrolysed at 0.4 V vs. SCE when immersed into aqueous 0.1 M NaClO4 solution). (c) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 0.1 V s−1) for the oxidation of (a) 10, (b) 160, (c) 640 nmol of THPD deposited onto a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrodes and immersed in 0.1 M KSCN. (d)
(a) Schematic illustration of a ring electrode fully coated with a redox liquid film; (b) schematic illustration of a redox liquid droplet-modified ring electrode exhibitying a well-defined three phase boundary. (e)
(i) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 100 mV s−1) for a micro-mesh electrode (100 mesh wires per inch) coated with different amounts of THPD immersed into a 0.1 M aqueous NaSCN solution; (ii) Digital image (obtained using a flatbed, refractive scanner) of the underside of the electrode that gave the voltammogram marked with the asterisk (*) in (i), after oxidation at 0.4 V vs. SCE for 60 s in 0.1 M NaSCN solution. The copper tape may be seen at the lower end of the picture; the blue (dark) lines around individual mesh squares indicates this as that site of electron transfer. 3.1. Experimental evidence for electron transfer processes at the triple phase junctionVarious experiments have been designed to illustrate that voltammetric processes occur at the base circumference of droplets. These are outlined in this section.3.1.1. Direct methods. 3.1.1.1. Methods based on microscopy. In the initial work by Marken et al.,9 oxidation of yellow THPD microdroplets immobilised on a siliconised ITO and immersed into aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution was seen to first take place around the edges of the microdroplets (the product (THPD+˙ClO4−, closely related to Wüster's Blue) is, fortuitously, coloured blue), when viewed through an optical microscope (see Fig. 5b(i)), suggesting the oxidation of those molecules at, or close to, the base circumference of the THPD microdroplets occurs. After prolonged oxidation, complete oxidation of the microdroplets was observed, although a uniformly moving colouration change was not observed, but rather the product forms at points that grow and merge with others close by, before the whole droplet becomes blue.9 These results were subsequently confirmed by Schröder et al.60 for the case of a single droplet (ca. 0.5 μL) of N,N,N′-trihexyl-para-phenylenediamine (TriHPD) oxidation on a bppg electrode immersed into 0.1 M aqueous sodium perchlorate at pH 7 (vide infra). In this case the electrode was removed from the electrolytic cell after a set period of electrolysis, and an imprint of the electrode surface taken by pressing it onto a clean sheet of filter paper. Evans and co-workers49 also verified the above results for THPD microdroplet immobilised on a bppg electrode, using the deposition of metallic silver to “fingerprint” the site of electrolysis, and SEM to view the results. In this experiment, a bppg electrode modified with microdroplets of THPD is immersed into an aqueous 0.1 M solution of silver(I) perchlorate, and potentiostatted at 0.0 V (vs. SCE) for various time periods. Neither THPD nor metallic silver is oxidised, nor is silver(I) reduced under these conditions (THPD+˙
is however reduced at this potential). However, silver(I) ions react with THPD molecules, to form THPD+˙ClO4−
(vide infra) and elemental silver:  THPD()+Ag+(aq)+ClO4−(aq)→[THPD+˙ClO4−]()+Ag(s)(C)Hence, profiling the reaction site is possible by first electrochemically oxidising the droplet in an aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution, so that the ionic liquid THPD+˙ClO4− completely makes up the organic droplets (vide infra), and then transferring the modified electrode into the solution of silver(I) perchlorate, and holding the electrode at 0 V for variable times, where the following processes may take place.Naked electrode: No reaction.Droplet surface: No reaction.Three phase boundary:[THPD+˙ClO4−]()+e−⇌THPD(), andreaction (C).The observation of the formation of arrays of silver microrings in the SEM photographs taken after short electrolysis times (see Fig. 5b(ii)) was taken to be direct confirmation of electron transfer at the triple phase junction as above. In addition, Evans and co-workers were able to demonstrate that as the electrolysis proceeds for longer times, the silver rings turn into silver microparticles (the whole droplet becomes oxidised) and the size of these deposits increase with electrolysis time.493.1.1.2. Monitoring concentration profiles within immobilised droplets. Stojek and colleagues34 followed (using a four electrode potentiostat) the development of ferrocinium (or decamethylferrocinium) ions produced by the electrochemical oxidation of ferrocene (or decamethylferrocene) in nitrobenzene droplets (typically 3 mm in diameter) singly immobilised on a glassy carbon electrode immersed into aqueous lithium perchlorate solutions, using a 20 μm thin conical-body platinum disc microelectrode. In this “electrochemical microscope” experiment, the microelectrode was carefully positioned at various places in the droplet, specifically in the centre of the drop, approximately 25 μm from the electrode surface, at the highest point of the drop from the electrode, and at the three phase boundary (25 μm away from the electrode surface). The ferrocinium reduction signals were observed to be highly dependent on the size of the droplet, and the spatial placement of the microelectrode in the drop: plateaux in the recorded chronoamperomograms were found to occur more early when the microdisc electrode was placed at the three phase boundary, compared with the droplet centre. Furthermore, the greater the distance from the microelectrode surface to the three phase boundary, the greater the delay in the detection of ferrocinium (or decamethylferrocinium) at the former. Thus, a “reaction front” develops from the three phase boundary. A requirement for this is the insertion of a counter ion from the aqueous phase into the nitrobenzene phase (vide infra).3.1.2. Indirect methods. 3.1.2.1. Evidence from surface coverage experiments. Marken and co-workers58b,59 suggested that changing the microdroplet coverage of an electrode surface by a redox oil may assist in the identification of the site of electron transfer, since as the droplet coverage increases, the microdroplets both grow bigger (to a limit) and increase in number density (q.v. §2.2), causing an increase in the net droplet edge (i.e. three phase boundary). Further increases in the amount of redox oil deposited on the electrode surface causes the droplets to merge to form thin layers (as observed), and thus, the size of the three phase boundary decreases. The peak voltammetric current is thus anticipated to first increase with amount deposited up to a threshold, and then to decrease as more material is further added to the electrode surface. The experimental observation of a current maximum with increasing electrode coverage in three different types of experiment47,49,56,58b
(including one photoelectrochemical process56) was taken as confirmation of electrochemistry at the three phase boundary, although it was noted47,58b,59 that this trend did not fully rule out electron transfer at the liquid|liquid interface. As an aside, it is worth noting that in all cases, the forward sweep at electrodes modified with an electroactive oil at high microdroplet coverage is almost sigmoidal,49,58b,59 suggesting that quasi-steady-state voltammetry is observed (compare Figs. 5c(a), (b) and (c)), although the back peak remains.3.1.2.2. Methods based on a geometric analysis of the voltammograms. It is readily appreciated that the locus of the (individual) three phase boundary is a circle (or ellipse). It follows that unless there is an exposed electrode surrounding the non-aqueous deposit, oxidation/reduction of the electroactive oil will not take place. This was shown to be the case by modifying a gold ring electrode with a single drop of THPD.49 When the ring electrode was completely covered by THPD (see Fig. 5d(a)), and immersed into aqueous 0.1 M purely resistive effects were observed; in contrast, when only the inner part of the ring electrode was modified with THPD (see Fig. 5d(b)), current–voltage curves were observed analogous to those at a microdroplet-modified electrode, albeit, with a greatly distorted oxidative peak.49As mentioned above, the current due to electron transfer at the three phase boundary is proportional to the length of the latter;28,29,69 the greater the length of contact of all three phases, the greater the number of electrons that can be discharged (or removed). For single drops immobilised on an electrode surface, controlling the length of the three phase boundary is readily accomplished by increasing the droplet size. Aoki and co-workers28,29 illustrated the dependence of the peak current for ferrocene oxidation in various sized droplets in an aqueous sodium perchlorate solution.28 It was shown that for a small experimental time duration (viz. when the potential perturbation occurs using high scan rates), the peak oxidation current was directly proportional to the droplet radius. In contrast, for large experimental timescales (slow voltage scan rates), the peak oxidation current became proportional to the size of the liquid|liquid interface defined by the droplet surface area.28 These data are entirely consistent with the expanding reaction zone idea introduced in §3.1.1.1. Furthermore, Aoki et al.28,29 suggested that the currents at such electrodes may be mimicked by a microband electrode of width δ
(the diffusion layer thickness located at the three phase boundary), and of length (2r−δ)π
(r is the radius of the droplet), with r≫δ. The current to a microband electrode is given by:28,70 (3)in which F is the Faraday constant, c is the concentration of the electroactive species in the droplet, D is the diffusion coefficient of the parent species in the drop (assumed to be the same as that of the electrochemically-transformed species), and t is the electrolysis time. Hence, for short duration electrolyses, the current becomes proportional to (2r−δ)δ√D/√t∝r, as observed. At longer times, the diffusion layer thickness increases up to r, and the current then becomes proportional to the droplet surface area.28 Aoki and co-workers29 recently further extended their model for electron transfer processes at the three phase boundary by employing sulfate ions in the aqueous phases (q.v. §3.4) to prevent the build-up of a moving reaction front (and thus obtain steady-state voltammetry). However, they inferred that the exact droplet geometry and fluctuations in the liquid|liquid interface are factors that become very important.29Recent work from our laboratory,71 in which the working electrode is a gold mesh electrode that has mesh spacings (squares of length ca. 210 μm) filled with THPD (or other redox liquid), or left “empty”, enabling variation of the amount of THPD placed into the mesh is illustrated in Fig. 5e. Mesh electrodes have recently been shown to exhibit time-dependent features, in that at short times they act as microband electrodes followed by micro-ring behaviour, and at long times, they show voltammetric features that may be understood by comparison with a regularly-distributed (specifically cubically packed) partially blocked electrode.72 The modified mesh, supported on one side with a transparent plastic backing, is then immersed into aqueous solutions and the potential scanned in the usual manner. It can be seen that this arrangement gives rise to quasi-steady-state oxidative currents, which generally increase with the number of individual mesh “squares” covered by the THPD liquid (Fig. 5e(i)). Although the current magnitudes do not scale with the total mesh “edge” or covered area, it can be seen that the blue ionic liquid (THPD+˙SCN−) only forms at the gold band (see Fig. 5e(ii)), even after prolonged oxidation (60 s). This latter observation further suggests that electron transfer processes may only occur at the three phase boundary.Several groups58,59,73–75 have tried to simulate redox processes at droplet modified electrodes with various degrees of success. Myland and Oldham74 endeavoured to model three phase boundary redox processes at single lenticular nitrobenzene droplet containing an electroactive solid, which was approximated by a cone (!), using cylindrical diffusion of redox species to and from the three phase boundary. Their simulated results poorly matched experimental data. Lovrić and Scholz75a refined this model to include the effect of electrolyte partitioning into the nitrobenzene drop, which they observed to be very significant (occurring over the liquid|liquid interface). However, they were unable to simulate the growing reaction zone mentioned above.74,75 Voltammetry at electrodes modified with microdroplets of a redox liquid were simulated first by Lovrić73 and later by Fulian, Ball and Compton.58,59 Although both systems assumed hemispherical deposits, the latter methods, using regular solution theory to account for non-ideality within the electroactive oil phase, gave better agreement with experimental data.58b,59 While the recent work by Aoki28,29 provides a framework for further simulation, other non-simple factors (such as coupled diffusion and migration75b) and volume changes likely need to be taken into account.In summary, we have illustrated several techniques by which the determination of the location of electron transfer may be inferred. In the above we have demonstrated that for electrically insulating droplets (i.e. molecular (not ionic) non-aqueous liquids that are totally unsupported), electron transfer processes are initiated ex silentio at the three phase boundary. In a select few cases, this is not so, as the electron transfer process is forced to occur over the redox liquid|aqueous interface. We next briefly assess why this happens.3.2. Electron transfer processes at the liquid|liquid interface (i.e. over the droplet surface)It may be appreciated that the only way in which this can take place is if the non-aqueous droplets are supported in some way. There are several examples whereby this may happen to deposits that do not have any deliberately added supporting electrolyte. The most obvious is if the non-aqueous electrode deposit were an ionic liquid.22 Alternatively, it may be possible for electrolyte ions to partition into the organic phase from the aqueous phase.18,32 The most common method is due to a liquid|liquid protonation process. As the redox moiety becomes protonated, and as the droplets are electrically unsupported, electroneutrality within the organic phase (vide infra) causes an anion to transfer with the proton, so as to counter balance the positive proton charge, to form a 1∶1 electrolyte in the oil phase (although it is possible, in principle, to enable acid-initiated dissolution of the protonated oil, q.v. §3.4). To date, four compounds have been examined;47,53,60,63 their voltammetry will be reported in §3.3 and §4.2.We next review the current–voltage behaviour observed at droplet-modified electrodes. Evans and co-workers49 recently showed, for a homologous series of compounds with differing hydrophobicity, that these systems may exhibit essentially three types of redox behaviour depending on the specific electroactive compound and electrolyte counter ion (see Fig. 6). Fig. 6  Graphs illustrating the classification by Evans and co-workers49 of the biphasic microdroplet voltammetry of TRPD oils in aqueous solution. (i) Anion insertion, case (i); the figure depicts four consecutive cyclic voltammetric scans (voltage sweep rate 10 mV s−1) of 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode immersed into aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution. (ii) Cation expulsion, case (ii); the figure shows four consecutive scans (recorded at 10 mV s−1) for 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode immersed into an aqueous 0.1 M potassium chloride solution. (iii) Ionic reaction at the three phase boundary, case (iii); the figure displays for successive cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 10 mV s−1) for the oxidation and re-reduction of 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a bppg electrode (4.9 mm diameter) immersed into 0.1 M aqueous sodium azide. 3.3. Case (i) current–voltage curves: hydrophobic compounds and electrolyte counter ionsFor a general oxidation process occurring in oil phase (A) microdroplets immobilised on an electrode surface,  A()+X−(aq)−e−⇌[A+˙X−]()(D)as the electrode process and anion (X−) transfer across the liquid|liquid interface (specifically the three phase boundary) take place simultaneously to preserve the overall electrostatically neutral ambience of the unsupported oil phase. Mutatis mutandis for cation insertion on reduction.35,38,47,64 In writing reaction (D), we have assumed that the ionic liquid product is thermodynamically stable. Fig. 6(i) shows voltammetric waves that are stable:9,49,53,55–63 continual redox cycling yields little, if any, apparent decrease in the peak currents. In addition, the oxidative peak current is of the same magnitude compared with that of the re-reductive process; the current–voltage waves are both chemically and electrochemically reversible.49 Several other important data can be inferred from the cyclic voltammetric responses at these electrodes. First, diffusion of anions in the aqueous phase does not impede the electron transfer kinetics, as has been shown using droplet-modified rotating disc electrodes.9,58b Rather, it is the diffusion of non-oxidised material within the organic phase droplets towards the three phase boundary that is rate limiting. This is seen in several ways. First, the peak-to-peak potential separations are not zero (as anticipated for a surface-bound species76), but are typically small (ca. 60 mV or less9,46,49); and second, the peak current is not always directly proportional to the voltage scan rate (as anticipated for surface confined species), the peak oxidative current often follows58b,61 the approximate relationship (scan rate)0.75, which suggests semi-confinement. It should be noted that data obtained at relatively large scan rates (>200 mV s−1) are distorted, since ohmic losses in the unsupported droplets become non-negligible.58b Further, although it would be desirable to measure diffusion coefficients within the droplets, this is not really possible, owing to the volume and surface tension changes incurred on electrochemically-induced ion insertion, Marangoni-type convection effects are likely to operate, and would increase the apparent diffusion within the droplets.46,55,58bThe second striking feature associated with the voltammetry of reaction (D) is that the current peaks are sharp, and the peak widths are very narrow.9,46,49,53–63 For thin-layer voltammetric processes (n electrons), in which neighbouring molecules do not interact, the full width at half maximum is 90.5/n mV.76 The values observed for the reaction (D) for microdroplet-modified electrodes are typically less than this,46,54,58b suggesting the dominance of reactant-reactant and product-product interactions over product-reactant interactions.77 This is especially noticeable in the work by Marken et al.9 where they observed that the oil-like product interacts less favourably with the electrode surface, and the interfacial tension in fact causes the droplets to shrink, despite the anticipated total volume increase due to anion insertion.9 We also note suggestions that variations in the size of the microdroplets, or other subtle differences in the local environment around individual microdroplets may give rise to a range of closely spaced formal potential values for the oxidation (rather than a single value), which may cause a broadening to the current–voltage response.78Hitherto, we have assumed the anion insertion process proceeds on electrochemical oxidation, which is readily verifiable since reaction (D) is electrochemically-reversible, and for which the Nernst equation applies:  (4)where ai is the activity of species i, and E0f is the formal potential associated with process (D), and as such, it incorporates, amongst other factors (such as ion pairing energies), a term for the Galvani potential difference between the two liquid phases (vide infra). Hence from eqn. (4), the oxidation and the reduction processes should occur at more negative potentials as the anion concentration in the aqueous phase increases (specifically, the peak currents should shift to more negative values by approximately 60 mV per decadic increase in anion concentration). This is indeed seen for processes that have the characteristics described for process (D),9,31,49,52–63 confirming anion insertion on oxidation.†Further evidence for the insertion process comes indirectly from EQCM measurements53,60 and from intra muros electrochemical EPR measurements made on the microdroplets;9 the product of process (D) is paramagnetic for the case of THPD redox oils. In aqueous perchlorate electrolytes, as the potential is stepped from a potential at which no Faradaic processes occur to an oxidising potential, a single-line signal is observed (in contrast to the multi-split hyperfine lines of the solution cation radical, due to non-crystalline nature of the deposits),9 with a width of 20 G (considerably smaller than the homogeneous solution phase spectrum).9 This feature disappears on stepping back, but reappears on subsequent oxidative steps, with no loss of signal intensity, even when the aqueous electrolyte flows past the electrode.9Eqn. (4) asserts that the redox process is sensitive to the nature of the aqueous anion; the equation incorporates a term for the inter-phase Galvani potential difference. Hence, we anticipate that as the aqueous anion hydrophilicity increases, the peak oxidation potential might shift to more positive values, as it becomes increasingly more energetically difficult to transfer the anion into the oil phase, until the anion can no longer thermodynamically transfer, and the organic phase cation is expelled into the aqueous phase.46,49,62 We will discuss this latter phenomenon in the next section (§3.4), as the lipophilicity of the oil phase plays a significant rôle. This behaviour has been observed both by Marken and co-workers9,62 for reversible anion insertion in THPD and in work by Scholz et al.,10,31,33 and is best seen via the straight line plots of the mid-point potential (Emid) against either the reciprocal of the hydrated anion radius (as given by the Born model),62 see Fig. 7(i), or the Gibbs transfer energy across the liquid|liquid interface, see Fig. 7(ii).62 Furthermore, it has been observed that if an ionic liquid is formed of the form THPD+˙X−, anion exchange processes may take place if this liquid is subsequently brought into contact with an aqueous phase containing a more hydrophobic anion.9,53,61 Fig. 7  (i) Plot of the formal potentials of THPD (■) and TOPD (●, O=n-octyl) verses the reciprocal of the radii of the electrolyte anions measured in 0.1 M electrolyte solution at pH 8. (ii) Plot of the formal potential of THPD oxidation verses the standard membrane potential,  of the electrolyte anions measured in 0.1 M electrolyte solution at pH 9. (iii) Plot of the formal potential of the first oxidation step for THPD dissolved in nitrobenzene (NB) and for the pure redox liquid measured in the presence of different electrolyte anions versus the standard membrane potentials of the electrolyte anions at the water|nitrobenzene interface at pH 9. The remainder of this section is devoted to illustrating the effect of specific ion interactions (generally arising via the transfer of a hydrophobic, but co-ordinating anion) on the voltammetry. First, however, we note the potential of this methodology for potentiometric ion sensing (q.v. §4.1),9,37,62 and in particular for the accurate determination of Gibbs transfer energies across specific liquid|liquid interfaces,10,62,30–40 and without the limitations of the narrow window of ΔG values offered by the classical four-electrode method.26a The use of droplet-modified electrodes to determine Gibbs transfer energies generally (but not exclusively) involves a single oil drop on an electrode. This drop may be a neat liquid, or an organic solution. It should be noted that for this purpose, accurate determination of the formal potential is required: Scholz et al.30 and Schröder et al.62 chose to use square wave voltammetry, since the potential of the net peak is the formal potential; Bond (for work on solid microparticles)
et al.11f and Marken et al.58b chose to extrapolate “zero current” oxidation potentials from plots of the peak current versus peak potential for both oxidation and reduction at various scan rates (and supporting electrolyte concentrations). The advantage of this latter method is that the slope of the plots is associated with the uncompensated droplet (and aqueous solution) resistance.11f Thus, this methodology has been employed extensively10,31–40 for transfer energies of simple ions to amino acids35 and peptides,40 in a variety of solvents.10,33,37As the hydrophobicity of either of the two components (the oil phase or the aqueous electrolyte) decreases, subtle effects may be induced. Fig. 8 illustrates a selection of voltammograms that deviate from the ideally hydrophobic case depicted in Fig. 6(i). In Fig. 8a, Evans and co-workers49 postulated that oxidation of microdroplets of N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl-para-phenylenediamine (TBPD, a compound less hydrophobic than THPD) in the presence of aqueous hexafluorophosphate ions enables the partial formation of a tight ion pair to form between the hydrophobic PF6− anion, and the TBPD+˙ cation radial, as evidenced by the second back-peak.49 In Fig. 8b, Marken and co-workers55 demonstrated that bromide insertion into THPD goes via the partially hydrated form, which then “relaxes” by expelling water from the organic phase.55 The ability to form the tri-iodide anion within THPD microdroplets was demonstrated by Evans and co-workers49 to proceed via a redox catalytic pathway after first insertion of iodide and then subsequent catalytic oxidation to yield iodine (see Fig. 8c). Such behaviour has also been reported by Scholz and co-workers for the case of iodine in nitrobenzene drops,32,38 where it was assumed that the partitioning of chloride-based electrolyte into such drops takes place, yielding I2Cl− ions.32 The final example (Fig. 8d) of a “non-ideal” response arises if the inserted ion forms a covalent bond with the redox compound. In the aqueous|organic electrochemistry that were are interested in, this really only applies to proton insertion. Experiments undertaken very recently by Wain et al.64on the electrochemical reduction of microdroplets of vitamin K1
(a yellow oil derivative of 1,4-napthaquinone), gave responses similar to that shown in Fig. 8d in dilute mineral acid solutions. Overall, it was shown that the single signal is due to a two-electron, two-proton reduction to the corresponding hydroquinone. However, owing to the fact that both the starting material and the product are neutral, due to the formation of the O–H bond, the chemically reversible reduction requires a diffusional overpotential, as the reaction can only take place at the base circumference of the microdroplets (there is no ionic liquid formation in this experiment).64 In aqueous alkali it was shown that insertion of alkali-metal cations take place to yield a conducting phase, and the more ideal behaviour results.64 Fig. 8  Unusual cyclic voltammetric charachterisitcs corresponding to an anion insertion process; all voltammograms are recorded when the reox oil was immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode. (a) 4 nmol TBPD (B=n-butyl) immersed into an aqueous 0.1 M solution of potassium hexaflurophosphate, scan rate 10 mV s−1. Similar shaped responses were also observed when the anion was AsF6−.49
(b) 5.3 nmol THPD immersed into potassium bromide solution, scan rate 100 mV s−1. The revese peak P1′ represents the expulsion of hydrated bromide ions from the ionic liquid; P2′ corresponds to that of non-hydrated bromide. (c) 1 nmol THPD immersed into 0.1 M potassium iodide, recorded at 100 mV s−1. Peak P1′ is the reverse process of peak P1
(expulsion of hydrated iodide), P2′ is the expulsion of non-hydrated iodide, and P3′ is the expulsion of the tri-iodide anion formed within the organic microdroplets; the dissociates into iodine and iodide in the aqueous solution, so is not re-inserted.49
(d) 5.7 nmol vitamin K1
(phylloquinone) immersed into 0.1 M hydrochloric acid, scan rate 100 mV s−1. We mentioned in §3.2 that if the organic-based redox species can be protonated,47,53,60,63,64 protons may transfer across the liquid|liquid interface, if the pH of the aqueous phase is smaller than the pKa of the organic compound. This has been reported for four compounds: 4-nitrophenyl nonyl ether (NPNE, q.v. §4.2),47 THPD,53,60N,N,N′-trihexyl-para-phenylenediamine (TriHPD),60 and N,N,N′,N′-tetraoctyl-para-phenylenediamine (TOPD).63 These last three compounds have two possible protonation sites, and these may be seen, especially in concentrated acid solution.60 In order to keep charge neutrality with microdroplets of THPD (or TriHPD) anions also transfer into the microdroplets (for the case of perchloric, and nitric acids). As this forms an ionic liquid, electron transfer may no longer take place at the three phase junction.60 Oxidation is associated with proton loss from the hydrophobic environment (protons are more hydrophilic than the THPD+˙ cation radical):53,60 THPD()+H+(aq)+ClO4−(aq)→[THPDH+ClO4−]()(E) [THPDH+ClO4−]()−e−⇌[THPD+˙ClO4−]()+H+(aq)(F)Depending on the hydrophobicity of the oil droplets, process (F) is observed either as a single process53,63 or as two processes involving first deprotonation at the liquid|liquid interface, followed by a bulk phase redox process.63 Protonation of THPD at both nitrogen atoms causes a single two-electron oxidation, with the expulsion of two protons per THPD molecule, to afford the hydrolytically unstable79 THPD2+ dication.60We now examine electrochemically-driven ion expulsion processes.3.4. Case (ii) current–voltage curves: hydrophilic compounds and electrolyte counter ionsDecreasing the hydrophobicity of the oil phase (by, for example, employing a redox oil with a lower degree of substitution or with polar side chains) or increasing the hydrophilicity of the aqueous-based counter ion has a profound effect on the voltammetry. This is best seen for the redox voltammetry of microdroplets of N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(6-methoxyhexyl)-para-phenylenediamine (TMHPD)55 in a 0.1 M aqueous sodium perchlorate solution, compared with that of THPD. These two compounds differ only by the replacement of the methyl group in each side chain of THPD with one methoxy moiety. Rather dramatically, oxidation of TMHPD occurs more easily than THPD, and rather than observing stable current–voltage signals as in Fig. 6(i), redox cycling causes both oxidative and reductive waves to consecutively decrease (so that the voltammetric response resembles that shown in Fig. 6(ii)).55 This type of profound change has been well documented in the work on both N,N,N′,N′-tetraalkyl-para-phenylenediamine (TRPD) redox oils,46,49,60,62 and ferrocene derivatives.52,80 Similar types of voltammograms are also observed for very hydrophilic anions (like fluoride), which have very negative Galvani ion-transfer potentials. In these cases, the following process occurs, again as a result of the need to maintain an electroneutral environment in the oil phase:  A()−e−⇌A+˙(aq)(G)Thus, the electro-generated cation is expelled from the oil phase.62 As before, electron transfer is initiated at the three phase boundary,29,46,49,52 although (vide infra) the dissolution may apparently leave from the liquid|liquid interface.46,49 On the reverse (second) sweep, the neutral oil is formed at the naked electrode surface or droplet three phase boundary, whence it nucleates either as a new microdroplet, or grows into another one respectively. However, the increasingly diminishing current occurs since the product (the cation radical) diffuses out of the diffusion layer in the aqueous solution, causing less material to be available to redeposit on the electrode surface in the reductive sweep.46,49,52 It should be noted that in some cases, the second and third successive oxidation peaks move to slightly more negative potentials, attributed either to the partitioning of aqueous electrolytes into the organic deposits, or as a result of the smaller size of the redeposited microdroplets.46,52 Generally, no additional new features are seen as a consequence of droplet nucleation.As an aside, we note that we may use the onset of this type of behaviour as a method to determine the Gibbs transfer energy of the cation radical from an oil phase into an aqueous phase, as undertaken by Schröder and co-workers,62 since, for a given redox molecule, the formal potential for the oxidation process (as defined by eqn. (4)) is a function of the Gibbs transfer energy for a given aqueous based anion. However, for process (G), no such dependence on the Gibbs trasnfer energy of the anion ocurrs, since the cation transfers out of the oil phase, giving rise to a discontinuity (“dog leg”) in plots of the formal potential against transfer energy, see Fig. 7(iii).46,62Treating the voltmmetric responses very simplistically as thin layer responses with no diffusional contribution, Evans and coworkers49 were able to demonstrate that for TRPD redox liquids, the product diffuses out of the organic phase from over the whole microdroplet, with two-thirds order kinetics.49 For this to take place, these authors inferred rapid charge transfer over the liquid|liquid interface, possibly via surface diffusion of TRPD+˙-anion pairs.49 However, this behaviour was not observed for all other systems,46,52 probably due to the presence of additional factors; reaction (G) suggests that the cation expulsion process is independent of the of the aqueous anion, but this is not always the case observed experimentally.46,52 For “hard” anions (such as fluoride or sulfate), the voltammetric signals are narrow, and both oxidation and reduction peak potentials are essentially independent of aqueous anion concentration. This is not the case for “softer” anions (such as bromide and nitrate), which may insert into the oil if it is made more hydrophobic.46,49 In this last case, the peak oxidation potential shifts by ca. 60 mV per decadic increase in anion concentration, however, the reverse peak potential is independent of the anion concentration, suggesting that an anion-facilitated cation expulsion pathway may exist (see Fig. 9), in which aqueous ions adsorb onto the surface of the oil microdroplets, enabling the formation of a transient tight ion pair on electrochemical oxidation, and as which the electro-generated cation dissolves into the aqueous phase (giving rise to the required 60 mV concentration dependence of the oxidation peak). This tight cation-anion pair breaks down in the aqueous phase, with the back reaction of process (G) occurring on the re-reduction sweep.46,52 Fig. 9  Gibbs free energy diagram illustrating the anion-facilitated cation dissolution pathway. The solid line illustrates the anion-facilitated cation transfer pathway, involving adsorption of anions from the aqueous phase to the surface of the microdroplets, represented by one of two relative states by solid and the short-dashed lines. The long-dashed line represents the energetic pathway for the dissolution of the cation into the aqueous phase without any contribution from the aqueous-based anion. In some cases, the dissolution signals are split.46,52 Based on variable scan rate analyses, these have been attributed to partial adsorption of material on the electrode surface,46,52 although such behaviour may be observed for strong product-reactant interactions, compared with product-product and reactant-reactant interactions.77a,b,81We now consider the third type of voltammetric response.3.5. Case (i) current–voltage curves: reactive chemistryThe voltammetric waveshape depicted in Fig. 6(iii), for THPD microdroplet oxidation in the presence of azide anions, is unusual, since it consists of a single large oxidation peak, with no reverse peak. Subsequent scans on the same electrode yield little further than resistive behaviour,49 consistent with an irreversible chemical process occurring at the modified electrode. For the specific system reported in Fig. 6(iii), Evans and colleagues49 proposed (based on mass spectrometric data) that azide insertion into the microdroplets at the three phase boundary reacted with the THPD+˙ radical cation, to form 2-azido-1,4-tetrahexyldiaminobenzene. Reactions of this type between ions (electrogenerated and inserted) has been mentioned in §3.3 for the case of proton insertion simultaneously with vitamin K1 reduction via the formation of a covalent O–H bond,64 and for the redox catalytic formation of tri-iodide.49 A similar process was reported by Marken et al.9 for hydroxide insertion into THPD microdroplet, whereby reaction may form the N-oxide (produced in a two-electron process).9A remarkable system has been recently reported by Marken et al.,61 in which chromate ions insert into TOPD microdroplets (upon electrochemical oxidation). The re-reduction however expels dichromate from the oil phase suggesting the following chemical reaction takes place within the electro-generated ionic liquid:  2[TOPD2+˙CrO42−]()+2H+(aq)⇌[TOPD2+˙Cr2O72−]()+H2O()+Products(H)Although the by-products of this reaction were not fully characterised, it was observed61 that these likely involved a side reaction of TOPD+˙. Given the toxicity of chromate ions, the above accumulation and transformation is of topical interest.Having reviewed the general principles of the voltammetry associated with immobilised electroactive droplets, we next examine potential applications and comment on possible future trends in this field.4. Applications of droplet modified electrodesWe will consider three types of application of these electrodes, in particular electrodes modified with microdroplet arrays, directing our examples to the ability of these electrodes to behave as (i) potentiometric ion sensors, (ii) model systems for surfactant-free emulsion systems, and (iii) as species that, depending on the need, may easily modify an electrode surface, and be easily removed from it.4.1. Enantiometric recognition at a liquid|liquid interfaceThe ability to discriminate between enantiomeric species is one of the most important aspects of analytical chemistry, since it is linked to the proliferation of life and the synthesis of drugs. Enantiomeric differentiation via electrochemical means is becoming increasingly attractive;82a it typically requires an electrode, a solvent, and a supporting electrolyte, any of which may be forced to have a degree of asymmetry, thereby encouraging selection. Thus, the early work by Seebach and Oei, using chiral solvents,82b and by Horner et al., using chiral supporting electrolytes,82c–e initially focused on stereoselective electrosynthesis.82f Owing to the fact that the electron transfer process takes place at the electrode surface, many authors have striven to develop the electrode architecture, either by specific construction, as in the case of the single crystal surfaces fabricated by Attard et al.,82g–i and Ravel82j or by modifying the electrode surface chemically with a plethora of possible reagents.82k–pFollowing earlier work by Dupont and co-workers22 on the immobilisation of microdroplets of a chiral ionic liquid on a bppg electrode, Scholz et al.37 recently deposited a single droplet of a chiral liquid containing decamethylferrocene on a paraffin impreganated graphite electrode (PIGE). The chiral liquid employed was either D- or L-menthol. As this is a room temperature solid, experiments were conducted at 40°C, after the solid|liquid phase transition (which is lowered by the presence of decamethylferrocene). Square wave voltammetric experiments conducted in aqueous solutions containing 1 M sodium hydroxide and 1 M sodium salt of either D- or L- tryptophan enabled potentiometric discrimination of both D- and L-tryptophan at both D- and L-menthol droplets; insertion of the D-ion into the D-liquid was observed to be more favourable than the transfer of the D-ion into the L-liquid,37 likewise, transfer of the L-ion to the L-liquid was seen to be thermodynamically preferred compared with insertion into the D-liquid.37 Disturbingly though, the potential values obtained of the four possible combinations were not symmetric.374.2. Droplet modified electrodes as emulsion mimicsFrom the outset of the development of droplet modified electrodes, their application as a basis for which to understand processes that take place in emulsion electrochemistry, was noted.9,43,44 Two possible mechanistic pathways for electrochemistry in emulsion media83 are (i) solution processes where a small amount of solubilised material diffuses from the micelles to the electrode surface, and (ii) processes in which the micelle comes into direct contact with the electrode. In this latter process, the micelle “wets” the electrode in the same sense as an electrode-immobilised randomly distributed oil microdroplet array.9 Several types of reactions at droplet modified electrodes are possible, such as electrocatalysis both within45,46,64 and over the surface of46,56 the microdroplets, encouraging the wider use of such electrode systems as an artificial means to study complex biochemical electron transfer processes, such as photosynthesis,45 and for the development of new concept solar cells.45 We illustrate several examples that demonstrate the ability of microdroplet-modified electrode to provide novel insights in electrochemical experiments.Bull and co-workers55 and Inzelt and Gergely41 demonstrated the ability to cause polymerisation processes at the three phase boundary. Inzelt and Gergely induced polythiophene formation via redox cycling a PIGE electrode modified with a 1 μL droplet of 3-methylthiophene immersed into an aqueous lithium perchlorate solution.41 Marken et al. demonstrated voltammetrically (see Fig. 10) a dimerisation pathway of N,N,N′,N′-tetrahexyl-meta-phenylenediamine (m-THPD) microdroplets immobilised on a bppg electrode, and immersed into an aqueous sodium perchlorate electrolyte:55 m-THPD()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[m-THPD+˙ClO4−]()(I) 2[m-THPD+˙ClO4−]()⇌(m-THPD)2()+2H+(aq)+2ClO4−(aq)(J) (m-THPD)2()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[(m-THPD)2+˙ClO4−]()(K)Confirmation of the above scheme came from mass spectrometric analysis of the oxidised microdroplets, which suggested additional formation of oligomers (up to the tetramer).55 These novel types of electrochemical polymerisation may have application in the formation of circular-structured polymeric deposits (the polymerisation process occurs at the three phase junction41,55). Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 100 mV s−1 showing the first five scans for 11.3 nmol of N,N,N′,N′-tetrahexyl-meta-phenylenediamine deposited onto a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed into aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate. Biphasic electrochemical processes may occur via different pathways to those that take place within homogeneous media.84 Hence, Bull et al. illustrated an interesting electrode-insensitive, highly selective biphasic Kolbe electrolysis, involving the encapsulation of the reaction intermediates (as well as the products) within oil phase microdroplets at the electrode, before they could react with the aqueous phase.85 However, there fact that the electrode “sees” both the oil and the aqueous phases may sometimes be an synthetic advantage; Wain and co-workers47 recently demonstrated the ability to reduce a hydrophobic nitroaromatic oil to the corresponding amine efficiently in both acidic and alkaline media.47 The mechanism was thought to be different in both conditions, but requiring proton transfer across the liquid|liquid interface in the former, and partially hydrated alkali-metal transfer in the latter.47The final example of this kind of application is the recent work undertaken by Davies and co-workers on emulsion electrosynthesis, using power ultrasound to assist in the emulsification process (as well as in increasing the mass transfer coefficient).65 This work was aimed at seeking a surfactant-free electrosynthetic protocol based on emulsion work pioneered by Rusling83a In this experiment, electrochemical reduction of vitamin B12
(a Co(III)L species) to the corresponding Co(I) moiety (process (L)) enables the formation of a weak carbon–cobalt bond (via the oxidative insertion of Co(I) into a carbon–halide bond), process (M):  Co(III)L+e−⇌Co(II)L; Co(II)L+e−⇌Co(I)L; or Co(III)L+2e−⇌Co(I)L(L) RX+Co(I)L→R-Co(III)L+X−(M) R-Co(III)L+(H+,e−) or (H˙)+CH2=CHZ→R-CH2CH2Z+Co(II)L(N)The Co–C bond may later undergo homolytic cleavage (reaction (N), induced thermally or photochemically), to yield carbon radicals and a Co(II) species. The carbon radicals may subsequently react with another species (such as an olefin with an electron-withdrawing group (Z) attached) to yield synthetically useful products (reaction (N)), or H-atom abstraction, or combine with each other to form a dimer.83a Davies and co-workers immobilised microdroplets of a haloalkane on an electrode surface.65 Reduction of the Co(III) species occurs at the naked electrode edges, with reaction of Co(I) taking place over the surface of the adjacent microdroplets. In this way, this systems provides a simplified “mimic” of the sono-emulsion system, and thus provide valuable information regarding optimum synthetic reaction parameters, such as starting material ratios, light wavelengths, etc.65 It is worth noting that the recent models used to predict the size and distribution of a random array of microdroplets immobilised on an electrode surface (partially blocked electrode, q.v. §2.2) may be extended to deduce the kinetics of the heterogeneous reaction between Co(I) and the haloalkane,67 thereby providing an alternative method to SECM for inferring such liquid|liquid kinetics.86 We further note that this may provide a means for deducing of the topography and local architecture of droplet modified electrodes; such work will be an exciting, albeit challenging, prospect!4.3. Fingerprinting specific compoundsIn this final application, we illustrate the ability of the electrochemistry of immobilised microdroplets of a purposely synthesised redox liquid to electroanalytically sense for sulfide. The advantage of this detection strategy lies in the easy ability to modify electrode surfaces with redox oil microdroplets, and also to remove them (by cleaning the electrode in a solvent - q.v. §2.2).Owing to the toxicity of hydrogen sulfide and its prelevance throughout the oilfield industry, detection of sulfide has gained a significant importance.87,88 One popular route for sulfide sensing is the “methylene blue reaction”,88,89 which involves homogeneous oxidation of N,N-dimethyl-para-phenylenediamine with Fe(III), which in the presence of sulfide forms methylene blue (a derivative of phenothiazine).88 Lawrence and co-workers have recently demonstrated the ability to replace the homogeneous oxidant (Fe(III)) with an heterogeneous electrode substrate, with advantages.16,54,88,89 Thus, Blythe and co-workers54 synthesised N1-[4-(dihexylamino)phenyl]-N1,N4,N4-trihexyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DPTPD, see Fig. 11a). The voltammetry of microdroplets of this compound immobilised on a bppg electrode and immersed in aqueous sodium perchlorate solution is shown in Fig. 11b. It can be seen that two one-electron processes occur, consistent with the following:54 DPTPD()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()(O) [DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[DPTPD2+(ClO4−)2]()(P) with the wider peak for the second oxidation suggesting stronger, “attractive” interactions between the DPTPD2+ and DPTPD+˙ liquids compared to those between the DPTPD+˙ liquid and the neutral oil.54,77 It was observed that when the concentration of the supporting electrolyte changed, or other types of anion, such as nitrate, were used, the voltammograms merely shifted across the abscissa (potential axis), as anticipated for reactions (O) and (P)
(q.v. §3.3). However, the voltammetric response changed in the presence of HS− anions, as can be seen in Fig. 11c. The main redox response at 0.14 V (vs. SCE) diminishes over consecutive potential cycles, and a new broad oxidative response at ca. 0.3 V (vs. SCE) grows, and a product response gradually appears at E½=ca.
−0.1 V (vs. SCE). It was observed qualitatively that the rate at which the voltammogram changes depends on the concentration of sulfide present in the solution (and on the voltage scan rate).54 It was proposed that the product formed is that shown in Fig. 11d
(PHPD):  [DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()+HS−(aq)−4e−→[PHPD+˙ClO4−]()+3H+(aq)(Q) with the reduction of the ionic liquid product at −0.1 V (vs. SCE),  [PHPD+˙ClO4−]()+e−⇌PHPD()+ClO4−(aq)(R)This ability to “tag” sulfide electrochemically may permit the possible use of such electrodes modified with arrays of microdroplets as highly innovative combinatorial sensors for a plethora of species, as they may provide alternative (and easily reversible) routes to modifying an electrode with a species-sensitive moiety without the need for the direct covalent modification of the electrode; the droplets partially wet the conductive substrate. Fig. 11  (a) Structure of N1-[4-(dihexylamino)phenyl]-N1,N4,N4-trihexyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DPTPD). (b) Cyclic voltammograms obtained for the oxidation of 1.7 nmol DPTPD deposited onto a 4.9mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed in aqueous 0.1M NaClO4. The third cycle from a multi-cycle experiment is shown for scan rates of (a) 20, (b) 50 and (c) 100mV s−1. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 20mV s−1) obtained for the oxidation of 3.4 nmol DPTPD deposited onto a 4.9mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed in aqueous 0.1M NaClO4 containing 2mM HS−. (d) The proposed structure of the product (PHPD). 5. ConclusionsThe main results in the field of droplet-modified electrodes have been presented. We have seen that when redox compounds are confined to a single electrode surface in this manner, we may be able to determine the Gibbs transfer energies of inert ions from the aqueous phase to the non-aqueous phase, encouraging the development of highly selective sensors based on purposely designed compounds, for both ions and molecules.In purely academic terms, electrochemical processes at the three phase boundary present a modelling challenge; solving such a problem may yield important insights into a plethora of biochemical phenomena.AcknowledgementsWe are greatly indebted to all those who have worked with us in our pursuit of the voltammetry of electroactive oils. Particular gratitude is expressed to Dr Uwe Schröder (Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität, Greifswald, Germany), Robert R. France (Oxford), Peter J. Welford (Oxford), Dr Steven D. Bull (Bath University), Prof. Stephen G. Davies (Oxford), Prof. David J. Walton (Coventry University), Bill Wood (Coventry University), Dr Colin M. Hayman (Loughborough University), Prof. Phillip C. B. Page (Loughborough University), Dr Shelley J. Wilkins (Oxford) and Phillip R. Greene (Oxford). We also thank the authors of ref. 8b for giving us a copy of their manuscript prior to publication, and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council for financial support via a studentship for J. D. W.References
  (a) See for example H. Liu, Science and Engineering of Droplets: Fundamentals and Applications, Noyes Publications, New Jersey and William Andrew Publishing, LLC, New York, USA,  2000, and references cited therein Search PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Chylek and J. Hallet, Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 1992, 118, 167 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Benayahu, A. Ben-David, S. Fastig and A. Cohen, Appl. Opt., 1995, 34, 1569 ; 
  (d) J. F. Nye, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1992, 438, 397 ; 
  (e) D. P. Singh and P. C. Reist, Environ. Monitor. Assess., 1993, 24, 35 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) T. J. Casadevall, W. I. Rose, Jr., W. H. Fuller, W. H. Hunt, M. A. Hart, J. L. Moyers, D. C. Woods, R. I. Chuan and J. P. Friend, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1984, 89, 9633 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) M. Richterova and V. Lisy, J. Bio. Phys., 2003, 29, 55 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) V. Svetlicic, N. Ivosevic, S. Kovac and V. Zutic, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8217 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) M. Kaplan, L. D. Russell, R. N. Peterson and J. Martan, Tissue Cell, 1984, 16, 455 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) H. Brücker, E. Schäfer and A. F. Holstein, Cell Tissue Res., 1985, 240, 303 ; 
  (k) G. Hu, A. H. Krall and D. A. Weitz, Phys. Rev. E, 1995, 52, 6289 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) W. Pflügl and U. M. Titulär, Physica A, 1995, 241, 52 CrossRef ; 
  (m) H. Tanaka, AIP Conf. Proc., 1992, 256, 240 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. A. Clark, P. B. Hietpas and A. G. Ewing, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 259 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Clark and A. G. Ewing, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 1119 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Kashyap and M. Grätzel, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 1468 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) K. Nakatani, H. Misawa, K. Sasaki, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1701 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Funakura, K. Nakatani, H. Misawa, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3073 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Funakura, K. Nakatani, H. Misawa, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 15192 CAS ; 
  (d) H. Yao, Y. Inoue, H. Ikeda, K. Nakatani, H.-B. Kim and N. Kitamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1494 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) K. Chikama, T. Negishi and K. Nakatani, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2003, 76, 295 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. V. Mirkin, B. Liu and S. A. Rotenberg, Methods Enzymol., 2002, 352, 111 ; 
  (b) C. Cai, B. Liu and M. V. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 114 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Liu, S. A. Rotenberg and M. V. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 6340 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Amatore, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. IIb, 1996, 323, 757 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) T. J. Schröder, R. Borges, K. Pihel, C. Amatore and R. M. Wightman, Biophys. J., 1996, 70, 1061 ; 
  (c) C. Amatore, S. Arbault, D. Bruce, P. de Oliveira, M. Erad and M. Vuillame, Faraday Discuss., 2000, 116, 319 RSC ; 
  (d) C. Amatore, S. Arbault, D. Bruce, P. de Oliveira, M. Erad and M. Vuillame, Chem. Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4171 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Amatore, S. Arbault, D. Bruce, P. de Oliveira, M. Erad and M. Vuillame, Port. Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 19, 145 Search PubMed .K. W. Willman and R. W. Murray, Anal. Chem., 1983, 55, 1139 CAS .U. Schröder, J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Compton, F. Marken, P. A. Z. Suarez, C. S. Consorti, R. G. de Souzs and J. Dupont, New J. Chem., 2000, 24, 1009 RSC .
  (a) C. Giacomelli, F. C. Giacomelli, C. M. Zaccaron and A. Spinelli, Anais do XIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Electroquímica e Electroanalítica, Araraquara, Brazil, December  2000, p. 30 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Giacomelli, F. C. Giacomelli, C. M. Zaccaron and A. Spinelli, in preparation.F. Marken, R. D. Webster, S. D. Bull and S. D. Davies, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 437, 209 CrossRef CAS .F. Scholz, Š. Komorsky-Lovrić and M. Lovrić, Electrochem. Commun., 2000, 2, 112 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. M. Bond, Broadening Electrochemical Horizons, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2002, ch. 5 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Grygar, F. Marken, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2002, 67, 163 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Scholz and B. Meyer, in Electroanalytical Chemistry, eds. A. J. Bard and I. Rubinstein, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1998, vol. 20, p. 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) K. J. McKenzie and F. Marken, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1885 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) J. C. Eklund and A. M. Bond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8306 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. M. Bond, R. Colton, F. Marken and J. N. Walter, Organometallics, 1994, 13, 5122 CrossRef CAS .T. Kuwana and W. G. French, Anal. Chem., 1964, 36, 241 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. A. Malmsten and H. S. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1067 CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Malmsten, C. P. Smith and H. S. White, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 215, 223 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. B. Morris, K. F. Fisher and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 5306 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. D. Norton, S. A. Anderson and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 3 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Lee, X. Gao, L. D. A. Hardy and H. S. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L90 CAS ; 
  (f) S. C. Paulson, N. D. Okerlund and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 581 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Ciszkowska, Z. Stojek, S. E. Morris and J. G. Osteryoung, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 2372 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Stojek, M. Ciszkowska and J. G. Osteryoung, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66, 1507 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Xie, T. Z. Liu and J. G. Osteryoung, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 4124 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Ciszkowska, A. Jaworski and J. G. Osteryoung, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 423, 95 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) W. Hyk and Z. Stojek, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 577 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) W. Hyk, K. Caban, M. Donten and Z. Stojek, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6943 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) K. Caban and Z. Stojek, Book of Abstracts, 53rd International Society of Electrochemistry meeting, Düsselldorf, Germany, September  2002 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) K. Caban, A. Kudelski, M. Donten and Z. Stojek, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 412 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Opallo and M. Saczek-Maj, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 306 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Opallo and M. Saczek-Maj, Chem. Commun., 2002, 448 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Saczek-Maj and M. Opallo, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 1060 CrossRef ; 
  (d) M. Opallo, Mater. Sci., 2002, 20, 7 CAS ; 
  (e) M. Opallo, J. Kukulka-Walkiewicz and M. Saczek-Maj, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 1045 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) M. Saczek-Maj and M. Opallo, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 566 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) N. S. Lawrence, M. Thompson, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1028 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Thompson, N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones and R. G. Compton, Sens. Acts B, 2003, 87, 33 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) N. S. Lawrence, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones and R. G. Compton, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 2054 CrossRef CAS .M. Weaver and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1975, 58, 95 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Shi and F. C. Anson, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 3114 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Shi and F. C. Anson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9850 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Shi and F. C. Anson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6283 CrossRef CAS ; (see also corrections, ibid.,  2001, 105, 2084; 
  (d) C. Shi and F. C. Anson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1047 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Shi and F. C. Anson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8963 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. Steiger and F. C. Anson, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 4579 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T. D. Chung and F. C. Anson, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 337 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) T. D. Chung and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 115 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) K. B. Oldham and J. C. Myland, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 530, 1 CrossRef .H. O. Shafer, T. L. Derback and C. A. Koval, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. D. Chung, J. Korean Chem. Soc., 2002, 5, 216 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Yuan, Z. Gao, M. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Y. Shao, Sci. Chin., Ser. B, Chem., 2002, 45, 494 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) N. Hu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1979 Search PubMed .M. Vagin and A. Karyakin, Book of Abstracts, 53rd International Society of Electrochemistry meeting, Düsselldorf, Germany, September  2002 Search PubMed.J. D. Wadhawan, U. Schröder, A. Neudeck, S. J. Wilkins, R. G. Compton, F. Marken, C. S. Consorti, R. F. de Souza and J. Dupont, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 493, 75 CrossRef CAS .B. M. Quinn, Z. Ding, R. Moulton and A. J. Bard, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1734 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Barker and P. R. Unwin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2330 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. P. Andrieux and J.-M. Savéant, in Molecular Design of Electrode Surfaces, ed. R. W. Murray, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1992, p. 207 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. P. Andrieux and J.-M. Savéant, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 93, 163 CrossRef .
  (a) H. H. J. Girault and D. J. Schiffrin, in Electroanalytical Chemistry, ed. A. J. Bard, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1989, vol. 15, p. 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Wei, A. J. Bard and M. V. Mirkin, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16033 CAS ; 
  (c) A. L. Barker, P. R. Unwin, J. Zhou, S. Amemiya and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7620 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Zhang and P. R. Unwin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2341 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Zhang, A. L. Barker and P. R. Unwin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 483, 95 CrossRef CAS .M. Powell, J. C. Ball, Y.-C. Tsai, M. F. Suárez and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8268 CrossRef CAS .P. Tasakorn, J. Chen and K. Aoki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 533, 119 CrossRef CAS .K. Aoki, P. Tasakorn and J. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 542, 51 CrossRef CAS .Š. Komorsky-Lovrić, M. Lovrić and F. Scholz, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2001, 66, 434 CrossRef CAS .Š. Komorsky-Lovrić, M. Lovrić and F. Scholz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 129 CrossRef CAS .V. Mirčeski and F. Scholz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 522, 189 CrossRef CAS .R. Gulaboski, V. Mirčeski and F. Scholz, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 277 CrossRef CAS .M. Donten, Z. Stojek and F. Scholz, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 324 CrossRef CAS .R. Gulaboski, V. Mirčeski and F. Scholz, Amino Acids, 2003, 24, 149 Search PubMed .Š. Komorsky-Lovrić, K. Riedl, R. Gulaboski, V. Mirceski and F. Scholz, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8000 CrossRef CAS ; Š. Komorsky-Lovrić, K. Riedl, R. Gulaboski, V. Mirceski and F. Scholz, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3090 CrossRef CAS .F. Scholz, R. Gulaboski, V. Mirčeski and P. Langer, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 659 CrossRef CAS .V. Mirčeski, R. Gulaboski and F. Scholz, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 813 .R. Gulaboski, K. Riedl and F. Scholz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 1284 RSC .R. Gulaboski and F. Scholz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5650 CrossRef CAS .A. Gergely and G. Inzelt, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 753 CrossRef CAS .S. Ulmeanu, H. J. Lee, D. J. Fermin, H.
H. J. Girault and Y. Shao, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 219 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) K. Nakatani, T. Uchida, H. Misawa, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 5197 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Nakatani, K. Chikama, H.-B. Kim and N. Kitamura, Chem. Lett., 1994, 793 ; 
  (c) K. Nakatani, T. Uchida, S. Funakura, A. Sekiguchi, H. Misawa, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, Chem. Lett., 1993, 717 CAS ; 
  (d) K. Nakatani, T. Uchida, H. Misawa, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 367, 109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) K. Nakatani, T. Uchida, N. Kitamura and H. Masuhara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 375, 383 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) N. Kitamura, K. Nakatani and H.-B. Kim, Pure Appl. Chem., 1995, 67, 79 CAS ; 
  (g) K. Nakatani, T. Suto, M. Wakabayashi, H.-B. Kim and N. Kitamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 4745 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) K. Nakatani, K. Chikama, H.-B. Kim and N. Kitamura, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 237, 133 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) K. Nakatani, N. Terui and N. Kitamura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 69, 997 CAS ; 
  (j) K. Nakatani, M. Wakabayashi, K. Chikama and N. Kitamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6749 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) K. Nakatani, N. Terui, K. Hasebe and N. Kitamura, Chem. Letts., 1996, 457 Search PubMed ; 
  (l) K. Nakatani, T. Suzuki, S. Sitara and N. Kitamura, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2286 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) K. Nakatani, M. Sudo and N. Kitamura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2908 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) K. Nakatani, M. Sudo and N. Kitamura, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Terui, K. Nakatani and N. Kitamura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 494, 41 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Nakatani, T. Noguchi and T. Negishi, Anal. Sci., 2002, 18, 533 CAS ; 
  (d) T. Negishi and K. Nakatani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 594 RSC .J. D. Wadhawan, A. J. Wain and R. G. Compton, ChemPhysChem, in press Search PubMed.A. J. Wain, A. N. Kirkham, D. J. Walton, B. Wood, R. R. France, S. D. Bull, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., in press Search PubMed.A. J. Wain, N. S. Lawrence, P. R. Greene, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 1867 RSC .T. J. Davies, B. A. Brookes, A. C. Fisher, K. Yunus, S. J. Wilkins, P. R. Greene, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 106, 6431 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Evans, C. E. Banks, S. J. Wilkins, R. R. France, N. J. Oldham, A. J. Fairbanks, B. Wood, D. J. Walton, U. Schröder and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9619 CrossRef CAS .J.-E. Dubois, A. Desbene-Monvernay and P.-C. Lacaze, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1976, 72, 353 CrossRef CAS .G. Wittstock, H. Emons and W. R. Heineman, Electroanalysis, 1996, 8, 143 CAS .J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Evans and R. G. Compton, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 533, 71 CrossRef CAS .F. Marken, R. G. Compton, C. H. Goeting, J. S. Foord, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, Electroanalysis, 1998, 10, 821 CrossRef CAS .F. Marken, A. N. Blythe, R. G. Compton, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1823 RSC .F. Marken, A. N. Blythe, J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Compton, S. D. Bull, R. T. Aplin and S. G. Davies, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 5, 17 Search PubMed .J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Compton, F. Marken, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 5, 301 Search PubMed .F. Marken, R. G. Compton, C. H. Goeting, J. S. Foord, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 5, 88 Search PubMed .
  (a) Q. Fulian, J. C. Ball, F. Marken, R. G. Compton and A. C. Fisher, Electroanalysis, 2000, 12, 1012 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. C. Ball, F. Marken, Q. Fulian, J. D. Wadhawan, A. N. Blythe, U. Schröder, R. G. Compton, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, Electroanalysis, 2000, 12, 1017 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Ball, DPhil Thesis, Oxford University,  2000, ch. 9.U. Schröder, R. G. Compton, F. Marken, S. B. Bull, S. G. Davies and S. Gilmour, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1344 CrossRef .F. Marken, C. M. Hayman and P. C. B. Page, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 172 CrossRef CAS .U. Schröder, J. D. Wadhawan, R. G. Evans, R. G. Compton, B. Wood, D. J. Walton, R. R. France, F. Marken, P. C. B. Page and C. M. Hayman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8697 CrossRef .F. Marken, C. M. Hayman and P. C. B. Page, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 462 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Wain, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, ChemPhysChem Search PubMed  , in press.T. J. Davies, C. E. Banks, B. Nuthakki, J. F. Rusling, R. R. France, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, Green Chem., 2002, 4, 570 RSC .N. V. Rees, J. D. Wadhawan, O. V. Klymenko, B. A. Coles and R. G. Compton, J. Electroanal. Chem., in press Search PubMed.T. J. Davies, B. A. Brookes and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. Search PubMed  , submitted.
  (a) T. Gueshi, K. Tokuda and H. Matsuda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 89, 247 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Gueshi, K. Tokuda and H. Matsuda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1979, 101, 29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Amatore, J.-M. Savéant and D. Tessier, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 147, 39 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. G. Phillips, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2222 CAS ; 
  (e) B. A. Brookes, T. J. Davies, A. C. Fisher, R. G. Evans, S. J. Wilkins, K. Yunus, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1616 CrossRef CAS .M. Hermes and F. Scholz, Electrochem. Commun., 2000, 2, 845 CrossRef CAS .K. Aoki, Electroanalysis, 1993, 5, 627 CAS .J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, unpublished results.J. D. Wadhawan, P. J. Welford, K. Yunus, A. C. Fisher and R. G. Compton, J. Brazil. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14, 510 Search PubMed .M. Lovrić, Electrochem. Commun., 1999, 1, 207 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Myland and K. B. Oldham, Electrochem. Commun., 2000, 2, 541 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Lovrić and F. Scholz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 540, 89 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Lovrić, Š. Komorsky and M. Lovrić, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 637 CrossRef CAS .H. D. Abruña, Co-ord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 86, 135 Search PubMed .
  (a) H. Matsuda, K. Aoki and K. Tokuda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 217, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Matsuda, K. Aoki and K. Tokuda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 217, 15 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. P. Brown and F. C. Anson, Anal. Chem., 1977, 49, 1589 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. G. Compton, M. E. Laing, A. Ledwith and I. I. Abu-Abdoun, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 431 CAS .
  (a) E. Laviron, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1979, 100, 263 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. F. Smith, K. Willman, K. Kuo and R. W. Murray, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1979, 95, 217 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. C. Lennox and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 3223 CrossRef .See for example, N. S. Lawrence, J. D. Wadhawan and R. G. Compton, Foundations of Physical Chemistry: Worked Examples, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1999, p. 140ff Search PubMed .For the dissolution of ferrocene derivatives from chemically modified electrodes, see   J. R. Lenhard and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 7870 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. G. Park, K. Aoki, K. Tokuda and H. Matsuda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1985, 195, 157 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-W. Lee and A. J. Bard, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 239, 441 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Richardson, G. G. Roberts, R. Bagnout, R. G. Compton and D. J. Riley, Electroanalysis, 1991, 3, 757 CAS .
  (a) R.-I. Stefan, H. Y. Aboul-Enein and J. F. van Staden, in Sensors Update, ed. H. Baltes, G. K. Fedder and J. G. Korvink, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2002, vol. 10, p.123 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Seebach and H. A. Oei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1975, 14, 634 CrossRef ; 
  (c) L. Horner and D. Degner, Electrochim. Acta, 1974, 19, 611 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Brown and L. Horner, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1977, 77 CAS ; 
  (e) L. Horner and W. Brich, Chem. Ber., 1978, 111, 574 CAS ; 
  (f) A. Merz, Top. Curr. Chem., 1989, 152, 72 ; 
  (g) G. A. Attard, A. Ahmadi, J. Felieu, A. Rodes, E. Herrero, S. Blais and G. Jerkiewicz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1381 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) A. Ahmadi, G. A. Attard, J. Felieu and A. Rodes, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2420 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) G. A. Attard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3158 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) R. Ravel, J. Phys: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 4119 CrossRef ; 
  (k) J. He, H. Sato, P. Yang and A. Yamagishi, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 388 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) B. F. Walkins, J. R. Behling, E. Kariv and L. L. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 3549 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) N. Muskal, I. Turyan, A. Shurky and D. Mandler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 1147 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (n) M. Schwientek, S. Pleus and C. H. Hamann, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 461, 94 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (o) C. Felcmann, R. Alt, G. Greiner, H. Rau and M. Wörner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 3483 RSC ; 
  (p) C. Felcmann, G. Greiner, H. Rau and M. Wörner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 3491 RSC .
  (a) J. F. Rusling, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1895 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Electrochemistry in Colloids and Dispersions, ed. R. A. Mackay and J. Texter, VCH, New York,  1992 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Chen, O. Ikeda and K. Aoki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 496, 88 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. D. Wadhawan, F. Marken and R. G. Compton, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1947 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. G. Compton, J. L. Hardcastle, F. J. del Campo and J. D. Wadhawan, in Encyclopædia of Electrochemistry, eds. A. J. Bard and M. Stratmann, vol. 3, Instrumental and Electroanalytical Chemistry, ed. P. R. Unwin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed.
  (a) J. D. Wadhawan, F. Marken, R. G. Compton, S. D. Bull and S. G. Davies, Chem. Commun., 2001, 87 RSC ; 
  (b) J. D. Wadhawan, F. J. del Campo, R. G. Compton, J. S. Foord, F. Marken, S. D. Bull, S. G. Davies, D. J. Walton and S. Ryley, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 507, 135 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shao, M. V. Mirkin and J. F. Rusling, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3202 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) P. Patnaik, A Comprehensive Guide to the Hazardous Properties of Chemical Substances, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn.,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) W. L. Orr and J. S. Sinninghe Damsté, ACS Symp. Ser., 1990, 429, 2–29 CAS .
  (a) N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis and R. G. Compton, Talanta, 2000, 52, 771 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Lawrence, DPhil Thesis, Oxford University,  2003.
  (a) N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones, S. N. Davies and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2000, 12, 1453 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones, S. N. Davies and R. G. Compton, Analyst, 2000, 125, 661 RSC ; 
  (c) N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis, F. Marken, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones, S. N. Davies and R. G. Compton, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 69, 189 CrossRef ; 
  (d) N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones, S. N. Davies and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2001, 13, 432 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) P. C. White, N. S. Lawrence, J. Davis and R. G. Compton, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 477, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) N. S. Lawrence, M. Thompson, J. Davis, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones and R. G. Compton, Mikrochim. Acta, 2001, 137, 105 Search PubMed .Footnote† It should be noted that the half-wave potential observed for reversible systems does depend on the dilution ratio of the electroactive species to inert oil, as observed by Schröder and co-workers62 for redox liquid microdroplet-modified electrode, and by Komorsky-Lović
et al.31 for solid compounds dissolved in a single oil drop.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2003
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams illustrating various approaches to the electrochemical study of droplet-modified electrodes. (a) A single, conductive drop, where experiments are conducted only in the droplet deposit. (b) Biphasic approaches to the study of droplet-modified electrodes: (i) conductive droplet, where the deposit totally covers the electrode surface, (ii) and (iii) non-conductive deposits cannot be interrogated unless part of the electrode at the droplet edge is exposed (ii) single droplet, (iii) droplet array.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the Anson18 thin layer (ca. 30 μm) of nitrobenzene (NB) modifying an edge plane pyrolytic graphite electrode (epg) surface.	 
Ox1(NB)+e−⇌Red1(NB)	(A)
Red1(NB)+Ox2(aq)⇌Ox1(NB)+Red2(aq)	(B)
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  General scheme of the laser-spectroscopy–electrochemistry system employed by Nakatani and co-workers43 for trapping droplets from emulsion media on electrodes carefully positioned in the focal plane of the objective lens. The xenon light source enables the absorption spectrum of the droplet to be simultaneously recorded by the photodector.	 


N,N,N′,N′-Tetrahexyl-para-phenylenediamine	9,45,46,48,49,53,55–60,62
N,N,N′,N′-Tetrahexyl-meta-phenylenediamine	55
N,N,N′,N′-Tetrabutyl-para-phenylenediamine	46,49,62
N,N,N′,N′-Tetraheptyl-para-phenylenediamine	46,49,62
N,N,N′,N′-Tetraoctyl-para-phenylenediamine	61–63
N,N,N′,N′-Tetranonyl-para-phenylenediamine	46,49,62
N,N-Dibutyl-N′,N′-diethyl-para-phenylenediamine	46
N,N-Diethyl-N′,N′-dihexyl-para-phenylenediamine	46
N,N-Diethyl-N′,N′-diheptyl-para-phenylenediamine	46
N,N,N′-Trihexyl-para-phenylenediamine	60
N,N,N′,N′-Tetrakis(6-methoxyhexyl)-para-phenylenediamine	55
N1-[4-(Dihexylamino)phenyl]-N1,N4,N4-trihexyl-1,4-phenylenediamine	54
3-methylthiophenea	41
n-Butylferrocene	51,52
4-Nitrophenyl nonyl ether	47
Vitamin K1	64

 	Fig. 4  (a) The structure of the N,N,N′,N′-tetraalkyl-para-phenylenediamine (TRPD) redox oils employed in the work from our laboratories.9,45,46,48,49,53,55–63 Typically, R is large (larger than n-butyl). (b) Optical images illustrating microdroplets of THPD (R=n-hexyl), 101.7 nmol, deposited on a bppg electrode surface. The microdroplets are seen as dark, globular features. In the figure, the abscissa is 445 μm, while the ordinate axis is 309 μm long. (c) Schematic illustration indicating the effect on the voltammetry of a solution phase species by the presence of electroinactive “blocking” material. Very low coverage of blocking deposit, (i), yields responses almost identical to that of a naked electrode; higher coverages, (ii), causes the diffusion regime to become increasingly radial, with profound effects on the voltammetric response.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the three phase boundary (alias triple phase junction) and the base circumference of the individual droplets. (b)
(i) Photograph of a microscopic image of THPD deposited on a siliconised ITO electrode and immersed into aqueous 1.0 M sodium perchlorate solution. The applied potential was stepped from −0.1 V to +0.4 V vs. SCE for 30 s (scale: abscissa 780 μm, ordinate 920 μm); (ii) SEM image of 4 nmol THPD deposited on a bppg electrode dipped into aqueous 0.1 M AgClO4 and potentiostatted at 0.0 V vs. SCE for 10 s (having previously been fully electrolysed at 0.4 V vs. SCE when immersed into aqueous 0.1 M NaClO4 solution). (c) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 0.1 V s−1) for the oxidation of (a) 10, (b) 160, (c) 640 nmol of THPD deposited onto a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrodes and immersed in 0.1 M KSCN. (d)
(a) Schematic illustration of a ring electrode fully coated with a redox liquid film; (b) schematic illustration of a redox liquid droplet-modified ring electrode exhibitying a well-defined three phase boundary. (e)
(i) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 100 mV s−1) for a micro-mesh electrode (100 mesh wires per inch) coated with different amounts of THPD immersed into a 0.1 M aqueous NaSCN solution; (ii) Digital image (obtained using a flatbed, refractive scanner) of the underside of the electrode that gave the voltammogram marked with the asterisk (*) in (i), after oxidation at 0.4 V vs. SCE for 60 s in 0.1 M NaSCN solution. The copper tape may be seen at the lower end of the picture; the blue (dark) lines around individual mesh squares indicates this as that site of electron transfer.	 
THPD()+Ag+(aq)+ClO4−(aq)→[THPD+˙ClO4−]()+Ag(s)	(C)
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Graphs illustrating the classification by Evans and co-workers49 of the biphasic microdroplet voltammetry of TRPD oils in aqueous solution. (i) Anion insertion, case (i); the figure depicts four consecutive cyclic voltammetric scans (voltage sweep rate 10 mV s−1) of 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode immersed into aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution. (ii) Cation expulsion, case (ii); the figure shows four consecutive scans (recorded at 10 mV s−1) for 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode immersed into an aqueous 0.1 M potassium chloride solution. (iii) Ionic reaction at the three phase boundary, case (iii); the figure displays for successive cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 10 mV s−1) for the oxidation and re-reduction of 4 nmol THPD immobilised on a bppg electrode (4.9 mm diameter) immersed into 0.1 M aqueous sodium azide.	 
A()+X−(aq)−e−⇌[A+˙X−]()	(D)
	(4)

 	Fig. 7  (i) Plot of the formal potentials of THPD (■) and TOPD (●, O=n-octyl) verses the reciprocal of the radii of the electrolyte anions measured in 0.1 M electrolyte solution at pH 8. (ii) Plot of the formal potential of THPD oxidation verses the standard membrane potential,  of the electrolyte anions measured in 0.1 M electrolyte solution at pH 9. (iii) Plot of the formal potential of the first oxidation step for THPD dissolved in nitrobenzene (NB) and for the pure redox liquid measured in the presence of different electrolyte anions versus the standard membrane potentials of the electrolyte anions at the water|nitrobenzene interface at pH 9.	 

 	Fig. 8  Unusual cyclic voltammetric charachterisitcs corresponding to an anion insertion process; all voltammograms are recorded when the reox oil was immobilised on a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode. (a) 4 nmol TBPD (B=n-butyl) immersed into an aqueous 0.1 M solution of potassium hexaflurophosphate, scan rate 10 mV s−1. Similar shaped responses were also observed when the anion was AsF6−.49
(b) 5.3 nmol THPD immersed into potassium bromide solution, scan rate 100 mV s−1. The revese peak P1′ represents the expulsion of hydrated bromide ions from the ionic liquid; P2′ corresponds to that of non-hydrated bromide. (c) 1 nmol THPD immersed into 0.1 M potassium iodide, recorded at 100 mV s−1. Peak P1′ is the reverse process of peak P1
(expulsion of hydrated iodide), P2′ is the expulsion of non-hydrated iodide, and P3′ is the expulsion of the tri-iodide anion formed within the organic microdroplets; the dissociates into iodine and iodide in the aqueous solution, so is not re-inserted.49
(d) 5.7 nmol vitamin K1
(phylloquinone) immersed into 0.1 M hydrochloric acid, scan rate 100 mV s−1.	 
THPD()+H+(aq)+ClO4−(aq)→[THPDH+ClO4−]()	(E)
[THPDH+ClO4−]()−e−⇌[THPD+˙ClO4−]()+H+(aq)	(F)
A()−e−⇌A+˙(aq)	(G)

 	Fig. 9  Gibbs free energy diagram illustrating the anion-facilitated cation dissolution pathway. The solid line illustrates the anion-facilitated cation transfer pathway, involving adsorption of anions from the aqueous phase to the surface of the microdroplets, represented by one of two relative states by solid and the short-dashed lines. The long-dashed line represents the energetic pathway for the dissolution of the cation into the aqueous phase without any contribution from the aqueous-based anion.	 
2[TOPD2+˙CrO42−]()+2H+(aq)⇌[TOPD2+˙Cr2O72−]()+H2O()+Products	(H)
m-THPD()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[m-THPD+˙ClO4−]()	(I)
2[m-THPD+˙ClO4−]()⇌(m-THPD)2()+2H+(aq)+2ClO4−(aq)	(J)
(m-THPD)2()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[(m-THPD)2+˙ClO4−]()	(K)

 	Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 100 mV s−1 showing the first five scans for 11.3 nmol of N,N,N′,N′-tetrahexyl-meta-phenylenediamine deposited onto a 4.9 mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed into aqueous 0.1 M sodium perchlorate.	 
Co(III)L+e−⇌Co(II)L; Co(II)L+e−⇌Co(I)L; or Co(III)L+2e−⇌Co(I)L	(L)
RX+Co(I)L→R-Co(III)L+X−	(M)
R-Co(III)L+(H+,e−) or (H˙)+CH2=CHZ→R-CH2CH2Z+Co(II)L	(N)
DPTPD()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()	(O)
[DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()+ClO4−(aq)−e−⇌[DPTPD2+(ClO4−)2]()	(P)
[DPTPD+˙ClO4−]()+HS−(aq)−4e−→[PHPD+˙ClO4−]()+3H+(aq)	(Q)
[PHPD+˙ClO4−]()+e−⇌PHPD()+ClO4−(aq)	(R)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Structure of N1-[4-(dihexylamino)phenyl]-N1,N4,N4-trihexyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DPTPD). (b) Cyclic voltammograms obtained for the oxidation of 1.7 nmol DPTPD deposited onto a 4.9mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed in aqueous 0.1M NaClO4. The third cycle from a multi-cycle experiment is shown for scan rates of (a) 20, (b) 50 and (c) 100mV s−1. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 20mV s−1) obtained for the oxidation of 3.4 nmol DPTPD deposited onto a 4.9mm diameter bppg electrode and immersed in aqueous 0.1M NaClO4 containing 2mM HS−. (d) The proposed structure of the product (PHPD).	 
Footnote
† It should be noted that the half-wave potential observed for reversible systems does depend on the dilution ratio of the electroactive species to inert oil, as observed by Schröder and co-workers62 for redox liquid microdroplet-modified electrode, and by Komorsky-Lović
et al.31 for solid compounds dissolved in a single oil drop.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2003
