Photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscopy for localized photovoltaic investigations on organic semiconductors  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP53851F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP53851F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3739-3748Photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscopy for localized photovoltaic investigations on organic semiconductors

        
          
            Jacek 
            Gasiorowski
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jan Philipp 
            Kollender
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kurt 
            Hingerl
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Niyazi Serdar 
            Sariciftci
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrei Ionut 
            Mardare
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Achim Walter 
            Hassel
          
        
      *bd
aLinz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (LIOS), Physical Chemistry, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria
bInstitute for Chemical Technology of Inorganic Materials, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria. E-mail: hassel@elchem.de
cZentrum für Oberflächen- und Nanoanalytik, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria
dChristian Doppler Laboratory for Combinatorial Oxide Chemistry at the Institute for Chemical Technology of Inorganic Materials, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria
Received 
      10th September 2013
    , Accepted 18th November 2013First published on 18th November 2013AbstractPhotoelectrochemical characterization of the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) was performed using an adapted version of a photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscope (PE-SDCM). The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function were determined using spectroscopic ellipsometry in order to identify the absorption region of the polymer. Detailed photoelectrochemical experiments were performed for the thin polymer layer contacted with 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate dissolved in propylene carbonate as well as with an electrolyte containing a 5.4 mM ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple. The effect of the illumination on the P3HT covered WE in contact with both the pure electrolyte and an electrolyte containing a ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple was studied using dark/illumination sequences. The stability of the photovoltaic effect was characterized using long term current transients. Finally, the photoelectrochemical impedance spectroscopy was applied to determine the electrical properties of the P3HT in the dark and under illumination.
Introduction
Solar radiation, as potentially the largest renewable energy source, attracted increased scientific attention in the last 10 years in view of the drawbacks of other energy sources such as environmental impact, radioactive contamination, anthropogenic greenhouse effects and exhaustion. This resulted in a significant amount of work done on the photon-to-electricity conversion.1,2 Among all types of photovoltaic devices, organic solar cells (OSCs) are especially interesting due to their mechanical3,4 and optical properties5,6 which can be easily tuned by chemical design.7,8 Their mechanical flexibility was found to be a big advantage in the device preparation.9,10 The large input from the scientific community resulted in the impressive progress in the development of new materials and concepts, pushing the power conversion efficiency of the OSCs above 10%.11–13 This accumulation of knowledge is followed by a rapidly increasing number of newly synthesized materials, which deserve characterization. Usually, proper electrochemical, optical and electrical characterization of a new organic compound requires large amounts of material. Further characterization of the device structure (e.g. solar cell), in terms of studying the materials applicability as a donor/acceptor material, rapidly increases the necessary amount of material for testing. For this reason a technique is required that manages with little material. Such an approach can be realized through localized characterization on small areas as they require only a strikingly small amount of material.
The basic concept of Scanning Droplet Cell Microscopy (SDCM) developed in 1997 by Hassel et al.14 for local electrochemical oxidation of aluminium was optimized in the last 16 years for various applications. This technique allows localization of electrochemical reactions on a small area of the working electrode. A strong localization down to the μm2 region is achieved by pressing a silicone sealing terminated glass capillary filled with an electrolyte against the working electrode. Inside the capillary, electrodes are installed so that all common electrical and electrochemical measurements can be performed with a high reproducibility of the small addressed areas.15 The possibility of electrolyte confinement in combination with scanning capabilities using gantry robots was recently used for localized anodisations of thin film compositional spreads such as Al–Fe,16 Hf–Ti,17 Ta–Ti,18 Nb–Ti19 or Hf–Ta,20 investigation of nanoparticles embedded in anodic oxides,21,22 electrochemistry at the grain boundaries23 or electrochemical lithography.24,25 By installing a light guide inside the capillary of the SDCM the photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscope (PE-SDCM) becomes possible where the small investigated area can be illuminated and photo-induced phenomena can be studied.26
The scanning droplet cell microscope was already successfully applied for electrochemical characterization of organic semiconductors where less than 1 mg of the polymer and less than 1 mL of the electrolyte solution were used.27,28 In the present work PE-SDCM is applied for photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical characterization of very small amounts (nanograms) of organic semiconductors.
Experimental
In the present study, a soluble derivative of polythiophenes, the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (98%, Rieke Metals), was used without further purification. The polymer was dissolved in chlorobenzene (99+%, Acros Organics) to yield a concentration of 10 g L−1 and at a later stage it was spin-casted on two 15 × 15 mm2 glass/ITO (15 Ω □−1, Kintec Co.) substrates. The glass/ITO substrates were precleaned by sequential sonication in acetone, isopropanol and de-ionized water and dried in nitrogen. After deposition, the P3HT samples were annealed at 150 °C for 3 min in a glovebox containing a nitrogen atmosphere. The thickness of the P3HT layers measured by contact profilometry (DekTak XT Stylus profilometer) was approximately 35 nm for the first substrate and 25 nm for the second substrate. The optical properties of P3HT films were assessed using NIR-Vis-UV spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). The measurements were conducted using a Woollam M-2000 (rotating compensator) ellipsometer (Lincoln, USA) which spans an energy range of 0.73 to 6.5 eV. The ellipsometric data were analyzed with WVASE™ software.
All photovoltaic investigations presented in this work were performed using a photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscope (PE-SDCM) adapted for non-aqueous based electrolytes.26 In this technique only a small electrolyte droplet released at the tip of a glass capillary comes into contact with the sample surface and in this way defining the working electrode (WE).14 Due to the small diameter of the droplet, the number of possible measurements even on small substrates of a few square millimeters is significantly increased while using only minimal amounts of material (≪1 mg) and electrolyte solution (<100 μL). During the photoelectrochemical studies, the first substrate was investigated using 0.1 M solution of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6, ≥99%, Fluka Analytical), prepared by dissolution in propylene carbonate (PC, 99.7%, Sigma Aldrich). The second substrate was investigated using 0.1 M solution of TBAPF6 in PC, but containing additionally 5.4 mM ferrocene. The organic electrolytes used in this study were chosen due to their large electrochemical window, viz. high overpotentials for anodic and cathodic decomposition reaction. However, extra caution was necessary due to the possible oxygen or water contamination which may affect the electrochemical measurements and their interpretation.
More than 100 measurements were performed on both P3HT/ITO/glass substrates using two different cells, corresponding to each electrolyte solution used. A schematic description of a PE-SDCM is presented in Fig. 1. Due to the use of different electrolytes, two separate cells were necessary for the complete photoelectrochemical study in order to avoid ferrocene contamination when investigating the first sample. Each cell was built using 2.5 mm outer diameter boron-silicate glass capillaries. The tip was pre-formed using a capillary puller (PC-10, Narishige) and afterwards ground using a micro-grinder for achieving the desired tip diameter. Due to the necessity of avoiding air contact combined with the need for precisely defining the WE area, the PE-SDCM was used in the contact mode.29 In this way, a high reproducibility of the addressed areas was possible by using a soft silicone gasket.15 The gasket was formed on the rim of the outer capillary by dipping it into liquid silicone followed by drying it under constant N2 flow for a few hours. The precisely wetted area on the WE was determined before starting the PE-SDCM experiments. For this purpose, an anodic oxide was grown on a Ti thin film using an aqueous electrolyte (acetate buffer) and high resolution optical microscopy with automated pattern recognition was applied for determining the area of the coloured spot produced.15 The addressed WE area of the cell used with the organic electrolyte without ferrocene was 0.13 mm2 while that of the cell used for the electrolyte containing ferrocene was 0.11 mm2. In order to allow direct comparison of the results all obtained electrochemical data were normalized to their corresponding areas. As a reference electrode (RE), an Ag/AgCl micro-quasi-reference (μ-QRE) electrode was used due to its applicability under non-aqueous conditions. The active region of the μ-QRE was prepared by electrodeposition of AgCl along 15 mm of a longer Ag wire (99.999% Wieland Dentaltechnik, Germany) (100 μm in diameter) in 1 M HCl. A detailed description of the preparation can be found elsewhere.30 The μ-QRE wire was inserted into a small glass capillary for mechanical stability, leaving the sensing area exposed outside it. The remaining Ag wire was sealed within the glass capillary for preventing electrolyte contact using two component epoxy resin. The potential of the μ-QRE used in this work was 0.211 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). As a counter electrode (CE), a spiral-shaped 100 μm in diameter high purity Au wire was used (99.999%, Wieland Dentaltechnik, Germany). The spiral shape of the Au CE was used in order to maximize its total surface area. The RE was inserted together with the CE into the 2.5 mm outer diameter boron-silicate glass capillary. In order to locally illuminate the wetted area, a 270 μm in diameter multi-mode optical fibre was used. The end of the optical fibre and the reference electrode were installed in close proximity to the surface inside the outer body capillary, as presented in Fig. 1. The electrical contacting of the WE was ensured by using an In droplet connecting both, the ITO film and a W needle. A 500 μm in diameter stainless steel syringe needle installed at the top part of the PE-SDCM was connected to a Teflon tube serving as an electrolyte inlet. In the last fabrication step, the top of the droplet cell was sealed with two-component epoxy glue fixing all components. The size of the electrolyte droplet was controlled using a high-precision syringe pump.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscope (PE-SDCM). 
All photovoltaic measurements presented in this work were performed using a 532 nm diode pumped solid state laser module with auto-power control. The reason of choosing this wavelength is described later. Due to the high surface photosensitivity, all photovoltaic measurements were done in a specially designed dark room for avoiding radiation contamination of the sample during the experiments. The laser radiation was coupled into the optical fibre using an in-house developed optical fibre port. The illumination was controlled by a manually operated shutter. In order to measure the optical power on the wetted area, a fully assembled droplet cell was placed on the detection area of an optical power meter (Coherent Lasermate Q, VL54). The measured optical power density was 98 mW cm−2.
The tip of the PE-SDCM was positioned on the sample surface using a gantry robot built using three linear stages (precision better than 400 nm). For ensuring high reproducibility of the wetted area the applied force was constantly measured and readjusted using a small force sensor (KN 245). All electrochemical experiments were carried out using a CompactStat Potentiostat (IviumTechnologies, The Netherlands) with an integrated frequency response analyzer allowing electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements. The full impedance measurements were conducted at frequencies ranging between 10 kHz and 2 Hz. The dynamic changes of the electrical properties were studied in single frequency measurements; the impedance of the circuit was detected at 1 kHz. The complete setup was controlled using an in-house developed LabView program.
Results and discussion
Optical properties
Usually the optical properties of the organic semiconductors are given either by the real and the imaginary part of the refractive index or by the real and the imaginary part of the dielectric function. These can be determined by using spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). In this technique the complex reflectance ratio is determined by (1)where rp and rs are the complex Fresnel reflection coefficients for p- and s-polarized light, respectively, and ρ is their ratio. The value ψ represents the absolute value of the ratio and Δ describes the phase difference between p- and s-polarized light. These values are obtained directly from the ellipsometric measurement. Using these values in computer modelling, the real and the imaginary part of the dielectric function (ε1, ε2) of the material can be determined, provided that the substrate is known (glass) and the thickness is obtained independently. In the case of the present study, the optical properties of P3HT were determined by SE before the photoelectrochemical characterization.
The chemical structure of the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is presented in the inset of Fig. 2a. The resulting real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function of the pristine polymer are presented in Fig. 2a. ε2 (plotted in black), which describes the absorption of the material, shows a broad peak. However, this absorption peak consists of two transitions which were both modelled as Lorentzian-type oscillators. The main peak has a maximum at 2.3 eV while a smaller one can be identified in the shoulder observable at 2.1 eV. The main peak is assigned to the intramolecular absorption of the P3HT, while the smaller peak with maximum at 2.1 eV is assigned to transitions between stacked P3HT molecules in the layer. According to these results, for further photoelectrochemical measurements a laser with a wavelength of 532 nm (2.33 eV) was therefore used to probe the photovoltaic behaviour of P3HT.
 Fig. 2  The ellipsometric characterization of the optical properties of the P3HT (structure in the inset). The real part of dielectric function is plotted in red and the imaginary part in black. The dashed line shows the position of the excitation wavelength of the laser used in the photoelectrochemical experiments. In (a) the dielectric function (ε1, ε2) of the undoped P3HT is shown, in (b) the dielectric function (ε1, ε2) of the doped P3HT. 
The imaginary part of the dielectric function is Kramers Kronig consistent with the shape of the real part of the dielectric function (plotted in red). Similar to ε2, the plot of the real part of the dielectric function indicates two transitions. The existence of the two oscillators can be explained by the formation of an extended conjugated length due to the semi-crystalline morphology. At high energies above the resonance energy, the real part of the dielectric function shows no additional resonant frequencies, approaching the value of 3 at the highest energy. The absorption spectrum of a polymer is strongly dependent on its electronic structure which can be easily modified by doping. Additionally, since all doping methods produce the same features in the optical absorption spectra, the ellipsometric characterization of the chemical doping using iodine on P3HT was performed. The resulting real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function in this case are plotted in Fig. 2b. After iodine doping the maximum of the main peak observed in the ε2 plot decreases. At the same time a new peak with a maximum at 1.6 eV appears. This new absorption can be attributed to the formation of energetic levels in the band gap. Furthermore, after doping, the value of the real part of the dielectric function shows a decrease of the main oscillator strength as indicated by the decreased value of ε1. At the same time the appearance of a new oscillator at lower energies attributed to the newly formed energetic levels in the band gap, as compared to the undoped material, can be observed. This behaviour is consistent with the sum rule for the dielectric function.31,32 For higher energies (>3 eV), the behaviour of the dielectric function is rather independent of the doping.
The effect of the illumination on the P3HT covered WE in contact with both pure electrolyte and an electrolyte containing ferrocene is sequentially presented in Fig. 3. In the part (a) of Fig. 3 the results obtained from contacting the WE with the pure electrolyte (0.1 M TBAPF6 in PC) are shown. After contacting the surface, the current transients corresponding to an applied potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl were measured under alternating dark and illumination conditions. According to previous studies, at this potential no electrochemical process occurs.27 All changes detected during this experiment result from the interaction between the 532 nm laser radiation and the WE. As mentioned before, the chosen wavelength fits to the maximum absorption of the P3HT as evidenced by the ellipsometric study (Fig. 2). At first, the PE-SDCM was kept for 10 s in the dark and a background current (dark current) density of approximately 200 nA cm−2 was measured. After this period the shutter was opened allowing the laser radiation to illuminate the addressed surface also for 10 s. This sequence of 10 s current density measurements in dark followed by measurements under illumination conditions was repeated for a total time of 90 s.
 Fig. 3  Current transients measured in the dark and during illumination with the laser light. The results of the measurement were done in the presence of (a) the pure 0.1 M TBAPF6 in PC and (b) a 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple dissolved together with a 0.1 M TBAPF6 electrolyte in PC. 
During the first illumination period a strong current density peak reaching −20 μA cm−2 is noticeable immediately after opening the shutter. This negative peak decays rapidly during the first second under illumination conditions and later on, the current density stabilizes at a value of −4.5 μA cm−2 at the end of the predefined time period. This behaviour can be attributed to a photo-activated oxidation (charging) effect. In this particular case, the well-known irreversible behaviour of the chemical doping, observed e.g. in P3HT films illuminated in air (in the presence of oxygen), is not present anymore due to the controlled applied potential. After illumination of the P3HT, a transition from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (or π → π* transition) occurs. The absorption of light leads to the formation of an exciton which splits into elementary mobile charges (electrons and holes) at the polymer/electrolyte interface. Ideally, the holes should be transported through the P3HT layer to the ITO electrode, while the electrons should be finally transported to the CE using the electrolyte path via ionic transfer. In the real system, however, some of the charges present at the P3HT/electrolyte interface are localized by electrolyte anion (PF6−) attachment creating a doped form of polythiophene (P3HT+PF6−). This doped polythiophene interfacial layer should therefore have a much higher conductivity as compared to the P3HT film. At the same time, after doping, new energetic states are created in the bandgap leading to its decrease in photoconductivity. This effect was already presented in Fig. 2b where after doping, the main absorption peak decreases and a new absorption peak appears at lower energies.
As soon as the first illumination period was finished, the shutter was closed and the current transient was measured in the dark. As can be noticed from Fig. 3a within the first second of the measurement, a strong increase in the positive current density was recorded. This can be attributed to a de-doping process triggered by the discharging of the polymer/electrolyte interface. The absolute height of the de-doping current density peak is much smaller as compared to the doping peak. Afterwards, a strong decrease in the current density is observable down to the background value. Further alternating measurements in the dark and under illumination reveal the same behaviour as described above, suggesting a good reproducibility and stability of the photovoltaic effect evidenced here.
Similar measurements were performed using the second droplet cell filled with an electrolyte containing 5.4 mM ferrocene. These results are presented in Fig. 3b. As in the case of using the pure electrolyte, the current transient was at first measured in the dark for 10 s. The background level of the current density was slightly higher as compared to the pure electrolyte case, a stabile value of 600 nA cm−2 being identified. This increase of the dark current density can be due to the different formulation of the electrolyte which in this case is expected to have a slightly higher conductivity and reactivity. After opening the shutter during the first illumination period, the measured photocurrent shows a strong negative peak. The value of the photocurrent density peak was −24 μA cm−2 and rapidly reaches −11 μA cm−2 where it stabilizes. Similar to the case of a pure electrolyte, the strong change in the current flow during laser irradiation is due to the P3HT excitation and charge separation at the polymer/electrolyte interface. Interestingly, the value of the photocurrent density plateau is tripled as compared to the experiment where a pure electrolyte was used. This increase can be explained by a slightly modified charge transport. The presence of the redox couple Fc/Fc+ in the electrolyte solution will modify its redox energetic level. Holding the applied potential at a constant value (0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) will result in an alignment between the ITO Fermi level and the new redox level of the electrolyte which increases the bending of the P3HT HOMO–LUMO levels improving the charge transfer.
As soon as the first illumination period was finished, the next dark period was triggered by closing the shutter. The resulting current density shows from the beginning a strong positive peak with a maximum at 16 μA cm−2. Similar to the previous experiment, this peak can be attributed to a discharge of the P3HT/electrolyte interface taking place in the first second of the measurement. As compared to the experiment with a pure electrolyte, it is found that the addition of ferrocene results in a more comprehensive charging process. This is suggested by the current density peak heights measured within the first second during illumination and in the dark, which are very similar. This is in contrast to the case when a pure electrolyte was used, where the difference between the peak heights is substantially larger (Fig. 3a). This effect of reversibility when the cell, containing an electrolyte with dissolved ferrocene, was used is reproducible for all measured light–dark cycles up to 90 s.
The values of the current density plateaus measured under illumination and dark conditions in each cycle (n) using the pure electrolyte are presented in Fig. 4a. Each time during illumination within the time frame of each cycle, the current density settles in a plateau level oscillating between −3 and −4 μA cm−2. Within all four cycles, the photocurrent is reproducible suggesting a good stability of the polymer in contact with the pure electrolyte. When the shutter is closed and the dark conditions are established, the plateau values of the current densities increase, slightly oscillating in the range of 0.2–0.4 μA cm−2. These values are comparable to the initial current measured before the first cycle describing the electrochemical dark current. The difference between the photocurrent and the dark current plateaus is directly related to the photoinduced charge formation during radiation absorption. A similar characterization of the P3HT/electrolyte system was performed using the ferrocene containing electrolyte and the results are presented in Fig. 4b. Under illumination, the photocurrent density plateaus observed in each cycle show values ranging between 9.5 and 11 μA cm−2. These values are approximately three times higher than those obtained using the pure electrolyte. This effect is due to the presence of the Fc/Fc+ redox couple which modifies the flat band potential of the system, as previously discussed.
 Fig. 4  The measured short circuit current from current transients measured in the dark and during illumination with the laser light for (a) a pure electrolyte and (b) an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple. 
In order to study the effect of charging–discharging of the system under illumination and in the dark in more detail, the varying charge in both processes was calculated from each transient by integrating the current densities presented in Fig. 3. For the transients measured under illumination, each negative current density peak was integrated using as a reference line the photocurrent plateau, while for the positive current density peaks obtained after actuating the shutter, the integration reference line used was defined by the dark current level. All four charging–discharging pairs of peaks observable in Fig. 3 for both electrolytes/cells were analyzed in this manner, and the obtained surface normalized charge was used for further discussions.
The results obtained when using a pure electrolyte are presented in Fig. 5a. It is seen that under illumination the amount of normalized charge taking part in the photoelectrochemical process is for the first cycle approximately 50 μC cm−2, while the first dark measurement shows only 0.45 μC cm−2. Responsible for this difference is the de-doping process. Starting with the second cycle, the situation changes and the charge balance becomes reproducible. The charge density levels for the doping process under irradiation conditions settle to a lower value of 20 μC cm−2 while the de-doping process is defined by a slightly increased charge consumption of approximately 0.8 μC cm−2 as compared to the first cycle. Therefore, the use of a pure electrolyte in the PE-SDCM resulted in an almost 25 times stronger charging process as compared to the discharging in the dark. This leads to an accumulation of PF6− doped P3HT+ at the polymer/electrolyte interface decreasing the effective absorbance of the WE. The reason can be found in Fig. 2b where the dielectric function of the chemically doped P3HT shows a decreased absorption peak as compared to the undoped polymer.
 Fig. 5  The calculated charge density measured from current transients measured in the dark (black square) and under illumination (red circle) with the laser light for (a) a pure electrolyte and (b) an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple. 
Similar evaluations were conducted for the results obtained using the electrolyte containing 5.4 mM ferrocene. The calculated charge densities measured under illumination and in the dark are presented in Fig. 5b. In this case, the amount of charges accumulated during charging and released during discharging is almost identical in each cycle. This equilibrated charge balance provides better system stability. Furthermore, only small variations of the charge densities (between 3 and 10 μC cm−2) were found between different cycles. Comparing the behaviour of the charge–discharge processes for both electrolytes used, it is found that the P3HT in contact with the pure electrolyte has a very unbalanced charge transport, the differential charge density value being almost one order of magnitude higher in the absence of ferrocene. This is most likely caused by an accentuated charge accumulation at the interface due to a lower electrolyte conductivity resulting in the formation of a stable salt upon local neutralization by PF6− ions. The situation is different in the case of the ferrocene containing electrolyte where the electrochemical reduction of Fc+ to the neutral Fc takes part actively in the charging–discharging processes.
The stability of the photocurrents evidenced during the on/off illumination cycling presented so far was furthermore studied using long term illuminations. In this experiment the sample was kept under constant illumination for 600 s while continuously recording the photocurrents. For both cells/electrolytes used, new spots were addressed on the surface of the WE for this purpose. As done previously, both PE-SDCMs were first used to measure the dark current flowing through the cell for 10 s. In order to check the dark current reproducibility after the 600 s of radiation exposure, the shutter was closed and the current densities in the dark were again recorded. The resulting current transients are presented in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  The current transients measured within 600 s during illumination of the P3HT layer with the laser light in contact with a pure electrolyte (black line) and an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple (red line). 
When the glass/ITO/P3HT electrode is in contact with the pure electrolyte (black line), after opening the shutter a negative peak with a minimum at −3 μA cm−2 is observed. Afterwards, the initial negative current decreases to −1.8 μA cm−2 and later on changes slowly until a new minimum of −2.8 μA cm−2 is reached after 20 s of illumination (30 s from beginning of the experiment). As soon as the second current density minimum is elapsed, the negative current density increases to −1 μA cm−2 during the next 130 s (160 s from beginning the experiment) and remains constant until the end of the measurement. A similar trend can be noticed for the ferrocene containing electrolyte (red line) also presented in Fig. 6. After opening the shutter, a much stronger negative peak with a minimum at −37 μA cm−2 was recorded, and the negative current density decreases within the first 10 s down to −10 μA cm−2. Also in this case, a second negative peak of the current density with a minimum at −15 μA cm−2 is recorded at 60 s after opening the shutter (70 s since the experiment started). The decrease toward a stable negative photocurrent level is much slower when using ferrocene. Approximately 300 s are necessary for establishing a negative photocurrent plateau level at −4 μA cm−2, which remains constant until the end of the radiation exposure.
The photocurrent densities measured in the photoelectrochemical cell are influenced by the cell geometry and material properties. Thus a longer radiation exposure will describe the cell/material stability. When comparing the behaviour of the glass/ITO/P3HT working electrode contacted with both types of electrolyte solutions (without and with ferrocene), very similar shapes of the current density transients can be noticed. The first sharp negative peak of the current density present for both investigated electrolytes (Fig. 6) can be attributed to charging of the P3HT/electrolyte interface. This occurs after photoexcitation of the P3HT layer and the same process was also observed during the cyclic measurements presented in Fig. 3. The different peak current density values can be correlated with the different electrolyte conductivities. As soon as the interface charging process is completed, a second negative current peak is present for both types of electrolyte. The second peak measured using a pure electrolyte becomes visible faster than the one measured using an electrolyte containing the redox couple. Since the photocurrent depends on both, light absorption and electrical conductivity of the P3HT film, any change in the current value could in principle be attributed to a modification of both parameters. Changes due to only one parameter are not excluded, but are unlikely. Their change is caused by the photo-oxidation of the sample leading to a decrease in the optical absorption (see Fig. 2) and a strong increase in the electrical conductivity. Even though the photodoping of the P3HT film triggers a decrease of the amount of photogenerated charges due to the absorption decrease, the charge transport is at the same time much improved due to higher film conductivity. Both effects are competing and a dominance of the increased conductivity is responsible for the second photocurrent peak observed in Fig. 6. Later on, equilibrium is attained which is described by the presence of the photocurrent plateaus.
In the case of the pure electrolyte, the position of the second peak is reached faster than in the case of the electrolyte containing the redox couple. This is again due to a difference in the electrical conductivity, this time of the electrolyte. An increase in the conductivity of the electrolyte containing the redox couple allows an easier charge transport through the system (even for a decreased amount of carriers), which results in a longer time necessary for attaining the equilibrium. The decay of the photocurrent toward the plateaus is due to the strong decrease of the amount of photogenerated charges, a point being reached where no photooxidation can occur anymore.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was used for characterization of the electrical properties of P3HT in both analyzed cases with pure and ferrocene containing electrolytes. All measurements were performed at the same applied potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, allowing the detection of changes in the electrochemical system due to the interaction with radiation. During the EIS investigations a single measurement spot was addressed by the PE-SDCMs for each electrolyte in order to directly compare the effect of the doping–de-doping process on the impedance when the illumination conditions change.
The resulting Bode plots of the full impedance spectra obtained from the P3HT are presented in Fig. 7 for the case of using the pure electrolyte (Fig. 7a) and the electrolyte containing the redox couple (Fig. 7b). Fig. 7 shows two different situations which were investigated using both electrolytes/cells. The impedance behaviour was analyzed in the absence of light (plotted in black) and upon reaching the equilibrium photocurrent after 600 s of illumination (plotted in blue). The frequency dependent impedance is presented in the upper part of Fig. 7, while the corresponding phase shift is plotted in the lower part. A substantial difference between the spectra measured under the dark and under illumination conditions can be observed for both electrolytes. If at high frequencies the impedances have almost the same value (around 10 kΩ), the low frequency impedances decrease upon irradiation with almost one order of magnitude, affecting in turn the slope of the curves. The reason for this behaviour is connected to the increase of the charge density due to the charge photogeneration under illumination conditions. The frequency dependent phase analysis shows a phase shift exceeding −80° (−85° when ferrocene is used) when the measurements are performed in dark. A phase shift to −60° is observed after the equilibrium is reached at 600 s of light exposure.
 Fig. 7  The results of the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy study measured for P3HT in contact with a pure electrolyte (a) and an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple (b) in the dark (black spots) and after 600 s (blue spots). Data obtained from fitting of the experimental data are presented as solid lines. 
In order to quantify the electrical circuit elements responsible for the impedance behaviour, all measured impedance spectra were fitted using an equivalent model presented in the inset of Fig. 7b. The presence of the redox couple in the electrolyte did not affect the impedance spectra significantly, small differences between the results shown in Fig. 7a and b being observed only upon fitting. The equivalent model chosen here was already successfully applied in previous studies.27,28 In the model REL characterizes the electrolyte. The interface between the P3HT and the electrolyte is described by the resistance (R1) connected in parallel with a constant phase element (CPE1) describing the interface capacitance relevant during the charging process. In this way, the diffuse double layer which forms at the contact between the polymer surface and the electrolyte due to dipole alignment of adsorbed electrolyte molecules is described. Additionally, the changes in the double layer which occur upon charge generation after laser illumination are also considered by the model. The successful use of this simplified model can suggest that even though certain electrolyte penetration occurs inside the polymer, the electrolyte is confined at the interface. The P3HT film is described by a resistance (R2) connected in parallel to a second constant phase element (CPE2). This part of the equivalent circuit describes all changes in the P3HT layer as a function of illumination (Table 1).
Table 1 Values of the components obtained from fitting the experimentally obtained EIS spectra




Sample

R
1/Ω

C
1A/F cm−2

R
2/Ω

C
2A/F cm−2




0.1 M TBAPF6
Dark
148310
3.26 × 10−6
8.27 × 108
8.18 × 10−7


After 600 s illumination
62511
7.06 × 10−8
1.49 × 107
1.28 × 10−5






0.1 M TBAPF6 + 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+
Dark
119070
1.79 × 10−5
2.12 × 109
9.68 × 10−7


After 600 s illumination
61521
7.07 × 10−8
1.04 × 107
1.44 × 10−5




The interface changes are also reflected in the behaviour of the area normalized capacitance. As compared to the measurements in the dark, the interface capacitance (C1A) decreased by two orders of magnitude reaching 70 nF cm−2 after 600 s of illumination. This decrease can be related to a change in the effective dielectric constant (previously observed in Fig. 2) triggered by the photodoping process reaching stationary conditions as indicated by the presence of the photocurrent plateaus (Fig. 3). In the case of a P3HT layer, after illumination the resistance of the film drops by almost two orders of magnitude while the film capacitance increases with more than one order of magnitude. This behaviour is due to an increased charge density in the bulk of the P3HT caused by the photoexcitation (Table 1).
When using the electrolyte containing the redox couple, the values of the circuit elements obtained from the EIS measurements upon fitting closely follow the same trend as described for the pure electrolyte. Overall, small differences between the obtained values can be observed. The stronger difference was found in the case of the measurements in the dark, where the presence of the ferrocene decreased the interface resistance while slightly increasing its capacitance. This change can be explained by a different dipole formation mechanism at the P3HT/electrolyte:ferrocene interface in the presence of the Fc+ ions.
A study of the dynamic changes taking place in the P3HT/electrolyte system during the radiation exposure was performed using single frequency impedance measurements (1 kHz). This was necessary since the time used for acquiring a full impedance spectrum is larger than the time needed for reaching equilibrium conditions under irradiation. Fig. 8 shows the impedance transient of this experiment. Part (a) of Fig. 8 shows the modulus of the 1 kHz impedance while part (b) presents the corresponding phase shift of electrolytes with or without ferrocene. After a short time in the dark (30 s), the shutter was opened allowing a constant radiation exposure of the P3HT up to 600 s while continuously measuring the impedance. For both electrolytes the dark impedance shows an almost constant level, a difference of approximately 200 kΩ observable in Fig. 8a being consistent with the previously shown full impedance spectra in Fig. 7. The beginning of the irradiation exposure coincides with an impedance drop for both electrolytes. During the previously observed (see Fig. 6) time necessary for reaching the photocurrent plateau when using the pure electrolyte (100 s) the impedance shows a small peak which later on decays toward a value of approximately 175 kΩ. This slow decay of the impedance suggests a time dependent photodegradation of the system containing a pure electrolyte. The presence of the redox couple modifies the overall behaviour of the impedance. During the longer system equilibration time (300 s) needed in this case (see Fig. 6), oscillations of the impedance can be observed defining a transitional regime towards the stable photocurrent plateau. The time evolution of the impedance is more constant when the redox couple is present since it triggers a faster discharging of the film, promoting a higher stability of the system.
 Fig. 8  The time evolution of the impedance modulus (a) and phase shift (b) measured at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz. 
The time evolution of the associated phase shifts is similar to the impedance behaviour. After the illumination start-up the phase shifts of both systems increase to values close to −40°. The equilibration times needed for each electrolyte can be also determined under these experimental conditions. Using the pure electrolyte, after 100 s the phase appears to be almost stable, slightly increasing in time. Strong phase oscillations were detected due to the presence of ferrocene. These can be attributed to the dynamic processes taking place during the equilibration time of 300 s. After this time, the phase fluctuations are diminished and the further evolution follows the same pattern as the phase corresponding to the pure electrolyte. A constant difference in time between both phases is also observed and it can be correlated with the constant difference between the photocurrent plateaus discussed before (Fig. 6).
Conclusions
Photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscopy was used for the photovoltaic characterization of a P3HT thin film. The photocurrent behaviour was studied as a function of the electrolyte composition. The dark/illumination sequential measurement revealed, for a pure electrolyte, a decay in the photocurrent due to the unbalanced photocharging–discharging process. This effect was minimized after addition of the 5.4 mM redox couple ferrocene/ferrocenium. During a long term stability measurement it was found also that the electrolyte containing the redox couple shows a much higher and stabile photocurrent due to the higher conductivity and reactivity. The electrical characterization was performed using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The resulting curves were fitted using an equivalent circuit and the information of the film resistance measured in the dark and after 600 s of illumination was obtained. It was found that illumination produced a decrease by one order of magnitude of the film resistance. Moreover, it was found that the electrolyte composition does not influence the film resistance after 600 s of illumination. Finally, the time evolution of the impedance modulus measured at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz was performed showing that the electrolyte strongly influence the degradation time of the P3HT thin layer.
Acknowledgements
The financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth and the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development is gratefully acknowledged (Christian Doppler Laboratory for combinatorial oxide chemistry). We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Ministry for Austrian Funds for Advancement of Science (FWF) with the Wittgenstein Prize (Z 222-N19 Solare Energieumwandlung).
Notes and references
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guenes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, D. Q. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185 RSC .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. M. Egbe, B. Carbonnier, E. Birckner and U. W. Grummt, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryachev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 779 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, T. M. Khan, J.-Ch. Liu, j. Hsu, J. W. Shim, A. Dindar, J. P. Youngblood, R. J. Moon and B. Kippelen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1536 CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C.-C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180 CrossRef CAS .
R. Service, Science, 2011, 332(6027), 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
A. W. Hassel and M. M. Lohrengel, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 43, 3327 CrossRef .
A. I. Mardare and A. W. Hassel, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80, 046106 CrossRef PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, A. P. Yadav, A. D. Wieck, M. Stratmann and A. W. Hassel, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2008, 9, 035009 CrossRef .
A. I. Mardare, A. Ludwig, A. Savan, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, A. Savan, A. Ludwig, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Corros. Sci., 2009, 51, 1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, A. Savan, A. Ludwig, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, A. Ludwig, A. Savan, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, S. Borodin, A. D. Wieck, M. Rohwerder and A. W. Hassel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3105–3109 CAS .
A. I. Mardare, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1270 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Woldemedhin, D. Raabe and A. W. Hassel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1246 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Mardare, A. D. Wieck and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Mardare, M. Kaltenbrunner, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Bauer and A. W. Hassel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209, 813 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kollender, A. I. Mardare and A. W. Hassel, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gasiorowski, A. I. Mardare, N. S. Sariciftci and A. W. Hassel, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 691, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gasiorowski, A. I. Mardare, N. S. Sariciftci and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lohrengel, A. Moehring and M. Pilaski, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 367, 334 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hassel, K. Fushimi and M. Seo, Electrochem. Commun., 1999, 1, 180 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Y. Yu, M. Cardona, Fundamentals of semiconductors. Physics and Materials properties, Springer, 4th edn,  2010, p. 335 Search PubMed .
J. Gasiorowski, R. Menon, K. Hingerl, M. Dachev and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 513, 211 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the photoelectrochemical scanning droplet cell microscope (PE-SDCM).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  The ellipsometric characterization of the optical properties of the P3HT (structure in the inset). The real part of dielectric function is plotted in red and the imaginary part in black. The dashed line shows the position of the excitation wavelength of the laser used in the photoelectrochemical experiments. In (a) the dielectric function (ε1, ε2) of the undoped P3HT is shown, in (b) the dielectric function (ε1, ε2) of the doped P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current transients measured in the dark and during illumination with the laser light. The results of the measurement were done in the presence of (a) the pure 0.1 M TBAPF6 in PC and (b) a 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple dissolved together with a 0.1 M TBAPF6 electrolyte in PC.	 

 	Fig. 4  The measured short circuit current from current transients measured in the dark and during illumination with the laser light for (a) a pure electrolyte and (b) an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple.	 

 	Fig. 5  The calculated charge density measured from current transients measured in the dark (black square) and under illumination (red circle) with the laser light for (a) a pure electrolyte and (b) an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple.	 

 	Fig. 6  The current transients measured within 600 s during illumination of the P3HT layer with the laser light in contact with a pure electrolyte (black line) and an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple (red line).	 

 	Fig. 7  The results of the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy study measured for P3HT in contact with a pure electrolyte (a) and an electrolyte with a dissolved 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+ redox couple (b) in the dark (black spots) and after 600 s (blue spots). Data obtained from fitting of the experimental data are presented as solid lines.	 

0.1 M TBAPF6	Dark	148310	3.26 × 10−6	8.27 × 108	8.18 × 10−7
After 600 s illumination	62511	7.06 × 10−8	1.49 × 107	1.28 × 10−5


0.1 M TBAPF6 + 5.4 mM Fc/Fc+	Dark	119070	1.79 × 10−5	2.12 × 109	9.68 × 10−7
After 600 s illumination	61521	7.07 × 10−8	1.04 × 107	1.44 × 10−5

 	Fig. 8  The time evolution of the impedance modulus (a) and phase shift (b) measured at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
