 Dye -sensitized solar cells on glass paper: TCO-free highly bendable dye -sensitized solar cells inspired by the traditional Korean door structure   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03096A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03096A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6071-6075Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Dye-sensitized solar cells on glass paper: TCO-free highly bendable dye-sensitized solar cells inspired by the traditional Korean door structure†

        
          
            Seung I. 
            Cha
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yuhyun 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyu Hyeon 
            Hwang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yun-Ji 
            Shin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seon Hee 
            Seo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dong Yoon 
            Lee
          
        
      
Advanced Materials & Application Research Division, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute, 70 Boolmosangil, Changwon 641-120, Korea. E-mail: sicha@keri.re.kr;  Fax: +82-55-280-1590;   Tel: +82-55-280-1649
Received 
      7th November 2011
    , Accepted 10th January 2012First published on 16th January 2012Abstract
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are considered a suitable photovoltaic system for urban applications and highly bendable DSSCs can be expanded to applications such as dispensable DSSCs for commercial advertising and small portable power sources. However, although many reports have shown flexible or highly bendable photoelectrodes using TCO-coated polymeric substrates or metal meshes, until now, few have shown highly bendable DSSCs using electrodes because the flexibility of a single electrode is not a critical issue for highly bendable DSSCs. Here, we report a new DSSC design, inspired by the traditional Korean door structure consisting of a paper-bonded wooden frame, and a process for TCO-free highly bendable DSSCs utilizing glass paper and metal mesh. In the new DSSC design, constituents such as stainless steel mesh and mesoporous TiO2 loaded with a Ru-complex dye were bonded on the glass paper, which was sputter-coated with Pt on one side and filled with electrolyte. The glass-paper-based flexible DSSCs showed 2% energy-conversion efficiency, which was maintained under bending until the radius of curvature reached 2 cm. The new glass-paper-based flexible DSSCs may have potential applications as low-cost highly bendable solar cells to overcome the limitations of conventional sandwich-type DSSCs.

Broader context
A new dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) design, modeled on traditional Korean door structures and utilizing porous glass paper, suitable for bendable DSSCs is proposed. In the new design, all device components, including the photoelectrode, conductive metal mesh, and counter electrodes, were bonded to the glass paper, which was filled with electrolyte. The new design has several advantages over conventional sandwich-type structures. One is DSSCs can be fabricated with such flexibility that they can be rolled on pencils and twisted. Also, energy-conversion efficiency is maintained at over 90% of that of flat condition even while bending to a 2 cm radius of curvature. In addition, the bendable DSSCs developed using the new cell design are TCO free. TCO is very expensive and accounts for a large portion of DSSC production cost. Additionally, it is very fragile during deformation. Therefore, a TCO-free structure is an important advantage of the design. The new design affords additional processing options. In particular, heat treatment and deformation during processing are possible. Heat treatment results in a more effective working electrode, eliminating the need for sinter-free electrodes in flexible DSSCs. Deformation enables roll-to-roll processing, and in practice, we have used hot roll pressing for the cladding process.


Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted attention due to their low production cost and relatively high energy-conversion efficiency even under weak illumination. Owing to these advantages, DSSCs are considered a suitable photovoltaic system for urban applications, including building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) and electronics-integrated photovoltaics (EIPV).1–3 Flexible DSSCs can be attached to buildings or integrated into electronics for mechanical reliability and light-weight structures/devices.4–9 Additionally, highly bendable DSSCs can be expanded to applications such as dispensable DSSCs for commercial advertising and small portable power sources.
Generally, DSSCs have a sandwich-type structure consisting of two transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-coated substrates that face each other and an inserted spacer or gasket to provide space for electrolyte filling between the electrodes and to prevent electrical shorts.1–9 The structure is produced as follows. A photoelectrode layer containing mesoporous TiO2 and the loaded dye is deposited onto one transparent conductive substrate. An electrochemical catalytic counter electrode, such as Pt, is deposited on the other conductive substrate. The two separately prepared electrodes are assembled by inserting a spacer and gasket into the sandwich-type structure and filling the space between the two electrodes with an electrolyte. The sandwich-type structure has been the dominant design for DSSCs, and there are few alternatives.10 Thus, flexible DSSCs have been prepared according to the aforementioned structure and processing sequence but using a different substrate. For flexible DSSCs, polymeric films, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) coated with TCO, have been used as substrates instead of glass.4–9 Therefore, heat treatment was limited, and sinter-free or low-temperature processing of mesoporous TiO2 photoelectrodes on TCO-coated polymeric substrates was considered a breakthrough for flexible DSSCs. However, the TCO layer on a plastic substrate is so fragile that its electrical conductivity easily vanishes under a small amount of strain or deformation.11 Additionally, TCO-coated substrates, including glass- or polymer-based substrates, are very expensive and account for a large portion of the production cost of DSSCs. Therefore, several approaches have been introduced to replace TCO films, including metal-based meshes and carbon-based transparent conductive films.12–18 In particular, metal-based meshes are highly bendable and electrically conductive and can be heat treated during electrode fabrication. However, although many reports have shown flexible or highly bendable photoelectrodes using TCO-coated polymeric substrates or metal meshes, until now, few have shown highly bendable DSSCs using electrodes because the flexibility of a single electrode is not a critical issue for highly bendable DSSCs. The sandwich-type cell structure is a fundamental problem for highly bendable DSSCs. It is vulnerable to electrical shorts during bending, and the strain is concentrated on the sealing gaskets or spacers during deformation. Therefore, a novel cell structure and preparation process are required to obtain highly bendable DSSCs. Here, we report a new DSSC design, inspired by the traditional Korean door structure consisting of a paper-bonded wooden frame, and a process for TCO-free highly bendable DSSCs utilizing glass paper and metal mesh.
The conventional sandwich-type DSSC structure consists of two electrodes deposited on TCO-coated transparent substrates bonded by a gasket to provide space between the electrodes for electrolyte filling and to prevent electrical shorts (Fig. 1(a)). This structure is disadvantageous because the strain applied on the two electrodes during bending is in opposite directions, i.e., one substrate is under compressive strain and the other is under tensile strain. Therefore, strain is concentrated on the gasket, and bending capacity is limited because the substrates detach from each other at the gasket. To avoid this problem, we propose a new DSSC structure utilizing glass paper in which a surface-treated stainless steel mesh is attached to one side of the glass paper, and Pt is deposited on the other side, forming the cell core (Fig. 1(b)). Additionally, a mesoporous TiO2 photoelectrode loaded with a Ru-complex dye (di-tetrabutylammoniumcis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II), N719) is deposited on the stainless steel mesh. This structure was patterned after by the traditional Korean door structure consisting of a wooden frame and bonded paper, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Because all components were bonded on the neutral plane of the highly flexible glass paper core, strain applied on the components was reduced, and highly flexible DSSCs were prepared. In the new DSSC structure, the glass paper plays several important roles. It acts as a structural core support, similar to the substrate in the sandwich structure, where the components are bonded. At the same time, the pores in the glass paper are filled with electrolyte, preventing electrical shorts during operation and deformation. Compared with the sandwich-type DSSC, in which only one side of the substrate is used, and two substrates and spacing are required, a single sheet of glass paper is sufficient for the new DSSC structure because both sides are used for the electrode, and the interior is filled with electrolyte. A Pt thin film coated on one side of the glass paper acts as an electrochemical catalyst and conductor, forming the counter electrode. Surface-treated metal mesh bonded on the other side of the glass paper collects electrons and forms electrical connections with an external circuit. The photoelectrode, consisting of a mesoporous TiO2 layer and the loaded dye, is deposited on the metal mesh, providing excited electrons due to incident photons.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) conventional sandwich-structured dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and (b) new DSSC design developed in this study. The cross-sectional view of the new dye-sensitized solar cell design is shown in the circle. (c) Picture of traditional Korean doors. 
The fabrication process for DSSCs with the new structure (Fig. 1(b)) is different from that for conventional sandwich-type DSSCs. As a first step, the constituent materials, glass paper, and stainless steel mesh, were surface treated as shown in Fig. 2(a). A Pt thin film of 100 nm thickness was sputter-coated on one side of the glass paper to form an electrocatalytic and conductive layer. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the surface of each glass paper fiber was coated by the Pt thin film. Due to the interconnection of the glass fibers, the Pt-coated side of the glass paper was electrically conductive (gray object in Fig. 2(a)). The stainless steel mesh was surface treated with Ti and TiO2 by Ti sputtering on both sides to form a 300 nm thick layer, followed by heat treatment at 480 °C for 1 h in air to oxidize the Ti thin film, prevent corrosion of the metal mesh by the acidic electrolyte, and promote adhesion between the mesoporous TiO2 photoelectrode and the glass paper.18 Additionally, the oxide layer was expected to inhibit electron recombination during operation (see ESI† for X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of surface-treated stainless steel mesh). The stainless steel mesh and glass paper were bonded by a double layer of TiO2 nanoparticles to form the cell core. The side of the glass paper opposite to the Pt thin film was coated with 500 nm TiO2 particles so that the surface of the glass paper served as the platen with pores for electrolyte filling (Fig. 2(c)). The stainless steel mesh and coated glass paper were bonded using a 20 nm TiO2 nanoparticle paste, followed by heat treatment at 480 °C for 1 h in air. The bonding was sufficient to withstand bending and twisting without detachment, as shown in Fig. 2(d). The bonding likely resulted from the sintering of TiO2 nanoparticles on the TiO2 surface layer of the stainless steel mesh and the TiO2-coated surface of the glass paper, as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f). It should be emphasized that the adhesive layer between the stainless steel mesh and the glass paper must be porous to allow electrolyte filling in the photoelectrode, which is coated on the bonded surface of the glass paper burying the stainless steel mesh, so that the ions can move from the photoelectrode to the counter electrode. This glass-paper-based cell core offers distinct advantages. All constituents, including the glass paper, stainless steel mesh, and porous TiO2 adhesive, can be heat treated in the subsequent process, which is not possible in flexible DSSCs with polymer-based substrates. Additionally, the glass-paper cell core was allowed to be deformed freely, i.e., bend and twist, during preparation and subsequent processes, which implies that a roll-to-roll process is possible.
 Fig. 2  (a) Picture of glass paper (upper) and stainless steel mesh (lower) after surface treatment. In the picture of the glass paper, one side is Pt coated and the other side is uncoated. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs of the Pt-coated side of the glass paper. (c) SEM micrograph of the TiO2 particle-coated surface of the glass paper. (d) Pictures of the stainless steel mesh bonded to glass paper; the inset shows that it was able to be bent and deformed easily. (e) Planar view and (f) cross-sectional view of the bonded interface between the surface-treated stainless steel mesh and TiO2 nanoparticle-coated glass paper. 
The mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited as a photoelectrode on the cell core consisting of the stainless steel mesh bonded to the glass paper using doctor blading followed by sintering, which is a conventional paste-based process. Even using conventional doctor blading, the paste can be deposited on the cell core, burying the stainless steel mesh due to the supportive glass paper (Fig. 3(a)). The thickness of the TiO2 layer was increased by repeating the deposition process, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The DSSC cell structure was completed by filling the glass paper with electrolyte by loading the Ru-complex dye, N719, in the mesoporous TiO2 layer, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The cell core was highly flexible and was able to be twisted and rolled without damage, as shown in Fig. 3(d). Therefore, polymer sheaths were used to cover the cell by hot roll pressing to protect the cell and prevent solvent evaporation from the glass paper, as shown in Fig. 3(e). In this study, we used 0.1 mm thick laminated polymer film consisting of PET, polyethylene (PE), and ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA), which is used commercially as pouch film for papers.
 Fig. 3  
          SEM micrographs of mesoporous TiO2 layers deposited using doctor blading of the paste (a) two times and (b) three times, followed by heat treatment. (c) Picture of glass-paper-based DSSCs after photoelectrode deposition. (d) Bending of the DSSCs by twisting and rolling around a small glass bottle. (e) Picture of polymer sheath cladding by commercial hot-roll pressing. 
The completed DSSC was also highly bendable and could be rolled on a pencil or twisted, as shown in Fig. 4(a). In fact, all components except the electrolyte were assembled in the center of the DSSC and were highly flexible without mechanical failure. Therefore, the DSSC cells fabricated according to the proposed design maintained their bending ability when the cladded polymer sheaths were sufficiently flexible, without failure under deformation. The energy-conversion performance of the new DSSC cell is shown in Fig. 4(b) according to the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 layer shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). When the TiO2 paste was deposited twice (Fig. 3(a)), the energy-conversion efficiency of the DSSC was 2.05% under 1.5 AM, 1 sun illumination condition (open circuit voltage of 0.7 V, fill factor of 0.72, short-circuit current of 4.1 mA cm−2). However, thickening the electrode did not increase the energy-conversion efficiency, which was 2.01% with three depositions of the TiO2 electrode (open circuit voltage of 0.68 V, fill factor of 0.76, short-circuit current of 3.9 mA cm−2). The energy-conversion efficiency of the new DSSC did not change significantly according to bending curvature and maintained 90% of that for the flat condition until the radius of curvature reached 2 cm, and dropped to 70% at 1.4 cm (Fig. 4(c) and (d)). A possible reason for the efficiency drop is a reduction in the light-receiving area due to bending. In addition, the prepared DSSCs were bent or deformed at least tens of times during electrolyte filling and polymer sheath cladding.
 Fig. 4  (a) Pictures of laminated PET film-cladded glass-paper-based DSSCs under flat, bent, and twisted conditions. I–V characteristic curves of glass-paper-based DSSCs according to (b) photoelectrode thickness and (c) bending curvature. (d) Variation in energy-conversion efficiency according to bending curvature. The energy-conversion performance was measured under a 1 sun condition, 1.5 AM illumination. 
It should be mentioned that the measured energy-conversion efficiency was not fully optimized, and we expect that the efficiency of the new DSSC design will be enhanced by further improvements. One of the components that should be improved is counter electrode. In this study, the sputtered Pt thin film is utilized for the counter electrode. However, when the DSSC was prepared with Pt nanoparticles on a F-doped SnO2 (FTO)-coated glass substrate instead of with sputtered Pt thin film on one side of the glass paper, (see S2(a)† for a detailed structure of the device structure) the energy-conversion efficiency increased to nearly 4% with the metal mesh supported photoelectrode and electrolyte filled ceramic paper. (See Fig. S2† for detailed information on this experiment and the result.) In addition, the limited pore volume of glass paper could be another factor to be improved for faster ion movements.
In summary, TCO-free highly bendable DSSCs were developed by applying a new cell design based on glass paper, inspired by traditional Korean door structures. In the new DSSC design, constituents such as stainless steel mesh and mesoporous TiO2 loaded with N719 dye were bonded on the glass paper, which was sputter-coated with Pt on one side and filled with electrolyte. The glass-paper-based flexible DSSCs showed 2% energy-conversion efficiency, which was maintained under bending until the radius of curvature reached 2 cm. The new glass-paper-based flexible DSSCs may have potential applications as low-cost highly bendable solar cells to overcome the limitations of conventional sandwich-type DSSCs.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef .
H. J. Sanith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef .
F. O. Lenzmann and J. M. Kroon, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Furuta and H. Minoura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Durr, A. Schmid, M. Obermaier, S. Rosselli, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 607 CrossRef .
S. Ito, N.-L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Szkeeruddin, P. Pechy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC .
L. Heng, X. Wang, N. Yang, J. Zhai, M. Wan and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 266 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Cha, B. K. Koo, K. H. Hwang, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6300 RSC .
S. I. Cha, K. H. Hwang, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2011, 3, 295 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fu, X. L. Zhang, R. L. Barber and U. Bach, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4270 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, J. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, P. Shen, B. Zhao, X. Feng, S. Jiang, H. Chen, H. Li and S. Tan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, V. R. Subramania and M. Misra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14028 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Huang, M. Zhong, H. Shen, Y. Wang and H. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 9020 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vijauakumar, A. Du Pasquier and D. P. Birnie, III, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2120 CrossRef .
C. S. Rustomji, C. J. Frandsen, S. Jin and M. J. Tauber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Yang and L. Lu, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 064510 CrossRef .
Y. Yoshida, S. S. Pandey, K. Uzaki, S. Hayase, M. Kono and Y. Yamaguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 093301 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03096aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
A new dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) design, modeled on traditional Korean door structures and utilizing porous glass paper, suitable for bendable DSSCs is proposed. In the new design, all device components, including the photoelectrode, conductive metal mesh, and counter electrodes, were bonded to the glass paper, which was filled with electrolyte. The new design has several advantages over conventional sandwich-type structures. One is DSSCs can be fabricated with such flexibility that they can be rolled on pencils and twisted. Also, energy-conversion efficiency is maintained at over 90% of that of flat condition even while bending to a 2 cm radius of curvature. In addition, the bendable DSSCs developed using the new cell design are TCO free. TCO is very expensive and accounts for a large portion of DSSC production cost. Additionally, it is very fragile during deformation. Therefore, a TCO-free structure is an important advantage of the design. The new design affords additional processing options. In particular, heat treatment and deformation during processing are possible. Heat treatment results in a more effective working electrode, eliminating the need for sinter-free electrodes in flexible DSSCs. Deformation enables roll-to-roll processing, and in practice, we have used hot roll pressing for the cladding process.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) conventional sandwich-structured dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and (b) new DSSC design developed in this study. The cross-sectional view of the new dye-sensitized solar cell design is shown in the circle. (c) Picture of traditional Korean doors.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Picture of glass paper (upper) and stainless steel mesh (lower) after surface treatment. In the picture of the glass paper, one side is Pt coated and the other side is uncoated. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs of the Pt-coated side of the glass paper. (c) SEM micrograph of the TiO2 particle-coated surface of the glass paper. (d) Pictures of the stainless steel mesh bonded to glass paper; the inset shows that it was able to be bent and deformed easily. (e) Planar view and (f) cross-sectional view of the bonded interface between the surface-treated stainless steel mesh and TiO2 nanoparticle-coated glass paper.	 

 	Fig. 3  
          SEM micrographs of mesoporous TiO2 layers deposited using doctor blading of the paste (a) two times and (b) three times, followed by heat treatment. (c) Picture of glass-paper-based DSSCs after photoelectrode deposition. (d) Bending of the DSSCs by twisting and rolling around a small glass bottle. (e) Picture of polymer sheath cladding by commercial hot-roll pressing.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Pictures of laminated PET film-cladded glass-paper-based DSSCs under flat, bent, and twisted conditions. I–V characteristic curves of glass-paper-based DSSCs according to (b) photoelectrode thickness and (c) bending curvature. (d) Variation in energy-conversion efficiency according to bending curvature. The energy-conversion performance was measured under a 1 sun condition, 1.5 AM illumination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03096a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
