Minding our P-block and Q-bands: paving inroads into main group corrole research to help instil broader potential   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC00105A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC00105A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4605-4641Minding our P-block and Q-bands: paving inroads into main group corrole research to help instil broader potential†

        
          
            Woohyun 
            Lee‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xuan 
            Zhan‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Jaymee 
            Palma
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jenya 
            Vestfrid
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Zeev 
            Gross
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            David G. 
            Churchill
          
          
        
      *ade
aKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Department of Chemistry, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: david.churchill.korea@gmail.com
bSchulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel. E-mail: chr10zg@technion.ac.il
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering & Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 200 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S3E5, Canada. E-mail: jukabyzia@gmail.com
dCenter for Catalytic Hydrocarbon Functionalizations, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, Republic of Korea
eKAIST Institute for Health Science and Technology (KIHST) (Therapeutic Bioengineering Section), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
Received 
      7th January 2021
    , Accepted 8th April 2021First published on 9th April 2021AbstractMain group chemistry is often considered less “dynamic” than transition metal (TM) chemistry because of predictable VSEPR-based central atom geometries, relatively slower redox switching and lack of electronic d–d transitions. However, we delineate what has been made possible with main group chemistry to give it its proper due and up-to-date treatment. The huge untapped potential regarding photophysical properties and functioning hereby spurred us to review a range of corrole reports addressing primarily photophysical trends, synthetic aspects, and important guidelines regarding substitution and inorganic principles. We also look at Ag and Au systems and also consider substitutions such as CF3, halogens, additives and also counterions. Throughout, as well as at the end of this review, we suggest various future directions; further future industrial catalytic and health science research is encouraged.
Woohyun Lee
Dr Woohyun Lee is from South Korea. He earned his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from KAIST (2016). During his undergraduate coursework, he pursued research under the supervision of Prof. David G. Churchill. He graduated with a PhD from the Department of Chemistry at KAIST under the guidance of Professor David G. Churchill in March 2021 (Integrated MS and PhD Student) publishing more than 6 scientific articles. His thesis research topics included designing new fluorescent sensors for the detection of natural small biomaterials/biomolecules such as biothiols and ROS. He has recently been hired by Samsung (2021–).
Xuan Zhan
Dr Xuan Zhan is from the PRC and graduated with a PhD from IIT Technion (Haifa Israel) in 2020 while working in the laboratory of Professor Zeev Gross. His synthetic chemistry was fruitful and he synthesized and isolated a variety of element corrole compounds. He has published more than 6 articles on corroles and closely related systems to date from his research at the Technion. He is now a postdoctoral fellow at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen) with Professor Gang Chen.
Jaymee Palma
Jaymee Palma is originally from the Philippines and graduated high school from the prestigious Korea Science Academy of KAIST. She is currently a fourth-year undergraduate student at KAIST (Daejeon, South Korea), majoring in chemistry and minoring in chemical and biomolecular engineering. She pursued both individual study and undergraduate research projects in the Molecular Logic Gate Laboratory of Professor David G. Churchill and is currently performing graduation research in the Molecular Biophysics Laboratory supervised by Professor Jin Young Kang. Jaymee is currently the Editor In Chief of The KAIST Herald, the official English newspaper of KAIST.
Jenya Vestfrid
Dr Jenya Vestfrid earned her PhD from IIT Technion in the laboratory of Professor Zeev Gross in 2016 investigating corroles with unique photophysical properties. She was awarded the Lyon Sachs Postdoctoral Fellowship and pursued her training in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry at the University of Toronto with Professor Timothy P. Bender, exploring structure–function relationships of the active layer in OPVs. In 2018 she joined the group of Professor Alán Aspuru-Guzik in the Department of Chemistry at University of Toronto as the first experimental chemist and leads efforts to automate synthetic chemistry as part of the self-driving laboratory.
Zeev Gross
Zeev Gross is the R. M. and R. D. Blum Professor of Chemistry at the Technion, serving also as Dean of the division for continuing & external studies and heading multiple youth outreach activities in Chemistry. His research focus is on uncovering unique physical and chemical properties of metallocorroles, for utilization in applications that are of prime importance for modern society: discovering new drugs and designing optimal catalysts for energy-relevant processes. He was the Moore Distinguished Scholar in Caltech in 2013, received the Israel Chemical Society Award for the Outstanding Scientist in 2014, and the Hans Fischer Life Achievements Award in 2018.
David G. Churchill
David G. Churchill is a full professor of chemistry and head of the inorganic chemistry division at KAIST. With 120 research peer reviewed scientific articles (H index = 32), he is a synthetic chemist interested in neurodegenerative disease research. He has (co-)organized the International Symposium for Molecular Neurodegenerative Disease Research (ISMNDR) at KAIST (2012–present) and is Editor in Chief of Main Group Chemistry. Churchill spent a sabbatical with Professor Gross in 2017–18, and has been a figure for globalization at KAIST. He is currently the international relations specialist of the newly-formed Korean Association of Selenium Research and Chairperson of Se2022.
1. Introduction
The corrole framework has spawned a variety of different derivatives, usually principally categorized by the central N4-bound central element, whether it is a transition metal or main group element center, and the (exchangeable) axial ligands. However, while this does give a first approximation into options that will help explore all of the possible photophysical differences and needs require during synthetic undertakings, there are strong effects enforced by beta substitutions as well as additives too. Furthermore, there are somewhat different macrocyclic designs and additional details to incorporate together in this main group-themed invited review. Foremost, new synthetic breakthroughs will help spawn new endeavours. Overall, we are seeking to help greatly advance main group-themed porphyrinoid science; we consider these systems important in a variety of emergent applications etc.
There is a conceptual hierarchy of having groupings by central heavy atom, followed by axial ligands, followed by beta substituents and reaction type. The axial groups may be covalent or not and exchangeable or non-exchangeable. β-substituent chemistry also involves main group chemistry. The near ubiquitous presence of tpfc (tpfc = 5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole) meso positions will not be a focal point for this review, unless there is something noteworthy regarding these substitutions. For the peralkylated beta position corrole systems, this precludes direct substitution at the beta positions.
Main group chemistry also, in addition to Transition Metal chemistry, has a capacity to deal in the currency of different redox states. The central elements can access different redox states (valence states); for main group chemistry, lone pairs and VSEPR theory often manifest in strongly articulated features that further help differentiate main group species from those of the d-block. Further, NMR spectroscopy and X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (XAFS) can be helpful in forming a detailed and complete study.
We necessarily step back in time to discuss some important papers from the 1990's. Thus, the literature searching will deal fully with main group (“corrole and main group”, Table 1). Interesting are synthetic methodologies, trends, and guidelines for reported main group chemistry. For our purposes, we also consider heavier group 11 elements in our review; Ag and Au corroles, and Cu (briefly) are treated. Coinage metal corroles are an important group to consider with this up-to-date review. Some comments pertain to catalysis and synthesis.
Table 1 The number of published corrole articles per main group element (ISI Web of Science, Since 1970–)




Elemental symbol
Search terms
Number of reports
Notes




Al
Aluminum and corrole
36
Since 2002–


Sb
Antimony and corrole
6
Since 2006–


Bi
Bismuth and corrole
4
Since 2011–


B
Boron and corrole
26
Since 2003–


Ga
Gallium and corrole
83
Since 2000–


Ge
Germanium and corrole
24
Since 2001–


P
Phosphorus and corrole
34
Since 1998–


Si
Silicon and corrole
10
Since 2009–


Sn
Tin and corrole
19
Since 1998–


Reviews: 2


Au
Gold and corrole
33
1 highlighted


Ag
Silver and corrole
30
Since 2003–


S
Sulfur and corrole
7
Since 2012–


Se or Te
(Selenium or tellurium) and corrole
1
Since 2017–




The scarcity of reports is reflected by which types of corroles are most common (Table 1). In terms of the main group corrole complexes, gallium corroles come to mind first as a large group of publications during the last 20 years; similar to gallium corroles, after the first report on the aluminum corrole in 2002, the investigations of Al corroles have been carried out widely in recent years, partly due to their simplicity in preparation and reliability of their excellent fluorescent properties (high fluorescence quantum yields). Besides, for these two widely reported groups (gallium and aluminum corroles), we also focus in this review on the photophysical properties of corroles chelated with other main-group elements such as Sb, Bi, B, Ge, Sn, P, and Si (Table 1).
Review articles with metallocorroles have emerged. In the 2012 report by Kolle et al.,1 structural chemistry of metallocorroles was covered, mainly about the copper, silver, and gold corrole chemistry was discussed. Copper corroles are discussed in detail as being saddled; the electronic state features provide a theoretical rationale for the observed conformation: dx2–y2versus the a2u orbital interference. In contrast, the gold corrole shows no saddling.
Furthermore, Kadish and coworkers published a review article about the electrochemical studies of corrole complexes: from free-base, transition-metal to main group corroles (groups 13, 14, and 15).2 The main group corroles described exhibited typical macrocycle-centered electrochemical features with the HOMO–LUMO gap value being around 2.1 V.
Another review reported in 2017 by the Abhik Ghosh group, also made a comprehensive summary about the electronic structure of corrole derivatives;3 spectroscopic techniques (UV-vis spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, EPR, X-ray absorption), electrochemical investigations, as well as quantum chemical calculations were explored for free-base, transition-metal, and main group corroles.
The substituent effect on the redox property was also discussed in this review. For example, Gross and co-workers investigated the bromination effects on the redox potentials of gallium; this resulted in a positive shift of 780 mV when the maximum of eight beta-position bromines were introduced to the periphery of the gallium corrole. This is a massive article with extensive coverage regarding main group chemistry and substituent effects.
Not to take away from the other outstanding Chem. Rev. contributions from 2017; here, however we have an opportunity to put into perspective a set of corrole literature from 2018, 2019, and 2020 as well.
2. Aluminum
One recent article by Xuan Zhan et al. in 2019 brings out an important theme; the paper dealt with the aluminum (and also gallium) compounds, and in addition, with beta substitutions (Fig. 1).4 The presence of gallium and aluminum, as well as the differing numbers of beta CF3 groups (specifically, three and four), allowed for an assessment of photophysical properties for the different tpfc-substituted systems. The CF3 substituent effect on the photophysical and redox properties was investigated; 2 showed the highest fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF = 0.71) among the tri- and tetra-CF3 β-substituted aluminum and gallium corroles. To study the effect of CF3-substitution, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted; compound 2 exhibited a 1st reduction potential of −1.24 V; 3 showed two reduction processes, one at −1.11 and one at −1.59 V. Photocatalytic properties were also studied; these systems were charged with toluene to afford benzyl bromide in which the corrole acts as a photosensitizer to bring Br− to Br2 which then undergoes reaction with toluene in the presence of UV light to give C–H bond activation. TON values were 18, 130, and 59 for compounds 1, 2, and 3, respectively; the overall trend of the photocatalytic performance was similar with the order of the 1st oxidation potential: 3 (0.74 V) > 2 (0.62 V) > 1 (0.23 V). Results display that the complex with a more positive redox potential has a higher photooxidation effect.
 Fig. 1  Structures of compounds 1–3. 
A report by Yang et al. from 2012 involves a femtosecond spectroscopic study.5 In this report, experimental data was combined with an assessment of electronics using TD-DFT. The hexacoordinated species was studied (Fig. 2). Femtosecond polarization-resolved VIS-pump IR-probe spectroscopy was used to study the angle between μel (excited electronic transition dipole moment) and μvib (single vibrational transition dipole moment) to study the electronic transition dipole moments, and help assign the absorption bands to electronic transitions for corroles. S0 → S1 and S0 → S2 transitions were assessed by way of the absorption spectra obtained experimentally. The angle between μel and μvib was determined by perturbed free induction decay (PFID) to help remove the influence of overlapping contributions of the signals from the electronic excited state. For the S0 → S1 transition, relative angles between μel and μvib were found to be 34 ± 2° and 43 ± 2° for 5 and 7, respectively (py = pyridine). In the case of a S0 → S2 transition, relative angles between μel and μvib were found to be 53 ± 2° and 51 ± 2°. Therefore, angles between μel and μvib were determined as 87 ± 4° and 94 ± 4°, similar with the data of 83° and 90° observed for compounds 5 and 7, respectively, as calculated by TD-DFT. The Q-band of 5 was located at 16210 cm−1 for the S0 → S1 transition and at 17116 cm−1 for the S0 → S2 transition. Q-bands for compound 7 were exhibited at 16640 cm−1 for S0 → S1 and 15670 cm−1 for S0 → S2.
 Fig. 2  The aluminum system with/without eight bromine substituents at the beta positions. 
The research group of Heyne reported on thorough ultrafast electronic and vibrational characteristics of the fully β-brominated six-coordinated aluminum corrole 7 which bears two pyridines as axial ligands (Fig. 2);6 the researchers suggested that there was a very fast Soret-to-Q-band transition. When examining the Q-band shift position, its pattern and intensity are important because, in this case, it is indicative of a lower-energy and NIR-related signal. As always, it is revealing about the chemical system's electronics. The time constant was found to be 250 fs: This can be compared to the system in which no substituents are bromine and which bears an axial Py group.7 The study was not able to clearly assign the triplet dynamics because of the electronic absorption overlap between the absorption and the emission bands. Triplet generation occurred with 100% and with a lifetime of about 95 ps. The composition of the corrole with the many peripheral beta Br substituents composes a strong “spin–orbit” coupling to the porphyrinoid as we would predict. Therefore, the singlet oxygen yield is expected to be quite high in this case.
In the study by Li et al. from 2018, the aluminum corroles, including meso-unsubstituted and meso-aryl substituted, were addressed by DFT calculations;8 this corrole system was able to be compared to the Al3+, Mg2+ and also Zn2+-containing porphyrins (Fig. 3). This involved an extensive study involving DFT calculations and thorough literature discussion. Propylene oxide (CH3CHCH2O) attacks the CO2 to afford copolymerization with olefin/CO2. PPNCl was used as a cocatalyst; the catalytic property allowed for these to be kinetics in the order of PPNCl > PPNBr > PPNI (bis(triphenylphosphine)iminium chloride etc). Substitution on the meso-position of the porphyrin and corrole affected the catalytic properties; the aryl and chlorinated-aryl substitution helped accelerate the initial reaction of the cyclic carbonates. However, the ring-closure step was not highly affected by the type of meso-aryl substitution.
 Fig. 3  Carbonate formation with catalytic use of aluminum corrole. 
A report by Pomarico et al. in 2018, involves a study of corroles and analysis of the photophysical properties of iodinated aluminum and gallium corroles (Fig. 4).9 The electronic bands for the Q- and Soret bands which are predominantly in nature are featured. The effect of the iodine at the β-positions was able to be assessed. The authors acquired and scrutinized the “density of states.” Also, the excited state dynamics were studied. The femtosecond (fs) resolved fluorescence study was used (broadband, upconversion); they acquired and discussed the time constants for the internal conversion (IC). Time constants were measured: without the iodo groups, the lifetimes of internal conversion from the Soret state to Q state were determined as 320 (8)–540 (5) fs; with lifetimes for those involving iodo groups found to be 70 (11)–185 (10) fs. Vibrational relaxation values were also observed to decrease upon iodination from 15 ps to 0.36–1.4 ps. Evidence of intersystem crossing (ISC) is also found. ISC rates were observed to increase upon the number of iodine substituents.
 Fig. 4  Group 13 compounds studied in the photophysical studies by Pomarico et al. 
Vestfrid et al. reported the tetra–iodinated aluminum corrole (10); the central Al3+ is shown with two Py ligands (Fig. 5).10 Compound 10 displayed emission bands at 612 and 669 nm in benzene; emission bands were found at 645 and 700 nm in pyridine. Compound 10 was isolated as a five-coordinate metallocorrole system in benzene, with only one pyridine axial ligand present. Phosphorescence is manifested with a peak at long wavelength (>850 nm) detected for 10 at room temperature and also at 77 K. The lifetime of the corrole excited state is modified from the nanosecond to microsecond regime upon iodination; values of 92 μs and 1 μs were obtained for 10 in degassed and aerobic toluene, respectively.
 Fig. 5  Aluminum corroles reported by Vestfrid prepared simply using N-iodo succinimide (L = pyridine). 
As a side note, the corrolin system, differs from the corrole system by way of the analogous small modification (Fig. 6) that differentiates hemes and chlorophylls: saturation of one double bond in the π-conjugated macrocycles. As intimated in the 2002 article, a feature mentioned earlier in the literature that had not been much appreciated was that corrole systems are indeed highly fluorescent.11 A dihydro corrole is an interesting and unique comparative system; the conceptual opposite would be one in which a final remaining double bond is formally introduced into the system by effecting (dehydrogenation) unsaturation. In this interesting chemical system, the spectra show that there are two Py molecules per molecule. Interestingly, compound 5 is red and 13 is light blue. However, confoundingly, there appears to be no facile way at present to go between (toggle) compounds 5 and 13 with regard to a facile (reversible) molecular switching event; but the comparison is an interesting facet of photochemistry from the standpoint of the aromatic system which is formally interchangeable by addition/loss of H2. Gain or loss of H2 from a system, even formal addition/loss, is interesting in the hydrogen storage field. The Spectral maxima are found at 432 and 620 nm versus 378, 616, and 644 nm for 5 and 13, respectively. Respective electronic emissions are found at 627, 689, and 660 and 727 nm; red shifting is achieved. Lastly, C2v molecular symmetry is broken; this symmetry alteration is another potentially interesting issue for future research.
 Fig. 6  Structure of aluminum corrole (5) and aluminum corrolin (13). 
The Hassani group reported one interesting application of aluminum corroles employed as the catalyst for the catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide;12 the structural effect on the catalytic performance was nicely handled by theoretical calculations; the structural vacancy defect observed in some aluminium corroles helped form an interior cavity inside the corrole structure for the pre-absorption of O2 and further reaction with CO substrate. The moderate energy barrier of 0.6–0.7 eV rendered the incoming CO molecules able to be oxidized for subsequent CO2 formation via a nearly barrierless process. Compared to other investigated corroles such as silicon and phosphorus corroles (Table 1), aluminum corroles showed better catalytic performance than those of silicon, but exhibited less photo-efficiency relative to phosphorus corroles.
A study by Blumenfeld et al. in 2014 did center around the 2,17-bis(chlorosulfonyl)-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corro-lato aluminum(III) system (14), nanoconjugated with TiO2 (14-TiO2) (Fig. 7).13 The system exploited both the nature of the Al3+ center, as well as the TiO2 substrate. The advantages of the TiO2 nanoconjugate can be assessed; the authors successfully established a new modality of sensing. These systems could, in a sense, be considered “contrast agents.” The systems are NIR active. The authors discussed PDT and presented and discussed absorption spectra. Cellular uptake and toxicity of Al-corrole systems was also studied; glioblastoma cells (U87-Luc) were used. Mouse hepatocyte cells were studied with corroles as well. The average diameter of these nanoparticles was found to be 29 nm. NIR fluorescence was displayed.
 Fig. 7  Structure of 2,17-bis(chlorosulfonyl)-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrolato (14). 
For a more comprehensive treatment of corroles and cancer, we refer the reader to the Chem. Rev. article by Gross, Gray and coworkers published in 2017.14 Also, the Chem. Rev. special issue (2017, volume 117, issue 4) provides an epic contribution to this branch of porphyrinoid research; some sections of articles contained in this Chem. Rev. issue also help underscore some clear “virtues” of main group chemistry.
Oppenheim et al. reported the synthesis of nanoparticles of Al(III), Ga(III), and Au(III) corroles as monomers.15 Al-tpfc(py)2, Ga-tpfc(py)2, and Au-tpfc were used as the monomers in this study (Fig. 8); all metallocorroles studied herein exhibited sharp Soret bands in organic solvents (pyridine and DMSO). However, it was broadened in water-based solvents (pyridine/water and 2% DMSO/water) which signalled the formation of various corrole nanocluster arrangements. The absorption wavelength maxima of nanoparticles were very close to their monomers; this finding suggests that the electronic corrole–corrole stacked interaction is weak in nanoparticles. Raman spectra studies and DFT calculations were supportive of this conclusion.
 Fig. 8  Structures of metallocorrole studied by Oppenheim et al. 
3. Antimony
The antimony corroles comprise a small but noteworthy group of reports (Table 1). In a report from 2017 by Zhan et al., an axial difluoride derivative was examined (Fig. 9).16 Ultrafast dynamics was employed. Thermal energy was able to help formally eliminate the F2; whether it can possibly be ejected as one neutral covalent F2 molecule is an important issue for further research. The addition and loss could be put into context with PMR, the “principle of microscopic reversibility;” we can also consider a mechanism involving stepwise loss of each ligand; ascertaining the degree of radical or anionic involvement is an important issue. Time-resolved spectroscopic methods of broadband fluorescence up-conversion was utilized in this research. Together with broadband absorption spectroscopy, intersystem crossing yields were found to be 95–99% efficient. Electronic dynamics of the Soret band were also tracked in real time; there are emergent applications pertaining to this, due to the observation of the photoinduced electron transfer (PET) mechanism. The potential energy surface decay paths were calculated, supplied, and included in an energy diagram; various potential wells signifying important contributions to photophysical research are shown.
 Fig. 9  Structure of compound 15 studied by Zhan et al. 
Metal-centered corroles were tested by Tiffner et al. as catalysts for CO2 “fixation” of epoxide to help synthesize carbonate. Mn, Fe–Cl, Co–PPh3, Cu, Sb-py, and Bi metallocorroles were studied; the Mn-centered 5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (16) showed the highest catalytic conversion ability when it was loaded at 0.05 mol% with 2 mol% tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB) (Fig. 10).17 Also, the Mn-centered 5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole was found to be able to convert various styrene oxides to their respective carbonates with more than 95% conversion, compared to the antimony corrole (17), 12% conversion. Carbonate synthesis was able to be checked by UV-vis absorption spectra. The Soret band at around 400 nm did not change during the reaction; however, the higher wavelength absorption band at 485 nm underwent a shift to 472 nm and was accompanied by a huge increase in absorbance. This spectral change reflects the presence of an axially ligated oxygen. After the carbonate was synthesized, the absorption spectra changes, reverting to its original form. The proposed mechanism of conversion is shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 10  (a) Metalated corroles under study, Sb-pyr corrole and Mn corrole. (b) Proposed synergistic catalysis mode for the Mn-corrole and TBAB-catalyzed CO2 fixation with epoxides. 
 Fig. 11  (a) The switching from SbIII to SbV by the formal addition or loss of X2. (b) Switching between the studied compounds SbIII and SbV. 
Recently, the group of Daniel G. Nocera reported an interesting halogen photoelimination report18 involving a Sb(v) dihalide system; bromide and chloride are both eliminated from the corrole system (Fig. 11). In this work, there is the interesting valence interconversion between III and V with the addition of X2 in the form of PhICl2 or Br2; this interconversion was also confirmed by relative electrochemical studies.
Interhalogen reports are also important. While this has to do with HX splitting, as an example, it has bearing on other studies in which, generically, X2 is generated in situ.19
The steady-state photolysis from the Sb(V) dibromide corrole to the Sb(III) version was performed in THF over the course of 2 min, as demonstrated by UV-vis absorption spectra studies. This work is of importance for main group corrole chemistry; they may possess the potential for the photo-redox interconversion between Mn+2 and Mn states; this photosensitivity is an interesting pursuit for future research (see below).
4. Bismuth
Bismuth is the heaviest naturally occurring element in the Periodic Table of the Elements that is not radioactive. Its chemistry is the subject of recent increased investigation. In light of the paucity of research for bismuth in porphyrinoid chemistry, we suggest it will be a hot topic in future research (see below).
In the report by Reith in 2011, the metal starting material used in this report was Bi(N(SiMe3)3).20 Importantly, this compound was photochemically oxidized to the Bi(V) species. The product formation was not detected without catalyst or hv irradiation. In both cases, sulfoxide was formed; also, trace sulfone was detected; this means the sulphide sulfur was chemically doubly-oxidized. In this case, N3− was introduced, serving as a 1O2 quencher.
In a report from 2014 by Faschinger et al., the authors used hexamethyl disilazine to prepare Bi(N(SiMe3)3), which was used for the production of bismuth 5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (21) (Fig. 12).21 Bismuth functionalization of 20 resulted in shifting of the Soret and Q-band, and turned-off the fluorescence of 20. The Soret band of 20 changed to become red-shifted during the addition of bismuth into the system; the fluorescence at around 670 nm thereupon disappeared. However, during the bismuth demetalation with HCl, the absorption and emission spectra recovered the original spectra. It is facile to remove Bi considering how puckered the system is, and how metal N bonds may be weaker, regarding the contracted nature of the corrole pocket and the nature of the Bi3+ ion. Compare this to what is seen for Cu or Ag systems; the demetallation of bismuth requires far less effort (several drops of 0.01 M HCl (aq.)).
 Fig. 12  Structure of 20 and 21. 
5. Boron
For boron-containing corroles, there have been diverse findings, of interest to main group chemists and a lot of “food for thought” for the main group chemistry and materials communities. Important examinations of the macrocycle core with this extremely small element have produced significant achievements in recent years, as performed by Penny Brothers, Abhik Ghosh and a few others (Table 1). Not only are the boron-corrole complexes discussed, but this section also treats the dyads involving BODIPY conjugations etc. including the complexes in which the BODIPY moiety is a nominal substituent to the corrole and participating wholeheartedly both electronically and sterically as its nature imbues; thus, inclusion of a nominal BODIPY discussion helps efforts in multimer design (below). In these cases, the boron is within the fixed [N2BF2] (MLX3) chelation environment, interesting from a main group and multimeric point of view.
There have been at least a couple of relevant boron reviews over the years. The Sorokin review helped summarize the versatility of boron with corroles.22 It shows a scope of donor atoms, which serve as bridging groups across the elements. Biology introduces hemes into the hemoglobin construct to prevent facile bis μ-oxo formation. For other elements too, the μ-oxo motif is a stable species and would need to be avoided for its “thermodynamic sink”-like propensity.
An original contribution for corrole functionalization involves the BPin functionality; its β-position boron creates an electronic hole in the otherwise electron rich and expansive π-delocalized system. Such features are found in solid state electronic materials such as N,B-containing polymers. It is likely for these to be important photophysical differences. A more pertinent review/perspective is that entitled “Boron Complexes of Pyrrolyl Ligands”.23 This also brings into the framework, the tripyrrolyl systems in which only B can always fit under normal conditions. The contracted, as well as the expanded porphyrins, were surveyed and discussed in this work.
In 2008, Penelope J. Brothers published an important preceeding paper for the community. This feature article introduced the structural and photophysical properties of boron–polypyrrole complexes from the boron porphyrin complexes to boron-containing corroles, boron subporphyrins, and expanded porphyrins and other systems (Fig. 13). Superposing the previous papers, and extrapolating to the future, allows us to take confidence that more research regarding boron and polypyrrolyl chemistry will emerge in the future.24
 Fig. 13  (a) Preparation of B2(1,2-O2C6H4)(ttp) (b) N-fused porphyrin complexes (c) structures of transoid dipyrromethene/dipyrromethene. 
The report by Tay et al. in 2019 from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. is a stylish advance for corrole chemistry, as well as an address to researchers focused on constrained main group porphyrinoid frameworks.25 It helps us “fuse” borate chemistry and photosensitizer macrocycle pocket chemistry (Fig. 14). With chromophoric porphyrinoid chemistry, the uniqueness of this chemistry again comes from consideration of element size (charge/radius) and oxophilic propensity; the ability for boron to be dimerized and geometrically varied within one porphyrin species (one pocket) comes to light (see “diagonal relationship”, Fig. 15), thus allowing the corrole core to host two small elemental centers at the same time; the two centers can be set up in geometrically different environments. The “hard” boron centers stay rigid (charge/radius = 3+/41 pm). There is enforcement of structure; the concept, therefore, of the coplanar form and “doming” form then becomes muddled. A compelling structure is the “transoid” structure. A positioning in which the two terminal F-ligands are geometrically directed toward different environments. The intramolecular μ-oxo species is also an intriguing structure in which there is a single O between two BPh units; these are, in turn, anchored to the corrole. In this example, boron is observed doing within one macrocycle what Fe is famous for doing between Fe-containing macrocycles. While these are expressed clearly as the porphyrin derivatives, there are also the corroloid examples included (albeit corrolazine); they can, in many cases, be considered closely related systems and compared together with corroles.
 Fig. 14  (a) Synthesis of diboron porphyrazine and phthalocyanine complexes. (b) Structures of tetrapyrrole complexes. 
 Fig. 15  “Diagonal relationship” of some lighter elements as shown by a portion of the periodic table of the elements (groups 1, 2, 13–15). 
An article by Albrett et al. in 2008 describes the structure of the diboron corrole (Fig. 16);26 it has not been determined to lie flat in a B–B arrangement. Researchers studied the DFT calculation of four structures for [B2OF2(Cor)]−, (a) cisoid dipyrromethenes only, (b) cisoid dipyrromethene/bipyrrole, (c) transoid dipyrromethenes only, and (d) transoid dipyrromethene/bipyrrole. The structure of cisoid dipyrromethenes was found to be most stable, and compounds (b–d) showed higher energies of 16.1 kcal mol−1, 19.5 kcal mol−1, and 32.3 kcal mol−1, respectively, and therefore less stable structures. Boron corrole chemistry is a creative and differential aspect of porphyrinoid core chemistry, and represents novel “core” main group chemistry.
 Fig. 16  Depictions of the different geometries readily open for the boron corrole species. 
Perhaps, the most intriguing, yet simple, main group hydride structure to consider is diborane (B2H6); its inability to fully provide for its electron-deficient B center character as a monomer leads to dimeric formation and bridging H's are an inevitability; a set of terminal hydrides exists as well. Hydride ligands are essential chemical groups for energy research, catalysis and environmental science considerations, as well as sustainability.27
The efforts from the Ghosh and Brothers collaboration produced a report underscoring boron's struggles at being assimilated as a normal central element (Fig. 17).28 Again, the transoid arrangement is, by far, the most interesting because of the disposition of the O; both B's, which are hard Lewis acid centers, are rigidly held in different environments and can thus be monitored separately by spectroscopy. The directionality of the resulting terminal fluorine groups, in this case, means that the reactivity will be different, in theory, depending on the sterics imparted by the macrocycle. The oxo chemistry for B can sometimes be likened to that possible for Si (see diagonal relationship) (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 17  Diversity in structure to afford μ-oxo species from the terminal fluorine species. 
As reported by the Srinivasan group in 2016, the carbatriphyrin (3.1.1)-one isomer of biphenyl corrole, was prepared and fully characterized; in particular, an X-ray diffraction was provided.29 The structural difference between this species and the biphenyl corrole lies at a chemical and conceptual cusp; the switchability of the 3,3′ to the 2,3′ position provided dynamics to the system. This species was isolated and characterized. It shows the possibilities of various additional structural features for future synthetic research. This chemical system derives attention due to its conceptual importance; it helps consider the effect of the formal exchange of NH to CH, which are reactive positions in the core. The ability for a NH group to be exchanged with a CH group is an important achievement, while enforcing the tetra-planar/tetrahedral design. We feel this unusual system should stand to receive more notoriety because of its unique asymmetry.
Structures 22, 24, and 25 were characterized by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography (Fig. 18). The formation of 24 and 25 was confirmed; additionally, the protonated form of 23 was also studied. The absorption spectra of 22, 23, 24, and 25 exhibited intense bands at 372 (22), 389 (23), 396 (24), and 379 (25), and weaker bands at 616 (22), 738 (23), 686 (24), and 709 (25). The molar absorption coefficient was higher for 23 than for 22, 24, and 25.
 Fig. 18  Synthesis of carbaporphyrinoids studied by the Srinivasan group. 
A “perspective” type article from Penelope J. Brothers mentioned the typical synthetic methodology to obtain boron N-confused complexes by treating N-confused precursor porphyrins with PhBCl2.23 Interestingly, the system can undergo a structural change upon protonation to form the corresponding boron complex in which it is coordinated to three nitrogen atoms (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Boron N-confused and N-fused porphyrin complexes. 
In recent chemistry, which serves as a comparison dealing with subporphyrin, Saito et al. showed the boron–subporphyrin formation (29) as a by-product; the authors also showed some level of absorption and emission spectra of boron–subporphyrins (Fig. 20).30 This article describes the chemical extrusion of boron(III) subporphyrin from meso-heptakis(pentafluorophenyl)[32]heptaphyrin by copper and boron metalation. Zn(II) and Cu(II) were studied for subporphyrin extrusion; 30 was not detected from 27, and less than 1% yield of 29 was possible. In contrast, 31 was synthesized from 28, and 29 was acquired in 36% yield through optimized reaction conditions. Compound 29 exhibits a Soret band at 359 nm, and Q-bands at 422 nm (shoulder) as well as 449 nm and 470 nm. The fluorescence spectrum of 29 exhibits peaks at 487 nm and 517 nm reflecting a 12% quantum yield.
 Fig. 20  Synthesis of subporphyrin compound 29. 
Besides those systems described as corrole-BODIPY dyads, one interesting oxacorrole-BODIPY dyad was reported by the Ravikanth group in 2015 (Fig. 21);31 it consisted of one BODIPY unit and two oxacorrole molecules with a meso-pyrrolyl linkage. Compared to the oxacorrole precursor, the dyads showed a slight blue-shift in terms of the absorption, and much weaker fluorescence emission. The fluorescence quantum yields of these novel dyads were determined as ΦF = 0.03–0.05; the weak fluorescence was due to the partially low-lying charge-transfer state. Because of the isostructural, as well as reduced core protonation possibility, an additional protonation/deprotonation event external to the core exists, while retaining the isomeric nature of the compound. It is an understatement to say the O group cannot protonate easily (ethereal oxygen H+ pKa = −3.5; were “O” to become protonated it would be exceptionally Brønsted Lowry acidic). In addition, the subsequent –CHO chemistry helps afford a well-defined molecular (and modular) triad that can be measured photophysically; we feel this is one of the great accomplishments of this work. Therefore, this chemistry relates to both boron chemistry as well as group 16 chemistry. The extent of the photophysical effect of the –CHO group in corrole chemistry is left to further research.
 Fig. 21  Corrole species containing a formal donor atom N to O change in the binding cavity. 
An excellent and simple review of all corrole systems related by borylation was published in 2014;32 it is “food for thought” for other polypyrrole systems. Simply, the B2Pin2 reagent was used in combination with dioxane; with the help of [Ir(cod)OMe]2, this substitution was shown, for the A2meso porphyrin system, to actually add preferentially to the beta-position (Fig. 22). For BODIPY, it is β-2,6-position-selective; for the dipyrromethane, the attachment of (-BPin) is alpha-position selective, a position that is not available in the case of the corrole system. There is also the ability to synthetically “pass along” through a brominated site to install the BPin group to the system. This involved the use of specific coupling conditions. Compounds here were prepared in dioxane and heated to 100 °C.
 Fig. 22  B-pin regioselectivity and the resulting fused system. 
The Osuka group reported a different type of chemistry in 2005.33 The authors used catalysts to effect boron-based substitution at the corrole ring to enable the Suzuki-coupling reaction (Fig. 23). One interesting reaction discussed is the chemical group exchange to afford a 2-OH group; this functionality can then revert to its keto form (via tautomer formation). We feel this pair can later be worked into an ESIPT chemosensing platform to allow for photodynamic switching upon reaction with analyte(s) (see future goals, vide infra).
 Fig. 23  Keto–enol tautomerization of the 2-hydroxycorrole species. 
6. Gallium
Recently, Gross and co-workers reported fluorescent tris-/tetra-β-CF3 substituted gallium corroles used as efficient photocatalysts for driving organic bromination reactions as discussed for the aluminum corroles (Fig. 24).4 The CF3 substituent imparts an electronic effect that influences both photophysical and electrochemical properties; red shifts, in terms of the absorption and emission spectra were observed, compared to the corresponding non-CF3-substituted gallium corroles. Each CF3 group gives a positive shift of 116 mV based on the redox potential comparisons between the tetra-CF3-substituted gallium tpfc species (43) and the gallium tpfc species. The tris-CF3 substituted gallium corroles (42) outperform the photocatalysts studied and compared in terms of the photo-catalytic performance due to its relatively stronger absorption at the wavelength of the irradiation source (λmax = 400 nm) and more positive redox potentials. The analogous Ga system that was substituted with three CF3 groups was found to perform most efficiently (TON = 109) among this series; this gallium corrole–CF3-substituted system possessed superior absorption intensity among these metallocorroles when studied at the same concentration (4 × 10−5 M) and possessed the largest redox potential value in that study.
 Fig. 24  Structures of compounds 3CF3-Ga and 4CF3-Ga. 
Further bromination (substitution) of the tris- and tetrakis-trifluoromethylated gallium corrole systems was studied by Zhan et al. in 2020 (Fig. 25).34 Soret bands of compounds 46 and 47 were measured and reported as 405 (2.96, ε × 104), 437 (7.16), and 421 (4.42), 442 (6.10), respectively, 5–12 nm red-shifted from the Soret band of 44 and 45. The redox potential study of 46 and 47 helps determine the 1st oxidation potentials of 0.89 V and 0.99 V, respectively. Photocatalytic properties were also studied: bromination of phenol for 47 and octabrominated gallium corrole and 47 therein showed more effective catalytic properties than the octabrominated gallium corrole, in concert with the 1st oxidation potential (0.99 V for 47 and 0.75 V for the octabrominated gallium corrole).
 Fig. 25  Structures of 44 and 45 and the synthesis and structures of 46 and 47. 
Recently, a gallium corrole-BODIPY dyad was used as an organic dye for solar cell design; this was reported in 2018 by the Sankar group.35 The system, in its entirety, consisted of the dyad as the donor and PC71BM as the acceptor group; the photophysical device was able to reach an excellent incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency value (IPCE): 61%. The structure and electronics of this system (48: PC71BM) is important for the “polypyrrole community” to consider because of the triad quality and the straightforward meso-substitution of the BODIPY groups matching (by overlapping absorption values) with the corrole species. The gallium is shown as an L2-type species (as well as an L1-type) pyridine (Fig. 26). Nitrogen–containing heterocycles are featured in this work (vide infra). Some conclusions regarding these photophysical properties are as follows: (i) the designed dyad clearly shows an overlaid absorption spectrum from the gallium corrole and BODIPY parts; it exhibited a gallium corrole-centered and solvent-dependent emission. (ii) The fluorescence was observed to be quenched in polar solvents such as THF and DMSO, explained by the possible PET process; (iii) the fluorescence was thoroughly quenched after blending this dyad with PC71BM, suggesting that an efficient photoinduced charge separation may exist in the blend active layer. This dyad, therefore, shows good photovoltaic properties; it acts as the electron donor in the design of organic solar cells.
 Fig. 26  Structure of 48. 
Claude P. Gros and Pierre D. Harvey et al. reported interesting slow and fast singlet energy transfer between functionalized gallium corroles and the BODIPY moiety with zero-/mono-/di-styryl substitution (Fig. 27).36 Among these dyads, the system with one styryl-functionalized BODIPY was demonstrated to show possible singlet energy transfer, either from the gallium corrole to BODIPY, or from BODIPY to the gallium corrole moiety. The energy transfer from gallium corrole-to-BODIPY was observed in the dyad which was devoid of a styryl group attached to the BODIPY unit; reverse energy transfer was demonstrated to occur in the dyad with two styryl groups functionalized into the BODIPY unit. Based on the Förster theory, the singlet energy transfer rate constant relied upon the fluorescence quantum yield of the electron donor, in the absence of an acceptor, as well as the J-integral value which depends on the overlap donor fluorescence spectra and the acceptor absorption.
 Fig. 27  Structure of different BODIPY-corrole dyads by Gros et al.36 
In the synthetic and molecular computation paper by Srikanth from 2015, gallium complexes were presented; its electronic features and the solar cell applications were discussed.37 The D–π–A system was designed for gallium corroles to help them overcome the poor light-to-current conversion of corroles (Fig. 28). The triple-bond from the ethynyl link in 53–56 was intended for the conduction band in the TiO2 mass. The charge separates effectively in the system of HOMOs on the donor unit, and LUMOs on the acceptor, or anchoring groups. Calculated results confirmed that HOMO energy levels in 53–56 are mainly contributed by the corrole, and LUMOs (include LUMO+1) were largely contributed by the anchoring groups present at 54 and 55. Moreover, in 55 and 56, the LUMO+1 was localized on the anchoring group. Stronger electron withdrawing groups at β-positions helps feed the increase of the electron density of LUMO orbitals.
 Fig. 28  Acetylene corrole conjugates from the report by Srikanth et al.37 
A paper by You et al. emphasized materials chemistry aspects based on discrete gallium corrole systems (Fig. 29).38 A so-called non-destructive readout fluorescence memory was discussed and reported. It was based on a gallium(III) corrole complex and a photochromic cis-1,2-dithienylethene moiety. Due to the large Stokes shift, the gallium tpfc system cooperated with photochromic cis-1,2-dithienylethene to efficiently render the “on–off” fluorescence switch event of the device. A rapid energy transfer constant with the scale of 10−9 s−1 was determined by fluorescence lifetime measurements.
 Fig. 29  Structures of gallium corrole and achieving open and closed forms of 3,3′-(hexafluorocyclopent-1-ene-1,2-diyl)bis(2-methyl-5-phenylthiophene) (DTE) by ET as reported by You et al.38 
Tris- and tetra-iodo gallium corroles were reported by Vestfrid et al. in 2014 (Fig. 4).39 The gallium system showed the absorption maxima at 402, 410, and 412 nm in 8, 9, and 11. For the iodine section, there is an addition of one iodine on a meso Ph ring which can bring the quantum yield value down 4-fold. Also, this can lead to a 60-times increase in the ISC constant. These heavily substituted species can interface with oxidants in that they can help generate 1O2. Through the photophysical PET process, they can treat the disease characterized by ROS concentration.
In the report by Blumenfeld from 2013, there is an ability to prepare contrast agent nanoparticle (NP) conjugates with corroles.40 In this paper, group 13 metals Al and Ga were studied and discussed together. It is the 2,17-bis-chlorosulfonated species; pyridine is shown again as the associating/dissociating exchangeable axial ligand (Fig. 30). The aluminum compound possesses absorptions at 424 (Soret band) and 592 nm (Q-band); fluorescence exists at 611 nm (λex = 426 nm, and gallium has electronic absorptions at 426 (Soret band) and 588 nm (Q-band); fluorescence is found at (λem,max) 609 nm (λex = 427 nm). Aluminum and gallium corroles were nanoconjugated with TiO2 nanoparticles by the hydroxylation with H2O2. Nanoconjugated particles 14-TiO2 and 60-TiO2 showed absorption bands at 427 nm (Soret), 576 nm, and 610 nm for 14-TiO2, and 423 nm (Soret), 589 nm, and 610 nm for 60-TiO2. Electronic emission characteristics of both particles showed broad spectra from 508 to 722 nm (excitation wavelength = 405 nm).
 Fig. 30  The aluminum and gallium system described by Blumenfeld et al.40 
Among the photophysical properties investigated for the corrole complexes, singlet oxygenation generation capacity is of great importance to help assess the corrole's anti-cancer properties. In 2012, Hai-yang Liu and co-workers reported the physical properties of three sets of halogenated corroles. The studies involved monohydroxyl halogenated corroles (66, 67, 68), peripherally fluorine-substituted corroles (61, 62, 63, 20) and gallium complexes (64, 65), as exhibited in Fig. 31.41a
 Fig. 31  Structures of 66–68 and 61–63 and 20 and 64 and 65. 
All corroles investigated showed typical electronic absorption spectra with Soret bands around 420 nm and Q-bands, which ranged from 500–650 nm. Compound 65 possessed the largest fluorescence quantum yield (0.31) among these corroles. Furthermore, the fluorescence emission intensity was shown to decrease with the increase of substituted atom mass of halogens in the mono-halogenated corroles studied; whereas the triplet quantum yields, oxygen quenching rates, as well as singlet oxygen quantum yields showed increasing trends. The gallium corroles, compared to the corresponding free-base counterparts, exhibited stronger fluorescence intensity, higher triplet quantum yields and blue shifts in terms of the emission peaks; smaller singlet oxygen quantum yields and oxygen quenching rate constants, however, were reported. In another set of free base corroles, compound 63 exhibited the highest singlet oxygen and triplet yields among these four corroles. This work is of great benefit in the pursuit to design ideal corrole photosensitizers for, e.g., photodynamic therapy by modulating the corrole framework.
Lei et al. discussed the phenothiazine group attached at the ortho, meta, and para positions of the 10-position group of the aryl group (Fig. 32).42 Overall, the gallium corrole exhibited higher fluorescence quantum yield and increased radiative rate constants compared to those for the free base system. Fluorescence quantum yields of 72–74 were determined as 0.50, 0.44, and 0.49 (toluene), and the radiative rate constants were measured as 20.9 × 107, 16.8 × 107, and 2.11 × 107 s−1, respectively.
 Fig. 32  Structure of free base PTZ-corroles (69–71) and gallium PTZ-corroles (72–74). Note: this concept was already reported in the 2012 report by Hwang et al.41b These authors showed that the CD5O value of the gallium(III) corrole bioconjugated to a cancer cell-directing protein decreases from 0.1–1 nM to 0.01–0.001 nM upon irradiation. 
Kowalska et al. discussed the steady-state spectroscopic features of aluminum and gallium corroles in 2009;43 both the absorption and emission characteristics, as well as the temporal fluorescence decays of two closely related species are mentioned: Al(tpfc)(py)n and Ga(tpfc)(py)n, n = 1, 2. From the ground-state spectra, the metallocorrole systems studied involved both pentacoordinated corrole (n = 1) and hexacoordinated geometries at the corrole core (n = 2) in a mixed benzene–pyridine solution. Excited-state radiative and nonradiative decay constants were studied; it was revealed that the temporal fluorescence decays of Ga(tpfc)(py)2 in a benzene–pyridine solution are biexponential. As depicted in Fig. 33, the hexacoordinated corrole in the excited state becomes dissociated; the excited-state dissociation–association equilibrium is, therefore, considered. The Ga corrole is formulated as having two Py axial ligands; the Al corrole bears one such axial ligand.
 Fig. 33  The electron excitation scheme featuring photophysical kinetic parameters for the gallium corrole. 
In 2013, the report by Santos et al. features a gallium corrole;44 this is noteworthy for the Ga3+ central atom as well as for substituent chemistry of group 15 chemistry. The system features a pendant amine group (–CHNCH2CH2NH2) at the β-3 position (precursor to compound 75) (Fig. 34); it is an interesting and possibly highly functional pendant. Fe3+, Ga3+, Cr3+, Ni2+, Zn2+, Ag+ were also tested with the corrole in solution. Fluorescent ion recognition testing was made with various soluble metal cations such as Na+, Ca2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Hg2+, Ag+, and Al3+. The response involved a luminescence change at 626 nm. This report has a strong main group component; Hg2+ gave a color change from purple to blue. The extra N,N metal chelation pocket enables further chemistry. How many corroles can be positioned around the silica nanosphere will depend on the nanoparticle diameter and features of the sphere itself; therefore, considerations of the natural and extent of involvement of silicon are also important.
 Fig. 34  Synthesis of silica nanoparticle with compound 75. 
In 2015, the Gros Group reported heterobimetallic complexes for medical imaging application. They synthesized the bimetallic complex by click reaction between corrole/porphyrin and DOTA/NOTA. Bimetallic complexes were synthesized with good yield, and showed higher relaxivity than DOTAREM (r1 = 3.5 mM−1 s−1 at 20 MHz, 37 °C).45 Another interesting example of click chemistry, reported in 2019 by Chen et al. is discussed in the phosphorus section.
7. Germanium
There are some germanium corrole reports. Sometimes they are combined with other elements in a merged scientific article. The first report of germanium corrole was reported by the Gross group in 2001;46 compound 76 was thereby synthesized and reported (Fig. 35); the electrochemical study for the first oxidation and reduction events suggest that only the corrole is involved in the redox process. The first oxidation potential was 1.13 V and the reduction potential was −0.99 V; therefore, the HOMO–LUMO gap is 2.13 V for 76.
 Fig. 35  Structure of 76. 
In 2018, Zhang and Sun reported the synthesis and photophysical features of germanium triazatetrabenzcorrole (78) and compared the properties with that of germanium phthalocyanine (Fig. 36).47 Absorption maxima of 78 and its derivative, 80, were detected at 444 and 659 nm for 78, and at 454 and 672 nm for 80; 80 showed an expected red-shifted absorption maxima compared with that for 78; this feature is because of the electron-donating property of the p-tert-butyl phenoxy group (R). Singlet oxygen quantum yields (ΦΔ) were measured and recorded; 0.59 for 78 and 0.55 for 80. Germanium phthalocyanine compounds 77 and 79 exhibited an almost 90 nm blue-shifted spectral absorption compared with their corresponding triazatetrabenzcorrole compounds. The singlet oxygen quantum yield of 77 was determined to be 0.83; however, 79 showed a ΦΔ value of only 0.12. The dramatic decrease of ΦΔ in 79 can be explained with its H-aggregation.
 Fig. 36  Structures of studied Germanium corroles by Zhang et al.47 
In a report by Stefanelli in 2011, one germanium(IV) corrole with a beta NO2 group and one NH2 group substituted at the 2- and 3- beta-positions and one-OCH3 as the axial ligand was prepared (Fig. 37).48 The amination of the precursor which was a nitrated Ge corrole was conducted successfully via the reaction with 4-amino-4H-1,2,4-triazole under basic conditions. This complex was well-characterized by X-ray diffraction. Nitro groups were implemented: incorporated and effects were assessed. This is interesting from a couple of standpoints; (i) the ability to connect multiple NO2 groups, (ii) identifying the breakdown of the optical effect for this group, (iii) the variability of bis-species which can be symmetric or not, depending on the isomer variation. In addition, on the inner 2 and 18 positions, there are –NH2 groups; this could, in fact, be considered a “hetero-multisubstituted” example.34 It is a very interesting species because of the proximal push–pull positions borne by the corrole.
 Fig. 37  Mixed nitration and amination derivatives of studied germanium(IV) corroles by Stefanelli et al.48 
In 2014, an axially bonded hetero dimer comprised of germanium(IV) corrole and free base/Zn(II) porphyrin (85 and 86) were synthesized from 84 by Reeta et al. (Fig. 38).49 Absorption spectra of dimers and 84 were compared in dichloromethane. Maximum wavelengths were found in the same range of the precursor units (monomer species); in particular, λmax at 400 nm of dimers are shifted from the 408 nm absorption observed for 84, which is the Soret band. Cyclic and differential voltammograms also showed that the redox potential of free base/Zn(II) dimers show a similar range with precursor monomers. Additionally, to study the excited state properties, the excited 84 and dimers with the excitation wavelength at 400 nm for Ge(IV) corrole, and 425 nm for free-base/Zn(II) porphyrins were presented. Excitation at both 400 and 425 nm allowed for the quenching of the fluorescence of both dimers 85 and 86. Quenching efficiency (%Q) of dimers were calculated in the range of 70–80%. Experiments performed showed that the electronic energy transfer (EET) from the Ge(IV) corrole to the axial free base/Zn(II) corrole, and PET from the ground state of the axial free base/Zn(II) corrole to the excited state of Ge-corrole are possible.
 Fig. 38  Germanium corroles 84–86 (P for porphyrin). 
A study by Fang et al. in 2011 describes the reactivity of Ge–H corrole complexes to form α-hydroxyalkyl and alkyl compounds.50 (tpfc)Ge–H (tpfc = tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole) was obtained through a classical reduction reaction of (tpfc)Ge–OCH3 with NaBH4; it is proposed that TFPC's electron withdrawing properties help stabilize the electron-rich Ge metal center.47 The mechanism of the reaction involving (tpfc)Ge–H is proposed to be through deprotonation of the complex in basic solution (via a catalytic amount of KOH) to form a Ge(II) corrole intermediate; this reduced center readily undergoes reaction with aldehydes, olefins, and alkyl halides. This study showed that main group metals, which, in many cases are less expensive than many transition metals, have parallel reactivity and can thus be used importantly in hydrogenation and other important transformations.
8. Phosphorus
Phosphorus chemistry is diverse with a lot of attention received from the main group element chemistry community. There is the appearance of P snugly at the corrole center, ligated usually by OH, F, OR, and also groups such as Ph or H or a combination thereof. There is a whole range of phosphorus chemistry with small molecules for discussion and future work. The topic of phosphorus porphyrinoids was, in fact, importantly reviewed in 2016 by Ravikanth et al.;51 part of the discussion of their article deals with corroles; other sections serve to treat porphyrins and phthalocyanines etc. Phosphorus corroles first emerged in 1998 (Table 1), as reported by Roberto Paolesse and Kevin M. Smith; phosphorus 8,12-diethyl-2,3,7,13,17,18-hexamethylcorrole was obtained from the “free-base” corrole system with POCl3 in pyridine 21 years after the phosphorus octaethylporphyrin report was made by Connell and his co-workers.52 This research, albeit somewhat different, is almost equally important because of the enforced octahedral structure; a square pyramidal geometry can also manifest. The importance of the 5/6 coordination “toggle” for phosphorus corroles is interesting and may be dependent on the type/nature and extent of beta–substitution; in other words, like the axial substituents directly attached to P, so too, the beta substituents might add an inductive effect or structural effect to the central element coordination chemistry and an (chiral) effect to the chemical system in its entirety.53a More can be done with the facile (P(O)/P(OH)2) switchable 5/6 coordination hydrolysis equilibrium in these systems; the nuances, can be explored in new research directions in the future.
One phosphorus report to which we optimistically refer is the 2018 article in collaboration with Roeder et al. which deals with photodynamic inactivation (PDI) of pathogens.53b The 2019 study by Q. C. Chen et al. took advantage of that phenomenon for the preparation of 12 fully characterized trans-bi-alkoxy phosphorus corroles, of which six contained remote synthons for further functioanlization.53c A biomedical slant on P corroles is underscored by the pioneering work of Kobayashi and coworkers involving bioprobing used an inexpensive and biocompatible elemental center.54
A report from Paolesse in 1998 stands as an important structural study and the first example of a phosphorus corrole (Fig. 39).55 This corrole system contains six peripheral Me and two Et groups at the 8 and 12 positions; in these systems, the meso groups being bare methine groups (CH), make for an interesting comparison to the often-studied tris-mesoaryl systems.
 Fig. 39  Structure of the phosphorus corrole system studied by Paolesse et al. 
Gross and co-workers reported functionalized phosphorus corroles which showed interesting and important triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion;56 these compounds were tested as potential photo-catalysts in oxidative coupling reactions of the benzylamine reaction (Fig. 40). Among these phosphorus corroles studied, the iodinated species showed near-IR phosphorescence (located around 796 nm at room temperature) and possessed singlet oxygen quantum yield values higher than those for the non-iodinated species. Both iodinated and non-iodinated phosphorus corroles can work as efficient triplet photosensitizers and showed triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion with perylene as the triplet acceptor. The tetra-iodinated species was determined to have an upconversion quantum value of 0.39 and an anti-Stokes effect of 0.5 eV. This work enlightens us about corrole utility as a potent triplet photosensitizer in driving photocatalytic organic reactions.
 Fig. 40  (a) Axial ligand exchange and macrocycle iodination of phosphorus corroles. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism for the aerobic photocatalytic oxidation of benzylamine. 
The β-nitration and bromination of phosphorus 5,10,15-tritolylcorrole was reported by the Paolesse group in 2016.57 Nitrated and brominated corroles were studied (Fig. 41). These nitrated and brominated corroles, to some degree have “ruffled” structures; this structural analysis helped us obtain deeper insights into how the mechanism changes regarding this EWG beta substitution and the types of substitution and positioning that are possible for the corrole.
 Fig. 41  Structure of the products of nitration and bromination reactions reported by the Paolesse group. 
As mentioned above, Nasim Hassani and co-workers reported the main group (aluminum, phosphorus, silicon) corroles used as catalysts in driving carbon monoxide oxidation into carbon dioxide.12 The phosphorus corroles studied herein showed efficient catalytic performance. The phosphorus corroles were interestingly studied in their ability to form CO2 from CO via chemical oxidation. O2 is adsorbed by the trivalent phosphorus center: this P(III) center has a very low energy barrier owing to its oxophilicity. Then, as mentioned above, the CO will be attacked to furnish the OCO bond. In the case of phosphorus, they pass through a barrierless transition. Both “end-on” and “side-on” geometries were examined theoretically. This element corrole example serves as a thermal catalyst (not photocatalyst).
With CF3 group substitution, instead of being on the beta positions, they are on the easily tunable axial aryl group; they are in a position to help electronically withdraw from the axial aryl groups. This report by Alexander et al. is also an important finding;58 they did reach for an application. This rigid molecular design leaves the coordinatively unsaturated LnP+ center to function as a single-site Lewis acidic center, like a constrained and elaborate phosphonium analogue which is intricate and rationally electronically tunable (Fig. 42). These novel corrole cations are thought to be potent Lewis acid catalysts demonstrated by their reported catalytic intramolecular cyclization with an isolated yield reaching 76% and 13C6-D-glucose deoxygenation (Fig. 42). 13C6-D-Glucose was fiercely deoxygenated with one corrole cation operating as the catalyst in the presence of excess H2SiEt2 at room temperature; the final product was determined as a mixture of hexane and hexene with a total yield of 67%. These results enlightened us about how main group corrole cations could be designed as new kinds of efficient Lewis acid catalysts for more practical catalytic reactions with a system that is tunable in several definite ways.
 Fig. 42  (a) Catalytic reactions based on phosphorus corrole cations. (b) Single phosphonium-type system with catalytic open side. (c) Structures of phosphorus corrole cations. 
Recently, Gross and co-workers reported the synthesis of β-trifluoromethylated phosphorus corroles and investigated their photophysical properties and potential; the geometrical and electronic structure of the corrole systems were probed; the photocatalytic performance of these newly prepared corroles are considered in driving the bromination of aromatics such as phenol, toluene, and benzene.19
A wide range of CF3-substituted difluorophosphorus corroles were prepared via the FSO2CF2CO2Me/CuI/DMF regimen; the isolated products beautifully included all four possible mono-CF3 regioisomers, as well as complexes with 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-CF3 groups on the macrocycle's periphery (Fig. 43). The formation of the mono-CF3 species 107 was more favoured than the other mono-CF3 species (106, 108 and 109); the total yield of the four isomers was determined as being approximately 33%. The differences among these four isomers are delineated through NMR spectral characterization and X-ray structural analysis; the chemical shifts of the β-pyrrolic CH group adjacent to the CF3 group which shows a doublet ranging from a shift value of 9.17 to 9.82 ppm, for the four mono-CF3 species. The bis-CF3 species 110 was prepared with 107 as a starting material, triggering reactions with the same method mentioned above, obtained with an isolated yield of 10%. On the other hand, the tris-/tetra-/penta-CF3 substituted species were synthesized using a penta-brominated corrole species as the starting material, intended for the targeted penta-CF3 product (113); however, byproducts also formed and these were determined as the tris- and tetra-species. The total isolated yield was low (8% yield) obtained for the targeted penta-CF3 complex 5. Further X-ray structural determinations of corroles 107, 108, 110 and 113 showed that this kind of trifluoromethyl functionalization helped delineate evident planar distortion on the corrole macrocycle. The CF3 effect on the photophysical and redox properties was shown to be profound with (i) red shifts observed in terms of electronic absorption and emission bands, and (ii) extremely positive shift values determined in aspects of redox potentials, with CF3 groups formally substituted stepwise on the macrocycle. Importantly, due to the electron withdrawing effect of the CF3 group, the reduction potentials become increasingly positive as expected with each additional CF3 substituent added, shifting the reduction potential by ∼193 mV, a value much larger than that observed for F, Cl, Br, and I when analogous substitution is carried out, which is only about 50 mV per halide. Interestingly, the fifth CF3 group induced a relatively smaller potential shift with a value of 120 mV rather than the predicted value of 193 mV.
 Fig. 43  Structures of mono and multitrifluoromethyl-substituted phosphorus corroles. 
Due to the highly positive redox potential and excellent photo-sensitizing ability of complex 113, Zhan et al. determined to probe the photo-oxidation reactions based on complex 113. As an octa-brominated gallium corroles was examined in driving the photo-bromination of phenol,34 Zhan et al. also tested 113 and compared it to the photo-catalytic performance of that for the octabrominated gallium tpfc and penta-brominated species (P-Br5). It was discovered that complex 113 was an excellent photocatalyst: efficient photo-bromination of phenol, toluene and benzene were observed. The formation of ortho-/para-monobrominated phenol, benzyl bromide and bromobenzene, were observed with photo-catalyst 113. This work supported that CF3 substitution on the corrole macrocycle could be an efficient method to help shift the redox potentials into a more positive region so to obtain more efficient photo-oxidation catalytic performance.
In 2019, the Liu group reported the synthesis of one type of a “flat” phosphorus corrole (phosphorus 5,10,15-tris(ethoxycarbonyl)) (Fig. 44) and its application in photodynamic therapy for the inhibition of liver cancer cells (HepG2).59 From a biomedical research point of view, they used the compounds in the context of xenograph tumors. Compound 114 exhibited Soret band at 415 and 507 nm, and a Q-band at 539 and 583 nm. As part of their in vivo studies, compound 114 was imparted to tumor tissue, and red light irradiation (625 nm) was maintained for 10 minutes. Anti-tumor screening studies with 114 exhibited the PDT activity; 3.33 g of tumor became smaller after the treatment of 114 – it became 1.74 g with 1.0 mg kg−1 of 114, and became 0.622 g with 2.0 mg kg−1 of 114. They also looked at the Ga and Mn derivatives too, but 114 showed the best PDT activity in HepG2 tumor, and 114 showed low toxicity.
 Fig. 44  Phosphorus corrole compound 114–119. 
Chen et al. obtained the corrolazine from the phthalocyanine (measurements were taken at 353 K and after 4 h) by the addition of PBr3 as the reagent, pyridine and under argon atmosphere (Fig. 44).60 The molecular structure (below) is depicted as having two axial –OH groups. The synthesized phosphorus phthalocyanines exhibited excellent inhibition capacity in avoiding steel corrosion in 1 mol L−1 HCl; the EIS (Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy) studies demonstrated electronic absorptions arising from these phthalocyanine inhibitors; this kind of absorption on the steel surface was confirmed by further model simulation; the related XPS/SEM analysis also showed the presence of the layer formed from inhibitor molecules. This proved to be very effective in protecting steel from corrosion. Moreover, these photosensitizers could undergo photodegradation, mainly self-oxidation upon photo-irradiation.
In the study from 2018 by Gao et al., four different P corroles were found to be fluorescent; meso-ester groups are featured at the 5,15 (117, 118, and 119) or 5,10,15 (116) positions (Fig. 44).61 Loss of CO2 might, in theory, afford the full free putative unsubstituted corrole. The resulting dihydro complexes were reported. The placement of ester groups helps the species become red-shifted, compared to P(tpfc)(OH)2, containing three pentafluorophenyl groups which are the well-known stabilizing electron withdrawing groups. The wavelength of the Soret band was found at 418 nm for 116–119; P(tpfc)(OH)2 exhibited a Soret band at 410 nm. The photophysical study of phosphorus corroles (116–119) showed that the meso-substitution on the 10-position does not affect the Soret and Q-bands, and emission wavelengths significantly. A cyclic voltammetry study of four compounds were also compared with P(tpfc)(OH)2; four compounds showed two irreversible reduction processes (−1.42, −1.03 V of half-wave potential for 116, with similar values being found for 117, 118, and 119) and three oxidation processes (1.11, 1.76, and 1.83 V of half-wave potential for 116, similar with others). Reduction and oxidation potential values of P(tpfc)(OH) was known as −1.05 and 1.05 V, respectively.47
Main group corrole research also extends to sulfur and sulfonation; these are important general goals in which there was progress made by the Paolesse group. This is described here and below in a later section (vide infra): Paolesse et al. reported the synthesis of sulfonated phosphorus corroles which showed an intense fluorescence in water and methanol (Fig. 45).62 Compound 123 exhibited a fluorescence quantum yield of 0.24 in methanol and 0.26 in water. Compound 123 showed a large value of molar extinction (76300 M−1 cm−1 in methanol, 65240 M−1 cm−1 in water), and strong Soret bands at 410 and 420 nm in methanol, and Q-like bands at 599 nm. In water, the Soret and Q-like bands displayed similar maxima wavelength as they did in other solvents. In addition to the photophysical properties of compound 123, Paolesse et al. studied the morphology of thin films composed of compound 123 on Au(III) surface. After depositing compound 123 on the Au(III) surface, the scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) image was studied. At ambient temperature, compound 123 was found to be aggregated on the Au surface; this deposition changes the surface morphology.
 Fig. 45  Synthesized phosphorus corroles described in the report by the Paolesse group. 
Iodination is an effective and labile approach to introduce heavy atoms to molecules. A report by Gross and co-workers (2016) involves phosphorus corroles which were iodinated at the beta positions (Fig. 46);63 phosphorescence was discovered to exist at room temperature in these systems. This kind of iodination was previously reported for Ga and Al corroles as well.41 Applications as drug candidates, 1O2 generation, imaging, dyes, catalysts – including photocatalysts are all active considerations. The structures are shown; post-transition metal complexes can be treated. The corrole meso position substitutions involve the 2,6-di-F phenyl groups, as well as the normal pentafluorophenyl groups. The 2,3,17 β-substituted P(OH)2 species was well-characterized and exhibited phosphorescence at 825 nm with a lifetime of 232 μs; the phosphorescence quantum yield was determined as 0.35%.
 Fig. 46  Mullikan population analysis of the HOMO of 88, 89, and their 3-SO2Cl-substituted derivatives, at the BP 86-D3/def2-TZVP(-f) level of theory. 
The Brudveg report from 2015 tackles the implementation of corroles in photoelectrochemical cells of the storied Grätzel cell type.64 TiO2 is added to the system. In this case, the beta octachlorinated corrole was used. The bis-carboxylate groups serve to anchor the corrole to the material; the electron is allowed to become injected into the cell. “Recombination dynamics” were determined. Energy in the form of light allows for injection of an electron from the anchored corrole into the metal oxide material. Then, the corrole helps extract an electron from the species dissolved in the solution. This is true for water oxidation; the device is a “photoanode” composed of a metal oxide coated with the corrole. Oxidation of iodide was found to occur (vide infra). In this study, the authors were able to compare the octachloro species with the nonchlorinated species (Fig. 47). Changes were observed when comparing the photophysical properties (wavelength, extinction coefficient) of 124 whose absorptions are 417 (27.2), 524 (1.05), 562 (1.43), and 597 (4.31) nm with compound 126 whose absorptions are 401 (5.40), 424 (28.3), 534 (1.5), 557 (1.13), and 600 (3.27) nm (ε × 10-4 M−1 cm−1).
 Fig. 47  Structure of the corroles reported by Brudveg et al. 
In 2015, Zhang et al. summarized the recent work on triazatetrabenzcorrole (TBC) (Fig. 48).65 A thorough discussion of phosphorus TBC derivatives was included; all phosphorus TBCs included were prepared by reaction of free base TBC with PX3 (X = Br, Cl). Compared to the silicon TBC derivatives, the phosphorus TBC derivatives showed more evident Q-band splitting due to the lower symmetry of phosphorus TBCs. The IR (infrared) spectroscopic characterization of phosphorus TBCs was summarized: the axial PO double bond showed a stretching frequency range of 1281–1298 cm−1; the IR range of the axial PO–H bond, and P–OH were observed in the ranges of 3389 to 3460 cm−1 and 980–991 cm−1, respectively. The phosphorus TBCs were demonstrated to bear a defined domed structure, rather than a planar structure, based on X-ray structural determinations, as well as geometrical optimization from calculations. The photosensitizing ability of P TBCs was suggested to be better than those of the corresponding P phthalocyanines; this is solidified by the fact that P TBCs possess large values of singlet oxygen quantum yields, when compared to P phthalocyanines. Besides, the TBCs were considered as better potential second-order nonlinear optical materials than phthalocyanines.
 Fig. 48  Structure of OP(V)TBC (128). 
Interestingly, the P(v) phthalocyanines are completely non-fluorescent; the related TBC species, however, are strongly fluorescent. The paper also contains a section on UV-vis absorption; the fused benzenoid fragments help push the Q-band to 400 cm−1. Interestingly, the Soret band is not affected. This is thought to be due to the deformation of the macrocycle that moderately affects the π-system; the electronics may also affect the deformation to some extent. The way the macrocycle undergoes reaction/rearrangement is of interest. Again, the N is extruded, which, in and of itself, is interesting. The extrusion can occur with a chemical agent such as HSiCl3, as well as with PX3, and with H2SO4/SO3, Mg/ClSiMe3, and NaBH4. Also, of importance, is how the monomeric units merge to form the completed corroid with diimine isoindoline + Si2Cl6 or HSiCl3; alternatively, the use of phthalic acid + SnCl2/urea can be employed. And, as brought out by the Zhang paper, the existence of the PO bond was described; interestingly, the PO–H stretch is displayed at around 3400 cm−1. An electron withdrawing group (EWG) on the TBC rings help decrease this frequency, and therefore, weakens the bands. Axial P–OH stretches are located at 980–991 cm−1; likewise, Si–O stretches are found to be positioned at 820 cm−1. Slightly more energetic Si–O–Si μ-oxo stretches are assignable at 1000 cm−1; the analogous Ge–O stretch is located at 718 cm−1 with the Ge–O–H unit having a stretch of 3250 cm−1. Therefore, this paper is very important in helping gauge certain main group motifs; their spectrophotometric and photophysical parameters will continue to be of interest in the corrole and main group literature alike.
The report by Liang et al. deals with the central corrole chemical functionality; the 4-methyl ester functionalities were profiled (Fig. 49).54 Soret bands and Q-bands for compound 129 were studied spectroscopically with magnetic circular dichroism (MCD). Additionally, the electronic excitation spectra include the frontier MOs that were produced and analysed with TD-DFT calculations. Soret and Q-bands of compound 129 were calculated as 418 nm for Soret band, and 528 nm, 562 nm, and 600 nm for Q-bands. The frontier MO energy study showed the phenyl-substitution to P(O) corrole, the HOMO–LUMO gap decreases, and the further modification with –CO2Me group at the para-position of the substituted aryl group helps further attenuate the HOMO–LUMO gap. Aryl substitution imparted a red-shift to the Soret and Q-bands, and the electron withdrawing group (–CO2Me) substitution shifted the Soret and Q-bands to more red-shifted positions.
 Fig. 49  Structure of the symmetric A3 triaryl meso corrole with phosphine oxide functionality reported by Liang et al. 
A T-shaped type of supramolecular arrangement by Giribabu from 2014 (Fig. 50).66 was prepared and studied confirming no electronic communication between the porphyrin and corrole. The absorptions of 130 were 408 (5.34, logε), 408 (sh), 522 (3.97), 561 (4.19), and 598 nm (4.50). Absorptions of 131 were found to be 419 (5.44), 516 (4.40), 553 (4.30), 597 (4.50), and 649 (3.95) nm; 132 showed similar absorption peaks to that of the 131 species (Fig. 50); the fluorescence data was obtained in hexane, CH2Cl2 and acetonitrile: there were two excitation wavelengths at 405 and 420. Emission peaks of 130 were observed at 603, 662 (fluorescence quantum yield = 0.41) nm with the excitation wavelength of 405 nm. For 132, peaks were located at 602, 653, and 720 (0.009) nm with excitation wavelengths of 405 nm. These aforementioned values were similar when an excitation of 420 nm was used. Fluorescence quenching effects were studied with the reduction potential of phosphorus corroles and the past-reported Ge(IV) corrole-porphyrin hetero-dimer.50 Ge(IV) corrole-porphyrin hetero dimer showed the PET effect from corrole to porphyrin, which was not shown in the phosphorus corrole.
 Fig. 50  Phosphorus corrole and corrole-porphyrin dimer. 
In the paper by Ghosh et al. in 2012,67 five- (133) and six-coordinate (130) phosphorus corrole species (absorption bands (133) = 405, 447, 482, 522, 557 nm, emission bands (133) = 568 nm, 610 (sh) nm) and also the PH2 version (134) were studied (Fig. 51); this sets the stage for further research, whose corrole system bears a single hydride which can, in principle, be removed. This hydride abstraction initiates production of a single-site catalysis.58 There is a clean distribution and interplay between the five- and six-coordinate systems shown. (The emission bands are 600 and 656 nm for 130, and 568 and 610 nm for 133.) A lot of understanding is achieved by determinations made by structural X-ray diffraction studies; therefore, such characterization studies are important to enable our understanding of dynamics in solution.
 Fig. 51  Phosphorus corroles 130, 133 and 134 by Ghosh. 
The report by Goldberg et al. from 2011, which is a rigorous study, involves a deep treatment of corrole analogues with spectroscopy;68 Goldberg et al. over the years has worked on the aza corrole system (Fig. 52). The authors discuss coordination chemistry, and the ability to achieve 5–6 coordination at the P center. The aza-incorporation brings a new heterocyclic dimension to the corrole system, a system which consequently bears neither meso carbons, nor meso groups, and maybe little possibility for meso [N + R] groups because of the sterics involved. The entire system is, therefore, naturally more compact; synthetically speaking, achieving the unsubstituted corrole is a “holy grail” for research because it is a putative and extremely compact (yet also an electron-rich compound). An early report by Gouterman et al. should be introduced into the discussion here also.69
 Fig. 52  Phosphorus aza corrole as prepared studied and reported by Goldberg. 
Phosphorus is both the element (i) used in the agent for extruding one meso N atom from the phthalocyanine system, and also (ii) that which becomes bound in the central cavity.68 The use of PBr3 was described. Whether the oxo form is in the solid state only (entirely), this partition between available 5 and 6 coordination is again an important issue. An early example of what is possible with contracted porphyrin-type systems, therefore, comes from the analogous triazacorrole system. PBr3 helps effect ring contraction; the N is “extruded” from the porphyrin, once the macrocyclic ring has been brought into existence;” it is interesting to know what the intermediate materials or important intermediates are that are in existence, and whether these intermediates can serve as a co-material. Whether generation of azaphosphate of the cyclohexyl variety have been generated is an issue for further discussion.
In a slightly different chemical system from that of a corrole, the P or B center, was seen to typically impose a tetrahedral environment where possible. In 2018, Lechosław Latos-Grażyński reported some interesting N-fused p-benziporphyrin complexes with boron and phosphorus central elements inserted (Fig. 53). The anti-aromatic phosphorus(V) and non-aromatic boron(III) complexes of two N-fused dihydro-p-benziporphyrin isomers were prepared by treating PCl3 or PhBCl2 with 5,10,15,20-tetraaryl-p-benziporphyrin.70 The uniqueness of the system is worthy of mention. The X-ray structural information of 137 showed the presence of a distorted trigonal pyramid with one carbon and two nitrogen atoms; this fused six-coordinate P complex possesses a chiral phosphorus center with it and its enantiomer allowing separation by HPLC through the use of a chiral column. Importantly, the anti-aromatic phosphorus(v) and non-aromatic boron(III) complexes were transformed to aromatic 18 π electron cationic systems by simple oxidation using bromine or DDQ. This work disclosed meaningful aromaticity switching in the cases of boron(III) and phosphorus(v) N-fused p-benziporphyrins and enlightened us that it would be a good way to explore modulation of spectroscopic features by this variation in macrocycle design which because it is so unique, may rightfully be compared/contrasted to corrole systems and their chemistry.
 Fig. 53  Structures of of complexes 136–140. 
9. Silicon
There is a short but important series of silicon corrole reports. We feel that there is a lot more to explore through future research with silicon-based corrole chemistry due to its rich oxygen chemistry, somewhat, analogous to boron corrole chemistry. In 2018, Paolesse and co-workers reported the preparation of some silicon triarylcorroles bearing a single hydroxyl group in the axial ligand position (Fig. 54);71 interestingly, the μ-oxo dimer was synthesized in a facile way. Importantly, those silicon corroles showed high affinity to fluoride; this rendered these silicon corroles as effective F− sensors. Apparently, there is a condensation reaction between two C–SiOH units to afford [C–Si–O–Si–C]. The fluoride is used because it is advantageous in forming stable Si–F units; the reaction with F– does give telltale changes to the absorption spectrum as observed in the titrimetric assay. Recorded in THF solvent, the electronic absorption spectra of these silicon corroles contain Soret bands around 410 nm and highly fluorescent quantum yields ranging from 0.25 to 0.50; the μ-oxo dimer showed extensive blue shifts in terms of electronic absorptions with a peak at 386 nm; a lower fluorescence quantum yield (0.09) was determined. Interestingly, this dimer exhibited a red-shifted emission spectra (peak centered around 599 nm) compared to these monomer silicon corroles (maxima varied from 574–586 nm).
 Fig. 54  Structures of silicon corroles and dimer reported by the Paolesse group. 
The first silicon(IV) corrole complex was synthesized by Osuka et al. in 2018. The SiIV corrole system was synthesized from the corresponding free base corrole with 50 equiv. of SiCl4. The authors suggested the SiIV corrole was formed during the aqueous workup by hydrolysis (Fig. 55).72 The 29Si NMR spectrum of 142 in CDCl3 showed a sharp singlet at δ = −148.82 ppm, reminiscent to peaks of compounds containing penta-coordinated silicon atoms. Compounds 148 and 150 also exhibited similar NMR spectra to that of 142; in contrast, 149 showed broad peaks in CDCl3 possibly because of aggregation. In the case of 151, μ-oxo dimer of the SiIV corrole showed an upfield-shifted 1H NMR spectrum due to the diatropic ring current of the other corrole ring. In the case of a photophysical property study, 142 showed a Soret band at λ = 405 nm, and a fluorescence band at λ = 568 nm and 617 nm; both are blue shifted and sharper than that of 20 (Soret band at λ = 407 nm, fluorescence at λ = 641 nm and 701 nm). 148 and 149 exhibited similar Soret and fluorescence bands with 142; in contrast, 150 showed a red-shifted Soret band at λ = 418 nm because of π-extension from the ethynyl group. However, the fluorescence band of 150 was blue shifted compared with 147, displayed at λ = 587 and 642 nm, respectively. The μ-oxo dimer, 151, exhibited a blue-shifted Soret band at λ = 389 nm, compared with 142. In contrast, 151 showed a red-shifted fluorescence band at λ = 644 nm with a fluorescence quantum yield of 7.0%.
 Fig. 55  Structures of free-base and silicon corroles, and its dimer form. 
An article by Joana et al. is a good example of a focused photophysics report.73 Photophysics of non meso-substituted silicon corrole compound 152 was compared with silicon phthalocyanine (153) and phosphorus corrole (128) (Fig. 56). UV-vis absorption data were acquired and analysed; electronic excitations were found at 672 and 690 nm for compounds 152 and 153, respectively. The photophysical features of singlet and triplet states at the lowest excited states were acquired. 152 showed the longest fluorescence lifetime in this study of 5.84 ns and the lowest fluorescence quantum yield of 0.24, compared with 153 (5.57 ns and 0.42) and 128 (3.20 ns and 0.36). In contrast to the fluorescence data, 152 exhibited the highest triplet formation quantum yield of 0.70 and singlet oxygen quantum yield of 0.61 than that compared to 153 (0.52 and 0.48) and 128 (0.45 and 0.43).
 Fig. 56  Structures of 128, 152 and 153. 
Based on the report from the Anderson research group, which pointed out that boron trifluoride can be used as a catalyst, the Rothemund condensation of triisopropylsilyl (TIPS) propynal with 3,4-diethylpyrrole gave a reaction mixture after oxidation with 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ) (Fig. 57).74 The reaction mixture was further purified and characterized by mass spectroscopic and X-ray structural determinations; porphyrin 154 was determined as the main product with an isolated yield of 16% via the BF3/DDQ protocol. Through this work, a wide range of by-products were prepared which included triphyrin 155, corrole 156, pentaphyrin 157, hexaphyrin 158 and two linear tripyrromethenes 159 and 160, as shown in Fig. 57.
 Fig. 57  Structures of compounds 154–160. 
The formed corrole 156 was observed as a greenish product and exhibited corrole electronic spectra that were typical with a Soret band centered around 474 nm in dichloromethane. The main product (154) was used as the starting material to prepare its corresponding zinc and nickel complexes; these metallic complexes were further characterized by X-ray determinations, which revealed the highly ruffled structural conformation of this kind of porphyrin. Internal hydrogen bonding was also observed which can help partly explain the ruffling feature of this porphyrin; the NH signal was recorded at 0.75 ppm in CDCl3, remarkably downfield-shifted for a porphyrin NH resonance. In summary, the authors reported one boron trifluoride-catalyzed reaction for preparing porphyrin derivatives in which certain related byproducts form.
Like the phosphorus TBCs described, the photophysical properties of silicon TBCs were also included in the review by Zhang et al.65 Compared to phosphorus TBCs, the silicon TBCs showed lower Q-band splitting due to their greater planarity on the macrocycle. The Si–O bond in Si TBCs (Si(OCH2Ph)TBC and Si(OSiEt3)TBC) featured an IR stretching at around 820 cm−1; the Si–O–Si bond in μ-oxo dimer exhibited an IR stretch at around 1000 cm−1. Corresponding to the silicon phthalocyanines, the silicon TBCs also showed great photosensitizing ability with high singlet oxygen quantum yields.
Besides silicon corroles and TBCs, the preparation of anionic silicon phthalocyanines were reported in 2009 by Myakov et al.75 The silicon mono-/di-/tri-phthalocyanine anions were prepared by the reaction of silicon phthalocyanine with Na or K, which was demonstrated and monitored by electronic absorption and EPR spectral studies. The THF solution colors of these three phthalocyanines changed from blue, at the beginning of the reaction, to a final dark blue, after the reduction was fully accomplished. The new peaks appeared upon the reduction process and were successfully assigned to phthalocyanine anions; for example, the first new peak (λmax = 580 nm) observed during the reduction of di-phthalocyanine was attributed to its monoanion; the new band, shifted and more blue, with an absorption λmax = 550 nm is assigned to its anion.
10. Tin
Tin has featured prominently, yet is less well known than other main group in corrole studies; the interesting aspect of a reduced bound Sn(II) has been addressed in recent years. The studies below indicated exceptional growth its possible and perhaps inevitable for this class of corrole. The limited literature to date features a sufficient amount of photophysics, as well as electrochemistry and synthetic points to assist future research with Sn corrole chemistry.
An article from 2020 by Lai et al., compares the excited state dynamics of pyrenyl corroles complexed with Sn4+, Ga3+, and P5+ centers (Fig. 58).76 Compared to standared aryl(phenyl) substituted corrole model systems, all corroles showed a sharper, stronger, and red-shifted Soret band and blue-shifted Q-band. The respective P and Ga corrole complexes were more fluorescent because of their planar conformation; in terms of fluorescence, Sn-corroles were found to be relatively photophysically quenched (ΦF = 0.01) exhibiting a short fluorescence lifetime of around 200 ps, (indicative of fast ISC coupling). These characteristics are attributed to its domed structure. Sn-corroles also show the fastest singlet oxygen generation rate (yields are as follows: ΦΔ,Sn = 0.71 vs. ΦΔ,P = 0.51 vs. ΦΔ,Ga = 0.43). Superoxide radical anion generation (O2−˙) was also observed upon irradiation; it proceeded by charge transfer from the excited T1 state of the Sn-corrole to ground-state oxygen. These properties make Sn-corrole a promising photosensitizer candidate. All three metal corroles bind to DNA through an “outside” binding mode. For comparison, we wish to mention photophysical values pertaining to Sb corrole systems reported by Heyne and coworkers 2017; relaxation processes in these systems were found to be 10 ps for fluorescence and 20 ps for absorption.17
 Fig. 58  Structures of pyridyl corroles 161–164 studied by Lai. 
A corrole report from Nyokong et al. shows the properties of a newly synthesized tin(IV) corrole (Sn(IV) tristhien-2-ylcorrole) and its applications in PDT (as compared to porphyrin analogues) (Fig. 59).77 Comparisons with trisphenylcorrole were also performed to help determine the effect of the thien-2-yl groups. Sn(IV) tristhien-2-yl corrole has a lower, red-shifted Q-band and is weakly fluorescent at its Soret maxima (ΦF = 0.03), due to fluorescence quenching enabled by the “heavy atom” effect from sulfur and also Sn. It does not aggregate and has a higher singlet oxygen quantum yield (ΦΔ = 0.87) than its porphyrin counterpart (ΦΔ = 0.83), making it a good candidate for study as a PDT photosensitizer. This is a “two-fold” increase compared to Sn(IV) trisphenylcorrole, mainly because the S-atom facilitates energy transfer from the S1 to T1 state. Sn(IV) tristhien-2-ylcorrole displays better lipophilicity and cellular uptake than does trisphenylcorrole; related cytotoxicity assays demonstrate that the Sn(IV) tristhien-2-yl corrole has an enhanced photocytotoxicity (IC50 = 3.2 μM) (phenyl analogue IC50 = 13.1 μM porphyrin analogue IC50 = 5.6 μM).
 Fig. 59  Structures of tin triarylcorroles 165 and 166. 
A novel tin(IV) corrole (5,10,15-tris(4-methoxycarbonylphenyl)corrole tin(IV)) was synthesized and tested for potential anti-cancer activity (Fig. 60).78 Absorption spectra, CD spectra, and viscosity studies show that both the unmodified corrole and the Sn corrole bind to CT-DNA in the outside groove (outside binding mode), with Sn corrole showing a tighter bonding (possibly due to H-bonding interactions). It was confirmed that the Sn corrole had good photonuclease activity. The superoxide anion radical was found to be generated (O2−˙). Sn, therefore, played an important, yet indirect role, in DNA cleavage; the unmodified corrole did not exhibit any photonuclease activity. The Sn corrole displayed cytotoxicity towards carcinoma cells at concentrations above 10 μM; this indicated its potential in inhibiting tumor cells. At higher concentrations (80 μM), this cytotoxicity is thought to be due to mitochondrial membrane degradation.
 Fig. 60  Tin corrole compound 167 studied by Xie et al. 
A tin corrole-cobalt porphyrin heterobimetallic complex (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) (TPFC = 5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole, TAP = 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(p-methoxyphenyl)porphyrin) was synthesized (Fig. 61).79 Photolysis and thermolysis of the Sn–Co bond were studied and revealed that the complex undergoes homolysis, producing the four-coordinate tin radical. Photooxidation of (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) (170) showed the absorption change as the absorption decreases at 413 nm and 624 nm, and the absorption increases at 423 and 536 nm, 572, and 595 nm which is similar with the (TAP)CoII (169) and (TPFC)Sn–O–Sn(TPFC) dimer. A laser flash photolysis study was performed; the transient spectrum of (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) recorded 10 ns after the laser pulse was performed and showed similar absorption with both the (TAP)CoII (419 nm) and (TPFC)Sn (168) radical species (550-600 nm). Transient absorption signals that decayed within several milliseconds were recorded; this suggests regeneration of (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) occurs. The activation energy of this recombination was calculated as 1.93 kcal mol−1. Additionally, the photolysis of (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) with N-tert-butyl-α-phenylnitrone (PBN) at –50 °C and −20 °C produced the EPR signal of a PBN-trapped radical. A thermolysis study of (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) produced the tin radical compound, by using the radical trap (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO). Reactivity of (TPFC)Sn radical from (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) photolysis/thermolysis was studied and revealed that the tin radical (TPFC)Sn catalyzes the alkyne cyclotrimerization. Therefore, (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) can be used for the cyclotrimerization of aryl alkynes.
 Fig. 61  Structures of (TPFC)SnII (168), (TAP)CoIIICl (169), and (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) (170). 
A study from Sinha and Kar in 2014, involved a facile demetalation strategy for Sn corroles using Grignard reagents.80 The free-base corrole was generated in high yields upon treating corrolato–Sn(IV) chlorides in DCM with methylmagnesium chloride. This reaction was applicable to various corrolato–Sn(IV) chloride derivatives as well, with yields proportional to the number of equivalents of Grignard reagent added. RMgCl was found to be the only reagent capable of demetalation, possibly because of its greater reactivity and basicity compared to those of RMgBr. The proposed mechanism involves successive steps of nucleophilic attack on the central Sn(IV) metal center; intermediates resulting in formation of up to four Sn–R bonds, one Sn–N bond and three Mg–N bonds in corroles are brought into existence. Addition of water allows for the breakage of the Sn–N and Mg–N bonds to help generate the free-base corroles.
Three novel Sn–corrole complexes (171–173) have been synthesized by Sinha et al. and were aggregated to form nanospheres for potential semiconductor applications (Fig. 62).81 The compounds exhibited π–π* transitions in the visible region and strong fluorescence at 600–650 nm wavelengths (red region). The corroles all bear five-coordinate, square pyramidal geometries, and feature domed conformations at the central metal (the Sn center deviates from the corrole plane by 0.61–0.65 Å). Intermolecular interactions by way of C–H–Cl bonding was observed (weak hydrogen bonding). Upon aggregation, 171 and 173 were seen to form hollow nanospheres. Compound 171 was used to create a semiconducting device that had good resistance (∼2.4 × 108 Ω); thus, this material has potential applications as a semi-insulating material. Through cAFM measurements, it has been confirmed that the nanospheres are electron-conducting molecules and with electron migration pathways possibly due to their spatially localized HOMOs.
 Fig. 62  Structures of tin corroles 171–173. 
Yun et al. synthesized a new four-coordinate, divalent Sn(II)–corrole complex [tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole tin(II) anion] through the reduction of the Sn(IV)–corrole anion by treatment with NaBH4, (2014).82 Reduced tin corrole species such as this are not commonly reported because of high thermodynamic instability. DFT calculations showed that the ground states of this molecule were filled, and analysis of its HOMO and LUMO levels show that the lowest T0 state occurs by π–π* excitation. The predicted geometries show a domed structure, with Sn–N bond distances equal and at around 2.0 Å. The synthesized Sn–corrole complex shows good reactivity towards alkyl halides and alkenes through a nucleophilic addition pathway (compared to an oxidation pathway for divalent Sn(II)). This shows the unique features of the corrole ligand, such as a preference for a five-coordinate geometry, and the formation of an anionic Sn(II)–corrole complex that favours nucleophilic displacement to form the more stable and neutral Sn(IV) product.
Photoexcited studies of tin corroles are relatively scarce; one typical publication on this topic was reported by the Gross group in 2006;83 the photoexcited states (especially the triplet state) of the tpfc aluminum chelate, the aluminum tpfc with β-octa brominated species, as well as the tin tpfc complex were investigated. The tpfc aluminum complex was determined with no signal observed in terms of light-induced EPR spectra. The TREPR (time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance) studies on Q-bands exhibited that in-plane triplet sublevels are preferentially populated for the tin tpfc complex due to the weak electronic interactions between the Sn4+ center and the corrole macrocycle; while the β-octa brominated aluminum complex showed predominant out-of-plane triplet sublevels, which might be due to the heavy atom effect aroused from the presence of the beta position bromine atoms, thus promoting the SOC (spin-orbital coupling) process. These results suggested that the corrole coordination with tin ion is not strong enough to accelerate the ISC process.
The bimetallic complex 174 was studied by Poulin et al. in 2006 (Fig. 63).84 Rh(TPP) (175) and Sn(Me6Et2Cor) (176) were used as a starting material; the rhodium and tin were directly bonded at compound 174. All spectral measurements were performed at 77 K, because compound 174 was not fluorescent at room temperature; homolytic metal–metal bond cleavage occurs at room temperature. Compound 175 displayed the absorption maximum at 534 and 570 nm; compound 176 showed the absorption maximum at 558 and 568. Compound 174 exhibited the absorption maximum at 534 nm, 568 nm, and the “shoulder peak” at 580 nm which originates from that seen in compounds 175 and 176. Compound 175 exhibited only the phosphorescence at 732 nm, compared to compound 176, which exhibited both fluorescence and phosphorescence (maximum at 739 nm). Compound 174 showed the phosphorescence only at 724 nm, assigned to be the phosphorescence of Rh(TPP).
 Fig. 63  (a) Structures of the tin-corrole/rhodium porphyrin complex 174 show together and separately and (b) the energy diagram pertaining to the different sections of compound 174. 
Spectral features suggested the singlet and triplet excited state of Rh(TPP) and Sn(Me6Et2Cor) (Fig. 63), so that the compound 175 and compound 176 fragment in compound 174 act as the singlet donor and singlet acceptor, respectively. Additional spectral features include the phosphorescence lifetime and the phosphorescence quantum yield was decreased in the bimetallic compound 174, compared to Rh(TPP) (ΦPhos(×10−3) 42 ± 4 → 0.42 ± 0.04 and τPhos (ps) 300 ± 5 → 120 ± 5).
In 2003, Barbe et al. also reported the synthesis of a heterobinuclear complex of Rh porphyrin and Sn(IV) corrole (174) through nucleophilic attack; the end goal was characterizing the effects of the two metals on the reactivity of the complex.85 These two complexes were chosen for the ease with which Rh porphyrin undergoes reduction and for the Sn(IV) corrole center not being affected by this reduction reaction. Furthermore, the Sn corrole chosen has an axial Cl ligand that can easily be replaced through nucleophilic substitution. The porphyrin–corrole complex possesses a blue-shifted Soret band (390 nm) and two Q-bands (519 and 563 nm). The Rh–Sn bond distance was determined to be 2.51 Å and is almost orthogonal to the porphyrin and corrole planes.
In the report by Kadish et al., Sn(IV)-corroles ((OEC)Sn(C6H5) and (OEC)SnCl, OEC = octaethylcorrole) were synthesized, compounds in which oxidations cannot occur at the metal centers (valence of 4 being the maximum); their electrochemical properties were studied.86 The structure was similar to most Sn-corroles, with the Sn lying slightly outside the corrole macrocycle plane thus affording an overall “domed” conformation. (OEC)Sn(C6H5) and (OEC)SnCl underwent three reversible oxidation reactions; these reactions occurred at the corrole center through stepwise electron abstraction. In the electroreduction experiments, Sn(IV) in (OEC)SnCl was reduced at its central atom to Sn(II). The HOMO–LUMO gap in (OEC)Sn(C6H5) was similar to that for the porphyrin derivatives (2.25 V); more studies are needed, however, to generalize this value to all corroles.
11. Group 11 (Cu, Ag, Au)
While we will only discuss Ag and Au here, there are more than a few important notions regarding Cu corroles to re-review elsewhere at a later time. Also, within other element corrole reports, copper can serve importantly as a reagent for coupling, etc. We delve into aspects of these Ag and Au reports below.
Briefly about Cu corroles, in the Accounts article from 2012, there is a full discussion, a then up-to-date discussion, of copper corroles.1 Also, a CV study was included; the discussion reverts back to foundational research by Taylor. Mention of copper corroles and how there is Cu(II) corrole radical anion character in the multideterminant electronic structures brought out a discussion point involving the geometric feature of saddling, defined by macrocycle angles; the Au[(tpFp)C] is only slightly saddled. Considering the absorption portions of the Au and Cu corrole – the Au is blue-shifted considerably from that for the Cu analogue.
11.1. Gold
In this section, we step away from the non-precious element/metals such as Al3+ and P5+ and discuss precious coinage metals with some interest, based on our need to parse the photophysics aspects, and show important aspects of synthesis.
In an article by Kolle from 2011, the tris meso 4-fluoro phenyl corole system is reported and evaluated (Fig. 64).87 The corrole is substituted with gold. The scientific underpinnings of the ordering of the Cu > Ag > Au triad was articulated. Clear CV data is provided and the corrole nature of the system is suggested to change from a radical character to a character deemed as “innocent”; in terms of low-lying orbitals, it is simply orbital mixing. The saddling is suspected of coming from the metal (dx2–y2 – corrole (“a2u” orbital interaction). The interaction is “symmetry forbidden,” which is enforcing an otherwise planar macrocyclic geometry, as in corrole or porphyrin chemistry. Furthermore, some issues such as the origin of the saddling being electronics and photophysical properties require more consideration: at present, it has been rationalized that the mechanical power of this electronic repulsion forces the saddling. In the case of gold, with everything else being the same, the respective 5dx2–y2 is higher in energy; therefore, decreased mixing of this orbital with that of the A1 is expected, and therefore no saddling is exhibited. Although appearing as stacked moieties in the solid state, the Au–Au internuclear distances are too long to be considered as true metallic solids.88
 Fig. 64  Gold corrole 177 by Kolle. 
In a gold corrole report involving the –CF3 group, what is spectrally and synthetically possible with this substitution has been partly explored by Sudhakar et al.89 The tetra-iodo analogue was converted to the cleanly isolated tetra CF3 gold species (Fig. 65). The structural study shows a distortion of the macrocycle. The Au, AuI4, and Au(CF3)4 species are shown as exhibiting stepwise increases in phosphorescence; also, the effect of the three CF3 groups was determined spectroscopically.
 Fig. 65  Gold corroles with iodo and CF3 beta substituent functionalities. 
The study of compound 181 showed that the existence of the Au(III) corrole radical redox isomer is dominant, versus that of the Au(II). This was achieved by the calculated spin density plot by DFT theoretical calculations in which the singly occupied orbital is determined and visualized. Moreover, the CF3 effect on the redox properties was found to be profound: the tetra-CF3 substitution lead to dramatic positive shifts (740 mV) in the reduction potentials which exceeded the effect from the eight Br atoms present as substituents. The stability of Au(CF3)4 was confirmed by employing this corrole as the electro catalyst for the proton reduction to hydrogen; the current intensity of AuII/AuIII did not change during this electrocatalysis. The CF3 effect was demonstrated to be immense on the physical and chemical properties of gold corroles.
In an article by Soll et al. in 2016, heavy atoms were incorporated and occupy both the definite center and the periphery of the corrole chemical system to greatly shift its photophysical features.90 Namely, the Au center – a single one – is bound to the corrole N4 core; three/four iodo groups are also present (Fig. 66), albeit located at the exterior (beta positions). The Au starting material and NIS are added synthetically at the same time to the reaction mixture (in one pot). Therefore, this “one pot” approach for converting one typical fluorophore-tpfc into “phosphores”, such as these phosphorescent gold corroles, was proven to be efficient. All three coinage metals were, in fact, used, studied, and discussed in this article. The target complexes were able to be obtained via mixed metalation and iodination procedures; the gold corroles, namely (tpfc)Au and (I4-tpfc) Au, displayed strong phosphorescent and singlet oxygen emission; (I4-tpfc) Au was determined to possess the largest values in terms of the triplet lifetime (1.2 ± 0.1 μs) and the singlet oxygen quantum yield value (ΦΔ/ΦΔ(TPP) = 1.5 ± 0.2; TPP = 5,10,15,20-(H2)meso-tetraphenylporphyrin), which showed great advantages by comparing these values of tpfc (triplet lifetime: 0.2 ± 0.1; singlet oxygen quantum yield: ΦΔ/ΦΔ(TPP) = 0.7 ± 0.1) and even (tpfc)Au (triplet lifetime: 0.4 ± 0.1 singlet oxygen quantum yield: ΦΔ/ΦΔ(TPP) = 0.4 ± 0.1). Importantly, X-ray structural investigations demonstrated that further iodination on the macrocycle of (tpfc)Au did not induce evident planar distortion whereas complexes (I4-tpfc) Cu/Ag showed very strong planar distortion on the corrole's macrocycle. These findings will be helpful for structure/function tuning and development of novel higher-level chromophores.
 Fig. 66  Preparation of the gold tetra-iodo species by Soll et al. 
Gold corroles bearing carboxyphenyl groups were studied by Alemayehu et al. (Fig. 67).91 A central bound gold atom makes corroles immediately phosphorescent at around 800 nm; the triplet lifetime was found to be ∼75 μs. The report considers the photophysical effect of the linking phenylene moieties. Photodynamic experiments were tested. Other strategies can be considered, stemming from this paper. Significant phototoxicity towards cancer cells was observed. From a medical standpoint, AY27 rat bladder cancer cells were used. The control experiment involved no Au. When the three mesoaryl para-COOH groups were present (metal), a bathochromic shift was observed. This signifies that there are strong isomeric differences. This isomerism can be an emphasis for future research. Those, which possess a phenylene(s) spacer and where it is placed, versus those that do not. (i) How corroles are measured as being amphiphilic (ii) how this is potentially switchable and its photophysical underpinnings and (iii) how molecular attributes can be further modulated will be important issues to address through future studies (see future research aims below).
 Fig. 67  Structure of gold complexes by Alemayehu et al. 
In 2014, Che and co-workers reported that gold corroles (Fig. 68) functioned as electron donors for the design of OSCs (organic solar cells);92 these investigated gold corroles displayed long-lived excited states with recorded triplet lifetimes above 25 μs and very low luminescent quantum yields determined below 0.15%, which resulted in low values of radiative decay processes and promoted ISC processes.
 Fig. 68  Structures and energy diagram of gold corroles as studied by the Che group. 
All gold corroles studied in this report exhibited typical electronic absorption spectra with Soret bands around 420 nm and several Q-bands varied from 550 to 600 nm, as recorded in degassed dichloromethane. DFT calculation results showed the energy gaps based on the HOMO–LUMO gap ranged from 2.23 to 2.28 eV and with the energy levels of HOMO changing from −5.41 eV to −5.27 eV, which were able to give a PCE range of −1.8 to 3.0% by employing C70 as the electron acceptor under vacuum-deposited conditions. The PCE was maximized to 6% based on compound 186 in the optimized solution-processed OSC. This finding demonstrated that well-functionalized corrole complexes could be used as excellent photosensitizers for the design of OSCs.
The Gross research group conducted very pioneering research on Au(III) and Au(I) corrole complexes (2011); the synthesis of Au(III)/Au(I) complexes chelated by a fully β-brominated corrole was described, and the physical and chemical properties of the complexes were investigated.93 The Au(I) corroles (188 and 189) were prepared from the reaction between the free-base corrole with full β-bromination with one equivalent [MeAu(PPh3)] or [ClAu(PPh3)] at room temperature, whereas the Au(III) corrole complex (190) was synthesized by treating the β-brominated free base corrole with [ClAu(tht)](tht = tetrahydrothiophene) at room temperature in chloroform. Interestingly, the single N-alkylation was achieved by treating the mixture of 188 and 189 with Br2/toluene or NIS/toluene with the Au(III) corrole (190) as one product, as shown in Fig. 69. The crystallographic determinations confirmed the structure of the formed benzyl group substituted-N corroles 191 and 192 as well as the Au(III) complexes 188 and 190, which provided a relaxed square-planar coordination environment for Au(III) corrole. The reduction potential for Au(III) corrole 190 was demonstrated to be more positively shifted for 400 mV than the analogue gallium corrole. This gold corrole 190 was determined as an excellent “phosphore” which displayed an emission with a maximum at 769 nm and exhibited a corresponding phosphorus lifetime of 195 ± 10 μs, as recorded in toluene under nitrogen atmosphere.
 Fig. 69  Core alkylation of N-site. 
Larsen et al. reported the free-base, Cu(III), and Au(III) azulicorroles in 2019 (Fig. 70).94 Synthesized azulicorroles showed the near-infrared absorption peaks at around 850–900 nm, suggesting the HOMO–LUMO gap is about 1.5 eV. Compared to free-base and Cu(III) azulicorroles, Au[AzuC] displayed simple cyclic voltammograms: reversible oxidation and irreversible two-electron reduction were observed. The HOMO–LUMO gap of Au[AzuC] was calculated as 1.63 eV, similar with the expectation from the absorbance spectra study, and smaller in value than the HOMO–LUMO gap of the Au triarylcorrole (∼2.2 eV).
 Fig. 70  Structures of the free-base azulicorrole H3[AzuC] (193). 
In 2016, Zhu reported a unique one-dimensional (1D) infinite monatomic gold wire (1D-IMGW) stabilized by corrole units; investigations were made by optical and electronic properties were assessed by DFT calculations.88 The intense interactions between the dz2 orbitals of the Auc atoms in the centers of the corrole rings and the 6s orbitals of the Aui atoms from the middle of the adjacent corrole, was considered as the main reason for the corrole to stabilize this 1D-IMGW. Three packing models were involved in this study, namely model 1-[Au(Au–cor)2] with two parallel Au–corrole macrocycle rings in which one Au atom is inserted between the two corrole bound Au species, model 2-[Au2(Au–cor)3)] with two Au atoms inserted among three Au–corrole rings in a similar pattern as model 1. Further extension was made to give model 3-[Au3(Au–cor)4] with a chain of three Au atoms inserted between two Au–corrole rings and arranged collinearly. The evaluation of binding energy of the three models demonstrated that the stability of this kind of hybrid structure increased as the Au wire length increased due to the increasing binding energy from model 1 (0.42 eV) to model 3 (0.65 eV). The Au wire extension exemplified from model 1 to model 3 also induced evident red shifts, and a broader shape in terms of electronic absorption spectra based on results from TD-DFT calculations. The fact that this 1D-IMGW involved mix valences of Au (3+ and 0) was supported by the Bader charge calculations on Au atoms: the calculated Bader charges of the two Au corrole atoms from model 1 were +0.96 |e| close in value to the Bader charge on Au3+ (+0.92 |e|) from Au(OH)3; the calculated charge on the Au+ ion of AuOH is +0.32 |e| which is much larger than the calculated charge on Aui −0.16 |e|. Importantly, this 1D-IMGW displayed broad and very strong absorption ranging from 200 to 800 nm according to a calculated plot with the absorption coefficient as the function of the photo energy (nm).
Higashino et al. reported gold, rhenium, and osmium corrole complexes with COOH group at para- and meta-positions of meso-phenyl groups. Photovoltaic properties of metal corroles were studied, and the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) were much higher for gold corroles compared to rhenium and osmium corroles. Transient absorption spectroscopy study revealed that gold corroles show slower intersystem crossing from the excited singlet state than other compounds, and get higher PCEs. meta-Aryl substituted gold corrole exhibited higher value of PCEs than para-aryl substituted one, and it is explained by the Au–TiO2 interaction, which is stronger in meta-aryl substituted corrole.95
11.2. Silver
In this section, we introduce and discuss silver-containing corrole reports from the literature. Nardis et al. reported the halogenation of some triarylcorroles and focused on the synthetic methods at play.96 One interesting finding is the synthesis of the silver 3,17-diiodo-5,10,15-tris(4-tert-butylphenyl)corrole which was thoroughly characterized by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray structural determinations. The iodination substitution effect on the electronic absorption was discussed; comparisons were made to the corresponding free-base corrole. Red shifts were both observed in terms of the Soret and Q-bands in which the effect on the Soret band was more pronounced.
A report from 2015 represents an important contribution by Kolle et al. Ligand non-innocence appears even in the title of the article and is discussed vigorously.97 Ag, stationed midway between Cu and Au in the coinage triad is undoubtedly an interesting central atom to consider. The electrochemical data is important to consider and gauge with an understanding it will lie somewhere between the unsubstituted derivative and the octabromo species. The β-unsubstituted silver triarylcorrole (Ag[TpXPC]) and β-octabrominated silver triarylcorrole (Ag[Br8TpXPC]) showed different Soret band shift values depending on para substitution (X) on the aryl group. The Soret band of Ag[TpXPC] was not shift-dependent on the para substitution; in contrast, Ag[Br8TpXPC] exhibited the Soret band red shift when the X group has stronger electron donating character. The Soret maxima wavelength of Ag[TpXPC] was found to be the same (423 nm) for all substitutions, X = CF3, H, CH3, and OCH3. However, the Soret maxima wavelength of Ag[Br8TpXPC] undergoes red-shifting, giving bands at 416, 425, 438, and 450 nm (X = CF3, H, CH3, and OCH3, respectively) as the electron-donating character of the X group increases progressively. Further, a UV-vis spectral study of one-electron reduction and oxidation of Ag[TPC] and Ag[Br8TPC] revealed that the Ag[TpXPC] has AgIII–corrole3− character similar with that found for gold corroles; Ag[Br8TpXPC] has AgII–corrole˙2−-like character, similar with that of copper corroles.
Bisacetylene substitution in a corrole species, if done right, still affords overall higher molecular symmetry; the substitution of focus is on the 3,17-position substitution in the report of Stefanelli et al. in 2019.98 The authors performed and described spectroelectrochemistry to show the differences of added pyridine; this is a clear and interesting pyridyl study (see the group 15 Section below). In addition, there is one system that bears a single –NO2 group at the 3-position. For this reason, the Au derivative was prepared and studied; it was intermediate between the apparently non-innocent Cu(II)/(III) corrole and the completely innocent Au(III) corrolate. The Ag version was determined to be innocent through this study. It will be good to reexplore these systems with multi beta CF3 substituent tuning.19
A report by Stefanelli et al. is interesting and relevant to our discussion for three reasons.98 First, the Ag falls into the category of being main group-adjacent. (In reality Ag(III) is open shell and d8. Second, the –NO2 involvement is interesting as it can further help strongly tune the system as the quintessential electron withdrawing substituent. Third, the extended π-system and how the phenylene fragment is used to enforce a spatial connection between the electron withdrawing –NO2 group and the corrole, etc is and important feature. The discussion from the data in this paper has deemed this species to bear ligand “innocence.” Prior to coupling, the species bearing Br or I groups could also be compared. Therefore, the substitution is located on the 3,17-positions and also the 3-position for the –NO2 group (Fig. 71). It seems like the halides and their reactivity patterns are, and will be for a while to come, interesting and important goals in corrole chemistry research. –CF3 derivatization reveals important, yet difficult, spesctroscopic patterns too. The Soret band with the species bearing an ethylene linker provides for a comparison in extending the π-system: the red shifting is represented by a formal push from 436 to 449 nm; the Q-band signals are shifted from 569 and 595 to 596 and 619 nm. These π-conjugative effects are important photophysical quantifiers of substitution. Ag–corrole intermolecular interactions found in the solid state are key motifs for future research.
 Fig. 71  Silver corroles 194–202 studied by Stefanelli et al. 
A work by Ueta et al. from 2019 is important because of the substitution at the 10-position (Fig. 72).99 There is Cl substitution; also, a diphenylamino group is installed. On top of that, the authors also explored the use of silver; also, the meso-carbazolyl derivative was prepared. The Ag system exhibits optical features at UV-vis (abs, extinction coefficient) for comparison with other systems: 423 (1.57), 565 (0.24) 606 (0.12) nm (ε × 10 −5 M−1 cm−1).
 Fig. 72  Structures of silver corroles as studied in the report of Ueta et al. 
The paper by Ooi et al. from 2016 points out a few relevant research issues.100 Silver corroles were studied; there are two different ways that the authors explored connecting two corroles together: through the 5-position and through the 10-position (Fig. 73). The difference between them helps form an interesting discussion point. The fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) for the 5–5-linked system was 0.15; for the 10–10 linked system, this value was 0.051. For the corrole monomer, it was 0.065. Therefore, there is an interesting difference in the isomers, which relate porphyrin skeleton chemistry to main group chemistry, and relate porphyrin dyad skeleton to photophysics.
 Fig. 73  Structures of silver corroles by Ooi et al. 
In this 2011 report by Ghosh, the authors performed a corrole substituent study; they studied the effect of the aryl-para position –CF3 and –CH3versus –OCH3 or –H groups (Fig. 74).101 Analytical measurements were performed in CH2Cl2; hyperspectra was obtained which “capture of hundreds of narrow spectral bands typically on a single detector, as opposed to multispectral, or the capture of several broadband channels;” Soret maxima of silver corroles are invariant when they pertain to the choice of the Ar para-substituent. The hyper spectra may be investigated more at a later time with corrole chemistry.
 Fig. 74  Structure of 4-aryl substituted Ag species as reported by Ghosh. 
The effect of losing the central Ag from the corrole binding pocket can be discussed (Fig. 75). Such metal dissociation was reported by Kadish, Smith, and Paolesse in 2009.102 The physical lifetime of freely released Ag3+ is also an important issue. The species might be harnessed as a powerful two-electron oxidant, and may also involve stepwise optical changes at the corrole ring. The loss may resemble the Ag(I) intermediate. This system also involves the –NO2 beta substituent positioned at the 3-position; it helps accelerate the demetalation process when compared to the unsubstituted silver corroles.
 Fig. 75  Silver corroles studied by Stefanelli et al. 
Szterenberg et al. reported the transformation of 21-silaphorin to the non-aromatic compound, iso-carbacorrole by using DDQ as a chemical oxidant.103 Reaction of silver(I) tetrafluoroborate and copper(II) acetate with iso-carbacorrole in dichloromethane in the presence of trimethylamine produced the metalation of iso-carbacorrole (214, 215, Fig. 76). Iso-carbacorrole showed the absorption band at 338 and 386 nm with less intense bands appearing at 624 and 673 nm. However, 214 and 215 showed the intense Soret-like bands at wavelengths less than 400 nm; the extinction coefficient was found around 5 × 105 M−1 cm−1. This difference is expected to be derived from the aromaticity of 214 and 215 as opposed to being from the iso-carbacorrole.
 Fig. 76  Iso-carbacorroles 214 and 215 by Szterenberg et al. 
In 2007, Paolesse et al. reported the isolation of silver metalated corroles through the reaction of AgNO2/I2 with free base corroles.104 From the reaction with AgNO2, the free base corrole produced only silver metalated corrole or silver metalated with β-position nitrated corrole. Researchers suggested the excess amount of the Ag+ ion helps form the Ag(III) corrole; the NO2− attacks the π–cation radical of the Ag(III) corrole. Also suggested is that a second one-electron oxidation occurs, which triggers the loss of a proton, and restores the aromaticity of the corrole (Fig. 77). The cyclic voltammetry studies of (TtBuPCor)Ag and (NO2TtBuPCor)Ag were conducted in dichloromethane with 0.1 M TBAP. (TtBuPCor)Ag exhibited electron transfer at E1/2 = 0.72, 1.20, and −0.87 V vs. SCE; the HOMO–LUMO gap was found to be 1.59 V. In the case of (NO2TtBuPCor)Ag, a one-electron reduction at −0.63 V and three oxidations at 0.93, 1.35, and 1.51 V were detected. During the oxidation and reduction of silver-corroles, the monitored absorption spectra were seen to greatly change as expected. (TtBuPCor)Ag is observed having a Soret band at 424 nm in dichloromethane, and two bands at 560 nm and 586 nm. The one-electron reduction allowed the Soret band to shift from 424 to 441 nm; the electronic oxidation forced the Soret band to shift from 424 to 404 nm. UV-visible bands were also found changed; a new band at 636 nm grew in upon applying a one-electron reduction. In contrast, only a band at 586 nm was detected in the case of electron oxidation.
 Fig. 77  Silver corroles studied by Paolesse et al. 
12. Main group-containing substrates, pendants, and components in corrole research
In this overarching final section, we discuss main group-containing substrates, pendants and components peripheral to the element in the corrole N4 binding pocket. These peripheral units are nonetheless in some cases, equally important and give novelty to the corrole system under discussion and help form a discussion about preparative chemistry, and forming rich systems for future applications.
12.1. Group 13
There is still more to say about boron core chemistry. Again, in the paper by Albrett et al.,28 the transoid arrangement is, by far, the most interesting isomer from our point of view; the rigid positioning of the oxygens, both boron positions are Lewis acidic centers and rigidly held in different environments. They can be monitored spectroscopically; thus, this chemistry can certainly be developed further. The directionality of the terminal fluoride groups in this case means that the reactivity can differ, depending on the sterics imparted by the corrole macrocycle, one center is potentially dependent on the substitution and directing nature of the other. The F's can be exchanged for other substituents. The oxo-chemistry can sometimes be likened to options open for silicon oxo chemistry (diagonal relationship) (Fig. 15). As far as chemistry peripheral to the binding core chemistry is concerned, simply, reagents such as B2Pin2 can be used with e.g. dioxane,32 with later transition metal catalysts such as the help of a complex such as [Ir(cod)OMe]2. Without a late transition metal and therefore an electron rich metal center, there is arguably less straightforward element-element coupling chemistry methodology currently possible. In a separate case, boron, in the form of silver tetrafluoroborate was used;105 the core is monovalent and the BF4− salt is present. To what extent B in the counter ion can be discovered to influence chemistry in this context relates to how future ion pairing chemistry and its subtleties can be developed.
12.2. Group 14
Silicon, for example, is notable in its selective reactions with fluorine. In the report by Santos et al. in 2013, there is a Si pendant system worthy of note;44 silicon can facilitate pendant attachment chemistry.106 In a report from 2014 by Faschinger et al., hexamethyl disilazine was used.21 Few silica pendants are known in corrole chemistry; this chemistry might be good to start cataloguing in a related review pertinent to porphyrinoid research.
12.3. Group 15
From a bioinorganic chemistry perspective, it is important to comment on the function of small nitrogen-containing species, whether they be chemically reduced or oxidized or residing in a happy medium. Nitrogen fixation, as well as nitrogen energy exploitation of e.g. certain bacteria, involves essential small molecule intermediates. Nitrogen and its chemistry at corrole metal center chemistry, as well as the addition to the beta positions have already been, and continue to be, explored. Nitration is actually an important reaction class to consider, pertaining to possible post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins in which the tyrosine phenol group becomes nitrated; also, other (aryl) C–H positions among the residues of the 21 naturally occurring amino acids can be nitrated. PTMs are extremely important to understand and reflect the way proteins are handled, and ultimately brought for recycling at the proteasome;107 the way corroles can be used in this PTM analysis is a suggested area of study for continued research. As a start, the difference in physical and photophysical properties of new classes of derivatives can be examined with corroles.
Small metal-bound and free nitrogen-containing species are also extremely important in nature and catalysis. An interesting report of chromium(v) and chromium(vi) nitrido tpfc species was published in 2003 by the research group of Gross.108 The stable anion nitrido species was prepared by reaction of chromium(III) tpfc with the (nitrido)manganese(v) complex of salophene; the targeted anion compound was well characterized by EPR spectroscopy. The neutral chromium(vi) nitrido tpfc species was successfully synthesized by chromium(III) tpfc; treated with sodium hypochlorite and ammonia it afforded the target complex. It was characterized by NMR spectroscopy; the silent EPR spectra also supported the diamagnetic nature of the chromium center and strongly supports a chromium(vi) center, exhausted of all valence electrons. This work enlightens researchers to new approaches to obtain high-valent transition metal complexes by, at first, introducing N3− coordination to the metal.
The report by Alemayehu et al. from 2018 pertaining to platinum corroles easily relates to aspects of main group chemistry (Fig. 78); conceptually in a tangential way to corrole core chemistry, the system features a Ph–Cn group at the meso position, as well as a bottom axial Py group.109 The CN group is shown to be covalently attached at the meso position. Notice that the Py two rings are tilted at 90° with respect to each other (as seen from a top down projected view). When they are forced to be eclipsed, this and related photophysical consequences will be interesting topics for future research efforts. In addition, in this case, phosphorescence was determined. The Soret band was observed at 430 nm and the Q bands were observed at 595–599 nm. The fate and reactivity of the pendant –CN group gives inspiration about metal binding. In this system, there are four different N positions. The Py took the place of H- and N-bound PhCN. The phosphorescence of the compound was measured. Differences were found in optical properties for systems in which the only differences were the p-positions CF3versus CH3 in the triaryl aryl substitution of the corrole. There is a detectable difference in the fluorescence lifetime decay curves between these different systems.
 Fig. 78  Platinum corroles studied by Alemayehu et al. 
A corrole tethered by an amine linkage was studied;110 this study relates to nitrogen-containing corroles. In addition, the related phthalocyanine was prepared. It is a dyad in which one atom of the buckyball is formally changed to N (C59N). There is no element reported to be inside the corrole (non-endohedral). The buckyball possesses an N unit in place of a C atom; a tether through the familiar corrole 10-position (4-phenyl position) is achieved. Therefore, there is a three-atom linkage –NH–C(O)–CH2– between the end of the 10-phenyl group and the start of the buckyball. Presumably, the ammonium pendant is inside the pocket. Discussion of different substitutions for and alternatives for ammonium can come into play as well. In a separate report, have also authors introduced an ionic N-quaternary system.17 In the report by Santos et al. in 2013,44 the pendant amine at the 3 position (–CHNCH2CH2NH2) is a versatile chemical group, useful for certain further reactions. Extra metal ion chelation donor atoms may be possible because of the presence of this side-chain. The outermost N may be allowed to undergo further reactions to help create further creative derivatization. Separately, from a report by Pomarico, the nitronium ion (NO2+) was reported and can be utilized to its maximum.57 As we know, the nitronium is isoelectronic with CO2. In terms of N-heterocycles, the use of carbazole as a convenient and dyad-conjugate corrole-appended moiety in the systems was reported by Reddy in 2018.31 In fact, there are a plethora of nitrogen containing heterocycles to follow up with, including much more with pyrroles themselves. Pyridine as a coordinating solvent molecule has been, thus far, extremely prevalent in corrole chemistry. Py with corroles is reminiscent of the abundance of phosphines used prevalently as ligands in inorganic chemistry in the 1970s and 1980s.
There is a corrole report in which N2 loss was reported (nitrogen extrusion), published in 2015;111 one equivalent of N2 was thus formed and chemically evolved (but not directly detected). This N2 production has not yet been interconnected with other related corrole nitrogen chemistry to the best of our knowledge.
Heavier group 15 elements will also be increasingly important in future corrole research. Phosphorus, as a central element, also continues to be strongly featured in corrole chemistry as a light and each abundant element of choice, and separately, as the central atom of an oxidizable substrate (e.g. PPh3 in oxygen transfer reactions). As a peripheral element to P-core chemistry, there is a lot more phosphorus corrole chemistry to discuss, develop and a lot of phosphorus chemistry to exploit. From the standpoint of reagents, POCl3 and DMF are used routinely to help afford the CHO group. In a report from 2014 by Faschinger et al., the heavier congener bismuth was used as a starting material as the tri-immine, Bi(N(SiMe3)2)3.21 This pertains to corrole synthesis involving covalent displacement reactions, separate from the salt metathesis approach.
12.4. Group 16
Oxygen, sulfur, selenium, and element below continue to hold an important conceptual scientific position for porphyrinoid chemistry. When considering oxygen as the central element of activity, there is a range of chemical positions to consider; axial, beta, meso (aryl) substituent, etc. A recent cobalt report describes a cobalt superoxide compound related conceptually to oxygen reduction chemistry, rather than water oxidation.112
Discussion of the putative oxo species bis terminal oxo species for Re and Ir corrole centers has been important.113 This is a good starting point for additional notions of the element oxygen as a donor atom as well as an atom involved in various substrates. The involvement of oxygen in porphyrinoid chemistry in helping iron achieve a higher valence state, and in conversion of X–O substrates in oxygen atom transfer reactions is illustrated in many reports, such as the one by Collman et al. (Fig. 79)114
 Fig. 79  The conversion to a higher valence stage of iron and conversion of X–O in oxygen atom transfer. 
Compared to the copper corrole, the Soret bands of chromium-oxo triarylcorrole and the molybdenum-oxo triarylcorrole did not undergo shifting in various substitutions on the meso-aryl groups. Chromium-oxo triarylcorroles and copper corroles both reveal low HOMO–LUMO gaps, 0.95 eV for copper triarylcorroles, and the metal-based LUMO level. However, from a frontier MO study, based on the TD-DFT the dxy-based LUMOs of chromium-oxo triarylcorroles and molybdenum-oxo triarylcorroles were analysed and found to not have an effective symmetry pertaining to the Soret bands. M[T(p-X-P)C](O) were studied in this article (M = Cr and Mo, X = CF3, H, CH3, and OCH3).115
In an article that addresses halide chemistry, we encounter important and novel sulfur polypyrrole/corrole chemistry in the form of the –SF5 substituent.32 This recent addition to the corrole repertoire adds 126 g mol−1 to the molecular weight of the corrole, similar to that of I (126 g mol−1) when substituted at the beta position (or elsewhere). The –SF5 group may be easily exchanged for another group and may participate in its own chemistry. It is most likely considered an electrophile and an electron withdrawing group, but perhaps it is preceded by a reputation for its steric bulk. The 2015 report by Brudveg et al. for example, features a relevant photophysical study.64 Electronic excitation helps inject an electron from the anchored group of the corrole into the metal oxide. Then, the corrole helps extract an electron from species dissolved in the solution. This is possible for purposes of water oxidation. In a recent report by Paolesse et al., in terms of beta substitution, there were, in fact, 24 different trisulfonated derivatives shown to form.62 The sulfonation reagents ClSO3H/CCl2H2 were found to react at the corrole 2-position, as well as the 8-position. Another example is represented by the 2,12 di-SO3H version. All in all, the 2-SO3H phosphorus corrole derivative was studied in detail. In this research, the previous version suffered from poor regiochemistry and required a modified synthetic method.
In a 2016 report, compound 219 was also shown featuring a sulfonic group on the corrole 2 and 17 positions (Fig. 80).116 Also, phosgene was used in synthesis, for example it was enlisted to help generate compound 221.
 Fig. 80  Metallocorroles studied by Pribisko. 
A study by Xu et al., examined the effects of trans axial ligands (4-cyanopyridine (py-CN) pyridine (py) 4-(dimethylamino)pyridine (py-NMe2) 1-methylimidazole (im-Me) thiophenolate (thi)) on water oxidation catalysis activity of various Co-corrole complexes.117 The proposed mechanism for oxygen evolution is the loss of one axial ligand and the acceptance of a water molecule by the electronically reduced Co center. The addition of axial ligands to Co-TFPC corrole complexes causes a red shift in the Soret band and an increase in Q-band intensity. The Co-corrole coordinated with py and py-OMe exhibits an octahedral geometry, with the four N atoms in the plane and the two molecules of py or py-OMe occupying the axial sites; the electronic structure was determined to be d6Co(III). The addition of the axial ligands caused an increase in the electron density of the Co metal center. Electrocatalytic water oxidation studies showed that electron-donating axial ligands provide a higher efficiency in catalyzing water oxidation than did electron-withdrawing ligands. This is thought to arise from the weakening of the Co(v)–oxo bond, which causes a smaller activation energy barrier for O–O bond formation via nucleophilic attack on the Co(v)–oxo unit.
The study by Lei et al., involved a bifunctional Co-corrole investigated as a cheaper and more efficient water oxidation catalyst.118 The Co is in the plane of the corrole macrocycle; it was shown to behave as a Co(III)Cl-corrole in terms of its oxidation state. Stable during electrocatalytic H2O splitting, it can efficiently catalyze both O2 evolution and H2 production. In comparison, Mn-corroles are not stable and will decompose rapidly upon multiple cycles of electrocatalysis.
12.5. Group 17
In the article from 2018 discussed above in the group 15 section, the authors had unearthed the finding of the effect (prediction) of the ammonium cocatalyst halide ordering of PPNCl > PPNBr > PPNI.8 These cocatalysts are freely interacting in solvent with the corrole system as a counter ion in an electrostatic fashion. Considering this present design, an incredible number of molecular advances can be brought to life with this ion pairing design, which will certainly touch many applications. For starters, future molecular designs could address metal substrate association with varying strength. They are attracted to the corrole (cobalt), in which other intermolecular forces may also participate. Regarding the 2019 study by Chen, some of these P-corroles possessed a conspicuous pendant iodo-alkyl group that is able to participate in facile protein conjugation. Iodine (R–I) is just one example where remote synthons can allow for further novel corrole functionalization or bio macromolecular functionalization (depending on one's perspective).53b

12.5.1. Fluorine. 
With safe handling as an objective, better understanding of halogens and the interrelationships with oxidants involving oxygen is an important part of research, industry, and commercial dealings. Improved methods in handling halogens and their connection with the research of ROS and porphyrinoids is an important research angle. In the 2017 report by Zhan et al., the formal (reversible) loss of difluorine (F2) from the system discussed above is treated.16 It is relatively dangerous and difficult to handle F2 in the chemical laboratory. Therefore, such research helps suggest how element corroles can help mitigate practical risk of halogen use in industrial processes. There are also the fluoro alkyl and aryl substituents used in corrole research that impart an electron withdrawing effect.


12.5.2. Chlorine. 
In a report from 2015 by Brennan et al., the authors collected the physical and photophysical properties, as well as the electrochemical properties, of the corroles.64 Upon chlorination, the fluorescence lifetime decreases ∼5 times. The halide substitution increases the rate of photoconversion to the electronically excited triplet state. It has been previously discussed that porphyrins have a 5-fold greater change when only a mere 2 chloride substituents are present.119
The compounds 224 and 127 were much less photo-efficient than the 125 compound as per the study involving the DSSC approach (Fig. 81).64 The authors underscore many structure–function relationships that have yet to be prepared, tested, and utilized. The Brudveg report from 2015 involves an octachlorinated corrole system. In this case, the authors were able to compare the octachloro species with the new chloro species under investigation (see discussion above).
 Fig. 81  Gallium and phosphorus corroles studied by Brennan et al. 


12.5.3. Bromine. 
Discrete halogen site attachment, depending on the position, can help tune photophysics in corrole systems. Aryl bromine groups are ubiquitous in corrole chemistry; control of bromination and halogen chemistry in corrole chemistry continues to be an ongoing research objective. In an ultrafast electronic study with corroles and bromine substitution, the excitation energy relaxation time constant for Al(tpfc-Br8)(py)2 was found to be 250 fs.6
In the report by Mahmood et al., a corrole system was prepared that bears meso aryl groups which possess bulky 2,6-di-bromine substituents; as part of their photophysical study, energy relaxation and triplet formation was measured.120 This is compared to the value of 500 fs for the corrole without the Br substituents and with the presence of the axially-coordinating Py group. The authors of the study were not able to clearly assign the triplet dynamics because of electronic absorption overlap. In addition, the fluoro group ends up on the 4-position in all three aryl rings. In a separate yet equally interesting report by Pomarico, corrole bromination was effected by adding elemental Br2 to the corrole solution.57 Again, in the paper by Mahmood et al., the authors reported the synthesis of some multibrominated free base corroles (Fig. 82). These sterical corroles showed typical absorption spectra involving a Soret band around 400 nm; Q bands were found to range from 510–610 nm as recorded in CH2Cl2.
 Fig. 82  Sterically multibrominated corroles reported by Mahmood et al. 


12.5.4. Iodine. 
There are no corrole reports describing iodine as the central element. Of course, numerous examples in the literature exist where they are present at the beta positions. One recent report by Mahammed et al. involving the beta positions has allowed for an investigation of triplet–triplet annihilation as described above.56
The 2003 paper by the Collman group, for example, discusses the employment of iodine in the form of the iodosylbenzene oxidant in corrole catalysis research;114 the Ar–I–O species (colorless) bears a well-defined structure. We suspect that corrole–I(beta)–O(beta) functionalities may exist in situ, in the milieu, but are as of yet unidentified. The synthesis of iodosyl benzene, however, can be generated in a slightly roundabout way; for example, the iodo diacetyl functionality [I(OAc)2] can disassemble to give PhIO. In this report, the treated olefin is converted to epoxide. The I–bound O assists in the epoxidation of the double bond.
In 2017, the Gross group reported the facile iodination of cobalt corroles. This culminated in the generation and study of di-/tris-/tetra-β-iodinated cobalt corroles (Fig. 83);121 further investigations of redox properties demonstrated the facile iodination of these cobalt corroles is possible and exerts a more pronounced substitution effect than the iodination in the analogous gallium and aluminium corroles.
 Fig. 83  Beta brominated and iodinated cobalt corroles by Sudhakar et al. 

13. Future goals
The corrole research community needs additional breakthroughs and a prioritization of important research topics and suggestions of concepts and derivatizations, which are not yet reported but should/may be studied as funding and time affords: We find that some lesser-studied main group substituents can be more thoroughly reported. This is not a result of the expense of the reagent, but rather a likely commentary on the reagent's availability, stability and convenience in use. We list improvements based on three categories: central element (A), system reactivity (B), and potential future application (C).
• (A1) Further research with boron corroles should be conducted; we need to synthetically achieve a planar central boron corrole. This appears to be experimentally impossible, currently; but it can be studied as a putative species in the vapour phase. The Coord. Chem. Rev. by Sorokin in 2019 does allude to it. We should even have a square pyramidal BF [N4] anionic species as well.70 Undoubtedly, there is a lot of small molecule chemistry to further explore with boron corroles.
• (A2) Future gallium corrole research might be able to (i) help better address ROS speciation and reactivity, (ii) enlist the use of specific oxidants in catalysis, (iii) used to help explore more about isomers and involve deepened NMR spectroscopic studies.
• (A3) The goals for research in boron corrole chemistry could also be merged with those for selenium chemistry, especially with N3C core-containing systems.
• (A4) As mentioned by Ravikanth at the ICPP in Munich (2018), Selenium and Tellurium corroles should be explored; whether trying to affix one (a single ion) into the core, or appending them to the outside in varying positions/numbers; there are new synthetic limitations that can hopefully be soon overcome.
• (A5) There are also important reports about tin chemistry and its IV and II chemistry which enables for possible valence state “toggling.”
• (A6) We suggest investigating a nitrogen-centered corrole. As with any self-respecting organometallic/coordination chemist, it would be important to seek the synthesis of this extreme example of Group 15 chemistry and make it a synthetic reality; as the planar boron(III) corrole has been proposed, we also pose the challenge of the preparation of N(III) and N(v) centered corrolates in which the light p-block atom will help form a web of five or perhaps even six or more nitrogen centers. How close one can come to successful isolation with these systems, even though the final compound might be unstable, will help better define corrole chemistry. The “web” of e.g. five nitrogens may be able to interact differentially in catalysis and medicine applications (diagnostics).
• (A7) Why do we want corrole demetallation to be facile? Determining the stability of the metal ligand interaction is often for comparative academic purposes; establishing more about the Irving–Williams series is a driving force both academically, as well industrially. Isn’t it better if there is greater stability and less ability for displacement? An objective by researchers to determine chemical reversibility of certain reactions is one of the driving forces, which should be an ongoing aim.
• (A8) Through more advances with main group chemistry (in addition to combined studies with TM corroles), we can achieve real working applications of corroles in novel PDT type systems and biosensor arrays, as well as solar energy applications.
• (B1) We should determine the stability/inertness of the superoxide species in metalloporphyrinioid systems research relative to KO2, for example.
• (B2) Corrole by-products can and should be studied in more detail to ascertain more about reaction pathways and side product pathways.74,122
• (B3) Certain derivatives can be prepared authentically through the use of boron trifluoride; for example, a Rothemund condensation involving triisopropyl–silyl propynal with 3,4 diethyl pyrrole can be pursued.
• (B4) We need continued efforts into new synthetic methodologies and new reagents to help find a way to create selective functionalization of the corrole (porphyrinoid) beta positions.
• (B5) The H-meso free-base is an important target; that for unsubstituted corroles of any metal type allows for a lower molecular weight system and agreement with the MW constraint regarding the rule of 5, invoked to place corrole derivatization into context with medicinal chemistry goals.123a (Note: In this regard, the first water-soluble corrole that meets the drug-like criterion of a sub 500 Da molecular mass has been published!)123b
• (B6) Also, the practicality of tin couplings can be further researched. Moreover, the implementation of tin so far in the corrole community is simply the scratching of the surface.
• (B7) More can be developed regarding the –CHO β-substituent and regiochemistry when multiple β-positions are present.
• (B8) Exploration of –F and –CF3 corroles functionalization has only just begun, in terms of the patterns that have been discovered and the corrole systems which have been substituted with –CF3: many –CF3 corrole research articles have been published to date. But this research area is by no means saturated; much more can be accomplished as we have recently reported on the e.g. “hetero multisubstitution” concept.34
As an important update about fluorine as a substituent, the excellent work by Gallardo et al. was recently published, (brought to our attention by an expert reviewer of this manuscript) in which the authors were able to explore more than 40 different fluorinated corroles.161 The work was also supported by structural characterization in some cases, and studied in the context of antiviral activity. This fine recent article will help further progress in the direction of corrole types that can help serve specific applications in main group oriented research, as well as medicinal chemistry and other related areas.
• (B9) A paper by Vestfrid et al. also describes the isomerism that occurs upon beta-position sulfonation.63 The mobility of incipient beta groups during the synthesis is an important issue for further and thorough exploration.
• (B10) Also, beta position nitration can be investigated in various ways.57 The system can be affected differently if it is attached by the nitronium (electrophilic), versus approached by the nitrite ion (nucleophilic ion); this difference of addition can be explored. The presence of radical character, too, can be surveyed.
• (B11) In some metallocorrole systems, effecting certain multi-beta substitutions is challenging under any given set of conditions. In this way, we can imagine that the central group is able to be “carved” out by the pattern (number and type) of beta substitution. Stability or inertness against further reactivity due to “carved” electronics or distortion of the macrocycle can be an issue for further investigations.
• (B12) Researchers can consider direct attachments of group 12-Corrole or [L2X]Pd-units etc present at the beta positions, in future studies, in the same vein as reports discuss –SF5 unit addition.124
• (B13) In the report by Saito et al., the chemical scission of the large corrole or porphyrinic dimeric fragments into two smaller fragments with an idea that both smaller units will give unique photophysical signatures is a concept to pursue in future synthetic and photochemistry related corrole research;30 this has not been adapted for corroles as of yet to our knowledge and can be exploited for main group corrole chemistry, especially for tin corrole photochemistry.
• (C1) Cocatalysts: for certain types of catalysts, we should employ novel cocatalysts; the cocatalyst can be part of the corrole backbone.8 We should study the light-sensitivity of the related substrates. What is the absorption of e.g. bis(triphenylphosphine)iminium chloride, and how do its spectral characteristics relate to its symmetry? And, how does the symmetry change/or is fluxional? Researchers could probably seek a better understanding of optical properties of phosphorus-containing species, as well as make determinations regarding the presence of different axial ligands bound to element-corrole systems. PPNF, as well, could be studied beyond computational efforts reported already.
• (C2) Use of catalysts: it might be prudent to restate (and adapt) questions posed by Sinha et al. in the introduction of their paper:112 (i) What is the effect of a given catalyst in terms of overpotential and catalytic activity? (ii) Why is the reaction in question more (less) efficient at high pH? (iii) Which formal oxidation state (valence state) is responsible for ensuring success in catalysis? What are the electronic structures and geometry and strain (or loss of strain) of the oxidized complexes? These points are continually pertinent issues in electrocatalysis of corroles as well as in other chemical systems.
• (C3) Reaching an understanding of the relationships of corroles to other newer synthetic systems allows corroles to be a new photophysical “standard” just like porphyrins have been used as the standard, off of which, corrole chemistry was explored, and conceptually is, used in synthetically designing corrole derivatives.
• (C4) There is a need to more thoroughly address the interplay of corrole ROS/RNS/biological oxidant chemistry and chemical mechanisms, and oxo species arising from the presence of ionizing radiation; this is, in many cases, related to the organoelement nature of the species, especially the heavy central element nature, as well as the presence of peripheral Br, I, or other (mixed) groups.
14. Conclusions
That corrole chemistry has been said to be ∼20 years behind porphyrin chemistry doesn’t have to mean this will always be the case and should give further inspiration for future contracted porphyrinoid research, considering the amount of ground covered in the literature thus far, especially recently. In this review, through summaries of collections of related reports, ordered by element and substituent and application, we have tried to tie together an up-to-date working profile of main group chemistry for the porphyrinoid oriented researcher; we surveyed the photophysical “landscape” and have described, within categories of central elements, breakdowns by substituent and relevant reactions either of the synthesis of the corrole itself or catalyzed reactions moderated by metallocorroles. We have tried to define where “holes” and opportunities exist in research, as related to main group chemistry; additionally, we have addressed heavier group 11 chemistry, as well as substituent chemistry, and have made comments to this effect regarding future research. At this time point, it should be clear that preparing a simple main group corrole is now an ordinary feat. To transform future main group research to the “extraordinary”, different chemical functionalities can be combined along the lines of what we have discussed herein; extrapolating forward, especially with respect to the beta substituents, such intricate derivatization will be necessary among other aspects of research. As time goes on, we should be able to easily carve an applied chemistry discipline for main group corrole systems.
Note: as with any sizable review undertaking, pertinent reports have emerged as completed manuscripts since the original outline became fleshed out. An additional literature search (2020.11.08) revealed articles from 2020 that we wanted also briefly bring to the attention of the reader. The reports span the topics of gallium corroles, sulfide, iodine, oxygen as a substrate, etc.125–160
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Z. G. acknowledges support from the Israel Science Foundation. D. G. C. acknowledges Z. G., the Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, and support from KAIST for facilitating his sabbatical year (2017–2018). J. P. acknowledges the KAIST_Winter/Spring semester URP Program 2020 at KAIST.
References
K. E. Thomas, A. B. Alemayehu, J. Conradie, C. M. Beavers and A. Ghosh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1203–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Z. Ou and K. M. Kadish, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3377–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3798–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, P. Yadav, Y. Diskin-Posner, N. Fridman, M. Sundararajan, Z. Ullah, Q.-C. Chen, L. J. W. Shimon, A. Mahammed, D. G. Churchill, M.-H. Baik and Z. Gross, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12279–12286 RSC .
Y. Yang, D. Jones, T. von Haimberger, M. Linke, L. Wagnert, A. Berg, H. Levanon, A. Zacarias, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross and K. Heyne, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 1023–1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stensitzki, Y. Yang, A. Berg, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross and K. Heyne, Struct. Dyn., 2016, 3, 043210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, A. Mahammed, U. Tripathy, Z. Gross and R. P. Steer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 459, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li and Z. Cao, Organometallics, 2018, 37, 406–414 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pomarico, P. Pospíšil, M. E. F. Bouduban, J. Vestfrid, Z. Gross, S. Záliš, M. Chergui and A. Vlček, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 7256–7266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vestfrid, M. Botoshansky, J. H. Palmer, A. C. Durrell, H. B. Gray and Z. Gross, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12899–12901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahammed and Z. Gross, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2002, 88, 305–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohajeri and N. Hassani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 7661–7674 RSC .
C. M. Blumenfeld, B. F. Sadtler, G. E. Fernandez, L. Dara, C. Nguyen, F. Alonso-Valenteen, L. Medina-Kauwe, R. A. Moats, N. S. Lewis, R. H. Grubbs, H. B. Gray and K. Sorasaenee, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2014, 140, 39–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Teo, J. Y. Hwang, J. Termini, Z. Gross and H. B. Gray, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2711–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oppenheim, M. H. B. Gray, A. J. D. Bilio, B. J. Brennan, L. M. Henling, P. Lim, M. Soll, J. Termini, S. C. Virgil, Z. Gross and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 10287–10294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhan, T. Stensitzki, M. Gerecke, A. Berg, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross and K. Heyne, Molecules, 2017, 22, 1174 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tiffner, S. Gonglach, M. Haas, W. Schöfberger and M. Waser, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1048–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lemon, S. J. Hwang, A. G. Maher, D. C. Powers and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 5333–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, P. Teplitzky, Y. Diskin-Posner, M. Sundararajan, Z. Ullah, Q.-C. Chen, L. J. W. Shimon, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, M. Kosa, M.-H. Baik, D. G. Churchill and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6184–6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Reith, M. Stiftinger, U. Monkowius, G. Knör and W. Schöfberger, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 6788–6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Faschinger, S. Aichhorn, M. Himmelsbach and W. Schöfberger, Synthesis, 2014, 3085–3096 CAS .
A. B. Sorokin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 389, 141–160 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Brothers, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 12374–12386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Brothers, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2090–2102 RSC .
A. C. Y. Tay, B. J. Frogley, D. C. Ware, J. Conradie, A. Ghosh and P. J. Brothers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3057–3061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Albrett, J. Conradie, P. D. W. Boyd, G. R. Clark, A. Ghosh and P. J. Brothers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 2888–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Albrett, P. D. W. Boyd, G. R. Clark, E. Gonzalez, A. Ghosh and P. J. Brothers, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 4032–4034 RSC .
A. M. Albrett, K. E. Thomas, S. Maslek, A. Młodzianowska, J. Conradie, C. M. Beavers, A. Ghosh and P. J. Brothers, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5486–5493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Adinarayana, A. P. Thomas, P. Yadav, V. Mukundam and A. Srinivasan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2993–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saito, K. S. Kim, Z. S. Yoon, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5591–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reddy, N. Duvva, S. Seetharaman, F. D'souza and L. Giribabu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27418–27428 RSC .

  (a) H. R. A. Golf, A. M. Oltmanns, D. H. Trieu, H.-U. Reissig and A. Wiehe, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 4224–4237 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. R. A. Golf, H.-U. Reissig and A. Wiehe, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80(10), 5133–5143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hiroto, I. Hisaki, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6763–6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, Y. Zini, N. Fridman, Q.-C. Chen, D. G. Churchill and Z. Gross, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 81, 163–168 CrossRef .
R. Mishra, B. Basumatary, R. Singhal, G. D. Sharma and J. Sankar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31462–31471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Brizet, N. Desbois, A. Bonnot, A. Langlois, A. Dubois, J.-M. Barbe, C. P. Gros, C. Goze, F. Denat and P. D. Harvey, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 3392–3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srikanth, G. N. Sastry and Y. Soujanya, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2015, 115, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang and Y. You, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2015, 19, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vestfrid, I. Goldberg and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10536–10542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Blumenfeld, R. H. Grubbs, R. A. Moats, H. B. Gray and K. Sorasaenee, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 4774–4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. Shao, H. Wang, S. He, L. Shi, K. Peng, Y. Lin, L. Zhang, L. Ji and H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 14228–14234 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Y. Hwang, D. J. Lubow, D. Chu, J. Sims, F. Alonso-Valenteen, H. B. Gray, Z. Gross, D. L. Farkas and L. K. Medina-Kauwe, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 163, 368–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lei, 
            et al.
          , Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2012, 28, 465–469 Search PubMed .
D. Kowalska, X. Liu, U. Tripathy, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross, S. Hirayama and R. P. Steer, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2670–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. M. Santos, 
            et al.
          , Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8564–8572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Desbois, S. Pacquelet, A. Dubois, C. Michelin and C. P. Gros, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2015, 11, 2202–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Simkhovich, A. Mahammed, I. Goldberg and Z. Gross, Chem. – Eur. J., 2001, 7, 1041–1055 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2018, 22, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefanelli, 
            et al.
          , Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 8281–8292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Giribabu, J. Kandhadi, R. K. Kanaparthi and P. S. Reeta, J. Lumin., 2014, 145, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, Z. Ling, P. J. Brothers and X. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11677–11679 RSC .
R. Sharma and M. Ravikanth, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2016, 20, 895–917 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sayer, M. Gouterman and C. R. Connell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Hansch, A. Leo and R. W. Taft, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 165–195 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Shamali, A. Preuß, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross, G. Däschlein and B. Röder, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2018, 24, 358–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Q.-C. Chen, Z.-Y. Xiao, S. Fite, A. Mizrahi, N. Fridman, X. Zhan, O. Keisar, Y. Cohen and Z. Gross, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 11383 CAS .
X. Liang, J. Mack, L.-M. Zheng, Z. Shen and N. Kobayashi, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 2797–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Paolesse, T. Boschi, S. Licoccia, R. G. Khoury and K. M. Smith, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1119–1120 RSC .
A. Mahammed, K. Chen, J. Vestfrid, J. Zhao and Z. Gross, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7091–7103 RSC .
G. Pomarico, L. Tortora, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith and R. Paolesse, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2016, 158, 17–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Gilhula and A. T. Radosevich, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7177–7182 RSC .
Z. Zhang, H.-J. Yu, H. Huang, H.-H. Wang, S. Wu, H.-Y. Liu and H.-T. Zhang, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 163, 779–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Chen and X.-S. Zhang, Trans. Indian Inst. Met., 2018, 71, 1113–1126 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, C. Azarias, A. D’Aléo, M. Giorgi, O. Siri, T. S. Balaban, D. Jacquemin and G. Canard, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 780–788 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Naitana, S. Nardis, G. Pomarico, M. Raggio, F. Caroleo, D. O. Cicero, S. Lentini, L. Prodi, D. Genovese, S. Mitta, A. Sgarlata, M. Fanfoni, L. Persichetti and R. Paolesse, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 905–916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vestfrid, R. Kothari, A. Kostenko, I. Goldberg, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 6061–6067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Brennan, Y. C. Lam, P. M. Kim, X. Zhang and G. W. Brudvig, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16124–16130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 285, 52–64 CrossRef CAS .
L. Giribabu, J. Kandhadi and R. K. Kanaparthi, J. Fluoresc., 2014, 24, 569–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, W.-Z. Lee and M. Ravikanth, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 4231–4239 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Fox and D. P. Goldberg, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 8181–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gouterman, P. Sayer, E. Shankland and J. P. Smith, Inorg. Chem., 1981, 20, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
A. Idec, M. Pawlicki and L. L. Grażyński, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 25, 200–204 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Pomarico, D. Monti, M. Bischetti, A. Savoldelli, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith, D. Genovese, L. Prodi and R. Paolesse, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8438–8446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueta, M. Fukuda, G. Kim, S. Shimizu, T. Tanaka, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 7637–7646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Zhang and Y. Rong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 222, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krivokapic, A. R. Cowley and H. L. Anderson, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 1089–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Myakov, V. A. Kuropatov and T. I. Lopatina, Russ. J. Coord. Chem., 2009, 35, 191–194 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lai, L.-L. Wang, B. Wan, A.-W. Lu, H. Wang and H.-Y. Liu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 390, 112283 CrossRef CAS .
B. Babu, E. Prinsloo, J. Mack and T. Nyokong, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 18805–18812 RSC .
A.-N. Xie, Z. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, A. Ali, D.-X. Zhang, H. Wang, L.-N. Ji and H.-Y. Liu, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2018, 22, 739–750 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Yao, Z. Lyun, Q. Xiong, B. Wang and X. Fu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4999–5007 RSC .
W. Sinha and S. Kar, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sinha, M. Kumar, A. Garai, C. S. Purohit, T. Som and S. Kar, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12564–12573 RSC .
L. Yun, H. Vazquez-Lima, H. Fang, Z. Yao, G. Geisberger, C. Dietl, A. Ghosh, P. J. Brothers and X. Fu, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 7047–7054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wagnert, A. Berg, E. Staviski, T. Berthold, G. Kothe, I. Goldberg, A. Mahammed, L. Simkhovich, Z. Gross and H. Levanon, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2006, 30, 591–604 CrossRef CAS .
J. Poulin, C. Stern, R. Guilard and P. D. Harvey, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 171–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Barbe, G. Morata, E. Espinosa and R. Guilard, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2003, 7, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kadish, S. Will, V. A. Adamian, B. Walther, C. Erben, Z. Ou, N. Guo and E. Vogel, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 4573–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Thomas, A. B. Alemayehu, J. Conradie, C. Beavers and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 12844–12851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, J.-X. Liang and G. Wei, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12338–12343 RSC .
K. Sudhakar, A. Mizrahi, M. Kosa, N. Fridman, B. Tumanskii, M. Saphier and Z. Gross, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9837–9841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Soll, K. Sudhakar, N. Fridman, A. Müller, B. Röder and Z. Gross, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5840–5843 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Alemayehu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18935–18942 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Lai, L. Wang, C. Yang, M.-Y. Chan, X. Guan, C.-C. Kwok and C.-M. Che, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4655–4665 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabinovich, I. Goldberg and Z. Gross, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12294–12301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Larsen, L. J. McCormick-McPherson, S. J. Teat and A. Ghosh, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 6737–6745 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashino, Y. Kurumisawa, A. B. Alemayehu, R. F. Einrem, D. Sahu, D. Packwood, K. Kato, A. Yamakata, A. Ghosh and H. Imahori, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 12460–12467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nardis, G. Pormarico, M. Stefanelli, S. Lentini, D. O. Cicero, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith and R. Paolesse, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2016, 20, 465–474 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Thomas, H. Vazquez-Lima, Y. Fang, Y. Song, K. J. Gagnon, C. M. Beavers, K. M. Kadish and A. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 16839–16847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stefanelli, 
            et al.
          , Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 13589–13598 RSC .
K. Ueta, T. Tanaka and A. Osuka, Molecules, 2019, 24, 642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ooi, T. Tanaka and A. Osuka, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 8920–8927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alemayehu, J. Conradie and A. Ghosh, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1857–1864 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefanelli, 
            et al.
          , Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6879–6887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Skonieczny, L. Latos-Grażyński and L. Szterenberg, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4861–4874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stefanelli, M. Mastroianni, S. Nardis, S. Licoccia, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith, W. Zhu, Z. Ou, K. M. Kadish and R. Paolesse, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10791–10799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wicht, S. Bahnmüller, A. Thüsing, B. Wolfram and M. Bröring, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 4477–4485 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
S. Kors, K. Geijtenbeek, E. Reits and S. Schipper-Krom, Front. Mol. Biosci., 2019, 6, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Golubkov and Z. Gross, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4507–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Alemayehu, L. J. McCormick, K. J. Gagnon, S. M. Borisov and A. Ghosh, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9360–9368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rotas and N. Tagmatarchis, ARKIVOC, 2015, 124–139 Search PubMed .
H.-B. Zou, H. Yang, Z.-Y. Liu, M. H. R. Mahmood, G.-Q. Mei, H.-Y. Liu and C.-K. Chang, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sinha, A. Mizrahi, A. Mahammed, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 478–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Alemayehu, H. Vazquez-Lima, S. J. Teat and A. Ghosh, ChemistryOpen, 2019, 8, 1298–1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Collman, L. Zeng and R. A. Decreau, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2974–2975 RSC .
I. Johansen, H.-K. Norhein, S. Larsen, A. B. Alemayehu, J. Conradie and A. Ghosh, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2011, 15, 1335–1344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pribisko, J. Palmer, R. H. Grubbs, H. B. Gray, J. Termini and P. Lim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E2258–E2266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, H. Lei, Z. Zhang, Z. Yao, J. Li, Z. Yu and R. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9755–9761 RSC .
H. Lei, A. Han, F. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Han, P. Du, W. Lai and R. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1883–1893 RSC .
R. Bonnett, A. Harriman and A. N. Kozyrev, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1992, 88, 763–769 RSC .
M. H. R. Mahmood, Z.-Y. Liu, H.-Y. Liu, H.-B. Zou and C.-K. Chang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2014, 25, 1349–1353 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sudhakar, A. Mahammed, N. Fridman and Z. Gross, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2017, 21, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shan, N. Desbois, V. Blondeau-Patissier, M. L. Naitana, V. Quesneau, Y. Rousselin, C. P. Gros, Z. Ou and K. M. Kadish, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 12833–12844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. A. Lipinski, F. Lombarde, B. W. Dominy and P. J. Feeney, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1997, 23, 3–25 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Gross, P. Yadav, S. Khoury, N. Fridman, V. K. Sharma, A. Kumar, M. Majdoub, A. Kumar, Y. Diskin-Posner and A. Mahammed, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021 DOI:10.1002/anie.202103477 .
H. R. A. Golf, H.-U. Reissig and A. Wiehe, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 5133–5143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dandia and S. M. S. Chauhan, J. Chem. Sci., 2020, 132, 123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pierloot, Q. M. Phung and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 11493–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-T. Lien, S.-T. Chang, P.-T. Chen, D. P. Wong, Y.-C. Chang, Y.-R. Lu, C.-L. Dong, C.-H. Wang, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Honig, A. Friedman, N. Zion and L. Elbaz, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8627–8630 RSC .
F. Caroleo, G. Petrella, L. D. Zazzo, S. Nardis, B. B. Berna, D. O. Cicero and R. Paolesse, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lichtenberg, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 9674–9687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu and X.-F. Zhang, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 179, 108421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ajeeb, D. V. Klenitsky, I. V. Vershilovskaya, D. V. Petrova, A. S. Semeikin, W. Maes, L. L. Gladkov and M. M. Kruk, J. Appl. Spectrosc., 2020, 87, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zugermeier, J. Herritsch, J.-N. Luy, M. Chen, B. P. Klein, F. Niefind, P. Schweyen, M. Bröring, M. Schmid, R. Tonner and J. M. Gottfried, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 13825–13836 CrossRef CAS .
B. Basumatary, I. Hashiguchi, S. Mori, S. Shimizu, M. Ishida and H. Furuta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15897–15901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biswas, S. Bose, J. Debgupta, P. Das and A. N. Biswas, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 7155–7165 RSC .
C. M. Lemon, A.
G. Maher, A. R. Mazzotti, D. C. Powers, M. I. Gonzalez and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5247–5250 RSC .
R. De, S. Gonglach, S. Paul, M. Haas, S. S. Sreejith, P. Gerschel, U.-P. Apfel, T. H. Vuong, J. Rabeah, S. Roy and W. Schöfberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10527–10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Thomas, N. S. Settineri, S. J. Teat, E. Steene and A. Ghosh, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 10176–10182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haas, S. Gonglach and W. Schöfberger, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 737–749 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Kruk, D. V. Klenitsky, L. L. Gladkov and W. Maes, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 765–774 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jaworska, F. Caroleo and C. Di Natale, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 929–937 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hassani, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2020, 1177, 112766 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Thomassen and A. Ghosh, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 9023–9030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reinholdt, A. B. Alemayehu, K. J. Gagnon, J. Bendix and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 5276–5280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yadav, S. Khoury, A. Mahammed, M. Morales, S. C. Virgil, H. B. Gray and Z. Gross, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 3119–3122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ooi, B. Adinarayana, D. Shimizu, T. Tanaka and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9423–9427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. L. Araújo, A. C. Tomé, C. L. M. Santos, M. A. F. Faustino, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, M. M. Q. Simões, N. M. M. Moura, S. T. Abu-Orabi and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, Molecules, 2020, 25, 1662 CrossRef PubMed .
I. K. Attatsi, H. Zhong, J. Du, W. Zhu and X. Liang, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 503, 119398 CrossRef .
K. Sudhakar, A. Mahammed, Q.-C. Chen, N. Fridman, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2828–2836 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Chang, H.-P. Jhong, Y.-C. Chang, C.-C. Liu, T.-C. Chiang, H.-C. Huang and C.-H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 11543–11550 RSC .
W. Sinha, A. Mahammed, N. Fridman and Z. Gross, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3764–3772 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rahman, M. D. Ryan, J. Vazquez-Lima, A. Alemayehu and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3232–3238 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Alberto, B. C. de Simone, S. Liuzzi, T. Marino and N. Russo, J. Comput. Chem., 2020, 41, 1395–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mondal and S. Ye, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 405, 213115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Dai, Y. Peng, Z. Niu, Q. Sung, C. Shan, H. Yang, G. Verma, L. Wojtas, D. Yuan, Z. Zhang, H. Dong, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Feng and S. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4354–4359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Osterloh, V. Quesneau, N. Desbois, S. Brandès, W. Shan, V. Blondeau-Patissier, R. Paolesse, C. P. Gros and K. M. Kadish, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 595–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, A. Mahammed, H. Kim, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Gross, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sung, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 214–222 RSC .
M. Bischetti, G. Pomarico, S. Nardis, F. Mandoj, D. O. Cicero and R. Paolesse, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sahu, S. Mondal, B. Patra, T. Pain, S. K. Patra, C. Dosche and S. Kar, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 166–170 RSC .
K. E. Thomas, N. Desbois, J. Conradie, S. J. Teat, C. P. Gros and A. Ghosh, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 533–540 RSC .
S. Kappler-Gratias, L. Bucher, N. Desbois, Y. Rousselin, K. Bystricky, C. P. Gros and F. Gallardo, RSC Med. Chem., 2020, 11, 783–801 RSC .

Footnotes† Dedicated to Professor Emeritus Melvyn R. Churchill on the occasion of his 80th birthday (June, 2020).‡ Two authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Woohyun Lee
	Dr Woohyun Lee is from South Korea. He earned his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from KAIST (2016). During his undergraduate coursework, he pursued research under the supervision of Prof. David G. Churchill. He graduated with a PhD from the Department of Chemistry at KAIST under the guidance of Professor David G. Churchill in March 2021 (Integrated MS and PhD Student) publishing more than 6 scientific articles. His thesis research topics included designing new fluorescent sensors for the detection of natural small biomaterials/biomolecules such as biothiols and ROS. He has recently been hired by Samsung (2021–).

Xuan Zhan
	Dr Xuan Zhan is from the PRC and graduated with a PhD from IIT Technion (Haifa Israel) in 2020 while working in the laboratory of Professor Zeev Gross. His synthetic chemistry was fruitful and he synthesized and isolated a variety of element corrole compounds. He has published more than 6 articles on corroles and closely related systems to date from his research at the Technion. He is now a postdoctoral fellow at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen) with Professor Gang Chen.

Jaymee Palma
	Jaymee Palma is originally from the Philippines and graduated high school from the prestigious Korea Science Academy of KAIST. She is currently a fourth-year undergraduate student at KAIST (Daejeon, South Korea), majoring in chemistry and minoring in chemical and biomolecular engineering. She pursued both individual study and undergraduate research projects in the Molecular Logic Gate Laboratory of Professor David G. Churchill and is currently performing graduation research in the Molecular Biophysics Laboratory supervised by Professor Jin Young Kang. Jaymee is currently the Editor In Chief of The KAIST Herald, the official English newspaper of KAIST.

Jenya Vestfrid
	Dr Jenya Vestfrid earned her PhD from IIT Technion in the laboratory of Professor Zeev Gross in 2016 investigating corroles with unique photophysical properties. She was awarded the Lyon Sachs Postdoctoral Fellowship and pursued her training in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry at the University of Toronto with Professor Timothy P. Bender, exploring structure–function relationships of the active layer in OPVs. In 2018 she joined the group of Professor Alán Aspuru-Guzik in the Department of Chemistry at University of Toronto as the first experimental chemist and leads efforts to automate synthetic chemistry as part of the self-driving laboratory.

Zeev Gross
	Zeev Gross is the R. M. and R. D. Blum Professor of Chemistry at the Technion, serving also as Dean of the division for continuing & external studies and heading multiple youth outreach activities in Chemistry. His research focus is on uncovering unique physical and chemical properties of metallocorroles, for utilization in applications that are of prime importance for modern society: discovering new drugs and designing optimal catalysts for energy-relevant processes. He was the Moore Distinguished Scholar in Caltech in 2013, received the Israel Chemical Society Award for the Outstanding Scientist in 2014, and the Hans Fischer Life Achievements Award in 2018.

David G. Churchill
	David G. Churchill is a full professor of chemistry and head of the inorganic chemistry division at KAIST. With 120 research peer reviewed scientific articles (H index = 32), he is a synthetic chemist interested in neurodegenerative disease research. He has (co-)organized the International Symposium for Molecular Neurodegenerative Disease Research (ISMNDR) at KAIST (2012–present) and is Editor in Chief of Main Group Chemistry. Churchill spent a sabbatical with Professor Gross in 2017–18, and has been a figure for globalization at KAIST. He is currently the international relations specialist of the newly-formed Korean Association of Selenium Research and Chairperson of Se2022.

Al	Aluminum and corrole	36	Since 2002–
Sb	Antimony and corrole	6	Since 2006–
Bi	Bismuth and corrole	4	Since 2011–
B	Boron and corrole	26	Since 2003–
Ga	Gallium and corrole	83	Since 2000–
Ge	Germanium and corrole	24	Since 2001–
P	Phosphorus and corrole	34	Since 1998–
Si	Silicon and corrole	10	Since 2009–
Sn	Tin and corrole	19	Since 1998–
Reviews: 2
Au	Gold and corrole	33	1 highlighted
Ag	Silver and corrole	30	Since 2003–
S	Sulfur and corrole	7	Since 2012–
Se or Te	(Selenium or tellurium) and corrole	1	Since 2017–

 	Fig. 1  Structures of compounds 1–3.	 

 	Fig. 2  The aluminum system with/without eight bromine substituents at the beta positions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Carbonate formation with catalytic use of aluminum corrole.	 

 	Fig. 4  Group 13 compounds studied in the photophysical studies by Pomarico et al.	 

 	Fig. 5  Aluminum corroles reported by Vestfrid prepared simply using N-iodo succinimide (L = pyridine).	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of aluminum corrole (5) and aluminum corrolin (13).	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of 2,17-bis(chlorosulfonyl)-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrolato (14).	 

 	Fig. 8  Structures of metallocorrole studied by Oppenheim et al.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of compound 15 studied by Zhan et al.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Metalated corroles under study, Sb-pyr corrole and Mn corrole. (b) Proposed synergistic catalysis mode for the Mn-corrole and TBAB-catalyzed CO2 fixation with epoxides.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The switching from SbIII to SbV by the formal addition or loss of X2. (b) Switching between the studied compounds SbIII and SbV.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of 20 and 21.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Preparation of B2(1,2-O2C6H4)(ttp) (b) N-fused porphyrin complexes (c) structures of transoid dipyrromethene/dipyrromethene.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Synthesis of diboron porphyrazine and phthalocyanine complexes. (b) Structures of tetrapyrrole complexes.	 

 	Fig. 15  “Diagonal relationship” of some lighter elements as shown by a portion of the periodic table of the elements (groups 1, 2, 13–15).	 

 	Fig. 16  Depictions of the different geometries readily open for the boron corrole species.	 

 	Fig. 17  Diversity in structure to afford μ-oxo species from the terminal fluorine species.	 

 	Fig. 18  Synthesis of carbaporphyrinoids studied by the Srinivasan group.	 

 	Fig. 19  Boron N-confused and N-fused porphyrin complexes.	 

 	Fig. 20  Synthesis of subporphyrin compound 29.	 

 	Fig. 21  Corrole species containing a formal donor atom N to O change in the binding cavity.	 

 	Fig. 22  B-pin regioselectivity and the resulting fused system.	 

 	Fig. 23  Keto–enol tautomerization of the 2-hydroxycorrole species.	 

 	Fig. 24  Structures of compounds 3CF3-Ga and 4CF3-Ga.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structures of 44 and 45 and the synthesis and structures of 46 and 47.	 

 	Fig. 26  Structure of 48.	 

 	Fig. 27  Structure of different BODIPY-corrole dyads by Gros et al.36	 

 	Fig. 28  Acetylene corrole conjugates from the report by Srikanth et al.37	 

 	Fig. 29  Structures of gallium corrole and achieving open and closed forms of 3,3′-(hexafluorocyclopent-1-ene-1,2-diyl)bis(2-methyl-5-phenylthiophene) (DTE) by ET as reported by You et al.38	 

 	Fig. 30  The aluminum and gallium system described by Blumenfeld et al.40	 

 	Fig. 31  Structures of 66–68 and 61–63 and 20 and 64 and 65.	 

 	Fig. 32  Structure of free base PTZ-corroles (69–71) and gallium PTZ-corroles (72–74). Note: this concept was already reported in the 2012 report by Hwang et al.41b These authors showed that the CD5O value of the gallium(III) corrole bioconjugated to a cancer cell-directing protein decreases from 0.1–1 nM to 0.01–0.001 nM upon irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 33  The electron excitation scheme featuring photophysical kinetic parameters for the gallium corrole.	 

 	Fig. 34  Synthesis of silica nanoparticle with compound 75.	 

 	Fig. 35  Structure of 76.	 

 	Fig. 36  Structures of studied Germanium corroles by Zhang et al.47	 

 	Fig. 37  Mixed nitration and amination derivatives of studied germanium(IV) corroles by Stefanelli et al.48	 

 	Fig. 38  Germanium corroles 84–86 (P for porphyrin).	 

 	Fig. 39  Structure of the phosphorus corrole system studied by Paolesse et al.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Axial ligand exchange and macrocycle iodination of phosphorus corroles. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism for the aerobic photocatalytic oxidation of benzylamine.	 

 	Fig. 41  Structure of the products of nitration and bromination reactions reported by the Paolesse group.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Catalytic reactions based on phosphorus corrole cations. (b) Single phosphonium-type system with catalytic open side. (c) Structures of phosphorus corrole cations.	 

 	Fig. 43  Structures of mono and multitrifluoromethyl-substituted phosphorus corroles.	 

 	Fig. 44  Phosphorus corrole compound 114–119.	 

 	Fig. 45  Synthesized phosphorus corroles described in the report by the Paolesse group.	 

 	Fig. 46  Mullikan population analysis of the HOMO of 88, 89, and their 3-SO2Cl-substituted derivatives, at the BP 86-D3/def2-TZVP(-f) level of theory.	 

 	Fig. 47  Structure of the corroles reported by Brudveg et al.	 

 	Fig. 48  Structure of OP(V)TBC (128).	 

 	Fig. 49  Structure of the symmetric A3 triaryl meso corrole with phosphine oxide functionality reported by Liang et al.	 

 	Fig. 50  Phosphorus corrole and corrole-porphyrin dimer.	 

 	Fig. 51  Phosphorus corroles 130, 133 and 134 by Ghosh.	 

 	Fig. 52  Phosphorus aza corrole as prepared studied and reported by Goldberg.	 

 	Fig. 53  Structures of of complexes 136–140.	 

 	Fig. 54  Structures of silicon corroles and dimer reported by the Paolesse group.	 

 	Fig. 55  Structures of free-base and silicon corroles, and its dimer form.	 

 	Fig. 56  Structures of 128, 152 and 153.	 

 	Fig. 57  Structures of compounds 154–160.	 

 	Fig. 58  Structures of pyridyl corroles 161–164 studied by Lai.	 

 	Fig. 59  Structures of tin triarylcorroles 165 and 166.	 

 	Fig. 60  Tin corrole compound 167 studied by Xie et al.	 

 	Fig. 61  Structures of (TPFC)SnII (168), (TAP)CoIIICl (169), and (TPFC)Sn–Co(TAP) (170).	 

 	Fig. 62  Structures of tin corroles 171–173.	 

 	Fig. 63  (a) Structures of the tin-corrole/rhodium porphyrin complex 174 show together and separately and (b) the energy diagram pertaining to the different sections of compound 174.	 

 	Fig. 64  Gold corrole 177 by Kolle.	 

 	Fig. 65  Gold corroles with iodo and CF3 beta substituent functionalities.	 

 	Fig. 66  Preparation of the gold tetra-iodo species by Soll et al.	 

 	Fig. 67  Structure of gold complexes by Alemayehu et al.	 

 	Fig. 68  Structures and energy diagram of gold corroles as studied by the Che group.	 

 	Fig. 69  Core alkylation of N-site.	 

 	Fig. 70  Structures of the free-base azulicorrole H3[AzuC] (193).	 

 	Fig. 71  Silver corroles 194–202 studied by Stefanelli et al.	 

 	Fig. 72  Structures of silver corroles as studied in the report of Ueta et al.	 

 	Fig. 73  Structures of silver corroles by Ooi et al.	 

 	Fig. 74  Structure of 4-aryl substituted Ag species as reported by Ghosh.	 

 	Fig. 75  Silver corroles studied by Stefanelli et al.	 

 	Fig. 76  Iso-carbacorroles 214 and 215 by Szterenberg et al.	 

 	Fig. 77  Silver corroles studied by Paolesse et al.	 

 	Fig. 78  Platinum corroles studied by Alemayehu et al.	 

 	Fig. 79  The conversion to a higher valence stage of iron and conversion of X–O in oxygen atom transfer.	 

 	Fig. 80  Metallocorroles studied by Pribisko.	 

 	Fig. 81  Gallium and phosphorus corroles studied by Brennan et al.	 

 	Fig. 82  Sterically multibrominated corroles reported by Mahmood et al.	 

 	Fig. 83  Beta brominated and iodinated cobalt corroles by Sudhakar et al.	 
Footnotes
† Dedicated to Professor Emeritus Melvyn R. Churchill on the occasion of his 80th birthday (June, 2020).
‡ Two authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
