Electrospun nanofibers promote wound healing: theories, techniques, and perspectives   - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TB00067E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TB00067E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 3106-3130Electrospun nanofibers promote wound healing: theories, techniques, and perspectives†

        
          
            Chen 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Miao 
            Jin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Qianqian 
            Tang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhongrong 
            Chen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Cheng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Runhuai 
            Yang
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Zhao
          
        
      *f
aCollege of Life Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, Anhui, China
bSchool of Basic Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, Anhui, China
cChaohu Clinical Medical College, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, Anhui, China
dSchool of Biomedical Engineering, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, Anhui, China
eDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China. E-mail: yangrunhuai@ahmu.edu.cn
fCenter for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Electronic Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei 230027, P. R. China. E-mail: zhaog@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      12th January 2021
    , Accepted 16th March 2021First published on 19th March 2021AbstractAt present, the clinical strategies for treating chronic wounds are limited, especially when it comes to pain relief and rapid wound healing. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop alternative treatment methods. This paper provides a systematic review on recent researches on how electrospun nanofiber scaffolds promote wound healing and how the electrospinning technology has been used for fabricating multi-dimensional, multi-pore and multi-functional nanofiber scaffolds that have greatly promoted the development of wound healing dressings. First, we provide a review on the four stages of wound healing, which is followed by a discussion on the evolvement of the electrospinning technology, what is involved in electrospinning devices, and factors affecting the electrospinning process. Finally, we present the possible mechanisms of electrospun nanofibers to promote wound healing, the classification of electrospun polymers, cell infiltration favoring fiber scaffolds, antibacterial fiber scaffolds, and future multi-functional scaffolds. Although nanofiber scaffolds have made great progress as a type of multi-functional biomaterial, major challenges still remain for commercializing them in a way that fully meets the needs of patients.
1. Introduction
The effective healing of wounds is currently a common concern of the global medical community. Usually, wounds need to go through several successive, overlapping stages of cellular and biochemical activities to heal. Depending on its healing time, a wound can be classified as chronic or acute. A chronic wound is one that cannot completely heal in a short period of time.1 Generally speaking, wounds that fail to heal completely within 4–8 weeks can be considered as chronic wounds.2 A normal wound healing process involves four stages: hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling.3 The detailed normal healing process of an acute wound has been discussed in a number of studies, which will be summarized later in this paper.
The healing of a wound, however, may stop at any of these stages, most commonly in the inflammatory or proliferative stage.4 At this point, a normal wound would develop into a chronic wound, which leads to impairment in wound cell functions and failure of normal healing. For example, diabetic foot ulcers have been a common and severe type of chronic wound in clinical settings.5 Diabetic foot ischemic, neuropathic, and neuroischemic diseases can lead to the occurrence of diabetic foot, which will cause varying degrees of foot infections and ulcers and even require amputation.6 It is estimated that by 2030, 552 million people worldwide will be affected by diabetes,7 and 25% of diabetic patients will develop foot ulcers, 60% of which will further develop infections, which increases their risk of subsequent amputation.8
Small wounds can usually be healed through skin tissue repair, depending on the proliferation ability of the tissue.9 However, large-area burns and mechanical injuries need to be treated by external wound dressings or other medical means.10
Clinical methods for treating chronic wounds include debridement, orthopedics, casting, negative pressure treatment, and infection treatment. For local wound care, feasible methods include cleaning with saline applying modern wound dressings that promote a moist environment.11,12 These methods, however, are only effective in treating very small chronic wounds.13 Take negative pressure wound treatment for example, although it has brought significant clinical benefits, its mechanism of action remains unclear.14 In addition, orthopedics and castings involve higher medical costs and cause greater pain to patients.15 Therefore, it is critical to develop alternative methods for wound treatment. Tissue-engineered skin substitutes are considered a very promising method for treating wounds unsuitable for primary closure.16 These substitutes offer an ideal alternative to the traditional repair mechanism through skin regeneration. This process does not generate any scars or helps to reduce scars, while enabling the structure and function of the skin to be completely restored.17 By our definition, practical wound dressings should be those that (1) are antimicrobial; (2) promote rapid hemostasis; and (3) have good biocompatibility and promote cell growth.18 Electrospun nanofibers in tissue engineering have been demonstrated to have these characteristics, which opens up new possibilities for the treatment of chronic wounds.19
As an electrostatic fiber formation technology, electrospinning can be used to tailor devices to the required fiber morphology and structure, including high voltage power supply devices, quantitative injection pumps, and fiber collection devices. An electrospinning device gradually pulls polymer droplets from Taylor cones into filament fibers with diameters of microns or even nanometers under the action of high voltage electric fields.20 The resulting fiber scaffolds have high porosity, good mechanical properties, and excellent biocompatibility, which facilitate cell respiration, skin regeneration, wound moisturization, internal and external metabolism, and hemostasis.21,22
Fiber scaffolds (Scheme 1) fabricated by electrospinning devices can provide structural and morphological clues to the adhesion of various types of cells in wounds and serve as templates for wound tissue regeneration.23 The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex of fibrin and matrix proteins that deliver the mechanical and biological performances required for bone growth, skin regeneration, vascular reconstruction, and growth of other tissues. With similar microstructures to ECM proteins, electrospun fiber scaffolds play an important role in maintaining cell growth and infiltration and are therefore suitable for use in tissue engineering.24
 Scheme 1  Electrospun nanofibers promote wound healing. (A) Electrospinning devices and (B) electrospun fiber scaffolds to promote wound healing. 
Some wound healing studies have found that bioactive substances can be used in combination with electrospun fiber scaffolds to provide biological signals and multiple functions, which can effectively address the limitations of single scaffolds and inspire the development of multifunctional scaffolds in the future.25 Many researches have proposed the integration of antibiotics, auxin, analgesic drugs, natural healing drugs, and even nanoparticles into electrospun fiber scaffolds, which has brought the role of traditional wound healing and tissue engineering into full play.26,27
Next, we will discuss the various stages of wound healing, the evolvement of and what's entailed in the electrospinning technology, and methods that combine wound healing with electrospun nanofibers to produce multi-functional nano biomaterials.
2. Wound healing process
When a wound occurs to the normal skin, the body will start a complex wound healing process (Fig. 1).28 In this section, we will summarize the general process and mechanism of acute wound healing.
 Fig. 1  A summary of acute wound healing. EGF: epidermal growth factor; FGF: fibroblast growth factor; IGF: insulin-like growth factor; IL-1: interleukin-1; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase; PDGF: platelet-derived growth factor; TGF: transforming growth factor; TNF: tumor necrosis factor; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase. 
In the first stage of hemostasis, blood coagulation and hemostasis occur within a few hours.29,30 Vascular and lymphatic vessel destruction during injury results in tissue exposure to blood. To prevent some important organs of the body from being damaged after injury,31 the following mechanisms take place. Platelet-collagen contact is activated, i.e., platelet activation, and a coagulation cascade is initiated to prevent further blood loss and to facilitate platelet aggregation and thrombus formation.32 The bleeding stops when a collagen matrix forms around the thrombus. Importantly, it has been demonstrated that these complex cellular response processes proceed through regular biochemical reactions rather than chaos. Platelets recognize and bind rapidly to damaged wound tissues after injury.33 By activated platelet degranulation, a large number of growth factors and coagulation factors are released from the body to blood clots composed of fibronectin, fibrin, vitreous connexin, and thrombin reactive protein.34 The body's coagulation cascade occurs under the action of growth factors released by wound platelets. Among the various growth factors, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) play a particularly important role, which will be explained later in detail (Table 1). PDGF can promote vascular tissue regeneration and attract platelets, macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, etc.35 TGF-β is involved in the chemotaxis of platelets, neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and many other tissues and cells, as well as collagen production and indirect angiogenesis; it can also participate in and activate cellular responses and express some important enzymes and cytokines during wound healing.36 The main purpose of these mechanisms is to prevent blood loss.
Table 1 Growth factors involved in wound healing. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2006, American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 1994, Elsevier




Growth factor
Abbreviation
Source
Functions




Platelet-derived growth factor
PDGF
Platelets, macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells
Fibroblast proliferation, chemotaxis and collagen metabolism; chemotaxis and activation of neutrophils and macrophages; angiogenesis


Transforming growth factor α
TGF-α
Activated macrophages, platelets, keratinocytes, many tissues
It stimulates mesenchymal, epithelial, endothelial cell growth and endothelial cell chemotaxis


Transforming growth factor β
TGF-β
Platelets, neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, many other tissues and cells
Fibroblast proliferation, chemotaxis, collagen metabolism, indirect angiogenesis, actionsof other growth factors


Epidermal growth factor
EGF
Platelets, saliva, urine, milk, plasma
Stimulates epithelial cell and fibroblast proliferation and granulation tissue formation


Vascular endothelial growth factor
VEGF
almost exclusively on endothelial cell
Angiogenesis


Interleukin 1
IL-l
Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes
Induces fever, adrenocorticotrophic hormone release, enhances TNF-α and IFN-γ, activates granulocytes and endothelial cells, and stimulates hematopoiesis


Interleukin 2
IL-2
Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes
Activates macrophages, T cells, natural killer cells, and lymphokine-activated killer cells; stimulates differentiation of activated B cells; stimulates proliferation of activated B and T cells; and induces fever


Interleukin 4
IL-4
Mast cells
Early: stimulates fibroblast proliferation; later (72 hours): down regulates cytokine expression


Interleukin 6
IL-6
Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes
Is released in response to IL-1; induces fever; enhances release of acute-phase reactants by the liver; and is important in inhibiting extracellular matrix breakdown during proliferation


Interleukin 8
IL-8
Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes
Enhances neutrophil adherence, chemotaxis, and granule release; and enhances epithelization


Interleukin 10
IL-l0
Th2 and some regulatory T cells
Early: unknown; later(72 hours): down regulates cytokine expression


Tumor necrosis factor
TNF
Macrophages, mast cells, T lymphocytes
Fibroblast proliferation


Leukocyte-derived growth factor
LDGF
Macrophages, neutrophils, T lymphocytes
Chemoattractant and mitogen for connective tissue cells


Connective tissue growth factor
CTGF
Endothelial cells, flbroblasts
Chemoattractant and mitogen for connective tissue cells


Fibroblast growth factors
FGF
Brain, pituitary, macrophages, many other tissues and cells
Fibroblast and epithelial cell proliferation; stimulates matrix deposition, wound contraction, and angiogenesis


Keratinocyte growth factors
KGFs
Fibroblasts
Epithelial cell proliferation


insulin-like growth factor 1
IGF-1
Liver, plasma, fibroblasts
Stimulates synthesis of sulfated proteoglycans and collagen, fibroblast proliferation


Human growth hormone
HGH
Pituitary and thus plasma
Anabolism, stimulates IGF-1


Interferons
IFNs
Lymphocytes, fibroblasts
Inhibition of fibroblast proliferation and collagen synthesis




The inflammatory phase occurs after the initial vasoconstriction in the hemostatic phase. Inflammation usually ends completely after 48–72 hours, but may also last for 5–7 days. As the inflammatory phase begins, vasodilation occurs and vascular permeability increases. The release of histamine and other vasoactive mediators is a process that is subjected to hypertrophic degranulation cells.35 Neutrophils begin to be attracted to the vascular endothelial cells of the wound by a variety of chemotactic substances within 24–36 hours after injury and enter the wound.37,38 Neutrophils contain a large number of enzymes in vesicles secreted by their cells and in granules in the cytoplasm.39 These enzymes include elastase and cathepsin, as well as some bacteria growth inhibiting enzymes such as peroxidase and lysozyme.40 Various cytokines41 such as PDGF, interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, TGF-β, leukocyte-derived growth factor (LDGF) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) are released from neutrophils (Table 1).42 Migration of neutrophils to a wound plays an infiltrative role that helps to prevent the wound from becoming infected. In this process, neutrophils are responsible for phagocytosis and destruction of bacterial structures and removal of residual corpses and damaged tissues.43,44 Research results have shown that the activity of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) in chronic wounds is 30 times higher than that in acute wounds, and the activity and content of neutrophil elastase in chronic wounds are significantly higher than those in acute wounds.45 Upon recruitment to the wound bed, monocytes differentiate into macrophages, and the phagocytic process continues. It is likely that these macrophages exhibit a pro-inflammatory phenotype during the inflammatory phase and cause phagocytose debris and dead neutrophils.46 Neutrophils appear and function in a wound within hours after injury, and they are extruded together with a shell containing dead cells and wound degradation products or phagocytized by macrophages. Neutrophils are a major source of several proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, which can stimulate differentiation of monocytes into M1 macrophages.47–49
The proliferative phase lasts several weeks. The hallmark of this phase is that fibroblasts migrate to the wound where they are activated and deposit a newly synthesized ECM that produces collagen, fibrin, fibronectin, and hyaluronic acid.50 Granulation tissue deposits to fill the wound defect. Cells proliferating during this phase mainly include fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Resident fibroblasts in the surrounding tissue proliferate for the first 3 days and migrate into the wounded site on day 4.51 Fibroblasts in the surrounding tissue activate proliferation from a non-replicative quiescent state under the chemotaxis of growth factors such as PDGF and EGF.52 Keratinocytes migrate to the margin of the wound under the stimulation of EGF and TGF-α, as shown in Table 1, and eventually close the defect.35 Collagen (synthesized by fibroblasts) maintains tissue integrity and strength in wounds and plays a pivotal role at all stages.53,54 Collagen is the basis of cell matrix formation in wounds. It is also a major protein component of the connective tissue for acute wounds. Unwounded dermis contains approximately 80% type I collagen and 20% type III collagen. The granulation tissue for acute wounds, in contrast, contains 30% to 40% type III collagen.31 The formation of new blood vessels and granulation tissue is key to wound healing and occurs at all stages of the repair process. A large number of angiogenic factors are secreted during hemostasis, which in turn promotes angiogenesis. Angiogenesis is a key factor that helps in increasing the metabolic activity in wounds. As a heparin-binding endothelial cell-specific mitogen, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a naturally occurring regulator of physiological and pathological angiogenesis.55,56 During angiogenesis or neovascularization, the VEGF, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), and TGFβ produced by epidermal cells, fibroblasts, macrophages, and vascular endothelial cells stimulate the wound microenvironment. At this point, there is an increased demand for oxygen and nutrients to support the exuberant metabolic activity at the wound site, which results in reduced pH and oxygen tension of the microenvironment. The lactate content is therefore increased, which eventually introduces a new blood supply. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) binds to DNA-specific sequences that regulate the expression of VEGF, thereby stimulating angiogenesis. As new blood vessels enter the wound repair area, oxygen tension returns to a normal level, and oxygen binds to HIF and inhibits its activity, resulting in reduced VEGF synthesis. As the proliferative phase progresses, fibroblasts become the primary cells at the wound site.35
The remodeling phase lasts for weeks or even years, during which fibroblasts synthesize collagens and other regenerative proteins that comprise more than 50% of the protein in scar tissue; 80–90% of the collagen contained in intact dermis is comprised by type I collagen and the remaining 10–20% by type III collagen. The synthesis rate of collagen reaches its maximum around three weeks after injury peaks and then begins to decline and remains balanced with its breakdown rate. At this point, scar remodeling begins and can continue for up to two years. The quality and quantity of the matrix deposited during this healing phase can significantly affect scar strength.57 Collagen synthesis and breakdown, along with remodeling of the extracellular matrix, continue to occur and balance with each other around three weeks after injury.58 Matrix metalloproteinases from fibroblasts, neutrophils, and macrophages are responsible for collagen degradation at this stage. Their degradation process is tightly regulated. As a key regulator of macrophage activation, MMP-10 can promote the expression of collagenolytic MMPs (such as MMP-13) in M2 macrophages, thereby promoting clearance of scar tissues in skin wounds. There is evidence that MMP-10 does not affect the synthesis and deposition of fibrillar collagens (types I and III), but rather promotes the resolution of fibrosis through MMPs (particularly MMP-13) that control collagen breakdown. As MMP-10 is not a collagenase, fibrosis and scarring are greater and persist in the absence of MMP-10. These findings suggest that MMP-10 controls the ECM remodeling activity of M2 macrophages.59 As the matrix matures, fibronectin and hyaluronic acid break down, and the collagen bundles increase in diameter.60 Transforming growth factors β1 and β2 are major inducers of fibroblast myofibroblast differentiation, ECM deposition, wound contraction and scar formation, whereas TGF-β3 inhibits scar formation. Fibroblast growth factors 1 and 2, known as acidic and basic FGFs, respectively, are produced by inflammatory cells, vascular endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and keratinocytes. Both of the two factors play a part in reepithelialization, angiogenesis, and granulation tissue formation. Additionally, fibroblast growth factor 2 stimulates the production of ECM and matrix degrading enzymes, thereby promoting matrix synthesis and remodeling that are essential for normal wound healing.61 The wound remodeling mechanism involves ECM remodeling, cell maturation, and programmed cell death or apoptosis. During this process, fibronectin and hyaluronic acid are replaced, collagen bundles increase in size and intensity, neovascularization ceases, and the metabolic activity within the ECM declines. The density of cells, such as macrophages, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts, is reduced by apoptosis.62 Relatively decellularized scar tissues are preserved with an increased tensile strength.63,64
3. Electrospun nanofibers
Skin is the largest and most accessible organ in the human body. It plays an essential role in protecting the underlying tissue from external biological, chemical and physical invasion. It also prevents fluid loss and acts as a sensory organ of the surrounding environment to help regulate body temperature.65 The use of autograft and allograft has long been the “golden standard” for skin regeneration, especially when it comes to massive skin damage and slow healing or non-healing chronic wounds. This approach, however, suffers from some limitations, such as the incidence rate of patients, the risk of immunogenic rejection, and the spread of disease, while having disadvantages such as narrow availability of excellent donors and high costs.66,67 Tissue engineered skin substitutes have proved to be an effective option for treating local wounds.16 In addition to wound healing, artificial skin products or skin substitutes can also be used for living skin transplantation. More importantly, they help to reduce the incidence of rare skin diseases, such as bullous skin disease, which would result in large-scale skin rupture. Many studies have shown that composite engineered skin containing epithelial cells is effective in repairing severe skin injuries. Although these tissue engineering applications have been around for many years through a great number of launched products, little progress has been made in their combination with electrospun nanofibers for developing commercial therapies for use in clinical settings.68 In this section, we will discuss the evolvement of electrospun nanofibers, how the electrospinning technology works as well as factors affecting the formation of nanofibers.
3.1 Electrospinning
Electrospinning is a technology that utilizes high potential to produce continuous ultrafine fibers (Fig. 2). This technology was first described by Raleigh in 1897. Recent years have seen an exponentially increasing number of papers published each year on the use of electrospinning for wound healing (Fig. 4). These breakthroughs in the electrospinning technology are attributed to several factors, including its ease of operation and its capability of fabricating multi-functional fiber products. The great technological progress in electrospinning has made it possible to design and synthesize novel polymer materials with ideal properties.69 Electrospinning has proved to be a highly cost-effective technology and can easily move from lab research to industrial production. In addition, the technology can also be used to obtain specially arranged nanofiber structures that feature a high specific surface area and a remarkable inter- and intra-fiber porosity.70,71
 Fig. 2  Evolvement of electrospinning. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2 Electrospinning process
Electrospinning is an electrohydrodynamic process in which droplets are electrically charged to produce a jet, which is then stretched and dried to produce fibers. A typical electrospinning system comprises a high voltage DC or AC power supply, a quantitative or constant speed injection pump, and a fiber conductive or insulating collection device (Fig. 3A). Electrospinning is a process that uses an electric potential to overcome the surface tension of a solution to produce an ultra-fine jet.74 When the system is energized (Fig. 3C), the suspended droplets of the polymer solution on the spinneret nozzle will be charged. As the droplets spread from a sphere to an ellipsoid (Fig. 3B), a sharp tip is formed at the top of the ellipsoid, then a jet is formed, and finally the droplets evolve into smaller ones, which are repelled from the mother droplets by Coulomb force. The edge of the tip then disappears.75 The formed jet is then derived and extended along a straight line. As the fibers keep extending, the jet bends around and beats strongly. Finally, the polymer is precipitated on the collector due to the instantaneous evaporation of the polymer and the disappearance of the charge on the fiber surface (Fig. 3C).73 Electrospun fibers can be deposited on various types of collectors, such as conductive, insulating, directional, porous, static or rotating hub structures (Fig. 3D).76
 Fig. 3  Electrospinning nanofiber preparation and assembly: (A) A photo of a basic electrospinning system; (B) The breakup of a 18.5 μm radius jet; Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2010, Physics of Fluids. (C) Charge distribution of the fibers during curing on the collector; Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (D) Electrospun fibers collected using a planar static collector and a rotary collector. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2015, Colloids Surf., B. 
In general, we divide the electrospinning process into four successive steps: (1) the droplet is charged and forms a Taylor cone or conical jet; (2) the jet consisting of droplets with the same charge is derived and elongated along a straight line; (3) the jet bends from a straight line to all sides and beats continuously; and (4) the volatilization of the jet solvent causes the fibers to solidify and be collected on a grounded collector.77–80
3.3 Electrospinning parameters
The process control of electrospinning usually focuses on the operating conditions for obtaining fibers with specific purpose properties.81 The fiber morphology is affected by several factors (Table 2), which work together to form electrospun nanofibers.82
Table 2 Electrospinning parameters (solution, process and ambient) and how they affect fiber morphology. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2010, Elsevier Inc




Parameters
Effect on fiber morphology




Solution viscosity
Low-beads generation, high-increase in fiber diameter, disappearance of beads


Polymer concentration
Increase in fiber diameter with increase of concentration


Molecular weight of polymer
Reduction in the number of beads and droplets with increase of molecular weight


Conductivity
Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in conductivity


Surface tension
No conclusive link with fiber morphology, high surface tension results in instability of jets


Applied voltage
Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in voltage


Distance between tip and collector
Generation of beads with too small and too large distance, minimum distance required for uniform fibers


Feed rate/flow rate
Decrease in fiber diameter with decrease in flow rate, generation of beads with too high flow rate


Humidity
High humidity results in circular pores on the fibers


Temperature
Increase in temperature results in decrease in fiber diameter




Electrospinning is defined as the production of fibers from polymer solutions under high voltage electric fields. The solution, process and ambient conditions can be optimized to refine the morphology, diameter, and porosity of nanofibers. Factors affecting the electrospinning process are divided into three categories: solution parameters, process parameters, and ambient parameters.83
The classification of these parameters greatly affects the development of regular, high porosity and multi-functional fiber scaffolds. Examples include multi-layer electrospinning, post-processing of fiber scaffolds, collection of wet fibers, template-assisted collection, electrospinning with a pore forming agent, and self-assembly of scaffolds. It is concluded that changes in any one of the parameters will affect the other parameters and even the formation of the whole product. Therefore, to better explore what's entailed in the electrospinning technology and how it can be used for fabricating nanofiber scaffolds, it is necessary to understand the characteristics of all these parameters (Table 2).79
4. Electrospun nanofibers for promoting wound healing
In recent years, there have been a growing number of studies focusing on electrospun nanofibers and wound healing (Fig. 4). With structural support and physiological biochemical responses available, the ECM provides a dynamic and three-dimensional (3D) internal network environment in which cells can be maintained. Cell signals are transmitted between the nucleus and the ECM to enable cell adhesion, migration, growth, differentiation, apoptosis, regulation of cytokine and growth factor activity, and activation of intracellular signals. In addition, interactions between cellular receptors and the ECM molecules are crucial for wound healing as well as the associated cell migration, proliferation, and tissue remodeling. Electrospun fibers for tissue engineering have a similar structure to natural ECM, so they can fully exert similar physiological and biochemical reactions to those exerted by ECM.84 Various materials including gauzes, membranes, foams, and hydrogels have been used as dressings for wound treatment. An ideal wound dressing should be one with multiple functions, including reducing pain, preventing contamination of the wound, absorbing exudates, maintaining a moist environment for gas exchange, protecting the wound from further damage, and enhancing the regenerative capacity.85,86 In addition, given the growing concerns over antibiotic-resistant bacteria, further research efforts are needed to develop wound dressings that can quickly stop infection, prevent adverse outcomes and deliver high healing rates with lower costs.87 Nanofiber scaffolds that have been optimized in vitro to promote cell migration or biomolecule delivery can be evaluated for healing in vivo by using mouse, rat or rabbit models.88
 Fig. 4  Trends in the number of publications in the past two decades with the keywords “electrospun nanofiber” and “electrospun nanofiber wound healing”. 
4.1 Advantages of electrospinning

4.1.1 Compositional and structural effect. 
Skin wound healing studies include hydrogel polymerization, 3D printing, or scaffolds formed by physical foaming of gases such as sodium borohydride. However, these materials lack the ability to mimic the natural structure of the skin's extracellular matrix (ECM).89 Electrospinning, a nanotechnology, has recently attracted a great deal of interest in wound healing because of its ability to produce biomimetic nanofiber materials from a variety of natural and synthetic polymers with biologically relevant properties.90 Electrospinning can be used to produce healing dressings from the skin's extracellular matrix components such as collagen, elastin, laminin and various polysaccharides.91,92 In addition, extracellular matrix components simply alternately adsorb complementary polyvalent substances on the surface of electrospun nanofibers through electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, nonspecific adsorption, protein–ligand binding, or other secondary interactions.93,94 Currently, researchers have produced electrospun type I and III collagen or its downstream products gelatin nanofibers.95,96 By blending with other polymers, K. Jalaja found that oxidized sucrose could be cross-linked with gelatin nanofiber electrospinning without damaging the nanofiber structure. Sucrose is introduced into aldehyde functional groups through periodate oxidation. It was proved that the morphology of the cross-linked gelatin nanofibers remained intact even when the oxidized sucrose was exposed to water-based media.97 Eria vonasek successfully immobilization of phages to cellulose nanofibers without the need for group and chemical modification by non-specific adsorption, protein–ligand binding, and electrostatic interaction, respectively, enables efficient translation of naturally occurring phages and their mixtures for antimicrobial applications.98 In another study, Seungkuk Ahn developed a completely plant-based nanofiber dressing consisting of cellulose acetate (CA) and soybean protein hydrolysate (SPH) using a spinning jet spinning technique. The scaffold successfully simulated the physical and chemical properties of natural skin ECM. It can promote the proliferation, migration and infiltration of fibroblasts. CA/SPH scaffolds accelerate re-epithelialization and reduce scar formation and collagen anisotropy.99


4.1.2 Mechanical effect. 
The mechanical parameters of electrospinning scaffolds can affect cell growth and tissue regeneration.100 The mechanical properties of scaffolds modulate the wound healing process and determine the fate of cells by modulating the ability of biochemical signals.101 According to the anchoring dependence, most tissue cells do not survive at all in dissociation and suspension,102 whereas the spinning scaffold has the ability to resist constant pushing and pulling and thus provides an elastic microenvironment for survival.103,104 The cellular response to the force exerted by the cell consists of an internal and external force feedback loop coupled with the elasticity of the extracellular microenvironment.105,106 At the cellular scale, normal tissue cells depend on actin and myosin for anchoring and pulling their surroundings. Filaments scalability and cross-cell adhesion detect elasticity and transfer force to fibrous scaffolds, which respond to perceived resistance by the cell and change the physical properties of the scaffold.107,108 In turn, the response of cells to the rigidity of the modified scaffold can be altered.109 Cells respond to fibrous scaffold resistance by regulating their adhesion, cytoskeleton, and global state.110 We can choose or add suitable materials to electrospinning nanofibers to adjust the mechanical properties of the nanofibers, so as to form mechanical properties of composite materials that are very close to human skin.


4.1.3 Synergistic effect of bioactive materials. 
Electrospun nanofiber dressings provide an excellent platform for local delivery of therapeutic drugs to wound sites. Local treatment of wound healing can reduce pain, stimulate new tissue regeneration, increase vascular perfusion and reduce biological load.111 In order to shorten the environmental response time and quantitatively control the release of wound drugs, antioxidants, antibiotics, enzymes and growth factors can be incorporated into electrospun nanofibers for wound healing by designing different environment-responsive fiber structures.112 Peng-Yue hu prepared polycaprolactone/Fe3O4 fiber membrane using a self-made spinning device combined with magnetic composite fiber membrane with excellent heating efficiency and thermal cycling characteristics. The drug is delivered precisely to the wound by a magneto-thermal effect.113 Elisa A has demonstrated excellent antibacterial properties by electrospinning Ti3C2 (MXene) flakes into chitosan nanofibers for wound dressing applications.114 In addition, Xueling Li proposed a MXene based solar energy absorption and demonstrated excellent photothermal conversion efficiency collector (DASC).115 Based on this, an antimicrobial drug release model combining photothermal material and electrospinning drug release can be boldly imagined. In addition, a variety of biological reagents can be added to electrospinning nanofibers at the same time to increase the functionality of nanofiber scaffolds.

4.2 Suitable polymer materials
When electrospun fiber scaffolds are applied for wound healing, suitable polymers, such as natural polymers, synthetic polymers, natural polymers, and synthetic polymers, should be selected to offer the required scaffold properties (Table 3).116 Natural polymers come from a variety of renewable resources and are inherently biocompatible and biodegradable. Polysaccharides such as chitosan,117 cellulose,118 and hyaluronic acid119 and proteins such as collagen120 and silk fibroin121 have been electrospun for inhibition of bacterial reproduction, topical drug delivery, wound healing, and other biological applications.
Table 3 Different polymers used in electrospinning, methods to characterize them, and their applications. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2020 Polymers. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society




Polymers
Characterizations
Applications





a Scanning electron microscopy.
b Differential scanning calorimeter.
c Transmission electron microscopy.
d Wide angle X-ray diffraction.
e Attenuated total reflectance infra red spectroscopy.
f Nuclear magnetic resonance.
g X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.
h Scanning probe microscopy.
i Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infra red spectroscopy.
j Tissue engineering.
k Small angle X-ray scattering.
l Energy dispersive X-ray.
m Environmental scanning electron microscopy.
n X-ray diffractometry.
o Fourier transform infrared.





Gelatin
SEMa, mechanical evaluation
Scaffold for wound healing


Gelatin/polyaniline
SEM, DSCb, conductivity measurement, tensile testing
Tissue engineering scaffolds


Silk
SEM, TEMc, WAXDd
Biomedical applications


Silk fibroin
SEM, ATR-IRe,13C CP/MAS NMR, WAXD, NMRf, in vitro human keratinocyte culture
Nanofibrous scaffolds for wound healing


Chitosan
SEM, viscosity analysis, conductivity measurement
Wound dressings


Silk/chitosan
SEM, viscosity analysis, conductivity measurement
Wound dressings


Silk fibroin, silk/PEOj
SEM, FTIR, XPSg
Nanofibrous TE scaffold


Collagen120
SEM, FTIR, SPMh
Biomaterials, wound healing


Collagen/chitosan
SEM, FTIR
Biomaterials


Chitosan/PEO
SEM, XPS, FTIR, DSC
TE scaffold, drug delivery, wound healing


Cellulose
SEM, DSC, ATR-FTIRi
Affinity membrane


Cellulose acetate
SEM, FTIR
Adsorptive membranes/felts


Hyaluronic acid, (HA)
SEM
Medical implant


Fibrinogen
SEM,TEM, mechanical Evaluation
Wound healing


Poly(glycolide) (PGA)
SEM, TEM, in vitro rat cardiac fibroblast culture, in vivo rat model
Nonwoven TEj scaffolds


Poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)
SEM, in vitro human chondrocyte culture
3D cell substrate


Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)
SEM, WAXD, SAXSk, degradation analysis
Biomedical applications, wound healing


Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)
SEM, EDXl
Biomaterials


Poly (vinyl alcohal)/cellulose acetate (PVA/CA)
SEM, FTIR, WAXD, mechanical evaluation
Biomaterials


Poly(ethylene-co-vinyl alcohol) (PEVA)
SEM, in vitro human aortic smooth muscle cell and dermal fibroblast cultures
Nonwoven tissue engineering scaffold


Polylactide (PLA)159
SEM, FTIR, in vitro L929 cells cultures, in vivo rat model
Tissue repair, wound healing, wound dressing


Poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)
SEM, in vitro rat mesenchymal stem cell culture
Bone tissue engineering


Polyethylene oxide (PEO)160
SEM, FTIR, XPS
Nanofibrous TE scaffold


Polyurethane (PU)
SEM, in vivo guinea pig model
Nonwoven tissue template wound healing


Syndiotactic 1,2-polybutadiene
ESEMm, XRDn, FTIRo
Tissue engineering applications


Polystyrene (PS)
SEM, in vitro human fibroblast, keratinocyte, and endothelial single or cocultures
Skin tissue engineering




Chitosan is a natural polysaccharide and has been widely used for fabricating biomedical materials due to its low price, easy availability good antibacterial performance, high biocompatibility, and controllable biodegradability.122 Chitosan is commonly recognized as a promising natural polymer for wound dressing application due to its superior biodegradability, biocompatibility, and antibacterial and hemostatic properties.123 Chitosan can be used together with polyvinyl alcohol,124 polylactic acid,125 and collagen126 to fabricate nanofiber mats that feature good antimicrobial activity against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Elastin is an ECM protein mainly produced from fibroblasts and chondrocytes, and has good elasticity and ductility.127 Elastin is highly cross-linked and almost insoluble in water, dilute acid, alkali and salt solutions, but the monomer of elastin, i.e., protoelastin, is water-soluble. Elastin is thermostable due to its special cross-linking structure, and thermal decomposition occurs only when the temperature is higher than 220 °C. Elastin remains intact under physical, chemical and enzymatic actions.128,129 Natural polymer collagen and elastin can be electrospun to prepare nanofiber scaffolds for developing biomimetic vascular constructs for tissue engineering.130 These fibers can withstand high blood pressure and pulsatile environments.131
Hyaluronic acid is a proteoglycan widely found in the ECM.132 As it can be decomposed and absorbed in human body and has no toxicity and low immune response, hyaluronic acid has been used in wound repair and other applications.133 A mechanically stable and biocompatible bilayer polymer scaffold composed of chitosan, polycaprolactone, and hyaluronic acid was prepared by electrospinning. Improvements were found in the swelling, degradation, and water vapor permeability of this scaffold. The antimicrobial performance evaluation revealed significantly reduced bacterial adhesion on this scaffold, which delivered a remarkable antimicrobial effect. In vitro investigation of renal epithelial cells demonstrated enhanced cell proliferation, growth, and migration on this scaffold. The novelty of this innovation is that hyaluronic acid is used to modify composite nanofiber membranes in the scaffold to accommodate wound healing applications. The modified fiber membranes exhibit good transparency, elasticity, and hydrophilicity in both dry and wet states, which can promote the adhesion and proliferation of renal epithelial cells and provide a new way for the treatment of local wounds.134
Silk fibroin has good biocompatibility and biodegradability, and its β folding structure endows it with excellent mechanical properties.135 It has been widely investigated as a biomaterial for medical applications.136 The use of antioxidants in wounds to prevent the effects of free radicals has been investigated. Silk fibroin extracted from silkworm cocoons is a fibroin containing 5263 amino acid residues. This type of silk fibroin has been used in various forms, such as sponges, hydrogels, films, fibers, and microspheres, to promote collagen synthesis and reepithelialization through rapid proliferation of epithelial cells. Thanks to the silk fibroin's excellence in biocompatibility biodegradability and oxygen and water vapor permeability with the external environment as well as its minimal inflammatory reaction silk fibroin nanofibers loaded with fenugreek have been prepared by co-electrospinning. With the increase in the concentration of fenugreek in the nanofiber mat, the antioxidant, thermal and mechanical properties of fenugreek are enhanced. It has been validated that fibroblasts have good proliferation ability on nanofiber scaffolds. In addition, silk fibroin cucurbitacin nanofibers can be used in wound treatment to enable complete reepithelialization and enhanced collagen deposition, which in turn accelerates wound healing. This study demonstrated the feasibility of fenugreek-incorporated silk fibroin nanofiber scaffolds for wound healing.137
Synthesized polymers are characterized by good physical properties, acceptable biocompatibility, good processability, good production repeatability, among others.138 Composite membranes prepared from synthesized polymers perform well in applications including fabrication of tissue engineering scaffolds and sustained release of drugs.139 Polyurethane membranes (PU membranes) are commonly used in biomedical applications due to their good elasticity, light weight, oxygen permeability, high mechanical strength, and good barrier properties.140 Despite their extremely thin film, PU membranes can withstand the pressure of more than 10000 mm water column.141 Hydrophilic agents can be added to significantly improve the waterproof performance and moisture permeability of the film. PU membranes can also be used as a nanofiber material to speed up the wound epithelialization and dermal histogenesis processes.142
Pharmaceutical grade polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), unlike chemical grade polyvinyl alcohol, is a very safe macromolecular organic substance. Free of side effects and non-toxic to human body, PVA exhibits good biocompatibility, especially in ophthalmology,143 wound dressings,144 and artificial joints.145 As a commonly used safety film-forming agent, PVA has also been used to fabricate medical membranes and artificial kidney membranes146 to support wound skin repair.147
Polycaprolactone (PCL), a synthetic polymer that can be used in human tissue engineering, has the advantages of high mechanical strength, good processability and biodegradability.148 Blending PCL with collagen can compensate for the uncontrollable degradation rates and poor mechanical properties of collagen electrospun fibers.149 PCL/collagen nanofibers can provide a favorable matrix for the growth of dermal fibroblasts.150 When combined with collagen, biodegradable PCL can offer cell adhesion sites for constructing dermal substitutes, which makes it a promising alternative to implant materials in tissue repair. PCL nanofiber membranes provide interconnected pores with higher porosity, which enable fibroblasts to adhere and migrate to form dermal substitutes. Studies have shown that fibroblasts on PCL-blended collagen nanofibers have a higher proliferation rate and have a more normal morphology than those on PCL nanofibers.151
Polylactic acid-glycolic acid (PLGA) copolymer, which is randomly polymerized from two monomers, lactic acid and glycolic acid, is a kind of aliphatic polyester in the biomedical field. It has attracted increasing research attention because of its good biocompatibility, non-toxicity, good encapsulation and biodegradability in vivo. The mechanical and physicochemical properties of PLGA copolymer depend largely on the ratio of the two monomers.152 With a controllable biodegradation rate, PLGA copolymer has been widely used to fabricate biomedical engineering devices,153 examples of which include artificial catheters and drug sustained release carriers.154 PLGA has also been widely used as a biomaterial for pharmaceutical and medical applications. The combination of PLGA and inorganic nanocomposites can successfully improve the tissue regeneration rate, completely heal the tissue injury, and significantly inhibit inflammatory reactions.155 PLGA is hydrolyzed into lactic acid and glycolic acid which are naturally produced in human body, and these two products have their specific decomposition pathway. Evaluation of the effects of PLGA degradation products on human osteoblasts in vitro revealed that the degradation products are only toxic when they are at a high concentration under buffer conditions. Comparatively, a low concentration of PLGA degradation products can lead to reduced cell proliferation and rapid cell differentiation.156 Admittedly, the exception to this is lactose deficiency. The degradation time of PLGA copolymer can be changed by adjusting the monomer ratio.157
These polymers have high mechanical properties and special properties to promote wound healing. In addition, the solvent system in which the polymer is located has a great influence on the spinnability of the polymer at the first step of the whole electrospinning process. The polymer needs to be dissolved in a suitable solvent. The solvent should have some appropriate properties, such as volatility, vapor pressure, and boiling point, to maintain the integrity of the polymer solution. The morphology and size of electrospun nanofibers are strongly dependent on the solution's properties such as viscosity and surface tension.82 Electrospun fibers come with a number of advantages, such as high specific surface areas, adjustable porosity, and easy surface functionalization and drug loading. Recent years have seen the wide use of electrospun fibers in tissue engineering, drug delivery, and fabrication of wound dressings.158
4.3 Migration and growth of cells in scaffolds
Tissue engineering is a relatively new field, which uses living cells, biocompatible materials, appropriate biochemical and physical factors and their combination to create tissue-like structures. These tissue structures are eventually implanted into the body to repair damaged or failed organs. Cell scaffolds are usually used for at least one of the following purposes: 1. Cell attachment and migration; 2. Retention and presentation of biochemical factors; 3. Providing a porous environment for adequate diffusion of nutrients, expression products and wastes; and 4. Mechanical rigidity or flexibility.161 Tissue engineering scaffolds are usually used to provide structural support for the growth and adhesion of cells in scaffolds. Scaffolds with biomimetic structures of target tissues such as the wound microenvironment are used as templates for tissue formation.162 The ECM is composed of water, proteins and polysaccharides, and it is found in tissues with a specific composition and topological structure. The ECM is a non-cellular component present in all tissues and organs. It is continuously modified by enzymes or non-enzymes and post-translational modifications to produce biochemical and mechanical properties, such as tensile strength, compressive strength and elasticity, and is regulated by the buffer effect of maintaining extracellular homeostasis and water retention. It provides the physical properties (biomechanics, protection and tissue characteristics) required for cell growth and the biochemical and biomechanical signals required for histomorphogenesis, differentiation, and homeostasis.163 Therefore, it is feasible to use fiber scaffolds with a similar microstructure to that of the ECM to fabricate tissue engineering wound dressings.164 For example, oriented fiber scaffolds can control the arrangement of cells on the scaffolds and differentiate into tissues with an anisotropic microstructure.165 The electrospinning technology is the most effective method to prepare ECM-like microenvironment structures and to produce similar physiological and biochemical reactions to those taking place in ECM.166
Cell migration and infiltration within the wound are essential for wound healing.167 The space size, fiber orientation, and porosity of nanofibers have a great impact on cell migration and infiltration. Several studies have examined the natural microenvironment of the complex corneal tissue. The corneal stroma is composed of orthogonally arranged collagen nanofiber layers, which are sensitive to light transparency. The electrospinning technology is used to simulate the orthogonal arrangement of fiber structures, which helps to maintain the phenotype of corneal cells and thus enable corneal stroma regeneration.168,169 Compared to randomly arranged nanofibers and uniaxially arranged nanofibers, cross-linked nanofibers perform better in promoting the migration of fibroblasts and keratinocytes in vivo.170
It is also feasible to incorporate this application into nerve tissue engineering (Fig. 5A). Researcher validated the effectiveness of directional poly-ε-caprolactone (PCL) nanofiber scaffolds prepared by electrospinning under optimal conditions in nerve tissue engineering and compared their performance with that of random scaffolds. The diameter of the fibers was adjusted easily by changing the concentration of the polymer solution. Neural stem cells were used as model cells to evaluate their adaptability in vitro. The results showed that the elongation direction and the protrusion growth direction of the directional scaffold were parallel to the fiber direction (Fig. 5B). Directional PCL nanofiber scaffolds can be used as a promising cell carrier in nerve tissue engineering.171
 Fig. 5  Effects of morphology and spatial structure of nanofibers on migration and growth of cells involved in wound healing process. (A) SEM images for aligned fibers and (B) immunostained neurofilament after 11 days of culture. Scale bar: 50 μm. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020 Biomaterials; (C) SEM images of scaffolds (50% Col/TSF, 60% Col/TSF and 70% Col/TSF) and (D) adhesion of DAPI stained BMSCs to the scaffolds (magnification: 100×). Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019 Materials Science and Engineering: (C and E) illustration of liquid-collecting electrospinning setups and (F) relative shape and size of spongiform fiber scaffolds, section thickness: 30 μm. Scale bar: 500 μm. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2016 Materials. 
The striking progress in stem cell research has laid a foundation for cell therapy of diseases that cannot be cured by traditional drugs. Stem cells have indefinite self-renewal and the potential to differentiate into other types of cells, making them stay at frontier of regenerative medicine research.172 Another study demonstrated the effects of collagen/tussah silk fibroin (COL/TSF) composite scaffolds (Fig. 5C) loaded with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) (Fig. 5D).173 Researches on BMSCs have provided new ideas and strategies for wound repair. BMSCs are pluripotent stem cells that can differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes, tendon cells, endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and nerve cells. Homologous BMSCs do not induce immune response in vivo, which makes them hold a potential as seed cells in various tissue engineering.174 During the early stage of inflammation, these BMSCs migrate to the injured site to regulate the proliferation and migration of dermal mesenchymal and epithelial cells.175 In addition, it has been demonstrated that neural stem cells can produce keratinocytes and fibroblasts and release angiopoietin-1 or extracellular matrix protein, thereby playing an active role in the healing process.176 The researchers extracted collagen (Col) and tussah silk fibroin (TSF) from bovine tendons and tussah cocoons respectively and prepared composite scaffolds. The moisturizing capacity and cell infiltration ability of the scaffolds were improved, and the BMSCs showed higher cell adhesion, viability and differentiation ability. A study on rats has shown that scaffolds implanted with stem cells are more conducive to wound healing. It has been demonstrated that scaffolds implanted with BMSCs have good skin affinity, good permeability and water permeability, and good wound healing ability, which are expected to be candidate materials for skin tissue engineering.173
Cell growth and penetration are often designed to be multidimensional in order to address the surface limitations of flat, flaky fiber mats prepared by traditional electrospinning.177 In another study, Huizhi Chen developed a 3D network scaffold that combines fiber morphology and interconnected pore structures (Fig. 5E).178 The scaffold promotes effective infiltration and growth of fibroblasts and keratinocytes in vitro. To activate the interaction between cells and materials, the surface of the PLGA copolymer fibers was modified with type I collagen by chemical modification.178 Type I collagen is a major component of the ECM of natural skin179 and is rich in arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD) peptides to stimulate cell adhesion.180 It has been reported that the pore size of human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) tends to be 6 to 20 μm, and larger pore sizes (>20 μm) would cause cells to grow along the fibers rather than bifurcate in a 3D structure.181 In an in vitro cell infiltration study (Fig. 5F), human dermal fibroblasts were seeded on the surface of 3D fiber scaffolds, and over time, the fibroblasts gradually migrated to the interior of all scaffolds. In vivo wound healing experiments were performed on diabetic mice. In the absence of collagen, 3D fiber scaffolds can significantly promote wound healing in diabetic mice. In the early stage of wound healing, collagen containing scaffolds can promote the formation of new epidermis. Collagen-free 3D fiber scaffolds can significantly promote wound healing in diabetic mice. Therefore, 3D fiber scaffolds can serve as promising wound dressings for chronic wound repair by replacing ECMs with chronic wound loss or cell growth dysfunction.178 The main component of natural ECM is collagen scaffolds produced by dermal fibroblasts. When cells are cultured on porous scaffolds, type I and type III collagen are the most abundant, which play an important role in maintaining mechanical integrity and provide a platform for reepithelization.182 From the above discussion, we can see the advantages of 3D fiber scaffolds for cell infiltration and growth. In recent years, electrospinning has become a hot topic in the fields of materials science and biology. Currently available methods for preparing electrospun 3D fiber scaffolds include gas foaming (such as foaming with sodium borohydride), direct electrospinning, short fiber assembly into 3D scaffolds, 3D printing, electrospray, origami and cell chip engineering, and centrifugal electrospinning.183
We know that the porosity and pore size of fiber scaffolds have a great impact on cell migration and infiltration. There are many ways to increase the porosity and pore size, among which the use of porogens has become the mainstream direction at present. The metal foam of titanium alloy is designed to independently study porosity and pore size and shape. The results show that in the same porosity range, the shape and direction of the holes have an important influence on the mechanical properties. In contrast, the pore size has only a slight effect on the volume stiffness. Therefore, These results are for the future most of the cells tend to grow on the surface of the fibers when the pore size of the fibers is small, and proliferate and deposit rapidly when the porosity and pore size are large (Fig. 6A).184 To expand the porosity and pore size of the fiber scaffold and promote rapid cell proliferation, Brendon M. Baker hypothesized that the entry of cells into the scaffold would be accelerated by increasing the porosity while maintaining the overall orientation of the scaffold. To test this hypothesis, polycaprolactone and polyethylene oxide (PEO: a water-soluble polymer) were co-electrospun from two separate spinnerets to form a double polymer composite fiber-oriented scaffold (Fig. 6B). By adjusting the manufacturing parameters, a directional scaffold with a full range of sacrificial polyethylene oxide fiber contents was produced. The porosity and pore size of the scaffold changed in a predictable manner by removing polyethylene oxide components. When planting mesenchymal stem cells, cell infiltration and distribution could be improved by increasing the sacrifice rate and porosity. In pure polycaprolactone scaffolds, cells lined in the periphery of the scaffolds; whereas in scaffolds with a polyethylene oxide content greater than 50%, cells spread throughout the scaffolds. These findings suggested that cell infiltration in dense fiber aggregates can be accelerated by removing sacrificial fibers. This strategy can promote the formation and maturation of functional structures in vitro and in vivo in fiber tissue engineering and promote wound healing.185
 Fig. 6  Evaluating the effects of pore size and porosity of scaffolds on cell migration and infiltration. (A) MicroCT slices (xz and xy planes) of specimens manufactured with (a–c) particle porogen: nominal porosity 30% with pore range 300–500 lm, 50% with pore range 180–300 μm and 70% with pore range 180–300 μm and with (d–f) fiber porogen: nominal porosity 10, 30, 50%. Scale bar: 1 mm. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2020 Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance; (B) An electrospinning device for preparing double polymer composite fiber scaffolds. (a) Schematic diagram of electrospun PCL (red), PEO (green) and PCL/PEO composite scaffolds. (b) With the increase of PEO removal, the number of pores decreased, but the average pore size increased. (c) The increase of PEO removal promoted the infiltration of mesenchymal stem cells into composite fiber scaffolds. DAPI stained MSC-seeded scaffolds with varying % PEO contents (% mass loss) after three weeks of in vitro culture. Scale bar: 500 μm. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2008 Biomaterials; (C) representative SEM images of aligned electrospun PGS-PEO/PLA fibers (a) PGS-rdcPLA fibers (b) cured PGS-rdcPLA fibers. Scale bar: 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2019. 
In another study, Hsin-Ju Wu successfully prepared nanofibers consisting of polyglycerol sebacate (PGS)/polyethylene oxide (PEO: a water-soluble polymer as shell)/polylactic acid (PLA: as core layer) by using core–shell coaxial electrospinning (Fig. 6C). The results showed that the fiber morphology can be well maintained by adjusting the shell composition and the rotating speed of the collector drum. After dehydration, the scaffolds remained aligned, and the porosity and pore size increased. Directional fiber membranes can guide the orientation of cultured cells and effectively promote cell proliferation.186
4.4 Scaffolds with antimicrobial properties
Infections and abnormal inflammation occur in the early stages of wound healing even with appropriate treatment.187 Therefore, developing wound dressings capable of local anti-infective and anti-inflammatory drug delivery is essential for wound healing (Table 4). Commonly used antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin hydrochloride, amoxicillin, tetracycline, polymyxin, levofloxacin, penicillin, and gentamicin, have been used in combination with electrospun fibers to provide satisfactory antibacterial ability.188 Antibiotics can be classified into different types according to their bactericidal or bacteriostatic effects on structures or macromolecules related to bacterial cells. These include: inhibition of cell wall synthesis (penicillin and cephalosporin), interference with cell membranes, inhibition of protein synthesis (tetracycline, macrolides, and clindamycin), and interference with nucleic acid synthesis (metronidazole and quinolone).189
Table 4 Antibiotics for antimicrobial drug delivery. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2010 Curr. Med. Chem.




Drug
Targeted microorganism
Activity




Amphotericin B

Aspergillus fiimigatus

Targeted drug delivery at infection site


Polymyxin B

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

(1) Decreased bacteria count in lung. (2) Increased bioavailability. (3) Decreased lung injury caused by bacteria


Ampillicin

Micrococcus Luteus and Salmonella typhimurium
(1) Increased stability. (2) Full biological activity of Ampicillin was observed


Ciprofloxacin

Salmonella dublin

(1) Decreased motality of animals. (2) Distribution of liposomes to all areas of infection


Benzyl penicillin

Staphylococcus aureus

Lower drug concentrations and shorter time of exposure were required


Netilmicin

Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli
(1) Reduction in toxicity. (2) Increased circulation half-life. (3) Increased survival rate of animal model


Gentamicin

Klebsiella pneumoniae

(1) Increased survival rate of animal model. (2) Increased therapeutic efficacy


Streptomycin

Mycobacterium avium

Increased antimicrobial activity


Amikacin
Gram-negative bacteria
Prolonged drug and exposure


Zidovudine
Human immunodeficiency virus
Enhanced targeting of ZDV to lymphatics


Vancomycin or teicoplanin
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
(1) Enhanced each drug uptake by macrophages. (2) Enhanced intracellular antimicrobial effect of each drug


Aijunglucoside

Leishmania donovani

Reduced toxicity


Phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotide
HIV
Protection of oligonucleotides from degradation


Saquinavir
HIV
(1) Protect the drug from cytochrome C metaboish. (2) Bypass efflux pump


Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol.

Mycobacterium Turberculosis

(1) High drug payload. (2) Improved pharmacokinetic. (3) High therapeutic efficacy


Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol

Mycobacterium Turberculosis

(1) Enhanced bioavailability. (2) Improved pharmacodynamic


Amphotericin B.

Candida albicans

Lower in vivo toxicity due to reduced accumulation in kidney and liver


Halofantrine

Plasmodiumberghe

Prolonged circulation half-life


Primaquine and ampicillin

Leishmania donovani, Salmonella typhymurium and Listeria monocytogenes
Particle itself exhibits antimicrobial activity


Beta-lactam/ciprofloxacin

Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus anthracis
(1) Improved bioavailability. (2) Higher therapeutic efficacy


Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

(1) Increased residence time. (2) Increased drug bioavailability. (3) Decreased administration frequency


Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride
Gram-negative bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria, and mycoplasma
Prolonged drug release


Tobramycin

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Increased drug bioavailability


Clotrimazole
Fungi (e.g. yeast, aspergilli, dermatophytes)
(1) Prolonged drug release. (2) High physical stability. (3) High encapsulation efficiency


Ketoconazol
Fungi
(1) High physical stability. (2) Chemical instability when exposed to light


Miconazole nitrate
Fungi
(1) High physical stability. (2) High encapsulation efficiency. (3) Enhanced skin targeting effect


Econazole nitrate
Fungi
(1) High encapsulation efficiency. (2) Controlled drug release profile. (3) Enhanced drug penetration through stratum corneum




Adaptive drug resistance of microorganisms is due to the transient changes of gene or protein expression to extreme environments such as heat shock, oxidative stress, acid shock, and organic solvent and toxic by-product stress, which leads to raised levels of microbial resistance to antibiotics. When the stress is removed, the resistance is reversible.190 Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common type of Gram-negative bacteria, which can cause diseases in humans and animals. The adaptive drug resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is typically characterized by formation of biofilms (Fig. 7A) and generation of persistent cells (Fig. 7B).191
 Fig. 7  Drugs combined with nanoparticles to remove bacteria and biofilm. (A) Mechanism of biofilm formation. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2013 Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews. (B) Mechanism of antibiotic resistance. Antibiotics initially penetrate the biofilm (green); cells show adaptive stress response to the environment and survive (pink); changes in the microenvironment within the biofilm lead to bacterial resistance (yellow); and the formation of multidrug-resistant persistent cells (blue). Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019 Biotechnology Advances. (C) Schematic illustration of four nanoparticle platforms for antimicrobial drug delivery: (a) liposome, (b) polymeric nanoparticle, (c) solid lipid nanoparticle, and (d) dendrimer. (D) Multiple mechanisms of antimicrobial action of nitric oxide-releasing nanoparticles (NO NPs), chitosan-containing nanoparticles (chitosan NPs), silver-containing nanoparticles (Ag NPs), zinc oxide-containing nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), copper-containing nanoparticles, titanium dioxide-containing nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs), and magnesium-containing nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2013 Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews. 
Biofilm-mediated resistance: A biofilm is a collection of microorganisms that attract each other on biological or abiotic surfaces and embed in polymeric ECM. Biofilm resistance has been described as a complex phenomenon in many fungal pathogens. The mechanisms of biofilm resistance are mainly related to the overexpression of ECM, drug targets, and efflux pumps. It has been reported that genetic point mutations that promote drug resistance and efflux-based resistance mechanisms play an important role in biofilm mediated resistance. In addition, the adaptive resistance mechanism related to environmental stressors is likely to be the key factor for a biofilm to act as a pathogen in the host and environment.192 We can say that biofilm mediated drug resistance is an adaptive mechanism, which is reversible. This mechanism generally involves preventing antibiotic penetration, changing the cell growth environment, inducing adaptive stress response, and inducing peripheral cell differentiation. The biofilm regulation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa mainly depends on the quorum sensing system, the regulatory system GacS/GacA,193 and RetS/LadS.194 Bacterial extracellular polysaccharides (EPSs), a primary component of ECM, usually gain survival advantages by protecting cells from abiotic and biological stresses including host defense factors. EPSs are involved in cell recognition, surface adhesion, and biofilm formation. Studies have shown that the biosynthesis of most EPSs is regulated by the ubiquitous second messenger c-di-GMP, which promotes the transition to the biofilm growth mode closely related to eukaryotic hosts.195,196 For quorum sensing, one factor that affects biofilm formation is the ability of bacteria to adhere to the surface, which is correlated with the virulence and movement of bacteria under the control of the Lasl/LasR, rhll/rhlR, and PQS/MvfR systems. Quorum sensing inhibitors work by competing with their own inducers for their receptors. Therefore, they can inhibit biofilm formation, bacterial movement and virulence factors. Unfortunately, many of the previously studied quorum sensing inhibitors are clinically toxic.197
Resistance of persistent cells to antibiotics: Persistent bacteria are multidrug-resistant bacteria, which may lead to recurrence of infection. Many studies have shown that they can be formed in response to different trigger factors. Bacterial phenotypic variation is a persistent phenomenon, i.e., the response heterogeneity of genetically identical bacterial populations to antibiotic therapy. Persistent bacteria are also thought to be able to quickly adapt to antibiotic stress, such as by turning on/off genes related to general stress response.198 The persistent formation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is related to biofilms in vitro and in vivo. Due to the protection of the ECM and the slow growth of biofilms, most antibiotics are ineffective. Biofilms have been demonstrated to be 1000 times more tolerant to antibiotics than plankton.199 Most Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells can be killed by antibiotics. However, due to the presence of dormancy, which prevents the synthesis of antibiotic targets, persistent molecules are able to maintain viability and refill biofilms.200 In the presence of antibiotics, the persistent cells in the biofilm will not proliferate temporarily, but will return to their original activity and state after the removal of antibiotics. Therefore, the remaining persistent cells in the biofilm are responsible for the persistence of the biofilm's chronic infection function.201
Nanostructured biomaterial particles come with a nanoscale size, a high specific surface area, and a multi-functional structure. When combined with electrospun fibers in particular, they can not only reduce the absorption of microorganisms and increase the drug flux, but also deliver antibacterial agents to the infected site, so that higher doses of drugs can be given to the infected sites to overcome drug resistance. In addition, biofilm formation and intracellular bacteria can be reduced to overcome the mechanism of drug resistance (Fig. 7D).202 In recent years, the combination of drugs and nanoparticles has become a popular method to improve the precision delivery and utilization of drugs. This method can minimize the side effects of drugs (Fig. 7C).203 In addition, the combination of antibacterial and antifungal agents can endow scaffolds with broad-spectrum and lasting antibacterial activity.204 For example, a study found that electrospun nanofibers containing silver nanoparticles have antibacterial activity. The researchers summarized the antibacterial activity characteristics of silver nanoparticles by evaluating the biofilm formation and drug sensitivity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In addition, they demonstrated that reactive oxygen species and membrane damage were involved in the antimicrobial mechanism of nanosilver.205
Gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) coated with small molecule 6-aminopenicillic acid (APA) were doped into polymer electrospun fibers to inhibit multidrug-resistant bacteria. Finally, it was found that Au NPs with good biocompatibility had significant antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria. This wound healing scaffold can help to better manage bacterial infections of wounds.206
It has been reported that water-soluble carbohydrates containing aldehyde groups lead to the formation of Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The purification process of Fe3O4 products does not require any expensive method. With Gram-negative bacteria used as a model, the antimicrobial effect of Fe3O4 nanoparticles on Pseudomonas aeruginosa was examined. These particles proved to be an effective fungicide.207 In addition to the above materials, povidone, polymyxin, neomycin, and bacitracin have been used to fabricate wound dressings for applications in clinical settings. In conclusion, a series of synthetic methods have been developed to support the wound healing process. However, the problems of infection, inflammation, and limited tissue regeneration still persist.208
4.5 New multi-functional fiber scaffolds for promoting wound healing
In the future, electrospun fiber scaffolds will tend to be multi-functional to promote the multiple stages of the wound healing process. Targeted products should be developed to adapt to the characteristics and needs of different stages of wound healing. Specifically, differentiated stem cells can be easily infiltrated into electrospun fiber scaffolds to provide a system for quantitative and controlled release of multiple drugs. By tailoring the amount and progress of drug release (simultaneous or continuous stepwise release) to the stage of wound healing, this system is capable of improving the anti-inflammatory and antibacterial activities of wounds, promoting blood purification and blood separation in wounds, and ultimately promoting wound healing.210
In the future, nanoparticles will be increasingly used to target bacteria instead of traditional antibiotic drugs on a large scale (Fig. 8A). Current nanotechnology approaches to clear bacterial infections include nanoparticles used as antibacterial supplements to antibiotics in the antibacterial coatings of implantable materials and pharmaceutical materials to prevent infection and promote wound healing, nanoparticles used as carriers for precise delivery of antibiotics and thereby supporting traditional antibiotics in wound treatment, nanoparticle-based bacteria detection systems for diagnosis of microorganisms, and nanoparticles incorporated into anti-bacterial influenza vaccines to control bacterial infections. Currently accepted antimicrobial mechanisms of nanoparticles include oxidative stress-induced mechanisms, metal ion release mechanisms, and non-oxidative mechanisms. Multiple simultaneous mechanisms of action against microorganisms require multiple gene mutations to occur simultaneously in the same bacterial cell in order for antimicrobial resistance to develop. Therefore, it is difficult for bacterial cells to develop drug resistance to nanoparticles (Fig. 8B).211
 Fig. 8  Multi-functional electrospinning scaffold to promote wound healing. (A) The antibacterial application of nanoparticles and (B) mechanisms of NPs action in bacteria cells. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2017 Nanomedicine. (C) Core–shell electrospun fibers with an improved open pore structure for size-controlled delivery of nanoparticles and micrographs of the pore structure after the fiber meshes are immersed for one week. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (D) Top view and side view of 1 mm thick, radially aligned scaffold (RAS) and vertically aligned scaffold (VAS). The double-headed arrows indicate the alignment of nanofibers. BMSCs proliferated on 3D RAS and VAS after culturing for 9 days. (E) Schematic illustration of the application of 3D scaffolds consisting of radially or vertically aligned nanofibers in diabetic wound healing and their underlying mechanisms. (a) Radially aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds accelerate of surface wounds. (b) Vertically aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote the formation of granulation tissue in deep wounds. (c) Radially aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote angiogenesis, granulation tissue formation, ECM deposition, and reepithelialization. (d) Vertically aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote angiogenesis, granulation tissue formation, and ECM deposition. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2020 Acta Materialia Inc. 
Fibers of a core–shell coaxial structure can offer a simple method for site directed quantification of nanoparticles and antibiotic drugs. Zahra Mahdieh designed core–shell electrospun fibers with an improved open pore structure for size-controlled nanoparticle delivery (Fig. 8C). They found that electrospun fiber meshes with controllable drug delivery properties have a great potential in wound dressing, tissue engineering and cancer treatment applications. In their study, core–shell fibers were developed with silver nanoparticles loaded in the core. The fiber shell was composed of polycaprolactone, polyethylene glycol as porogen and zinc oxide nanoparticles. Zinc oxide nanoparticles were used to improve the pore structure in the shell (which was the diffusion pathway of silver nanoparticles), thereby controlling the release rate. By changing the particle size, the diffusion and release rates of silver nanoparticles from electrospun fibers were fine-tuned.212
In addition, fibers with a core–shell structure provide an easy way to achieve blood purification and blood separation in wounds. Mehdi Pakravan studied the coaxial electrospinning of core–shell polyethylene oxide-chitosan nanofibers, and found that hollow nanofibers can be obtained after washing the fiber membrane with polyethylene oxide. This finding has attracted great interest among researchers working on applications such as blood purification in hemodialysis. Modrzejewska produced chitosan hollow fibers by wet spinning and concluded that: (1) Chitosan hollow fibers can be formed by wet weaving using a water coagulant (sodium hydroxide); (2) the mechanical properties of chitosan membranes are similar to those used in medicine to date. (3) The membranes are selected according to the specific blood components retained and can therefore be used for blood separation. (4) The cut-off film determined by molecular weight distribution analysis reaches 10 kD.213
Shixuan Chen proposed a personalized therapy based on 3D scaffolds consisting of radially or vertically aligned nanofibers and BMSCs (Fig. 8D). These scaffolds have customizable sizes, depths, and shapes, which allow them to adapt to various diabetic wounds. In addition, these scaffolds can return to their original shape in atmosphere and water after compression. The BMSCs-loaded 3D scaffolds have an ability to enhance granulation tissue formation and to promote angiogenesis and collagen deposition (Fig. 8E). Moreover, these scaffolds can on the one hand inhibit the formation of M1 macrophages and the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-a, and on the other hand promote the formation of M2 macrophages and the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4 and IL-α. Therefore, 3D nanofiber scaffolds loaded with BMSCs with controlled structure and arrangement will enjoy a promising prospect of application in treating diabetic wounds.214
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Management of difficult wounds has long been a challenge facing the research community.215 With the increasingly high incidence of chronic diseases such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease, a growing number of patients have been suffering from nonhealing wounds. This increases the demand for improved wound treatment and care.216 Wound dressing options range from simply covering and hiding the wound to providing nutrients directly participating in the interaction of cells or specific chemicals in the local wound.217 Wound dressings can be designed to induce partial skin regeneration in vivo while protecting the wound, providing an ideal moist environment for healing, and reducing scar generation.218 Biopolymer dressings have become an integral part of modern wound care to accelerate acute wound healing.
Future wound dressings should be designed to be antimicrobial, non-toxic to mammalian cells, non-antigenic, permeable to gas exchange and resistant to shear stress. They should also feature high elasticity and flexibility to allow them to be well adapted to the basic wound morphology. From the patients' perspective, wound dressings should alleviate patients’ sensation of pain and reduce the healing time. For commercialization considerations, wound dressings should be designed to be esthetic and inexpensive with a long shelf life.219 However, wound healing is an extremely complex process and different wound dressings are required for different wounds. For example, the treatment of severe exudative wounds requires special absorption dressings, whereas that of dry wounds requires high moisture dressings.220
Electrospinning is a powerful technology for fabricating biomimetic dressings with improved biological activity to promote tissue regeneration, although there have been a limited number of materials suitable for electrospinning.221 Studies have revealed the cellular and molecular control mechanisms of the inflammatory response during wound healing, marking a key milestone in pathological tissue repair and providing theoretical support for electrospinning-based regulation of wound healing.222 At the molecular level, utilizing electrospun materials and other active ingredients, such as drugs or cells, to directly stimulate physiological repair has become a promising research area.223 Although this is technically challenging at the molecular level, it is possible in an apparent sense to combine the biological properties of natural polymeric materials with nanoscale structures to mimic the ECM, thereby stimulating cell migration and proliferation, controlling the inflammatory response and accelerating wound healing. Promising wound dressings in extreme cases need to be able to disrupt biofilms.224 Section 4.4 discusses a number of studies in which antimicrobial nanofiber-based wound dressings are applied to delay biofilm formation, and future studies should further develop these wound dressings to achieve personalized wound care. However, from a technical point of view, particular attention should be paid to how to select polymers and the final polymer blends, how to select solvents, how to regulate the charge density and surface tension, and how to improve the mechanical properties and degradation rate of scaffolds. In addition, the electrospinning technology makes it easy to load active substances (drugs, antimicrobial compounds, and growth factors). Although electrospinning has come a long way since its inception, fibers and membranes prepared by electrospinning are only commercially available for non-pharmaceutical applications, such as air and water filtration,225in vitro cell culture vectors,226 and sound insulation materials.227 Although bioactive electrospun nanofibers have now been widely used,228 their fabrication and commercialization are greatly challenged by the high cost and limited availability of commercially available scaffolds.229 Moreover, the clinical efficacy of electrospun nanofibers as a topical wound therapy can also be undermined by the nanotoxicological effects and dose and exposure uncertainties of the nanosystem.230,231
Undoubtedly, significant progress has been made in the past decade in tailoring nanofiber mats for wound healing applications. Nanofiber mats have been used to develop several wound dressings that deliver drugs directly to the wound for greater effectiveness. However, there are many challenges in electrospinning, such as the use of easily evaporated and cytotoxic organic solvents. The popular electrospray technology is based on electrospinning by changing the properties of the polymer solution, such as concentration, solvent and viscosity, as well as process parameters, such as flow rate, distance from tip to collector and voltage.232 Electrospray is a new technology that causes the jet to break up to produce microns or nanoparticles (spheres or capsules) of different sizes and shapes in the process of forming a jet by Taylor cone.233 Micro or nanoparticles with high loading rate can be obtained by electrospray without the need for surfactants.234 Unlike electrospinning, electrospray technology can be used to directly encapsulate living cells, but the polymers and their solvents used for electrospinning are not compatible with living cells.235 Therefore, after the electrospinning scaffold is made, the cells must be implanted into the scaffold, which is very inefficient. As a result, the cells are usually only planted on the surface of the scaffold (hundreds of microns thick). In addition, the modulus of the electrospun scaffold is usually much higher than that of the biological soft tissue, which can lead to a mechanical biological mismatch and may damage healing.236 This is a major challenge in the use of electrospun scaffolds for cell-based wound healing or other tissue engineering applications.
Early researchers injected drugs into aggregates of pluripotent stem cells pre-differentiated into early heart lineages in a biocompatible and biodegradable micromatrix. Compared with the conventional method of injecting single cells, this method can significantly increase the survival rate of injected cells by more than six times and effectively prevent the formation of teratoma.237 Based on this, ShutingZhao et al. successfully developed a novel and efficient coaxial electrospray technique to prepare microcapsules with alginate saline gel shell and mouse embryonic stem cell (ES) aqueous solution (rather than hydrogel) as the core. The encapsulated ES cells can survive and proliferate well.238
We boldly imagine a new type of cell microencapsulation electrospray technology based on the principle of electrospinning, which has wide availability, high production efficiency and can be used for miniaturized 3D culture of multipotent cells. It is of great value to promote the clinical application of stem cell-based local wound healing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11627803), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFC0115500 and 2018YFE0194500), and the USTC Research Funds of the Double First-Class Initiative (No. YD2380002001). Part of the work was performed at USTC Center for Micro- and Nanoscale Research and Fabrication. This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61973003, 61603002), the Basic and Clinical Collaborative Research Improvement Project of Anhui Medical University (2019xkjT017), and the Key Program in the Youth Elite Support Plan in Universities of Anhui Province (gxyqZD2020012), and the Teaching Research Project of Anhui Province (2020jyxm0886).
References
C. E. Attinger, 
            et al., Clinical approach to wounds: debridement and wound bed preparation including the use of dressings and wound-healing adjuvants, Plast. Reconstr. Surg., 2006, 117, 72S–109S CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, 
            et al., Advances in portable electrospinning devices for in situ delivery of personalized wound care, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19166–19178 RSC .
S. Enoch, J. E. Grey and K. G. Harding, Recent advances and emerging treatments, BMJ, 2006, 332, 962–965 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Erickson, A. V. Heul and B. S. Kim, New and emerging treatments for inflammatory itch, Ann. Allergy, Asthma, Immunol., 2021, 126, 13–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Bandyk, The diabetic foot: Pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment, Semin. Vasc. Surg., 2018, 31, 43–48 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ahmad, The diabetic foot, Diabetes Metab. Syndr., 2016, 10, 48–60 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Manu, 
            et al., Delayed referral of patients with diabetic foot ulcers across Europe: patterns between primary care and specialised units, J. Wound Care, 2018, 27, 186–192 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Boulton, 
            et al., The global burden of diabetic foot disease, Lancet, 2005, 366, 1719–1724 CrossRef .
N. Pazyar, 
            et al., Skin wound healing and phytomedicine: a review, Skin Pharmacol. Physiol., 2014, 27, 303–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Krishnan, 
            et al., Polysaccharide nanofibrous scaffolds as a model for in vitro skin tissue regeneration, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2012, 23, 1511–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Queen, 
            et al., A dressing history, Int. Wound J., 2004, 1, 59–77 CrossRef PubMed .
R. G. Sibbald, 
            et al., Cost-effectiveness of becaplermin for nonhealing neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers, Ostomy Wound Manage., 2003, 49, 76–84 Search PubMed .
F. L. Game, 
            et al., A systematic review of interventions to enhance the healing of chronic ulcers of the foot in diabetes, Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev., 2012, 28, 119–141 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Stanley, Negative Pressure Wound Therapy, Vet. Clin. North Am.: Large Anim. Pract., 2017, 47, 1203–1220 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Carruthers, 
            et al., Casting and Splinting Management for Hand Injuries in the In-Season Contact Sport Athlete, Sports Health, 2017, 9, 364–371 CrossRef PubMed .
S. MacNeil, Progress and opportunities for tissue-engineered skin, Nature, 2007, 445, 874–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Monavarian, 
            et al., Regenerative Scar-Free Skin Wound Healing, Tissue Eng., Part B, 2019, 25, 294–311 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, 
            et al., Electrospun nanofibers for wound healing, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 76, 1413–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, 
            et al., Nanofiber Dressings Topically Delivering Molecularly Engineered Human Cathelicidin Peptides for the Treatment of Biofilms in Chronic Wounds, Mol. Pharm., 2019, 16, 2011–2020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kai, S. S. Liow and X. J. Loh, Biodegradable polymers for electrospinning: towards biomedical applications, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 45, 659–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Meng, 
            et al., Fabrication and characterization of three-dimensional nanofiber membrance of PCL–MWCNTs by electrospinning, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2010, 30, 1014–1021 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Recent development of polymer nanofibers for biomedical and biotechnological applications, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2005, 16, 933–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vilchez, 
            et al., Applications of Electrospun Nanofibers with Antioxidant Properties: A Review, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, A review on electrospinning design and nanofibre assemblies, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 89–106 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peh, 
            et al., Simultaneous Delivery of Highly Diverse Bioactive Compounds from Blend Electrospun Fibers for Skin Wound Healing, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26, 1348–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pilehvar-Soltanahmadi, 
            et al., An update on clinical applications of electrospun nanofibers for skin bioengineering, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2016, 44, 1350–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Saei, 
            et al., An overview on different strategies for the stemness maintenance of MSCs, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2017, 45, 1255–1271 CrossRef PubMed .
G. C. Gurtner, 
            et al., Wound repair and regeneration, Nature, 2008, 453, 314–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Broughton, J. E. Janis and C. E. Attinger, The basic science of wound healing, Plast Reconstr. Surg., 2006, 117, 12–34 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jespersen, Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of fibrinolysis and inhibition of coagulation. Experimental and clinical studies with special reference to women on oral contraceptives and selected groups of thrombosis prone patients, Dan Med Bull, 1988, 35, 1–33 CAS .
M. C. Robson, D. L. Steed and M. G. Franz, Wound healing: biologic features and approaches to maximize healing trajectories, Curr. Probl. Surg., 2001, 38, 72–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kerstein, The scientific basis of healing, Adv. Wound Care, 1997, 10, 30–36 CAS .
W. T. Lawrence and R. F. Diegelmann, Growth factors in wound healing, Clin. Dermatol., 1994, 12, 157–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Velnar, T. Bailey and V. Smrkolj, The wound healing process: an overview of the cellular and molecular mechanisms, J. Int. Med. Res., 2009, 37, 1528–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Diegelmann and M. C. Evans, Wound healing: an overview of acute, fibrotic and delayed healing, Front. Biosci., 2004, 9, 283–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Lichtman, M. Otero-Vinas and V. Falanga, Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) isoforms in wound healing and fibrosis, Wound Repair Regen., 2016, 24, 215–222 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Yager and B. C. Nwomeh, The proteolytic environment of chronic wounds, Wound Repair Regen., 1999, 7, 433–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Suleman, Extracellular Bacterial Proteases in Chronic Wounds: A Potential Therapeutic Target?, Adv. Wound Care, 2016, 5, 455–463 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Latijnhouwers, 
            et al., Tenascin-C degradation in chronic wounds is dependent on serine proteinase activity, Arch. Dermatol. Res., 1998, 290, 490–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Butin-Israeli, 
            et al., Neutrophil-induced genomic instability impedes resolution of inflammation and wound healing, J. Clin. Invest., 2019, 129, 712–726 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Boeringer, L. J. Gould and P. Koria, Protease-Resistant Growth Factor Formulations for the Healing of Chronic Wounds, Adv. Wound Care, 2020, 9, 612–622 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Larouche, 
            et al., Immune Regulation of Skin Wound Healing: Mechanisms and Novel Therapeutic Targets, Adv. Wound Care, 2018, 7, 209–231 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ellis, E. J. Lin and D. Tartar, Immunology of Wound Healing, Curr. Dermatol. Rep., 2018, 7, 350–358 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Robson, Wound infection. A failure of wound healing caused by an imbalance of bacteria, Surg. Clin. North Am., 1997, 77, 637–650 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Trengove, 
            et al., Analysis of the acute and chronic wound environments: the role of proteases and their inhibitors, Wound Repair Regen., 1999, 7, 442–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mahdavian, 
            et al., Macrophages in skin injury and repair, Immunobiology, 2011, 216, 753–762 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zarei and M. Soleimaninejad, Role of growth factors and biomaterials in wound healing, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2018, 46, 906–911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Wu, 
            et al., Platelet-derived growth factor-AA is a substantial factor in the ability of adipose-derived stem cells and endothelial progenitor cells to enhance wound healing, FASEB J., 2019, 33, 2388–2395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goksen, B. Balabanli and S. Coskun-Cevher, Application of platelet derived growth factor-BB and diabetic wound healing: the relationship with oxidative events, Free Radical Res., 2017, 51, 498–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Witte and A. Barbul, Role of nitric oxide in wound repair, Am. J. Surg., 2002, 183, 406–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Witte and A. Barbul, General principles of wound healing, Surg. Clin. North Am., 1997, 77, 509–528 CrossRef CAS .
R. Goldman, Growth factors and chronic wound healing: past, present, and future, Adv. Skin Wound Care, 2004, 17, 24–35 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Baum and C. J. Arpey, Normal cutaneous wound healing: clinical correlation with cellular and molecular events, Dermatol. Surg., 2005, 31, 674–686 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Clark, Regulation of fibroplasia in cutaneous wound repair, Am. J. Med. Sci., 1993, 306, 42–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Pierce, 
            et al., Platelet-derived growth factor-BB and transforming growth factor beta 1 selectively modulate glycosaminoglycans, collagen, and myofibroblasts in excisional wounds, Am. J. Pathol., 1991, 138, 629–646 CAS .
S. Takeshita, 
            et al., Therapeutic angiogenesis. A single intraarterial bolus of vascular endothelial growth factor augments revascularization in a rabbit ischemic hind limb model, J. Clin. Invest., 1994, 93, 662–670 CrossRef CAS .
David A. Volgas, Manual of Soft-Tissue Management in Orthopaedic Trauma, Healing of soft tissues and bone, 2011, 4, 0034–84274 Search PubMed .
M. Y. Sieggreen, Healing of physical wounds, Nurs. Clin. North Am., 1987, 22, 439–447 CAS .
K. S. Smigiel and W. C. Parks, Matrix Metalloproteinases and Leukocyte Activation, Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci., 2017, 147, 167–195 CAS .
T. K. Hunt, The physiology of wound healing, Ann. Emerg. Med., 1988, 17, 1265–1273 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Demidova-Rice, M. R. Hamblin and I. M. Herman, Acute and impaired wound healing: pathophysiology and current methods for drug delivery, part 2: role of growth factors in normal and pathological wound healing: therapeutic potential and methods of delivery, Adv. Skin Wound Care, 2012, 25, 349–370 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Strodtbeck, Physiology of wound healing, Newborn and Infant Nursing Reviews, 2001, 1, 43–52 CrossRef .
J. Hart, Inflammation. 2: Its role in the healing of chronic wounds, J. Wound Care, 2002, 11, 245–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Potter, D. Veitch and G. A. Johnston, Scarring and wound healing, Br. J. Hosp. Med., 2019, 80, 166–171 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dervisevic, 
            et al., Skin in the diagnostics game: Wearable biosensor nano- and microsystems for medical diagnostics, Nano Today, 2020, 30, 100828 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Pereira, 
            et al., Advanced biofabrication strategies for skin regeneration and repair, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 603–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Richardson, Acute wounds: an overview of the physiological healing process, Nurs Times, 2004, 100, 50–53 Search PubMed .
A. B. Mohd Hilmi, A. Hassan and A. S. Halim, A Bilayer Engineered Skin Substitute for Wound Repair in an Irradiation-Impeded Healing Model on Rat, Adv. Wound Care, 2015, 4, 312–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nemati, 
            et al., Current progress in application of polymeric nanofibers to tissue engineering, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 36 CrossRef .
T. Yi, 
            et al., From Cellulose to Cellulose Nanofibrils-A Comprehensive Review of the Preparation and Modification of Cellulose Nanofibrils, Materials, 2020, 13, 5062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Sofi, 
            et al., Recent advances in formulating electrospun nanofiber membranes: Delivering active phytoconstituents, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2020, 60, 102038 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, 
            et al., Electrospinning and Electrospun Nanofibers: Methods, Materials, and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5298–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Sandri, et al., Electrospinning Technologies in Wound Dressing Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2020, vol. 14, pp. 315–336 Search PubMed .

          B. Robb and B. Lennox, The electrospinning process, conditions and control, in Electrospinning for Tissue Regeneration, Woodhead Publishing,  2011, 3, pp. 51–66 Search PubMed .
V. Van Hoeve, S. Gekle, J. H. Snoeijer, M. Versluis, M. P. Brenner and D. Lohse, Breakup of dimunitive Rayleigh jets, Phys. Fluids, 2010, 22, 122003 CrossRef .
J. Zhong, 
            et al., Effect of nanofiber orientation of electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds on cell growth and elastin expression of muscle cells, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 136, 772–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Electrospinning of Nanofibers: Reinventing the Wheel?, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, 
            et al., Electrospun Nanofibers: New Concepts, Materials, and Applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1976–1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, 
            et al., Advances in three-dimensional nanofibrous macrostructures via electrospinning, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 862–890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, 
            et al., Progress in electrospun polymeric nanofibrous membranes for water treatment: Fabrication, modification and applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 77, 69–94 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Dynamics and Feedback Control of Electrospinning Processes, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., 2017, 25, 611–618 Search PubMed .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Electrospinning: a fascinating fiber fabrication technique, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325–347 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Ibrahim and A. Klingner, A review on electrospun polymeric nanofibers: Production parameters and potential applications, Polym. Test., 2020, 90, 106647 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Barnes, 
            et al., Nanofiber technology: designing the next generation of tissue engineering scaffolds, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2007, 59, 1413–1433 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Hydrogel-Based Multifunctional Dressing Combining Magnetothermally Responsive Drug Delivery and Stem Cell Therapy for Enhanced Wound Healing, Adv. Ther., 2020, 3, 2000001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sood, M. S. Granick and N. L. Tomaselli, Wound Dressings and Comparative Effectiveness Data, Adv. Wound Care, 2014, 3, 511–529 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Homaeigohar and A. R. Boccaccini, Antibacterial biohybrid nanofibers for wound dressings, Acta Biomater., 2020, 107, 25–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gupta, 
            et al., Aligned and random nanofibrous substrate for the in vitro culture of Schwann cells for neural tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 2560–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, 
            et al., 3D printing of hydrogels: Rational design strategies and emerging biomedical applications, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100543 CrossRef .
S. Chen, 
            et al., Electrospinning: An enabling nanotechnology platform for drug delivery and regenerative medicine, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2018, 132, 188–213 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee, 
            et al., Electrospinning of polysaccharides for regenerative medicine, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2009, 61, 1020–1032 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Boland, 
            et al., Electrospinning collagen and elastin: Preliminary vascular tissue engineering, Front. Biosci., 2004, 9, 1422–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Yan and L. Bai, Electrospun nanofiber templated assembly of hybrid nanoparticles, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 9344–9352 RSC .
J. L. Medina-Franco, O. Mendez-Lucio and K. Martinez-Mayorga, The interplay between molecular modeling and chemoinformatics to characterize protein-ligand and protein-protein interactions landscapes for drug discovery, Adv. Protein Chem. Struct. Biol., 2014, 96, 1–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cui, 
            et al., Collagen-tussah silk fibroin hybrid scaffolds loaded with bone mesenchymal stem cells promote skin wound repair in rats, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 109, 110611 CrossRef CAS .
Â. Semitela, 
            et al., Electrospinning of bioactive polycaprolactone-gelatin nanofibres with increased pore size for cartilage tissue engineering applications, J. Biomater. Appl., 2020, 35, 471–484 CrossRef .
K. Jalaja and N. R. James, Electrospun gelatin nanofibers: A facile cross-linking approach using oxidized sucrose, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 73, 270–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vonasek, 
            et al., Bacteriophages immobilized on electrospun cellulose microfibers by non-specific adsorption, protein–ligand binding, and electrostatic interactions, Cellulose, 2017, 24, 4581–4589 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, 
            et al., Soy Protein/Cellulose Nanofiber Scaffolds Mimicking Skin Extracellular Matrix for Enhanced Wound Healing, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 170–175 Search PubMed .
M. Nguyen-Truong, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Mechanical Considerations of Electrospun Scaffolds for Myocardial Tissue and Regenerative Engineering, Bioengineering, 2020, 7, 122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Willerth and S. E. Sakiyama-Elbert, Combining Stem Cells and Biomaterial Scaffolds for Constructing Tissues and Cell Delivery, Stem J., 2019, 1, 1–25 Search PubMed .
D. E. Discher, Tissue Cells Feel and Respond to the Stiffness of Their Substrate, Science, 2005, 310, 1139–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Blanchoin, 
            et al., Actin Dynamics, Architecture, and Mechanics in Cell Motility, Physiol. Rev., 2014, 94, 235–263 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pinheiro and Y. Bellaïche, Mechanical Force-Driven Adherens Junction Remodeling and Epithelial Dynamics, Dev. Cell, 2018, 47, 3–19 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Discher, Tissue Cells Feel and Respond to the Stiffness of Their Substrate, Science, 2005, 310, 1139–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Martino, 
            et al., Cellular Mechanotransduction: From Tension to Function, Front. Physiol., 2018, 9, 824 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Spatz and B. Geiger, Molecular engineering of cellular environments: cell adhesion to nano-digital surfaces, Methods Cell Biol., 2007, 83, 89 CAS .
C. Lo, 
            et al., Cell Movement Is Guided by the Rigidity of the Substrate, Biophys. J., 2000, 79, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xing, 
            et al., Highly Aligned Nanofibrous Scaffold Derived from Decellularized Human Fibroblasts, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3027–3035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, 
            et al., Recent advances in electrospun nanofibers for wound healing, Nanomedicine, 2017, 12, 1335–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, 
            et al., Green electrospun grape seed extract-loaded silk fibroin nanofibrous mats with excellent cytocompatibility and antioxidant effect, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 139, 156–163 CrossRef CAS .
V. Albright, 
            et al., Micelle-Coated, Hierarchically Structured Nanofibers with Dual-Release Capability for Accelerated Wound Healing and Infection Control, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800132 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Hu, 
            et al., In situ melt electrospun polycaprolactone/Fe3O4 nanofibers for magnetic hyperthermia, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 110, 110708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Mayerberger, 
            et al., Antibacterial properties of electrospun Ti3C2Tz (MXene)/chitosan nanofibers, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35386–35394 RSC .
X. Li, 
            et al., Numerical analysis of photothermal conversion performance of MXene nanofluid in direct absorption solar collectors, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 226, 113515 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Sultana, Mechanical and biological properties of scaffold materials, in Functional 3D Tissue Engineering Scaffolds, Woodhead Publishing,  2018, vol. 1, pp. 1–21 Search PubMed .

          C. Salas, Z. Thompson and N. Bhattarai, Electrospun chitosan fibers, in Electrospun Nanofibers, Woodhead Publishing,  2017, vol. 15, pp. 371–398 Search PubMed .

          D. Liu, G. Sui and Y. Dong, Electrospun polymeric composite nanofibers with cellulose nanocrystals and their applications, in Electrospun Polymers and Composites, Woodhead Publishing,  2021, vol. 5, pp. 147–178 Search PubMed .
E. K. Brenner, 
            et al., Electrospinning of hyaluronic acid nanofibers from aqueous ammonium solutions, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 87, 926–929 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, G. Chang and J. Chen, Electrospun collagen/chitosan nanofibrous membrane as wound dressing, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 313-314, 183–188 CrossRef .
B. Sun, 
            et al., Polypyrrole-coated poly(L-lactic acid-co-epsilon-caprolactone)/silk fibroin nanofibrous nerve guidance conduit induced nerve regeneration in rat, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 94, 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Islam, 
            et al., Chitosan based bioactive materials in tissue engineering applications-A review, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 164–183 CrossRef .
S. Ahmed and S. Ikram, Chitosan Based Scaffolds and Their Applications in Wound Healing, Achievements in the Life Sciences, 2016, 10, 27–37 CrossRef .
R. Ahmed, 
            et al., Novel electrospun chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol/zinc oxide nanofibrous mats with antibacterial and antioxidant properties for diabetic wound healing, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 120, 385–393 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. T. Nguyen, O. H. Chung and J. S. Park, Coaxial electrospun poly(lactic acid)/chitosan (core/shell) composite nanofibers and their antibacterial activity, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 86, 1799–1806 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Chen, 
            et al., Electrospun collagen–chitosan nanofiber: A biomimetic extracellular matrix for endothelial cell and smooth muscle cell, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 372–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Zhang, et al., Biodegradable Polymers, in Principles of Tissue Engineering, Academic Press, Boston,  2014, vol. 23, pp. 441–473 Search PubMed .
A. J. Cocciolone, 
            et al., Elastin, arterial mechanics, and cardiovascular disease, Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., 2018, 315, 189–205 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wen, S. M. Mithieux and A. S. Weiss, Elastin Biomaterials in Dermal Repair, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 280–291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Buttafoco, 
            et al., Electrospinning of collagen
and elastin for tissue engineering applications, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 724–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Boland, 
            et al., Electrospinning collagen and elastin: preliminary vascular tissue engineering, Front. Biosci., 2004, 9, 1422–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gonzalez Rico, 
            et al., The role of versican in the skin ECM and its interaction with hyaluronic acid, Biomecánica, 2019, 27, 35–49 CrossRef .
H. Honda, 
            et al., Hyaluronic Acid Accelerates Tendon-to-Bone Healing After Rotator Cuff Repair, Am. J. Sports Med., 2017, 45, 3322–3330 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chanda, 
            et al., Electrospun chitosan/polycaprolactone-hyaluronic acid bilayered scaffold for potential wound healing applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 116, 774–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sogawa, N. Ifuku and K. Numata, 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)-Containing Silk Fibroin: Its Enzymatic Synthesis and Adhesion Properties, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 5, 5644–5651 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kundu, 
            et al., Silk fibroin biomaterials for tissue regenerations, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 457–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Selvaraj and N. N. Fathima, Fenugreek Incorporated Silk Fibroin Nanofibers-A Potential Antioxidant Scaffold for Enhanced Wound Healing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5916–5926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Akbarinejad, 
            et al., Electrospun soluble conductive polypyrrole nanoparticles for fabrication of highly selective n-butylamine gas sensor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 236, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Double stimuli-responsive cellulose nanocrystals reinforced electrospun PHBV composites membrane for intelligent drug release, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 155, 330–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Joshi, B. Adak and B. S. Butola, Polyurethane nanocomposite based gas barrier films, membranes and coatings: A review on synthesis, characterization and potential applications, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 97, 230–282 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, 
            et al., Fluorinated hyperbranched polyurethane electrospun nanofibrous membrane: fluorine-enriching surface and superhydrophobic state with high adhesion to water, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 421, 49–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, 
            et al., Electroactive anti-oxidant polyurethane elastomers with shape memory property as non-adherent wound dressing to enhance wound healing, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121999 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vijayasekaran, 
            et al., Poly(1-vinyl-2-pyrrolidinone) hydrogels as vitreous substitutes: histopathological evaluation in the animal eye, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 1996, 7, 685–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, 
            et al., In vivo wound healing and antibacterial performances of electrospun nanofibre membranes, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 94, 499–508 Search PubMed .
M. Oka, 
            et al., Development of an artificial articular cartilage, Clin. Mater., 1990, 6, 361–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Darabi, 
            et al., An Alkaline Based Method for Generating Crystalline, Strong, and Shape Memory Polyvinyl Alcohol Biomaterials, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hussein, 
            et al., Electrospun PVA/hyaluronic acid/L-arginine nanofibers for wound healing applications: Nanofibers optimization and in vitro bioevaluation, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 164, 667–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Hiep and B. T. Lee, Electro-spinning of PLGA/PCL blends for tissue engineering and their biocompatibility, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2010, 21, 1969–1978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chanda, 
            et al., Electrospun chitosan/polycaprolactone-hyaluronic acid bilayered scaffold for potential wound healing applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 116, 774–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Venugopal, Y. Zhang and S. Ramakrishna, In vitro culture of human dermal fibroblasts on electrospun polycaprolactone collagen nanofibrous membrane, Artif. Organs, 2006, 30, 440–446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng and S. H. Teoh, Surface modification of ultra thin poly (epsilon-caprolactone) films using acrylic acid and collagen, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 1991–2001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Murcia Valderrama, R. van Putten and G. M. Gruter, The potential of oxalic – and glycolic acid based polyesters (review). Towards CO2 as a feedstock (Carbon Capture and Utilization – CCU), Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 119, 445–468 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gentile, 
            et al., An overview of poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA)-based biomaterials for bone tissue engineering, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 3640–3659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haider, K. C. Gupta and I. K. Kang, PLGA/nHA hybrid nanofiber scaffold as a nanocargo carrier
of insulin for accelerating bone tissue regeneration, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 314 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Go, 
            et al., An osteoconductive PLGA scaffold with bioactive beta-TCP and anti-inflammatory Mg(OH)2 to improve in vivo bone regeneration, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 937–948 RSC .
F. Meyer, 
            et al., Effects of lactic acid and glycolic acid on human osteoblasts: a way to understand PLGA involvement in PLGA/calcium phosphate composite failure, J. Orthop. Res., 2012, 30, 864–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, 
            et al., Self-assembly of amino acid-based random copolymers for antibacterial application and infection treatment as nanocarriers, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 540, 634–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Goh, I. Shakir and R. Hussain, Electrospun fibers for tissue engineering, drug delivery, and wound dressing, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 3027–3054 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, 
            et al., In Vitro and In Vivo Comparison Study of Electrospun PLA and PLA/PVA/SA Fiber Membranes for Wound Healing, Polymers, 2020, 12, 839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pakravan, M. Heuzey and A. Ajji, Core–Shell Structured PEO-Chitosan Nanofibers by Coaxial Electrospinning, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 412–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Berthiaume, T. J. Maguire and M. L. Yarmush, Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine: history, progress, and challenges, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 403–430 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Naahidi, 
            et al., Biocompatibility of hydrogel-based scaffolds for tissue engineering applications, Biotechnol. Adv., 2017, 35, 530–544 CrossRef CAS .
C. Frantz, K. M. Stewart and V. M. Weaver, The extracellular matrix at a glance, J. Cell Sci., 2010, 123, 4195–4200 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Hong, Electrospun fibrous polyurethane scaffolds in tissue engineering, in Advances in Polyurethane Biomaterials, Woodhead Publishing,  2016, vol. 19, pp. 543–559 Search PubMed .
J. Han, 
            et al., Cell alignment induced by anisotropic electrospun fibrous scaffolds alone has limited effect on cardiomyocyte maturation, Stem Cell Res., 2016, 16, 740–750 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, X. Lu and C. Wang, Electrospinning based all-nano composite materials: Recent achievements and perspectives, Compos. Commun., 2018, 10, 140–150 CrossRef .
S. Qin, R. A. Clark and M. H. Rafailovich, Establishing correlations in the en-mass migration of dermal fibroblasts on oriented fibrillar scaffolds, Acta Biomater., 2015, 25, 230–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Neves, 
            et al., Patterning of polymer nanofiber meshes by electrospinning for biomedical applications, Int. J. Nanomed., 2007, 2, 433–448 CAS .
B. Kong, 
            et al., Fiber reinforced GelMA hydrogel to induce the regeneration of corneal stroma, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. El-Lakany, 
            et al., alpha-Bisabolol-Loaded Cross-Linked Zein Nanofibrous 3D-Scaffolds For Accelerating Wound Healing And Tissue Regeneration In Rats, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 8251–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Amores De Sousa, 
            et al., Functionalization of Electrospun Nanofibers and Fiber Alignment Enhance Neural Stem Cell Proliferation and Neuronal Differentiation, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2020, 8, 12–15 CrossRef .
R. S. Mahla, Stem Cells Applications in Regenerative Medicine and Disease Therapeutics, Int. J. Cell Biol., 2016, 2016, 6940283 Search PubMed .
B. Cui, 
            et al., Collagen-tussah silk fibroin hybrid scaffolds loaded with bone mesenchymal stem cells promote skin wound repair in rats, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 109, 110611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Li, 
            et al., Silk fibroin/chitosan scaffold with tunable properties and low inflammatory response assists the differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 105, 584–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Rajabian, 
            et al., Evaluation of bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells for full-thickness wound healing in comparison to tissue engineered chitosan scaffold in rabbit, Tissue Cell, 2017, 49, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zimolag, 
            et al., Electric field as a potential directional cue in homing of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells to cutaneous wounds, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Res., 2017, 1864, 267–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, 
            et al., Electrospun fibrous mats with high porosity as potential scaffolds for skin tissue engineering, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1795–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, 
            et al., Electrospun 3D Fibrous Scaffolds for Chronic Wound Repair, Materials, 2016, 9, 272 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Müller, 
            et al., Influence of surface pretreatment of titanium- and cobalt-based biomaterials on covalent immobilization of fibrillar collagen, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 4059–4068 CrossRef .
M. Maisani, 
            et al., Cellularizing hydrogel-based scaffolds to repair bone tissue: How to create a physiologically relevant micro-environment?, J. Tissue Eng., 2017, 8, 1–26 CAS .
J. L. Lowery, N. Datta and G. C. Rutledge, Effect of fiber diameter, pore size and seeding method on growth of human dermal fibroblasts in electrospun poly(epsilon-caprolactone) fibrous mats, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 491–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du and K. K. Y. Wong, Nanomaterials for Wound Healing: Scope and Advances, Theranostic Bionanomater., 2019, 9, 211–230 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Advanced fabrication for electrospun three-dimensional nanofiber aerogels and scaffolds, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 963–979 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-S. Carmen, 
            et al., Effect of Pore Size, Morphology and Orientation on the Bulk Stiffness of a Porous Ti35Nb4Sn Alloy, J. Mater. Eng. Perfor., 2018, 27, 2899–2909 CrossRef .
B. M. Baker, 
            et al., The potential to improve cell infiltration in composite fiber-aligned electrospun scaffolds by the selective removal of sacrificial fibers, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2348–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Wu, 
            et al., Preparation of aligned poly(glycerol sebacate) fibrous membranes for anisotropic tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 100, 30–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Lee, 
            et al., Application of Materials as Medical Devices with Localized Drug Delivery Capabilities for Enhanced Wound Repair, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 392–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, 
            et al., Coaxial electrospun fibers: applications in drug delivery and tissue engineering, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2016, 8, 654–677 CAS .
C. B. Walker, Selected antimicrobial agents: mechanisms of action, side effects and drug interactions, Periodontol 2000, 1996, 10, 12–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, 
            et al., Resistance mechanisms and reprogramming of microorganisms for efficient biorefinery under multiple environmental stresses, Synth. Syst. Biotechnol., 2019, 4, 92–98 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gurunathan, 
            et al., Oxidative stress-mediated antibacterial activity of graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 5901–5914 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kean, 
            et al., Transcriptome Assembly and Profiling of Candida auris Reveals Novel Insights into Biofilm-Mediated Resistance, mSphere, 2018, 3, e00334-18 CrossRef .
M. L. Workentine, 
            et al., The GacS-GacA two-component regulatory system of Pseudomonas fluorescens: a bacterial two-hybrid analysis, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2009, 292, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Records and D. C. Gross, Sensor kinases RetS and LadS regulate Pseudomonas syringae type VI secretion and virulence factors, J. Bacteriol., 2010, 192, 3584–3596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schmid, 
            et al., Screening of c-di-GMP-Regulated Exopolysaccharides in Host Interacting Bacteria, Methods Mol. Biol., 2018, 1734, 263–275 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lory, M. Merighi and M. Hyodo, Multiple activities of c-di-GMP in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Nucl. Acids Symp. Ser., 2009, 53, 51–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mostafa, 
            et al., Polyphenols from Salix tetrasperma Impair Virulence and Inhibit Quorum Sensing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Molecules, 2020, 25, 1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gefen and N. Q. Balaban, The importance of being persistent: heterogeneity of bacterial populations under antibiotic stress, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 2009, 33, 704–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, 
            et al., Sensitizing bacterial cells to antibiotics by shape recovery triggered biofilm dispersion, Acta Biomater., 2018, 81, 93–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hesketh, 
            et al., Genome-wide dynamics of a bacterial response to antibiotics that target the cell envelope, BMC Genom., 2011, 12, 226 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, 
            et al., Identification of genes involved in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm-specific resistance to antibiotics, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e61625 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Pelgrift and A. J. Friedman, Nanotechnology as a therapeutic tool to combat microbial resistance, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 1803–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, 
            et al., Development of nanoparticles for antimicrobial drug delivery, Curr. Med. Chem., 2010, 17, 585–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dhand, 
            et al., Bio-inspired crosslinking and matrix-drug interactions for advanced wound dressings with long-term antimicrobial activity, Biomaterials, 2017, 138, 153–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Kora and J. Arunachalam, Assessment of antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles on Pseudomonas aeruginosa and its mechanism of action, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 27, 1209–1216 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, 
            et al., Pharmaceutical Intermediate-Modified Gold Nanoparticles: Against Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria and Wound-Healing Application via an Electrospun Scaffold, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5737–5745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, 
            et al., Superior Antibacterial Activity of Fe3O4–TiO2 Nanosheets under Solar Light, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21875–21883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Lee, 
            et al., Application of Materials as Medical Devices with Localized Drug Delivery Capabilities for Enhanced Wound Repair, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 392–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pang, 
            et al., Antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: mechanisms and alternative therapeutic strategies, Biotechnol. Adv., 2019, 37, 177–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, 
            et al., In vivo wound healing and antibacterial performances of electrospun nanofibre membranes, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 94, 499–508 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Hu and L. Shao, The antimicrobial activity of nanoparticles: present situation and prospects for the future, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1227–1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mahdieh, S. Mitra and A. Holian, Core–Shell Electrospun Fibers with an Improved Open Pore Structure for Size-Controlled Delivery of Nanoparticles, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4004–4015 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Modrzejewska and W. Eckstein, Chitosan hollow fiber membranes, Biopolymers, 2004, 73, 61–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, 
            et al., Mesenchymal stem cell-laden, personalized 3D scaffolds with controlled structure and fiber alignment promote diabetic wound healing, Acta Biomater., 2020, 108, 153–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fu, Delivery Systems in, Wound Healing and Nanomedicine, Wound Healing – New insights into Ancient Challenges, V. A. Alexandrescu, IntechOpen,  2016, DOI: 10.5772/63763 Search PubMed .
M. Ashtikar and M. G. Wacker, Nanopharmaceuticals for wound healing - Lost in translation?, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2018, 129, 194–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Ovington, Advances in wound dressings, Clin. Dermatol., 2007, 25, 33–38 CrossRef .
M. Madaghiele, 
            et al., Polymeric hydrogels for burn wound care: Advanced skin wound dressings and regenerative templates, Burns Trauma, 2014, 2, 153–161 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Rieger, N. P. Birch and J. D. Schiffman, Designing electrospun nanofiber mats to promote wound healing - a review, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4531–4541 RSC .
B. S. Atiyeh, 
            et al., Moist exposed therapy: an effective and valid alternative to occlusive dressings for postlaser resurfacing wound care, Dermatol. Surg., 2004, 30, 18–25 Search PubMed .
M. S. Khil, 
            et al., Electrospun nanofibrous polyurethane membrane as wound dressing, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2003, 67, 675–679 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Eming, T. Krieg and J. M. Davidson, Inflammation in wound repair: molecular and cellular mechanisms, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2007, 127, 514–525 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghorbani, 
            et al., Combined effects of 3D bone marrow stem cell-seeded wet-electrospun poly lactic acid scaffolds on full-thickness skin wound healing, Int. J. Polym. Mater., 2018, 67, 905–912 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. James, 
            et al., Biofilms in chronic wounds, Wound Repair Regen., 2008, 16, 37–44 CrossRef .
Y. Dou, W. Zhang and A. Kaiser, Electrospinning of Metal-Organic Frameworks for Energy and Environmental Applications, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. He, 
            et al., A novel layer-structured scaffold with large pore sizes suitable for 3D cell culture prepared by near-field electrospinning, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 86, 18–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, 
            et al., Sound Absorption and Insulation Properties of a Polyurethane Foam Mixed with Electrospun Nylon-6 and Polyurethane Nanofibre Mats, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3558–3563 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Luo, 
            et al., Electrospinning versus fibre production methods: from specifics to technological convergence, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4708–4735 RSC .
P. L. Chern, C. L. Baum and C. J. Arpey, Biologic dressings: current applications and limitations in dermatologic surgery, Dermatol. Surg., 2009, 35, 891–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, 
            et al., Pain relief during wound care for patients with a deep open wound in an orthopedic trauma department: a best practice implementation project, JBI Database Syst. Rev. Implement. Rep., 2019, 17, 2559–2569 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Barrett, 
            et al., Challenges faced in implementation of a telehealth enabled chronic wound care system, Rural Remote Health, 2009, 9, 1154 CAS .
R. M. Soares, N. M. Siqueira, M. P. Prabhakaram and S. Ramakrishna, Electrospinning and electrospray of bio-based and natural polymers for biomaterials development, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 92, 969–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rosell-Llompart, J. Grifoll and I. G. Loscertales, Electrosprays in the cone-jet mode: From Taylor cone formation to spray development, J. Aerosol Sci., 2018, 125, 2–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Tapia-Hernández, 
            et al., Micro- and Nanoparticles by Electrospray: Advances and Applications in Foods, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2015, 63, 4699–4707 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Boda, X. Li and J. Xie, Electrospraying an enabling technology for pharmaceutical and biomedical applications: A review, J. Aerosol Sci., 2018, 125, 164–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Castilho, 
            et al., Mechanical behavior of a soft hydrogel reinforced with three-dimensional printed microfibre scaffolds, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1245 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, 
            et al., Bioengineering of injectable encapsulated aggregates of pluripotent stem cells for therapy of myocardial infarction, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, 
            et al., Coaxial electrospray of liquid core-hydrogel shell microcapsules for encapsulation and miniaturized 3D culture of pluripotent stem cells, Integrat. Biol., 2014, 6, 874–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† 10.1039/d1tb00067eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Electrospun nanofibers promote wound healing. (A) Electrospinning devices and (B) electrospun fiber scaffolds to promote wound healing.	 

 	Fig. 1  A summary of acute wound healing. EGF: epidermal growth factor; FGF: fibroblast growth factor; IGF: insulin-like growth factor; IL-1: interleukin-1; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase; PDGF: platelet-derived growth factor; TGF: transforming growth factor; TNF: tumor necrosis factor; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase.	 

Platelet-derived growth factor	PDGF	Platelets, macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells	Fibroblast proliferation, chemotaxis and collagen metabolism; chemotaxis and activation of neutrophils and macrophages; angiogenesis
Transforming growth factor α	TGF-α	Activated macrophages, platelets, keratinocytes, many tissues	It stimulates mesenchymal, epithelial, endothelial cell growth and endothelial cell chemotaxis
Transforming growth factor β	TGF-β	Platelets, neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, many other tissues and cells	Fibroblast proliferation, chemotaxis, collagen metabolism, indirect angiogenesis, actionsof other growth factors
Epidermal growth factor	EGF	Platelets, saliva, urine, milk, plasma	Stimulates epithelial cell and fibroblast proliferation and granulation tissue formation
Vascular endothelial growth factor	VEGF	almost exclusively on endothelial cell	Angiogenesis
Interleukin 1	IL-l	Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes	Induces fever, adrenocorticotrophic hormone release, enhances TNF-α and IFN-γ, activates granulocytes and endothelial cells, and stimulates hematopoiesis
Interleukin 2	IL-2	Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes	Activates macrophages, T cells, natural killer cells, and lymphokine-activated killer cells; stimulates differentiation of activated B cells; stimulates proliferation of activated B and T cells; and induces fever
Interleukin 4	IL-4	Mast cells	Early: stimulates fibroblast proliferation; later (72 hours): down regulates cytokine expression
Interleukin 6	IL-6	Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes	Is released in response to IL-1; induces fever; enhances release of acute-phase reactants by the liver; and is important in inhibiting extracellular matrix breakdown during proliferation
Interleukin 8	IL-8	Macrophages, mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes	Enhances neutrophil adherence, chemotaxis, and granule release; and enhances epithelization
Interleukin 10	IL-l0	Th2 and some regulatory T cells	Early: unknown; later(72 hours): down regulates cytokine expression
Tumor necrosis factor	TNF	Macrophages, mast cells, T lymphocytes	Fibroblast proliferation
Leukocyte-derived growth factor	LDGF	Macrophages, neutrophils, T lymphocytes	Chemoattractant and mitogen for connective tissue cells
Connective tissue growth factor	CTGF	Endothelial cells, flbroblasts	Chemoattractant and mitogen for connective tissue cells
Fibroblast growth factors	FGF	Brain, pituitary, macrophages, many other tissues and cells	Fibroblast and epithelial cell proliferation; stimulates matrix deposition, wound contraction, and angiogenesis
Keratinocyte growth factors	KGFs	Fibroblasts	Epithelial cell proliferation
insulin-like growth factor 1	IGF-1	Liver, plasma, fibroblasts	Stimulates synthesis of sulfated proteoglycans and collagen, fibroblast proliferation
Human growth hormone	HGH	Pituitary and thus plasma	Anabolism, stimulates IGF-1
Interferons	IFNs	Lymphocytes, fibroblasts	Inhibition of fibroblast proliferation and collagen synthesis

 	Fig. 2  Evolvement of electrospinning. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrospinning nanofiber preparation and assembly: (A) A photo of a basic electrospinning system; (B) The breakup of a 18.5 μm radius jet; Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2010, Physics of Fluids. (C) Charge distribution of the fibers during curing on the collector; Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (D) Electrospun fibers collected using a planar static collector and a rotary collector. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2015, Colloids Surf., B.	 

Solution viscosity	Low-beads generation, high-increase in fiber diameter, disappearance of beads
Polymer concentration	Increase in fiber diameter with increase of concentration
Molecular weight of polymer	Reduction in the number of beads and droplets with increase of molecular weight
Conductivity	Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in conductivity
Surface tension	No conclusive link with fiber morphology, high surface tension results in instability of jets
Applied voltage	Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in voltage
Distance between tip and collector	Generation of beads with too small and too large distance, minimum distance required for uniform fibers
Feed rate/flow rate	Decrease in fiber diameter with decrease in flow rate, generation of beads with too high flow rate
Humidity	High humidity results in circular pores on the fibers
Temperature	Increase in temperature results in decrease in fiber diameter

 	Fig. 4  Trends in the number of publications in the past two decades with the keywords “electrospun nanofiber” and “electrospun nanofiber wound healing”.	 


Gelatin	SEMa, mechanical evaluation	Scaffold for wound healing
Gelatin/polyaniline	SEM, DSCb, conductivity measurement, tensile testing	Tissue engineering scaffolds
Silk	SEM, TEMc, WAXDd	Biomedical applications
Silk fibroin	SEM, ATR-IRe,13C CP/MAS NMR, WAXD, NMRf, in vitro human keratinocyte culture	Nanofibrous scaffolds for wound healing
Chitosan	SEM, viscosity analysis, conductivity measurement	Wound dressings
Silk/chitosan	SEM, viscosity analysis, conductivity measurement	Wound dressings
Silk fibroin, silk/PEOj	SEM, FTIR, XPSg	Nanofibrous TE scaffold
Collagen120	SEM, FTIR, SPMh	Biomaterials, wound healing
Collagen/chitosan	SEM, FTIR	Biomaterials
Chitosan/PEO	SEM, XPS, FTIR, DSC	TE scaffold, drug delivery, wound healing
Cellulose	SEM, DSC, ATR-FTIRi	Affinity membrane
Cellulose acetate	SEM, FTIR	Adsorptive membranes/felts
Hyaluronic acid, (HA)	SEM	Medical implant
Fibrinogen	SEM,TEM, mechanical Evaluation	Wound healing
Poly(glycolide) (PGA)	SEM, TEM, in vitro rat cardiac fibroblast culture, in vivo rat model	Nonwoven TEj scaffolds
Poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)	SEM, in vitro human chondrocyte culture	3D cell substrate
Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)	SEM, WAXD, SAXSk, degradation analysis	Biomedical applications, wound healing
Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)	SEM, EDXl	Biomaterials
Poly (vinyl alcohal)/cellulose acetate (PVA/CA)	SEM, FTIR, WAXD, mechanical evaluation	Biomaterials
Poly(ethylene-co-vinyl alcohol) (PEVA)	SEM, in vitro human aortic smooth muscle cell and dermal fibroblast cultures	Nonwoven tissue engineering scaffold
Polylactide (PLA)159	SEM, FTIR, in vitro L929 cells cultures, in vivo rat model	Tissue repair, wound healing, wound dressing
Poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)	SEM, in vitro rat mesenchymal stem cell culture	Bone tissue engineering
Polyethylene oxide (PEO)160	SEM, FTIR, XPS	Nanofibrous TE scaffold
Polyurethane (PU)	SEM, in vivo guinea pig model	Nonwoven tissue template wound healing
Syndiotactic 1,2-polybutadiene	ESEMm, XRDn, FTIRo	Tissue engineering applications
Polystyrene (PS)	SEM, in vitro human fibroblast, keratinocyte, and endothelial single or cocultures	Skin tissue engineering

 	Fig. 5  Effects of morphology and spatial structure of nanofibers on migration and growth of cells involved in wound healing process. (A) SEM images for aligned fibers and (B) immunostained neurofilament after 11 days of culture. Scale bar: 50 μm. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020 Biomaterials; (C) SEM images of scaffolds (50% Col/TSF, 60% Col/TSF and 70% Col/TSF) and (D) adhesion of DAPI stained BMSCs to the scaffolds (magnification: 100×). Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019 Materials Science and Engineering: (C and E) illustration of liquid-collecting electrospinning setups and (F) relative shape and size of spongiform fiber scaffolds, section thickness: 30 μm. Scale bar: 500 μm. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2016 Materials.	 

 	Fig. 6  Evaluating the effects of pore size and porosity of scaffolds on cell migration and infiltration. (A) MicroCT slices (xz and xy planes) of specimens manufactured with (a–c) particle porogen: nominal porosity 30% with pore range 300–500 lm, 50% with pore range 180–300 μm and 70% with pore range 180–300 μm and with (d–f) fiber porogen: nominal porosity 10, 30, 50%. Scale bar: 1 mm. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2020 Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance; (B) An electrospinning device for preparing double polymer composite fiber scaffolds. (a) Schematic diagram of electrospun PCL (red), PEO (green) and PCL/PEO composite scaffolds. (b) With the increase of PEO removal, the number of pores decreased, but the average pore size increased. (c) The increase of PEO removal promoted the infiltration of mesenchymal stem cells into composite fiber scaffolds. DAPI stained MSC-seeded scaffolds with varying % PEO contents (% mass loss) after three weeks of in vitro culture. Scale bar: 500 μm. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2008 Biomaterials; (C) representative SEM images of aligned electrospun PGS-PEO/PLA fibers (a) PGS-rdcPLA fibers (b) cured PGS-rdcPLA fibers. Scale bar: 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2019.	 

Amphotericin B	
Aspergillus fiimigatus
	Targeted drug delivery at infection site
Polymyxin B	
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
	(1) Decreased bacteria count in lung. (2) Increased bioavailability. (3) Decreased lung injury caused by bacteria
Ampillicin	
Micrococcus Luteus and Salmonella typhimurium	(1) Increased stability. (2) Full biological activity of Ampicillin was observed
Ciprofloxacin	
Salmonella dublin
	(1) Decreased motality of animals. (2) Distribution of liposomes to all areas of infection
Benzyl penicillin	
Staphylococcus aureus
	Lower drug concentrations and shorter time of exposure were required
Netilmicin	
Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli	(1) Reduction in toxicity. (2) Increased circulation half-life. (3) Increased survival rate of animal model
Gentamicin	
Klebsiella pneumoniae
	(1) Increased survival rate of animal model. (2) Increased therapeutic efficacy
Streptomycin	
Mycobacterium avium
	Increased antimicrobial activity
Amikacin	Gram-negative bacteria	Prolonged drug and exposure
Zidovudine	Human immunodeficiency virus	Enhanced targeting of ZDV to lymphatics
Vancomycin or teicoplanin	Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)	(1) Enhanced each drug uptake by macrophages. (2) Enhanced intracellular antimicrobial effect of each drug
Aijunglucoside	
Leishmania donovani
	Reduced toxicity
Phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotide	HIV	Protection of oligonucleotides from degradation
Saquinavir	HIV	(1) Protect the drug from cytochrome C metaboish. (2) Bypass efflux pump
Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol.	
Mycobacterium Turberculosis
	(1) High drug payload. (2) Improved pharmacokinetic. (3) High therapeutic efficacy
Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol	
Mycobacterium Turberculosis
	(1) Enhanced bioavailability. (2) Improved pharmacodynamic
Amphotericin B.	
Candida albicans
	Lower in vivo toxicity due to reduced accumulation in kidney and liver
Halofantrine	
Plasmodiumberghe
	Prolonged circulation half-life
Primaquine and ampicillin	
Leishmania donovani, Salmonella typhymurium and Listeria monocytogenes	Particle itself exhibits antimicrobial activity
Beta-lactam/ciprofloxacin	
Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus anthracis	(1) Improved bioavailability. (2) Higher therapeutic efficacy
Rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide	
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
	(1) Increased residence time. (2) Increased drug bioavailability. (3) Decreased administration frequency
Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride	Gram-negative bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria, and mycoplasma	Prolonged drug release
Tobramycin	
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
	Increased drug bioavailability
Clotrimazole	Fungi (e.g. yeast, aspergilli, dermatophytes)	(1) Prolonged drug release. (2) High physical stability. (3) High encapsulation efficiency
Ketoconazol	Fungi	(1) High physical stability. (2) Chemical instability when exposed to light
Miconazole nitrate	Fungi	(1) High physical stability. (2) High encapsulation efficiency. (3) Enhanced skin targeting effect
Econazole nitrate	Fungi	(1) High encapsulation efficiency. (2) Controlled drug release profile. (3) Enhanced drug penetration through stratum corneum

 	Fig. 7  Drugs combined with nanoparticles to remove bacteria and biofilm. (A) Mechanism of biofilm formation. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2013 Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews. (B) Mechanism of antibiotic resistance. Antibiotics initially penetrate the biofilm (green); cells show adaptive stress response to the environment and survive (pink); changes in the microenvironment within the biofilm lead to bacterial resistance (yellow); and the formation of multidrug-resistant persistent cells (blue). Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019 Biotechnology Advances. (C) Schematic illustration of four nanoparticle platforms for antimicrobial drug delivery: (a) liposome, (b) polymeric nanoparticle, (c) solid lipid nanoparticle, and (d) dendrimer. (D) Multiple mechanisms of antimicrobial action of nitric oxide-releasing nanoparticles (NO NPs), chitosan-containing nanoparticles (chitosan NPs), silver-containing nanoparticles (Ag NPs), zinc oxide-containing nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), copper-containing nanoparticles, titanium dioxide-containing nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs), and magnesium-containing nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2013 Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.	 

 	Fig. 8  Multi-functional electrospinning scaffold to promote wound healing. (A) The antibacterial application of nanoparticles and (B) mechanisms of NPs action in bacteria cells. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2017 Nanomedicine. (C) Core–shell electrospun fibers with an improved open pore structure for size-controlled delivery of nanoparticles and micrographs of the pore structure after the fiber meshes are immersed for one week. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (D) Top view and side view of 1 mm thick, radially aligned scaffold (RAS) and vertically aligned scaffold (VAS). The double-headed arrows indicate the alignment of nanofibers. BMSCs proliferated on 3D RAS and VAS after culturing for 9 days. (E) Schematic illustration of the application of 3D scaffolds consisting of radially or vertically aligned nanofibers in diabetic wound healing and their underlying mechanisms. (a) Radially aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds accelerate of surface wounds. (b) Vertically aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote the formation of granulation tissue in deep wounds. (c) Radially aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote angiogenesis, granulation tissue formation, ECM deposition, and reepithelialization. (d) Vertically aligned 3D nanofiber scaffolds promote angiogenesis, granulation tissue formation, and ECM deposition. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2020 Acta Materialia Inc.	 
Footnote
† 10.1039/d1tb00067e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
