Regulation of stem cell fate using nanostructure-mediated physical signals  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00572C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00572C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12828-12872Regulation of stem cell fate using nanostructure-mediated physical signals

        
          
            Ying 
            Kong†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jiazhi 
            Duan†
a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Han
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chunhui 
            Sun
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yuanhua 
            Sang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shuhua 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Yi
          
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Hong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ad
aState Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China. E-mail: hongliu@sdu.edu.cn; sangyh@sdu.edu.cn; wangshuhua2019@sdu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, 266200, China. E-mail: hanlin@sdu.edu.cn
cNeurological Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China
dCollaborative Innovation Center of Technology and Equipment for Biological Diagnosis and Therapy in Universities of Shandong, Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research (iAIR), University of Jinan, Jinan, 250022, China
eThe Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of Shandong Province, Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Science, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China. E-mail: fanyi@sdu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th July 2021
    First published on 18th October 2021AbstractOne of the major issues in tissue engineering is regulation of stem cell differentiation toward specific lineages. Unlike biological and chemical signals, physical signals with adjustable properties can be applied to stem cells in a timely and localized manner, thus making them a hot topic for research in the fields of biomaterials, tissue engineering, and cell biology. According to the signals sensed by cells, physical signals used for regulating stem cell fate can be classified into six categories: mechanical, light, thermal, electrical, acoustic, and magnetic. In most cases, external macroscopic physical fields cannot be used to modulate stem cell fate, as only the localized physical signals accepted by the surface receptors can regulate stem cell differentiation via nanoscale fibrin polysaccharide fibers. However, surface receptors related to certain kinds of physical signals are still unknown. Recently, significant progress has been made in the development of functional materials for energy conversion. Consequently, localized physical fields can be produced by absorbing energy from an external physical field and subsequently releasing another type of localized energy through functional nanostructures. Based on the above concepts, we propose a methodology that can be utilized for stem cell engineering and for the regulation of stem cell fate via nanostructure-mediated physical signals. In this review, the combined effect of various approaches and mechanisms of physical signals provides a perspective on stem cell fate promotion by nanostructure-mediated physical signals. We expect that this review will aid the development of remote-controlled and wireless platforms to physically guide stem cell differentiation both in vitro and in vivo, using optimized stimulation parameters and mechanistic investigations while driving the progress of research in the fields of materials science, cell biology, and clinical research.
Ying Kong
Ying Kong received her BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from China University of Mining and Technology, in 2017. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree in Materials Science at Shandong University, China. Her current research interests include the fate regulation of stem cells/immune cells by nanomaterials mediated-physical signals.
Jiazhi Duan
Jiazhi Duan received his BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Hubei University in 2016. He is now studying in Materials Science for PhD at Shandong University. His current research mainly focused on stem cells fate commitment by materials cues and physical signals.
Lin Han
Lin Han received her BS degree in physics and microelectronics from Shandong University, China, in 2003, MS degree in microelectronics from Tsinghua University in 2006, and PhD. Degree in electrical engineering from Princeton University, USA, in 2011. She was an Associate Postdoctoral/Research Scientist in biomedical engineering at Yale University between 2011 and 2015. She has been a professor at Shandong University since 2016. Her research focuses on biosensors, microfluidic chip for bioengineering, 2D materials and devices, flexible electronics, etc.
Shuhua Wang
Shuhua Wang is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University. She received her PhD degree in 2016 from Institute of Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research is mainly focused on nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage, including lithium/zinc ion batteries, nanogenerators, and the application of nanomaterials in regulating the fate of stem cells and/or immune cells.Fan YiDr Fan Yi is a professor of pharmacology, the Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of Shandong Province, School of Basic Medical Science, Shandong University. His current research is focused mainly on drug discovery and biomedical sciences related to signal transduction and targeted therapy. Until now, he has published more than 100 high level peer-reviewed papers including Cell, Nature and Cell Metabolism with total citation of over 5000 and H-index of 39.
Hong Liu
Dr Hong Liu is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, and Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research (iAIR), University of Jinan. His current research is focused mainly on photo-electrical functional materials, biosensors, tissue engineering and stem cells, especially the interaction between stem cell and nanostructured biomaterials. Until now, he has published more than 300 papers with total citation of over 23000 and H-index of 71. He was included in the Clarivate Analytics’ Highly Cited Researchers 2018–2020 list, and RSC Top 1% Highest cited Chinese Researchers 2016 and 2019 list.
1 Introduction
Tissue or organ damage is difficult to heal with traditional medical approaches; tissue engineering has emerged as a promising treatment method over time.1 Seed cells, scaffolds, and growth factors are the three essential elements of tissue engineering, which can be combined to build artificial tissues or organs in vitro and in vivo. Stem cells, including adult and embryonic stem cells, are important seed cells. Adult stem cells, such as hematopoietic stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), neural stem cells (NSCs) and muscle satellite cells, are a kind of undifferentiated cells located within a differentiated tissue, organ or organism;2 while embryonic stem cells (ESCs) derive from inner cell mass of blastocyst-stage embryos.3 Various kinds of stem cells have immensely promoted the progress of tissue engineering, even though controllable stem cell differentiation is still a challenge.4–7
The stem cell niche is a diverse, complex, and dynamic microenvironment, and the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in this niche.8,9 Natural ECM networks consist of functional macromolecules, such as proteins and proteoglycans.10 The ECM provides structural support to the organs and tissues, as the outside layers form the basement membranes and act as the substrates of single cells for migration.10 The ECM has many functions besides supporting cells.11,12 ECM proteins typically include multiple, independently folded domains with conserved sequences and arrangement. Some domains of ECM proteins bind adhesion receptors, such as integrins, which mediate the cell–matrix adhesion and transduce signals into cells, while other receptors bind soluble growth factors and determine their activity, distribution, and transportation. Specific nanostructures of well-organized ECM proteins can integrate numerous complex signals and control cell development and differentiation as well as other behaviors of these cells. Therefore, nanostructured ECM is a crucial platform for cell fate regulation (Fig. 1a).13
 Fig. 1  (a) The microstructure and components of the extracellular matrix. Surrounding the cell, there are nanoscale fibrous collagen nanofibers and proteoglycan complex nanofibers along with nanostructured fibronectin and integrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Cell signaling pathways are governed by protein phosphorylation and are critically involved in cell development and in the regulation of pluripotent states in stem cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2014, Wang et al. 
As shown in Fig. 1b, some receptors are located on the surface of stem cells, which respond to external signals, regulate gene expression, and affect the behavior, stemness, and differentiation of stem cells.14 Recently, an increasing number of surface receptors related to physical niches have been found, which can be used in stem cell engineering.15 Surface receptors can be divided into the several categories (Table 1).
Table 1 Some categories of surface receptors




Categories
Light irradiation parameters
Functions
Ref.




Phenotypic receptors
STRO-1, cluster of differentiation 166 (CD166) or activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM), cluster of differentiation 73 (CD73) or ecto-5′-nucleotidase (NT5E), cluster of differentiation 90 (CD90) or Thy-1, and cluster of differentiation 105 (CD105) or endoglin (ENG).
Associate with the phenotypic properties of MSCs; control the morphology of stem cells

16







Growth factor receptors
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), basic fibroblast growth factor receptor (bFGFR), insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), transforming growth factor-beta receptor type-1 (TGFR1), and transforming growth factor-beta receptor type-2 (TGFR2)
Regulate the self-renewal and differentiation of stem cells

17,18







Chemokine receptors
G-Protein-coupled receptors for CXC, CCR, CC, C or CX3C chemokines
Affect the homing, engraftment, and migration of MSCs to the sites of injury and neoplasia

19–21







Cytokine receptors
Type I and type II cytokines and the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor families, including interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R), interleukin-3 receptor (IL-3R), interleukin-4 receptor (IL-4R), interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R), interleukin-7 receptor (IL-7R), interferon-beta receptor (IFNβR), TNF1, and IIR
Respond to microenvironment signals, directly regulate migration, or upregulate gene transcription of stem cells

22–24







Cell–matrix receptors
Integrin subunits, like integrin subunit alpha 1 (ITGA1), integrin subunit alpha 2 (ITGA2), integrin subunit alpha 3 (ITGA3), integrin subunit alpha 5 (ITGA5), integrin subunit alpha 6 (ITGA6), integrin subunit alpha V (ITGAV), integrin subunit beta 1 (ITGB1), integrin subunit beta 3 (ITGB3), and integrin subunit beta 5 (ITGB5); the cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44)
Mediate the cell–matrix and cell–cell adhesion and affect cellular processes such as cell attachment, motility, proliferation, differentiation, and death

25







Cell–cell receptors
The notch receptors and their ligands (jagged canonical notch ligand 1 (JAG1), jagged canonical notch ligand 2 (JAG2), delta like canonical notch ligand 1 (DLL1), delta like canonical notch ligand 3 (DLL3), and delta like canonical notch ligand 4 (DLL4)); the immunoglobulin superfamily, including intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (ICAM2), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1), and ALCAM
Enter the cell nucleus and alter gene expression in MSCs; influence hematopoietic and immune functions

26,27







Immuno-modulating receptors
The major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules and several soluble factors, such as indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-10 (IL-10); toll-like receptors (TLR) on their surface, such as the TLR1, TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, and TLR9
Immunomodulatory roles

28,29





Among these receptors, those related to the biomolecule-driven signaling pathways have been widely investigated and their progress has been comprehensively reviewed in several important articles.15 However, biomolecule cues are generally expensive, easy to degrade, and may exert a negative effect on other adjacent tissues. Moreover, it is difficult to locally regulate these biomolecules in clinics.
Some of the stem cell surface receptors respond to the physical environment or to physical signals accepted by the ECM of stem cells. Therefore, stem cell fate can be regulated by the physical signals surrounding the cells or the physical fields to which the cells are exposed.30–32 Physical signals, such as mechanical signals, light signals, thermal signals, electrical signals, acoustic signals, and magnetic signals, have become attractive candidates for the regulation of stem cell differentiation over the past decades owing to their higher safety, lower cost, and tunable localized properties compared with those of biological and chemical signals. These signals are generally either applied directly on cells or by relying on the construction of the cellular microenvironment by nanomaterials.
Some important reviews on the regulation of stem cell fate by nanomaterials and physical signals are summarized in Table 2. These reviews have highlighted the recent progress in tissue engineering and regenerative therapy and have also provided instructions to regulate stem cell fate decisions. Few investigations concerned with physical signals as the sole regulators of stem cell fate have been comprehensively reviewed.33,34 Previous reviews have focused on the mechanical properties of materials or stimulus-responsive platforms, which have been proven to function as macroscopic regulators.34–37 However, in many cases, the macro magnetic, optical, acoustic, and electrical fields do not influence stem cells significantly, likely due to physical signal receptors being located on the cell membrane and acting through the ECM. Moreover, the strength of the physical signals accepted by the surface receptors from the macroscopic physical field is too small to trigger the signaling pathways. Therefore, emitting macroscopic physical signals to the whole cell population may be ineffective, whereas localized physical signals can be easily recognized by the surface receptors, thereby regulating stem cell fate more efficiently. When applying a macroscopic physical field, a weak field is difficult to trigger the signaling pathway of cells, while a strong field may represent a potential risk to the surrounding tissues. To perform noninvasive stimulation of stem cells, it is necessary to apply indirect physical stimulation using materials. Indeed, significant efforts have been made to investigate the role of nanomaterials in stem cell fate decisions, as they can act as effective regulators by mimicking and affecting the ECM of stem cells.35 Furthermore, both nanomaterial-based cell scaffolds and internalized nanoparticles have been reported to influence stem cell differentiation, which work extracellularly and intracellularly, respectively.38,39
Table 2 Relevant reviews on the regulation of stem cell fate via nanomaterials and physical signals




Ref.
Year
Title





40

2005
Synthetic biomaterials as instructive extracellular microenvironments for morphogenesis in tissue engineering



30

2009
Control of stem cell fate by physical interactions with the extracellular matrix



41

2009
Designing materials to direct stem-cell fate



42

2009
Nanotechnology and nanomaterials: promises for improved tissue regeneration



43

2010
Directed stem cell differentiation: the role of physical forces



44

2011
Photosensitive materials and potential of photocurrent mediated tissue regeneration



35

2012
Mimicking dynamic in vivo environments with stimuli-responsive materials for cell culture



33

2013
Physical cues of biomaterials guide stem cell differentiation fate



45

2014
Materials as stem cell regulators



46

2015
Piezoelectric materials for tissue regeneration: a review



47

2016
Material cues as potent regulators of epigenetics and stem cell function



48

2016
Graphene scaffolds in progressive nanotechnology/stem cell-based tissue engineering of the nervous system



49

2016
Use of nanoscale mechanical stimulation for control and manipulationof cell behaviour



50

2017
Spatiotemporal hydrogel biomaterials for regenerative medicine



34

2018
Manipulating cell fate: dynamic control of cell behaviors on functional platforms




Based on the above opinion, the key to triggering the physical signaling pathways in stem cells is to deliver targeted physical signals to the receptor located on the cell surface. Therefore, the only approach to regulate stem cell fate using physical signals is the local application of these signals on the ECM of specific cells without affecting surrounding cells. It is very difficult to create nanoscale electric fields, magnetic fields, pressure, or light spots in vivo via conventionally designed concepts and existing manufacturing technology. Fortunately, recent advances in nanoscale functional materials facilitate the localized stimulation of surface receptors on stem cells based on the energy conversion properties of some specially designed nanomaterials.51,52 For example, localized electric signals can be produced through the piezoelectric property of the nanomaterials driven by ultrasonic irradiation53 and magnetoelectric response54 or the photoelectric property excited by light irradiation,55 while localized stress can be generated by photo-constriction and magneto-constriction effects of nanostructures driven by light irradiation and an alternating magnetic field.56,57 The details of the mechanisms and the associated nanomaterials will be discussed in the following sections.
In this review, we classify the physical signals into six categories: mechanical, light, thermal, electrical, acoustic, and magnetic, according to the form of external physical stimulation sensed by the cells (Fig. 2), and then explain the intrinsic interactions among various physical signals. The effective signals that drive cell differentiation are also discussed in detail in the following six subsections. In each section, we briefly introduce the effects of physical signals, and then the characteristics of nanostructured materials-mediated physical signals are discussed in detail, especially in terms of regulating stem cell differentiation into specific lineages, such as osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes, muscle cells, and neurons. Finally, we summarize the current challenges and future outlooks in this field as we believe that these nanostructured materials-mediated physical signals show great potential for in vivo and clinical applications.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of nanostructured materials-mediated physical signals and the interactions that regulate stem cell differentiation. The physical signals are subdivided into mechanical, thermal, electrical, acoustic, magnetic, and light signals. (NIR, near-infrared; CB, conduction band; VB, valence band; LSPR, Localized surface plasmon resonance; TENG, triboelectric nanogenerator; MEA, microelectrode array; UV, ultraviolet; US, ultrasound). 
2 Mechanical signals
Mechanical signals are more easily sensed by cells when cells interact with materials, and their regulatory effects on stem cells are the prime interest of researchers among various physical signals. Mechanical signals can directly influence the commitment of stem cell fate without stimulation signal conversion.58,59 Summarized from previous studies, the mechanical signals for stem cell fate regulation mainly include two aspects: mechanical force—including shear stress, mechanical strain compression, tension and other types of force—and nanostructured materials-mediated mechanical cues, which mainly consist of substrate topography, substrate stiffness, and some other aspects such as cell rigidity (Table 3).
Table 3 Some studies discussing mechanical signals for the stem cells fate regulation




Mechanical signals
Cell sources
Type of stimulation
Fate regulation
Ref.




Mechanical force
Shear stress
ESCs
Fluid shear stress
Embryonic hematopoiesis

60



MSCs
Fluid shear stress
Endothelial cell and smooth muscle-related markers

61



Mechanical strain
ESCs
Local cyclic stress
Local cyclic stress might be sufficient to drive an ESC to differentiate

62



Midgut stem cells
Stretch
Mechanical stress regulated stem cell differentiation through the stretch-activated ion channel Piezo.

63



Static pressure
MSCs
Static pressure
Neural-like cells

64



Substrate properties
Substrate stiffness
MSCs
Variably compliant polyacrylamide gels
Soft matrices – neurogenic, stiffer matrices – myogenic, comparatively rigid matrices – osteogenic

65



MSCs
Varying weight percent polymer
Osteogenesis occurred mostly at 11–30 kPa in 3D microenvironments.

66



Skeletal muscle stem cells
Varying weight percent polymer
Substrate elasticity regulated skeletal muscle stem cell self-renewal.

67



Substrate topography
MSCs
Nanoscale symmetry and disorder
Nanoscale disorder stimulated human MSCs to produce bone mineral in vitro.

68



MSCs
Nanoscale pits
Nanostructured surface retained stem-cell phenotype and maintained stem-cell growth over eight weeks.

69



Epidermal stem cells
Circular islands
Micropatterned surfaces triggered human epidermal stem cells to initiate terminal differentiation.

70





Under specific conditions and mechanical stimuli, the stem cells can receive the signal input and respond to external cues, which leads to different fate decisions such as muscle cell, osteogenic, or neural differentiation.71 Stem cell differentiation toward terminal mature states, controlled by mechanical factors with high efficiency and directional guidance, would provide supportive guidance for tissue repair, stem cell therapy, and other research areas. Since there are many difficulties in accurately controlling and regulating stem fate decisions and functions both in vivo and in vitro, novel mechanical load equipment and nanomaterial processing technologies would notably facilitate fundamental studies by creating a well-controlled biomechanical microenvironment and investigating the effect of biomechanical stimulation in stem cells. In addition, mechanical signals can also be applied and mediated by thermal signals, light stimulation, electric fields, and magnetic fields, which rely on thermo-sensitive materials, photo-crosslinked hydrogels, converse piezoelectric effect, and magnetic-mechanical coupling through nanostructured materials, respectively. These indirect methods can easily implement localized mechanical stimulation of stem cells and regulate their fate lineages.
2.1 Directly exerted mechanical forces
Mechanical force signals are of great significance in the development and function of tissues and organs, including the lung, heart, muscle, cartilage, and bone. The notion that mechanical force plays an important role in stem cell fate commitment has broadened extensive horizons related to manipulating stem cell fate and led to a more intensive comprehension of stem cell differentiation processes. As illustrated in Fig. 3, various types of mechanical forces exist at the cell, tissue, and organ levels inside the body, including shear stress, cyclic stretch, compression, interstitial flow, and tension.72 In the past decades, many in vitro models that mimic mechanical stimuli in vivo have been established to investigate their effect on stem cell fate commitment. In the following section, we discuss the influence of mechanical signals, such as shear stress and stretch forces, on stem cell fate regulation.
 Fig. 3  Mechanical stimuli found at the cell, tissue, and organ levels inside the body. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 

2.1.1 Shear stress. 
Shear stress plays a vital role in many biological processes and has been extensively studied in recent years, particularly in vascular biology. To generate such biophysical signals of shear stress, microfluidic shear devices73,74 or parallel plate flow chambers61 have been developed to investigate stem cell responses. As shown in Fig. 4a, the pulsatile flow bioreactor includes a peristaltic pump, a glass culture reservoir with inlets and outlets for medium circulation and air exchange, a compliance chamber, and a culture chamber.61 The culture medium for circulation was produced using a peristaltic pump. In this study, shear stress for the stem cells was initially set as at 1 dyne cm−2 and gradually increased to 15 dyne cm−2 over a two-day period. The cells on the scaffolds were then stimulated by 15 dyne cm−2 for another two days. The results demonstrated that shear stress significantly upregulated the expression of endothelial cell-related markers, and downregulated smooth muscle-related markers, compared with those in static control group.
 Fig. 4  (a) Overview of the bioreactor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2009, Springer Nature. (b) Bright-field images (top), corresponding green fluorescent protein (GFP) images of oct3/4 expression (middle) and corresponding Discosoma red fluorescent protein (DsRed) images of a constitutive promoter (CAGGS) expression (bottom). Cells attached to the arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-coated beads were continuously stressed for ∼1 h (17.5 Pa, 0.3 Hz) and the expression levels of oct3/4 or CAGGS were measured over time in the mouse embryonic stem cells (scale bar = 10 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. 
Apart from affecting MSCs, the shear stress can also contribute to the fate commitment of ESCs.60,75,76 Using a similar pulsatile flow bioreactor to the one mentioned above, the effect of shear stress on mouse ESC differentiation was investigated. Fluid shear stress upregulated the expression of Runx1 in CD411c-Kit1 hematopoietic progenitor cells, and strengthened their hematopoietic colony-forming potential.60 Another study showed that ESCs could be directed to differentiate into vascular wall cells by shear stress loading in vitro.75


2.1.2 Mechanical strain. 
Cells can maintain a dynamic balance of cell-ECM force by adjusting their actin cytoskeleton. External mechanical strain signals can be transduced to stem cells through specific receptors expressed on the cell surfaces, such as integrins, which cause the instantaneous imbalance as well as the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Extensive studies have revealed that mechanical stimulation is effective in guiding stem cell differentiation toward vascular smooth muscle cells,77–79 osteoblasts,80,81 and chondrocytes,82 which may contribute to the functionality evaluation process of stem cell therapy for tissue engineering purposes.
The signals transduced by mechanical strain can change cell shape, activate various signaling pathways, and induce gene transcription resulting in a fate change in stem cell. As shown in Fig. 4b, the long-term effect of local cyclic stress through focal adhesions led to oct3/4 gene downregulation in mouse ESCs.62 The undifferentiated cells were stably transfected with green fluorescent protein (GFP) driven by the oct3/4 promoter with the addition of leukemia inhibitory factor. After a constant stimulus of a local stress (17.5 Pa, 0.3 Hz, 60 min), oct3/4 had a ∼35% downregulation in expression within 24 h, and ∼50% downregulation within 72 h, while control group without stress persisted on oct3/4 expression. This result suggests that local cyclic stress was able to drive an ESC to differentiate through focal adhesions.
Mechanical regulation of stem cell differentiation can also be accomplished using stretch force. A recent study reported that a population of unipotent stem cells could directly sense external stretching in vivo, therefore adjusting their fate decision. This mechanosensing was activated through Piezo and cytosolic Ca2+ increase.63 Moreover, stretch could activate the ion channel Piezo1, which directs fate of human NSCs, and mechanosensing showed a similar pathway.83
Usually, the mechanical strain used for the regulation of stem cells is anisotropic, which may also induce an anisotropic effect on stem cells. The cyclic uniaxial strain on elastic substrates may cause cells to align themselves perpendicular to the strain axis and to anisotropically direct stem cell fate. In a recent report, stem cells were stimulated by a 5% cyclic uniaxial strain (1 Hz) for 2–4 days.84 DNA microarray analysis showed general gene expression changes, including decreases in cartilage matrix markers, an upregulation in the smooth muscle marker, and alterations in cell signaling. Moreover, uniaxial strain increased the proliferation of MSCs. Another study compared the differential effects of equiaxial with uniaxial strain on MSCs, and revealed that cyclic equiaxial strain decreased the expression of SM-22α and SM α-actin in human MSCs (hMSCs) on collagen- or elastin-coated membranes after 1 d, and the expression of α-actin in stress fibers were downregulated.85 However, the expression of SM-22α and SM α-actin was transiently promoted by cyclic uniaxial strain after 1 d, and then decreased to basal levels after the cells grew perpendicular to the direction of strain.

2.2 Nanostructure mediated mechanical signals
In recent years, nanostructured materials have been developed as a controllable interaction between cells and the microenvironment. Physicochemical features of nanostructures, such as substrate stiffness86 (or elasticity) and topography,87,88 can exert an important influence on stem cell behavior and build a differentiation-inducing microenvironment on stem cells. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, stem cells can sense the mechanical signals mediated by variations in substrate stiffness and nanotopography, mainly through integrin-mediated focal adhesion signaling and response to the signals by adjusting the degree of actin polymerization.30,89 Therefore, the cytoskeleton of stem cells can be regulated by the stiffness and topography of biomaterial scaffolds, indicating that the mechanical signals mediated by the nanomaterials can regulate signal transduction of stem cells and subsequently guide their differentiation into specific lineages.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic summary of the types of cell responses following culture on different hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (b) Influence of ECM nanotopography on stem cells. The nanoscale geometry and size of the features of the ECM may have significant effects on diverse cell properties, including attachment/adhesion, migration, and proliferation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 

2.2.1 Substrate stiffness mediated mechanical signals. 
Multiple cues can regulate stem cells differentiation, including the elasticity or compliance of the matrix substrate (Fig. 6a).25 Elastomeric polymer cell culture substrate, such as hydrogels, has been commonly used due to their unique physicochemical properties, which can be controlled by simply adapting the density of crosslinks in the network.90–93 The stiffness of hydrogels could be varied from very soft (<1 kPa in elastic modulus, similar to a viscous fluid such as honey) to rather stiff (∼500 kPa, similar to silicone rubber).45 Hydrogels, including polyacrylamide, hyaluronic acid hydrogels, alginate hydrogels, and polyethylene glycol are frequently used as cell culture materials owing to their easy processing properties. Particularly, stem cells tend to efficiently differentiate into specific tissue lineages in which the tissue elasticity is similar to that of the hydrogel substrate for stem cell culture. hMSCs were cultured on variably compliant polyacrylamide gels, and the results showed that soft matrices that mimic the brain (0.1–1 kPa) were in favor of neurogenesis, stiffer matrices that mimic muscle (8–17 kPa) promote myogenesis, and comparable rigid matrices that mimic collagenous bone (25–40 kPa) promote osteogenesis (Fig. 6b).65
 Fig. 6  Substrate elasticity regulates stem cell fate. (a) Multiple factors can influence the differentiation of stem cells, including secreted soluble factors, elasticity or compliance of the matrix substrate, and biochemical composition and dimensionality of the matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (b) The in vitro gel system allows researchers to control the elastic modulus via crosslinking, cell adhesion by covalent attachment of collagen-I, and thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) In situ staining of the encapsulated clonally derived mouse mesenchymal stem cells for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (Fast Blue; osteogenic biomarker, blue) and neutral lipid accumulation (Oil Red O; adipogenic biomarker, red) after 1 week of culture with combined osteogenic and adipogenic chemical supplements within encapsulating matrices consisting of arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-modified alginate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. 
The variable stiffness of cell culture substrates can alter cell morphology and phenotype through focal adhesions, especially in two-dimensional cultures.94,95 A recent study showed that stiff matrix promoted hMSC differentiation into smooth muscle cell lineage, while soft matrix (∼1 kPa) promoted hMSC differentiation into chondrogenic and adipogenic lineages. In addition, both matrix stiffness and TGF-β factors were important in defining a unique differentiation pathway.96 Another study investigated the effect of the stiffness of electrospun cell culture nanofiber substrates on MSC fate decisions. The utilized materials were core–shell poly(ether sulfone)–poly(caprolactone) (PES–PCL) fibers (30.6 MPa) and pure PCL (7.1 MPa), and the modulus difference between the two materials was more than four times. The lower modulus PCL fibers provided more appropriate microenvironments for chondrogenesis of murine embryonic mesenchymal progenitor cells, and the stiffer core–shell PES–PCL fibers supported enhanced osteogenesis.97
The effect of a stiffness gradient of 1.0 ± 0.1 Å kPa mm−1 on hMSCs cultured on a hydrogel was also investigated. The hMSCs undergo directed migration, or durotaxis, up stiffness gradients, rather than remain stationary. hMSCs migrated to a stiffer matrix and then differentiated into a more contractile myogenic phenotype. The phenotype of those cells migrating from soft to stiff regions was not completely altered by the stiff hydrogel, as some cells retained the expression of neural marker. This result indicated that stiffness variation, not just stiffness alone, can be an effective regulator of stem cell behavior.98
In 3D culture systems, the stiffness of scaffolds is also considered as an important regulator for the oriented differentiation of stem cells. As shown in Fig. 6c, mouse MSCs (mMSCs) were encapsulated into a 3D hydrogel, which was constructed by alginate polymers and integrin-binding RGD peptides.66 Osteogenic differentiation was favored at middle E (11–30 kPa), while softer (2.5–5 kPa) microenvironments promoted adipogenic differentiation, indicating the significant role of matrix rigidity in regulating MSC fate. Moreover, another study reported the proliferation and differentiation of rat neural stem cells encapsulated within 3D scaffolds, which was contrasted by alginate hydrogels, and the elastic moduli ranged from 0.18 to 20 kPa. The expression of neuronal marker β-tubulin III was upregulated in the cells encapsulated within the softest hydrogels, of which elastic moduli was comparable to that of brain tissue (∼180 Pa).99
Tissue-specific elastic modulus generated from developmental changes in the ECM may be time-dependent in vivo due to tissue progression in some typical cases. To mimic the temporal change of stiffness in vitro, thiolated hyaluronic acid (HA) hydrogels were crosslinked with poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate, and their properties were tuned by varying the molecular weight of the crosslinker.100 When the hydrogel was tuned to comparably heart muscle development, pre-cardiac cells on collagen-coated HA hydrogels exhibited a 3-fold upregulation of mature cardiac specific markers, and ∼60% maturing muscle fibers formed after two weeks, compared with that of cells on polyacrylamide hydrogels.
A major challenge during stem cell culture is the development of optimal culture conditions and culture substrates to maintain the stemness of stem cells. Muscle stem cells (MuSCs) exhibit steady regenerative ability in vivo but rapidly lose that ability in vitro. Using a bioengineered substrate to mimic the biophysical and biochemical ECM features, researchers have found that substrate elasticity is an effective regulator of MuSC fate during cultivation.67 Unlike cultured on rigid plastic dishes (∼106 kPa), MuSCs cultured on soft hydrogel substrates mimicking the elasticity of muscle (12 kPa) maintained their self-renewal ability in vitro and contributed effectively to muscle regeneration.
The substrate topography designed for stem cell culture can account for cellular responses from attachment, self-renewal, migration to differentiation, and production of new tissues. Various nanoengineering tools and synthesis methods, including electron beam lithography, photolithography, electrospinning, hydrothermal synthesis, and other micro/nanofabrication techniques have been successfully developed and utilized to create experimental platforms to understand the role of substrate topography on stem cell behavior. To date, various nanotopographies of cell culture substrates, including nanofibrous,101 nanopits,69 and nanogroove,102 have been reported. Furthermore, the size, order, and dynamic change of topographic cues, which could be accurately controlled by the advanced manufacturing technology, can also impact pluripotent stem cell fate decisions.


2.2.2 Micro-nanotopography mediated mechanical signals. 
Previously, numerous studies have been performed to explore the regulatory effect of various substrate morphology cues on stem cell fate.103–106 Recently, control of nanoscale symmetry and disorder in nanoscale substrate surface agglomeration was accomplished, allowing understanding of anisotropy and randomness in the regulation of hMSC differentiation.68 Another study revealed that the differentiation process of human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) could be efficiently controlled through one-dimensional hydroxyapatite nanostructures with tunable lengths.107 In addition, biodegradable polylactic acid nanopillar arrays with different diameters was fabricated using anodic aluminum oxide nanowell arrays with different diameters as templates to explore the effect of the nanopillar diameter on stem cell differentiation. Osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs can be enhanced by nanopillar arrays, especially by nanopillar arrays with a diameter of 200 nm (Fig. 7).108
 Fig. 7  Polylactic acid nanopillar array-driven osteogenic differentiation by pillar diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (a) Diagram depicting human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) cultured on polylactic acid (PLA) nanopillar arrays with different pillar diameters. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images of the anodic aluminum oxide template platform with different nanopit diameters of 100 nm, 200 nm, and 300 nm, and SEM images of PLA planar film, PLA-100, PLA-200, and PLA-300. (c) ALP activity of hADSCs and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis of the expression levels of osteoblast-specific genes runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osteopontin (OPN), and osteocalcin (OCN). 
Several studies have noted that stem cell fate can be manually regulated by controlling their shape using artificial micropatterned substrates. For example, micropatterns were fabricated as cell culture substrates using photolithographic methods with various pattern templates. hMSCs were cultured on the designed substrate to investigate the effect of cell shape on stem cell fate commitment. The results suggested that adherent, flat, and spreading hMSCs on large ‘island’ tend to undergo osteogenesis, while non-spreading, round cells on small ‘island’ may become adipocytes.109 Another study cultured hMSCs in rectangles with increasing aspect ratio, in pentagonal symmetry with different subcellular curvatures and each occupying the same area, finding that hMSCs displayed different adipogenesis and osteogenesis rates when exposed to competing soluble differentiation signals. Geometric profiles of the designed substrate which increase actomyosin contractility can enhance osteogenesis.110
Topographical cues of substrates may also be designed to maintain the phenotype and multipotency of stem cells. A recent study devised a nanoscale substrate fabricated by electron beam lithography and processed it into thermoplastic PCL by hot embossing. MSCs were cultured on this substrate for up to eight weeks.69 I immunofluorescence staining results of progenitor (STRO-1 and ALCAM) and osteoblast markers (OCN and OPN) after MSCs were cultured on the designed substrate and on controls for four weeks are shown in Fig. 8a, which demonstrates that the nanostructured surface can retain the phenotype and maintain growth of stem cell over eight weeks. Another study utilized a seedless galvanic-cell-based approach to synthesize ZnO nanorod arrays for hADSCs culture.111 Stemness genes and protein expression levels of hADSCs cultured on ZnO nanorod arrays for 3 weeks were higher than those in the control groups. Moreover, the ZnO nanorod arrays maintained the stemness of hADSCs without inhibiting their proliferation and oriented differentiation capabilities.
 Fig. 8  (a) On the planar control (flat) a heterogeneous cell population was formed that retained certain levels of expression of STRO-1 and ALCAM (mesenchymal stem cells marker), while also expressing osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN) (osteoblast marker). Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. (b) Scanning electron micrographs of the human hMSCs plated on poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) micropost arrays of the indicated heights. The bottom images are magnifications of the boxed regions of the top images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. 
A study reported the use of a replica-molded array of hexagonally spaced poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) microposts from microfabricated silicon masters.112 The surface morphology presented the same surface geometry but different post heights (0.97, 6.10, and 12.9 μm) to control substrate rigidity. hMSCs were seeded and cultured on these substrates, and the morphology of the cultured stem cells is shown in Fig. 8b. Micropost rigidity influenced cell morphology, focal adhesions, cytoskeletal contractility, and stem cell differentiation. Moreover, the subsequent fate of hMSCs can be predicted by early changes in cytoskeletal contractility.
In contrast with other methods that regulate stem cell fate, nanotopography-driven differentiation has a great advantage in obtaining special cell lineages in specific areas with designed nanostructures. Therefore, we propose a strategy to obtain multilineage cells at the same biomaterial by constructing different nanostructures in different areas to form organoids in vitro. We define this method for the construction of organoids as localized committed differentiation of stem cells. The nanotopography can promote osteogenic differentiation with the presence of osteogenic induction medium. For example, Liu et al. constructed a TiO2 nanorod array locally on a well-polished TiO2 ceramic plate to form a TiO2 nanostructure–TiO2 smooth surface periodic stripe pattern through a microfabrication-hydrothermal process.113 They cultured MSCs in the osteogenic induction medium and found that cells cultured on the nanostructured TiO2 strongly differentiated into osteogenic cells, and those on the smooth ceramic parts maintained stemness compared with those on culture plates in the same culture medium (Fig. 9). This confirmed that differentiation can occur locally on specially designed nanostructure parts and can achieve localized committed differentiation of stem cells on the same surface of biomaterials.
 Fig. 9  Location controlled osteogenic differentiation of MSCs on a micropattern TiO2 ceramic and TiO2 nanorod array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016, Wiley. (a) Schematic illustration of the localized osteogenic differentiation of MSCs on micropatterned substrate. (b) Digital and SEM images of fabricated patterned TiO2 substrate. Immunofluorescence staining and relative expression level analysis of osteogenic markers (c) OPN and (d) OCN of MSCs on patterned TiO2 substrate after 14 d culture. (e) Calcium nodules stained by Alizarin Red S of MSC on patterned TiO2 substrate after 14 d culture. 
Another important study supporting the idea of localized committed differentiation of stem cells has been conducted by Mou et al.114 They did not use growth factor cocktails to promote NSCs differentiation into glial or neural lineages. In this study, nanoporous TiO2 ceramic thin films and condensed TiO2 ceramic thin films were prepared and cut into micro-slabs. Connecting the two kinds of TiO2 micro-slabs alternatively from a periodical porous-dense TiO2 pattern, and NSCs were cultured on the periodical patterned surface. The growth medium of NSCs contain basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), and the differentiation of NSCs are initiated by removing bFGF and EGF from the growth medium. As shown in Fig. 10, glial differentiation occurred on the nanoporous surface, and neural differentiation occurred on the smooth surface. The nanoporous surface may absorb more protein and provide sustainable release of bFGF and EGF after growth medium replacement, and the activation of EGFR favors astrocytes differentiation, while the smooth surface has a limited protein absorption. Therefore, more investigations need to be done to confirm whether the different topography is the dominant factor that drive different lineage differentiations in the future.
 Fig. 10  Localized committed differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs) on different topographies of a TiO2 micropattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the micropattern. (b) NSCs cultured and differentiated on the micropattern stained with Nestin (green) and the nuclei were labeled with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue). The NSCs on the pattern were differentiated for 7 days (b3) and 15 days (b4) and then immunostained with the class III β-tubulin (TuJ1) (green) for neurons, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (red) for astrocytes, and DAPI (blue) for nuclei. Scale bar = 200 μm. 
As discussed above, the physical properties and nanotopography can regulate stem cell differentiation, which can be used to control the differentiation at localized areas of biomaterials and have great applications in tissue engineering. To date, the mechanism of nanotopograhy-driven regulation of stem cell differentiation and the relationship between physical property/nanotopography and surface receptors of stem cells have not been well understood. It is still very difficult to theoretically predict stem cell fate for a biomaterial with specific stiffness and designed nanotopography. The investigation in this field remains at the experimental level, and interdisciplinary research between biophysics and stem cell biology should be the final approach to solve the theoretical problems of this topic.

2.3 External field responsive materials mediate mechanical signals

2.3.1 Temperature-driven thermo-sensitive material mediate mechanical signals. 
Topography cues of cell culture substrates have been utilized to mimic the stem cell microenvironment using various methods in an attempt to alter cell shape, spreading, migration, and even differentiation. However, many reported substrates for stem cell culture are usually limited to static models that inadequately imitate naturally dynamic cellular microenvironments. Therefore, designing more intelligent biomaterials is necessary to dynamically reproduce stem cell microenvironments and facilitate definite commitment to stem cell fate. This demands the rational design of spatiotemporal response biomaterials to fulfill the need for dynamic stem cell culture. From the synthesis and control aspects of intelligent biomaterials reported in numerous studies, thermo-sensitive materials may serve as suitable candidates for dynamic response substrates. Thermo-responsive biomaterials for stem cell culture can be divided into shape memory polymer (SMP) and thermo-sensitive hydrogel (TSH). Both types of substrates have been researched for stem cell fate regulation in recent years.
SMPs possess the ability to “memorize” their original shape through covalent or physical crosslinking of two different components. These polymers consist of a fixed phase and a reversible phase, of which the fixed phase is responsible for the storage and recovery of the original shape, and the reversible phase is responsible for the shape change. They can deform by heating the polymer above its glass transition temperature (Tg) and stored in a temporary shape after cooling back down past their Tg. The temporary shape could recover back to its original shape when triggered by various types of cues, including temperature, force, water, and electricity. The SMPs most investigated in the past years for cell culture are thermos-induced SMPs. Lee et al. reported a cell substrate with dynamic surface roughness based on shape memory acrylate networks for differentiation of human MG63 osteoblast-like cells.115 As shown in Fig. 11a, the surface roughness could be reduced to smooth using compression (0 h) and fully recover within 24 h under culture conditions. This strategy of a SMP with dynamic surface roughness may improve osseointegration. Microstructures of SMP-based cell substrates for stem cell fate regulation have also been developed. As shown in Fig. 11b, micro-well substrates were fabricated through thermal lithography with arrays of triangle-, square-, hexagon- or round-shaped microwells to direct MSC differentiation, which were composed of a biocompatible and biodegradable SMP network.116 Moreover, parallel microgroove patterns on the SMP substrate surface were fabricated via thermal embossing lithography (Fig. 11c).117 Dynamically tunable surface microstructures can direct MSCs differentiation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Confocal images of pre- and post-compression dynamic 30:65:5 networks recovering at 37 °C in phosphate-buffered saline. Scale bar = 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Topographic surface images of the c-6A PEGPCL substrate with various microwells observed by SEM before and after shape-memory transition by a 38 °C and 41 °C heat treatment. Scale bar = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the programmed control of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell shape, reorganization of actin cytoskeleton, and differentiation by the dynamic change of a microgrooved surface activated with the thermal-induced shape memory effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (d) Hydrogel solution is flowable at 4 °C, quickly gels at 37 °C and is injectable through 26G needle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
TSHs are another frequently utilized thermo-responsive biomaterial for cell culture. Among the various kinds of TSHs, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) and chitosan-based composite hydrogels have been favored because of their good biocompatibility and biodegradability. These TSHs are known to be thermo-responsive, maintain the gel state, and dissolve once they are cooled below its lower critical solution temperature (LCST). PNIPAAm possesses a LCST (32 °C) at which the macromolecular structure transforms from a hydrophilic to a hydrophobic state. The unique properties of this material enabled the 3D culture of MSCs and the regulation of stem cell fate.119,120 Moreover, adjusting the oligomer length and maintaining the same monomer composition and oligomer chemical structure can independently regulate the hydrogel modulus. TSHs with different moduli could regulate the proliferation rate and degree of differentiation (Fig. 11d).118 TSHs combined with electrospun technology have also been developed to regulate stem cell fate. Dang et al. fabricated thermally responsive electrospun nanofibers for MSCs culture and found that the nanostructure of the nanofiber could induce myogenic differentiation, and the thermo-responsive property enabled cell sheet production.121 This strategy provides an effective method for the production of tissue-engineered cell sheets. Brunelle et al. synthesized an electrospun thermos-sensitive hydrogel scaffold for the differentiation of hMSCs.122 The 37 °C-temperature exposure induced phase transition of the hydrogel to a gel state, and thus effectively encapsulated the stem cells in a 3D hydrogel. They found that the 3D hydrogel could enhance the chondrogenesis of hMSCs according to chondrocytic gene and protein expression.


2.3.2 Photo-driven crosslinking degree derived mechanical signals of hydrogels. 
UV light plays a vital role in the photo-crosslinked hydrogels for two-dimensional (2D) or 3D culture, despite the potential risk of short-time UV irradiation.123
HA is a natural component of the ECM that participates in many biological processes. To obtain crosslinking groups, Guvendiren et al. functionalized HA with methacrylic anhydride (MA) to prepare methacrylated hyaluronic acid (MeHA) hydrogels, and dithiothreitol (DTT) was introduced into the MeHA solution to obtain uniform mechanical properties.124 The MeHA hydrogels can be stiffened by UV irradiation-triggered crosslinking (Fig. 12a), exhibiting tunable Young's moduli. hMSCs were seeded on MeHA hydrogel substrates in situ for 2D culture, in which the spread area and traction can be altered by different stiffness (soft, 3 kPa; stiff, 30 kPa; soft-to-stiff, 3–30 kPa). During long-term cultivation for up to two weeks, the differentiation of hMSCs can be regulated by the moment of stiffening, that is, later stiffening favored adipogenesis, while earlier stiffening favored osteogenesis. These findings clearly illustrate that photo-crosslinked hydrogels can temporally mediate the mechanical properties of stem cell multilineage differentiation in 2D culture models.
 Fig. 12  Photo-crosslinked hydrogel, piezoelectric film, and magnetic field that mediate the mechanical properties of stem cell differentiation. (a) Schematic diagram of the methacrylated hyaluronic acid (MeHA) crosslinking process, rheology profiles of hydrogel formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. (b) Cell culture exposition to micro vibration when seeded in the active area of the piezoelectric film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Use of magnetized ESCs to create an embryoid body and using remote magnetic forces to stimulate it. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017, Du et al. 
Traditional planar 2D cultures cannot mimic the natural ECM and limit cell spreading. Since development of 3D culture techniques is urgently needed, researchers have paid increasing attention to 3D hydrogels. Khetan et al. functionalized HA with both methacrylate and maleimide groups to obtain MeMaHA hydrogels, which can encapsulate hMSCs in 3D and regulate their differentiation by local photodegradation-mediated cellular traction.127 They found that hMSCs tended toward osteogenic differentiation when cells were able to spread and pull on the surrounding matrix, while adipogenesis was promoted when cells remained rounded and were unable to displace the surrounding matrix. This study provided extended insights into the role of mechanical cues mediated by 3D hydrogel UV-photodegradation in hMSC fate decisions.
As summarized in Table 4, photo-crosslinked or photo-degradable hydrogels were used to regulate stem cell differentiation under UV irradiation. These UV-reactive hydrogels can mediate mechanical signals that affect the ECM, such as elasticity, stiffness, traction, and control differentiation.
Table 4 Research studies on stem cell differentiation driven by photo-crosslinked hydrogels with light assistance




Cell resources
Differentiation
Photo-responsive hydrogels
Light irradiation parameters
Ref. (year)




hMSCs
Chondrocytes
PEG-RGDS hydrogels
UV light (a) 365 nm at 20 mW cm−2, (b) 365 nm at 10 mW cm−2, and (c) 405 nm at 25 mW cm−2

128 (2009)


hMSCs
Adipocytes, osteoblasts
AHA hydrogels
365 nm UV, 10 mW cm−2, 4 min

129 (2010)


hMSCs
Osteoblasts
MeHA hydrogel substrates
UV, 2 min

124 (2012)


hMSCs
Adipocytes, osteoblasts
RGD-modified MeHA hydrogels, MeMaHA hydrogels
UV, 4 min

127 (2013)


hMSCs derived from the synovium
Chondrocytes
HA hydrogels containing KGN-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
UV, 1 min

130 (2015)


hADSCs
Endothelial cells
GelMA/HAMA bicomponent network hydrogels
365 nm UV, 40 s

131 (2017)






2.3.3 Electric field-driven mechanical signals mediated by piezoelectric thin films. 
Moreover, materials converse piezoelectric effects can be accomplished by applying an excitation electric field to generate mechanical deformation, thus affecting cellular behavior as a substrate. Frias et al. cultured MC3T3-E1 cells on piezoelectric film polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) with alternating current (AC) stimulation of 5 V at 1 Hz and 3 Hz for 15 min and found that piezoelectric materials can be used as efficient mechanical stimulation generators through electrical-mechanical transformation processes (Fig. 12b).125 Converse piezoelectric effects on stem cell fate decision have been rarely investigated until now, making it possible to develop novel piezoelectric biomaterial-based tissue repair strategies through mechano-sensing and mechano-transduction.
Although the direct current can induce mechanical signals by converse piezoelectric effect and affect cell behavior, the complex effect of signals mixed with electricity and stretch compression makes the mechanism complicated and difficult to explain. In addition, this system is difficult to be translated into clinical applications, not only because PVDF is not biodegradable, but also because the essential electric wires in this system will cause serious problems in vivo.


2.3.4 Magnetic field-driven mechanical signals mediated by nanostructures. 
As mentioned above, mechanical forces play an essential role in regulating stem cell behavior and fate, which has promoted the rapid development of mechanobiology. Apart from the directly applied mechanical forces including compression, traction, shear stress, and some other types of force with mechanical movement and topography-induced localized force, the remote-control mechanical force mediated by magnetic fields and materials may provide additional possibility and predictability for stem cell fate commitment. Based on the functions of specific nanostructures, some magnetic field-responsive nanomaterials can convert the energy of a moving magnetic field into mechanical force, which can be utilized to efficiently regulate cell behavior or fate. Herein, the recent progress in magnetic field-driven mechanical signals mediated by nanomaterials for stem cell fate regulation is briefly reviewed.
The nanostructures that can be driven by a magnetic field to form mechanical signals include magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic hydrogels, and some nanomaterials with magneto-construction properties.
Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles are the most popular magnetic materials in biomedical applications because of their good biocompatibility and easy synthesis. The mechanical force can be generated by the effect of a static or alternating external magnetic field on magnetic nanoparticles that are attached to a surface or inside an object. When magnetic nanoparticles are taken in a stem cell or firmly attached to the surface of stem cells, the mode of mechanical load on the stem cells can be different according to the application method of magnetic fields, which can cause different effects of Fe3O4 nanoparticle-mediated mechanical signals. Jiang et al. synthesized Fe3O4/bovine serum albumin (BSA) particles with a diameter below 200 nm for the magnetic control of bone marrow MSC (BM-MSC) stimulation.132 The Fe3O4/BSA particles taken by BM-MSCs combined with a constant static magnetic field could significantly promote the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs, while the individual magnetic particles or external magnetic field did not influence the osteogenic differentiation potential of MSCs. Another study reported that Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles together with an external magnetic field were used as stimulation for BM-MSC fate regulation.133 Cells that incorporated magnetic nanoparticles were pelleted and subjected to a static magnetic field and/or magnet-derived shear stress. The results showed that the magnetic-based mechanical force could facilitate chondrogenic differentiation.
Stem cells can sense and respond to the surrounding microenvironment according to changes in physical properties through the binding effect of integrin on the cell membrane.134 By manipulating the binding state between stem cells and implants, it is possible to control stem cell fate decisions. Magnetic control of adhesive ligand presentation, such as RGD, serves as an appealing strategy for the remote manipulation of cell-implant interactions. In recent years, Bian's group has completed a series of investigations on the remote control of RGD ligands using various methods and the regulation effect on the adhesion, spreading, and differentiation of hMSCs.135–137 Their work mainly utilized the combination of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles conjugated with the RGD ligand and anchored to a glass substrate by a long flexible poly(ethylene glycol) flexible linker as the magnetically tunable oscillatory motion for the regulation of hMSCs. Different strategies based on controllable PEG linker molecular weight, the application of oscillation motion frequency controlled by the magnetic field, and reversible caging and uncaging of the RGD ligand accounted for the tunable adhesion of stem cells on the implant, thus enabling the fate commitment of hMSCs.
Furthermore, the attached proteins, ion channels, or lipids on the stem cell membrane could be designed as mechanotransduction targets to modulate cell fate, as it may induce the initiation of a variety of signaling pathways. By conjugating magnetic nanoparticles with specific antibodies that target cell surface mechanosensitive receptors, the mechanical signals mediated by magnetic nanoparticles and magnetic field would further elicit specific signaling pathways for cell differentiation commitment. The transmembrane ion channel stretch-activated potassium channel (TREK-1) and RGD-coated magnetic particles combined with a magnetic field were utilized as the mechanical signals for human bone marrow stromal cell differentiation commitment.138 The mechanotransduction signal stimulation for bone marrow stromal cells labeled with TREK-1 or RGD magnetic nanoparticles promoted differentiation with different degrees of specific marker expression toward the osteochondral lineage. Another study reported that magnetically targeting and activating two specific mechanical-sensitive cell membrane receptors, platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα) and integrin ανβ3, could also be targets for magneto-mechanical stimulation of human bone marrow-derived MSCs toward osteogenic differentiation.139
In addition to the magneto-mechanical force generated by the magnetic particles at the nanoscale level, the devices of coupling the magnetic nanoparticles into a controllable system also emerge as a potential strategy for stem cell regulation. As shown in Fig. 12c, a 3D magnetic tissue stretcher was developed to mechanically control the differentiation of ESCs.126 The ESCs incorporated with magnetic nanoparticles were capable of sensing the mechanical force generated by the magnetic stretcher. This design enabled ESCs differentiation toward the mesodermal cardiac pathway. Another study incorporated magnetic nanoparticles into microscale hydrogels to probe strain-induced cell responses.140 This magnetic hydrogel enabled the application of a relatively homogeneous deformation following non-contact actuation under external magnetic fields for cell regulation. Park et al. presented a biological microelectromechanical system that is mainly made of an actuator and a cartridge-type chamber to apply a cyclic compressive load on MSCs of various magnitudes.141 The cyclic load for stem cells was applied at 1 Hz frequency for 10 min, twice a day. The culture results showed that the designed system-derived magnetic-driven mechanical force could enhance the chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs, even in the absence of exogenous inducing factor TGF-β.
In addition to the magnetic nanoparticles tightly attached to the surface of the stem cells can affect their fate by magnetic field-derived mechanical force, the nanoparticles endocytosed by the stem cell can also be influenced by the magnetic field and suffer mechanical force inside the stem cells. This effect of mechanical signals on stem cell fate has rarely been investigated, but it should become a very attractive topic in stem cell fields.
As discussed above, mechanical signals that originate from different microenvironments or physical fields play an important role in the regulation of stem cell fate. In fact, although all the above methods based on different physical mechanisms can be used to tune stem cell fate, they each have advantages and disadvantages, which determine their potential application prospects. Directly exerted mechanical forces are the most powerful tool for mechanical signal regulation of stem cell fate; however, its use in clinical applications is improbable because mechanical signal production relies on instruments that are unsuitable for in vivo application. Substrate stiffness and micro-nanotopography-mediated mechanical signals are very promising methods for clinical tissue reparation applications, because the substrate can be chosen as a biodegradable material, induce direct differentiation of stem cells to obtain different functional cells at different parts of the biomaterials, and possibly help construct organoids in vitro. However, it is very difficult to control the mechanical signal applied to the stem cell quantitatively and in a timely manner. The advantage of temperature-driven mechanical signals mediated by thermo-sensitive material is that this method can regulate stem cell fate in vitro because laser heating is easily applied to the cells through thermo-sensitive material, and the redundant heat can disperse to the culture media. If this method is used for tissue regeneration in vivo, the laser heating process becomes complicated or impossible because of the light irradiation depth limitation and the difficulty in avoiding heating effects on the adjacent cells or tissue. The hydrogel photo-driven crosslinking is a unique method to apply mechanical signals to the cells, but it also poses complications when used in vivo. Electric field-driven piezoelectric thin film-mediated mechanical signals is an attractive method for in vitro demonstration of the mechanical signals that affect stem cell differentiation because it is very easy to control the force intensity and time, and to observe the cell morphology over time. However, PVDF is not biodegradable, and electricity-exerting equipment and connection wires are essential in this system, which will bring great difficulty in clinical applications. Magnetic field-driven mechanical signals mediated by nanostructures are one of the most promising methods for the regulation of stem cell fate both in vitro and in vivo. As a non-contact field for driving mechanical signal production, this approach has great potential in vivo and will have great applications in clinical tissue repair applications.

3 Magnetic signals
The magnetic field, one of the basic physical factors in the natural environment, is pervasive throughout the environment owing to modern technological developments. Moreover, the magnetic field signal has a significant effect on cells, tissues, and many physiological processes within organisms, which play essential roles in many biological processes of stem cells, including self-renewal, migration, lineage differentiation, and apoptosis.142 Research on the effect of magnetic signals on stem cell fate decisions can be predominantly divided into three categories according to the origin of the magnetic field: (1) macroscopic magnetic field signals, (2) nanomaterial-mediated-magnetic field signals and magnetic field, and (3) light-driven nanostructure-mediated plasmon-induced magnetic resonance. Specifically, a magnetic field with tunable frequency and field strength for signal input, whether the signals are mediated by nanomaterials, provides a superior and accurate external trigger for stem cell fate regulation. From this perspective, applying magnetic field signals has been utilized as an important approach to control the behavior and response of stem cells noninvasively and precisely, although the mechanism of how and why the magnetic field influences stem cell fate remains poorly understood. The current progress of the magnetic field research on the fate commitment of stem cells will be described in three parts, as mentioned above.
3.1 Macroscopic magnetic signals
Macroscopic magnetic signals are those directly generated by electromagnets or permanent magnets and can be divided into (1) static magnetic fields (SMFs), (2) pulsed electromagnetic fields (PEMFs), (3) alternating electromagnetic fields and (4) rotating magnetic fields.143 Among the different types of magnetic fields, the SMFs create a single magnetic field that can be easily generated using a permanent magnet and enables SMF signals to be feasible for long-term stem cell stimulation. According to the magnetic field intensity, SMFs can be categorized as weak (<1 mT), moderate (1 mT–1 T), strong (1–5 T), and ultra-strong (>5 T).144

3.1.1 Static magnetic fields. 
Utilizing SMFs as the stimulation signals to stem cells, the regulation effect may vary with the magnetic field density, exposure time, and other parameters. When dental pulp cells were continuously exposed to SMFs at 290 mT in combination with osteogenic induction, the SMF signals could significantly accelerate osteogenic differentiation and mineralization.145 A comparable magnetic field density of 200 mT for 24 h day−1 was applied to stimulate rat bone marrow MSCs, which enhanced effect of osteogenic differentiation and mineralization.146 The effect of magnetic field density at 400 mT on cells was also investigated, and the results also showed a promoting effect on differentiation towards chondrogenesis147 or osteogenesis.148,149 Furthermore, another study explored the effects of moderate intensity SMFs (3, 15, and 50 mT) as biophysical stimulators on the proliferation and osteoblast differentiation of human BM-MSCs.150 Alizarin red staining of the cultured cells at different magnetic field densities is shown in Fig. 13a, and SMFs could promote the osteoblastic differentiation of MSCs, especially the magnetic field density at 15 mT.
 Fig. 13  (a) Mineralized bone nodule formation by hMSCs after 21 days of osteogenic culture, assessed by Alizarin red staining. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) The solenoid coil, which generated the electromagnetic field, was located inside a CO2 incubator. The inner diameter and length were 180 mm and 400 mm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2013, Kang et al. (c) Schematic procedure of low-frequency electromagnetic fields (50 Hz, 1 mT) exposure in neuronal differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs) and corresponding immunofluorescence images of neurons using antibody against the class III β-tubulin (TuJ1). Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
The mechanism for the effects of SMFs on various stem cells was similar because the cell membrane possessed diamagnetic properties, and SMF stimulation served to modify the membrane flux. Moreover, the ECM proteins also presented diamagnetic properties, which enabled the SMFs to affect their structures, orientations, and functions.153 These effects on the cells may contribute to the reported mechanism by which SMFs influence stem cell fate by altering Ca2+ concentration or increasing membrane rigidity.149


3.1.2 Electromagnetic fields. 
Electromagnetic fields (EMFs) also have promotive effects on stem cell differentiation. The EMF generator devices mainly consist of three parts: a program control computer, power amplifier, and solenoid. A typical solenoid is shown in Fig. 13b. There are two parameters that predominately define the electromagnetic field properties: frequency and magnetic flux density.151 Usually, low-frequency and low-energy electromagnetic fields are generated from the stimulation source. In addition, the magnetic flux density applied in most previous studies for stem cells fate regulation varied from 0.1 to 5 mT and the frequencies varied from 7.5 to 75 Hz. For example, homogeneous sinusoidal extremely low-frequency magnetic fields (5 mT, 15 Hz) produced by a solenoid were applied to hMSCs in a cartilage differentiation induction medium for three weeks, and the results showed that EMFs can promote chondrogenic differentiation.154 Another study demonstrated that EMFs (0.5, 50 Hz) accelerate cell proliferation and enhance cell differentiation of mouse bone marrow stromal cells.155 In addition, the effect of low-frequency electromagnetic fields (1 mT, 50 Hz) on the differentiation of human BM-MSCs toward neurons was assessed. The neuron marker (TuJ1) staining results indicated that SMFs efficiently enhanced neuronal differentiation (Fig. 13c).152 Pulsed electromagnetic fields, one of the most commonly used EMFs, produce magnetic fields and electric currents, which also enhance cell differentiation.156–158
However, until now, the precise mechanisms of EMFs influencing stem cell fate are not yet fully understood. It has been suggested that EMFs enhance osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow stromal stem cells through selective activation on Ca2+-related mechanisms.159 Additionally, EMF exposure may induce neural differentiation by increasing intracellular reactive oxygen species concentrations,160 and EMFs could also promote neurogenesis via upregulation of Cav1-channel activity.161 More efforts on mechanism investigation should be paid.

3.2 Localized magnetic signal mediated by magnetic nanostructure
A number of previous studies have reported that external magnetic field signal stimulation allows stem cells to sense the field change and regulate their behaviors, such as cell growth, elongation, migration, and differentiation. However, for the terminal purpose of tissue repair and regeneration engineering, it may not be enough to employ the magnet field as a single treatment. Thus, it is essential to design a proper scaffold to provide support, and contribute to connecting, and communicating functions. In addition, a properly designed substrate for stem cell culture also accounts for the regulation of stem cell behavior. Therefore, a magnetic field combined with a cell scaffold could be developed as a novel strategy with more controllable and functional properties for the fate regulation of stem cells.

3.2.1 Superparamagnetic nanoparticles-based scaffolds. 
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe3O4 or γ-Fe2O3) possess a magnetic field-responsive property, which behave like common materials without an external magnetic field and will be rapidly magnetized to saturation and respond to the magnetic field when exposed to an external magnetic field. Therefore, the combined application of an external magnetic field and scaffolds containing magnetic nanoparticles may have a special effect on stem cells.162 Yun et al. reported the synergism between magnetic scaffolds and SMFs.163 As shown in Fig. 14a, the magnetic scaffold was constructed with Fe3O4 nanoparticles and polycaprolactone (PCL) in different proportions. A neodymium (Nd2Fe14B) disc magnet was placed under the magnetic scaffold for magnetic field stimulation. Primary mouse calvarium osteoblasts were cultured on the surface of the magnetic nanocomposite scaffolds for 10 days. The gene expression and ALP activity experimental results indicated that the magnetic nanocomposite scaffolds synergized with SMFs enhanced osteoblast differentiation of primary mouse calvarium osteoblasts. Moreover, effects of the magnetic scaffold and SMF on the osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells has also been reported.164 The magnetic nanofiber scaffold was constructed using superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and poly(L-lactide) with a mixing and electrospinning method, and a magnetic field of 100 mT was served by a neodymium magnet. Therefore, both the external SMF signals and the incorporation of Fe3O4 nanoparticles can enhance the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells, and the synergism of SMF stimulation and magnetic scaffold could further promote these changes. Another study developed intrinsically superparamagnetic Fe-hydroxyapatite nanoparticles, which replaced the Fe3O4 nanoparticles with Fe2+ and Fe3+ substitution in the material structure to investigate the influence of magnetic materials and magnetic field on differentiation of SaOS-2 human osteoblast-like cells.165 Furthermore, a strategy combining the magnetic scaffold and SMF was also applied and tested in vivo, and the results supported osteogenesis for bone repair in vivo.166 Therefore, the combinatory external SMF stimulation and internal magnetism scaffold can be a promising strategy for stem cell fate regulation and regenerative engineering.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration showing the combined magnetic cues from the internal magnetic nanoparticles and the external magnetic field that can influence the cell responses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustrations showing the process of direct lineage reprogramming into dopaminergic neurons using the electromagnetic field (EMF)-induced AuNP magnetization. Mouse fibroblasts transiently transfected with apelin (APLN) were plated on the AuNP substrate and exposed to a specific frequency and intensity of EMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Scaffolds for adjusting the ECM have also been designed to investigate the combined effect of magnetic field signals on stem cells. Lee et al. investigated the influence of extremely low-frequency electromagnetic fields (50 Hz, 1 mT) on the neuronal differentiation of hMSCs on graphene-based substrates.168 Graphene was employed as the cell scaffold as it could support neuronal differentiation of stem cells. By the application of low-frequency electromagnetic fields, the neuronal differentiation efficacy of stem cells grown on a graphene-coated substrate could be synergistically enhanced.


3.2.2 Magnetic field responsive nanomaterials. 
Magnetic field-responsive nanomaterials have also been explored to assess the influence of the magnetic field on the cells. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) become transiently magnetized once exposed to specific EMF frequencies, enabling more direct transfer of EMF energy to the target cells. As shown in Fig. 14b, Yoo et al. designed an AuNP-based substrate for fibroblasts to investigate the effect of EMF on induced dopamine neurons differenrtiation.167 They selected mouse tail-tip fibroblasts and transiently transfected them with plasmids that express the dopamine neurons lineage transcription factors in vitro. EMF stimulation activated histone acetyltransferase Brd2, resulting in the acetylation of histone H3K27 and activation of neuron-specific genes. Fibroblasts were reprogrammed to induce dopamine neurons without de-differentiated to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) under EMF exposure and AuNPs facilitating. The direct reprogramming of somatic cells into other lineages is attractive, and EMF provides a particularly method to non-invasively regulate cell fate with high efficiency and low toxicity. This study may inspire researchers to explore the effect of nanostructures meditated-physical signals on somatic cells reprogramming.
Although magnetic fields have been proven to regulate stem cell fate with or without the mediation of nanomaterials, the physical and biological mechanisms of this effect are not clear. In fact, the generation of a localized alternative magnetic field at the interface between cells and substrate and how the localized alternative magnetic field acts on the surface receptor of the stem cells are still of the essence.

3.3 Electromagnetic signals mediated by light irradiated metal nanostructures based on the localized surface plasmon resonance effect
Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is due to the strong absorption of photon energy by nanoparticles or metals, when the incident photon frequency matches the collective oscillation frequency of the noble metal nanoparticles or the conducting electrons of metal. In the LSPR condition, the metal nanoparticles exhibit strong electromagnetic field enhancement and generate hot electrons. The localized electromagnetic enhancement generated by the LSPR effect could act as a magnetic signal to regulate stem cell fate. In addition to noble metal nanoparticles, some compounds, especially chalcogenides, possess a high plasmonic effect.169 Recently, Liu et al. found that micro-electromagnetic field variation based on the plasmonic effect of CuS driven by near-infrared can induce hADSCs to differentiate into neuron-like cells without any growth factor or neural differentiation media, which opened a new door for the regulation of stem cell fate with the plasmonic effect of non-metal compound nanostructures.170 In a photo-induced plasmon system, several physical signals, such as light, thermal, mechanical electrical, and magnetic signals, are all involved and closely related. However, the dominant factor and the minor factor that contribute to stem cell fate regulation are not identified, and the underlying mechanism are also not clear. There remains blank in this promising field and more efforts need to be paid in the future.
4 Thermal signals
An appropriate temperature is one of the most fundamental factors influencing cell behavior, including growth, migration, differentiation, and apoptosis. Generally, temperatures in the range of 35–37 °C are optimal for cell viability both in vivo and in vitro. Deviating from this region, cell metabolism and growth may be affected, even causing cell death. Moreover, when the external temperature is slightly increased higher than 37 °C, the cells also develop an adaptive heat acclimation process to increase heat tolerance. This mild heat has considerable effects on the activity of enzymes, proteins, and various reaction processes inside the cells, which endow the temperature regulation of cell fate. Through decades of research efforts, numerous studies have reported the effects of mild heat on the cells, especially on stem cells, and their underlying mechanisms. In addition, photothermal nanomaterials can mediate localized thermal signals for regulating cell fate under light stimulation, In the following part, the influence of the mild heat and photothermal nanomaterial-mediated thermal signals on the stem cells fate decision will be mainly reviewed.
4.1 Thermal signals in the regulation of stem cell fate
At the cellular level, heat exposure may increase the temperature of both the inside and outside microenvironment of the cells, which may induce the facilitation of biological reactions due to the temperature coefficient effect and thereby regulate stem cell behaviors, including proliferation and differentiation. To maintain cell homeostasis, some specific biological process may occur inside the cells after heat shock. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are molecules that maintain cellular homeostasis during environmental changes.171 Usually, heat shock protein synthesis is correlated with this tolerance and is constitutively at basal unstressed levels and sensitively responds to various cell stresses such as hyperthermia and anoxia.172 From this aspect of stem cells, HSPs may serve as regulators of stem cell proliferation and differentiation when encountering external heat exposure. A recent study carried out an experiment in which NSCs isolated from forebrain cortices were cultured at either 37.0 °C (control) or 38.5 °C (mild heat exposure) for four days, showing that heat exposure upregulated both HSP27 mRNA expression and p-Akt levels.173 In addition, mild heat exposure promoted the proliferation of NSCs, possibly through the Akt pathway, and promoted neuronal differentiation. Some studies have also investigated the heat shock effect on MSCs, and mild heat shock (1 h at 41 °C, 42.5 °C, or 44 °C) can enhance osteoblastic differentiation of hTERT-immortalized MSCs.174 The influence of HSPs on murine embryonal carcinoma stem cells has also been investigated, and researchers have found that HSPs also account for the regulation of cell differentiation and proliferation.172,175
4.2 Localized thermal signal mediated by photothermal nanomaterials
Mild heat stimulation can regulate stem cell differentiation, and hyperthermia (40–42 °C) is favorable for bone regeneration, which is only 3–5 °C higher than the temperature of human body. Nevertheless, the delivery of heat signals to specific sites of cells is difficult owing to the limitations of conventional heating strategies. Hence, researchers have focused on photothermal nanomaterial-mediated localized thermal signals for regulating cell fate under light stimulation, and some relevant studies are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Research studies on stem cell differentiation driven by photothermal materials with light assistance





In vitro results

In vivo results
Photothermal materials
Light irradiation parameters
Ref. (year)




hNSCs → neurons
—
rGO sheets, ∼0.8 nm in thickness
532 nm, 5 ns pulse duration, 10 Hz repetition rate, 0.3 W, 300 mJ maximum pulse energy, ∼0.5 cm2 spot size, 30 s each hour

176 (2014)


MG63 → osteoblasts
Rat calvarial defects → bone repair
Alginate gel including carbon nanotubes, 80 mm diameter and 2 mm thickness
NIR, 4 W cm−2, 15 min at 42 °C every day for 5 days

177 (2014)


MC3T3-E1 → osteoblasts
Tooth-extracted sockets in normal and ovariectomized osteoporotic model mice → bone repair
Alginate gel including carbon nanotubes, 10 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness
NIR, 4.0 W cm−2, 10 min at 42 °C every day for 10 days

178 (2015)


hBMSCs → osteoblasts
Rats tibia critical and cylindrical defects → osteogenesis
BPs@PLGA nanosheets
808 nm NIR, 1 W cm−2

179 (2018)


MSCs → fibroblasts
BALB/c mice wound model → would healing
Matrigel with CuS@BSA NPs (in a diameter of 5–8 nm)
980 nm NIR, 1 W cm−2, 5 min

180 (2020)




Graphene has extraordinary thermal conductivities and photothermal responses, and has opened up numerous fascinating applications in tissue engineering and biomedicine. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets have been utilized as localized rapid heaters to drive human NSCs (hNSCs) differentiation into neurons under pulsed laser irradiation.176 The photothermal actuation of black phosphorus (BP) can be achieved by NIR irradiation. Tong et al. synthesized an osteo-implant composed of BPs and poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (BPs@PLGA) and characterized their photothermal response under 808 nm NIR irradiation (1 W cm−2) (Fig. 15a–d).179 As shown in Fig. 15d, BPs@PLGA had much more effective photothermal effects than pure PLGA, and a 0.2 wt% low content of BPs in BPs@PLGA scaffolds can mediate a temperature increase of 17.7 °C. They found that BPs@PLGA with 808 nm NIR irradiation can effectively upregulate the expressions of HSPs and promote osteogenesis both in vitro and in vivo, which may be a promising strategy for heat-stimulated bone regeneration mediated by photothermal nanomaterial scaffolds.
 Fig. 15  Nanomaterials with photothermal response. (a) SEM image of BPs (the inset shows the photograph of BPs in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solution). (b and c) Photos of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and 0.2 wt% BPs@PLGA membranes, respectively. (d) Photothermal heating curves of PLGA (blue line) and BPs@PLGA membranes with different contents of BPs (red lines) immersed in the culture medium under 808 nm laser irradiation. The pure culture medium serves as the control (black line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Particle size distribution and TEM image of CuS@bull serum albumin (CuS@BSA). (f) Infrared (IR) thermal images of CuS@BSA dispersion in vitro under 980 nm NIR irradiation. (g) IR thermal images of Matrigel or CuS@BSA with Matrigel dispersion in vivo under 980 nm NIR irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2020, Xiao et al. 
CuS nanoparticles, another photothermal material, have already been used in photothermal therapy (PTT) of cancers.181 Recently, researchers proposed an ultrasmall CuS@bull serum albumin (BSA) nanoparticles (NPs), in size of 5–8 nm as observed in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 15e).180 Both CuS@BSA NPs in vivo and Matrigel encapulasted-CuS@BSA in vitro exhibited efficient photothermal conversion properties according to infrared (IR) thermal images under 980 nm NIR irradiation (Fig. 15f and g). CuS@BSA NPs can mediate heat signals and serve as a suitable agent to promote the differentiation of MSCs to fibroblasts in vitro and improve the closure of a wound in an injured wound model in vivo when combining CuS@BSA NPs with Matrigel.
In our opinion, many nanomaterials for cancer PTT may also regulate stem cell differentiation, which can be fabricated into difunctional platforms in the future to realize cancer therapy as well as tissue repair.
5 Light signals
Among the various external stimulation methods, the effect of noninvasive light should not be underestimated.182,183 Light with different wavelengths, including ultraviolet (UV), visible light, and infrared light, differ in regulation of stem cell differentiation. Stem cells can sense light irradiation from typical receptors. For example, Wang et al.184 reported that NSCs naturally express blue/red light-sensitive opsins, the melanopsin/transient receptor potential channel 6, which are photoreceptors present within mammalian retinas.185
In addition to light stimulation, rational materials with typical light-responsive properties have also been designed to achieve dynamic physical stimulation of cells with light assistance, such as photo-crosslinking and photothermal response, which have been discussed in the above Sections 2.3.2 and 4.2. With direct light irradiation at different wavelengths, the light can be changed into a special wavelength or wavelength region different from the initial light mediated by light-converting nanomaterials, such as UCNPs and second harmonic generation (SHG) nanostructures.
5.1 The effect of light irradiation on stem cell differentiation
Light irradiation is mainly applied in the form of visible light (380–780 nm in wavelength) to direct cell differentiation. Light signals can be simply generated by various tools and devices, such as diode lasers,186,187 He–Ne lasers,188 and light-emitting diodes (LED).189–193
Low-level laser irradiation (LLLI) was applied to rBMSCs using a 632 nm diode laser to promote myogenic differentiation with 5-azacytidine (5-aza) induction at an energy density of 5.0 J cm−2.186 Another study demonstrated that LLLI from 632 nm LED promoted osteogenesis of rBMSCs with optimized parameters at 15 mW cm−2 and 4 J cm−2, seen as the increased expression of ALP and OCN.189 Furthermore, Shao et al. developed a CRISPR-dCas9 effector device that was activated by far-red light (FRL, 730 nm) and used this optogenetic device to mediate targeted epigenetic modulation, which can efficiently promote neural differentiation of iPSCs, which holds great promise for directing stem cell differentiation and optogenetics-based therapy.193
The above studies focused on the effect of red light, while various wavelengths may contribute differently and are controversial. Higuchi et al. investigated the osteogenic differentiation of amniotic fluid-derived stem cells (AFSCs) when exposed to LEDs (0–2 mW cm−2) in various wavelengths, including 470 nm (blue), 525 nm (green), 600 nm (yellow) and 630 nm (red).192 They found the osteogenic differentiation of AFSCs was significantly promoted by green or blue light irradiation from LEDs, rather than red or yellow light at the same power density. This conclusion was different from other reports,186,189 which may be attributed to the different stem cell types and various irradiation parameters. Moreover, blue light (453 nm) irradiation has been confirmed to initiate the differentiation of human skin cells, providing a therapeutic strategy for skin diseases.190
Some of the light irradiation parameters applied to stem cells for specific differentiation are summarized in Table 6.
Table 6 Research studies on the differentiation of stem cells with light irradiation




Cell resources
Differentiation
Types of light
Light irradiation parameters
Ref. (year)




rBMSCs
Myocytes
632 nm diode laser
60 mW, 0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, or 5.0 J cm−2

186 (2008)


rBMSCs
Osteoblasts
630 nm LED
1.2 cm distance between the LED and the cell layer, 5 and 15 mW cm−2, 2 and 4 J cm−2 radiant exposures

189 (2010)


AFSCs
Osteoblasts
470 nm (blue), 525 nm (green), 600 nm (yellow), and 630 nm (red) LED
0–2 mW cm−2

192 (2011)


rBMSCs
Osteoblasts
620 nm LED
1 W output, 2 cm distance between the LED and the cell layer, 10 cm diameter of the light spot, 6.67 mW cm−2 power density, 150 s for 1 J cm−2, 300 s for 2 J cm−2 and 600 s for 4 J cm−2

191 (2012)


iPSCs
Neurons
730 nm FRL LED
FRL light illumination for 6 h each day

193 (2018)


mNSCs
Astrocytes
980 nm NIR
150 mW, 62.5 ms pulses, 8 Hz, 90 min for 5 consecutive days

184 (2019)




Previous research has indicated that visible light has a stronger ability to regulate stem cell fate. However, the penetration depth of visible light is too small, and visible light has more harmful side effects on cells and tissues than near-infrared light, which prohibit its clinical applications. Therefore, in situ conversion of near-infrared light into visible light to realize localized visible stimulation of stem cells has attracted much attention from researchers.
5.2 Light-converting nanomaterials-meditated optical signals

5.2.1 Up-conversion nanoparticles. 
Lanthanide-doped UCNPs exhibit the intrinsic properties of converting near-infrared (NIR) light into high-energy light regions with low wavelengths, including UV, visible, and NIR light. Recent research results illustrated that the upconversion nanostructures can regulate stem cell fate both outside and inside stem cells.
In a recent study, silica shell-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs (UCNP@SiO2) core–shell nanoparticles were synthesized using a microemulsion method to regulate MSCs fate as a light conversion platform (Fig. 16a).194 The authors designed and constructed a special scaffold by assembling a specially modified UCNP@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticle into a matrix. The surface of UCNP@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles was modified by two kinds of molecules: a UV-driven photocleavage molecule, which can be broken under strong NIR light irradiation, and the other is a stable polymer molecule, which can capture the stem cells on the scaffold. Under NIR irradiation, UCNPs can convert NIR irradiation into UV, causing cleavage of photocleavage molecules and blocking cell–matrix interactions (Fig. 16b). Upon low-power NIR irradiation (0.5 W cm−2), the differentiation of MSCs was toward adipogenesis due to the detachment of some poly(ethylene glycol) (P1), while toward osteogenic differentiation upon high-power NIR irradiation (6 W cm−2) with more P1 detaching (Fig. 16c). This study proposed a strategy for realizing multidirectional differentiation of MSCs using an upconversion substrate-mediated optical signal and different NIR lasers.
 Fig. 16  Light-converting-mediated optical signals for stem cell differentiation. (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of UCNP@SiO2. (b and c) Schematic diagram of modulating cell–matrix interactions and the fate of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) using an upconversion nanoparticle (UCNP)-based substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Schematic diagram of intracellular upconversion nanotransducer (UCNT)-based nanocomplex for hMSCs differentiation under NIR light irradiation. (e) Real-time measurement of relative fluorescence intensities in hMSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (f) Distribution of the second harmonic generation (SHG) signal from the lithium niobate (LN) nanocrystals within a typical cell with a spindle-like shape and the fluorescent image of rat MSCs (rMSCs) with immunostained actin (red) that are labeled with LN nanocrystals (blue). Scale bar = 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to assembling UCNPs in the scaffold, uptake of UCNPs can also regulate cell differentiation intracellularly.51,196,197 Kang et al. used an upconversion nanotransducer (UCNT)-based nanocomplex to intracellularly photocleavage and release chondro-inductive kartogenin (KGN) and/or either calcium chelator or calcium supplier and regulated the differentiation of hMSCs both in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 16d).51 They found that the photocleavage in the UCNT-based nanocomplex can regulate intracellular calcium levels in hMSCs under 980 nm NIR irradiation at 1 W cm−2 (Fig. 16e). The decrease in intracellular calcium and KGN release induced hMSC differentiation into chondrocytes, while the increase in intracellular calcium and KGN release favored the osteogenic differentiation.


5.2.2 The second harmonic multiplier nanostructures. 
In addition to UCNPs, lithium niobate (LiNbO3, LN) nanocrystals with SHG nanocrystals have been reported to label the rat MSCs (rMSCs) for imaging cellular internalization, and their influence on stem cell differentiation was also evaluated.195 The results showed that LN nanocrystals were taken up by the rMSCs and their distribution was highly consistent with actin filaments under 910 nm NIR excitation (Fig. 16f). Moreover, rMSCs incubated with 50 μg mL−1 of LN nanocrystals retained their osteogenic and adipogenic abilities. This work provides insights into multifunctional SHG nanocrystals with deep tissue tracking, localized drug release, and stem cell therapy.
Although light signals can regulate stem cell fate and realize directional differentiation, techniques for the use of light should be further investigated in the future. The most important factors in direct use of UV and visible light are the penetration depth and to avoid damaging cells and tissues surrounding the target stem cells. To convert NIR light into visible or UV light inside the cells or round the cells in vivo, although the problem of light penetration depth can be solved, and the required UV/visible light can be obtained, the degradability of the nanoparticles becomes the strongest enemy for clinical applications. Solving the above problems is urgent for the light signal regulation of stem cells and their applications in tissue engineering.

6 Electrical signals
Since cell electrophysiology has been intensively investigated in recent years, electrical signals are now considered as a stimulation approach and potential regulator of stem cell fate, controlling cardiogenic, osteogenic, chondrogenic, and neuronal differentiation. In fact, the electrical field can modulate almost most processes in various stem cell types, such as adhesion, migration, proliferation, and differentiation.198 Although many receptors and pathways have been shown to affect cell fate, how an electrical signal regulates the fate of stem cells is not very clear.31 Many progress has been made in the past decades in cell differentiation and tissue engineering because of the development of convenient electrical stimulation methods and devices.162,199–201 According to the way cells are subjected to exogenous electrical stimulation, these methods can be classified into two categories in this review: direct electrical stimulation and indirect electrical stimulation. In this review, indirect electrical stimulation is defined as materials-mediated electrical stimulation with electricity or charge, including conductive material-mediated electrical signals, fabricated devices based on nanomaterials for applying electrical signals, and the surface charge of typical materials.
In addition, these kinds of stimulation mentioned above are generally invasive for cells and the human body, and electrical stimulation can also be realized in a material-mediated noninvasive manner, relying on the innate properties of typical materials such as photoelectricity and piezoelectricity, which are reviewed in detail in this section.
6.1 Direct electrical stimulation
Direct electrical stimulation can be applied in the form of a direct current (DC) electrical field, alternating current (AC) electrical field, and electric impulse stimulation, which stimulate cells in a contact manner. Electrical signals are often generated or realized by various tools and devices, such as incubation chambers between electrodes,202–205 electric stimulator,206 indium tin oxide (ITO) glass electrodes,207 gap cuvettes,208 microfabricated capacitance sensor arrays,209 vertical nanowire electrode array,210 and electromyography electrodes.211
A steady electrical field was applied to dedicate stem cell differentiation. Elena et al. found that a constant electrical field (1000 V m−1) could be utilized to initiate the differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) toward cardiac lineages.202 In this study, researchers used an assembled bioreactor that included incubation chambers and electrodes for steady stimulation of hESCs (Fig. 17a). It has been reported that rMSCs can differentiate into osteocytes induced by a lower amplitude of the electrical field (100 V m−1).205
 Fig. 17  Direct electrical stimulation for stem cell differentiation. (a) Image of the bioreactor, including the incubation chambers and electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the Teflon culture dish and the indium tin oxide (ITO)-deposited glass plates for culturing the neural stem cells that connect to a biphasic current stimulator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2011, Chang et al. (c) Experimental design: early-stage or late-stage hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPS-CMs) and supporting fibroblasts were encapsulated in a fibrin hydrogel to form tissues stretched between two elastic pillars, which were made to contract via electrical stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Moreover, the application of pulsed electric fields is generally more applicable for dynamic cell stimulation, mimicking the frequency of electrophysiological signals and thus regulating stem cell differentiation. Biphasic electrical currents generated by fabricated ITO electrodes (Fig. 17b) to modulate electrical stimulation on fetal mouse NSCs (mNSCs), significantly increasing the proliferation of mNSCs and promoting their differentiation toward neurons, which effectively altered cellular phenotypes and could serve as a new solution for various neurodegenerative diseases.207
Among many kinds of stem cells, iPSCs developed by Shinya Yamanaka and co-workers exhibit similar growth properties of ESCs, such as marker genes and multipotency,212 that is, these cells can differentiate into specific lineages and even tissues. Kacey et al. investigated the cardiac differentiation of human iPSCs (hiPSCs) and then the maturation of hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPS-CMs) under a gradual increase in electromechanical training with monophasic square waveform (4.5 mV intensity, 2 ms in duration) for 3 weeks to induce auxotonic contractions of 3D tissues (Fig. 17c).203 Such tissues displayed adult-like gene expression profiles and morphological and functional properties, which may support studies on cardiac development and disease therapy. Another pulsed electrical stimulation, nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs), are also involved in directing stem cell fate. For example, nsPEFs with optimized parameters have been shown to significantly promote chondrogenic differentiation of porcine bone marrow-derived stromal cells (pMSCs) in vitro and cartilage regeneration in a rat cartilage defect model in vivo, which relies on the activation of JNK, CREB, and STAT3 signaling pathways, providing another route to explore cartilage repair.208
Some of the direct electrical stimulation parameters that are directly applied to stem cells toward specific differentiation are summarized in Table 7, which shows that the magnitude of voltages ranges from a few millivolts to tens of volts, while the electric field intensity from 102 to 106 V m−1 for regulating stem cell differentiation into specific lineages. These optimized parameters are believed to provide instructive suggestions for the design of indirect electrical stimulation parameters.
Table 7 Research studies on the differentiation of stem cells with direct electrical stimulation




Cell resources
Differentiation
Electrical stimulation parameters
Ref. (year)




hESCs
Cardiomyocytes
1000 V m−1 amplitude of the applied electrical field

202 (2009)


hiPSCs
Cardiomyocytes
The electric field (100 or 150 V m−1) with a biphasic square pulse (5 ms) at 5 Hz frequency for 1–30 d

206 (2018)


hiPSCs
Cardiac tissues
4.5 mV intensity, 2 ms in duration, monophasic square waveform for (i) constant (three weeks at 2 Hz); and (ii) intensity training (two weeks at a frequency increasing from 2 Hz to 6 Hz by 0.33 Hz per day, followed by one week at 2 Hz)

203 (2018)


mNSCs
Neurons
100 Hz electrical stimulation with a magnitude of 8 and 32 mA cm−2 with 50 or 200 ms pulses

207 (2011)


pMSCs
Chondrocytes
5 × 105–2 × 106 and 3 × 106 V m−1 for durations of 10, 60, 100 or 300 ns, 5 pulses with 1 s intervals

208 (2019)




Direct electrical stimulation experiments undoubtedly unraveled that the electrical signal can determine the differentiation of stem cells, which could be used to repair some defected tissues. However, most published studies on direct electrical stimulation of stem cells rely on nonbiodegradable simple or complex electrodes, and need to be connected to complicated electrical signal generators, which are only suitable for in vitro investigations.
6.2 Indirect electrical stimulation

6.2.1 Conductive nanomaterial-meditated electrical signals. 
Cells can sense and respond to electrical stimulation through a conductive nanostructured culture substrate or scaffold connected to electrical stimulation devices during in vitro cultivation rather than direct contact with large electrical stimulation devices, because the localized signal is more powerful than the equipotential electrode.213 In this review, these conductive materials are classified into inorganic nanomaterials,214,215 conductive hybrid polymers,32,216–220 carbon-based nanomaterials,221–224etc., which have been subjected to DC and/or AC electrical stimulation as well as pulses and have been used to stimulate cells. The determination of proper electrical stimulation parameters is important and comparable to direct electrical stimulation for directing stem cell fate, as mentioned above.
6.2.1.1 Inorganic conductive nanomaterials. 
Inorganic nanomaterials usually undergo AC electrical stimulation to promote osteogenic differentiation. For example, Woo et al. prepared fibronectin-coated Au NPs (∼20 nm) by submersing polyethyleneimine (PEI) precoated cover glass in a Au NP dispersion agent for 1 d and delivered electrical stimulation to hESCs on an Au NP-based conductive substrate through a three-electrode system (Fig. 18a and b).214 This specially designed matrix enhanced osteogenic differentiation of hESCs through 30 min AC stimulation and may help tackle the problems associated with protein or peptide delivery systems for stem cell differentiation. The processing technology of Si wafers is developing rapidly in the field of nanomaterials, obtaining versatile micro/nano-topographical patterns. Huang et al. prepared patterned Si surfaces by etching techniques and utilized these Si scaffolds to promote the osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow-derived MSCs (rBMSCs) with pulsed AC electrical stimulation (150 V m−1, 1 Hz, 2 ms pulse width).215
 Fig. 18  Conductive biomaterials used for mediating electrical stimulation and regulating the differentiation of stem cells. (a) SEM image of fibronectin-coated Au NPs fabricated on polyethyleneimine (PEI)-precoated cover glass. (b) Schematic diagram of fibronectin-coated Au NPs surface for human embryonic stem cell (hESC) stimulation by AC electrical field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) SEM image of electrospinning poly(L-lactic acid)/polyaniline (PLLA/PANi) nanofibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (d) Digital photo of the CNT rope stimulation device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012, Wiley. (e) SEM images of mouse neural stem cells (mNSCs) on 3D-GFs with low and high magnification, live/dead staining image of mNSCs on 3D-GFs after 5 d (live cells, green; dead cells, red), and immunofluorescence images of mNSCs proliferated on 3D-GFs for 5 d (green nestin, neural stem cell marker; blue DAPI, nuclei). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2013, Li et al. 
6.2.1.2 Conductive polymers. 
Polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole (PPy) are typical conductive polymers that are widely used to regulate stem cell fate, such as osteogenesis217,219,220 and neurogenesis218 under indirect electrical stimulation. Poly-L-lactide (PLLA)/PANI nanofibrous scaffolds at a ratio of 85:15 were obtained by electrospinning with a diameter of 195 ± 30 nm (Fig. 18c), which resulted in neurite growth of NSCs with a steady electric field of 100 V m−1 for 60 min.216 Another study demonstrated that moderately conductive PANI substrates were coated with collagen type I (ColI) and/or sulfated hyaluronan (sHya) to mimic the ECM of bone tissue.217 With pulsed electrical field stimulation (7 ms rectangular pulses, 3.6 mV cm−1, 10 Hz), hMSCs on substrates showed stronger osteogenic differentiation tendency. Several researchers have reported that PPy films synthesized from pyrrole and ammonium persulfate favored the osteogenic differentiation of different MSCs under corresponding constant voltage parameters.219,220 Therefore, these two conductive polymers can be effective for direct commitment to both neural and osteogenic lineages.
6.2.1.3 Carbon-based nanomaterials. 
Carbon-based nanomaterials, which are thought to be degraded in vivo, are an important category of nanostructured inorganic non-metal materials. Recently, the researchers have proved that conductive carbon nanotubes (CNTs),221–223,226 carbon nanofibers,227 graphene,225,228,229 and graphene oxide230 can be used as a mediated matrix to realize electrical stimulation to regulate the fate of stem cells. CNT ropes were prepared by Huang et al. used a chemical vapor deposition method, following a specially designed spin and twisting process (Fig. 18d).223 By applying pulsed electrical stimulation at 5, 0.5, and 25 ms intervals on the CNT rope, the differentiation of mNSCs cultured on the CNT rope was promoted. Another important type of carbon nanostructure used as a mediator for regulating stem cell fate with electrical stimulation is graphene. Li et al. prepared porous three-dimensional graphene foams (3D-GFs) as scaffolds by depositing a graphene layer on the surface of a nickel foam framework, following a chemical etching process.225 They found that the 3D-GF scaffolds enhanced mNSC differentiation toward astrocytes and promoted the differentiation especially to neurons under external pulses electrical stimulation (1–100 ms monophasic cathodic pulses, 10 s intervals, 20–30 mA) compared with that in 2D graphene samples (Fig. 18e).
Although all-carbon nanomaterials possess high conductivity, and carbon nanotubes and graphene have been proven to be degraded slowly in vivo, all-carbon scaffolds are difficult to apply in clinical treatments because of the difficulty in controlling the degradation speed in vivo. Therefore, some researchers designed biodegradable conductive scaffolds by assembling a layer of conductive nanostructures on a biopolymer porous scaffold to overcome the above problems. Liu et al. synthesized a porcine acellular dermal matrix–graphene (PADM–Graphene) hybrid conductive scaffold by chemically assembling reduced graphene oxide (rGO) on the channel surface of a PADM scaffold. The scaffold has the capability to enhance neuronal differentiation of rMSCs and is suitable for electrical stimulation as a biodegradable conductive scaffold.231
The stimulation mode for electrical signals is important for the enhancement effect as a methodology for the regulation of stem cell fate. Normally, the cells are seeded and cultured on the surface of the conductive scaffold, and electric potential is applied to the scaffold. DC or AC and pulse electric field with a specially designed frequency and voltage waveform can be applied on the two tops of the scaffold or using two-electrode and three-electrode modes as well as microelectrode arrays. The different electricity application modes have different effects on stem cell differentiation, which is still unclear. Some of the electrical stimulation parameters applied to conductive biomaterials for oriented differentiation of stem cells are summarized in Table 8. These electrical simulation-responsive biomaterials could facilitate the guidance of stem cell differentiation in vitro and have great potential in implantation for tissue regeneration with the assistance of electrical stimulators, and more biocompatible nanomaterials should be developed to effectively promote stem cell differentiation with external electrical stimulation.
Table 8 Research studies on stem cell differentiation under conductive biomaterials-mediated electrical signals





In vitro results

In vivo results
Materials
Electrical stimulation parameters
Ref. (year)




hESCs → osteocytes
—
Fibronectin-coated Au nanoparticles (20 nm) on the surface of culture dishes
AC stimulation from three-electrode structure for 30 min

214 (2009)


rBMSCs → osteocytes
—
Patterned Si substrates with micropyramids and nanoporosity
150 V m−1, at a frequency of 1 Hz and a pulse width of 2 ms AC

215 (2019)


NSCs → neurons
—
PLLA/PANi nanofibers with a diameter of 195 ± 30 nm
Steady potential of 1.5 V for 1 h

216 (2011)


hMSCs → osteocytes
—
PANI/ColI/sHya (a mesoporous surface topography with pore sizes ranging from 200–300 nm)
7 ms rectangular pulses, 3.6 mV cm−1, 10 Hz

217 (2015)


hNSCs → neurons
—
PPy(DBS) films, characteristic ‘cauliflower’ morphology
±0.25 mA cm−2, a biphasic waveform of 100 μs pulses with 20 μs interphase open circuit potential and 3.78 ms short circuit (250 Hz)

218 (2015)


rBMSCs → osteocytes
—
Flat PPy films
Constant 2 V on day 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12 for 4 h

219 (2018)


hDPSCs → osteocytes
—
PPy films
Electrical field of 33 V m−1 for 4 h on different days

220 (2019)


NSCs → neurons
—
Laminin-SWCNTs films (The conductivity of a 10-bilayer film was ∼430 S m−1)
1–10 μA cm−2, a series (∼10–15) of 1 ms pulses spaced in 1–10 s intervals

221 (2009)


hMSCs → cardio progenitor cells
—
CNTs/PLA nanofiber scaffold
An electrical current of 15 V m−1 for 2 ms duration at a frequency of 1 Hz for 14 days

222 (2012)


rNSCs → neurons
—
CNT ropes (the bundles of CNTs with a diameter of approximately 20 nm; SWCNTs with a diameter of 1–2 nm)
5 mV, 0.5 mA, 25 ms intermittent stimulation

223 (2012)


rBMSCs → osteocytes
—
PLLA/MWCNTs mixture with average diameter of 300–600 nm
Direct current, 1.5 V, 1.5 h day−1

226 (2017)


mNSCs → neurons
—
Electrospun carbon nanofibers (the average diameter of 384 ± 99 nm with a range of 200–600 nm after annealing)
Electrical current of 100 μA and pulse rates of 100 Hz with 100 μs duration for 24 h

227 (2017)


hMSCs → osteocytes and neuronal cells
—
Monolayer graphene with flat, grid and column patterns
0.5 V, 0.3 V, and 0.1 V voltages, 1 Hz, 3 Hz, and 5 Hz frequencies with 1 ms pulses

228 (2016)


rBMSCs → Schwann-cell-like phenotypes
—
Inkjet-printed graphene circuits (sheet resistance < 1 kΩ sq−1)
100 mV at 50 Hz for 10 min during 15 days

229 (2017)


mNSCs → astrocytes and neurons
—
3D graphene foams (a porosity of 99.5 ± 0.2%, a pore size of 100–300 mm, and a width of 100–200 mm)
1–100 ms monophasic cathodic pulses, 10 s intervals, 20–30 mA stimulation threshold

225 (2013)


hNSCs → neurons
—
3D graphene oxide foam (a thicknesses of ∼15–50 μm and density of ∼10 graphene oxide sheets per μm)
100 ms monophasic cathodic pulses, intervals of 10 s, 20 mA stimulation threshold

230 (2015)






6.2.2 Electrical signals applied with microfabricated devices. 
Apart from conductive materials with external potential applied, electrical stimulation can also be applied through nanostructured functional materials with novel physical properties, or through some specially designed electronic devices based on nanomaterials, such as triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs),232–234 microelectrode arrays (MEAs),235,236 and microfluidic devices.237,238 These devices can apply electrical stimulation locally to specific parts of the stem cells.
Previously, we fabricated a TENG to provide to pulsed electrical signals and a highly conductive poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–rGO (rGO–PEDOT) hybrid microfiber as a scaffold (Fig. 19a and b).232 Driven by human walking steps, TENG can supply electrical simulation to induce neural-like differentiation of rMSCs on 15% rGO–PEDOT without any bio/chemical factors. A recent study has also designed a self-powered implantable electrical stimulator, which was composed of a TENG and a flexible interdigitated electrode employing PET as the substrate and packaged by PDMS, which significantly promoted the attachment, proliferation, and differentiation of MC3T3-E1, as well as the level of intracellular Ca2+ level after AC and pulsed DC electrical stimulation.233
 Fig. 19  Several electrical stimulation methods to regulate stem cell differentiation. (a) Schematic illustration of the springs installed on the triboelectric nanogenerator. (b) SEM image of 15% poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-reduced graphene oxide (rGO–PEDOT) microfibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of the microelectrode array chip, microscopy image of the quadrupole-electrode array, and schematic illustration of a single quadrupole-electrode unit with four circular electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Crystal structure of lithium niobate and the spontaneous polarization-induced status of the surface charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
Microelectrode array (MEA) devices have been used to stimulate stem cell differentiation. Zheng et al. cultured rMSCs on the surface of an MEA chip and applied AC electrical stimulation and found that electrical stimulation can promote the osteogenic differentiation (Fig. 19c).236 Another example is that the hNSCs encapsulated in conductive polysaccharide-based biogel and cultured on the microprinted MEA constructed with conductive polymer array can realize enhanced neural differentiation under biphasic waveform electrical stimulation.235
As a versatile tool for biology research, microfluidic chips have attracted broad interest from researchers in many fields, especially tissue engineering. Well-designed microfluid chips can be manufactured using a microfabrication process that is normally used to fabricate microelectronic mechanical systems (MEMS), which can not only realize in situ electrical stimulation and signal measurement of electrophysiology, but can also realize single-cell research and in situ measurement of secretory proteins when the stem cells are under differentiation. Ni et al. proposed a device that can quickly apply various electrical stimulation to suspend cells in a microfluidic chip.237 Pulsed electrical stimulation was applied to clusters consisting of human cardiac myocytes (hCMs), human fibroblast cells (hDFs), and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (hUVECs), and their electrical responses were recorded, which provided parameter protocols for directing cardiac cell differentiation. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, there is no strategy to induce or enhance the differentiation of stem cells by microfluidic chip-mediated electrical stimulation, providing new pathways for further investigations in stem cell therapy.
In fact, these nanostructured electrodes or devices can act as powerful tools for the timely investigation of electrical signals locally and even quantically. A deeper understanding of the effect of electrical signals on stem cell differentiation can be achieved through these devices, but these devices are difficult to use in clinical applications.


6.2.3 Electrical signals derived from the surface charges of functional materials. 
6.2.3.1 Ferroelectric materials. 
As mentioned above, the release of the surface charge can be accomplished by applying an external potential to the electrode. In fact, surface charges exist on the surface of some synthesized materials because of the intrinsic properties of the materials or specially designed surface chemical properties. The surface charge of these materials can also supply electrical stimulation to stem cells, thereby regulating their lineage fate as a noninvasive stimulation tool. Ferroelectric crystals are one such type of material. As illustrated in Fig. 19d, ferroelectric materials such as LiNbO3 (LN) single crystals possess a spontaneous polarized potential inside the crystal along the c-axis.239 To balance the internal potential along the Z-axis of the LN crystal, opposite charges are absorbed on the two opposite surfaces and form layers of charge on the surface. The surface of the positive pole Z+ side of the LN wafer absorbs negative charges in air, while the negatively charged Z− surface absorbs positive charges (Fig. 19d). We investigated the differentiation of rMSCs cultured on the Z+, Z−, and neutral Y0 surfaces of LN surfaces, and found that positive charge can enhance the osteogenic differentiation of rMSCs compared with negative charge and neutral charge. In addition, we found that endocytosis of ferroelectric LiNbO3 nanoparticles of rMSCs induced enhanced differentiation of rMSCs to osteoblasts, which is also attributed to the surface charge of LiNbO3 nanoparticles.195 In addition to inorganic ferroelectric crystals, the surface charges on poled ferroelectric polymer films, such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), have been shown to promote osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs.240
6.2.3.2 Hydrogels with charges. 
Surface charges are not only derived from the external or internal electrical potential but can also be found on the surface of materials modified with specific molecules with charges. With this point, as a very important kind of biomaterial, hydrogels can be considered as potential biomaterials for the regulation of stem cell fate with their surface charge, because their surface can be modified easily. In recent years, researchers have attempted to fabricate hydrogels with different physical, chemical, and biological cues for regulating stem/progenitor cell differentiation, of which the surface charge of hydrogels plays a key role. In Mahrokh et al.'s study, a biocompatible and biodegradable macromer oligo-(polyethylene glycol) fumarate (OPF) was chemically modified by the incorporation of a cationic monomer [2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl]-trimethylammonium chloride to fabricate a positively charged hydrogel.241 Rat neuronal cells from dorsal root ganglions (DRGs) anchored to the hydrogels and neurite extension were analyzed, and the neurite lengths of cells on charged hydrogels were significantly longer than those on unmodified hydrogels. Another study developed an OPF-based positively charged hydrogel and electrical conductivity by covalently embedding graphene oxide acrylate and carbon nanotube poly(ethylene glycol)acrylate.242 It showed great biocompatibility and enhanced proliferation and spreading of rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells, exhibiting great potential for application in neural tissue engineering. In addition to neural development, synthetic hydrogels can serve as a scaffold with the potential to induce chondrogenic differentiation and relevant tissue because of their soft and flexible properties that mimic natural cartilage tissue. Negatively charged poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS) gel, neutral charged poly(dimethylacrylamide) (PDMAAm) gel, and their complexes with different ratios (P(AMPS-co-DMAAm)) were used to induce differentiation of ATDC5 cells.243 The results suggested that PAMPS gel or highly negatively charged P(AMPS-co-DMAAm) gel can induce chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 in insulin-free maintenance medium, and neutrally charged PDMAAm gel favored cell aggregation and chondrogenesis under insulin supplementation.
Although the charges on the surface of biomaterials have a regulatory effect on stem cell fate, it is believed that the stiffness of the surface-charged materials also plays an important role in the direction of stem cell differentiation. Normally, hard substrates such as LN single crystal surface charges are favorable for hard tissue repair (i.e., osteogenesis), while soft substrates such as hydrogels-mediated surface charge support soft tissue regeneration (i.e., neurogenesis and chondrogenesis).
The effect of static charges on the surface of surface-charged materials is limited. Therefore, some ferroelectric materials were used to generate periodic stimulation by applying an excitation electric field to generate mechanical deformation, thus affecting cellular behavior as a substrate (reviewed in the Section 2.3.3).125
As mentioned above, static charge on the surface of materials with special properties or artificially constructed microelectrode arrays can regulate stem cell fate; however, practical clinical application would be complicated. The most well-known materials with intrinsic charges are inorganic ferroelectric materials. Although they can be used as perfect models to demonstrate the surface charge regulating stem cell fate, their high stability prohibits their clinical applications due to the difficulty of biodegradation when they are implanted in vivo.

6.3 External field responsive materials mediate electrical signals

6.3.1 Ultrasound-driven piezoelectric nanomaterial-meditated electrical signals. 
As mentioned above, although active electrical stimulation can produce a periodic electrical signal, connecting wires between the cell culture conductive materials and electrical signal generator is a great obstacle for its practical medical applications. Conversely, ferroelectricity-derived surface static charges can provide a passive electric field, but the surface charges can be easily saturated during the cell culture process. Fortunately, the electromechanical coupling property of piezoelectric materials can overcome these problems. Piezoelectric materials can generate alternative electric fields or alternatively absorb and release charges on the surface of the material under mechanical deformation,244 which have been widely used in piezo generators, sensors, piezo actuators, and transducers.245
6.3.1.1 Piezoelectric nanoparticles. 
Piezoelectric micro/nanosized particles or films can be driven by sound, ultrasound, or other vibrations, which have been used as pressure sensors, loudspeakers, and nanogenerators.246,247 As a very powerful energy transporting tool, ultrasound can be used to drive piezoelectric micro/nanostructures, which have been used in some biofields.248 As a mediator, piezoelectric nanostructures can convert vibration energy to electrical signals, which provide a perfect opportunity to stimulate stem cells cultured on the surface of the nanostructures and regulate stem cell fate.
Piezoelectric nanoparticles, along with ultrasonic irradiation, fulfill the demand for in vivo electrical stimulation for tissue engineering, and are one of the most important strategies for regulating stem cell fate in biomedical applications. Therefore, some attempts related to the regulation of cell fate by ultrasound-driven nanostructured mediated electrical signals have been proposed.
Hexagonal boron nitride (BN) possesses a graphene-like structure, where B and N atoms alternately substitute the sites of C atoms in graphene. A single-layer BN crystal possesses piezoelectric properties, because the centers of positive and negative charge misalign and cause polarization of the BN single-layer crystal when the BN plane suffers stress and causes deformation.249 However, the double-layered BN could not exhibit piezoelectric properties because the up site of the B atom on one layer is an N atom, which causes the neutralization of the polarization of the two layers. This property is similar to the piezoelectric properties of MoS2 crystals.250 Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) exhibit similar atom arrangements as CNTs, and BNNTs, especially single-layered BNNTs, possess high piezoelectric properties (Fig. 20a).251 Ciofani et al. cultured PC12 cells with BNNTs – 200–600 nm in length and 50 nm in diameter to investigate cell viability and neural differentiation under ultrasound stimulation (40 kHz, 20 W, 5 s, 4 times day−1 for 9 days) (Fig. 20b).252 They found that BNNTs were endocytosed in the cell and could enhance differentiation into neuron-like cells. In this process, the nerve growth factor (NGF) specific receptor TrkA was found to play a major role in BNNT-mediated ultrasound-driven electrical stimulation differentiation. Another study investigated the osteogenic differentiation of primary human osteoblasts with endogenous stimulation mediated by poly-L-lysine (PLL)-coated BNNTs and ultrasound stimulation.253 The highest OPN and OCN protein expression, Ca2+ production, and TGF-β1 synthesis were observed in the 10 μg mL−1 PLL-BNNTs + ultrasound treatment (40 kHz, 5 s, 3 times day−1 for 7 days), indicating that the osteoblast maturation process was driven by BNNTs-mediated electrical stimulation.
 Fig. 20  Piezoelectric nanoparticle-mediated electrical stimulation for stem cell differentiation. (a) The structural illustration of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2018, Kim et al. (b) “Wireless” electrical stimulation of cells: internalizing piezoelectric nanoparticles (e.g., BNNTs) provide inner electrical stimulation as a response to external ultrasound stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Calcium and (d) sodium transients induced by BNTPs + ultrasound. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM images of nylon-11 NPs. (f) Relative amplitude of the piezoelectric response detected by piezoelectric force microscopy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Tetragonal barium titanate ceramics have good ferroelectric properties and superior piezoelectricity, and are bioinert, making them nontoxic to cells and tissues. Therefore, barium titanate nanoparticles (BTNPs) have been used as models to investigate the piezoelectric effect on the regulation of cell fate and other bioeffects. For example, BTNPs have been exploited as nanotransducers to provide indirect electrical stimulation to human neuroblastoma-derived SH-SY5Y cells.254 The BTNPs with diameter of 479.0 ± 145.3 nm was dispersed in culture media at a concentration of 50 μg mL−1, and the SH-SY5Y cells were cultured with the under ultrasound stimulation (1 MHz, 5 mm distance from the cells, 5 s, 0.1–0.8 W cm−2). A comparative investigation of piezoelectric and non-piezoelectric BTNPs on the differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells was performed, and it was found that piezoelectric BTNPs can enhance the differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells, and confirmed that the voltage-sensitive channels related to Ca2+ and Na+ transients induced by ultrasound-driven piezoelectric nanoparticle-mediated electrical signals, as shown in Fig. 20c and d, respectively. Marino et al. fabricated a two-photon polymerization of a nanocomposite, Ormocomp/BTNPs composites.256 Ormocomp is a commercial photosensitive resist, and enhanced osteogenic differentiation of human osteosarcoma-derived SaOS-2 cells under ultrasound stimulation (0.8 W cm−2, 5 s every 4 h, 3 times day−1). These nanostructured materials that mediate electrical stimulation can remotely initiate cell differentiation and tissue regeneration.
In addition to inorganic piezoelectric nanostructures, organic piezoelectric materials have also been used to tune the fate of cells. The odd number (e.g., 7, 9, and 11) nylons have intrinsic piezoelectricity, especially nylon-11.257 In our recent study, piezoelectric nylon-11 nanoparticles (nylon-11 NPs) were synthesized by a simple anti-solvent method, exhibiting a uniform morphology (Fig. 20e).255 The amplitude image detected by piezoelectric force microscopy was shown in Fig. 20f, confirming the piezoelectric feature of nylon-11 NPs. It was found that hDPSCs incubated with optimized 200 μg mL−1 biocompatible nylon-11 NPs exhibited the highest osteogenesis efficiency under ultrasound stimulation. We also found that nylon-11 NP-mediated electrical stimulation accelerated osteogenesis of hDPSCs by stimulating Ca2+ influx with ultrasound assistance.
6.3.1.2 Piezoelectric film or bulk materials. 
Apart from nanoparticles, piezoelectric films or bulk materials can serve as substrates or scaffolds to mediate electrical signals and regulate cell differentiation, they are very important for the clinical design of electrically stimulated tissue repair. PVDF has several crystal forms, of which non-piezoelectric α-phase PVDF has an alternating trans-gauche (TGTG) conformation (Fig. 21a), and piezoelectric β-phase PVDF has an all-trans conformation (TTTT) and exhibits a net dipole moment (Fig. 21b).258,259 The piezoelectric properties of β-PVDF strongly vary with the processing conditions, and their d33 coefficient is −25 pC N−1 by theoretical calculations.260 Hoop et al. cultured PC12 cells on β-PVDF film substrates and applied ultrasound (132 kHz, 80 W, 10 min, 5 times day−1) to stimulate cells with piezoelectric material-mediated electrical signals on surfaces when undergoing vibration (Fig. 21c).261 The effect of piezoelectric signals on neural differentiation of PC12 cells is comparable to that induced by the typical neural differentiation growth factor, NGF. They found that dynamic stimulation mediated by piezoelectric film activated calcium channels, which was similar to the effect of piezoelectric nanoparticles, and induced neurite generation via a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent pathway.
 Fig. 21  Piezoelectric films/composite-mediated electrical stimulation for cell differentiation. Structure diagrams of (a) alpha-polyvinylidene fluoride (α-PVDF) and (b) beta-polyvinylidene fluoride (β-PVDF), the arrow indicates the direction of the dipole. (c) “Wireless” electrical stimulation on cells: piezoelectric substrates (e.g., PVDF) provide external electrical stimulation under ultrasound stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2017, Hoop et al. (d) Structure diagram of polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene (P(VDF-TrFE)), the arrow indicates the direction of the dipole. (e) Amplitude of pressure variation induced by ultrasounds and (f) the corresponding voltage for P(VDF-TrFE) films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) PFM map of P(VDF-TrFE)/BNTPs films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
Polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene (P(VDF-TrFE)), a copolymer of PVDF, has a piezoelectric coefficient comparable to that of PVDF by theoretical calculations;260 and the TTTT conformation of P(VDF-TrFE) is shown in Fig. 21d. Researchers have combined P(VDF-TrFE) with piezoelectric nanoparticles, such as BTNPs263 and BNNTs,262 to increase the d31 coefficient compared with that of planar piezoelectric films. Under pulsed ultrasound stimulation (1 W cm−2, 100 Hz burst rate), the amplitude of the pressure variation by P(VDF-TrFE) was 2–6 kPa (Fig. 21e), while the corresponding induced voltage was approximately 23–61 mV (Fig. 21f) by numerical analysis, which is favorable for cell stimulation.262Fig. 21g shows the PFM image of P(VDF-TrFE)/BNTP films. Studies have demonstrated that polymer/ceramic composite-meditated electrical signals can promote either the neural differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells263 or the osteogenic differentiation of SaOS-2 cells262 with ultrasound assistance through a direct piezoelectric effect.
6.3.1.3 Magnetic/piezoelectric multiple stimulation. 
Multiple stimulations hold great promise for the regulation of cell fate. The above examples of ultrasound-driven piezoelectric material-mediated electrical signals for the regulation of stem cell/cell line differentiation are based on nonbiodegradable piezoelectric materials, which is limited for clinical applications. In recent years, some materials constructed using bio-derived natural molecules have been proven to possess piezoelectric properties, which have great potential for clinical applications owing to their biodegradable performance in vivo. PLLA is a typical bio-derived piezoelectric material. Unlike the polarization direction of PVDF, PLLA has a d14 piezoelectric coefficient of −9.82 pC N−1264 and its biodegradable properties provide great potential application in tissue engineering. Binan et al. proved that electrospun poly L-lactic acid/gelatin scaffolds can enhance the differentiation of neuronal stem cells into motor neurons.265 In some occasions, researchers endow piezoelectric materials with other functions to form multiple multifunctional nanostructures. Under well-designed stimulation, PC12 cells can move to a targeted area and differentiate induced by magnetic piezoelectric helical microswimmers, which are composed of PLLA/CoFe2O4 or P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 hybrid helical nanostructures, called piezoelectric microswimmers, were used to realize the magnate-induced target cell differentiation of PC12 (Fig. 22a).266 After 7 days, the PC12 cells were already differentiated by the co-stimulation of microswimmers-mediated electric signals under ultrasound irradiation, while those stimulated only with microswimmers or ultrasound remained undifferentiated (Fig. 22b). Effective bone generation was achieved using a built-in P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 membrane by remote tuning of the ME microenvironment.267
 Fig. 22  Magnetic/piezoelectric composites-driven cell differentiation. (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasound-driven piezoelectric microswimmers inducing neuronal differentiation of rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. (b) Comparison of PC 12 cells cultured in different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of S. platensis@Fe3O4@BTNPs micromotors. (d) Cell viability of PC 12 cells after micromotors treatment. (e) Schematic diagram of micromotors to inducing the targeted PC 12 cell differentiation. (f) Fluorescence images of differentiated PC12 cells co-stimulated by micromotors and ultrasound signals. (g) Comparison of average neurite length of PC 12 cells cultured under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Similarly, Liu et al. designed a magnetic/piezoelectric micromotors to precisely regulate the neural electrical stimulation.268Spirulina platensis is a microscopic filamentous alga, and the micromotors were fabricated by coating S. platensis with magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and piezoelectric BTNPs. SEM images showed that the nanoparticles on the helical structures were successfully obtained after this coating (Fig. 22c). The micromotors had good cytocompatibility up to a concentration of 20 μg mL−1 after incubation for 36 h (Fig. 22d). As shown in Fig. 22c, the micromotor reached the targeted PC12 cell under rotating magnetic field stimulation, and then generated in situ electrical signals mediated by BTNPs with ultrasound (1 MHz, 1 W cm−2) assistance and regulated cell differentiation (Fig. 22e). The average neurite length of PC12 cells incubated with S.platensis@Fe3O4@BTNPs and ultrasound was 50.8 ± 7.4 μm, calculated from 20 cells (Fig. 22f and g). In the presence of NGF, the average neurite length reached 65.4 ± 6.2 μm (Fig. 22g), indicating the favorable synergistic effect of piezoelectric nanomaterial-mediated signals and growth factors on neural differentiation.
Furthermore, the external electric potential can induce the size variation of the piezoelectric film, which can regulate stem cell differentiation. Related works have been reviewed in detail in the Section 2.3.3.

Table 9 summarizes some studies on piezoelectric material-mediated electrical signals for regulating cell differentiation under ultrasound stimulation. The ultrasound frequency and other parameters in this part are much lower than individual acoustic stimulation because ultrasound-driven piezoelectric nanomaterial-mediated electrical signals play a major role in driving cell differentiation, and researchers have alleviated the effect of acoustic waves.
Table 9 Research studies on stem cell differentiation driven by piezoelectric materials with ultrasound assistance





In vitro results

In vivo results
Piezoelectric materials
Ultrasound stimulation parameters
Ref. (year)




PC12 → neural-like cells
—
BNNTs with 200–600 nm in length and about 50 nm in diameter
40 kHz, 20 W, 5 s, 4 times day−1 for 9 days

252 (2010)


hOBs → osteoblasts
—
BNNTs are hollow with diameters of 40–70 nm, lengths <500 nm, thickness of ∼10 nm
40 kHz, 5 s, 3 times day−1 for 7 days

253 (2013)


SH-SY5Y → neurons
—
BTNPs with hydrodynamic size of 479.0 ± 145.3 nm
1 MHz, 5 mm distance from the cells, 5 s, 0.1–0.8 W cm−2

254 (2015)


SaOS-2 → osteocytes
—
Ormocomp/BTNPs scaffolds prepared through two-photon polymerization
0.8 W cm−2, 5 s every 4 h, 3 times day−1

256 (2015)


hDPSCs → osteocytes
—
Nylon-11 NPs with ∼50 nm in diameter
—

255 (2019)


PC12 → neurons
Zebrafish Parkinson's disease model → recovery of degenerative dopaminergic neurons
Carbon shell @ BaTiO3 core–structured NPs; the BaTiO3 are ∼66 ± 10 nm in diameter and the carbon shells are 3–5 nm in thickness
HB810B sonicator, 640 mW cm−2, 1 MHz

269 (2020)


PC12 → neural-like cells
—
β-PVDF films
132 kHz, 80 W, 10 min, 5 times day−1

261 (2017)


SH-SY5Y → neurons
—
P(VDF-TrFE)/BTNPs films; BTNPs distribute homogeneously and cavities form surrounding them
SonoPore KTAC-4000 sonoporator, 1 W cm−2, 100 Hz burst rate

263 (2016)


SaOS-2 → osteocytes
—
P(VDF-TrFE)/BNNTs films with a highly patterned fracture surface; BNNTs as bundles of multi-walled tubes with 10 nm average in diameter and micrometer scale in length
Sonopore KTAC-4000 sonoporator, 1 W cm−2, 100 Hz burst rate, 100% duty cycle

262 (2017)


PC12 → neural-like cells
—
Helical swimmer PLLA/CoFe2O4 with a pitch angle of 25°, inner diameter of 250 mm and etching ratio of 70%; P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 composite with a pitch angle of 35°, inner diameter of 250 mm, and etching ratio of 30%
—

266 (2019)


PC12 → neurons
—

S. platensis@Fe3O4@BTNPs micromotors, S. platensis are in a spiral shape with a total length of ∼22 μm, a spiral width of 5 μm, and a diameter of 0.6 μm
1 MHz, 1 W cm−2

268 (2020)




Unfortunately, as shown in Table 9, few studies have used stem cells as model cells to prove that ultrasound-driven piezoelectric materials mediate electrical signal regulation of stem cell fate, and the cells of most studies were cell lines, which cannot completely illustrate that the effect of piezoelectric materials under ultrasound irradiation can affect stem cell differentiation. Therefore, more convincing evidence should be obtained by conducting experiments on stem cells.


6.3.2 Light-driven photoelectric nanomaterials-mediated electrical signals. 
Photoelectric materials are a very large family of functional materials that can convert light energy into electric energy and further convert it to chemical energy. Photoelectric materials have been widely applied in photovoltaic cells (solar cells),270 photocatalysis for organic pollution,271 hydrogen generation,272 and photocatalytic synthesis.273 Therefore, photoelectric conversion, especially near-infrared light-driven photoelectric-material-mediated electrical signals, should be one of the most suitable practical approaches for generating wireless electrical stimulation to regulate cell fate in vivo. However, there is very little research on this topic.
6.3.2.1 Photovoltaic microcell array. 
Vargas-Estevez et al. prepared a photovoltaic microcell array to generate electrical signals on a mico-solar cell (Fig. 23a and b), and realized the wireless stimulation of osteoblast-like SaOS-2 cells under irradiation by a white LED lamp, sun simulator, and lasers (Fig. 23c and d).274 In this work, the authors proved that the micro-solar cell array can generate electric signals under irradiation with light with good cytocompatibility (Fig. 23e and f), and 46% of cells grown on the micro-solar cell array displayed intracellular calcium peaks under light irradiation. In contrast, only 6% and 5% cells grown on bare silicon substrates and glass coverslips showed calcium peaks under the same light parameters, respectively (Fig. 23g and h).
 Fig. 23  SEM images of (a) the fabricated photovoltaic microcell array (PVMA) and (b) the test structure made to reach the electrical contacts for optoelectronic characterization (the inset shows how the connection was made). (c) SEM capture of SaOS-2 cells growing on PVMA and (d) bare silicon. (e) Confocal laser scanning microscope images of cells after 24 h of culture on PVMA and (f) bare silicon. Stress fibers (red), focal contacts (green), and nuclei (blue) can be observed. SaOS-2 cells respond to PVMA activation. (g) Intracellular calcium transient pattern of a stimulated (activated) and an unstimulated (control) SaOS-2 cell. (h) Percentage of activated SaOS-2 cells on PVMA and glass coverslip/bare silicon controls for the same light stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
6.3.2.2 Photo-electric conversion. 
Sun et al. fabricated a more complicated nanostructured film to realize infrared light photoelectric conversion by using upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) to convert near-infrared (NIR) light into visible light, and the visible light is absorbed by the PPy film and converted to electrical signals.275 In their work, NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs were coated on an ITO electrode, which previously assembled a PPy layer. Under irradiation with 980 nm NIR light, the nanostructured film generates electric signals, ions, and ROS, which stimulate the PC12 cells cultured on the nanostructured film, thus regulating neural differentiation. The as-prepared PPy/UCNPs photoelectrode exhibited a photocurrent response depending on NIR light (980 nm) irradiation, and the intracellular ROS were monitored, indicating that photoelectrodes could provide both electrical stimulation and ROS on cells during neural differentiation of PC12 cells.
Based on the mechanism of photoelectric conversion, semiconductors can be used as a wireless tunable electric signal source for the regulation of stem cell fate. A TiO2 based hybrid photoelectric conversion film was prepared by deposition of amorphous SiO2 on a SiO2 glass substrate, following a TiO2 photo-active layer, and then covering a layer of rGO nanobelt grid-like structure by brushing the GO nanobelt suspension followed by a reduction process.276 The authors cultured hNSCs on the surface of the hybrid film and investigated the effect of light irradiation on the differentiation of hNSCs. In this hybrid structure, rGO can act as an electrode, which transfers the photo-induced electrons to the surface-attached stem cells and realizes electrical stimulation of the stem cells. They found that light-driven TiO2 thin-film mediated electrical signals can accelerate neural differentiation of hNSCs. In another study, they deposited a layer of graphene oxide nanosheets on a TiO2 thin film layer, and prepared rGO/TiO2 heterostructured films by reducing GO to rGO, which possessed higher photocatalytic activity than the bar TiO2 thin film.277Fig. 24a and b show the surface morphology of GO/TiO2 film and GO sheets on the as-prepared GO/TiO2 film, respectively. After annealing, the rGO/TiO2 heterojunction films were stimulated by flash photo to mediate electron injection into hNSCs, thereby promoting their neural differentiation, as shown in Fig. 24c and d. Similarly, the enhanced photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 can be realized by combining it with GO-coated electrospun microfibers, thereby regulating PC12 cell differentiation remotely and spatiotemporally via opto-electronic conversion under light stimulation (450 nm at 10 mW cm−2).278
 Fig. 24  Photocatalytic nanomaterials that mediated electrical signals for stem cell differentiation. AFM image of (a) GO/TiO2 film and (b) the GO sheets on the GO/TiO2 film. Immunofluorescence images of hNSCs differentiated on rGO/TiO2 for three weeks (c) without or (d) with flash photo stimulation. DAPI (blue) for nuclei, GFAP (red) for glial cells, and TuJ1 (green color) for neural cells (scale bar = 200 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of assembled C3N4 sheets. (f) Two-photon fluorescence spectra of the C3N4 sheets dispersed in water at different excitation wavelengths. (g) Photocurrent transients measured under intensity modulated blue and red light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
C3N4 possesses two-photon absorption properties and can overcome the limitations of UV irradiation in medical treatment. Tiwari et al. synthesized a C3N4 sheet for mediating electron stimulation to regulate osteogenesis of hBMSCs under red light excitation.279 SEM images showed that the C3N4 particles were ∼6 μm in size with random overlapping of individual sheets (Fig. 24e), and two-photon fluorescence spectra confirmed the photoluminescence emission of the C3N4 sheet (Fig. 24f). The nonlinear optical effects of C3N4 sheets resulted in the release of electrons and generation of photocurrent under both blue and red light excitation (Fig. 24g), providing the potential for mediating electrical stimulation on attaching cells. Researchers found that these red-light-absorbing C3N4 sheets can efficiently promote the osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs, demonstrating their therapeutic application in bone regeneration and fracture healing.

Table 10 summarizes some investigations on cell differentiation by photoactivated nanomaterial-mediated-electrical signals, including nanomaterials with photocatalytic or two-photon absorptive properties. These investigations have proposed that noninvasive electrical stimulation regulates cell differentiation by light irradiation, which is a great inspiration for us to utilize photocatalytic materials that have already been reported and developed.
Table 10 Research studies on stem cell differentiation driven by photoactivated nanomaterials with light assistance





In vitro results

In vivo results
Photoactivated nanomaterials
Light irradiation parameters
Ref. (year)




PC 12 → neurons
—
PPy/NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs photoelectrode
980 nm NIR light

275 (2012)


hNSCs → neurons
—
rGO grid/TiO2 NPs/SiO2; TiO2 NPs havea uniform surface distribution on the SiO2 matrix
Flash photo pulse generated from the xenon lamp, 10 mW cm−2, 4 s pulse duration and 1 Hz (4 flashes per s), repeated after 60 s time intervals for total 30 min, every 12 h

276 (2013)


hNSCs → neurons
—
rGO/TiO2 heterojunction films; electron injection can be from the photoexcited TiO2 into the cells on the rGO through Ti–C and Ti–O–C bonds
Flash photo pulse generated from the xenon lamp, 10 mW cm−2, 4 s pulse duration and 1 Hz (4 flashes per s), repeated after 60 s time intervals for total 30 min, every 12 h

277 (2013)


PC12 → neurons
—
GO/g-C3N4 coated electrospun microfibers; g-C3N4 NPs are ∼6.34 nm in thickness and ∼63 nm in diameter, electrospun microfibers are ∼1.36 μm in diameter
450 nm visible light, 30 cm distance between the lamp and the sample, 10 mW cm−2, 1 s with a time interval of 1 s for a total 30 min, every 12 h

278 (2017)


hBMSCs → osteoblasts
Mouse cranial defect model → bone repair
Random stack C3N4 sheets with an average size of ∼6 μm, quantum-sized carbon dots
455 nm (blue), 520 nm (green), and 635 nm (red) light, 10 mA in 10 cm height

279 (2017)


MSCs → osteoblasts
Rats tibia bone defect mode → bone repair
Bismuth sulfide/hydroxyapatite film
808 nm laser, 0.29 W cm−2

280 (2019)




As discussed above, light-driven electrical signals mediated by photoelectric conversion nanostructures can be used to realize wireless electrical signals for the regulation of stem cell fate. However, these materials should be well designed. To adapt to clinical requirements, photoelectric conversion materials must be biocompatible and biodegradable. In this case, the selection of materials should be limited. Fortunately, some bio-derived molecules, such as porphyrin,281 emodin,282 phthalocyanine,283 Prussian blue,284 and 5-aminolevulinic,285 have been found to possess photoelectric conversion properties, which have ever been used in PDT or photocatalysis. To realize stem cell differentiation-based tissue engineering applications, the above photoelectric conversion materials will be paid much attention. Another important factor in the application of these materials is that infrared light should be used as an exciting light because the optical window for therapy is in the infrared region of the light. Therefore, the difficulty in selecting and designing nanomaterials for light-driven wireless electrical signal generation increases, which restricts progress in this field.

7 Acoustic signals
Acoustic waves possess a massive amount of energy and have promoted great progress in biomedical and clinical research, especially ultrasound imaging and diagnostic techniques. Acoustic wave stimulation has also been widely utilized in directing cell lineage fate and cell therapy recently, and is devoted to triggering the piezoelectric response of specific nanomaterials owing to their deep tissue penetration, easy controllability, and noninvasive properties (reviewed in the Section 6.3.1).
In this section, we introduce the effects of various acoustic waves and material-mediated physical cues on stem cell differentiation from the following three aspects: the effect of acoustic wave stimulation, and the combination of acoustic waves and nanomaterials.
7.1 Acoustic and ultrasonic signals
Several investigations have established the stimulatory effect of different acoustics on stem cell differentiation, usually in the form of extracorporeal shock waves (ESWs) and ultrasound generated by ultrasonicators or other apparatus with different frequencies, powers, power densities, stimulation time, duty cycles, and/or pulsed parameters.
Recruiting, proliferation, and differentiation of the stem cells were enhanced under ESWs stimulation (0.16 mJ mm−2, 1 Hz, 500 impulses).286 Histological assessment suggested that rMSCs progressively differentiated into osteoblast and chondrocyte lineages. In animal experiments, ESW treatment did not cause any side effects in segmental femoral defect rats. Catalano et al. investigated the effects of ESW stimulation on the osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs and found that ESWs can enhance hADSC differentiation toward osteoblast-like cells under osteogenic induction, and clarified the mechanisms involved.287
Ultrasonography is an important acoustic wave. Under ultrasonic irradiation, microbubble formation and collapse, and a very special physical micro-field form at the interface between the bubble and liquid substrate. Theoretical stimulation results indicated that the pressure at the gas–liquid interface was over 1000 atm, and the temperature inside the bubbles was even 4200 K in a very short period during the formation and collapse process.288 Therefore, ultrasound can regulate specific cell lineage differentiation. In addition to osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs289 and neuronal differentiation of mNSCs,290 researchers have extended dynamic ultrasound treatment to control hepatocyte-like cell differentiation.291
Several researchers have used customized ultrasound, such as low-intensity ultrasound (LIUS)292,293 and low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS)294,295 to investigate specific lineage differentiation.
LIUS exposure at an intensity range of 100–500 mW cm−2 can promote the neuronal differentiation and neurite growth of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) and denser neuronal networks.292,293 Thus, LIUS may serve as a potential tool for neuronal induction differentiation and neural cell therapy.
Furthermore, LIPUS with different pulsed parameters can promote the osteogenic,296,297 chondrogenic298 or multilineage differentiation299 of different types of MSCs as well as neuronal differentiation of gingival stem/progenitor cells.300 In addition, this LIPUS strategy has been extended to regulate the fate of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Xu et al. treated HSPCs with LIPUS (1.5 MHz, 200 μs burst sine wave with repetition rate at 1.0 kHz).301 LIPUS treatment can enhance the viability proliferation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, promote burst-forming unit-erythroid colony formation and favors cell differentiation into early erythroid progenitors without affecting the percentage of CD34+ and CD14+ cells.

Table 11 summarizes acoustic wave stimulation parameters for stem cell differentiation reported in the relevant literature. The frequency of acoustic waves ranges from several hundred kilohertz to megahertz, while the power density is in the range of 100–103 mW cm−2. These parameters are very useful for tissue engineering applications with nanomaterial-mediated physical cues.
Table 11 Research studies on the differentiation of stem cells with acoustic waves stimulation




Cell resources
Differentiation
Acoustic waves
Acoustic stimulation parameters
Ref. (year)




hADSCs
Osteoblast-like cells
ESWs
0.32 mJ mm−2, peak positive pressure 90 MPa, 1000 shots, 4 shocks per s

287 (2017)


hADSCs
Osteocytes
Ultrasound
2–8 MHz for day 1, 4, 10 and 14

289 (2016)


mNSCs
Neurons
Ultrasound
510 kHz–3 W s cm−2, 994 kHz–3 W s cm−2, 4.36 MHz–3 W s cm−2, 994 kHz–25 W s cm−2 and 4.36 MHz–25 W s cm−2

290 (2017)


hMSCs
Chondrocytes
LIUS
15, 30, 60, and 120 mW cm−2, 1.0 MHz with 200 μs tone burst

292 (2004)


rNSPCs
Neurons and astrocytes
LIUS
1.8 MHz, 100–500 mW cm−2, 5–11 days, 5 min exposure per stimulation and a 3 day interval between stimulations

293 (2014)


rDPSCs, rPDLSCs, rBMSCs
Osteocytes and adipocytes
LIPUS
1 MHz, 250 or 750 mW cm−2 for 5 or 20 min

299 (2016)


hADSCs
Osteocytes
LIPUS
2.0 MHz, 200 μs burst width sine wave, 1.0 kHz pulse repetition, 1:4 pulse duty cycle, 20 and 30 mW cm−2, 30 min day−1

297 (2018)


rMSCs
Chondrocytes
LIPUS
3 MHz, 20 min at 20, 30, 40 or 50 mW cm−2

298 (2019)




Although some experiments have shown that acoustic waves can promote the differentiation of some types of stem cells, most experiments are performed in vitro, and the differentiation process is based on differentiation-inducing media, and the mechanism of differentiation enhancement is not clear. Research and clinical applications greatly differ because the acoustic wave cannot selectively stimulate the stem cell, and all the surrounding cells and tissues under strong irradiation, which may cause damage. Therefore, the use of acoustic energy to regulate stem cell fate remains a significant challenge.
7.2 Acoustic waves coordinated with biomaterials
As mentioned above, acoustic waves do not have selectivity for specific cells and may cause cell death or damage to the cells around the target cells in vivo. To overcome this shortage, researchers designed biomaterials and realized the enhanced regulation of stem cells cultured on the surface of the materials under ultrasound irradiation. The energy of the ultrasonic wave can be localized in a special area or transfer another type of energy mode, which can regulate stem cells cultured on the surface of the materials more efficiently. It should be noted that the nanostructures can be easily driven by the localized extremely high energy generated by the formation and collapse of the bubbles under acoustic irradiation and cause the stress or stain of nanostructures, which affects the behavior of the stem cells attached to the surface of the nanostructured materials. Therefore, acoustic wave stimulation and nanomaterials have a synergistic effect on cell differentiation because the former has noninvasive and non-contact properties, while the latter provides the possibility for transplantation in vivo.
To investigate the synergistic effect of acoustic waves and materials on cell fate, primary osteoblast-like cells were cultured on porous polycaprolactone (PCL), and stimulated by a specific acoustic wave, surface acoustic waves (SAWs), which are generated by a specially designed microcircuit on a piezoelectric material.302 It was found that over 80% of the osteoblast-like cells survived after SAW treatment (20 MHz for 10–30 s, 380 mW), and von Kossa staining images indicated that cells both with and without SAW stimulation could differentiate toward osteoblasts in mineralization-promoting medium after 18 days. Although this study did not provide more detailed or solid evidence for the enhancement of osteogenic differentiation of primary osteoblast-like cells, this method has great potential to regulate cell fate by using the coordinated effect of acoustic waves and nanostructured materials.
Representative ultrasonic types, LIUS and LIPUS, were also utilized to investigate stem/progenitor cell differentiation on material scaffolds. Park et al. selected rabbit MSCs as a model to explore how LIUS exposure affects cell fate both in vitro303 and in vivo.304 They used 3D alginate material to encapsulate rabbit MSCs at different passages and applied LIUS stimulation (1 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, 10 min every 12 h for 1 or 2 weeks). The mRNA levels of chondrogenic markers such as Sox-9, aggrecan, and type II collagen were clearly higher in the LIUS-stimulated group at early passages and decreased overall by the passages.303 Similarly, biodegradable polyglycolic acid (PGA) non-woven mesh was implemented as a scaffold for the construction of rabbit MSCs and then implanted in nude mice.304 Applying LIUS (0.8 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, and 10 min day−1) to the nude mouse model, the size and shape of the implanted constructs changed progressively over 4 weeks with or without LIUS. Their research revealed the positive role of LIUS as a conventional mechanical stimulation in the chondrogenesis of MSCs. The nanostructured materials-mediated mechanical cues including topological surfaces have been reviewed in the section 2.2.2, and topological surface nanostructures were combined with ultrasound stimulation and can mediate physical cues for regulating cell fate in this part. Vertical microtube arrays with topological surfaces of 5 μm diameter and 5, 10, or 20 μm in height were fabricated by laser direct writing via two-photon polymerization of a biocompatible photopolymer.305 The early osteoblastic marker ALP activity increased by up to 50% with LIPUS (40 kHz, 60 mW cm−2, 20 min day−1, 5 days) treatment. The late osteoblastic marker OCN secretion significantly increased on the topographical surface compared with that on the flat surfaces, and the OCN secretion increase was also induced by the synergistic effect of LIPUS treatment and the increase in microtube height. These findings will improve the understanding of osteogenic differentiation and realize the combination of nanostructure-mediated mechanical signals with acoustic cues.
Studies combining nanomaterial substrates/scaffolds with acoustic stimulation are summarized in Table 12. These parameters are comparable to studies on the effect of acoustic waves individually on cell differentiation, as shown in Table 11.
Table 12 Research studies on stem cell differentiation involving a combination of nanomaterials and ultrasound stimulation





In vitro results

In vivo results
Materials
Acoustic stimulation parameters
Ref. (year)




Primary osteoblast-like cells → osteoblasts
—
Porous PCL scaffolds with pore sizes of 150–300 μm and a thickness of 2 mm
SAWs, 20 MHz, 10–30 s, 380 mW

302 (2009)


Rabbit MSCs → chondrocytes
—
3D alginate
LIUS, continuous wave, 1 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, 10 min every 12 h for 1 or 2 weeks

303 (2006)


Rabbit MSCs → chondrocytes
Nude mice subcutaneous implantation → chondrogenesis
PGA non-woven mesh
LIPUS, 0.8 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, 10 min day−1, 4 weeks

304 (2006)


MG-63 → osteoblast-like cells
—
Topological microtubes surfaces with inner diameter of 5 μm and various heights (5, 10, 20 μm)
LIPUS, 40 kHz, 60 mW cm−2, 20 min day−1, 5 days

305 (2019)




Based on the special properties of functional materials, acoustic wave-driven materials can generate different physical signals, such as mechanical signals, light signals, and electrical signals. The ultrasound-driven nanostructure-mediated electrical and light signals were discussed in the previous sections. In fact, the investigation on applying acoustic wave to regulate the cell fate for clinical applications has just begun, and will be very “hot” due to the extremely high temperature, electrical field, and electromagnetic field generated at the interface of gas–liquid interface of the bubbles generated by ultrasonic irradiation. Most importantly, various ultrasonic imaging and therapy instruments have been developed, which will promote research related to the regulation of cells by acoustic waves in vitro and in vivo.
8 Summary and future outlook
Applying physical signals, including electrical, mechanical, light, heat, magnetic, and acoustic signals to the stem cells provides a powerful toolbox for the regulation of stem cell fate with timely and energy-controllable stimulation and is expected to have clinical applications in the future. However, most conventional techniques for applying physical signals are only suitable for in vitro experiments as they require large-size signal generators, lack the ability to recognize and specifically regulate the target stem cells, and cannot avoid affecting the surrounding cells or tissues, which prevents the practical application of regulating the stem cell fate using physical signals. A new concept termed as the “regulation of the stem cell fate via physical signals mediated by nanostructures” was proposed in this review after summarizing the findings of previous research studies related to the physical cues of biomaterials guiding the stem cell differentiation.
Based on the concept of “regulation of the stem cell fate via physical signals mediated by nanostructures,” localized wireless physical signals can be obtained at the surface of nanostructured biomaterials under an external physical field, while the physical stimulation can be realized locally, timely, and quantitively in the stem cells cultured on the surface of these materials. This mode of wireless physical stimulation using specially designed functional nanostructures and an external field will have great applications in tissue regeneration.
However, this research field is still very young and significant efforts must be made before it can be widely used for stem cell therapy. Moreover, there are significant challenges in the future research aspects and practical applications of this field. Several aspects related to this field require further elucidation in future studies.
8.1 To understand the mechanisms by which the localized physical signals regulate the stem cell fate
Although various potential receptors and signaling pathways associated with stem cell differentiation have been identified by conventional biological investigation methods, the interaction mechanism between the localized physical stimulation and the specific part of the stem cells is very difficult to understand, as there is no specific tool or methodology to detect or observe nanoscale variations when the receptor is activated. In this regard, there is a great demand for interdisciplinary research involving collaborations among the biophysicists, cell biologists, and researchers from microelectromechanical systems. In this field, micro-devices, nano-measurement technology, micro-physical stimulation affecting surface receptors of stem cells, and the pathway of differentiation is very important. Different fields, like biophysics, molecular biology, and materials science to should be explore to obtain a complete picture of this topic.
8.2 Concept design and research instrument building to realize wireless physical stimulation
There should be different concepts for the regulation of stem cells by nanostructure-mediated physical signals. So far, the published research related to the use of nanomaterial-mediated localized physical signals to tune the stem cell fate is just a drop in the ocean. Some exciting fields related to this research area are awaiting further exploration.
It should be noted that the design concept for generating wireless physical signals to stimulate stem cells includes three factors. (1) The kind of physical signals that should be chosen for the regulation of stem cell fate based on the cell type and direction of stem cell differentiation; (2) the criteria to choose materials with special energy conversion properties, such as mechanical-electrical, photoelectrical, ultrasonic-mechanical, magnetic-mechanical, and magnetic-electrical conversions. The method to design and synthesize nanostructures to realize local stimulation, particularly, the materials that have high biocompatibility and biodegradability; (3) the design of efficient devices or systems to apply external physical fields or irradiation to nanostructures in vitro or in vivo.
8.3 
          In vivo investigation on tissue regeneration based on the regulation of stem cells via nanostructure-mediated physical signals
To generate proper physical signals for directing the stem cell fate, the external stimulation parameters should be further optimized for both in vitro and in vivo conditions. Some physical signals, especially UV, have high cytotoxicity and may hamper cell survival in the human body and their safety needs to be critically assessed. Based on the success of in vitro research, further in vivo investigations assessing the use of wireless physical stimulation for stem cell differentiation and tissue regeneration should be comprehensively conducted. The effects of surrounding tissues, cells, and the surrounding microenvironment on energy conversions should be studied, which will be beneficial for the clinical applications of this concept. During in vivo investigations, proper balancing of the contradictions between biodegradation and the maintenance time of the energy conversion property should be done.
8.4 Interdisciplinary teams are very important for this topic
As mentioned above, this topic involves different disciplines, such as materials science, cell biology, molecular biology, biophysics, and microelectronics. This research topic has typical characteristics of interdisciplinary research. As such, this research cannot be accomplished by a single well-organized team. To understand the fundamental mechanism and realize the clinical applications of this concept, a large number of biological and physical key problems, difficulties associated with microfabrication and device manufacturing, and in vivo verification problems should be tackled by integrated interdisciplinary teams.
There is still a long way to go from conducting successful experimental studies to exploring the beneficial clinical applications of this concept. Although there are already many obstacles in this domain, it is reasonable to expect that new materials and devices will continue to emerge and be at the forefront of research in the future. There are tremendous opportunities and challenges in this field and we hope that this review will aid in the development of safe, noninvasive, and non-contact platforms, which can be used to guide stem cell differentiation pathways. We also believe that further research in this area will drive progress in many other fields as well, including materials science, cell biology, and clinical therapy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFB0405400), the Project of “20 items of University” of Jinan (2018GXRC031) and the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University (2020QNQT001). The Collaborative Innovation Center of Technology and Equipment for Biological Diagnosis and Therapy in Universities of Shandong are thanked. Ref. 14 (https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2013.151) is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0). Ref. 151 (https://doi.org/10.1038/emm.2013.11) and ref. 225 (https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01604) are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Reproduced from ref. 114 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C6NR01874B), ref. 116 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C5TB01682G), ref. 195 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C6NR00785F), ref. 236 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C9LC01081E), ref. 255 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TB03321H), ref. 266 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C9MH00279K), and ref. 277 (https://doi.org/10.1039/C3NR02161K) with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Ref. 126 (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00543-2), ref. 180 (https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.39471), ref. 106 (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018738), ref. 251 (https://doi.org/10.1186/s40580-018-0149-y), and ref. 261 (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-03992-3) are licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Reproduced from ref. 279 (https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b07138) with permission from ACS AuthorChoice (https://pubs.acs.org/page/policy/authorchoice_termsofuse.html) of the American Chemical Society.
References
L. G. Griffith and G. Naughton, Science, 2002, 295, 1009–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Prochazkova, M. G. Chavez, J. Prochazka, H. Felfy, V. Mushegyan and O. D. Klein, in Stem Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering in Dental Sciences, ed. A. Vishwakarma, P. Sharpe, S. Shi and M. Ramalingam, Academic Press, Boston,  2015, pp. 249–262 Search PubMed .
M. J. Evans and M. H. Kaufman, Nature, 1981, 292, 154–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bianco and P. G. Robey, Nature, 2001, 414, 118–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Higuchi, Q. Ling, S. Hsu and A. Umezawa, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4507–4540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Trounson and C. McDonald, Cell Stem Cell, 2015, 17, 11–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hashemzadeh, M. E. Taghavizadeh Yazdi, M. S. Amiri and S. H. Mousavi, Tissue Cell, 2021, 71, 101504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Discher, D. J. Mooney and P. W. Zandstra, Science, 2009, 324, 1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Scadden, Cell, 2014, 157, 41–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Hynes, Science, 2009, 326, 1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bonnans, J. Chou and Z. Werb, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2014, 15, 786–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Malanchi, A. Santamaria-Martínez, E. Susanto, H. Peng, H. Lehr, J. Delaloye and J. Huelsken, Nature, 2012, 481, 85–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. Thannickal, C. A. Henke, J. C. Horowitz, P. W. Noble, J. Roman, P. J. Sime, Y. Zhou, R. G. Wells, E. S. White and D. J. Tschumperlin, Am. J. Pathol., 2014, 184, 1643–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Wang, S. E. Peterson and J. F. Loring, Cell Res., 2014, 24, 143–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Dalby, A. J. García and M. Salmeron-Sanchez, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17091 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lv, R. S. Tuan, K. M. C. Cheung and V. Y. L. Leung, Stem Cells, 2014, 32, 1408–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. McCarty, S. Gronthos, A. C. Zannettino, B. K. Foster and C. J. Xian, J. Cell. Physiol., 2008, 219, 324–333 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Baser, M. Skabkin, S. Kleber, Y. Dang, G. S. Gülcüler Balta, G. Kalamakis, M. Göpferich, D. C. Ibañez, R. Schefzik, A. S. Lopez, E. L. Bobadilla, C. Schultz, B. Fischer and A. Martin-Villalba, Nature, 2019, 566, 100–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shaik, H. Peng, J. Lu, S. Rits-Volloch, C. Xu, M. Liao and B. Chen, Nature, 2019, 565, 318–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Omatsu, M. Seike, T. Sugiyama, T. Kume and T. Nagasawa, Nature, 2014, 508, 536–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Murphy, M. Baggiolini, I. F. Charo, C. A. Hebert, R. Horuk, K. Matsushima, L. H. Miller, J. J. Oppenheim and C. A. Power, Pharmacol. Rev., 2000, 52, 145–176 CAS .
F. Soveg, J. von Moltke and R. Savan, Nat. Immunol., 2019, 20, 114–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Locksley, N. Killeen and M. J. Lenardo, Cell, 2001, 104, 487–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamashita and E. Passegué, Cell Stem Cell, 2019, 25, 357–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Even-Ram, V. Artym and K. M. Yamada, Cell, 2006, 126, 645–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Lai, Development, 2004, 131, 965–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Majumdar, M. Keane-Moore, D. Buyaner, W. B. Hardy, M. A. Moorman, K. R. McIntosh and J. D. Mosca, J. Biomed. Sci., 2003, 10, 228–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Tomchuck, K. J. Zwezdaryk, S. B. Coffelt, R. S. Waterman, E. S. Danka and A. B. Scandurro, Stem Cells, 2008, 26, 99–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Chen, C. Y. Yu, M. J. Chen, S. H. Chou, M. S. Chiang, W. H. Chou, B. S. Ko, H. P. Huang, H. C. Kuo and H. N. Ho, Cell Transplant ., 2015, 24, 845–864 Search PubMed .
F. Guilak, D. M. Cohen, B. T. Estes, J. M. Gimble, W. Liedtke and C. S. Chen, Cell Stem Cell, 2009, 5, 17–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Thrivikraman, S. K. Boda and B. Basu, Biomaterials, 2018, 150, 60–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Patel, J. H. Min, M. Hong, H. Lee, S. Kang, S. Yi and W. Koh, Biomed. Mater., 2020, 15, 45007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Higuchi, Q. Ling, Y. Chang, S. Hsu and A. Umezawa, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3297–3328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Yan, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8639–8684 RSC .
J. Kim and R. C. Hayward, Trends Biotechnol., 2012, 30, 426–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gelmi and C. E. Schutt, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2001125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lavrador, M. R. Esteves, V. M. Gaspar and J. F. Mano, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005941 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. D. Chueng, Y. Li, M. Patel, C. Rathnam, G. Dey, L. Wang, L. Cai and K. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3147 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yu, M. Ma, Z. Liu, Z. Pi, X. Du, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2020, 255, 120160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Lutolf and J. A. Hubbell, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Lutolf, P. M. Gilbert and H. M. Blau, Nature, 2009, 462, 433–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and T. J. Webster, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 66–80 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Clause, L. J. Liu and K. Tobita, Cell Commun. Adhes., 2010, 17, 48–54 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Jin, M. P. Prabhakaran, S. Liao and S. Ramakrishna, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2011, 102, 93–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Murphy, T. C. McDevitt and A. J. Engler, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 547–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Rajabi, M. Jaffe and T. L. Arinzeh, Acta Biomater., 2015, 24, 12–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Crowder, V. Leonardo, T. Whittaker, P. Papathanasiou and M. M. Stevens, Cell Stem Cell, 2016, 18, 39–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3169–3190 RSC .
P. G. Childs, C. A. Boyle, G. D. Pemberton, H. Nikukar, A. S. G. Curtis, F. L. Henriquez, M. J. Dalby and S. Reid, Acta Biomater., 2016, 34, 159–168 CrossRef PubMed .
T. E. Brown and K. S. Anseth, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6532–6552 RSC .
H. Kang, K. Zhang, Q. Pan, S. Lin, D. S. H. Wong, J. Li, W. Y. Lee, B. Yang, F. Han, G. Li, B. Li and L. Bian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802642 CrossRef .
S. Hassanpour-Tamrin, H. Taheri, M. Mahdi Hasani-Sadrabadi, S. Hamed Shams Mousavi, E. Dashtimoghadam, M. Tondar, A. Adibi, A. Moshaverinia, A. Sanati Nezhad and K. I. Jacob, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701420 CrossRef .
J. Jang, K. Kim, J. Yoon and C. B. Park, Biomaterials, 2020, 255, 120165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, H. Hsu, R. Hsu, C. Peng, Y. Lu, Y. Chen, S. Chen and S. Hu, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, Y. Zheng, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Feng, X. Wang and S. Wu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13581–13594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, H. Xie, J. Shan and K. F. Mak, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1295–1299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wei, H. Wang, H. Liu, D. Tsai, J. Ke, C. Wu, Y. Yin, Q. Zhan, G. Lin, Y. Chu and J. He, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15018 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Eichholz, I. Woods, M. Riffault, G. P. Johnson, M. Corrigan, M. C. Lowry, N. Shen, M. Labour, K. Wynne, L. O'Driscoll and D. A. Hoey, Stem Cell Transl. Med., 2020, 9, 1431–1447 CAS .
A. Barzegari, Y. Omidi, A. Ostadrahimi, V. Gueguen, A. Meddahi-Pellé, M. Nouri and G. Pavon-Djavid, Cell Tissue Res., 2020, 381, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Adamo, O. Naveiras, P. L. Wenzel, S. McKinney-Freeman, P. J. Mack, J. Gracia-Sancho, A. Suchy-Dicey, M. Yoshimoto, M. W. Lensch, M. C. Yoder, G. García-Cardeña and G. Q. Daley, Nature, 2009, 459, 1131–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Dong, Y. Q. Gu, C. M. Li, C. R. Wang, Z. G. Feng, R. X. Qiu, B. Chen, J. X. Li, S. W. Zhang, Z. G. Wang and J. Zhang, Acta Pharmacol. Sin., 2009, 30, 530–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chowdhury, S. Na, D. Li, Y. Poh, T. S. Tanaka, F. Wang and N. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 82–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, G. Si, J. Huang, A. D. T. Samuel and N. Perrimon, Nature, 2018, 555, 103–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mou, S. Wang, X. Liu, W. Guo, J. Li, J. Qiu, X. Yu, Z. L. Wang, X. Liu, Z. Geng and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10031–10037 RSC .
A. J. Engler, S. Sen, H. L. Sweeney and D. E. Discher, Cell, 2006, 126, 677–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huebsch, P. R. Arany, A. S. Mao, D. Shvartsman, O. A. Ali, S. A. Bencherif, J. Rivera-Feliciano and D. J. Mooney, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 518–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Gilbert, K. L. Havenstrite, K. E. G. Magnusson, A. Sacco, N. A. Leonardi, P. Kraft, N. K. Nguyen, S. Thrun, M. P. Lutolf and H. M. Blau, Science, 2010, 329, 1078–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Dalby, N. Gadegaard, R. Tare, A. Andar, M. O. Riehle, P. Herzyk, C. D. Wilkinson and R. O. Oreffo, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. McMurray, N. Gadegaard, P. M. Tsimbouri, K. V. Burgess, L. E. McNamara, R. Tare, K. Murawski, E. Kingham, R. O. C. Oreffo and M. J. Dalby, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 637–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Connelly, J. E. Gautrot, B. Trappmann, D. W. Tan, G. Donati, W. T. S. Huck and F. M. Watt, Nat. Cell Biol., 2010, 12, 711–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Kshitiz, J. Park, P. Kim, W. Helen, A. J. Engler, A. Levchenko and D. H. Kim, Integr. Biol., 2012, 4, 1008–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Uto, J. H. Tsui, C. A. DeForest and D. Kim, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2017, 65, 53–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, L. Y. Koo, W. M. Wang, D. A. Lauffenburger, L. G. Griffith and K. F. Jensen, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 5257–5264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Plouffe, D. N. Njoka, J. Harris, J. Liao, N. K. Horick, M. Radisic and S. K. Murthy, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5050–5055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, Y. Nakayama, K. Qin, K. Yamamoto, J. Ando, J. Yamashita, H. Itoh, K. Kanda, H. Yaku, Y. Okamoto and Y. Nemoto, J. Artif. Organs, 2005, 8, 110–118 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, G. M. Riha, S. Yan, M. Li, H. Chai, H. Yang, Q. Yao and C. Chen, Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol., 2005, 25, 1817–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghazanfari, M. Tafazzoli-Shadpour and M. A. Shokrgozar, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2009, 388, 601–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shimizu, K. Yamamoto, S. Obi, S. Kumagaya, T. Masumura, Y. Shimano, K. Naruse, J. K. Yamashita, T. Igarashi and J. Ando, J. Appl. Physiol., 2008, 104, 766–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Maul, D. W. Chew, A. Nieponice and D. A. Vorp, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol., 2011, 10, 939–953 CrossRef PubMed .
D. F. Ward Jr., R. M. Salasznyk, R. F. Klees, J. Backiel, P. Agius, K. Bennett, A. Boskey and G. E. Plopper, Stem Cells Dev., 2007, 16, 467–480 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kimelman-Bleich, D. Seliktar, I. Kallai, G. A. Helm, Z. Gazit, D. Gazit and G. Pelled, J. Tissue Eng. Regener. Med., 2011, 5, 384–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. McMahon, A. J. Reid, V. A. Campbell and P. J. Prendergast, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2008, 36, 185–194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Pathak, J. L. Nourse, T. Tran, J. Hwe, J. Arulmoli, D. T. T. Le, E. Bernardis, L. A. Flanagan and F. Tombola, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16148–16153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kurpinski, J. Chu, C. Hashi and S. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 16095–16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Park, J. S. Chu, C. Cheng, F. Chen, D. Chen and S. Li, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2004, 88, 359–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohammed, T. Lai and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 1676–1685 RSC .
J. Lee, O. Jeon, M. Kong, A. A. Abdeen, J. Shin, H. N. Lee, Y. B. Lee, W. Sun, P. Bandaru, D. S. Alt, K. Lee, H. Kim, S. J. Lee, S. Chaterji, S. R. Shin, E. Alsberg and A. Khademhosseini, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz5913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ramaswamy, I. Roohani, Y. J. No, G. Madafiglio, F. Chang, F. Zhao, Z. Lu and H. Zreiqat, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 1107–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Watt and W. T. S. Huck, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2013, 14, 467–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saha, A. J. Keung, E. F. Irwin, Y. Li, L. Little, D. V. Schaffer and K. E. Healy, Biophys. J., 2008, 95, 4426–4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Leipzig and M. S. Shoichet, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 6867–6878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, M. W. Tibbitt, L. Basta and K. S. Anseth, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 645–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, Y. Chen, X. Li, N. Kawazoe, Y. Yang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 63, 1–8 CrossRef .
C. K. K. Choi, Y. J. Xu, B. Wang, M. Zhu, L. Zhang and L. Bian, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6592–6600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ye, X. Wang, L. Cao, S. Li, Z. Li, L. Yu and J. Ding, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4720–4729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Park, J. S. Chu, A. D. Tsou, R. Diop, Z. Tang, A. Wang and S. Li, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 3921–3930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nam, J. Johnson, J. J. Lannutti and S. Agarwal, Acta Biomater., 2011, 7, 1516–1524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Tse and A. J. Engler, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e15978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Banerjee, M. Arha, S. Choudhary, R. S. Ashton, S. R. Bhatia, D. V. Schaffer and R. S. Kane, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 4695–4699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Young and A. J. Engler, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1002–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, Y. Jin, N. Wang, F. Cao, W. Zhang, W. Bai, W. Zheng and X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700171 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Watari, K. Hayashi, J. A. Wood, P. Russell, P. F. Nealey, C. J. Murphy and D. C. Genetos, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 128–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Q. Gao, L. Ge, Q. Zhou, E. M. Warszawik, R. Bron, K. W. C. Lai and P. van Rijn, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2638–2652 RSC .
M. Ha, A. Athirasala, A. Tahayeri, P. P. Menezes and L. E. Bertassoni, Dent. Mater., 2020, 36, 88–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Panda, R. K, A. Gebrekrstos, S. Bose, Y. S. Markandeya, B. Mehta and B. Basu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 164–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, Y. Zhang, R. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Lai, G. Rui and C. Lin, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 1118–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, S. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Duan, S. Wang, J. Han, Y. Sang, X. Yu, D. Li, W. Tang, S. Ge and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33717–33727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, B. Ma, F. Liu, J. Duan, S. Wang, J. Qiu, D. Li, Y. Sang, C. Liu, D. Liu and H. Liu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2243–2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. McBeath, D. M. Pirone, C. M. Nelson, K. Bhadriraju and C. S. Chen, Dev. Cell, 2004, 6, 483–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Kilian, B. Bugarija, B. T. Lahn and M. Mrksich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 4872–4877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, B. Ma, F. Liu, D. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Sang, J. Wang, D. Li, H. Liu and S. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Y. Wang, M. T. Yang, R. A. Desai, X. Yu, Z. Liu and C. S. Chen, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 733–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, J. Li, S. Wang, B. Ma, S. Zhang, W. Guo, X. Zhang, W. Tang, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 1770–1778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mou, S. Wang, W. Guo, S. Ji, J. Qiu, D. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhou, W. Tang, C. Wang and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13186–13191 RSC .
E. M. Lee, K. Smith, K. Gall, B. D. Boyan and Z. Schwartz, Biomaterials, 2016, 110, 34–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gong, L. Lu, D. Liu, X. Liu, K. Zhao, Y. Chen and S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 9011–9022 RSC .
T. Gong, K. Zhao, G. Yang, J. Li, H. Chen, Y. Chen and S. Zhou, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1608–1619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Li, X. Li, Z. Fan, Z. Liu, X. Xie and J. Guan, Acta Biomater., 2015, 26, 23–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cho, S. Kim, K. D. Park, M. C. Jung, W. I. Yang, S. W. Han, J. Y. Noh and J. W. Lee, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 5743–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Na, S. W. Kim, B. K. Sun, D. G. Woo, H. N. Yang, H. M. Chung and K. H. Park, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 2631–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Dang and K. W. Leong, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2775–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Brunelle, C. B. Horner, K. Low, G. Ico and J. Nam, Acta Biomater., 2018, 66, 166–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, X. Zuo, X. Feng, Y. Sun, Q. Ge, X. Wang and C. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36939–36948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guvendiren and J. A. Burdick, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 792 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Frias, J. Reis, F. Capela, E. Silva, J. Potes, J. Simões and A. T. Marques, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 1920–1925 CrossRef CAS .
V. Du, N. Luciani, S. Richard, G. Mary, C. Gay, F. Mazuel, M. Reffay, P. Menasché, O. Agbulut and C. Wilhelm, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 400 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Khetan, M. Guvendiren, W. R. Legant, D. M. Cohen, C. S. Chen and J. A. Burdick, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Kloxin, A. M. Kasko, C. N. Salinas and K. S. Anseth, Science, 2009, 324, 59–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khetan and J. A. Burdick, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 8228–8234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, X. Xu, Y. Ye, K. Song, Y. Cheng, J. Di, Q. Hu, J. Li, H. Ju, Q. Jiang and Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 1292–1299 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eke, N. Mangir, N. Hasirci, S. MacNeil and V. Hasirci, Biomaterials, 2017, 129, 188–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhu, W. Zhang, Z. Mao and C. Gao, Acta Biomater., 2016, 46, 141–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Son, H. D. Kim, M. Kim, J. A. Kim, J. Lee, H. Shin, N. S. Hwang and T. H. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1339–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, S. S. Guo and R. Fässler, J. Cell Biol., 2016, 215, 445–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. H. Wong, J. Li, X. Yan, B. Wang, R. Li, L. Zhang and L. Bian, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1685–1695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, H. J. Jung, D. S. H. Wong, S. K. Kim, S. Lin, K. F. Chan, L. Zhang, G. Li, V. P. Dravid and L. Bian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5909–5913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, D. S. H. Wong, X. Yan, H. J. Jung, S. Kim, S. Lin, K. Wei, G. Li, V. P. Dravid and L. Bian, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9636–9649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Kanczler, H. S. Sura, J. Magnay, D. Green, R. O. C. Oreffo, J. P. Dobson and A. J. El Haj, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2010, 16, 3241–3250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, A. Haj and J. Dobson, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 19276–19293 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Huang, B. Gao, M. Li, G. M. Genin, T. J. Lu and F. Xu, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e238 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, W. Y. Sim, S. W. Park, S. S. Yang, B. H. Choi, S. R. Park, K. Park and B. H. Min, Tissue Eng., 2006, 12, 3107–3117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maziarz, B. Kocan, M. Bester, S. Budzik, M. Cholewa, T. Ochiya and A. Banas, Stem Cell Res. Ther., 2016, 7, 54 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, J. Sun, L. Zhao, F. Zhang, X. Liang, Y. Guo, M. D. Weir, M. A. Reynolds, N. Gu and H. H. K. Xu, Biomaterials, 2018, 183, 151–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ba, M. Hadjiargyrou, E. DiMasi, Y. Meng, M. Simon, Z. Tan and M. H. Rafailovich, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 7831–7838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hsu and J. Chang, Cytotechnology, 2010, 62, 143–155 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chuo, T. Ma, T. Saito, Y. Sugita, H. Maeda, G. Zhang, J. Li, J. Liu and L. Lu, J. Hard Tissue Biol., 2013, 22, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Amin, M. A. Brady, J. St-Pierre, M. M. Stevens, D. R. Overby and C. R. Ethier, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2014, 20, 1612–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, Y. Lo, W. Chang, C. Lin, S. Lee, Y. Abiko and H. Huang, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 2010, 48, 793–798 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chiu, K. Ou, S. Lee, C. Lin, W. Chang, C. Chen and H. Huang, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2007, 35, 1932–1939 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kim, R. Leesungbok, S. Lee, H. Lee, S. H. Park, S. Mah and S. Ahn, Bioelectromagnetics, 2015, 36, 267–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kang, J. M. Hong, J. A. Kang, J. Rhie, Y. H. Jeong and D. Cho, Exp. Mol. Med., 2013, 45, e6 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Seong, J. Moon and J. Kim, Life Sci., 2014, 102, 16–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Rosen, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2003, 39, 163–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mayer-Wagner, A. Passberger, B. Sievers, J. Aigner, B. Summer, T. S. Schiergens, V. Jansson and P. E. Müller, Bioelectromagnetics, 2011, 32, 283–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, X. Zhang, Z. Xu and R. He, Phys. Ther., 2012, 92, 1208–1219 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Schwartz, B. J. Simon, M. A. Duran, G. Barabino, R. Chaudhri and B. D. Boyan, J. Orthop. Res., 2008, 26, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tsai, W. H. Chang, K. Chang, R. Hou and T. Wu, Bioelectromagnetics, 2007, 28, 519–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, D. Hsieh, P. Lin, H. Chiu and T. Chiou, Bioelectromagnetics, 2009, 31, 209–219 Search PubMed .
L. Petecchia, F. Sbrana, R. Utzeri, M. Vercellino, C. Usai, L. Visai, M. Vassalli and P. Gavazzo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13856 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, Y. Seo, H. Yoon, C. Kim, J. Park and S. Jeon, Neurochem. Int., 2013, 62, 418–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Piacentini, C. Ripoli, D. Mezzogori, G. B. Azzena and C. Grassi, J. Cell. Physiol., 2008, 215, 129–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shuai, Y. Cheng, W. Yang, P. Feng, Y. Yang, C. He, F. Qi and S. Peng, Composites, Part B, 2020, 192, 107986 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yun, S. Ahn, K. Park, M. Kim, J. Kim, G. Jin, H. Kim and E. Kim, Biomaterials, 2016, 85, 88–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cai, Y. Shi, D. Shan, W. Jia, S. Duan, X. Deng and X. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 55, 166–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Panseri, C. Cunha, T. D'Alessandro, M. Sandri, G. Giavaresi, M. Marcacci, C. T. Hung and A. Tampieri, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2012, 10, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meng, B. Xiao, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Xue, J. Lei, H. Kong, Y. Huang, Z. Jin, N. Gu and H. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2655 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yoo, E. Lee, H. Y. Kim, D. Youn, J. Jung, H. Kim, Y. Chang, W. Lee, J. Shin, S. Baek, W. Jang, W. Jun, S. Kim, J. Hong, H. Park, C. J. Lengner, S. H. Moh, Y. Kwon and J. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1006–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, W. Jang, H. Im and J. Sung, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2015, 15, S95–S102 CrossRef .
J. J. Cha, K. J. Koski, K. C. Y. Huang, K. X. Wang, W. Luo, D. Kong, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5913–5918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. Hao, W. Gao, F. Liu, J. Duan, Y. Kong, D. Liu and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9833–9841 RSC .
T. Yamada, A. Hashiguchi, S. Fukushima, Y. Kakita, A. Umezawa, T. Maruyama and J. Hata, In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol.: Anim., 2000, 36, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
E. Afzal, M. Ebrahimi, S. M. Arab Najafi, A. Daryadel and H. Baharvand, Cell Biol. Int., 2011, 35, 713–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Hossain, K. Matsuzaki, M. Katakura, N. Sugimoto, A. A. Mamun, R. Islam, M. Hashimoto and O. Shido, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e190356 Search PubMed .
R. NØrgaard, M. Kassem and S. I. S. Rattan, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 2006, 1067, 443–447 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Maruyama, A. Umezawa, S. Kusakari, H. Kikuchi, M. Nozaki and J. Hata, Exp. Cell Res., 1996, 224, 123–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5602–5611 RSC .
T. Yanagi, H. Kajiya, M. Kawaguchi, H. Kido and T. Fukushima, J. Biomater. Appl., 2014, 29, 1109–1118 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kajiya, Y. Katsumata, M. Sasaki, T. Tsutsumi, M. Kawaguchi and T. Fukushima, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2015, 31, 635–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, Q. Liao, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, A. Gao, W. Zhang, X. Gao, W. Wei, M. Guan, P. K. Chu and H. Wang, Biomaterials, 2019, 193, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, J. Peng, Q. Liu, L. Chen, K. Shi, R. Han, Q. Yang, L. Zhong, R. Zha, Y. Qu and Z. Qian, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 1500–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, R. Yan, L. Wu, Y. Sun, S. Liu, Z. Zhou, J. He and D. Ye, Acta Biomater., 2018, 72, 256–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Qu, M. Sun, J. Kim, L. Xu, C. Hao, W. Ma, X. Wu, X. Liu, H. Kuang, N. A. Kotov and C. Xu, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2021, 5, 103–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De Martino, S. Cavalli and P. A. Netti, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 2000470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Xu, Q. Liu, W. Sun, B. Jiang, K. Yang, J. Li, Y. Gong, Q. Liu, D. Liu and X. Li, Biomaterials, 2019, 225, 119539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Terakita, Genome Biol., 2005, 6, 213 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hou, H. Zhang, X. Yuan, J. Li, Y. Wei and S. Hu, Lasers Surg. Med., 2008, 40, 726–733 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Pagin, F. A. de Oliveira, R. C. Oliveira, A. C. P. Sant’Ana, M. L. R. de Rezende, S. L. A. Greghi and C. A. Damante, Lasers Med. Sci., 2014, 29, 55–59 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Stein, D. Benayahu, L. Maltz and U. Oron, Photomed. Laser Surg., 2005, 23, 161–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Leu and J. Wu, Photomed. Laser Surg., 2010, 28, 157–165 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liebmann, M. Born and V. Kolb-Bachofen, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2010, 130, 259–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, H. Wu, Y. Zheng, X. Xu and J. Yu, Laser Med. Sci., 2012, 27, 645–653 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Higuchi, P. Shen, J. Zhao, C. Chen, Q. Ling, H. Chen, H. Wang, J. Bing and S. Hsu, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2011, 17, 2593–2602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, M. Wang, G. Yu, S. Zhu, Y. Yu, B. C. Heng, J. Wu and H. Ye, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E6722–E6730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, H. Qin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11182–11187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Qiu, W. Guo, S. Wang, B. Ma, X. Mou, M. Tanes, H. Jiang and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7416–7422 RSC .
J. Li, C. W. T. Leung, D. S. H. Wong, J. Xu, R. Li, Y. Zhao, C. Y. Y. Yung, E. Zhao, B. Z. Tang and L. Bian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22074–22084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, W. Y. Lee, T. Wu, J. Xu, K. Zhang, D. S. Hong Wong, R. Li, G. Li and L. Bian, Biomaterials, 2016, 110, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Khare, B. Basu and A. K. Dubey, Biomaterials, 2020, 258, 120280 CAS .
L. Leppik, K. M. C. Oliveira, M. B. Bhavsar and J. H. Barker, Eur. J. Trauma Emerg. Surg., 2020, 46, 231–244 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. M. Ryan, M. N. Doulgkeroglou and D. I. Zeugolis, BMC Biomed. Eng., 2021, 3, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Krueger, A. Riess, A. Jonitz-Heincke, A. Weizel, A. Seyfarth, H. Seitz and R. Bader, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Serena, E. Figallo, N. Tandon, C. Cannizzaro, S. Gerecht, N. Elvassore and G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Exp. Cell Res., 2009, 315, 3611–3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ronaldson-Bouchard, S. P. Ma, K. Yeager, T. Chen, L. Song, D. Sirabella, K. Morikawa, D. Teles, M. Yazawa and G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Nature, 2018, 556, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, L. Li, M. Tang, Y. Zeng, H. Li and X. Yu, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 2019, 148, 47–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Leppik, M. B. Bhavsar, K. M. C. Oliveira, M. Eischen-Loges, S. Mobini and J. H. Barker, J. Visualized Exp., 2019, 143, 59127 Search PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Liang, W. Huang, L. Guo, W. Cai, L. Wang, C. Paul, H. Yang, H. W. Kim and Y. Wang, Antioxid. Redox Signaling, 2018, 28, 371–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Chang, J. W. Kim, J. A. Kim, S. E. Lee, S. Kim, W. H. Suh, H. S. Kim, S. Kwon, S. J. Kim and Y. H. Suh, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e18738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ning, J. Guo, K. Zhang, K. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Yang and Z. Ge, Stem Cell Res. Ther., 2019, 10, 45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lee, I. Kim, N. Han, S. Yun, K. I. Park and K. Yoo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 6319 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kwon, J. S. Lee, J. Lee, J. Na, J. Sung, H. Lee, H. Kwak, E. Cheong, S. Cho and H. Choi, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6343–6351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Krueger, L. M. S. Magri, A. S. Botelho, F. S. Bach, C. L. K. Rebellato, L. Fracaro, F. Y. I. Fragoso, J. A. Villanova, P. R. S. Brofman and L. Popović-Maneski, Neurosci. Lett., 2019, 696, 38–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takahashi and S. Yamanaka, Cell, 2006, 126, 663–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ferrigno, R. Bordett, N. Duraisamy, J. Moskow, M. R. Arul, S. Rudraiah, S. P. Nukavarapu, A. T. Vella and S. G. Kumbar, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 468–485 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Woo, M. Shim, J. S. Park, H. N. Yang, D. Lee and K. Park, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5631–5638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Deng, Y. Fan, L. Zheng, J. Che, X. Li and K. E. Aifantis, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 103, 109748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Prabhakaran, L. Ghasemi-Mobarakeh, G. Jin and S. Ramakrishna, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2011, 112, 501–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Thrivikraman, P. S. Lee, R. Hess, V. Haenchen, B. Basu and D. Scharnweber, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23015–23028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Stewart, N. R. Kobayashi, M. J. Higgins, A. F. Quigley, S. Jamali, S. E. Moulton, R. M. Kapsa, G. G. Wallace and J. M. Crook, Tissue Eng., Part C, 2015, 21, 385–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Hu, T. C. Chen, C. W. Tsao and Y. C. Cheng, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2019, 107, 1607–1619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Cheng, C. H. Chen, H. W. Kuo, T. L. Yen, Y. Y. Mao and W. W. Hu, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 3938 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. S. Kam, E. Jan and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 273–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mooney, J. N. Mackle, D. J. P. Blond, E. O'Cearbhaill, G. Shaw, W. J. Blau, F. P. Barry, V. Barron and J. M. Murphy, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 6132–6139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Wu, N. Tai and T. Wang, Small, 2012, 8, 2869–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Liu, J. M. Crook and G. G. Wallace, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 107, 110312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Gao, Q. Song, R. Huang, L. Wang, L. Liu, J. Dai, M. Tang and G. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1604 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, W. Jing, X. Hu, Z. Huang, Q. Cai, Y. Ao and X. Yang, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2017, 105, 3369–3383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, T. Ye, S. Lee, H. Cui, S. Miao, X. Zhou, D. Shuai and L. G. Zhang, Nanomedicine, 2018, 14, 2485–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Balikov, B. Fang, Y. W. Chun, S. W. Crowder, D. Prasai, J. B. Lee, K. I. Bolotin and H. Sung, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13730–13739 RSC .
S. R. Das, M. Uz, S. Ding, M. T. Lentner, J. A. Hondred, A. A. Cargill, D. S. Sakaguchi, S. Mallapragada and J. C. Claussen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601087 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi, S. A. Shirazian and R. Rahighi, Carbon, 2016, 97, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, S. Wang, X. Yu, J. Qiu, J. Li, W. Tang, Z. Li, X. Mou, H. Liu and Z. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1897–1904 RSC .
W. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Yu, S. Wang, J. Qiu, W. Tang, L. Li, H. Liu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5086–5095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, R. Shi, Z. Liu, H. Ouyang, M. Yu, C. Zhao, Y. Zou, D. Jiang, J. Zhang and Z. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
G. Conta, A. Libanori, T. Tat, G. Chen and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tomaskovic Crook, P. Zhang, A. Ahtiainen, H. Kaisvuo, C. Y. Lee, S. Beirne, Z. Aqrawe, D. Svirskis, J. Hyttinen, G. G. Wallace, J. Travas Sejdic and J. M. Crook, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1900425 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zheng, Z. Zhang, R. Zhu and D. Sun, Lab Chip, 2020, 20, 373–383 RSC .
L. Ni, P. Kc, E. Mulvany, G. Zhang and J. Zhe, Biomed. Microdevices, 2019, 21, 20 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Reyes, H. van Heeren, S. Guha, L. Herbertson, A. P. Tzannis, J. Ducrée, H. Bissig and H. Becker, Lab Chip, 2021, 21, 9–21 RSC .
J. Li, X. Mou, J. Qiu, S. Wang, D. Wang, D. Sun, W. Guo, D. Li, A. Kumar, X. Yang, A. Li and H. Liu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 998–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, W. Li, T. He, L. Qian, G. Tan and C. Ning, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dadsetan, A. M. Knight, L. Lu, A. J. Windebank and M. J. Yaszemski, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 3874–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, A. L. Miller, S. Park, B. E. Waletzki, Z. Zhou, A. Terzic and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14677–14690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kwon, K. Yasuda, Y. Ohmiya, K. Honma, Y. M. Chen and J. P. Gong, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 494–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chu, J. Lim, W. Hwang, Y. Lin and J. Wang, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 2020, 148, L58–L64 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Qiu, B. Wang, N. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, D. Walker, Y. Wang, H. Tian, T. R. Shrout, Z. Xu, L. Chen and F. Li, Nature, 2020, 577, 350–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mitragotri, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2005, 4, 255–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ares, T. Cea, M. Holwill, Y. B. Wang, R. Roldán, F. Guinea, D. V. Andreeva, L. Fumagalli, K. S. Novoselov and C. R. Woods, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1905504 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, T. V. Pham, J. H. Hwang, C. S. Kim and M. J. Kim, Nano Convergence, 2018, 5, 17 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ciofani, S. Danti, D. D. Alessandro, L. Ricotti, S. Moscato, G. Bertoni, A. Falqui, S. Berrettini, M. Petrini, V. Mattoli and A. Menciassi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6267–6277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Danti, G. Ciofani, S. Moscato, D. D'Alessandro, E. Ciabatti, C. Nesti, R. Brescia, G. Bertoni, A. Pietrabissa, M. Lisanti, M. Petrini, V. Mattoli and S. Berrettini, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465102 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Marino, S. Arai, Y. Hou, E. Sinibaldi, M. Pellegrino, Y. Chang, B. Mazzolai, V. Mattoli, M. Suzuki and G. Ciofani, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7678–7689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, F. Liu, Z. Li, J. Duan, Y. Kong, M. Hao, S. Ge, H. Jiang and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1847–1854 RSC .
A. Marino, J. Barsotti, G. de Vito, C. Filippeschi, B. Mazzolai, V. Piazza, M. Labardi, V. Mattoli and G. Ciofani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25574–25579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Itoh, M. Takano, T. Yanagisawa and M. Hashimoto, Ferroelectrics, 1998, 216, 35–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chelakara Satyanarayana and K. Bolton, Polymer, 2012, 53, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Rajabi, M. Jaffe and T. L. Arinzeh, Acta Biomater., 2015, 24, 12–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strashilov, G. Alexieva, B. Vincent, V. S. Nguyen and D. Rouxel, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 118, 1469–1477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoop, X. Chen, A. Ferrari, F. Mushtaq, G. Ghazaryan, T. Tervoort, D. Poulikakos, B. Nelson and S. Pané, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4028 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. Genchi, E. Sinibaldi, L. Ceseracciu, M. Labardi, A. Marino, S. Marras, G. De Simoni, V. Mattoli and G. Ciofani, Nanomedicine, 2018, 14, 2421–2432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Genchi, L. Ceseracciu, A. Marino, M. Labardi, S. Marras, F. Pignatelli, L. Bruschini, V. Mattoli and G. Ciofani, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1808–1820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hattori, S. Iwauchi, K. Nagano and T. Tanaka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1971, 10, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Binan, C. Tendey, G. De Crescenzo, R. El Ayoubi, A. Ajji and M. Jolicoeur, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 664–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Liu, M. Dong, L. Müller, G. Chatzipirpiridis, C. Hu, A. Terzopoulou, H. Torlakcik, X. Wang, F. Mushtaq, J. Puigmartí-Luis, Q. Shen, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1512–1516 RSC .
W. Liu, F. Zhang, Y. Yan, C. Zhang, H. Zhao, B. C. Heng, Y. Huang, Y. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Wen and X. Deng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006226 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, B. Chen, K. Liu, J. Gao, Y. Ye, Z. Wang, N. Qin, D. A. Wilson, Y. Tu and F. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910108 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, P. J. Feng, J. H. Liu, M. Dong, X. Q. Shen, Y. X. Chen and Q. D. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sang, Z. Zhao, M. Zhao, P. Hao, Y. Leng and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 363–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, J. Feng and H. Zhao, Nature, 2020, 584, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vargas-Estevez, A. Blanquer, G. Murillo, M. Duque, L. Barrios, C. Nogués, E. Ibañez and J. Esteve, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 571–578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, D. Yu, Y. Guan, Z. Du, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9833–9836 RSC .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6291–6301 RSC .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10316–10326 RSC .
Z. Zhang, R. Xu, Z. Wang, M. Dong, B. Cui and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34736–34743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, Y. Seo, T. Yoon, W. G. Lee, W. J. Cho, M. Yousuf, A. M. Harzandi, D. Kang, K. Kim, P. Suh and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 742–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, Y. Zheng, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Feng, X. Wang and S. Wu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13581–13594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Amir, X. Li, M. C. Gruschka, N. D. Colley, L. Li, R. Li, H. R. Linder, S. A. Sell and J. C. Barnes, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 10910–10920 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Lou, M. Li, Z. Yuan and Y. Rao, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 19747–19750 RSC .
K. Takanabe, K. Kamata, X. Wang, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13020 RSC .
H. Maaoui, P. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Pan, R. Chtourou, S. Szunerits, R. Boukherroub and S. L. Jain, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 1282–1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Q. Qu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10671–10676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, T. Wurtz, C. Wang, Y. Kuo, K. D. Yang, H. Huang and F. Wang, J. Orthop. Res., 2004, 22, 526–534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Catalano, F. Marano, L. Rinella, L. de Girolamo, O. Bosco, N. Fortunati, L. Berta and R. Frairia, J. Tissue Eng. Regener. Med., 2017, 11, 390–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Lorimer and T. J. Mason, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1987, 16, 239–274 RSC .
W. Huang, J. Kim, K. Kim, S. Bakshi, J. Williams, P. Matthieu, E. Loboa, K. K. Shung, Q. Zhou and X. Jiang, IEEE Sens. J., 2016, 16, 61–68 CAS .
A. Schuster, H. Rabe, T. Schwab, M. Bischof, C. Degel, M. Klotz and K. Schäfer, Phys. Med., 2017, 4, 8–16 CrossRef .
F. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Cai, X. Li, M. Bai, T. Sun and L. Du, Ultrasound Med. Biol., 2018, 44, 1044–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ebisawa, K. Hata, K. Okada, K. Kimata, M. Ueda, S. Torii and H. Watanabe, Tissue Eng., 2004, 10, 921–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lee, T. Lo, T. Young, Y. Li, N. G. Chen, C. Chen and Y. Chang, Ultrasound Med. Biol., 2014, 40, 2195–2206 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Kang, J. M. Hong, J. A. Kang, J. Rhie and D. Cho, J. Ultras. Med., 2013, 32, 1461–1470 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lim, J. Kim, H. Seonwoo, S. H. Park, P. Choung and J. H. Chung, Biomed Res. Int., 2013, 2013, 1–15 Search PubMed .
S. R. Angle, K. Sena, D. R. Sumner and A. S. Virdi, Ultrasonics, 2011, 51, 281–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Ma, S. Guo, Y. He, G. Bai and W. Zhang, Biosci. Rep., 2018, 38, BSR20180087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Lin, T. Zhang, X. Wang, K. Cheng, M. Gao, P. Xia and X. Li, Stem Cell Res. Ther., 2019, 10, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, A. D. Walmsley, P. R. Cooper and B. A. Scheven, J. Endodont., 2016, 42, 425–431 CrossRef PubMed .
T. El-Bialy, A. Alhadlaq, B. Wong and C. Kucharski, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2014, 42, 1406–1412 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xu, H. Gul-Uludag, W. T. Ang, X. Yang, M. Huang, L. Marquez-Curtis, L. McGann, A. Janowska-Wieczorek, J. Xing, E. Swanson and J. Chen, Biotechnol. Lett., 2012, 34, 1965–1973 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, J. Friend, L. Yeo, A. Dasvarma and K. Traianedes, Biomicrofluidics, 2009, 3, 34102 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Lee, B. H. Choi, B. Min, Y. S. Son and S. R. Park, Artif. Organs, 2006, 30, 707–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cui, K. Park, S. R. Park and B. H. Min, Tissue Eng., 2006, 12, 75–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Paun, B. S. Calin, C. C. Mustaciosu, M. Mihailescu, C. S. Popovici and C. R. Luculescu, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 11213–11230 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Ying Kong
	Ying Kong received her BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from China University of Mining and Technology, in 2017. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree in Materials Science at Shandong University, China. Her current research interests include the fate regulation of stem cells/immune cells by nanomaterials mediated-physical signals.

Jiazhi Duan
	Jiazhi Duan received his BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Hubei University in 2016. He is now studying in Materials Science for PhD at Shandong University. His current research mainly focused on stem cells fate commitment by materials cues and physical signals.

Lin Han
	Lin Han received her BS degree in physics and microelectronics from Shandong University, China, in 2003, MS degree in microelectronics from Tsinghua University in 2006, and PhD. Degree in electrical engineering from Princeton University, USA, in 2011. She was an Associate Postdoctoral/Research Scientist in biomedical engineering at Yale University between 2011 and 2015. She has been a professor at Shandong University since 2016. Her research focuses on biosensors, microfluidic chip for bioengineering, 2D materials and devices, flexible electronics, etc.

Shuhua Wang
	Shuhua Wang is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University. She received her PhD degree in 2016 from Institute of Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research is mainly focused on nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage, including lithium/zinc ion batteries, nanogenerators, and the application of nanomaterials in regulating the fate of stem cells and/or immune cells.
Fan Yi	Dr Fan Yi is a professor of pharmacology, the Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of Shandong Province, School of Basic Medical Science, Shandong University. His current research is focused mainly on drug discovery and biomedical sciences related to signal transduction and targeted therapy. Until now, he has published more than 100 high level peer-reviewed papers including Cell, Nature and Cell Metabolism with total citation of over 5000 and H-index of 39.

Hong Liu
	Dr Hong Liu is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, and Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research (iAIR), University of Jinan. His current research is focused mainly on photo-electrical functional materials, biosensors, tissue engineering and stem cells, especially the interaction between stem cell and nanostructured biomaterials. Until now, he has published more than 300 papers with total citation of over 23000 and H-index of 71. He was included in the Clarivate Analytics’ Highly Cited Researchers 2018–2020 list, and RSC Top 1% Highest cited Chinese Researchers 2016 and 2019 list.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The microstructure and components of the extracellular matrix. Surrounding the cell, there are nanoscale fibrous collagen nanofibers and proteoglycan complex nanofibers along with nanostructured fibronectin and integrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Cell signaling pathways are governed by protein phosphorylation and are critically involved in cell development and in the regulation of pluripotent states in stem cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2014, Wang et al.	 

Phenotypic receptors	STRO-1, cluster of differentiation 166 (CD166) or activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM), cluster of differentiation 73 (CD73) or ecto-5′-nucleotidase (NT5E), cluster of differentiation 90 (CD90) or Thy-1, and cluster of differentiation 105 (CD105) or endoglin (ENG).	Associate with the phenotypic properties of MSCs; control the morphology of stem cells	
16



Growth factor receptors	Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), basic fibroblast growth factor receptor (bFGFR), insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), transforming growth factor-beta receptor type-1 (TGFR1), and transforming growth factor-beta receptor type-2 (TGFR2)	Regulate the self-renewal and differentiation of stem cells	
17,18



Chemokine receptors	G-Protein-coupled receptors for CXC, CCR, CC, C or CX3C chemokines	Affect the homing, engraftment, and migration of MSCs to the sites of injury and neoplasia	
19–21



Cytokine receptors	Type I and type II cytokines and the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor families, including interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R), interleukin-3 receptor (IL-3R), interleukin-4 receptor (IL-4R), interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R), interleukin-7 receptor (IL-7R), interferon-beta receptor (IFNβR), TNF1, and IIR	Respond to microenvironment signals, directly regulate migration, or upregulate gene transcription of stem cells	
22–24



Cell–matrix receptors	Integrin subunits, like integrin subunit alpha 1 (ITGA1), integrin subunit alpha 2 (ITGA2), integrin subunit alpha 3 (ITGA3), integrin subunit alpha 5 (ITGA5), integrin subunit alpha 6 (ITGA6), integrin subunit alpha V (ITGAV), integrin subunit beta 1 (ITGB1), integrin subunit beta 3 (ITGB3), and integrin subunit beta 5 (ITGB5); the cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44)	Mediate the cell–matrix and cell–cell adhesion and affect cellular processes such as cell attachment, motility, proliferation, differentiation, and death	
25



Cell–cell receptors	The notch receptors and their ligands (jagged canonical notch ligand 1 (JAG1), jagged canonical notch ligand 2 (JAG2), delta like canonical notch ligand 1 (DLL1), delta like canonical notch ligand 3 (DLL3), and delta like canonical notch ligand 4 (DLL4)); the immunoglobulin superfamily, including intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (ICAM2), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1), and ALCAM	Enter the cell nucleus and alter gene expression in MSCs; influence hematopoietic and immune functions	
26,27



Immuno-modulating receptors	The major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules and several soluble factors, such as indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-10 (IL-10); toll-like receptors (TLR) on their surface, such as the TLR1, TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, and TLR9	Immunomodulatory roles	
28,29



40
	2005	Synthetic biomaterials as instructive extracellular microenvironments for morphogenesis in tissue engineering

30
	2009	Control of stem cell fate by physical interactions with the extracellular matrix

41
	2009	Designing materials to direct stem-cell fate

42
	2009	Nanotechnology and nanomaterials: promises for improved tissue regeneration

43
	2010	Directed stem cell differentiation: the role of physical forces

44
	2011	Photosensitive materials and potential of photocurrent mediated tissue regeneration

35
	2012	Mimicking dynamic in vivo environments with stimuli-responsive materials for cell culture

33
	2013	Physical cues of biomaterials guide stem cell differentiation fate

45
	2014	Materials as stem cell regulators

46
	2015	Piezoelectric materials for tissue regeneration: a review

47
	2016	Material cues as potent regulators of epigenetics and stem cell function

48
	2016	Graphene scaffolds in progressive nanotechnology/stem cell-based tissue engineering of the nervous system

49
	2016	Use of nanoscale mechanical stimulation for control and manipulationof cell behaviour

50
	2017	Spatiotemporal hydrogel biomaterials for regenerative medicine

34
	2018	Manipulating cell fate: dynamic control of cell behaviors on functional platforms

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of nanostructured materials-mediated physical signals and the interactions that regulate stem cell differentiation. The physical signals are subdivided into mechanical, thermal, electrical, acoustic, magnetic, and light signals. (NIR, near-infrared; CB, conduction band; VB, valence band; LSPR, Localized surface plasmon resonance; TENG, triboelectric nanogenerator; MEA, microelectrode array; UV, ultraviolet; US, ultrasound).	 

Mechanical force	Shear stress	ESCs	Fluid shear stress	Embryonic hematopoiesis	
60

MSCs	Fluid shear stress	Endothelial cell and smooth muscle-related markers	
61

Mechanical strain	ESCs	Local cyclic stress	Local cyclic stress might be sufficient to drive an ESC to differentiate	
62

Midgut stem cells	Stretch	Mechanical stress regulated stem cell differentiation through the stretch-activated ion channel Piezo.	
63

Static pressure	MSCs	Static pressure	Neural-like cells	
64

Substrate properties	Substrate stiffness	MSCs	Variably compliant polyacrylamide gels	Soft matrices – neurogenic, stiffer matrices – myogenic, comparatively rigid matrices – osteogenic	
65

MSCs	Varying weight percent polymer	Osteogenesis occurred mostly at 11–30 kPa in 3D microenvironments.	
66

Skeletal muscle stem cells	Varying weight percent polymer	Substrate elasticity regulated skeletal muscle stem cell self-renewal.	
67

Substrate topography	MSCs	Nanoscale symmetry and disorder	Nanoscale disorder stimulated human MSCs to produce bone mineral in vitro.	
68

MSCs	Nanoscale pits	Nanostructured surface retained stem-cell phenotype and maintained stem-cell growth over eight weeks.	
69

Epidermal stem cells	Circular islands	Micropatterned surfaces triggered human epidermal stem cells to initiate terminal differentiation.	
70


 	Fig. 3  Mechanical stimuli found at the cell, tissue, and organ levels inside the body. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Overview of the bioreactor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2009, Springer Nature. (b) Bright-field images (top), corresponding green fluorescent protein (GFP) images of oct3/4 expression (middle) and corresponding Discosoma red fluorescent protein (DsRed) images of a constitutive promoter (CAGGS) expression (bottom). Cells attached to the arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-coated beads were continuously stressed for ∼1 h (17.5 Pa, 0.3 Hz) and the expression levels of oct3/4 or CAGGS were measured over time in the mouse embryonic stem cells (scale bar = 10 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic summary of the types of cell responses following culture on different hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (b) Influence of ECM nanotopography on stem cells. The nanoscale geometry and size of the features of the ECM may have significant effects on diverse cell properties, including attachment/adhesion, migration, and proliferation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Substrate elasticity regulates stem cell fate. (a) Multiple factors can influence the differentiation of stem cells, including secreted soluble factors, elasticity or compliance of the matrix substrate, and biochemical composition and dimensionality of the matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (b) The in vitro gel system allows researchers to control the elastic modulus via crosslinking, cell adhesion by covalent attachment of collagen-I, and thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) In situ staining of the encapsulated clonally derived mouse mesenchymal stem cells for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (Fast Blue; osteogenic biomarker, blue) and neutral lipid accumulation (Oil Red O; adipogenic biomarker, red) after 1 week of culture with combined osteogenic and adipogenic chemical supplements within encapsulating matrices consisting of arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-modified alginate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Polylactic acid nanopillar array-driven osteogenic differentiation by pillar diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (a) Diagram depicting human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) cultured on polylactic acid (PLA) nanopillar arrays with different pillar diameters. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images of the anodic aluminum oxide template platform with different nanopit diameters of 100 nm, 200 nm, and 300 nm, and SEM images of PLA planar film, PLA-100, PLA-200, and PLA-300. (c) ALP activity of hADSCs and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis of the expression levels of osteoblast-specific genes runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osteopontin (OPN), and osteocalcin (OCN).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) On the planar control (flat) a heterogeneous cell population was formed that retained certain levels of expression of STRO-1 and ALCAM (mesenchymal stem cells marker), while also expressing osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN) (osteoblast marker). Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. (b) Scanning electron micrographs of the human hMSCs plated on poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) micropost arrays of the indicated heights. The bottom images are magnifications of the boxed regions of the top images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Location controlled osteogenic differentiation of MSCs on a micropattern TiO2 ceramic and TiO2 nanorod array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016, Wiley. (a) Schematic illustration of the localized osteogenic differentiation of MSCs on micropatterned substrate. (b) Digital and SEM images of fabricated patterned TiO2 substrate. Immunofluorescence staining and relative expression level analysis of osteogenic markers (c) OPN and (d) OCN of MSCs on patterned TiO2 substrate after 14 d culture. (e) Calcium nodules stained by Alizarin Red S of MSC on patterned TiO2 substrate after 14 d culture.	 

 	Fig. 10  Localized committed differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs) on different topographies of a TiO2 micropattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the micropattern. (b) NSCs cultured and differentiated on the micropattern stained with Nestin (green) and the nuclei were labeled with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue). The NSCs on the pattern were differentiated for 7 days (b3) and 15 days (b4) and then immunostained with the class III β-tubulin (TuJ1) (green) for neurons, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (red) for astrocytes, and DAPI (blue) for nuclei. Scale bar = 200 μm.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Confocal images of pre- and post-compression dynamic 30:65:5 networks recovering at 37 °C in phosphate-buffered saline. Scale bar = 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Topographic surface images of the c-6A PEGPCL substrate with various microwells observed by SEM before and after shape-memory transition by a 38 °C and 41 °C heat treatment. Scale bar = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the programmed control of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell shape, reorganization of actin cytoskeleton, and differentiation by the dynamic change of a microgrooved surface activated with the thermal-induced shape memory effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (d) Hydrogel solution is flowable at 4 °C, quickly gels at 37 °C and is injectable through 26G needle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photo-crosslinked hydrogel, piezoelectric film, and magnetic field that mediate the mechanical properties of stem cell differentiation. (a) Schematic diagram of the methacrylated hyaluronic acid (MeHA) crosslinking process, rheology profiles of hydrogel formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. (b) Cell culture exposition to micro vibration when seeded in the active area of the piezoelectric film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Use of magnetized ESCs to create an embryoid body and using remote magnetic forces to stimulate it. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017, Du et al.	 

hMSCs	Chondrocytes	PEG-RGDS hydrogels	UV light (a) 365 nm at 20 mW cm−2, (b) 365 nm at 10 mW cm−2, and (c) 405 nm at 25 mW cm−2	
128 (2009)
hMSCs	Adipocytes, osteoblasts	AHA hydrogels	365 nm UV, 10 mW cm−2, 4 min	
129 (2010)
hMSCs	Osteoblasts	MeHA hydrogel substrates	UV, 2 min	
124 (2012)
hMSCs	Adipocytes, osteoblasts	RGD-modified MeHA hydrogels, MeMaHA hydrogels	UV, 4 min	
127 (2013)
hMSCs derived from the synovium	Chondrocytes	HA hydrogels containing KGN-loaded PLGA nanoparticles	UV, 1 min	
130 (2015)
hADSCs	Endothelial cells	GelMA/HAMA bicomponent network hydrogels	365 nm UV, 40 s	
131 (2017)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Mineralized bone nodule formation by hMSCs after 21 days of osteogenic culture, assessed by Alizarin red staining. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) The solenoid coil, which generated the electromagnetic field, was located inside a CO2 incubator. The inner diameter and length were 180 mm and 400 mm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2013, Kang et al. (c) Schematic procedure of low-frequency electromagnetic fields (50 Hz, 1 mT) exposure in neuronal differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs) and corresponding immunofluorescence images of neurons using antibody against the class III β-tubulin (TuJ1). Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration showing the combined magnetic cues from the internal magnetic nanoparticles and the external magnetic field that can influence the cell responses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustrations showing the process of direct lineage reprogramming into dopaminergic neurons using the electromagnetic field (EMF)-induced AuNP magnetization. Mouse fibroblasts transiently transfected with apelin (APLN) were plated on the AuNP substrate and exposed to a specific frequency and intensity of EMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

hNSCs → neurons	—	rGO sheets, ∼0.8 nm in thickness	532 nm, 5 ns pulse duration, 10 Hz repetition rate, 0.3 W, 300 mJ maximum pulse energy, ∼0.5 cm2 spot size, 30 s each hour	
176 (2014)
MG63 → osteoblasts	Rat calvarial defects → bone repair	Alginate gel including carbon nanotubes, 80 mm diameter and 2 mm thickness	NIR, 4 W cm−2, 15 min at 42 °C every day for 5 days	
177 (2014)
MC3T3-E1 → osteoblasts	Tooth-extracted sockets in normal and ovariectomized osteoporotic model mice → bone repair	Alginate gel including carbon nanotubes, 10 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness	NIR, 4.0 W cm−2, 10 min at 42 °C every day for 10 days	
178 (2015)
hBMSCs → osteoblasts	Rats tibia critical and cylindrical defects → osteogenesis	BPs@PLGA nanosheets	808 nm NIR, 1 W cm−2	
179 (2018)
MSCs → fibroblasts	BALB/c mice wound model → would healing	Matrigel with CuS@BSA NPs (in a diameter of 5–8 nm)	980 nm NIR, 1 W cm−2, 5 min	
180 (2020)

 	Fig. 15  Nanomaterials with photothermal response. (a) SEM image of BPs (the inset shows the photograph of BPs in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solution). (b and c) Photos of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and 0.2 wt% BPs@PLGA membranes, respectively. (d) Photothermal heating curves of PLGA (blue line) and BPs@PLGA membranes with different contents of BPs (red lines) immersed in the culture medium under 808 nm laser irradiation. The pure culture medium serves as the control (black line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Particle size distribution and TEM image of CuS@bull serum albumin (CuS@BSA). (f) Infrared (IR) thermal images of CuS@BSA dispersion in vitro under 980 nm NIR irradiation. (g) IR thermal images of Matrigel or CuS@BSA with Matrigel dispersion in vivo under 980 nm NIR irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2020, Xiao et al.	 

rBMSCs	Myocytes	632 nm diode laser	60 mW, 0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, or 5.0 J cm−2	
186 (2008)
rBMSCs	Osteoblasts	630 nm LED	1.2 cm distance between the LED and the cell layer, 5 and 15 mW cm−2, 2 and 4 J cm−2 radiant exposures	
189 (2010)
AFSCs	Osteoblasts	470 nm (blue), 525 nm (green), 600 nm (yellow), and 630 nm (red) LED	0–2 mW cm−2	
192 (2011)
rBMSCs	Osteoblasts	620 nm LED	1 W output, 2 cm distance between the LED and the cell layer, 10 cm diameter of the light spot, 6.67 mW cm−2 power density, 150 s for 1 J cm−2, 300 s for 2 J cm−2 and 600 s for 4 J cm−2	
191 (2012)
iPSCs	Neurons	730 nm FRL LED	FRL light illumination for 6 h each day	
193 (2018)
mNSCs	Astrocytes	980 nm NIR	150 mW, 62.5 ms pulses, 8 Hz, 90 min for 5 consecutive days	
184 (2019)

 	Fig. 16  Light-converting-mediated optical signals for stem cell differentiation. (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of UCNP@SiO2. (b and c) Schematic diagram of modulating cell–matrix interactions and the fate of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) using an upconversion nanoparticle (UCNP)-based substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Schematic diagram of intracellular upconversion nanotransducer (UCNT)-based nanocomplex for hMSCs differentiation under NIR light irradiation. (e) Real-time measurement of relative fluorescence intensities in hMSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (f) Distribution of the second harmonic generation (SHG) signal from the lithium niobate (LN) nanocrystals within a typical cell with a spindle-like shape and the fluorescent image of rat MSCs (rMSCs) with immunostained actin (red) that are labeled with LN nanocrystals (blue). Scale bar = 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Direct electrical stimulation for stem cell differentiation. (a) Image of the bioreactor, including the incubation chambers and electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the Teflon culture dish and the indium tin oxide (ITO)-deposited glass plates for culturing the neural stem cells that connect to a biphasic current stimulator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2011, Chang et al. (c) Experimental design: early-stage or late-stage hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPS-CMs) and supporting fibroblasts were encapsulated in a fibrin hydrogel to form tissues stretched between two elastic pillars, which were made to contract via electrical stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

hESCs	Cardiomyocytes	1000 V m−1 amplitude of the applied electrical field	
202 (2009)
hiPSCs	Cardiomyocytes	The electric field (100 or 150 V m−1) with a biphasic square pulse (5 ms) at 5 Hz frequency for 1–30 d	
206 (2018)
hiPSCs	Cardiac tissues	4.5 mV intensity, 2 ms in duration, monophasic square waveform for (i) constant (three weeks at 2 Hz); and (ii) intensity training (two weeks at a frequency increasing from 2 Hz to 6 Hz by 0.33 Hz per day, followed by one week at 2 Hz)	
203 (2018)
mNSCs	Neurons	100 Hz electrical stimulation with a magnitude of 8 and 32 mA cm−2 with 50 or 200 ms pulses	
207 (2011)
pMSCs	Chondrocytes	5 × 105–2 × 106 and 3 × 106 V m−1 for durations of 10, 60, 100 or 300 ns, 5 pulses with 1 s intervals	
208 (2019)

 	Fig. 18  Conductive biomaterials used for mediating electrical stimulation and regulating the differentiation of stem cells. (a) SEM image of fibronectin-coated Au NPs fabricated on polyethyleneimine (PEI)-precoated cover glass. (b) Schematic diagram of fibronectin-coated Au NPs surface for human embryonic stem cell (hESC) stimulation by AC electrical field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) SEM image of electrospinning poly(L-lactic acid)/polyaniline (PLLA/PANi) nanofibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (d) Digital photo of the CNT rope stimulation device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012, Wiley. (e) SEM images of mouse neural stem cells (mNSCs) on 3D-GFs with low and high magnification, live/dead staining image of mNSCs on 3D-GFs after 5 d (live cells, green; dead cells, red), and immunofluorescence images of mNSCs proliferated on 3D-GFs for 5 d (green nestin, neural stem cell marker; blue DAPI, nuclei). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2013, Li et al.	 

hESCs → osteocytes	—	Fibronectin-coated Au nanoparticles (20 nm) on the surface of culture dishes	AC stimulation from three-electrode structure for 30 min	
214 (2009)
rBMSCs → osteocytes	—	Patterned Si substrates with micropyramids and nanoporosity	150 V m−1, at a frequency of 1 Hz and a pulse width of 2 ms AC	
215 (2019)
NSCs → neurons	—	PLLA/PANi nanofibers with a diameter of 195 ± 30 nm	Steady potential of 1.5 V for 1 h	
216 (2011)
hMSCs → osteocytes	—	PANI/ColI/sHya (a mesoporous surface topography with pore sizes ranging from 200–300 nm)	7 ms rectangular pulses, 3.6 mV cm−1, 10 Hz	
217 (2015)
hNSCs → neurons	—	PPy(DBS) films, characteristic ‘cauliflower’ morphology	±0.25 mA cm−2, a biphasic waveform of 100 μs pulses with 20 μs interphase open circuit potential and 3.78 ms short circuit (250 Hz)	
218 (2015)
rBMSCs → osteocytes	—	Flat PPy films	Constant 2 V on day 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12 for 4 h	
219 (2018)
hDPSCs → osteocytes	—	PPy films	Electrical field of 33 V m−1 for 4 h on different days	
220 (2019)
NSCs → neurons	—	Laminin-SWCNTs films (The conductivity of a 10-bilayer film was ∼430 S m−1)	1–10 μA cm−2, a series (∼10–15) of 1 ms pulses spaced in 1–10 s intervals	
221 (2009)
hMSCs → cardio progenitor cells	—	CNTs/PLA nanofiber scaffold	An electrical current of 15 V m−1 for 2 ms duration at a frequency of 1 Hz for 14 days	
222 (2012)
rNSCs → neurons	—	CNT ropes (the bundles of CNTs with a diameter of approximately 20 nm; SWCNTs with a diameter of 1–2 nm)	5 mV, 0.5 mA, 25 ms intermittent stimulation	
223 (2012)
rBMSCs → osteocytes	—	PLLA/MWCNTs mixture with average diameter of 300–600 nm	Direct current, 1.5 V, 1.5 h day−1	
226 (2017)
mNSCs → neurons	—	Electrospun carbon nanofibers (the average diameter of 384 ± 99 nm with a range of 200–600 nm after annealing)	Electrical current of 100 μA and pulse rates of 100 Hz with 100 μs duration for 24 h	
227 (2017)
hMSCs → osteocytes and neuronal cells	—	Monolayer graphene with flat, grid and column patterns	0.5 V, 0.3 V, and 0.1 V voltages, 1 Hz, 3 Hz, and 5 Hz frequencies with 1 ms pulses	
228 (2016)
rBMSCs → Schwann-cell-like phenotypes	—	Inkjet-printed graphene circuits (sheet resistance < 1 kΩ sq−1)	100 mV at 50 Hz for 10 min during 15 days	
229 (2017)
mNSCs → astrocytes and neurons	—	3D graphene foams (a porosity of 99.5 ± 0.2%, a pore size of 100–300 mm, and a width of 100–200 mm)	1–100 ms monophasic cathodic pulses, 10 s intervals, 20–30 mA stimulation threshold	
225 (2013)
hNSCs → neurons	—	3D graphene oxide foam (a thicknesses of ∼15–50 μm and density of ∼10 graphene oxide sheets per μm)	100 ms monophasic cathodic pulses, intervals of 10 s, 20 mA stimulation threshold	
230 (2015)

 	Fig. 19  Several electrical stimulation methods to regulate stem cell differentiation. (a) Schematic illustration of the springs installed on the triboelectric nanogenerator. (b) SEM image of 15% poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-reduced graphene oxide (rGO–PEDOT) microfibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of the microelectrode array chip, microscopy image of the quadrupole-electrode array, and schematic illustration of a single quadrupole-electrode unit with four circular electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Crystal structure of lithium niobate and the spontaneous polarization-induced status of the surface charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  Piezoelectric nanoparticle-mediated electrical stimulation for stem cell differentiation. (a) The structural illustration of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2018, Kim et al. (b) “Wireless” electrical stimulation of cells: internalizing piezoelectric nanoparticles (e.g., BNNTs) provide inner electrical stimulation as a response to external ultrasound stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Calcium and (d) sodium transients induced by BNTPs + ultrasound. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM images of nylon-11 NPs. (f) Relative amplitude of the piezoelectric response detected by piezoelectric force microscopy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Piezoelectric films/composite-mediated electrical stimulation for cell differentiation. Structure diagrams of (a) alpha-polyvinylidene fluoride (α-PVDF) and (b) beta-polyvinylidene fluoride (β-PVDF), the arrow indicates the direction of the dipole. (c) “Wireless” electrical stimulation on cells: piezoelectric substrates (e.g., PVDF) provide external electrical stimulation under ultrasound stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2017, Hoop et al. (d) Structure diagram of polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene (P(VDF-TrFE)), the arrow indicates the direction of the dipole. (e) Amplitude of pressure variation induced by ultrasounds and (f) the corresponding voltage for P(VDF-TrFE) films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) PFM map of P(VDF-TrFE)/BNTPs films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 22  Magnetic/piezoelectric composites-driven cell differentiation. (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasound-driven piezoelectric microswimmers inducing neuronal differentiation of rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. (b) Comparison of PC 12 cells cultured in different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of S. platensis@Fe3O4@BTNPs micromotors. (d) Cell viability of PC 12 cells after micromotors treatment. (e) Schematic diagram of micromotors to inducing the targeted PC 12 cell differentiation. (f) Fluorescence images of differentiated PC12 cells co-stimulated by micromotors and ultrasound signals. (g) Comparison of average neurite length of PC 12 cells cultured under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

PC12 → neural-like cells	—	BNNTs with 200–600 nm in length and about 50 nm in diameter	40 kHz, 20 W, 5 s, 4 times day−1 for 9 days	
252 (2010)
hOBs → osteoblasts	—	BNNTs are hollow with diameters of 40–70 nm, lengths <500 nm, thickness of ∼10 nm	40 kHz, 5 s, 3 times day−1 for 7 days	
253 (2013)
SH-SY5Y → neurons	—	BTNPs with hydrodynamic size of 479.0 ± 145.3 nm	1 MHz, 5 mm distance from the cells, 5 s, 0.1–0.8 W cm−2	
254 (2015)
SaOS-2 → osteocytes	—	Ormocomp/BTNPs scaffolds prepared through two-photon polymerization	0.8 W cm−2, 5 s every 4 h, 3 times day−1	
256 (2015)
hDPSCs → osteocytes	—	Nylon-11 NPs with ∼50 nm in diameter	—	
255 (2019)
PC12 → neurons	Zebrafish Parkinson's disease model → recovery of degenerative dopaminergic neurons	Carbon shell @ BaTiO3 core–structured NPs; the BaTiO3 are ∼66 ± 10 nm in diameter and the carbon shells are 3–5 nm in thickness	HB810B sonicator, 640 mW cm−2, 1 MHz	
269 (2020)
PC12 → neural-like cells	—	β-PVDF films	132 kHz, 80 W, 10 min, 5 times day−1	
261 (2017)
SH-SY5Y → neurons	—	P(VDF-TrFE)/BTNPs films; BTNPs distribute homogeneously and cavities form surrounding them	SonoPore KTAC-4000 sonoporator, 1 W cm−2, 100 Hz burst rate	
263 (2016)
SaOS-2 → osteocytes	—	P(VDF-TrFE)/BNNTs films with a highly patterned fracture surface; BNNTs as bundles of multi-walled tubes with 10 nm average in diameter and micrometer scale in length	Sonopore KTAC-4000 sonoporator, 1 W cm−2, 100 Hz burst rate, 100% duty cycle	
262 (2017)
PC12 → neural-like cells	—	Helical swimmer PLLA/CoFe2O4 with a pitch angle of 25°, inner diameter of 250 mm and etching ratio of 70%; P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 composite with a pitch angle of 35°, inner diameter of 250 mm, and etching ratio of 30%	—	
266 (2019)
PC12 → neurons	—	
S. platensis@Fe3O4@BTNPs micromotors, S. platensis are in a spiral shape with a total length of ∼22 μm, a spiral width of 5 μm, and a diameter of 0.6 μm	1 MHz, 1 W cm−2	
268 (2020)

 	Fig. 23  SEM images of (a) the fabricated photovoltaic microcell array (PVMA) and (b) the test structure made to reach the electrical contacts for optoelectronic characterization (the inset shows how the connection was made). (c) SEM capture of SaOS-2 cells growing on PVMA and (d) bare silicon. (e) Confocal laser scanning microscope images of cells after 24 h of culture on PVMA and (f) bare silicon. Stress fibers (red), focal contacts (green), and nuclei (blue) can be observed. SaOS-2 cells respond to PVMA activation. (g) Intracellular calcium transient pattern of a stimulated (activated) and an unstimulated (control) SaOS-2 cell. (h) Percentage of activated SaOS-2 cells on PVMA and glass coverslip/bare silicon controls for the same light stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  Photocatalytic nanomaterials that mediated electrical signals for stem cell differentiation. AFM image of (a) GO/TiO2 film and (b) the GO sheets on the GO/TiO2 film. Immunofluorescence images of hNSCs differentiated on rGO/TiO2 for three weeks (c) without or (d) with flash photo stimulation. DAPI (blue) for nuclei, GFAP (red) for glial cells, and TuJ1 (green color) for neural cells (scale bar = 200 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of assembled C3N4 sheets. (f) Two-photon fluorescence spectra of the C3N4 sheets dispersed in water at different excitation wavelengths. (g) Photocurrent transients measured under intensity modulated blue and red light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

PC 12 → neurons	—	PPy/NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs photoelectrode	980 nm NIR light	
275 (2012)
hNSCs → neurons	—	rGO grid/TiO2 NPs/SiO2; TiO2 NPs havea uniform surface distribution on the SiO2 matrix	Flash photo pulse generated from the xenon lamp, 10 mW cm−2, 4 s pulse duration and 1 Hz (4 flashes per s), repeated after 60 s time intervals for total 30 min, every 12 h	
276 (2013)
hNSCs → neurons	—	rGO/TiO2 heterojunction films; electron injection can be from the photoexcited TiO2 into the cells on the rGO through Ti–C and Ti–O–C bonds	Flash photo pulse generated from the xenon lamp, 10 mW cm−2, 4 s pulse duration and 1 Hz (4 flashes per s), repeated after 60 s time intervals for total 30 min, every 12 h	
277 (2013)
PC12 → neurons	—	GO/g-C3N4 coated electrospun microfibers; g-C3N4 NPs are ∼6.34 nm in thickness and ∼63 nm in diameter, electrospun microfibers are ∼1.36 μm in diameter	450 nm visible light, 30 cm distance between the lamp and the sample, 10 mW cm−2, 1 s with a time interval of 1 s for a total 30 min, every 12 h	
278 (2017)
hBMSCs → osteoblasts	Mouse cranial defect model → bone repair	Random stack C3N4 sheets with an average size of ∼6 μm, quantum-sized carbon dots	455 nm (blue), 520 nm (green), and 635 nm (red) light, 10 mA in 10 cm height	
279 (2017)
MSCs → osteoblasts	Rats tibia bone defect mode → bone repair	Bismuth sulfide/hydroxyapatite film	808 nm laser, 0.29 W cm−2	
280 (2019)

hADSCs	Osteoblast-like cells	ESWs	0.32 mJ mm−2, peak positive pressure 90 MPa, 1000 shots, 4 shocks per s	
287 (2017)
hADSCs	Osteocytes	Ultrasound	2–8 MHz for day 1, 4, 10 and 14	
289 (2016)
mNSCs	Neurons	Ultrasound	510 kHz–3 W s cm−2, 994 kHz–3 W s cm−2, 4.36 MHz–3 W s cm−2, 994 kHz–25 W s cm−2 and 4.36 MHz–25 W s cm−2	
290 (2017)
hMSCs	Chondrocytes	LIUS	15, 30, 60, and 120 mW cm−2, 1.0 MHz with 200 μs tone burst	
292 (2004)
rNSPCs	Neurons and astrocytes	LIUS	1.8 MHz, 100–500 mW cm−2, 5–11 days, 5 min exposure per stimulation and a 3 day interval between stimulations	
293 (2014)
rDPSCs, rPDLSCs, rBMSCs	Osteocytes and adipocytes	LIPUS	1 MHz, 250 or 750 mW cm−2 for 5 or 20 min	
299 (2016)
hADSCs	Osteocytes	LIPUS	2.0 MHz, 200 μs burst width sine wave, 1.0 kHz pulse repetition, 1:4 pulse duty cycle, 20 and 30 mW cm−2, 30 min day−1	
297 (2018)
rMSCs	Chondrocytes	LIPUS	3 MHz, 20 min at 20, 30, 40 or 50 mW cm−2	
298 (2019)

Primary osteoblast-like cells → osteoblasts	—	Porous PCL scaffolds with pore sizes of 150–300 μm and a thickness of 2 mm	SAWs, 20 MHz, 10–30 s, 380 mW	
302 (2009)
Rabbit MSCs → chondrocytes	—	3D alginate	LIUS, continuous wave, 1 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, 10 min every 12 h for 1 or 2 weeks	
303 (2006)
Rabbit MSCs → chondrocytes	Nude mice subcutaneous implantation → chondrogenesis	PGA non-woven mesh	LIPUS, 0.8 MHz, 200 mW cm−2, 10 min day−1, 4 weeks	
304 (2006)
MG-63 → osteoblast-like cells	—	Topological microtubes surfaces with inner diameter of 5 μm and various heights (5, 10, 20 μm)	LIPUS, 40 kHz, 60 mW cm−2, 20 min day−1, 5 days	
305 (2019)
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
