Redox mediators as charge agents for changing electrochemical reactions   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00489H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00489H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7454-7478Redox mediators as charge agents for changing electrochemical reactions†

        
          
            Andebet Gedamu 
            Tamirat
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuze 
            Guan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jingyuan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiayan 
            Luo
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yongyao 
            Xia
          
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Chemistry and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative Materials, Institute of New Energy, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yyxia@fudan.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-21-3124417;   Tel: +86-21-31244177
bDepartment of Chemistry, College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Kotebe Metropolitan University, P. O. Box: 31248, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
cSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
dCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China
Received 
      18th June 2020
    First published on 30th September 2020AbstractRedox mediators (RMs) play pivotal roles in enhancing the performance of electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems. Unlike the widely explored areas of electrode materials, electrolytes, separators, and electrolyte additives, RMs have received little attention. This review provides a comprehensive discussion toward understanding the effects of RMs on electrochemical systems, underlying redox mechanisms, and reaction kinetics both experimentally and theoretically. Our discussion focuses on the roles of RMs in various electrochemical systems such as lithium-ion batteries, Li–O2 batteries, Li–S batteries, decoupling electrolysis, supercapacitors, and microbial fuel cells. Depending on the reaction regions where the RMs become active, we can classify them into bulk, solid–solid interfacial, solid–liquid interfacial, and cell-unit RMs. The prospect of developing RMs with effective charge transfer properties along with minimal side-effects is an exciting research direction. Moreover, the introduction of an efficient RM into an electrochemical system can fundamentally change its chemistry; in particular, the electrode reaction polarization can be considerably decreased. In this context, we discuss the key properties of RMs applied for various purposes, and the main issues are addressed.
Yongyao Xia
Yongyao Xia received his PhD from Saga University, Japan, in 1997. Currently, he is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. His research interests involve advanced materials and technologies for energy storage and conversion devices.
1. Introduction
In view of the rapid growth in the levels of greenhouse gases and ever-increasing energy demands of the end user, there is a well-established need for newer energy technologies that can deliver clean and eco-friendly solutions.1 To this end, electrochemical energy storage (EES) and conversion systems have been considered to be the best solutions, which combine renewable energy resources with electric or plug-in hybrid vehicles.2 However, in the competition between petrol and electric vehicles, current batteries have not been able to meet the demand to fully take the place of their opponent. The continuous development of EES devices has necessitated higher power density, increased capacity, and enhanced operating cycles (Fig. 1).3
 Fig. 1  Radar charts of the important target metrics for Li-ion batteries in electric vehicles. The dotted area represents accomplished improvements in present Li-ion batteries. 
So far, great efforts have been devoted toward designing and preparing advanced materials with a tailored structure, composition, and morphology to improve the performance of EESs. Although significant progress has been achieved, the energy density, power density, and lifespan hardly meet the demands. Above all, the active material and electrode need to be modified to improve the rate performance. Till now, several applied strategies have gained fruitful results, such as mixing conducting species (especially carbon),4–8 surface coating by conductive materials,9–13 reducing particle size to the nanoscale,14–18 and adopting active materials with three-dimensional (3D) ionic diffusion paths.19–22 However, most approaches hardly reach the realm of their theoretical performances. On the other hand, to achieve increased capacity, present batteries need appropriate active materials with higher mass loading. In this case, it is challenging to retain the electrode's conductivity, particularly ionic conductivity. Another possible way is adopting the so-called next-generation batteries, such as lithium–air (Li–O2) and lithium-sulfur (Li–S) batteries. However, neither of them is achievable in the near term. Various problems, such as high overpotential, low coulombic efficiency, and poor cycling performance, hinder their way to practical applications. Moreover, the demand for safety necessitates a novel design for the battery. The “physical” prevention of overcharging should attract more attention, instead of merely updating the battery management system. Overall, the essence of improving the performances of EES devices is to tackle several issues such as ion and electron transport in bulk materials and on the electrode–electrolyte interface, as well as the stability of the materials and structures during charge–discharge cycling.
In addition to the above approaches, remarkable achievements have also been made with regard to the optimization and development of electrolytes, separator membranes, electrolyte additives, binders, etc. Redox mediators/shuttles (RMs)—although not considered to be the main components of electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems—also play critical roles in the performance of EES devices. However, RMs have received little attention compared with research on the structural design of electrode materials. RMs are a series of molecules, polymers, ions, or compounds that can be reversibly oxidized and reduced upon electrochemical cycling. In an electrochemical reaction, they serve as intermediate electron carriers or reservoirs without changing the final products (Fig. 2). For their applications in EES, the adoption of RMs makes it possible to accelerate the electrochemical reactions via quicker electron–hole transportation processes or overcome the excessive activation energy by forming a more stable transition state.23 Moreover, RMs can preserve electrons or holes from a half-reaction, thereby decoupling the electrochemical reaction. To accomplish this, key properties such as high reversibility, faster kinetics, and negligible side reactions are necessitated. Good solubility is also required if RMs are used as the component of electrolytes. In addition, a carefully selected RM usually has proper redox potential, which is slightly lower than the oxidation potential of the pure electrode material or higher than its reduction potential. Owing to such properties, RMs play unique roles in enhancing the performance of energy storage and conversion systems. Table S1 (ESI†) lists the potential RMs applicable for various electrochemical systems.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the working mechanism of RMs and its effect on cell voltage. A RM serves as an intermediate electron carrier or reservoir without changing the final products, which usually has proper redox potential that is slightly lower than the oxidation potential of the pure electrode material or higher than its reduction potential. 
In the field of Li-ion batteries, RMs are used to extract/inject charges into poorly conducting hosts such as LiFePO4,24,25 TiO2,26 and so on. These RMs can improve the pristine bulk conductivity as a dopant or accelerate charge transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface when working as solid or liquid additives. Further, they have been employed as a chemical overcharge protection agent that consumes the excess current in the case of battery overcharge.27,28 In terms of next-generation batteries, namely, Li–S and Li–O2 batteries, the electronically insulating discharge products contribute to poor rate capability, low active material utilization, and high polarization.29,30 In this regard, RMs boost the charge transport and charge transfer properties, which are the main performance bottlenecks of advanced EES devices. These soluble RMs in the electrolyte act as electron–hole transport agents that enable charge transfer at the solid–liquid interface, thereby activating insulating discharged products such as O species (Li2O and Li2O2)31,32 and S species (S, Li2S, and Li2S2);33,34 this reduces the overpotential.32 Besides, on a magnified scale, RMs have also long been used in catalytic hydrogen production systems via water splitting. In such systems, a shuttle RM, usually working as an independent electrode, is employed either as an electron conductor that transfers electrons from the conduction band edge of the O2 evolution system to the valence band edge of the H2 evolution system (Z-scheme photocatalysis systems)35,36 or as the redox decoupling intermediates of oxygen and hydrogen evolution that produce O2 and H2, respectively.37,38 Moreover, RMs can be potentially applied in supercapacitor systems as additives in electrolytes, which can provide considerable capacitive contributions via reversible faradaic reactions. They create a tunable redox shuttle that controls the electron transfer processes at the electrode surface and therefore enhances the capacities of double-layer supercapacitors.39 The unique characteristics of the fast electron transfer of RMs has also aroused much attention toward microbial fuel cell (MFC) applications.40
Although RMs perform crucial roles in the electrochemical energy storage and conversion processes, there has been no comprehensive description and discussion of RMs for various applications. Herein, we provide an extensive and systematic discussion on the roles of RMs in prevailing EES systems. It is inappropriate to sort RMs from the viewpoint of their functions or application fields, because a RM adopted in an electrochemical system may be multifunctional and RMs applied in different systems may deliver similar functions. In this review, we categorize RMs into bulk RMs, interfacial RMs, and cell units based on places where they are effective (Fig. 3). Bulk RMs can be obtained by incorporating redox couples into the active electrode materials, thereby forming a solid solution. The mediated electrochemical reaction homogenously occurs within the material particle. For such RMs, charge transportation happens within a distance lower than nanometers. Subsequently, two typical kinds of interfacial RMs are elaborated. First, solid–solid interfacial RMs, such as coating layers or blended electrodes, usually work on the interface between the mediator and active material and they provide quick charge shuttling between the active material and external circuit.24 The application scale varies from nanometers to micrometers. The other type act at the electrode–electrolyte interface at which the charge transfer process occurs. Most RMs of this kind are soluble molecules and they may need a longer shuttling distance (millimeter scale) to transport charge between the reactant and electron/hole donor. Furthermore, RMs with a large dosage can directly serve as specific electrodes or some key components of electrolytes.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of RMs applied under various scales. Bulk RMs are obtained by incorporating redox couples into the active electrode materials, forming a solid solution. Solid–solid interfacial RMs usually work at the interface between the mediator and active material, and solid–liquid interfacial RMs act at the electrode–electrolyte interface. RMs with a large dosage can directly serve as specific electrodes or some key components of electrolytes. 
We believe that RMs can provide many promising directions in the research of EES systems. Meanwhile, the explorations and applications of RMs would be beneficial to understand how to control the highly reactive environment in an electrochemical system and how to facilitate charge shuttling and systematically enhance the efficiency. This interesting concept should certainly be explored further, particularly in conjunction with improved electrode design, cell configuration, and other important components of electrochemical systems. Further, we consider that the introduction of an effective RM into a certain electrochemical system has the capability to fundamentally change the system chemistry. It is worth noting that the feasibility studies of existing and new RMs should involve a proper evaluation of the charge transport mechanisms, their side-effects, and other related issues.
2. Bulk RMs
To fully explore the capacity of active electrode materials, they must be electrochemically addressable. However, due to the lack of electronic conductivity of the electrode materials, a significant quantity of conducting additives, such as carbon black, or Li+-conducting membranes have to be incorporated into the electrodes to form a continuous conducting network for electron percolation.41–43 Moreover, the large surface area of the conducting carbon increases binder consumption. Consequently, the energy density of the battery reduces considerably because of the presence of a large amount of inactive conducting agents and binders.24 Incorporating RMs into the bulk structure of poorly conducting active materials can reduce the addition of conducting additives. These RMs often trigger faster kinetic processes than the bulk phase and therefore can form a “highway” for charge transport. Bulk RMs, which are usually in the solid state, can be obtained by incorporating redox couples into the active materials as the dopant.
In a few works, RMs have been introduced into active materials to form a solid solution. In such cases, RMs are generally referred to as dopant ions. Such configurations, for instance, can accelerate Li intercalation in certain cathode materials with slower kinetics, such as LiMnPO4. A representative example is the solid solution of LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4 as the cathode material for Li-ion batteries.44 Normally, two plateaus are observed in this material because of the charge–discharge processes related to the phase transformation of MnPO4/LiMnPO4 and FePO4/LiFePO4 at lower current rates. Nonetheless, it has been observed that an additional discharge plateau appears at relatively high rates (Fig. 4a and b). The discharge capacity of the additional plateau increases with the current densities. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles show that different from the potential range of 2–3.9 V, an additional reduction peak is observed at 3.6 V when the potential range varies from 2 to 4.5 V, which confirms that the additional discharge plateau can be ascribed to the reduction in Mn3+via a new Fe3+/Fe2+ redox reaction, which can be described as follows: Li+ + FePO4 (containing Mn3+) + e− → LiFePO4(1) MnPO4 + LiFePO4→ LiMnPO4 + FePO4(2)
 Fig. 4  RMs as the dopant. (a) Typical charge–discharge curves of LiFe0.5Mn0.5O4 at C/5 rate; (b) CV at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c and d) Charge transfer processes for Li2TiO3 and Li1.2Ti0.4Fe0.4O2, respectively, during the redox process. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
It should be noted that the rate performance of LiFexMn1−xPO4 is critically dependent on the doping content, x, for the better kinetics of the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple, as confirmed by comparing the rate performances of LiMnPO4 and LiFePO4. Doped LiFexMn1−xPO4 shows a more remarkable improvement in rate performance as x increases (x ≥ 0.2). Moreover, beyond improving the rate ability, RMs work as a crucial factor in the material's electrochemical activation process in some cases. Dingguo Xia et al. reported a partially Fe3+-substituted material, namely, Li1.2Ti0.4Fe0.4O2, as the cathode for Li-ion batteries.45 Electrochemically inactive Li2TiO3 shows no oxygen redox activity before Fe3+ is incorporated into the pristine material. After doping, Li1.2Ti0.4Fe0.4O2 exhibits a reversible capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1. The substitution of Fe3+ in inert cubic Li2TiO3 triggers oxygen redox activity as the thermodynamic activation of charge transfer in the anionic redox process enhanced by Fe3+. A theoretical investigation demonstrated that electron transfer mainly occurred at the oxygen atoms surrounded by the Fe ion instead of the Ti ion. Referring to the author's conclusion, if the Mott–Hubbard U value of a heavy transition metal is larger than the charge transfer energy, Δ, then anionic redox can be activated when the oxygen 2p states move to the Fermi level (Fig. 4c and d). Similar situations may occur in other analogous structures, such as Li1.2Ti0.6Co0.2S2 and M-doped Li3NbO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni).46
Alternatively, RMs can be mixed with the active electrode material to form a matrix electrode. For example, a study by Min-Cheol Kim and co-workers introduced a polymeric redox mediator (PRM) that comprised iodine as the RM bonded to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) matrix; the PRM prevented redox shuttle and hence improved the performance of Li–O2 batteries.47 The PRM was mixed with multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and employed as a cathode material for Li–O2 batteries by a spray-casting method. The cathode structure, i.e., PRM homogeneously formed on MWCNTs, was reported to significantly enhance the electrochemical contact area for electrochemical reactions (Fig. 5). Furthermore, the PRM acted as a homogeneously dispersed RM (catalyst) as well as an electrode binder. The cycling performance was shown to increase by 214.0% and 925% and the polarization was reduced by 53.7% and 24.7% at 100 and 500 μA cm2, respectively, by using an optimal ratio of iodine to PVDF compared with the sample prepared without iodine. The catalytic decomposition of Li2O2 using iodine as the RM can be mechanistically represented by the following reactions:3I → I3 + 2e (electrochemical oxidation)I3 + Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 3I (chemical reduction)
 Fig. 5  Graphical representation of a PRM used as a cathode catalyst for lithium–air batteries. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
3. Solid–solid interfacial RMs
Homogenous doping provides an internal highway that crosses the bulk for charge transportation, further expediting or activating electrochemical reactions. Nevertheless, charge transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface experiences nonnegligible activation energy, thereby hindering the material's electrochemical performance, particularly under higher rates. To overcome such a drawback, RMs with faster kinetics are introduced to result in a quicker charge transfer process at the mediator–active material interface. Moreover, RMs can also serve as a “fuse” to prevent battery overcharge.
3.1 RMs used for surface modification
The coating of RMs onto the electrode surface can electrochemically address the issue of insulating electrode materials. Instead of dot contact between the active and conducting materials, uniform two-dimensional (2D) conductivity can be achieved by the coated RMs, leading to a faster charge transfer process when it crosses the electrolyte–electrode interface. Michael Grätzel et al. investigated the application of an interfacial mediator by adopting 4-[bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]benzylphosphonic acid (BMABP) as the RM and LiFePO4 as the cathode material.48 A monolayer of BMABP was adsorbed onto the LiFePO4 surface to form a conducting layer. The key property of this kind of RM is that the electron exchange reaction between the adjacent anchored molecules should be characterized by strong electronic coupling and low reorganization energy; meanwhile, charge transfer between the RM and active bulk should be fast and reversible. To realize the latter, except the reversibility of the RM+/RM couple, the redox potential should be close to the Fermi level of the bulk active materials. In the case of BMABP, during the charge process, two reactions are involved: BMABP → BMABP+ + e−(3) BMABP+ + LiFePO4 → BMABP + FePO4 + Li+(4)The introduced BMABP and other similar agents only aggregate as a thin layer on the bulk active materials, resulting in the minimum occupation of the electrode's volume and reducing the applied conducting carbon and corresponding binder; this increased the volume energy density. A similar strategy has also been introduced for the cathodes of sodium-ion batteries. Xiaogang Zhang et al. reported a Prussian blue analog (PBA) cathode, where its surface was functionalized by 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinododimethane (TCNQ).49 Besides the improved electronic conductivity, a bond formed between the Fe and N atom confirmed the interaction between PBA and TCNQ, which reduced the desorption risk of the conducting layer.
In some other cases, the bulk materials behave more like an anchor of the catalyst than an electrochemically active material. In 2014, a research published in Nature Communications reported a strategy to entrap polysulfides in the cathode, which relied on a chemical process in which the host—MnO2 nanosheets—reacted with the initially formed lithium polysulfides (LiPSs) to form surface-bound intermediates.50 For this purpose, they synthesized S/MnO2 nanosheet composites with S content of 75%. First, the thiosulfate groups were formed inside the composite matrix in situ by oxidation-soluble LiPSs formerly formed on the surface of ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets. Then, the newly created soluble “higher” polysulfides were proposed to anchor the thiosulfate groups to form polythionates via catenation and changing into insoluble “lower” polysulfides. Therefore, the polythionate complex created on the surface could be best described as a charge-transfer-type RM. As shown below, the polysulfides from the solution were anchored by the long-chain insoluble S2O32− (considered to be an internal mediator) formed on the MnO2 surfaces. As a result, long-chain polysulfides were converted to lower polysulfides according to the reaction mechanism shown in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  RMs used for surface modification. (a) Schematic showing the oxidation of the initially formed polysulfide by MnO2 to form thiosulfate on the surface; the reaction formula. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing. (b) Schematic representation of the working principles of polymer wiring of insulating electrode materials. Here, carbon-free LiFePO4 was studied with the redox polymer of poly(4-(10-(12-dodecyl phenoxazine)vinylpyridinium)-co-4-vinylpyridine) at a molar ratio of 6:1 (y/x = 5). Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) CV curves of three cells, namely, Li/hybrid-1, Li/hybrid-2, and Li/hybrid-3, with PTMA/LiFePO4 ratios of 25/75, 50/50, and 75/25 in hybrid electrodes, respectively, at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and potential range of 4.5–2.0 V vs. Li/Li+ for the 1st and 5th cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Voltage profile of the hybrid PTMA-LiFePO4 electrode at a current density of 26 mA h g−1. (e) CV of the hybrid electrode recorded between 2.5 and 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+ at different scan rates. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing. 
3.2 RMs in blended electrodes
Either doping or surface modification needs amendments toward the production of electrode materials. This results in increased costs to redesign the production line and producing strategy. An alternative route involves the introduction of RMs as a composition by refitting the electrode. Under this strategy, it is expected that the maximum utilization of the existing equipment can be maintained. The reported RMs chosen to refit the electrodes are mainly polymers because of the superior mechanical properties. Michael Grätzel proposed a polymer wiring design as a way to modify the electrode.51 The synthesized polymer of poly(4-((10-(12-dodecyl phenoxazine)vinylpyridinium)-co-4-vinylpyridine) (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide)) (also called PVP-DD-PXZ) (Fig. 6b) was chosen as the polymer wiring and LiFePO4 as the cathode. Few changes in manufacturing the LiFePO4/PVP-DD-PXZ electrode need to be considered. With 10% additive of PVP-DD-PXZ, the rate ability of the electrode was improved even in the absence of conducting carbon and binder.
Along similar lines, in 2009, Qian Huang and co-workers reported organic radical–inorganic hybrid cathode comprising the PTMA/LiFePO4 composite.52 Three pairs of reversible redox peaks were observed from the CV profile with the hybrid electrode (Fig. 6c), which is an indication of the combination of electrochemical characteristics between the LiFePO4 and PTMA electrodes. This shows that the oxidation/reduction voltage gap was decreased, which corresponds to an enhancement in the rate and reversibility of the redox couples. Later, in 2011, the same approach was employed for the construction of a supercapacitor–Li-ion battery hybrid system using PTMA and LiFePO4.53 Details of the unique sequential charging mechanism in the hybrid electrode was proposed by the authors. PTMA was converted into a high-potential redox species via the oxidation reaction, which subsequently relaxed and charged LiFePO4 by an internal charge transfer process. In Fig. 6d, both plateaus in the charge and discharge processes are discernible, and they correspond to distinct redox processes of PTMA and LiFePO4. Consistent with the charge–discharge plateaus observed during galvanostatic cycling, two sets of distinct peaks—in both reduction and oxidation—are visibly observed at lower scan rates (Fig. 6e). As shown in Fig. 5e, the CV response of the hybrid electrode indicates that the two cathodic peaks merge into a single peak at higher rates, dominated by the PTMA cathodic process. A single LiFePO4 electrode can reach unsafe levels of voltage polarization even under moderate scan rates. For the single LiFePO4 electrode setup, the electrode potential is driven to surpass the safe voltage range by a fast polarization increase, thereby preventing the redox reaction. This provides a significant advantage to the hybrid configuration: voltage abuse on the LiFePO4 particles accentuated at higher rates can be prevented by the overall electrode potential limited by the PTMA, eventually preventing the deterioration of LiFePO4.
3.3 RMs for fabricating high-safety Li-ion batteries
Interfacial RMs have been extensively studied in Li-ion batteries for two purposes: to enhance the poor electronic conductivity of electrode materials24,51 and overcharge protection.54–57 The former one has been discussed above. In the second case, an appropriate RM additive dissolved in the electrolyte or implanted in the separator is applied to bypass the charges via reversible redox reactions (Fig. 7a). When evaluating such redox shuttles, redox potential and electrochemical reversibility should be taken into account.58 It has been reported that for enhanced performance, the redox potential of the additives should be about 0.3–0.4 V above the maximum operating potential of the cathode.59,60 This enables the cells to be normally charged before the RM initiates its proposed role and therefore diminishing the self-discharge effect. However, to prevent the oxidation of the electrolyte, the potential should not exceed the operating electrochemical window of the most commonly used electrolytes. Therefore, the main factor to prevent the battery from overcharging is the potential window of these additives. When a critical cell voltage is reached, the redox shuttle molecules are either reduced at the anode or oxidized at the cathode, pushing the cell into overdischarge or overcharge. The mobile reaction product spreads throughout the electrolyte as well as the cell, where the reverse e− transfer reaction returns to its original state. An internal switch is the net effect of this process, which protects against the degradation of the cell by enforcing a limit on the cell voltage. These studies are clear evidence that while the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) could successfully passivate both cathode and anode (similarly, the current collectors are expected to be protected by the SEI) to prevent the electrolytes from further degradation, the reactions of the redox shuttle molecules are not successfully precluded. As a result, it is possible for different EES materials to work with suitable RMs for various applications to overcome this kinetically “selective” behavior of the SEI layer toward interfacial redox reactions.
 Fig. 7  RMs for fabricating high-safety Li-ion batteries. (a) Voltage profiles of overcharge abuse tests using MCMB/LiFePO4 coin cells containing 0.1 M DBBB in Gen2 electrolyte for over 3000 h. The charging rate was C/10 and the overcharge ratio was 100%. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Chemical structures of dimethoxybenzene-based redox shuttles (DDB, DBD, DBMOEB, and DBBB). Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2005, Electrochemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the overcharge protection mechanism based on the redox shuttle. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Among the redox shuttles reported till date, dimethoxybenzene-based redox shuttles have been considered to be good candidates for overcharge protection in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 7b).61 For example, 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-dimethoxybenzene (DDB), developed by Dahn and his group in 2005, stands out with many attractive features.56 Owing to the outstanding overcharge protection performance for Li-ion batteries, this molecule currently helps as an excellent standard for the redox-shuttle additives. The extended π-electron system of DDB with higher stability helps to stabilize the radical cation generated during the overcharge process. To protect the radical cation from intermolecular annihilation, two bulky tert-butyl groups were also bonded to the benzene ring. Nevertheless, DDB is not well matched with the Li-ion cell system; in particular, it is not fairly soluble in conventional carbonate-based electrolytes. Lu Zhang et al. developed the novel oligo-(ethylene glycol)-functionalized redox shuttle of 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)benzene (DBBB). This RM could potentially demonstrate effective and stable overcharge protection for Li-ion batteries. In the presence of DBBB, 180 cycles of 100% overcharge at the C/2 rate were demonstrated.62 The end-of-charge potential of DBBB is 0.3 V lower than that of the LiFePO4 cathode (3.6 V vs. Li/Li+), which indicates that DBBB is a suitable RM. Fig. 7c shows the voltage profiles of mesocarbon microbead (MCMB)/LiFePO4 cells containing 0.1 M DBBB in Gen2 electrolytes for cycling for 3100 h. First, the cells were charged at the C/10 rate for 20 h with 100% overcharge. Then, they were fully discharged to 2.3 V at the C/10 rate. Under this parameter, for each cycle, the charge capacity was double the discharge capacity. With each charge–overcharge–discharge cycle, the first plateau occurred at 2.8–3.4 V, which reflected the usual charging process for the LiFePO4 electrode to reach the maximum efficiency. Subsequently, the cell voltage dramatically climbed to 3.8 V, and a second plateau was formed; after the activation of the DBBB, the cell voltage rapidly increased to 3.8 V, and a second plateau emerged as a result of the overcharge shuttling operation for an additional 10 h. The flat plateau at 3.8 V evidently shows that the DBBB molecule regulates the overcharge current. Overcharge cycling continues until the redox shuttle fails (Fig. 7d). The authors have claimed that DBBB can survive for more than 3100 h of overcharge, indicating its extreme electrochemical stability.
4. Solid–liquid interfacial RMs
The introduction of solid RMs into electrodes serves the primary purpose of overcoming the insulating property of active materials. Besides conductivity improvement, RMs at the electrode–electrolyte interface play diversified roles in other aspects. In some next-generation battery systems, although disagreement exists,63 RMs show their potential in stabilizing intermediate products, like LiO2, which are formed during the discharge of the Li–O2 battery, or helping to overcome overpotentials, like charging Li2O2 in Li–O2 batteries and Li2S in Li–S batteries. Further, by changing the charge transfer process from a solid–solid interface (current collector–electrode interface) to a solid–liquid interface (electrode–electrolyte interface), RMs can result in faster kinetic process, and hence, an enhanced rate ability can be achieved. Different from solid RMs, a solid–liquid interfacial RM is usually soluble and can shuttle between the electron donors and acceptors. The choice of an efficient solid–liquid interfacial RM necessitates conflicting and stringent requirements. An excellent RM is supposed to be completely soluble, fully reversible, and stable against the electrolyte solvent and salt. It should also yield proper redox potential and high diffusion coefficient. The side reactions between the RMs and the electrode or intermediate products should be avoided, particularly in the Li–O2 system, because the intermediate superoxide radical is highly active. Moreover, maybe ideally, a perfect RM should not react with the Li-metal anode, which is prospected to maximize the energy density of next-generation batteries. The last condition is less important, because the redox shuttling problem can be addressed by introducing Li-conducting membranes such as Li7La3Zr2O12 or LiPON. As summarized by Vikram Pande and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan,64 solid–liquid interfacial RMs can be divided into four species: (a) RMm+ + me− ↔ RM(5) (b) RM + me− ↔ RMm−(6) (c) RMn+ + me− ↔ RM(n−m)+(7) (d) RMn− + me− ↔ RM(n+m)−(8)
This classification is important because the Gibbs free energy of a dissolved RM is dependent on the interaction with its solvation shell, particularly the solvent molecules. The Gutmann donor number (DN) and acceptor number (AN) describe the Lewis basicity and acidity of a solvent, respectively. For species (a) and (b), depending on their carried charge, the redox potentials of RMs are affected by the solvent's DN and AN, respectively. For species (c) and (d), the solvent molecules contribute minor effects if the RMs have a large size, because the degree of solvation remains stable under different RM oxidation processes. However, the solvent's AN and DN are crucial when the RM has a small size. Therefore, the design of solid–liquid interfacial RMs is complicated. In addition, in some electrochemical systems, the crossover of RMs that causes self-discharge is also a challenge.65,66 In such systems, an effective Li+-conducting membrane is needed, which is mechanically and chemically stable and impermeable to the RMs.67,68 Herein, we conclude valuable works on the solid–liquid interfacial RMs applied in Li-ion, Li–O2, and Li–S batteries.
4.1 Solid–liquid interfacial RMs in Li-ion batteries
Michael Grätzel's group introduced the redox targeting approach by freely diffusing relay molecules to address the insulating or poorly conducting property of LiFePO4.24Fig. 8 shows the redox targeting of an insulating LiFePO4 electrode by a freely diffusing molecular shuttle, S. They demonstrated two RMs as a proof of concept, namely, osmium polypyridyl complexes and poly(4-(10-(12-dodecyl phenoxazine)vinylpyridinium)-co-4-vinylpyridine). The molecular RM (indicated by S in the diagram) is dissolved in the electrolyte inside the cathodic compartment of the cell. In the charging process, RM is converted to RM+via oxidation at the current collector, which transports charge to the LiFePO4via bulk diffusion. Since the standard redox potentials of the Fermi level of LiFePO4 and that of RM+ nearly match with each other, RM+ gets reduced back to RM after the injection of holes into the LiFePO4 system. Therefore, FeII is oxidized to FeIII and Li ions are liberated. In the discharge phase, RM+ is reduced to RM at the current collector and therefore transports electrons to FePO4. CV measurements were conducted using a working electrode film containing carbon-free LiFePO4. Without RMs, because of the insulating property of LiFePO4, the electrode did not show any electrochemical response in the examined potential window. Strikingly, the addition of RM afforded two well-defined current plateaus corresponding to the oxidation and reduction processes.
 Fig. 8  Principle of redox targeting of an insulating electrode material by a freely diffusing molecule. During charging, S is oxidized to S+, which delivers charge to the LiFePO4 particles. S+ will be reduced back to S after the injection of holes into the LiFePO4 system. Therefore, FeII is oxidized to FeIII and Li ions are liberated. During discharging, S+ is reduced at the current collector to form S, thereby delivering electrons to FePO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Solid–liquid interfacial RMs in Li–O2 batteries

4.2.1 RMs for charging Li–O2 batteries. 
RMs, which can be dissolved in an electrolyte, are capable of charge separation at the electrode–electrolyte interface and they have been studied in fair detail in contrast to bulk and electrode-like suspended RMs. An important application of such types of RMs is nonaqueous Li–O2 batteries that have been demonstrated to be the most impressive next-generation battery system. Currently, Li–O2 batteries suffer from two decisive drawbacks: poor cycling life and large charging overpotential during the cycling process that results in low energy efficiency.69–71 Despite the fact that these two major limitations are associated with each other, the origin of the large charging overpotential is often fundamentally associated to the numerous reasons in the decay process of Li2O2, such as slow oxygen release from the Li2O2 crystal,72,73 poor electrical conductivity,74,75 and formation or decomposition of undesirable products such as Li2CO3.76,77 Furthermore, the solid discharge product (Li2O2) in Li–O2 batteries is irregularly formed on the electrode, or toroid-shaped Li2O2 may also be formed under certain circumstances;78 therefore, a porous air cathode can get easily clogged, hindering the efficient transport of oxygen and ions, causing further overpotential.79,80 Therefore, fully and effectively oxidizing the mass of solid Li2O2 on charging, reducing the charging overpotential, and improving the electrical energy efficiency are the major challenges faced by Li–O2 batteries.73 To this end, the use of RMs has been considered to be an effective approach not only to improve the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)/oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics (reduces the charge overpotential) but also suppress the side reactions of Li–O2 cells with an improved charging rate.81 The role of RMs in Li–O2 batteries was extensively studied by Yu Qiao and Shen Ye using in situ surface-enhanced Raman vibrational spectroscopy (SERS) and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy in combination with ex situ infrared and Raman spectroscopies.82 For this purpose, tetrathiafulvalene (TTF)-dissolved DMSO-based electrolyte was used as the RM in gold and porous carbon electrodes. The results demonstrated that TTF did not show any noticeable effect on the ORR, but it could greatly decrease the OER overpotential with fairly different characteristics on both the electrodes. During a round-trip galvanostatic ORR/OER cycle, free TTF+ was not observed in the solution on the gold electrode surface, where the oxidative decomposition of LiO2 consumed the electrochemically generated TTF+, but it did not play the same role for Li2O2. However, both Li2O2 and Li2CO3 were formed during the ORR on the porous carbon electrode surface either in the presence or absence of TTF solutions. Although TTF restrains the decomposition of the solvent and carbon electrode by reducing the OER overpotential, byproducts (such as Li2CO3) are still formed during the ORR, which can significantly affect the reversible capacity of the Li–O2 battery.
In 2013, considering the crucial role of RMs as effective electron–hole transfer agents to promote such oxidation reactions, we published our views in Nature Chemistry.83 In the reaction mechanism, the reduced form of RM (for simplicity, M), namely, Mred, was initially oxidized at the positive electrode surface into Mox and then the Li2O2 particles oxidized into Li+ and O2, reducing itself back to M (Fig. 9).83,84 Hence, the slow charge transfer between the insulating discharge product of Li2O2 and the electrode material was substituted by the free and fast diffusion of the RM couple (depicted as M/M+ in the diagram) between the two interfaces. For such a purpose, a suitable RM should meet three characteristics:32,85–87 (1) the redox potential of the RM must be well matched with that of the Li2O2 discharge product formation. In other words, the equilibrium potential of Li2O2 should be slightly lower than the oxidation potential of the RM; (2) the discharge product of Li2O2 must be efficiently decomposed by M+; and (3) the RM must be highly soluble in the electrolyte and inert to the electrolyte or Li-metal anode.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of an electron–hole transfer agent that promotes the oxidation of solid Li2O2. Left: Charge transfer between the discharge product of Li2O2 and the electrode surface controls the electrochemical oxidation of Li2O2 (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−). Right: In the presence of M, this sluggish charge transport process becomes free and fast. First, M is oxidized to M+ at the electrode surface and then Li2O2 is oxidized back to M (2M+ + Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2M). (E0, theoretical potential for Li2O2 oxidization; ΔE, polarization associated with charge transfer; E, potential at which Li2O2 is oxidized; EM/M+, electrochemical potential of oxidizing M). Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing. 
For the past few years, several RMs such as TTF,88,89 ferrocene (FC),90N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine (TMPD),83 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO),91,92 transition metal phthalocyanines,93 lithium iodide,94,95 lithium bromide,96,97p-benzoquinone,98,99 lithium nitrate,100,101 cesium iodide,32 cobalt bis(terpyridine),102 heme biomolecules,103 and tris[4-(diethylamino)phenyl]amine (TDPA)102,104–106 have been demonstrated to enhance the performance of nonaqueous Li–air batteries. As mentioned earlier, the role of these dissolved RMs is to circumvent the passivation issue of nonconductive decomposition products (such as Li2O2), which can cause the high overpotential of Li–O2 cells. This phenomenon is clearly illustrated in a recent work by SeonHye Yoon and co-workers.107 They demonstrated three different RMs, namely, CsI, LiI, and LiNO3/CsI, combined with a polyimide-coated carbon nanotubes (CNTs)-based air electrode. As shown in Fig. 10a–d, the employed RMs exhibited a significant decrease in the overpotential of the Li–O2 cells. More importantly, the combined LiNO3/CsIRM exhibited the lowest overpotential. A previous report confirmed that the carbon in the air electrodes induced side reactions with Li2O2 and activated the decomposition of the electrolytes at high potential (over 3.5 V), while it was commonly used as a matrix material for air electrodes.108,109 The polyimide coating on the carbon surface, combined with RMs, suppressed unwanted side reactions, such as Li2CO3 and organic materials (CH3CO2Li, HCO2Li, etc.) (Fig. 10e). In this report, the authors also argued that CsI effectively interrupted the growth of dendrites on the Li electrode during cycling owing to the shielding effect of the Cs+ ions; further, due to the presence of I− ions, it acted as a RM, which facilitated the dissociation of the reaction products (Li2O2) and lowered the overpotential. LiNO3 may help in stabilizing the carbon surface and Li anode.
 Fig. 10  RMs for Li–O2 battery charge. First discharge–charge cycle using polyimide-coated CNT electrodes used with various electrolytes. (a) Basic; (b) LiI; (c) CsI; (d) LiNO3/CsI (capacity was limited to 1500 mA h gelectrode−1). (e) Schematic illustration showing the effect of the LiNO3/CsI electrolyte and polyimide-coated CNTs on the anode (Li metal) and air electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing. (f) Proposed catalytic cycle for the electrochemical charging of Li–O2 cells with TEMPO RM. (g) First cycle with and without 10 mM TEMPO using a Ketjen black cathode and a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, Benjamin J. Bergner and co-workers demonstrated the use of TEMPO as a suitable RM for OER in Li–O2 cells.92 They found that TEMPO exhibited high electrochemical stability, fast diffusion kinetics, and appropriate redox potential, as well as assisted in enhancing the solubility of oxygen. Employing TEMPO in Li–O2 cells resulted in considerably lower charging potential and hence noticeably enhancing the round-trip efficiency. As shown in Fig. 10f, via an early step of the charging process, the highest oxygen evolution rate was observed, which could be associated to a voltage rise primarily below 4.0 V. However, the formation rate of oxygen was considerably lower than that projected for the oxidation of Li2O2 in the charging potential greater than 4.0 V. Given that the Li–O2 cells in the presence of TEMPO exhibited a distinct charging plateau (<4.0 V), a higher relative oxygen yield was anticipated compared with the typical Li–O2 with a charging plateau exceeding 4.0 V. As evidenced from the discharge plateau of ∼2.7 V (unaffected by TEMPO), TEMPO had no effect on the electrochemical reduction of oxygen to superoxides. The authors also systematically evaluated the role of RM based on the relevant chemical and physical properties, i.e., redox potential, electrochemical stability, diffusion coefficient, and impact on oxygen solubility. Fig. 10g shows a schematic illustrating the catalytic concept of the dissolved RMs. The anticipated catalytic cycle consists of two parts: (1) diffusion of RM (TEMPO) to the electrode surface (carbon) and electrochemical oxidation (TEMPO+) and (2) diffusion of oxidized RM (TEMPO+) to Li2O2 and chemical oxidation of Li2O2.


4.2.2 RMs for discharging Li–O2 batteries. 
The oxygen reduction in a Li–O2 battery comprises the following three steps:70,78,109–111 (1) O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2(9) (2) 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2(10) (3) LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2(11)
The first step is critical and highly influenced by the solubility of LiO2. If the formed LiO2 is insoluble, it will grow into Li2O2 on the electrode surface as an insulating film (about 6 nm),112 further passivating the electrode surface and leading to a low discharge capacity. Otherwise, soluble LiO2 experiences steps 2 and 3 in the solution and produces toroid-shaped Li2O2. The latter case delivers higher capacity and lower overpotential, particularly when the specific area of the cathode is low.113 Generally, the solubility of O2− depends on its interaction with the solvent, and the intensity of this interaction can be described by the DN and AN values. Solvents with high DN, such as DMSO, make LiO2 more soluble;78 meanwhile, a high-DN solvent is more susceptible to O2− attacks, leading to severe side reactions. The introduction of discharge RMs helps to stabilize O2− in a low DN solvent. Compared with the charge mediator, less-discharge RMs have been reported; the known discharge mediators are mainly organics, such as quinones,113–115 phenols,116 viologens,117 phthalocyanine,118 and epoxypropane.119 Some inorganics show their ability to stabilize O2−, too, such as H2O70,120 and K+.121 Further, certain gas diffusion cathodes and electrolytes were designed to fully utilize RMs.31,122 In 2016, Peter G. Bruce and his co-workers reported a quinone kind of 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DBBQ). As mentioned by the authors, DBBQ did not bind with O2 and facilitated the formation of LiO2 by stabilizing the production of superoxide intermediates. First, DBBQ was reduced to LiDBBQ and then the intermediate was bound to O2 to form LiDBBQO2. After that, LiDBBQO2 was decomposed to produce Li2O2via a disproportionation reaction or reacting with another dissolved LiDBBQ. At the last step, the DBBQ molecule was reproduced and therefore became reusable. The mechanism is described using the following equations and shown in Fig. 11a. DBBQ(sol) + Li(sol)+ + e− → LiDBBQ(sol)(12) LiDBBQ(sol) + O2(sol) ↔ LiDBBQO2(sol)(13) 2LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + O2(sol) + 2DBBQ(sol)(14) LiDBBQ(sol) + LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + 2DBBQ(sol)(15)
 Fig. 11  RMs for Li–O2 battery discharge. (a) Schematic of DBBQ-containing discharge process of the Li–O2 battery and potential changes. (b) Discharge capacity with (up) and without (bottom) DBBQ in electrolytes based on TEGDME (left) and DME (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing. (c) Mechanistic illustration of hybrid Li-ion and Li–O2 batteries. (d) Voltage profile of the rGO-MoS2 cathode vs. Li+/Li. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018, Cell Press. 
Therefore, the stability of intermediate LiO2 does not depend on the DN of the solvent, and this fact makes it possible to produce Li2O2 in a low-DN ether solvent (such as TEGDME and DME) in which DBBQ, LiDBBQ, and LiDBBQO2 are soluble. As mentioned before, solution-formed Li2O2, which usually possesses the toroid shape, delivers a much higher capacity by avoiding electrode surface passivation. The use of DBBQ increases the discharge capacity by 80- to 100-fold when a binder-free carbon fiber is adopted as the cathode. Furthermore, higher capacities of >4 mA h cmareal−2 at current densities of >1 mA cmareal−2 could be achieved (Fig. 11b). The solution-formed Li2O2 could be evidenced by the formation of the toroid-shaped products on the cathode. Moreover, the applied DBBQ helps to halve the discharge overpotential by increasing the discharge potential. Earlier than this work, Kazuhito Hashimoto and Shuji Nakanishi investigated quinones as the catalyst to reduce the overpotential of aprotic ORR.115 A series of quinones were investigated, namely, 1,4-naphthoquinone, anthraquinone (AQ), 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone, 2-methoxy-1,4-naphthoquinone, benzoquinone, tetramethyl-1,4-benzoquinone, and methoxy-benzoquinone. Among the catalysts mentioned above, benzoquinone exhibited the best catalytic performance with overpotential of less than 100 mV toward Li2O2 formation. In this case, quinones (Qox) were first reduced to a semiquinone (Qsem); the formed LiQsem in the presence of Li reacted with O2 and produced Qox and superoxide radicals. However, the authors did not provide any information regarding the discharge capacity and interactions between the superoxide radicals and quinones.
Li–O2 discharge RMs also demonstrate their potential in some unconventional Li–O2 derivative systems and other metal–gas batteries. Very recently, Ying Shirley Meng et al. designed a hybrid Li-ion and Li–O2 battery assisted by the LiI RM (Fig. 11c).123 This system adopted a reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-loaded 2D MoS2 as the cathode. With the assistance of LiI, the MoS2 cathode revealed its ability to store both Li ions and oxygen, forming Li2MoO2S2. The hybrid battery was designed to address volume changes in conventional Li–O2 batteries. A large amount of toroid-shaped Li2O2 located on the cathode led to huge volume changes if the Li–O2 battery was pushed into practical capacity, and a large quantity of the formed Li2O2 increased the risk of blocking the gas diffusion path on the cathode. In the case of hybrid batteries, oxygen was stored in the lattice structure, which is similar to that in a Li-ion battery; therefore, it could suppress volume changes during discharge. Moreover, this system showed very low overpotential of 0.02 V, except for the initial cycle (Fig. 11d). During discharge, I− was initially oxidized by the superoxide radical to IO− accompanied by a water residue, and the intermediate IO− reacted with MoS2 following an oxyhalogen–sulfur chemical reaction to generate the discharge product of Li2MoO2S2. It is interesting that LiI as the mediator could cover the charging process, too: I− was first oxidized to I3− and IO3− and these newly formed intermediates could help in promoting the release of oxygen. In early 2018, J.-M. Tarascon et al. demonstrated the utility of quinone derivatives in the electrochemical reduction of CO2.122 Quinones have been proven to reduce CO2via a chemical reaction; with the assistance of the DBBQ RM, a Li–CO2 battery was established, where Li2CO3 was identified as the ultimate discharge product.


4.2.3 Combining charge and discharge RMs. 
As common sense, the cycle of a secondary battery includes two steps: charge and discharge. However, most of the mentioned RMs for Li–O2 batteries can only handle one of these two steps. Hence, there is a demand to fabricate a dual mediator system to fully cover the discharge and charge processes of a Li–O2 battery. To avoid the interaction between charge and discharge RMs, the first choice of charge RMs would be species (a), as mentioned in Section 3.2.2; in principle, it is better to select discharge RMs from species (b). Peter G. Bruce reported a dual-mediator Li–O2 battery comprising TEMPO (charge) and DBBQ (discharge) RMs124 (Fig. 12a). The presence of a dual mediator facilitates the stability of the carbon cathode, only decomposition of <0.008% per cycle was found (compared with 0.12% in the absence of a mediator). Further, this dual-mediator Li–O2 battery is capable of delivering a capacity of 40 mA h cmareal−2 at rates in excess of 1 mA cmareal−2. Meanwhile, a dual-mediator redox-flow-based Li–O2 battery was fabricated by Qing Wang and his co-workers.125 They adopted duroquinone and ethyl viologen as the discharge and charge mediators, respectively. Meanwhile, the prevention of side reactions between the anode and RMs or their intermediates has attracted increased attention. As a prospective practical Li–O2 battery, it is expected that using a Li-metal anode can maximize the energy density. This raises concerns about Li degradation and self-redox process (Fig. 12b). Some strategies to obstruct the RMs’ path to Li metal are essential. Zhangquan et al. proposed a strategy toward RM immobilization.114 AQ was chosen as the RM in their work. AQ was anchored on a gas diffusion layer (GDL) to form a thin, conductive polymer film (termed PAQ). This strategy avoided the possible use of a Li conducting membrane when RMs were adopted. The Li–O2 battery with the anchored RM (PAQ) showed comparable rate ability to the battery containing the dissolved RM (AQ) (Fig. 12c). Further, both promoted a discharge capacity that was 50-fold higher than the case in which AQ was absent (GDL). Meanwhile, Haosheng Zhou and his group designed two protecting membranes, namely, Li+–Nafion single-ion conductor and MOF-based separator (Fig. 12d).126,127 The former adopted the non-carbon cathode of RuO2 and the discharge RM of DBBQ, affording capacity improvement from 800 to 3800 mA h g−1, as well as long-term cycling stability. The single-ion conductor played a key role in hindering the diffusion of RM to the counter electrode and suppressing oxygen crossover, further enhancing the stability of the Li-metal anode.
 Fig. 12  Dual-mediator Li–O2 battery. (a) Working mechanism of Li–O2 battery with dual mediators (i.e., TEMPO and DBBQ). Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing. (b) Photographs showing the color changes occurring when Li metal is immersed in DBBQ-containing/free electrolytes for 14 days. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Discharge voltage profile of Li–O2 batteries containing pristine AQ, soluble AQ, and PAQ. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of mediator-shuttling-led self-discharge (up) and protection from a Li+-Nafion separator (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Comparison of a protected dual-mediator cell (bottom) with conventional cell (up) and conventional dual-mediator cell (middle). Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another MOF-based membrane was reported by Zhou's group, where TTF and DBBQ were used as dual mediators. Further, the battery with this membrane delivered prolonged reversibility of 100 cycles and a higher capacity of 5000 mA h g−1. In addition, a solution to eliminate cathode degradation was proposed by Yi-Chun Lu et al.128 With regard to this work, the authors introduced a reduced discharge mediator (rDM)-rich region to fully cover the cathode surface. This region could exclude O2 and isolate the cathode from side reactions. Namely, a deposition layer comprising electrolyte-filled porous quartz fiber was placed between the cathode and O2, thereby excluding the direct formation of the discharge product on the cathode surface. The steady-state rDM-rich region was maintained by controlling the magnitude of the incoming O2 flux and outgoing rDM flux (Fig. 12e). Here, 98% byproducts were eliminated by this strategy, leading to more than 10-fold increase in the cycling life than that obtained in conventional dual-mediator Li–O2 batteries. A nanozyme-based RM composed of Fe(III) tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphine chloride (TCPP(Fe)) ligands and Zn-metal nodes utilized as ORR/OER bifunctional electrolyte additives in the Li–O2 system was also reported by Xiaowei Mu et al.129 The RM was added to the electrolyte and was intended to act as a shuttle for the superoxide species and electrons between the cathodes and products. As a result, by coordinating with the superoxide intermediates, the ZnTCPP(Fe) nanozymes functioned as a bifunctional catalyst for both discharge and charge processes. As a result, the Li–O2 batteries exhibited enhanced discharge capacity, improved energy efficiency, and superior cycling stability with the addition of Zn-TCPP(Fe) nanozymes.
As mentioned earlier, various previous studies have extensively investigated the main reasons for the charge and discharge overpotentials observed in Li–O2 batteries and concluded that they are not related to the OER and ORR kinetics. Rather, they might be attributable to electrolyte decomposition, transport limitations, and deposited products blocking the O2-evolving interface. Therefore, besides improving the active ORR/OER heterogeneous electrocatalysts, more importance should be attached to improving the stability of cathode materials and eliminating their electrocatalytic behavior toward electrolyte degradation. It should be noted that the identification of cathode and electrolyte compositions that facilitate solid Li–O2 cycling has recently become one of the most important aspects of this research field. In addition, understanding the electrochemical processes and factors that control the mediated charge transfer using an appropriate electrochemical model can also entirely change the discharge chemistry of Li–O2 batteries.

4.3 Interfacial RMs in Li–S batteries

4.3.1 RMs for Li2S activation. 
As mentioned earlier, controlling the solid product growth is essential to achieve higher capacities in rechargeable batteries via multiphase and multielectron dissolution–precipitation mechanisms (e.g., Li–O2 and Li–S systems). In Li–S batteries, due to the dynamic changes in the species and concentration, polysulfides that are intrinsic RMs are insufficient for effective regulation. Researchers have introduced a persistent extrinsic RM to direct an alternative growing pathway toward Li2S growth. These RMs play vital roles in increasing the conductivity of the cathode and provide better utilization of Li2S by activating the active material of Li2S in the first charge at lower and controlled potentials.50,130,131 One of the main challenges associated with Li2S-based electrodes is the initial activation of Li2S at higher potentials (up to 4 V vs. Li+/Li) to fully achieve its theoretical capacity of 1167 mA h g−1. The limitation stems from the insoluble nature, high charge transfer resistance, and intrinsic electronic insulating properties of Li2S. Long-chain polysulfides diffuse and react with the anode to form shorter polysulfides that return to the cathode according to the shuttling phenomenon, as shown in Fig. 13a.132 This polysulfide shuttling causes lithium anode corrosion and results in lowered coulombic efficiency and self-discharge. In this regard, RMs activate the Li2S cathode over the initial charge process and therefore enhance the utilization of the Li2S electrode (Fig. 13b).133 The Li2S cathode needs to overcome a huge potential barrier at the beginning of delithiation (i.e., Li2S → Li2−yS + yLi+ + ye−). In this regard, RMs play a critical role in lowering the potential barrier. After the external surface layer of the solid lithium sulfide is electrochemically oxidized into liquid and soluble LiPSs, the large potential gap disappears (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8). The soluble polysulfide additives can diffuse to the anode and then be directly reduced on the surface of the anode. As shown in Fig. 13b, another approach for enhancing the performance of Li2S is improving the interfacial area between the solid Li2S and liquid polysulfides. For example, small-molecule cobaltocene (CoCp2) has been demonstrated as an extrinsic RM to direct a solution-growing pathway for Li2S.134 The deposition pathway of Li2S is transformed from 2D to 3D growth using CoCp2, thereby increasing the utility of the coactive surface. Here, CoCp2+ is reduced back to CoCp2 at a certain potential value after which it diffuses in the electrolyte and chemically reduces the residual polysulfides. Concomitantly, it gets oxidized to CoCp2+ with continuous polysulfide reduction until the polysulfides are totally utilized and CoCp2 remains in its reduced form before electrooxidation on charge. Hence, the existence of an extrinsic RM guarantees the integrity of the redox-mediated Li2S growth cycle toward the full consumption of S on a finite conductive surface.
 Fig. 13  RMs for activating Li2S. (a) Summary of the effects of polysulfide dissolution, shuttling phenomenon, effect on the cathode, and insoluble products upon charging and discharging. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the activation process of the Li2S cathode over the initial charge. (c) Typical first-cycle galvanostatic charge profiles in the presence and absence of polysulfide additives. (d) Cycling performance showing the specific capacity upon the charge–discharge cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e and f) Voltage profiles of Li2S electrodes charged at the C/5 rate (∼1 mA) at a potential cutoff of 3.6 VLi under various electrolyte solutions. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Electrodeposition of Li2S onto carbon (C) cloth in the absence (left) and presence (right) of BPI. (h1 and h2) SEM images of Li2S deposited on C cloth after discharge without BPI. (h3 and h4) SEM micrographs of Li2S deposited on C cloth after battery discharge with BPI. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In Li–S batteries, the key to designing the RM is that the reduction potential of the RM should be marginally less than the plateau voltage where the reduction of Li2S4 to Li2S occurs. By using benzo[ghi]peryleneimide (BPI) as the RM, researchers have shown that the electrodeposition of Li2S on carbon current collectors can be redirected away from thin 2D layers and instead toward micron-sized, porous 3D deposits (Fig. 13g and h).135 When BPI is reduced at the electrode surface and given time to diffuse away, it can remotely reduce the dissolved polysulfides to Li2S. With BPI is present in the electrolyte, a 6-fold increase in Li2S formation capacity was observed, leading to an impressive 220% increase in the overall sulfur utilization.
In 2015, Lina Wang et al. reported a brand-new approach to effectively exploit Li2S. They employed a dual-phase nonaqueous electrolyte (cathode and anode electrolytes) separated by a protective lithium superionic conductor glass film (LISICON) of Li1+x+yAlxTi2xSiyP3yO12 (LTAP).133 The LTAP film blocks polysulfide anions, while it is permeable to Li ions. Consequently, this cell architecture helps to eliminate parasitic reactions related to the polysulfide shuttling effect. To facilitate the efficient oxidization of Li2S, a polysulfide RM formed in situ can be confined in the cathode compartment. In particular, the LTAP is permeable to Li ions, while it is impermeable to polysulfide anions, i.e., the RM. As a result, parasitic reactions associated with the polysulfide shuttling process get totally eliminated. Fig. 13c shows that the formation of partially delithiated Li2−yS results in reduced charge transfer resistance at the surface of the Li2S particles, which provides evidence for the vanishing barrier at the beginning of charging. With substantially reduced polarization, a reversible capacity of 800 mA h g−1 could be obtained, which is about 200 mA h g−1 more than that obtainable without the RM (Fig. 13d).
As discussed above, irreversible, fast capacity decay and active material loss caused by the dissolution of polysulfide species and successive polysulfide shuttling effect are additional issues that hamper the commercial development of high-energy Li–S batteries. These problems can partly be overcome by developing redox separators that can limit the diffusion of polar polysulfide intermediates between the electrodes. For instance, a lithium–vanadium (V)-oxide-coated hybrid separator (LiV3O8-HS) can serve as the RM to boost the performance of Li–S batteries.136 The LiV3O8 layer in the modified separator acts, in the first instance, as a physical membrane for suppressing the transfer of soluble polysulfides via the separator; secondly, it facilitates the conversion of soluble higher-order polysulfides to the insoluble short-chain polysulfides by the in situ formation of a thiosulfate/polythionate complex. Therefore, sulfur (re)utilization is effectively improved, resulting in an advanced Li–S cell with enhanced electrochemical activity and cycling stability.
In addition to this, RMs as additives to standard electrolyte solutions of Li–S batteries with Li2S cathode also allow the activation of the active material of Li2S in the first charge process at lower and controlled potentials, which is determined by the nature of the additives. Stefano Meini and co-workers demonstrated this concept using five different RMs, namely, cobaltocene (EM < ELi2S), dibenzenechromium (EM ≈ ELi2S), decamethylferrocene, LiI, and FC (EM > ELi2S).130 The electrochemical potentials of RMs were obtained on the basis of the available CV data for nonaqueous solvents. As mentioned earlier, for effective redox mediation, the reversible potential of the RM should be higher than the oxidation potential of the active material (in this case, 2.24 VLi). As expected, only the last three RMs exhibited an effective redox shuttle property due to the high driving force provided by the difference of several hundreds of millivolts compared with that of ELi2S(Fig. 13e and f). Among the three RMs, decamethylferrocene was found to exhibit outstanding ability to utilize Li2S at the low charging potential of 3.2 V.


4.3.2 RMs for sulfur activation. 
The other problem that limits the commercialization of Li–S batteries is the poor conductivity of sulfur. To overcome this problem, large amounts of conductive agents, such as carbon, and binders are employed in the cathode; this reduces the active mass loading of sulfur and therefore decreases the energy density.137–139 In the solution, the effective conductivity of the cathode increases for higher sulfur mass loading.140,141 Various studies investigating higher sulfur mass loading have employed thicker cathodes, which increased the areal capacity but not the volumetric capacity. RMs can also be effective remedies that can be introduced into the electrolyte as an electron transfer agent between the conductive surface and polysulfides. Using this concept, a group of researchers introduced cobaltocene (Co(η5C5H5)2) dissolved into the electrolyte as the RM to enhance the conductivity of the sulfur cathode in the Li–S battery via the conversion of polysulfides to Li2S.142 It has been confirmed that cobaltocene can act as a RM that facilitates electron transfer between the polysulfides and conductive surface since its redox potential lies within the polysulfide reduction region. In Fig. 14a, two pairs of electrochemical redox peaks at 2.30 and 2.05 V vs. Li/Li+ correspond to the reduction of sulfur into long-chain polysulfides (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8) and its subsequent reduction to Li2S. From Fig. 14b, a sharp redox peak is observed at 2.00 V for cobaltocene, which is lower than the second reduction peak of sulfur observed at 2.05 V. Therefore, cobaltocene is capable of reducing the polysulfides to Li2S. As shown in Fig. 14c, no high discharge plateau is seen at about 2.30 V associated with the reduction of sulfur to polysulfides, since the active material is a polysulfide. The discharge capacities increase with an increase in the cobaltocene concentration. According to the CV results, 50 mM cobaltocene only contributes a discharge capacity of 30 A h cm−2. Therefore, the enhanced capacity cannot be attributed to cobaltocene, but to the low discharge plateau at which the polysulfides are reduced to Li2S, confirming its effectiveness in charge shuttling (Fig. 14d).
 Fig. 14  RMs for activating sulfur. CV data. (a) Sulfur and (b) cobaltocene. The sweep rate is 0.2 mV s−1. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curves of cells with different concentrations (0, 12.5, and 25 mM) of cobaltocene in 1 M [S] catholyte. (d) Schematic illustration of the unified mechanism. Li2S nucleation and growth via conductive surface pathway and solution pathway with cobaltocene. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing. 
In Section 2, it was discussed that bulk RMs could be used to extract/inject charges with insulating or poorly conducting Li+ storage hosts15 such as LiFePO4143 and TiO2,26 which is referred to as the so-called “redox targeting” concept. Inspired by this concept, Jingfa Li and co-workers used a pair of dissolved RMs to develop a hybrid battery system termed as a “redox targeting Li–S flow battery”.34 They demonstrated tandem mediators using bis-(pentamethyl-cyclopentadienyl)chromium (CrCp*2) and bis-(pentamethyl-cyclopentadienyl)nickel (NiCp*2) for the S + 2e− + 2Li+ ↔ Li2S reaction. The only role of the RMs is to extract and inject electrons from and into the Li-ion storage compound in the energy reservoir. Hence, unlike a typical redox flow battery, the solubility of the RM in the electrolyte could not be a limitation for the performance of this redox targeting system. This is due to the fact that the RMs are charge transfer and transport agents and not energy storage compounds. The overall redox reactions are shown in Fig. 15a–c. In the beginning of the discharge reaction, CrCp*2 and S cathode undergo reaction in the energy tank. During this, S is reduced to sulfide or polysulfides, while CrCp*2 is oxidized to CrCp*2+. The oxidized CrCp*2+ diffuses to the inner electrochemical cell and gets reduced back to CrCp*2 at the cathode by the electrons generated from the Li anode. Then, the reduced CrCp*2 returns to the energy tank to begin the next round of reaction. The other RM of NiCp*2 does not participate in the electron extraction/injection process. Because of the electrode potential relation (E(Cr(III)Cp*2+/Cr(II)Cp*2) < E(S/Li2S) < E(Ni(III)Cp*2+/Ni(II)Cp*2)), it gets locked in the reduced state. In the charging process, NiCp*2 is oxidized to NiCp*2+. Diffusing to the energy reservoir, the discharge products of the sulfur cathode get oxidized by NiCp*2+, while NiCp*2 is regenerated in this reaction. Then, NiCp*2 moves back to the central electrochemical cell, where it is reoxidized to NiCp*2+ for a second round of chemical reaction. In these processes, CrCp*2 stays as CrCp*2+; otherwise, it does not participate in the reaction owing to the aforementioned electrode potential association. Therefore, two coupled electrochemical–chemical reactions of the RMs mediate the charge and discharge processes in battery cycling.
 Fig. 15  Redox targeting for a Li–S battery. (a) Schematic illustration of a redox targeting Li–S flow battery. (b) Illustration of the redox reactions occurring in the sulfur tank during discharge and charge. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of a single-cell flow battery with 10 × 10−3 M redox molecules in the presence of 12.2 mg poly(S-r-DIB) in the cathode compartment. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Li–S cell illustration of PBI 1–PS nanostructured catholyte with a side view of the PBI π-surface and its self-assembly into 1D nanowires via π stacking. (e) Addition of Li2S8 triggers the electrostatic crosslinking of the nanowire aggregates, resulting in a gel with a high local concentration of polysulfide immobilized on the RM network. (f) Charge–discharge profiles from galvanostatic cycling (second cycle) at a C/8 rate. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In the previous discussions, RMs could be directly dissolved into the electrolyte solution, and therefore, redox mediation occurred at the electrode interface. On the other hand, RMs as a gel-type polymer-based catholyte can be prepared and deposited in the vicinity of the active electrode. For example, perylene bisimide (PBI) has been designed as a RM that overcomes the electronic charge transport bottlenecks in Li–S batteries.144 Due to its capability of assembling into extended supramolecular networks, PBI was synthesized to serve as the RM to help enhance the charge transport properties in soluble polysulfide catholytes (Fig. 15d). Fig. 15e shows an outline of the hypothesis of the gelation mechanism. PBI 1 exists in the electrolyte in the form of long supramolecular nanofibers covered with a Li+ sheath in such a way that the Li+ interacts with the side chains of 1. Upon the introduction of S82−, the weakly associated lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) counterions are displaced and divalent LiPSs act as the electrostatic crosslinks, weaving nanowires of PBI 1 into a continuous fabric of the PBI–PS gel. A discharge plateau and gradual sloping regime corresponding to the S8 → S82− and S82− → S42− reactions, respectively, are shown in the charge–discharge curves at a C/8 rate (Fig. 15f). PBI 1 + Li2S8 and Li2S8 demonstrated discharge capacities of 267 ± 6 and 193 ± 11 mA h g−1 (S), respectively. Compared with Li2S8 alone, the nanostructured PBI 1 + Li2S8 gel network exhibited a 38% enhancement in sulfur utilization.

5. RMs as the cell unit
Most bulk and interfacial RMs work as dopants or additives, and the dosages of such mediators are generally low. This section summarizes another type of RM. In many cases, a large amount of RMs are required, thereby becoming the dominant ingredients of the electrodes or electrolytes. One of the most important purposes of such RMs is to decouple the generation of electrochemical gases, especially hydrogen production. It is common sense that electrochemical water splitting generates both H2 and O2 under the stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. The O2 impurity dispersed in the produced H2 increases the cost of further purification. Moreover, a mixture of H2 and O2 leads to a potential hazard of explosion. RM electrodes can temporarily store charges as electron reservoirs, thereby making it possible to divide the water-splitting process into two steps (as shown in eqn (16) and (17); assume each RM can hold one charge and is dissolved in an acid solution). 2H+ + 2RM → 2RM+ + H2(16) H2O + 2RM+→ 1/2O2 + 2RM + 2H+(17)
In 2013 and 2014, Leroy Cronin and his group published a series of works on decoupling O2 and H2 evolution during water splitting. Hydroquinone,145 H4[SiW12O40],146 and H3PMo12O4037 were used as the RMs to separate the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and OER processes. However, RM permeation is found in at least one of these systems.145 Yujie Sun et al. adopted a FC derivative, namely, (ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium chloride, and Na4[Fe(CN)6] as the RMs to decouple water splitting; the latter RM is suitable for both neutral and alkaline electrolytes.147 In this work, even the HER and OER processes occur asynchronously, but they are performed in the same compartment. Therefore, contamination from dissolved oxygen cannot be completely eliminated.
All the works mentioned above involve membranes to separate the gas evolution and RM sections, leaving concerns of membrane corrosion and leakages. Therefore, some strategies have been developed to completely separate the H2 and O2 evolution sections. Recently, our group published an article in Nature Communications in relation to hydrogen and oxygen production via alkaline water electrolysis using solid-state nickel hydroxide as the RM.38 The device architecture for the alkaline electrolytic cell was designed in such a manner that the H2 and O2 productions were performed in two decoupled steps (Fig. 16a). The cell architecture that contained suspended electrode-like nickel hydroxide as the RM offered several advantages. First, the independent generation of H2 and O2 gases avoids the mixing of the product gases over a wide range of current densities and therefore simplifies gas handling. This considerably increases the operational flexibility of alkaline electrolytic cells. Second, such device architecture makes the RM electrode pluggable; therefore, without the need of a membrane, it was possible to generate highly pure H2 and O2 gases, which further lowered the cost of the alkaline water electrolysis technology. Third, the independent generation of H2 and O2 gases needs different driving forces (voltage or power inputs). This implies that we can flexibly employ sustainable energy sources like wind or solar power for the generation of H2 or O2. Lastly, the NiOOH formed during H2 generation (Step 1) can be combined with a zinc anode to form a NiOOH–Zn battery for energy storage applications, and its discharge depends on the cathodic reduction of the NiOOH electrode (NiOOH → Ni(OH)2) and the anodic oxidization of the zinc electrode (Zn → ZnO22−). In situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) curves (Fig. 16b and c) clearly show the stepwise production of H2 and O2 gases.
 Fig. 16  RM working as an electrode/electrolyte component. (a) Diagrammatic illustration of the cell operation mechanism, where Step 1 (H2 production; switching to K1) comprises the anodic oxidization at the Ni(OH)2 electrode (Ni(OH)2 + OH − e− → NiOOH + H2O) and cathodic reduction of H2O at the HER electrode (H2O + e− → 1/2H2 + OH−). Step 2 (O2 production; switching to K2) comprises anodic OH− oxidization at the OER electrode (2OH − 2e− → 1/2O2 + H2O) and cathodic reduction of the NiOOH electrode (NiOOH + H2O + e− → Ni(OH)2 + OH−). (b) DEMS curves for O2 evolution (red line) and H2 evolution (black line) in the overall water electrolysis process at a constant applied current of 200 mA. (c) Chronopotentiometry curve corresponding to the DEMS curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing. 
A similar strategy was reported by adopting polytriphenylamine148 and Ni(OH)2149,150 for H2 generation and Na0.44MnO2 for Cl2 generation.151 Another interesting design was reported by Sean E. Goodwin and Darren Anthony Walsh,152 who used bipolar electrodes to divide the HER and OER processes into different cells. In this design, K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 was selected as the mediator electrode and this redox couple worked as the anode and cathode in the respective HER and OER cells. Based on this design, only the electron is exchanged, and therefore, the crossover of gases is completely eliminated.
6. RMs in supercapacitors
Interfacial RMs have also been widely employed in supercapacitors and have resulted in a number of benefits to the overall system performance. A quick reversible redox reaction introduced by RMs can efficiently enhance the ionic conductivity and increase the pseudocapacitance capacity.153 They can also store charges via valence changes and electron transfer between the mediators and electronic conductors (e.g., activated carbon), thereby providing extra charge capacity other than electrostatic double-layer capacitors (EDLCs)154,155 (Fig. 17). Different from pseudocapacitance, the RM-induced capacity does not rely on the number of electrochemically active sites. Sometimes, these electrochemically active sites are sparse on the electrode surface; usually, additional fabrication processes are necessitated, such as doping or surface modification, to introduce such sites. The energy density of a RM-based supercapacitor depends on the solubility of the RMs and interaction between the RMs and electrodes. If highly soluble RMs are applied to supercapacitors, enhanced volumetric energy density can be expected, because the dissolved mediator molecules/ions lead to negligible volume changes in the entire system.
 Fig. 17  Illustration of RMs for enhancing supercapacitors. One type of RM can efficiently enhance the ionic conductivity and increase the pseudocapacitance capacity via a quick reversible redox reaction. Another type of RM can store charges via valence changes and electron transfer between the mediators and electronic conductors. 
Besides generic essential demands such as high stability, excellent reversibility, and proper oxidation potential, the expectation of high power density from supercapacitors emphasizes the necessity for the faster kinetics of RMs. In detail, this depends on the interactions between the mediator and solvent, as well as those between the mediator and electrode. The former one includes RM diffusion in the solution and the solvation/desolvation rate. The latter one includes the speed of RM absorption/desorption and charge transfer rate. Numerous RMs such as methylene blue (MB),156 FC and 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinooxy,157p-phenylenediamine (PPD),153,158 NaI/I2,154 2-mercaptopyridine,159 hydroquinone,131 hexacyanoferrate,160etc. have been used in supercapacitors as the mediators in liquid and polymer electrolytes. Silvia Roldán et al.131 reported that two times higher specific capacitance could be achieved when hydroquinone was introduced as the RM in an electrolyte supporting 1 M H2SO4 using a chemically activated carbon electrode. The additional pseudocapacitive contribution from the faradaic reactions of the hydroquinone/quinone system promoted an increase in the capacitance when using this redox electrolyte (Fig. 18a). The effect of adding hydroquinone into the electrolyte is also clearly observed in the CV profiles (Fig. 18b). The CV profiles obtained in HQ/H2SO4 exhibit a set of anodic and cathodic peaks that are pseudocapacitive in nature, while the profiles found in H2SO4 demonstrate a rectangular shape, which is the characteristic of electrostatic capacitors. Haijun Yu et al. employed an organic electrolyte mediated by a redox shuttle obtained by mixing PDD as the RM into lithium perchlorate/acetonitrile electrolyte for the same application as that in activated carbon-based supercapacitors.153 Almost three times higher specific capacitance of the supercapacitor could be achieved with the electrolyte containing RM. From the CV curves (Fig. 18c), it is evident that the supercapacitor without the RM electrolyte exhibited a rectangular curve, implying an ideal capacitive behavior and a quasi-rectangular shape is observed after the addition of the PDD as the RM into the electrolyte, which is typical pseudocapacitive behavior. Similarly, Su and his co-workers148 showed that the addition of either K3Fe(CN)6 or K4Fe(CN)6 into the KOH solution enhanced the capacitance of the Co-Al layered double hydroxide (LDH) electrode. The capacitance values were improved up to 712 and 317 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 when the Co–Al electrode was mixed with either KOH/K3Fe(CN)6 or KOH/K4Fe(CN)6 electrolytes, which were higher than that for a pure KOH solution (226 F g−1). This improvement in capacitance could be attributed to the promotion of the electron gain and the suppression of loss of Co ions with the help of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− during charging–discharging (Fig. 18d). Nevertheless, the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− redox couple exhibited no redox peaks.
 Fig. 18  RM-enhanced supercapacitor. (a) Representation of the processes occurring on the carbon surface: double-layer formation and redox reaction. (b) CV obtained at 1 mV s−1 in HQ/H2SO4 and H2SO4 for AC-KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011, Wiley. (c) CV profiles of the supercapacitors with LiClO4 and LiClO4 + PPD electrolytes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in a voltage range from −1.25 to 1.25 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (d) Illustrations of the roles of hexacyanoferrate(II) and (III) in the courses of charge (A) and discharge (B) for the Co–Al LDH electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, dilemma remains in selecting supercapacitor RMs. A strong mediator–electrode interaction is required to suppress self-discharge (otherwise, the oxidized/reduced mediator can shuttle to the counter-electrode and neutralize the charge), but this interaction should not be too intense such that it hinders mediator desorption from the electrode surface. In addition, even though the preference to apply a highly concentrated RM solution enhances the energy density of the supercapacitor, a strong mediator–solvent interaction can possibly slow down the desolvation process. Therefore, it is fairly worthwhile to strike a balance among such interactions.
7. RMs in MFCs
In MFCs, the microbes function as the catalysts that oxidize the organic or inorganic electron donors and transfer electrons to the MFC anodes, generating a current toward the cathodes (Fig. 19a).161 Moreover, some bacteria can reduce the electron acceptors162–164 (such as nitrates, perchlorates, and metal ions) at the cathode. To improve the electron transfer capacity, RMs—as an electron bridge between the microbes and anodes/cathodes—can accept electrons from the microbes or donate electrons to the microbes. Exogenous RMs are usually used by microorganisms to shuttle the extracellular electron transport of non-electrogenic microorganisms or to enhance the capability of electrogenic microorganisms to transport electrons to the solid-phase electron acceptors or electrodes.165–167 In many cases, soluble RMs should be continuously added to realize a high electron transfer rate and enhance the current density. The undesirable batch process would reduce the economic viability and even lead to the continuous discharge of biologically recalcitrant compounds. Accordingly, the rational immobilization of RMs on the anode surface is essential for fabricating practical MFCs. Methods for immobilization mainly include adsorption,168,169 electropolymerization,170 and covalent grafting.171,172 Appropriate methods can guarantee that RMs would remain electrochemically active for a longer time.
 Fig. 19  RMs for MFCs. (a) Schematic of the operating principles of MFCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) Decolorization rates of Congo red in MFCs with and without the addition of RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) Comparisons of current densities and power densities of MFCs with MB and MR as RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Current production in MFCs with different kinds of flavins as the RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2010, Springer. 
Anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate (AQDS) is a kind of exogenous RM most commonly used in MFCs for the decolorization of azo dyes and degradation of organic wastes.170,172–174 A study done by Yongyou Hu et al. showed that a 36% increase in the maximum power density and 394% increase in the decolorization rates of Congo red could be realized with the addition of 0.005 mM AQDS. Moreover, electricity generation and decolorization rates could be further promoted by increasing the AQDS concentration (Fig. 19b).173 The mediator reduced the anode charge transfer resistance and kinetically accelerated the extracellular electron transfer between the microorganisms, anode, and Congo red. In addition, other exogenous RMs, such as MB,175,176 methyl red (MR),175 neutral red,168 and 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone,177 can also improve the power densities of MFCs. For example, MB and MR improve the electron transfer rates and minimize the side reactions of deactivating the catalysts in yeast-based MFC systems (Fig. 19c).175 For MB-based MFCs, the average maximum power density increases to 429.29 ± 42.75 mW m−2 at a current density of ∼1200 mA m−2.
Naturally occurring RMs, such as humic acids,173 pyocyanins,178 and flavins,179,180 are frequently used as artificial RMs in MFCs. A study shows that a low concentration of flavin-based compounds (i.e., flavin mononucleotide and riboflavin) in MFCs inoculated with Shewanella cells could enhance the current density and power outputs by decreasing the internal anode resistance (Fig. 19d).179 Accordingly, the overall coulombic efficiencies of the reactor configuration were also improved. Overall, the use of RMs is a remarkably effective strategy to promote the electron transfer in MFCs, both in the dissolved state at the anode compartment and immobilized on the anode surface. A desirable RM can afford quicker electron transfer rates and considerable performance improvements.
8. Outlook and summary
RMs—although not considered to be the main components of electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems—can play crucial roles in the efficiency of such devices. They uniquely serve as charge transporters, charge transfer agents, overcharge protectors, intermediate-product stabilizers, capacitive donors, etc. Categorized by their intermediate properties, RMs can work in the range of sub-nanometers to meters and do their jobs in various places: within the bulk particles, on the electrode–electrolyte interface, or the battery scale. We have reviewed different kinds of RMs on all the scales listed above and introduced their applications in various energy storage systems such as metal-ion batteries, Li–O2 batteries, Li–S batteries, electrolysis systems, supercapacitors, and MFCs.
Dramatic progress has been achieved in the past few years. Based on these explorations, it is possible to clarify the requests of RMs applied toward various requirements. The fundamental requirements are proper redox potential, stability, and reversibility. Further, in the case of RMs applied under various scales, different demands should be considered. For bulk RMs, the key issue is uniformity. The aggregation of the dopant diminishes the role of RMs as fast charge transporters. To avoid such problems, ions with radii and chemical properties similar to the substituted elements are the primary choices. Meanwhile, an optimal synthesis route can efficiently suppress dopant aggregation. Secondly, the stability of the doped structure should be considered to ensure the battery's cycling performance. Further, for solid–solid interfacial RMs, concerns mainly focus on the conducting contact between the active material and RMs. Usually, a good contact can be obtained if the mediator serves as a coating layer, but the RM layer should not be too dense to block the path for metal ions to be intercalated. RMs in blended electrodes suffer from additional contact issues, particularly if the polymer-type RM also works as the binder. In such a case, there should be balance between the polymer's flexibility and mechanical strength so that good conducting contact as well as non-exfoliation can be simultaneously ensured. Solid–liquid interfacial RMs have received more attention previously because they have been widely adopted in Li–O2 and Li–S batteries. These RMs are usually soluble molecules that move freely in the electrolyte. Therefore, such RMs should have high solubility in the chosen electrolytes and have higher diffusion coefficients, too, to fulfil the need for faster kinetics. In this case, RM shuttling at the counter-electrode is a nonnegligible problem. By introducing an ion-conducting membrane to shut the RM away from the sensitive electrode (such as lithium metal), this problem can be effectively resolved, but this protecting membrane requires careful evaluation such that it does not hinder fast metal-ion migration. An immobilized RM molecule is another method to prevent redox shuttling, but this can decrease the ability of the RMs to transport charge and mediated products. Another risk of adopting these RMs is the occurrence of side reactions, including electrode corrosion. Some strategies to protect the relevant parts should be established to achieve the full utilization of such highly reactive mediators. RMs as the cell unit are mainly applied as electrolysis-mediated electrodes to decouple the electrochemical reactions. For this kind of RM, stability should be seriously considered because most electrochemical water-splitting systems run under an acidic or alkaline environment. Some cell designs allow an additional chamber for placing the RM electrodes so that they are separate from severe chemical circumstances. Further, many chosen RMs of this sort are conventional battery electrodes, and their reversibility needs to be worthwhile before long-term running of such electrolysis systems. Moreover, different from the RMs mentioned above, instead of providing faster kinetics or activating electrochemical reactions, RM species for supercapacitors should be designed to improve the capacities. These RMs are essentially solid–liquid interfacial RMs, but they need enhanced solubility to provide sufficient capacities and strong interactions with the electrode to avoid shuttling issues. Consequently, the selected mediators should exhibit strong interactions with the solvent molecules and have firm absorption on the electrode surface. However, the dilemma is the demand for faster kinetics and higher capacities. The former requires quick desorption and desolvation processes, which may result in rapid capacity decay and severe shuttling problems. One solution is selecting a highly soluble RM but that has lower interaction with the electrodes. Consequently, the shuttling problem can be settled by applying ion-conducting separators. In addition, such RMs should not be too corrosive to decompose the electrodes, binders, and separators. Despite the challenges mentioned above, under the aim of practical applications, all the discussed RMs should have low cost and low toxicity. Moreover, particularly for solid–liquid interfacial RMs, the introduction of RMs should not decrease the battery's mass and volumetric energy density. Namely, despite the achieved progress, the field of RMs still has great research potential.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21935003) and the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0901500).
References
S. P. S. Badwal, S. S. Giddey, C. Munnings, A. I. Bhatt and A. F. Hollenkamp, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 1–28 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 Search PubMed .
X. Luo, J. Wang, M. Dooner and J. Clarke, Appl. Energy, 2015, 137, 511–536 Search PubMed .
R. Dominko, M. Gaberscek, J. Drofenik, M. Bele, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 770–773 Search PubMed .
R. Dominko, M. Gaberscek, J. Drofenik, M. Bele and J. Jamnik, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 3709–3716 Search PubMed .
H. C. Shin, W. I. Cho and H. Jang, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1472–1476 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Li, H. Guo, Z. Wang, W. Peng, Y. Yang and R. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 522–526 Search PubMed .
F.-Y. Su, C. You, Y.-B. He, W. Lv, W. Cui, F. Jin, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9644–9650 Search PubMed .
M. Yoshio, H. Y. Wang, K. Fukuda, Y. Hara and Y. Adachi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1245–1250 Search PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 979–982 Search PubMed .
J. M. Zheng, Z. R. Zhang, X. B. Wu, Z. X. Dong, Z. Zhu and Y. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A775–A782 Search PubMed .
X. Guo, C. Wang, M. Chen, J. Wang and J. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 107–112 Search PubMed .
M. Yu, W. Yuan, C. Li, J.-D. Hong and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7360–7366 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Zhou and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1903–1911 Search PubMed .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682–2699 Search PubMed .
R. S. Devan, R. A. Patil, J.-H. Lin and Y.-R. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3326–3370 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, X. Han, Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 699–728 Search PubMed .
A. Varma, A. S. Mukasyan, A. S. Rogachev and K. V. Manukyan, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14493–14586 Search PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, I. Park, D.-H. Seo, S. Lee, S.-W. Kim, W. J. Kwon, Y.-U. Park, C. S. Kim, S. Jeon and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10369–10372 Search PubMed .
G.-N. Zhu, H.-J. Liu, J.-H. Zhuang, C.-X. Wang, Y.-G. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4016–4022 Search PubMed .
A. D. Robertson and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1984–1992 Search PubMed .
Z. Xi, J. Guo, J. Lian, H. Li, L. Zhao, X. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Yang, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 140, 22–27 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Wang, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8197–8200 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, Y. Du, C. Jia, M. Zhou, L. Fan, X. Wang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6286–6289 Search PubMed .
F. Pan, J. Yang, Q. Huang, X. Wang, H. Huang and Q. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400567 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 651–654 Search PubMed .
J.-W. Wen, D.-W. Zhang, C.-H. Chen, C.-X. Ding, Y. Yu and J. Maier, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 155–160 Search PubMed .
M. D. Radin and D. J. Siegel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2370–2379 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng, S. Misra, J. Nelson, M. F. Toney and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15387–15394 Search PubMed .
Z. Guo, C. Li, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7505–7509 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489–494 Search PubMed .
J. Li, L. Yang, B. Yuan, G. Li and J. Y. Lee, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 15–21 Search PubMed .
J. Li, L. Yang, S. Yang and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501808 Search PubMed .
Y. Miseki, S. Fujiyoshi, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9691–9697 Search PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Meng, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 800–803 Search PubMed .
M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 403–409 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11741 Search PubMed .
D. Vonlanthen, P. Lazarev, K. A. See, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5095–5100 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Shi and J.-D. Gu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2018, 36, 1815–1827 Search PubMed .
Q. Huang and Q. Wang, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 312–322 Search PubMed .
L. Aymard, C. Lenain, L. Courvoisier, F. Salver-Disma and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2015–2023 Search PubMed .
J. K. Hong, J. H. Lee and S. M. Oh, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 90–96 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, M. Hou, S. Yuan, H. Yu, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 55, 6–9 Search PubMed .
B. Li, N. Jiang, W. Huang, H. Yan, Y. Zuo and D. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704864 Search PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Takeuchi, M. Nakayama, H. Shiiba, M. Ogawa, K. Nakayama, T. Ohta, D. Endo, T. Ozaki, T. Inamasu, K. Sato and S. Komaba, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7650–7655 Search PubMed .
M.-C. Kim, S. Choi, H. Kim, S.-B. Han, S.-H. Moon, E.-S. Kim, Y.-S. Kim and K.-W. Park, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227850 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, N. Evans, S. M. Zakeeruddin, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3163–3167 Search PubMed .
P. Nie, J. Yuan, J. Wang, Z. Le, G. Xu, L. Hao, G. Pang, Y. Wu, H. Dou, X. Yan and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20306–20312 Search PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Hart, Q. Pang, A. Garsuch, T. Weiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5682 Search PubMed .
D. Wang, S. E. Ela, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Pechy, I. Exnarc, Q. Wang and M. Graetzel, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1350–1352 Search PubMed .
Q. Huang, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, D. Choi and J. P. Lemmon, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 69–73 Search PubMed .
A. Vlad, N. Singh, J. Rolland, S. Melinte, P. M. Ajayan and J. F. Gohy, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4315 Search PubMed .
S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2224 Search PubMed .
S. Tobishima, Y. Ogino and Y. Watanabe, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 143–150 Search PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, J. W. Jiang, L. M. Moshurchak, M. D. Fleischauer, C. Buhrmester and L. J. Krause, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1283–A1289 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Ren, H. Lu, M. Jia, Z.-A. Zhang, Y.-Q. Lai and J. Li, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2012, 28, 2091–2096 Search PubMed .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Qin and K. Amine, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5605–5613 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen and K. Amine, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 703–707 Search PubMed .
C. Buhrmester, J. Chen, L. Moshurchak, J. W. Jiang, R. L. Wang and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2390–A2399 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. C. Redfern, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8204–8207 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, H. Kim, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A2274–A2293 Search PubMed .
V. Pande and V. Viswanathan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 60–63 Search PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Jia, S. Zhang, X. Li, J. Li and L. Li, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47, 261–272 Search PubMed .
C. Jia, F. Pan, Y. G. Zhu, Q. Huang, L. Lu and Q. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500886 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Zeng, B. Ding, C. Xu and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600660 Search PubMed .
L. Su, R. M. Darling, K. G. Gallagher, W. Xie, J. L. Thelen, A. F. Badel, J. L. Barton, K. J. Cheng, N. P. Balsara, J. S. Moore and F. R. Brushett, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A5253–A5262 Search PubMed .
H.-D. Lim, B. Lee, Y. Zheng, J. Hong, J. Kim, H. Gwon, Y. Ko, M. Lee, K. Cho and K. Kang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16066 Search PubMed .
N. B. Aetukuri, B. D. McCloskey, J. M. Garcia, L. E. Krupp, V. Viswanathan and A. C. Luntz, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 50–56 Search PubMed .
H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8374–8376 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, B. Zhang, Z. Bai, R. Guo, Z.-L. Xu, Z. Sadighi, L. Qin, T.-Y. Zhang, G. Chen, B. Huang and J.-K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8290–8299 Search PubMed .
Y. Hase, J. Seki, T. Shiga, F. Mizuno, H. Nishikoori, H. Iba and K. Takechi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12151–12154 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, F. Tu, J. Xie, G. Du, S. Zhang, G. Cao and X. Zhao, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500339 Search PubMed .
V. Viswanathan, K. S. Thygesen, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov, G. Girishkumar, B. D. McCloskey and A. C. Luntz, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214704 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Liu, C. Jin, S. Bie, R. Yang and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13563–13567 Search PubMed .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 Search PubMed .
L. Johnson, C. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, P. C. Ashok, B. B. Praveen, K. Dholakia, J.-M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 1091–1099 Search PubMed .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 962–963 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Yu, Z. Zhao, X. Fan, Z. Ling and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12033–12037 Search PubMed .
Z. Liang and Y.-C. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7574–7583 Search PubMed .
Y. Qiao and S. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15830–15845 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 445–447 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, K. Liao, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1024–1030 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Yuan, L. Li, Z.-F. Ma, D. P. Wilkinson, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2144–2198 Search PubMed .
V. Giordani, S. A. Freunberger, P. G. Bruce, J. M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A180–A183 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Gao, L. R. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 767 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, Q. Wang, R. Zhang, B. D. Trimm and M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7580–7583 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, B. Sun, Y. Zhao, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8505–8509 Search PubMed .
I. Gunasekara, M. N. Ates, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A760–A769 Search PubMed .
B. J. Bergner, A. Schuermann, K. Peppler, A. Garsuch and J. Janek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15054–15064 Search PubMed .
B. J. Bergner, M. R. Busche, R. Pinedo, B. B. Berkes, D. Schroeder and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7756–7765 Search PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, C. Liu, P. Phillips, P. Yasaei, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. F. Klie, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2167–2175 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, L. Li, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, F. Wu and K. Amine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5611–5640 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, M. Leskes, W. Yu, A. J. Moore, L. Zhou, P. M. Bayley, G. Kim and C. P. Grey, Science, 2015, 350, 530–533 Search PubMed .
S. Choudhury, C. T.-C. Wan, W. I. Al Sadat, Z. Tu, S. Lau, M. J. Zachman, L. F. Kourkoutis and L. A. Archer, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602809 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, D. Hirshberg, D. Sharon, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2334–2345 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Jia, J. Yang and Q. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6191–6197 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Kim, I. T. Kim, M. J. Song and M. W. Shin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 821–828 Search PubMed .
W. Walker, V. Giordani, J. Uddin, V. S. Bryantsev, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2076–2079 Search PubMed .
D. Sharon, D. Hirsberg, M. Afri, F. Chesneau, R. Lavi, A. A. Frimer, Y.-K. Sun and D. Aurbach, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16590–16600 Search PubMed .
K. P. C. Yao, J. T. Frith, S. Y. Sayed, F. Barde, J. R. Owen, Y. Shao-Horn and N. Garcia-Araez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16290–16297 Search PubMed .
W.-H. Ryu, F. S. Gittleson, J. M. Thomsen, J. Li, M. J. Schwab, G. W. Brudvig and A. D. Taylor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12925 Search PubMed .
C. M. Burke, R. Black, I. R. Kochetkov, V. Giordani, D. Addison, L. F. Nazar and B. D. McCloskey, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 747–756 Search PubMed .
R. C. Agrawal and G. P. Pandey, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 223001 Search PubMed .
C. K. Lee and Y. J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8561–8567 Search PubMed .
S. H. Yoon and Y. J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42617 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Lei, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, P. Du, J. Wen, R. S. Assary, U. Das, D. J. Miller, J. W. Elam, H. M. Albishri, D. Abd El-Hady, Y.-K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2383 Search PubMed .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 Search PubMed .
J. S. Hummelshoj, A. C. Luntz and J. K. Norskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 034703 Search PubMed .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178–9186 Search PubMed .
A. C. Luntz, V. Viswanathan, J. Voss, J. B. Varley, J. K. Norskov, R. Scheffler and A. Speidel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3494–3499 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 882–888 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, L. Guo and Z. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5915–5920 Search PubMed .
S. Matsuda, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18397–18400 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, Z. P. Jovanov, Y. Chen, L. R. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6539–6543 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. T. Frith, N. Garcia-Araez and J. R. Owen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1705–1708 Search PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Shen, W. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Yi, W. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, D. Wang and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8941–8946 Search PubMed .
H. Wan, Q. Bai, Z. Peng, Y. Mao, Z. Liu, H. He, D. Wang, J. Xie and G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24617–24620 Search PubMed .
F. Li, S. Wu, D. Li, T. Zhang, P. He, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7843 Search PubMed .
I. Landa-Medrano, M. Olivares-Marin, B. Bergner, R. Pinedo, A. Sorrentino, E. Pereiro, I. Ruiz de Larramendi, J. Janek, T. Rojo and D. Tonti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3822–3829 Search PubMed .
W. Yin, A. Grimaud, I. Azcarate, C. Yang and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6546–6554 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Li, X. Bi, L. Ma, T. Wu, M. Sina, S. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Alvarado, B. Lu, A. Banerjee, K. Amine, J. Lu and Y. S. Meng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2381–2392 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. R. Johnson, Z. P. Jovanov and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17118 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, F. W. T. Goh, R. Yan, S. Wu, S. Adams and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27930–27936 Search PubMed .
Y. Qiao, Y. He, S. Wu, K. Jiang, X. Li, S. Guo, P. He and H. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 463–468 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Qiao, H. Deng and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9816–9822 Search PubMed .
Z. Liang, Y. Zhou and Y.-C. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3500–3510 Search PubMed .
X. Mu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Wei, P. He and H. Zhou, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 336–340 Search PubMed .
S. Meini, R. Elazari, A. Rosenman, A. Garsuch and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 915–918 Search PubMed .
S. Roldan, C. Blanco, M. Granda, R. Menendez and R. Santamaria, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1699–1701 Search PubMed .
M. Wild, L. O'Neill, T. Zhang, R. Purkayastha, G. Minton, M. Marinescu and G. J. Offer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3477–3494 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1551–1558 Search PubMed .
M. Zhao, H.-J. Peng, J.-Y. Wei, J.-Q. Huang, B.-Q. Li, H. Yuan and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2070020 Search PubMed .
L. C. H. Gerber, P. D. Frischmann, F. Y. Fan, S. E. Doris, X. Qu, A. M. Scheuermann, K. Persson, Y.-M. Chiang and B. A. Helms, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 549–554 Search PubMed .
S. Maletti, F. S. Podetti, S. Oswald, L. Giebeler, C. A. Barbero, D. Mikhailova and J. Balach, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2893–2899 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Dong, H. Li, Z. Zhao, H. B. Wu, C. Hao, S. Liu, J. Qiu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5002 Search PubMed .
A. Swiderska-Mocek and E. Rudnicka, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 162–167 Search PubMed .
M. Helen, M. A. Reddy, T. Diemant, U. Golla-Schindler, R. J. Behm, U. Kaiser and M. Fichtner, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12146 Search PubMed .
J. Yan, X. Liu, H. Qi, W. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Yao and B. Li, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6394–6401 Search PubMed .
N. He, L. Zhong, M. Xiao, S. Wang, D. Han and Y. Meng, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33871 Search PubMed .
K. R. Kim, K.-S. Lee, C.-Y. Ahn, S.-H. Yu and Y.-E. Sung, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32433 Search PubMed .
Q. Huang, H. Li, M. Graetzel and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1793–1797 Search PubMed .
P. D. Frischmann, L. C. H. Gerber, S. E. Doris, E. Y. Tsai, F. Y. Fan, X. Qu, A. Jain, K. A. Persson, Y.-M. Chiang and B. A. Helms, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6765–6770 Search PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13656–13659 Search PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 Search PubMed .
W. Li, N. Jiang, B. Hu, X. Liu, F. Song, G. Han, T. J. Jordan, T. B. Hanson, T. L. Liu and Y. Sun, Chem, 2018, 4, 637–649 Search PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2904–2908 Search PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Dong, R. Wang, D. Bin, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 260–266 Search PubMed .
A. Landman, H. Dotan, G. E. Shter, M. Wullenkord, A. Houaijia, A. Maljusch, G. S. Grader and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 646–651 Search PubMed .
M. Hou, L. Chen, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 438 Search PubMed .
S. Goodwin and D. A. Walsh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23654–23661 Search PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, S. Hao, J. Lin and M. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 1123–1126 Search PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Zhou, A. N. Mansour and X. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5997–6002 Search PubMed .
B. Akinwolemiwa, C. Peng and G. Z. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5054–A5059 Search PubMed .
F. Yu, M. Huang, J. Wu, Z. Qiu, L. Fan, J. Lin and Y. Lin, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 39784 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Li, C. Gu, M. Yao, B. Yang, P. Lu and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 413–419 Search PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, Y. Lin, S. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Wang, M. Huang, J. Lin, Z. Lan and Y. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 1319–1324 Search PubMed .
K. Sun, M. Dong, E. Feng, H. Peng, G. Ma, G. Zhao and Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 22419–22425 Search PubMed .
L.-H. Su, X.-G. Zhang, C.-H. Mi, B. Gao and Y. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2195–2202 Search PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. A. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 Search PubMed .
Z. Shi, J. M. Zachara, L. Shi, Z. Wang, D. A. Moore, D. W. Kennedy and J. K. Fredrickson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 11644–11652 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Shi, L. Shi, G. F. White, D. J. Richardson, T. A. Clarke, J. K. Fredrickson and J. M. Zachara, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 299–310 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, L. H.-H. Hsu, P. Kavanagh, F. Barriere, P. N. L. Lens, L. Lapinsonniere, J. H. Lienhard, U. Schroeder, X. Jiang and D. Leech, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0024 Search PubMed .
M. Li, M. Zhou, X. Tian, C. Tan, C. T. McDaniel, D. J. Hassett and T. Gu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2018, 36, 1316–1327 Search PubMed .
N. L. Costa, T. A. Clarke, L.-A. Philipp, J. Gescher, R. O. Louro and C. M. Paquete, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 255, 308–317 Search PubMed .
D. R. Lovley and D. J. F. Walker, Front. Microbiol., 2019, 10, 2078 Search PubMed .
A. L. Popov, J. R. Kim, R. M. Dinsdale, S. R. Esteves, A. J. Guwy and G. C. Premier, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 2012, 17, 361–370 Search PubMed .
J. Ahmed and S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2013, 34, 3649–3653 Search PubMed .
C. Feng, L. Ma, F. Li, H. Mai, X. Lang and S. Fan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1516–1520 Search PubMed .
K. Guo, X. Chen, S. Freguia and B. C. Donose, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 184–189 Search PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Li, Z. Du and H. Y. Ng, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 164, 184–188 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, W. Li, Y. Li, Y. Hu and Y. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 142, 407–414 Search PubMed .
X. Tang and H. Y. Ng, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 244, 452–455 Search PubMed .
M. Christwardana, D. Frattini, G. Accardo, S. P. Yoon and Y. Kwon, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. R. Miroliaei, A. Samimi, D. Mohebbi-Kalhori, M. Khorram and A. Qasemi, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2015, 34, 1097–1105 Search PubMed .
E. Taskan, B. Ozkaya and H. Hasar, Water Sci. Technol., 2015, 71, 320–328 Search PubMed .
T. Zheng, Y.-S. Xu, X.-Y. Yong, B. Li, D. Yin, Q.-W. Cheng, H.-R. Yuan and Y.-C. Yong, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 197, 416–421 Search PubMed .
S. B. Velasquez-Orta, I. M. Head, T. P. Curtis, K. Scott, J. R. Lloyd and H. von Canstein, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1373–1381 Search PubMed .
Q.-Q. Wang, X.-Y. Wu, Y.-Y. Yu, D.-Z. Sun, H.-H. Jia and Y.-C. Yong, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 232, 439–444 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs00489hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yongyao Xia
	Yongyao Xia received his PhD from Saga University, Japan, in 1997. Currently, he is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. His research interests involve advanced materials and technologies for energy storage and conversion devices.

 	Fig. 1  Radar charts of the important target metrics for Li-ion batteries in electric vehicles. The dotted area represents accomplished improvements in present Li-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the working mechanism of RMs and its effect on cell voltage. A RM serves as an intermediate electron carrier or reservoir without changing the final products, which usually has proper redox potential that is slightly lower than the oxidation potential of the pure electrode material or higher than its reduction potential.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of RMs applied under various scales. Bulk RMs are obtained by incorporating redox couples into the active electrode materials, forming a solid solution. Solid–solid interfacial RMs usually work at the interface between the mediator and active material, and solid–liquid interfacial RMs act at the electrode–electrolyte interface. RMs with a large dosage can directly serve as specific electrodes or some key components of electrolytes.	 
Li+ + FePO4 (containing Mn3+) + e− → LiFePO4	(1)
MnPO4 + LiFePO4→ LiMnPO4 + FePO4	(2)

 	Fig. 4  RMs as the dopant. (a) Typical charge–discharge curves of LiFe0.5Mn0.5O4 at C/5 rate; (b) CV at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c and d) Charge transfer processes for Li2TiO3 and Li1.2Ti0.4Fe0.4O2, respectively, during the redox process. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
3I → I3 + 2e (electrochemical oxidation)
I3 + Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 3I (chemical reduction)

 	Fig. 5  Graphical representation of a PRM used as a cathode catalyst for lithium–air batteries. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 
BMABP → BMABP+ + e−	(3)
BMABP+ + LiFePO4 → BMABP + FePO4 + Li+	(4)

 	Fig. 6  RMs used for surface modification. (a) Schematic showing the oxidation of the initially formed polysulfide by MnO2 to form thiosulfate on the surface; the reaction formula. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing. (b) Schematic representation of the working principles of polymer wiring of insulating electrode materials. Here, carbon-free LiFePO4 was studied with the redox polymer of poly(4-(10-(12-dodecyl phenoxazine)vinylpyridinium)-co-4-vinylpyridine) at a molar ratio of 6:1 (y/x = 5). Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (c) CV curves of three cells, namely, Li/hybrid-1, Li/hybrid-2, and Li/hybrid-3, with PTMA/LiFePO4 ratios of 25/75, 50/50, and 75/25 in hybrid electrodes, respectively, at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and potential range of 4.5–2.0 V vs. Li/Li+ for the 1st and 5th cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Voltage profile of the hybrid PTMA-LiFePO4 electrode at a current density of 26 mA h g−1. (e) CV of the hybrid electrode recorded between 2.5 and 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+ at different scan rates. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  RMs for fabricating high-safety Li-ion batteries. (a) Voltage profiles of overcharge abuse tests using MCMB/LiFePO4 coin cells containing 0.1 M DBBB in Gen2 electrolyte for over 3000 h. The charging rate was C/10 and the overcharge ratio was 100%. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Chemical structures of dimethoxybenzene-based redox shuttles (DDB, DBD, DBMOEB, and DBBB). Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2005, Electrochemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the overcharge protection mechanism based on the redox shuttle. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
(a) RMm+ + me− ↔ RM	(5)
(b) RM + me− ↔ RMm−	(6)
(c) RMn+ + me− ↔ RM(n−m)+	(7)
(d) RMn− + me− ↔ RM(n+m)−	(8)

 	Fig. 8  Principle of redox targeting of an insulating electrode material by a freely diffusing molecule. During charging, S is oxidized to S+, which delivers charge to the LiFePO4 particles. S+ will be reduced back to S after the injection of holes into the LiFePO4 system. Therefore, FeII is oxidized to FeIII and Li ions are liberated. During discharging, S+ is reduced at the current collector to form S, thereby delivering electrons to FePO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of an electron–hole transfer agent that promotes the oxidation of solid Li2O2. Left: Charge transfer between the discharge product of Li2O2 and the electrode surface controls the electrochemical oxidation of Li2O2 (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−). Right: In the presence of M, this sluggish charge transport process becomes free and fast. First, M is oxidized to M+ at the electrode surface and then Li2O2 is oxidized back to M (2M+ + Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2M). (E0, theoretical potential for Li2O2 oxidization; ΔE, polarization associated with charge transfer; E, potential at which Li2O2 is oxidized; EM/M+, electrochemical potential of oxidizing M). Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 10  RMs for Li–O2 battery charge. First discharge–charge cycle using polyimide-coated CNT electrodes used with various electrolytes. (a) Basic; (b) LiI; (c) CsI; (d) LiNO3/CsI (capacity was limited to 1500 mA h gelectrode−1). (e) Schematic illustration showing the effect of the LiNO3/CsI electrolyte and polyimide-coated CNTs on the anode (Li metal) and air electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing. (f) Proposed catalytic cycle for the electrochemical charging of Li–O2 cells with TEMPO RM. (g) First cycle with and without 10 mM TEMPO using a Ketjen black cathode and a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
(1) O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2	(9)
(2) 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2	(10)
(3) LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2	(11)
DBBQ(sol) + Li(sol)+ + e− → LiDBBQ(sol)	(12)
LiDBBQ(sol) + O2(sol) ↔ LiDBBQO2(sol)	(13)
2LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + O2(sol) + 2DBBQ(sol)	(14)
LiDBBQ(sol) + LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + 2DBBQ(sol)	(15)

 	Fig. 11  RMs for Li–O2 battery discharge. (a) Schematic of DBBQ-containing discharge process of the Li–O2 battery and potential changes. (b) Discharge capacity with (up) and without (bottom) DBBQ in electrolytes based on TEGDME (left) and DME (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing. (c) Mechanistic illustration of hybrid Li-ion and Li–O2 batteries. (d) Voltage profile of the rGO-MoS2 cathode vs. Li+/Li. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dual-mediator Li–O2 battery. (a) Working mechanism of Li–O2 battery with dual mediators (i.e., TEMPO and DBBQ). Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing. (b) Photographs showing the color changes occurring when Li metal is immersed in DBBQ-containing/free electrolytes for 14 days. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Discharge voltage profile of Li–O2 batteries containing pristine AQ, soluble AQ, and PAQ. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of mediator-shuttling-led self-discharge (up) and protection from a Li+-Nafion separator (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Comparison of a protected dual-mediator cell (bottom) with conventional cell (up) and conventional dual-mediator cell (middle). Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  RMs for activating Li2S. (a) Summary of the effects of polysulfide dissolution, shuttling phenomenon, effect on the cathode, and insoluble products upon charging and discharging. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the activation process of the Li2S cathode over the initial charge. (c) Typical first-cycle galvanostatic charge profiles in the presence and absence of polysulfide additives. (d) Cycling performance showing the specific capacity upon the charge–discharge cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e and f) Voltage profiles of Li2S electrodes charged at the C/5 rate (∼1 mA) at a potential cutoff of 3.6 VLi under various electrolyte solutions. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Electrodeposition of Li2S onto carbon (C) cloth in the absence (left) and presence (right) of BPI. (h1 and h2) SEM images of Li2S deposited on C cloth after discharge without BPI. (h3 and h4) SEM micrographs of Li2S deposited on C cloth after battery discharge with BPI. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  RMs for activating sulfur. CV data. (a) Sulfur and (b) cobaltocene. The sweep rate is 0.2 mV s−1. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curves of cells with different concentrations (0, 12.5, and 25 mM) of cobaltocene in 1 M [S] catholyte. (d) Schematic illustration of the unified mechanism. Li2S nucleation and growth via conductive surface pathway and solution pathway with cobaltocene. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 15  Redox targeting for a Li–S battery. (a) Schematic illustration of a redox targeting Li–S flow battery. (b) Illustration of the redox reactions occurring in the sulfur tank during discharge and charge. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of a single-cell flow battery with 10 × 10−3 M redox molecules in the presence of 12.2 mg poly(S-r-DIB) in the cathode compartment. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Li–S cell illustration of PBI 1–PS nanostructured catholyte with a side view of the PBI π-surface and its self-assembly into 1D nanowires via π stacking. (e) Addition of Li2S8 triggers the electrostatic crosslinking of the nanowire aggregates, resulting in a gel with a high local concentration of polysulfide immobilized on the RM network. (f) Charge–discharge profiles from galvanostatic cycling (second cycle) at a C/8 rate. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
2H+ + 2RM → 2RM+ + H2	(16)
H2O + 2RM+→ 1/2O2 + 2RM + 2H+	(17)

 	Fig. 16  RM working as an electrode/electrolyte component. (a) Diagrammatic illustration of the cell operation mechanism, where Step 1 (H2 production; switching to K1) comprises the anodic oxidization at the Ni(OH)2 electrode (Ni(OH)2 + OH − e− → NiOOH + H2O) and cathodic reduction of H2O at the HER electrode (H2O + e− → 1/2H2 + OH−). Step 2 (O2 production; switching to K2) comprises anodic OH− oxidization at the OER electrode (2OH − 2e− → 1/2O2 + H2O) and cathodic reduction of the NiOOH electrode (NiOOH + H2O + e− → Ni(OH)2 + OH−). (b) DEMS curves for O2 evolution (red line) and H2 evolution (black line) in the overall water electrolysis process at a constant applied current of 200 mA. (c) Chronopotentiometry curve corresponding to the DEMS curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustration of RMs for enhancing supercapacitors. One type of RM can efficiently enhance the ionic conductivity and increase the pseudocapacitance capacity via a quick reversible redox reaction. Another type of RM can store charges via valence changes and electron transfer between the mediators and electronic conductors.	 

 	Fig. 18  RM-enhanced supercapacitor. (a) Representation of the processes occurring on the carbon surface: double-layer formation and redox reaction. (b) CV obtained at 1 mV s−1 in HQ/H2SO4 and H2SO4 for AC-KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011, Wiley. (c) CV profiles of the supercapacitors with LiClO4 and LiClO4 + PPD electrolytes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in a voltage range from −1.25 to 1.25 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (d) Illustrations of the roles of hexacyanoferrate(II) and (III) in the courses of charge (A) and discharge (B) for the Co–Al LDH electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  RMs for MFCs. (a) Schematic of the operating principles of MFCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) Decolorization rates of Congo red in MFCs with and without the addition of RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) Comparisons of current densities and power densities of MFCs with MB and MR as RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Current production in MFCs with different kinds of flavins as the RMs. Adapted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2010, Springer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs00489h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
