Recent advances in nanoparticles towards sustainability and their application in organic transformations in aqueous media  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR04148K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR04148K
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 16761-16786Recent advances in nanoparticles towards sustainability and their application in organic transformations in aqueous media

        
          
            Suraj R. 
            Attar
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Santosh B. 
            Kamble
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Yashavantrao Chavan Institute of Science, Satara, Maharashtra, India. E-mail: surajattar.chem@gmail.com; santosh.san143@gmail.com
Received 
      27th July 2022
    , Accepted 13th October 2022First published on 13th October 2022AbstractNanoparticles (NPs) play a crucial role in organic transformation and are becoming increasingly attractive in the field of catalysis as they show good catalytic activity in organic as well as aqueous media. Numerous NPs have been utilized for several organic transformations in aqueous media, which have led to dedicated efforts for the complete coverage of the application of metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs in water-mediated organic transformations in the last decades. This review aims to provide current highlights on the application of various types of metal NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media. The remarkable benefits associated with the catalytic application of NPs in water allows for various transformations to be performed under very mild and green conditions. Lastly, the author's perspectives are briefly considered, including future developments and crucial challenges in the ever-growing field of nanocatalysis.Suraj R. AttarMr Suraj Rafik Attar received his M.Sc. from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India, in 2009. He is pursuing his Ph.D. under the guidance of Dr Santosh B. Kamble at the Y. C. Institute of Science (Autonomous), Satara, India. He is a recipient of the Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Research Fellowship (2021) from the Government of Maharashtra, India. His current research interest is focused on the synthesis of nanocatalysts and their use in organic transformation for sustainable development. He has worked as an Assistant Professor at Yashwantrao Chavan College of Science, Karad and Krishna Mahavidyalaya Rethare Bk. Karad, M.S., India.Santosh B. KambleDr Santosh B. Kamble received his M.Sc. and Ph.D. from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. The main focus of his PhD thesis was organic transformation involving hydrotropic solutions as a green and sustainable methodology under the guidance of Prof. Mrs R. S. Salunkhe. He is a recipient of the Raman Post-Doctoral Fellowship from the University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi, India. Under the guidance of Prof. Richard Weiss at Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA, he completed his post-doctoral study. His main research interests include the synthesis of biologically important scaffolds via green and sustainable methodology, synthesis and applications of low-molecular weight organic gelators and use of nanocatalysts for organic transformations. He is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Y. C. Institute of Science, Satara, India.
1. Introduction
The new era of chemistry is shifting towards innovative techniques that mainly concentrate on the protocol of green chemistry.1 Nanocatalysts are a recently growing field applicable to almost all types of catalytic organic transformations and are an essential tool of green chemistry as they enable the development of less polluting chemical processes and open up synthetic pathways to desired products using a sustainable approach. Several forms of nanocatalysts such as metal NPs, metal oxide NPs, magnetic nanocatalysts, nano-mixed metal oxides, core–shell nanocatalysts, and supported nanocatalysts have been employed in catalytic applications.2 With developments in nanoscience and nanotechnology, a wide variety of nanostructured catalysts have been applied to various organic transformations; in particular, metal nanocatalysts are promising materials for heterogeneous catalysis. NPs have been found to exhibit superior catalytic performance compared with classical catalysts because of their high activity and selectivity due to their small size (1–100 nm). These significant advantages are attributed to their nano-size effect, as catalytic activity usually increases with decreasing nanoparticle size. However, the surface free energy of the catalyst is increased to a great extent at the nanoscale. Meanwhile, with the ultimate goal of solving environmental problems, the search for environmentally friendly reaction media such as water has gained importance in the field of catalysis for small- and large-scale applications in industries. Since the pioneering studies on Diels–Alder reactions by Breslow's group,3 there has been increasing recognition that organic reactions can proceed well in aqueous media and offer advantages over those occurring in organic solvents. The fusion of benign aqueous media and nanocatalysts seems to be an attractive way to develop next-generation green and sustainable protocols.4 Water, a plentiful resource with admirable specificity, is an abundant, safe and green medium that has been applied in an array of organic reactions in the past two decades.5 Water plays a dual role as a medium and solvent in quite a few of these convergent synthetic routes due to its high surface tension and hydrophobic nature, which underscore the tendency of non-polar molecules or their surfaces to aggregate in water. Breslow's hydrophobic effect in water emphasizes that to decrease the exposed organic surface area, the substrates must be aggregated.2 In addition, water has some significant properties, including a large cohesive energy density and high polarity, along with three-dimensional (3D) hydrogen bond networks. Often, water plays an important role by establishing hydrogen bonding with the active sites to accelerate the rate of reactions.3 Last but not least, due to its high heat capacity and unique redox stability, water is one of the safest media to carry out exothermic organic reactions.6 In recent years, the use of water as a green sustainable reaction medium has been under focus for diminishing environmental pollution.7,8 In this regard, we have tried to provide an overview of the applications of nanocatalysts in organic transformations [Fig. 1] and their role in aqueous media.
 Fig. 1  Applications of metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media. 
1.1. Metal NPs
The last decade has witnessed a tremendous growth of metal NPs in the field of nanocatalysis. Metal NPs exhibit quantum mechanical properties that make them promising materials for application in nanocatalysis.9 Several reports have shown their remarkable level of performance as a catalyst in terms of selectivity, reactivity and product yield.10 Over the past two decades, transition metal NPs have emerged as sustainable alternatives to metal catalysts owing to their durability, enormous surface area and high reusability as catalysts.11 The properties of metal nanoparticles such as palladium, gold and platinum will differ from those of their respective bulk metals.12 Metal nanoparticles exhibit size-induced quantum effects and can be exploited for a number of advanced functional applications such as sensors in electronic devices13 and catalysis.14 Indeed, the catalytic properties of metal nanoparticles are a function of their crystal lattice size parameter.

1.1.1. Copper (Cu) NPs. 
Largely, transition metals such as Pt, Pd, and Rh play important roles in hydrogenation for the reduction of a variety of functionalities because of their high surface area and large number of active sites.10 However, these noble metals are expensive and less ecofriendly in nature. Therefore, further efforts are needed to offer more efficient ecofriendly reaction conditions. Ahammed et al. developed a new hydrogenation protocol utilizing adsorbed hydrogen on Cu NPs for the reduction of aryl azides to the corresponding amines [Scheme 1].
 Scheme 1  Reduction of aryl azides to corresponding amines. 
The size of Cu NPs that are prepared from copper sulfate (CuSO4) by reacting with hydrazine hydrate in ethylene glycol ranges between 6 and 8 nm. A mixture of Cu NPs and ammonium formate in water at 100 °C is essential for a successful reaction. The simplicity, high yield, excellent chemoselectivity, cost effectiveness of the catalyst and use of water as a solvent make this procedure attractive. The authors observed a gradual decrease in the pH (6.91 to 6.41) of the reaction medium towards the acidic range with the progress of the reaction and assumed that the reactivity observed with Cu NPs may arise from the synergism of small Cu NPs in activating H2 due to which adsorbed surface hydrogen is moderately activated; thus, it was attributed to the reduction of azide with high selectivity and ruled out the formation of copper hydride (CuH). A demerit of this work is that water deactivates the Cu NPs after one cycle; thus, this catalyst cannot be recycled, but the authors claim that if the reaction is carried out in DMF under argon, the Cu NPs can be used two or more times as a reusable catalyst.15 Another interesting report by Alonso et al. describes a click reaction using unsupported and supported Cu NPs as catalysts.16 In this work, the Cu NPs are prepared by two methods: the unsupported Cu NPs are prepared by a fast chemical reduction method while the supported Cu NPs were supported on activated carbon. The synthesized unsupported Cu NPs and supported Cu/NPs were characterized by TEM. The successfully synthesized Cu NPs were used in the click reaction. The authors observed that unsupported Cu NPs (with a particle size of ∼3 nm) in tetrahydrofuran were found to catalyze the reaction of terminal alkynes and organic azides in the presence of triethylamine under microwave heating. Unfortunately, the Cu NPs underwent dissolution under these reaction conditions and consequently could not be recovered. In contrast, supported Cu NPs (∼6 nm in size) were found to be more robust and efficient than the unsupported Cu NPs. The authors also mentioned that the supported CuO NPs not only conducted the click reaction in water but were also easily recovered and re-utilized. This article clearly follows the direction of sustainable and environmentally benign practices.


1.1.2. Palladium (Pd) NPs. 
Pd NPs are the most frequently used metal NPs for catalytic coupling in the synthesis of C–C bonds. Almost all types of C–C coupling reactions such as the Heck, Suzuki, Sonogashira, Negishi and Stille reactions are reported to use Pd NPs.17 Saha et al. reported the ligand-free Pd NP-catalyzed synthesis of bis(heterocyclic) methane [Scheme 2] derivatives.9 The resulting catalyst Pd(0) had an average size of 20–50 nm and shows a high turnover number (TOF), reaching 2225 h−1 in domino Knoevenagel condensation followed by Michael addition in water, along with high durability even when recycled eight times. The promising nature of Pd NPs as a catalyst in this work is due to many factors such as the low catalyst loading and recyclability. The authors investigated the optimization of the solvent effect with various solvents including acetonitrile, dichloromethane (DCM), and tetrahydrofuran (THF). Significant improvement was achieved in DCM and THF, but the best result was observed when water was used as a solvent. Zhao et al. developed an efficient method for the highly selective and stereospecific allyl–aryl coupling of secondary allylic carbonates with aryl boronic acid catalyzed by Pd NPs in water [Scheme 3] at ambient temperature.18 The authors observed that in this method, biphenyls also formed in trace amounts, as determined by 1H NMR. In addition, the authors found that the average size of Pd NPs was reduced to 1.9 nm after 10 min of reaction and the average size of the Pd NPs remained in the range of 1.9–2.1 nm after 2 h, i.e. completion of the reaction. Uberman et al. employed a galvanostatic decomposition method to produce Pd NPs in aqueous media. Pd NPs with size ranging between 8 and 30 nm were used as a catalyst for the Suzuki and Heck coupling reaction in aqueous media.19 Although uniform size of the NPs cannot be obtained by electrochemical synthesis, they show high catalytic activity towards Suzuki [Scheme 4] and Heck reactions [Scheme 5] in water.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of bis(heterocyclic) methane derivatives. 
 Scheme 3  Allyl–aryl coupling of secondary allylic carbonates. 
 Scheme 4  Suzuki reaction. 
 Scheme 5  Heck reaction. 
The authors report that PVP Pd NPs were employed as prepared without further purification and could be stored for several months since no precipitation was observed. Recently, Ansari et al. reported a stable and catalytically active oxidizable Pd(0) nanoparticle catalyst compatible with the cross-coupling of water-sensitive acid chlorides in water by the shielding effect of nanomicelles.20 In this report, ultrasmall Pd(0) NPs (∼2.5 nm in size) were synthesized using the shielding effect of nanomicelle technology, and their subsequent catalytic exploration for the coupling of acid chlorides in water was reported [Scheme 6].
 Scheme 6  Coupling of acid chlorides. 
A proline-derived amphiphile, PS-750-M, prevents the aggregation of Pd NPs and stabilizes the oxidation state. The morphology, particle size distribution, and chemical composition were characterized by SEM, TEM, HRTEM and XRD. The oxidation states of the Pd NPs of Pd(0) and Pd(II) were confirmed by XPS. In addition, 13C NMR techniques were used to detect the bonding between Pd NPs and PS-750-M. Multiple peaks around 175.5–173.8 and 183.4–180.3 ppm clearly confirmed the bonding between the carbonyl carbons of PS-750-M and Pd NPs. Moreover, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) spectroscopy was performed to evaluate the carbonyl interactions of PS-750-M with Pd. After successful reaction with high efficiency, the authors claim that this approach is applicable at a large scale as well.


1.1.3. Gold (Au) NPs. 
Recently, gold NPs have become a center of attraction for researchers as they are remarkably stable and biocompatible. Moreover, the reduction of nitroarenes is one of the most widely studied chemical transformations as nitroaryl compounds are common organic pollutants in agricultural and industrial wastewater. Water-soluble Au NPs stabilized by PEG were reported by Guo et al. and used as a catalyst for the selective reduction of nitroarenes.21 The authors claim that the TON of the Au NP catalyst for reduction reached 330 (TOF = 30 min−1). Although Au NPs are water soluble, they can be easily recycled up to four times if the product is directly extracted from the reaction medium with diethyl ether [Scheme 7]. In addition, the authors also performed the evaluation of gold nanoparticles as a refractive index sensor. Au NPs (∼3 nm in size) were chosen as a representative nanomaterial and dissolved in a series of solvents covering a range of refractive indexes. Specifically, the experiments were conducted in carbon disulfide (n = 1.627), toluene (n = 1.496), chloroform (n = 1.447), tert-butanol (n = 1.399), and water (n = 1.333). Surprisingly, the absorbance spectra of these five samples showed that as the refractive index increased from 1.333 to 1.627, the maximum absorbance of the samples experienced a notable gradual red shift from 526 to 541 nm, which indicates that the Au NPs could indeed be used as refractive index sensors.
 Scheme 7  Reduction of p-nitrobenzene to aniline. 
In addition, Monti et al. developed Au NPs stabilized by sulfonated imidazolium salt and used this system as a catalyst for the reduction of 1,4-dinitrobenzene [Scheme 8] in aqueous media.22 In this method, the authors calculated the Au NPs parameters stabilized by three imidazolium salts. An interesting aspect of this report is that the authors investigated the spatial arrangement of the imidazolium salts in the interaction of Au NPs with the help of 1H NMR. In the 1H NMR spectrum of the imidazolium salt 1,3-bis(2,6-diisopropyl-4-sodiumsulfonatophenyl)imidazolium (L1), the authors observed a difference between the H signals of the imidazolium ring and the signals of the Au NPs. The H signals of the imidazolium ring appear at 9.58, 7.96, and 7.95 ppm, while the positions of these signals in the Au NPs are quite small (9.63, 8.01, and 8.00 ppm, respectively). In addition, the positions of the H of the isopropyl and phenyl groups change towards higher δ for the Au NPs (1.21 and 1.12 ppm, respectively) compared to those before (1.14 and 1.05 ppm, respectively). These displacements are significant to the change in the electronic environment that seems to affect the salt when interacting with the Au NP surface. The result shows that the isopropyl groups act as a steric barrier preventing the imidazolium cation from approaching the surface of gold. However, in 1-mesityl-3-(3-sulfonatopropyl)imidazolium (L2) and 1-(3-sulfonatopropyl)imidazolium (L3), the situation is completely different. The repulsion between the gold surface and the imidazole ring shielded the signal of the H of the rings to appear at lower δ (8.67, 7.47, and 7.39 ppm for L3 and 8.27, 7.32, and 7.21 ppm for Au NPs: L3) due to the metal–ligand interaction, which produces an increase in the positive charge density of the imidazole cation. The Au NPs are stable in aqueous media because the colloidal particles of Au NPs were absent at the end of the catalytic reaction. A simple work-up procedure and recyclability of the catalyst (recycled up to four times) are the advantages of this work.
 Scheme 8  Reduction of 1,4-dinitrobenzene. 


1.1.4. Platinum (Pt) NPs. 
Although Pt is a noble and expensive metal, Pt nanoparticles and nanowires have attracted increasing attention as they have applications in solar cells and fuel cells.23 Additionally, Pt nanoparticles are superior catalysts in the hydrogenation and oxidation of organic compounds as compared to bulk Pt. Erathodiyil et al. reported the enantioselective hydrogenation of α-ketoesters [Scheme 9] using cinchona alkaloid-modified platinum (Pt) nanowires (NWs) with a diameter of ∼1 nm.24 The hydrogenation reactions were performed at room temperature under 100 psi hydrogen using a catalyst-to-ligand (cinchonine) molar ratio of 1:1 in acetic acid and water as a solvent (1:1). The authors also investigated the hydrogenation of other activated ketones and observed that it also proceeded well, producing the corresponding alcohols in high yields. The catalyst was recovered via simple centrifugation and was recycled without a change in its activity and selectivity up to 10 times. These heterogeneous Pt nanowires were stable under water and air, and hence afforded one of the best results for the asymmetric hydrogenation of ketoesters in water.
 Scheme 9  Enantioselective hydrogenation of α-ketoesters. 
In another report, the selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids/ketones [Scheme 10] in water using recyclable binaphthyl-stabilized Pt nanoparticles (Pt-BNPs) as a catalyst was reported by Saha et al.25 Aqueous tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) as a green oxidant and water as a green solvent have been used in this oxidation reaction. In this report, the oxidation of toluene to benzoic acid was reported with a high turnover number (TON) of 738–1448. The formation of the binaphthyl moiety in the synthesis of the Pt-BNPs was confirmed through FT-IR spectroscopy, UV–visible spectroscopy, 195Pt NMR and XRD. Most interestingly, 195Pt shows two broad peaks at −2769 and −2346 ppm because of the oxidation of the platinum atom from the lower oxidation state Pt(0) to higher oxidation state Pt(II) owing to the removal of electrons. The authors also assumed that when the binaphthyl moiety binds to the surface atom of the NPs through covalent bonds, the binaphthyl-binding metal atom attains a higher oxidation state, which leads to deshielding and thus two different intensity peaks are observed in the 195Pt NMR. The absence of other peaks is evidence that no other complex is formed. Using XPS analysis, the authors observed that the NPs were present in the Pt0, Pt2+ and Pt4+ oxidation states and their ratio was found to be 47:36:17. From this as well, the authors assumed that Pt2+ was formed due to the biphenyl complex in moderate amounts. The authors also performed hot centrifugation and mercury poisoning tests to prove that the Pt-BNP catalyst is heterogeneous and does not leached in the solvent. The authors claim that Pt-BNPs can be reused for up to six cycles without much loss in their catalytic performance.
 Scheme 10  Selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids/ketones. 
However, from an economic point of view, Pd, Au and Pt are expensive transition metals; thus, strong efforts are necessary to discover inexpensive, ecofriendly and sustainable alternatives to them. Other issues related to the various methodologies for the preparation of metal NPs include the presence of toxic or explosive reducing agents and, in most cases, organic solvents are used as the reaction media.26 Recently, efforts have been made to replace toxic reducing agents with environmentally benign ones, which can function both as reducing agents and stabilizers.27 The selection of stabilizers is also important to prevent the self-agglomeration of metal NPs as the low stability and self-agglomeration of metal nanoparticles decrease the catalytic activity and recyclability of the catalytic system. Table 1 summarizes various metal NPs for organic transformation in aqueous media.
Table 1 Metal NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media




Sr. no.
Metal NPs
Conditions
Features
Yield (%)
NP size
TOF (h−1)
Ref.




1
Cu (0.5 eq.)
100 °C, 7–8 h, H2O
Hydrogenation of azides
83
6–8 nm
—

15



2
Cu NPs (4.3 mol%)
70 °C, 1–9 h, H2O
Click reaction
50–98
∼3 nm
—

16





*Cu NPs/C (0.5 mol%)
70 °C, 1–9 h, H2O
Click reaction
71–92
∼6 nm
—

16



3
Pd(0) (0.04 mmol)
100 °C, 70 min, H2O
Domino Knoevenagel condensation followed by Michael addition
89
20–50 nm
2225

9



4
Pd(0) 1 mol% (0.005 mmol)
25 °C, 4 h, H2O
Stereospecific allyl–aryl coupling of secondary allylic carbonates with aryl boronic acids
53–97
1.5–2.5 nm
2475

18



5
Pd(0) (0.0008 mol%)
90 °C, 2–24 h, EtOH:H2O
Suzuki and Heck reaction
73–95
8 nm
104–105

19



6
Pd(0) NPs (3 mol%)
Na2CO3, PS-750-M, rt, H2O, 3 h
Cross-coupling of acid chlorides
71–90
2.5 nm
—

20



7
Au NPs (0.5 mol%)
NaBH4, rt, H2O, 1 h
Nitroarene reduction
99
1.1 nm
30 min−1

21



8
Au NPs
rt, H2O, 1 h.
Reduction of aromatic nitro compounds
—
9–15 nm
—

22



9
Pt NWs
H2O, H2, 25 °C, 6 h
Enantioselective hydrogenation of α-ketoesters
74–78
1–2 nm
—

24



10
Pt BNPs (0.064 mol%)
TBHP, O2, H2O, 80 °C
Selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids
79–95
5–8 nm
30.75–60.33

25






2. Metal oxide NPs
Over the past two decades, metal oxide nanomaterials have received considerable attention because of their enormous surface area, good durability, and high reusability as catalysts.28 The synthesis of nanoscale transition metal oxides such as zinc oxide, copper oxide, tin oxide, titanium oxide, and iron oxide is of significant interest as sustainable alternatives to noble metal-based catalysts.29 Metal oxide NPs are also used in the industrial field due to their various applications in transistors, light-emitting diodes, ultraviolet photo detectors,30 solar cells, biosensors,31 gas sensing,32 antibacterial agents,33 and corrosion inhibitors.34 There are several methods reported for the synthesis of metal oxide NPs, such as microwave-assisted synthesis, thermal decomposition, solvothermal synthesis, continuous flow synthesis,35 ultrasound-assisted synthesis,36 seed-mediated microemulsion, hydrothermal synthesis,37 and the sol–gel method.38 Metal oxide NPs prepared from earth-abundant and inexpensive metals have attracted considerable attention because of their high catalytic activity towards organic transformations.39
2.1. Zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs
In the last decade, ZnO NP nanocatalysts have attracted the wide interest of researchers due to their sustainable and cost-effective nature. Recently, Attar et al. successfully synthesized two types of ZnO NPs, one using plant extract and another via a chemical method. The synthesized ZnO NPs were analyzed by FT-IR spectroscopy, TGA-DTA, XRD, BET, SEM and EDX. The presence of neem extract as a capping agent in the synthesized ZnO NPs was confirmed by FT-IR and TGA-DTA analyses. Surprisingly, the authors found that the ZnO NPs synthesized from plant extract (ZnO-PE) possess remarkably large BET surface area and pore volume compared to the ZnO NPs synthesized by the chemical method (ZnO-CM). The ZnO NPs prepared from neem extract grew to a smaller size (45 nm) with a high surface area and exhibited good catalytic performance [Fig. 2] in the synthesis of benzylidenemalononitrile [Scheme 11] and tetraketone [Scheme 12] in aqueous hydrotropic media at room temperature.36
 Fig. 2  Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of ZnO NPs from plant extract and by the chemical method. (a) Isoazadirolide. (b) Flavones. (c) Organic acids. (d) Quinone. (e) Azadirachtin. Copyright 2015, Springer. Reprinted from ref. 31 with permission. 
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of benzylidenemalononitrile. 
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of tetraketone. 
Chromatography-free separation, very short reaction time, high yield, and reusable hydrotropic medium are the advantages of this protocol. In another report, an ecofriendly one-pot, three-component synthesis of 4H-chromene catalyzed by ZnO NPs in aqueous media has been described by Ghosh et al.40 In this report, ZnO NPs were synthesized by the “bottom-up” method and characterized by FT-IR spectroscopy, XRD, EDX and TEM. The size of the ZnO NPs was identified by XRD and TEM analysis (∼12 nm). In addition, the authors described the structural motif of signified representative compound via single X-ray crystallographic analysis. The authors claim that the catalyst can be reused up to the sixth run. Column chromatography-free separation, clean procedure, and high selectivity make the nanoparticle-catalyzed organic synthesis enhancement (NOSE) approach attractive. Shinde et al. studied the effect of change in pH on ZnO NPs and used them as a catalyst for the synthesis of flavanone in aqueous hydrotropic media at room temperature.41 The authors observed that ZnO NPs at pH = 12 show enhanced catalytic activity compared to ZnO NPs prepared at pH = 11 due to the decrease in particle size [Scheme 13]. After the completion of the reaction, the ZnO NPs were separated from the reaction mixture via simple centrifugation. In this report, the authors claim that the catalyst can be recycled at least five times.
 Scheme 13  Synthesis of flavanone. 
Kumar et al. investigated the first ZnO NPs (NPCR)-catalyzed Ugi-type three-component reaction in aqueous media.42 In this work, 2-arylamino-2-phenyl-acetimidamine was synthesized using aldehyde, amine and isocyanides [Scheme 14]. Interestingly, in a survey of solvents with ZnO NPs, the authors investigated that water was the best choice, as other organic solvents diminished the reactivity. The authors also observed that catalyst loading played an important role in the reaction and claimed that 15 mol% ZnO NPs was sufficient to obtain the desired product in high yield. In addition, from a green chemistry point of view, the atom economy (95.2%) and atom efficiency (85.6%) were investigated.
 Scheme 14  Synthesis of 2-arylamino-2-phenyl-acetimidamine. 
2.2. Zirconium oxide (ZrO2) and cerium oxide (CeO2) NPs
Metal nanoparticles of the second transition series also play an important role in organic reactions because of their unique large and reactive surface areas.43 Saha et al. demonstrated fluorescent tetragonal ZrO2 NP-catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of biologically active 2-aminochromene, dihydropyrano[3,2-c]chromene, and chromeno[4,3-b]chromene derivatives in aqueous media.44 The authors claim that tetragonal ZrO2 NPs showed higher catalytic activity than monoclinic ZrO2 NPs and remained intact even at the tenth cycle [Scheme 15]. Recycling tetragonal ZrO2 shows a gradual decrease in the yield of the product due to the decrease in oxygen vacancies, which is evident from fluorescence and atomic absorption studies.
 Scheme 15  Synthesis of chromene derivatives. 
Among the lanthanides in the inner transition series, cerium is the most abundant element. Recently, CeO2 NPs have emerged as cost-effective and less corrosive heterogeneous catalysts. In addition, they exhibit high catalytic activity and sustainability in water. Shrestha et al. reported a green and efficient protocol for the synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives.45 In addition, a synthesized spirooxindole derivative shows efficient antioxidant and antibacterial activity [Scheme 16]. This method becomes more attractive because of the ease of handling, high yield, mild reaction conditions and green catalyst.
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives. 
2.3. Copper oxide (CuO) NPs
CuO NPs have been widely applied as catalysts because of their dual Lewis acid and Lewis base nature and highly reactive large surface area. Bhattacharjee et al. synthesized 1D nanorods and 2D nanosheets of CuO NPs synthesized using amino acids such as L-lysine and L-glycine via a microwave-assisted green synthetic route and used them as catalysts for the reduction of p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol.46L-Lysine and L-glycine act as good capping agents in the synthesis of CuO nanoparticles. The synthesis of CuO nanorods mediated by L-lysine afforded an average diameter of 30 nm, while L-glycine-assisted synthesis leads to the formation of CuO nanosheets 300–600 nm in length, 200 nm in width and 30–60 nm in thickness. The authors claim that the 1D CuO nanorods show enhanced catalytic action compared to the 2D nanosheets. In addition, they observed that 2D CuO nanosheets act as photocatalysts in the degradation of two different dyes, namely, methylene blue and eosin Y. In contrast, Nasrollahzadeh et al. developed an efficient and green method for the synthesis of CuO NPs using the extract of Gundelia tournefortii and used them as catalysts for the reduction of p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol in water.47 In this report, the extract of G. tournefortii obtained from a natural source also acts as a good capping agent in the synthesis of CuO nanoparticles. Surprisingly, the authors observed that the green-synthesized CuO NPs showed excellent catalytic performance for reduction in aqueous media. Furthermore, they synthesized N-monosubstituted urea, but in this method, ethanol was used as a solvent. The synthesis of polysubstituted furans has attracted much attention as a significant and widely applicable class of five-membered heterocyclic compounds. Payra et al. reported the synthesis of 3,4-dicarbonyl-substituted furan derivatives [Scheme 17] via the direct functionalization of α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds through conjugate addition-initiated domino reactions using CuO NPs in aqueous alcohol.48 The average particle size (∼10 nm) and morphology (spherical) of the CuO NPs were investigated by XRD and TEM. In the recyclability test, the authors observed a 15%–20% decrease in the efficiency of the catalyst due to the aggregation of NPs in the aqueous medium after the fifth run.
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of furan derivatives. 
Recently, Chowdhury et al. also reported green-synthesized CuO NPs using Lantana camara flower extract and used them as a catalyst towards the aza-Michael reaction in water under ultrasonic conditions. Sonochemistry deals with the study of the interaction between sonic waves and chemical change.49 The authors claim that CuO NPs are highly stable and can be reused up to the fifth cycle without losing their catalytic activity.50 Similarly, Shinde et al. synthesized biogenic CuO NPs from the leaf extract of Alpinia zerumbet and used them as a catalyst for the synthesis of xanthene derivatives [Scheme 18] in the presence of NaPTS in water.51 The authors report that biogenic CuO NPs shows higher absorption ability and higher optical band gap (2.48 eV) than previously reported materials. The authors also examined the catalytic activity of CuO NPs prepared from different methods such as heat treatment, co-precipitation, reflux, and hydrothermal treatment, and concluded that A. zerumbet-transformed CuO NPs afford better catalytic activity than CuO NPs synthesized using other methodologies.
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of xanthene derivatives. 
Recently, the three-component reaction of aldehyde, a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound and organic boronic acid for the synthesis of 1,3/1,4-diketones catalyzed by CuO NPs in water [Scheme 19] was investigated by Xia et al.52
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of 1,3/1,4-diketones. 
In this method, CuO NPs (∼40 nm) were directly purchased from a commercial supplier (Aladdin, 99.9% metal). This method has several advantages, such as a simple reaction setup, avoiding the use of organic solvents, wide substrate scope, and gram-scale synthesis.
2.4. Nickel oxide (NiO) NPs
NiO NPs have attracted much attention due to their inexpensive and non-hazardous nature. In addition, NiO NPs have good reactivity and selectivity for various organic transformations. Nasseri et al. reported the synthesis of oxindole derivatives [Scheme 20] using NiO NPs (11 nm) in aqueous media.53 The size and morphology of the synthesized NiO NPs were characterized by XRD and TEM. In addition, the average hydrodynamic size of the NiO NPs in water was determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (before and after the precursors were calcined at 400 °C). From the DLS analysis, the authors observed that when NiO NPs were calcined, the number of nanoparticles with higher size decreased at 400 °C. At the end of the reaction, the catalyst was recovered via centrifugation and recycled up to the fifth run with slightly reduced yield.
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of oxindole derivatives. 
2.5. Magnetically separable Fe3O4 NPs
In the last decade, organic reactions in water using recyclable catalysts have gained increasing attention from researchers due to economic and environmental considerations. Indeed, rather than filtration or centrifugation, the strategy of using dispersed magnetic NPs is typically more effective as they can be magnetically separated and recycled. Baig and Varma explained the several advantages of magnetic nanocatalysts over conventional catalyst systems:54
• Magnetic nanocatalysts are small in size and have an enormous surface area-to-volume ratio.
• Contact between the reactant molecules and catalyst is enhanced to a great extent due to the large surface area with active sites.
• Magnetic nanocatalysts can be rationally designed due to the easy control of their size, shape, and morphology.
• They are easy to separate from a reaction mixture due to their magnetic nature, thus facilitating recyclability and reusability.
Karami et al. synthesized xanthene derivatives using magnetically separable Fe3O4 NPs as a catalyst in water.55 The XRD patterns of the Fe3O4 nanoparticles confirm that the resultant nanoparticles were Fe3O4 with a spinel structure. The average size of the Fe3O4 NPs was estimated using the Debye–Scherrer formula and was found to be ∼13 nm. TEM analysis revealed that the Fe3O4 NPs are spherical in shape and ∼20 nm in size. The iron sites of the Fe3O4 NPs act as Lewis acids due to which the 3d orbital of Fe interacts with the carbonyl group. The carbon of the carbonyl group of the aldehyde becomes electron deficient, which leads to a nucleophilic attack in the next steps and the reaction proceeds. At the end, the authors reported that the catalyst can be recovered and reused several times without a significant loss of activity. Pagoti et al. used Fe3O4 NPs as a reducing agent for the conversion of aromatics, heteroaromatics and sulfonyl azides into the corresponding amines in aqueous media.56 As a plausible mechanism, the authors explained that the reduction of the inverse spinel-type magnetite (FeIIFeIII2O4) structure to a NaCl-type wüstite (FeO) structure takes place first, where hydrazine donates its hydrogen ions. The donated hydrogen ion (H+) reacts with the oxygen of magnetite to form a water molecule. After the completion of the reaction, the Fe3O4 nanocatalysts were simply separated using a magnet. The recovered MNPs were washed and reused for the next cycle. The authors observed that in each cycle, the recovered catalyst retained its efficiency but required a slightly longer reaction time after the fourth catalytic cycle. Before and after the tenth cycle, the average diameter size was estimated to be ∼10 nm using XRD and TEM analysis. With a magnetically separable/recycled catalyst, water as a solvent and nitrogen as a byproduct, this process follows a strictly green protocol. Safari et al. developed a simple and efficient method for the one-pot multicomponent reaction of aldehyde, malononitrile and resorcinol in water using Fe3O4 NPs to synthesize chromene derivatives.57 In this work, the iron cations act as Lewis acids and play a significant role in increasing the electrophilic character of the aldehydes. Interestingly, in the magnetization curve for the synthesized Fe3O4 NPs, the authors observed that the sample possesses a saturation magnetization value (Ms) of 62.76 emu g−1 and the magnetization curve follows a Langevin behavior over the applied magnetic field, which reveals that the synthesized Fe3O4 NPs are superparamagnetic in nature. In a similar way, Rostamnia et al. studied γ-Fe2O3 magnetically separable NPs for the synthesis of tetrahydro-4H-chromene and polyhydroquinolines in an ecofriendly solvent.58 All these methods offer several advantages including easy work-up procedure, high yield and recyclability of the catalyst without loss of catalytic activity. These catalysts show magnetic recoverability, which eliminates the need for catalyst filtration after the completion of the reaction, but suffer from the drawback of elaborate and tedious procedures for their synthesis.
Metal oxide NPs, being nontoxic materials, provide a green pathway to produce a variety of organic transformations. Additionally, metal oxide NPs are highly stable, inexpensive and can be reused for successive batches of reaction without much loss of catalytic activity. Table 2 depicts various features of metal oxide NPs for organic synthesis in water.
Table 2 Metal oxide NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media




Sr. no.
Metal oxide NPs
Conditions
Features
Yield (%)
NP size
TOF (h−1)
Ref.




1
ZnO NPs (10 mol%)
NaPTS, H2O, rt, 5–10 min
Tetraketone and benzylidenemalononitrile derivatives
85–95
45–56 nm
114

36



2
ZnO NPs (10 mol%)
55 °C, H2O, 40–65 min
Synthesis of 4H-chromenes
85–93
∼10 nm
—

40



3
ZnO NPs (5 mol%)
Hydrotrope, rt, H2O 5–10 min
Synthesis of flavanone
92–96
∼90 nm
—

41



4
ZnO NPs
rt, H2O
Ugi reaction
90
<50 nm
—

42



5
ZrO2 NPs (10 mol%)
80 °C, H2O
Synthesis of pyran-fused chromene derivatives
88–94
12 nm
—

44



6
CeO2 NPs (30 mol%)
H2O
Spirooxindole derivatives
93
—
—

45



7
CuO
—
Reduction of p-nitrophenol


30 nm



46



8
CuO NPs (10 mg)
Reflux, EtOH:H2O 2–3 h
Furan derivatives
75–91
10 nm
—

48



9
CuO NPs (10 mol%)
NaBH4, H2O, rt
Reduction of p-nitrophenol
94
30–40 nm
—

47



10
CuO NPs (2 mg)
H2O, 60 °C, 9 h
Aza-Michael reaction
70
13–28 nm
—

50



11
CuO NPs
NaPTS, H2O, rt, 1 h
Synthesis of 1,8-dioxooctahydroxanthenes
96
8 nm
—

51



12
CuO NPs
H2O, reflux
Synthesis of 1,4-diketones
23–87
40 nm
—

52



13
NiO NPs (0.004 g)
H2O, 70 °C, 0.5–1.5 h
Diindolyloxindole derivatives
80–98
11 nm
—

53



14
Fe3O4 (1 mol%)
H2O, 80 °C, 6–68 min
Synthesis of xanthene derivatives
86–96
13 nm
—

55



15
Fe3O4 (50 mol%) 116 mg 0.5 mmol
N2H4, H2O, 120 °C, 1.5–5 h
Reduction of organic azides to amines
99
10.14 nm
—

56



16
Fe3O4
H2O, rt, 25 min
Synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromene
80
18 nm
—

57



17
γ-Fe2O3 (5 mol%)
H2O, rt, 2.5 h
Synthesis of tetrahydro-4H-chromenes and hexahydroquinoline carboxylates
95
30 nm
—

58





3. Bimetallic NPs
Bimetallic NPs show higher catalytic activity than their monometallic counterparts in many organic transformations.59 Nanoparticles can be classified based on the required materials; metal nanoparticles are made from a single material, whereas bimetallic NPs comprise two materials. Bimetallic NPs are broadly classified into three types: core–shell, heterodimer and nano-alloy.60 Bimetallic NPs are mainly synthesized by two methods: the “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches. In recent years, bimetallic NPs have gradually attracted increasing attention as they are highly functional and applicable in the fields of electronics, optics, pharmaceuticals and catalysis because of their modified properties.53 Mixing metal NPs has many application advantages such as reducing the consumption of precious metals and increasing the stability, dispersibility, surface modification and functionality.61 The reactivity of metal catalysts can be roughly correlated to the center of the d-band with respect to the Fermi level, and this center can be shifted by mixing two or more metals.62 Bimetallic NPs are widely used in different applications such as electronics, pharmaceuticals, photoluminescence, drug delivery, and catalysis.61 The use of ferrite generated by the partial substitution of iron in the second metal inside the crystal lattice of Fe3O4 gives rise to more applications of bimetallic nanoparticles.63 Because of their simple recovery process, they are widely applicable in catalysis and medicine.64
The Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction is the most heavily used organic reaction.65 In this regard, Handa et al. reported a synergistic and selective Cu/ppm Pd-catalyzed66 Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in water. Furthermore, the base and catalyst can be recycled up to the fifth run with an E-factor of 5.8. In this report, 2 wt% aqueous TPGS-750-M was used as a designer surfactant, which self-aggregates in water and helps in the formation of nanomicelles. The entire aqueous medium, nanomicelles, base, copper, and palladium can be recycled, which is the most interesting aspect of this protocol. Maleki et al. reported the synthesis of benzoxazole via condensation between 2-aminophenols with aldehydes/orthoesters/carboxylic acids/amides/acyl chlorides using the Ag@TiO2 nanocomposite in water at room temperature.67 The synthesized Ag@TiO2 was analyzed by XRD, AFM, SEM and EDX. Interestingly, when the morphology of Ag@TiO2 was studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM), the authors observed an increase in roughness [Fig. 3 and 4] on the surface after the addition of benzoxazole. This increased thickness is attributed to the benzoxazole compounds on Ag@TiO2.
 Fig. 3  2D (a) and 3D (b) AFM images of the synthesized Ag@TiO2 composite particles. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission. 
 Fig. 4  2D (a) and 3D (b) AFM images of 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzoxazole deposited on Ag@TiO2. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission. 
Further, the recovery and reusability of the Ag@TiO2 nanocomposite were investigated in the reaction of benzaldehyde with 2-aminophenol. After the completion of the reaction, the catalyst was separated via solvent extraction of the product from the reaction mixture using ethyl acetate and could be reused 4 times without loss of activity.
3.1. Core–shell bimetallic NPs
When a single metal core is covered by another metal or metal oxide, it results in the formation of core–shell nanoparticles. Core–shell bimetallic NPs possess superior catalytic activity compared to alloyed or heterodimer materials.68,69 The biosynthesis of NPs using plant extract is a simple, inexpensive and green method. Mishra et al. described the biosynthesis of core–shell CuO-Pd NPs from Cyperus rotundus rhizome extract and used them as a catalyst for various organic transformations.70 AFM was used to characterize the surface roughness of the nanoparticles. In this report as well, the authors observed the rough surface of the nanoparticles in the AFM images. In addition, the particle distribution histogram showed that the CuO-Pd nanoparticles have a particle height or substrate depth of 10.56 nm. Moreover, the CuO-Pd nanocatalyst was recovered via simple filtration and could be recycled up to the fifth cycle. The XRD patterns and TEM images are unchanged after the fifth run, revealing the good catalytic efficiency of the catalyst. The authors claim that the core–shell CuO-Pd NP catalyst can be used for large-scale industrial purposes.
3.2. Magnetically separable bimetallic NPs
Magnetic NPs have gained considerable interest as they are magnetically separable, recyclable and act as a support in bimetallic NPs.71 Nitro group reduction is one of the most widely utilized organic transformations. Gabriel et al. reported the reduction of nitro group using Fe/ppm Pd in water at room temperature.72 A solution of 2 wt% TPGS-750-M surfactant in water was used as the gross reaction medium in this method. Furthermore, the authors claim that the transformation was successful at the 100 mmol scale. Handa et al. reported the synthesis of the Fe/ppm Pd catalyst from inexpensive FeCl3 and used it as a catalyst for the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in water.73 An advantageous aspect of this protocol is that the aqueous reaction containing both the SPhos ligand and catalyst can be recycled. The environmental factor of this reaction is very low (E-factor = 3) compared to that of previous works. Similarly, an interesting work was reported by Hudson et al., in which they prepared Cu/Fe NPs and utilized them for click reactions [Scheme 21] in aqueous media.74
 Scheme 21  Click reaction. 
Interestingly, in the Cu@Fe NPs, Fe plays three important roles: (i) it provides magnetic recyclability; (ii) serves as an electron donor for the reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I); and (iii) acts as a support for Cu(I). The authors also performed a leaching test of the reaction supernatant for Cu/Fe ppm using ICP-OES (with a detection limit of 0.001 ppm) and observed a lack of soluble copper in the reaction mixture or supernatant, which strongly suggests a heterogeneous mechanism of the catalyst. The classical Michael addition reaction is one of the most important tools for C–C bond formation reactions.75 Payra et al. designed NiFe2O4 NPs and applied them to Michael addition in water.76 The magnetically separable, recyclable NiFe2O4 was further used for carbon–carbon as well as carbon–heteroatom (aza, oxa and thia) Michael addition reactions. XRD and HRTEM studies reveal the formation of face-centered cubic spinel NiFe2O4 NPs with an average size of ∼16 nm. In the leaching study, the authors observed that there was no leaching of the metal in the reaction mixture. Kumar et al. developed the Cu/Fe2O4 magnetically separable catalyst for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles, azides [Scheme 22] and 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles [Scheme 23] in tap water.77,78 The M/Fe2O4 cluster structures mostly act as Lewis acids as they have a spinel structure that is more suitable than other metal oxides.79 Metal ferrite has a spinel structure with a face-centered cubic lattice with tetrahedral (Td) and octahedral (Oh) holes. In Cu/Fe2O4 (inverse structure), the Td sites are occupied by Fe3+ and Oh sites are occupied by M+ and Fe3+ atoms. In contrast, in Mn/Fe2O4 (mixed spinel structure), the Td sites are occupied by Mn(1−x)2+ and Fex3+ while the Oh sites are occupied by Mnx2+ and Fe(1−x)3+. In the Td site, the coordination number is four, while in the Oh site, the coordination number is six. Due to less steric hindrance, the Td sites act as Lewis acids.79 Furthermore, Mn/Fe2O4 is more active than other metal oxides because of more interactions. Mn/Fe2O4 NPs were used for the synthesis of novel spiroindoles by Naeimi et al. [Scheme 24]. Meanwhile, Ghahremanzadeh reported the synthesis of spiroindole derivatives via the one-pot three-component system of isatins, dimedone and anilinolactones [Scheme 25] using Mn/Fe2O4 NPs.80 After the successful application of Mn/Fe2O4 NPs, Naeimi et al. reported the synthesis of pyrimidine derivatives using Cu/Fe2O4 NPs as an inverse structure [Scheme 26] instead of Mn/Fe2O4 NPs.81
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives. 
 Scheme 23  Synthesis of 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles. 
 Scheme 24  Synthesis of spiroindole derivatives. 
 Scheme 25  Synthesis of spiroindole derivatives. 
 Scheme 26  Synthesis of pyrimidine derivatives. 
3.3. Doped bimetallic NPs
Doped bimetallic NPs are also widely used in catalysis, optical fibers, magnetic materials, battery cathodes, gas sensors and fuel cells because of their stability and electron transfer capability.82 Recently, Shinde et al. synthesized NiO and Fe-doped NiO NPs using Calotropis procera leaf extract. The leaf extract of C. procera acts as a reducing and capping agent for the synthesis of NiO and Fe-doped NiO NPs. Further, the green-synthesized NiO and Fe-doped NiO NPs were used as catalysts for the synthesis of diaryl pyrimidinone derivatives in hydrotropic aqueous media at room temperature [Scheme 27].
 Scheme 27  Synthesis of diaryl pyrimidinone derivatives. 
Although the same co-precipitation method was used for the synthesis of both nanoparticles, the authors observed broadening in the FWHM of the Bragg's peak of Fe@NiO due to the insertion of the Fe3+ ions into the lattice site of the Ni2+ ions of NiO during in situ synthesis. In addition, the doping of Fe3+ adds disorder to the crystalline nature of Fe-doped NiO. Doping results in a decrease in the particle size of the Fe@NiO NPs compared to that of the NiO NPs. However, the authors observed better reaction results with the Fe@NiO NPs than the NiO NPs for the synthesis of pyrimidinone derivatives.83 After the successful synthesis of Fe-doped NiO NPs, Shinde et al. synthesized Ni@ZnO NPs and used them as a catalyst for the synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones [Scheme 28] in water with the NaPTS hydrotrope.84 In these environmentally conscious times, researchers are required to focus on developing green methodologies for organic transformations.85 To fulfill this requirement, Baig and Varma reported the microwave-assisted nano-ferrite NP-catalyzed Paal–Knorr reaction in water.54 A variety of nano-ferrites modified by ligands were used to immobilize nanometals such as Pd, Cu, and Ru, which helped in the development of a green and sustainable protocol for azide–alkyne cycloaddition reactions, C–S coupling, O-allylation of phenol, Heck-type reactions, and hydration of nitriles. The reduced size (nm) enhances the catalytic surface area and due to their magnetic property, they can be easily separated, recycled and reused without losing their catalytic activity. Role of bimetallic NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media are summarized in Table 3.
 Scheme 28  Synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones. 
Table 3 Bimetallic NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media




Sr. no.
Bimetallic NPs
Conditions
Features
Yield (%)
NP size
TOF (h−1)
Ref.




1.
Copper/ppm Pd
H2O
Suzuki–Miyaura coupling
84
—
—

66



2.
Ag-h-TiO2
H2O
Photocatalytic degradation of nitrobenzene, metronidazole, and methylene blue dye
—
24 nm
—

67



3.
CuO-Pd (2 mol%)
Reflux, 30 min, H2O
Synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones and spirooxindole derivatives
92–98
5 nm
—

70



4.
Fe/Pd NPs
H2O, rt
Nitro group reduction
80–98
—
—

72



5.
Fe/Pd NPs
H2O, 45 °C, 24 h
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling
60–90
<50 nm
—

73



6.
NiFe2O4


Michael addition of active methylene compounds
89–98
20 nm
—

76



7.
Cu@Fe (5 mol%)
H2O, rt, 12 h
Azide–alkyne click reaction
93
—
—

74



8.
CuFe2O4
H2O, 70 °C, 3–9 h
Synthesis of 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles
74–86
—
—

77



9.
CuFe2O4 (10 mol%)
H2O, rt, 7 h
Synthesis of aryl azides and 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles from boronic acids
75–85
10–30 nm
—

78



10.
MnFe2O4 (10 mol%)
H2O, reflux, 2 h
Synthesis of novel spiro-furo-pyrido-pyrimidine-indolines
84–86
25–30 nm
—

79



11.
MnFe2O4 (5 mol%)
H2O, 90 °C, 6 h
Synthesis of novel spirooxindoles
74–82
33 nm
—

80



12.
CuFe2O4 (10 mol%)
H2O, ))), 40 W, 4 min
Synthesis of pyrido[2,3-d:6,5-d]dipyrimidines
98
45–50 nm
—

81



13.
Fe-NiO (5 mol%)
H2O, rt, NaPTS 5 min
Synthesis of diaryl pyrimidinone derivatives
98
20–25 nm
—

83



14.
Ni@ZnO
H2O, rt, NaPTS 1.4–3 h
Synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones
84–96
80 nm
—

84





4. Supported NPs
In recent years, supported metallic nanoparticles and their applications have become one of the fastest growing research fields. When metal nanoparticles are deposited on the surface of monoporous materials, they form supported metal NPs.86 The nanocatalyst particle size decreases to the nanoscale due to which the aggregation of the particles into small clusters occurs. This aggregation degrades the catalytic efficiency. To achieve optimum nanoparticle size and shape, it is necessary to terminate aggregation, and the partial growth addition of organic ligands, inorganic capping materials, metal salts and polymers plays a vital role in this regard.87 The porous material is normally solid, such as silica gel,88 zeolites,89 metal oxides,90 activated charcoal,91 and graphite materials,92 which can be considered porous media. Naturally occurring clay and rocks93 are also used as porous media. The support can either be a powder or pre-shaped cheap solid with a porous environment that usually not only inhibits particle growth to a particular size but also reduces particle aggregation.
4.1. Silica-supported NPs
Silica-supported nanoparticles have shown a wide range of applications in various scientific fields ranging from diagnostic tools to drug delivery owing to their unique properties such as surface reactivity, biocompatibility, stability, tunable pore size, and high surface area.88 Baig et al. reported a novel magnetic silica-supported ruthenium nanocatalyst and used it as a catalyst for the hydration of nitrile with high yield and excellent selectivity.94 The synthesis of amide by the hydration of nitrile is an important organic transformation required at a large scale [Scheme 29]. The authors claim that the synthesis of the catalyst (15–30 nm in size) can be readily performed at the gram-scale in one step in aqueous media under ambient conditions. In addition, the catalyst affords high yield and excellent selectivity in water. The catalyst was magnetically separable, which eliminated the requirement of catalyst filtration after the completion of the reaction. The stability of the synthesized catalyst in the reaction medium was studied by ICP-AES analysis of the catalyst before and after three reactions. The Ru metal concentration was found to be 3.96% before the reaction and 3.87% after the reaction, which reveals that the catalyst did not leach into the reaction medium. To check the recyclability, a TEM image of the catalyst was taken after the third cycle of the reaction, which did not show a significant change in size (15–30 nm), indicating the retention of the catalytic activity after recycling. Another interesting supported nanoparticle system, phosphine-free perfluoro-tagged Pd nanoparticles immobilized on fluorous silica gel (FSG), was reported by Boffi et al. and tested as a catalyst in a Heck reaction in water under aerobic conditions.95 In addition, the second step in the one-pot Heck reaction and the enantioselective enzyme-catalyzed reduction to form the chiral alcohol were also performed in aqueous media. Magnetically recyclable and inexpensive Pd catalysts with high TON (247000; TOF: 49500 h−1) after the third cycle are the advantages of this work. To formulate an efficient and environmentally benign synthetic methodology, Deng et al. developed a magnetic silica-supported dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid (DDBSA) catalyst for an efficient one-pot three-component reaction of spirooxindole pyrimidine derivatives [Scheme 30] in water.96
 Scheme 29  Synthesis of amide via the hydration of nitrile. 
 Scheme 30  Synthesis of spirooxindole pyrimidine derivatives. 
pH analysis and back-titration were performed to determine the loading of the DDBSA moiety on the surface of SiO2. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) confirmed the presence of Fe, S, Si, O, and C in the synthesized magnetic silica-supported DDBSA. The efficiency of the supported catalyst was found to be affected by the nature of the solvent, but in refluxing water, it performed ideally. The authors claim that the catalyst can be reused at least six times.
4.2. Clay-supported NPs
Borah et al. collected montmorillonite clay from western India and generated Cu(0) nanoparticles in the nanopores of modified montmorillonite. Furthermore, it was used as a catalyst for click reactions in aqueous media [Scheme 31] to afford high regioselectivity and excellent yield. Highly purified and activated montmorillonite clay affords high surface area and contains micro- and mesopores with a nanoscale diameter (0–10 nm). These nanopores act as the “host” Cu(0) nanoparticles and control the growth of Cu(0) nanoparticles.97
 Scheme 31  Click reaction. 
The authors observed an appreciable decrease in the specific surface area and specific pore volume using BET analysis after supporting the Cu(0) nanoparticles due to the clogging of some pores by the Cu(0) nanoparticles. In addition, the authors mentioned that the presence of Cu(0) nanoparticles may cause complexities in porosity measurement with nitrogen sorption as the electrostatic forces between the adsorbate and the metallic surface may affect the measured values to some extent. ICP-AES study reveals the presence of 0.05 mol% Cu in the catalyst.
Gao et al. developed phenylene-coated organorhodium-functionalized magnetic nanoparticles as a catalyst for asymmetric transfer hydrogenation in aqueous media.98 Excellent catalytic activity and high enantioselectivity are the key advantages of this catalyst. SEM analysis showed that the catalyst was composed of uniformly dispersed nanospheres with an average size of ∼370 nm. TEM analysis confirmed that the core–shell-structured magnetic nanospheres were encapsulated by a thin 30 nm organosilicate layer. The magnetic catalyst exhibited greatly enhanced catalytic performance because of the hydrophobic nature of the phenylene-coated organosilicate layer. Surprisingly, the authors experimentally proved that the magnetic catalyst can be recovered and reused at least 10 times without loss in its catalytic activity. Guo et al. designed a preparation method for a supermagnetic cellulose-derived carbonaceous solid acid (PCM-SO3H) catalyst for the hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose in aqueous media and ionic liquids.99 Supermagnetic cellulose-derived carbonaceous solid acid was synthesized via the incomplete hydrothermal carbonization of cellulose, followed by Fe3O4 grafting and –SO3H group functionalization. Cellulose is a water-insoluble aggregate of β-1,4-glucan comprising glucose monomers linked by β-1,4-glycosidic bonds. The stability of the PCM-SO3H catalyst in aqueous media was explained by the authors to be due to its stabilized aromatic carbon-SO3H bonds. Because the PCM-SO3H carbon material possesses –SO3H and –COOH groups, the electron-withdrawing –COOH groups increase the electron density between the carbon and sulfur atoms, and this probably stabilizes the aromatic carbon-SO3H bonds so that the leaching of the –SO3H groups is inhibited.
Today, photocatalysis attracts significant attention from researchers because it directly utilizes solar power and is usually associated with mild reaction conditions. Generally, plasmonic metal (Au, Ag, and Cu) NPs are used as photocatalysts. Recently, the selective hydrogenation of various chemical bonds efficiently driven by supported Au NPs in the presence of visible light in aqueous media was reported by Huang et al.100 The reaction system exhibits high substituent tolerance and tunable selectivity by light wavelength. Strong chemisorption between the reactant molecule and metal resulting in hybridized orbitals was demonstrated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. DFT calculations suggest low affinity between nitrobenzene and an isolated Au cluster; however, strong chemisorption was observed between the nitrobenzene molecule and ZrO2-supported Au NPs, which revealed that direct resonant photoexcitation of electrons takes place between the hybridized bonding and antibonding states. The enhanced reaction activity under light irradiation is due to this direct photoexcitation. In another report, Kale et al. designed novel a γ-Fe2O4@hydroxyapatite (HAP) [Scheme 32] catalyst and used it for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole in aqueous media.101 The authors mentioned that no ligands, base or extra additives/reagents are needed for the reaction. HAP acts as a base and the authors observed that the reactions did not take place on only HAP; this clearly indicates that the role of Fe2O3 is important in catalyzing the reaction. In addition, they calculated the E-factor to measure the “greenness” of the γ-Fe2O4@HAP catalyzed cycloaddition reaction and it was only 13.63, which was far less than that of previous works. The reusability of a catalyst is one of the important aspects of catalysis and to achieve this goal, the authors used an iron-based heterogeneous catalyst rather than a copper or ruthenium catalyst. This method is experimentally simple and economical; therefore, it can be used at a large scale.
 Scheme 32  Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole. 
4.3. Ionic liquid-supported NPs
Direct asymmetric aldol reactions between ketones and aldehydes are important carbon–carbon bond-forming reactions that serve as a convenient method for synthesizing chiral organic compounds.102 Kong et al. developed magnetically separable L-proline supported on ionic liquid nanoparticles for direct asymmetric aldol reaction in water.103 High activity (yield = 92%), diastereoselectivity (dr; 88/12), and enantioselectivity (ee; 85%) were obtained using 10 mol% catalyst for the reaction between cyclohexanone and 2-nitrobenzaldehyde within 12 h. The authors observed that the presence of an IL linker in the supported L-proline catalyst resulted in excellent catalytic activity for a wide range of ketones and aromatic aldehydes in the direct asymmetric aldol reaction in water without the need for any organic solvent or additional additives. In addition, the catalyst can be well dispersed in the reaction medium, easily magnetically recovered from the reaction mixture, and reused several times without significant loss of activity.
4.4. Porous organic framework (POF)-supported NPs
With a growing need for emerging applications, porous organic frameworks (POFs) have received great interest owing to their unique features, such as a large surface area, high chemical stability, permanent porosity, and modular synthetic procedure.104 Li et al. prepared a series of water-soluble Pd complexes via the attachment of hydrophilic groups, such as carboxylic acid and ammonium, to hydrophobic ligands. These complexes exhibit good catalytic activities in Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions in water, but the separation difficulty of Pd catalysts results in poor recyclability of these catalytic systems. To overcome these complexities, Li et al. developed a urea-based organic framework supported by the Pd catalyst for Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions and the selective reduction of nitroarene in neat water, and the reactions can even be efficiently performed at room temperature.105 The authors found that the superior performances are mainly attributed to the good dispersion of the urea-based frameworks in water and a microenvironment with a high concentration of organic substrates inside the frameworks due to the presence of hydrophilic urea linkages and hydrophobic voids. The authors also claimed that Pd nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution are formed after the catalytic reaction and are well stabilized by the synergistic effects of the coordination of the urea moiety with Pd and the confinement effect of the frameworks. Verma et al. also developed a reusable heterogeneous nano-sized bispyrazole-based cryptand-stabilized Pd catalyst for Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions in water.106
4.5. Graphene oxide framework (GOF)-supported NPs
Recently, Liu et al. designed a new, facile and green method for the Tsuji–Trost reaction in water using a 3D Pd-reduced graphene oxide framework (Pd-rGOF) with hierarchical macro- and mesoporous structures as a catalyst.107 3D graphene materials (3D GMs) with macro- and mesoporous structures possess large pore size, pore volume, large surface area, and high mechanical strength and act as nanoreactors to increase the contact area between the substrate and catalyst. In this study, the authors reported a covalence- and coordination-assisted self-assembly approach towards the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide framework (rGOF)-encapsulated Pd (Pd-rGOF) hybrids. In addition, the authors observed the absence of large particle aggregates in the TEM images, which suggested that the monodispersed Pd NCs were embedded in the pores of the rGOF matrix [Fig. 5].
 Fig. 5  Synthetic route and proposed formation mechanism of 3D Pd-rGOF. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 101 with permission. 
4.6. Graphene nanosheet (GNS)-supported NPs
In recent years, graphene nanosheets (GNSs) have garnered significant interest due to their huge specific surface area, high chemical stability, and low manufacturing cost. Because of these interesting properties, GNSs are a promising applicant for use in supercapacitors, batteries, and photocatalysis.108 Putta et al. investigated the functional property of β-cyclodextrin GNSs as a Pd-supported catalyst for Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions under green reaction conditions.109 β-Cyclodextrin has good dispersibility in water and GNSs have a hydrophobic nature; thus, they show an excellent catalytic property. The authors observed that during the reaction in aqueous media, all organic molecules would be strongly adsorbed on the surface of the GNSs because of the complete hydrophobic nature of the GNS surface; therefore, the conversions of the reactants would increase. Sharavath et al. synthesized a PCA-GNS-Pd catalyst for Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions in pure water.110 Due to the amphiphilic nature of the PCA-GNS-Pd material, it can be easily dispersed in water and hence exhibits highly stable catalytic activity in water with or without PTC. Wang et al. also developed a polyphenylene support for Pd catalyst for the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in water.111
Rafiee et al. synthesized H3PW12O14-supported SiO2-encapsulated γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles as a novel magnetically separable nanocatalyst for three-component Mannich-type reactions in water.112 The authors investigated that without the addition of the catalyst, only the imine was formed through the condensation of benzaldehyde and aniline. γ-Fe2O3@SiO2 NPs and PW produced the Mannich product with 65% and 85% yields, but the imine was also obtained in 20% and 15% yield, respectively; however, their combination in the form of γ-Fe2O3@SiO2-PW increased the yield of the Mannich product to 98% with 0% yield of the imine in a significantly shorter reaction time. An economic and environmentally friendly system for the efficient and selective oxidation of industrially and biologically important substrates in water using tert-butyl hydroperoxide catalyzed by a new magnetically recoverable Mn-porphyrin catalyst was developed by Rezaeifard et al. The novel catalyst coated with Cu(II) phthalocyanine was used for the epoxidation of olefins and oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons and sulfides to sulfones in aqueous media.113 Mn(TPP)OAc@SMNP as a catalyst could be reused at least seven times without any significant loss in catalytic activity. A robust magnetically separable biomimetic nanocatalyst (10–20 nm) with high thermostability (300 °C) is the advantage of this work. 1,2,3-triazole derivatives are an important class of organic compounds for medicinal chemistry, which exhibit biological activities such as antimicrobial and anti-HIV activity.114 Tajbakhsh et al. successfully synthesized nanomagnetic functionalized 2,2-biimadazole complex of the metal ions Cu(I), Cu(II), Ni(II), and Co(II), and used them as catalysts for the synthesis of propargylamines and 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole in water.115 The authors concluded that among the various nanomagnetic functionalized 2,2-biimadazole complexes of metal ions, Cu(I) is highly efficient for the synthesis of propargylamines via the A3 coupling reaction and for the one-pot synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles in water. The stability of the nanomagnet-supported catalyst was analyzed by AAS, which revealed that no significant amount of copper was detected in the product solution after the removal of the catalyst. In addition, the authors recorded the FT-IR spectra of the nanomagnet-supported catalysts before and after the catalytic reaction, which did not show any significant differences. Xiong et al. developed a recyclable Fe3O4 magnetic nanocatalyst supported on Cu(I) for the multicomponent synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles under microwave-assisted conditions in water.116 To improve the practicality and eco-friendliness of the CuAAC reaction, the authors used heterogeneous, recyclable and commercially available Fe3O4-supported CuBr as the catalyst. PEG400 as a phase transfer catalyst (PTC) was used to solubilize the non-miscible reactants for this reaction. The authors observed that microwave irradiation could considerably shorten the reaction time and simultaneously enhance the yields and purity of 1,2,3-triazoles in comparison with conventional protocols. Further, features of supported NPs for organic transformations are outlined in Table 4.
Table 4 Supported NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media




Sr. no.
Supported NPs
Conditions
Features
Yield (%)
NP size
TOF (h−1)
Ref.




1.
Fe@SiO2Ru
H2O, MW, 100 °C, 60 min
Hydration of nitriles to amides
>99
15–30 nm
—

94



2.
Pd@FSG
H2O, 2 mL NaHCO3 (1.5 M), 100 °C, 3–48 h
Heck reaction
98
3–4 nm
49500

95



3.
Cu(0)@montmorillonite
H2O, rt, 1 h
Click reaction
95
4–6 nm
—

97



4.
γ-Fe2O3@SiO2-DDBSA
H2O, reflux, 3 h
Synthesis of spirooxindole pyrimidines
95
∼50 nm
—

96



5
Fe3O4@phenylene
H2O, 40 °C, 0.5–5 h
Asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of aromatic ketones
>99
370 nm
—

98



6
PCM-SO3H
H2O, 180 °C, 2 h
Cellulose hydrolysis
68.9
100–200 nm
—

99



7
Au@ZrO2
H2O, hν, 40–80 °C
Hydrogenation of unsaturated aromatics
7–100
7 nm
—

100



8
γ-Fe2O3-HAP
H2O, 100 °C, 5 h
Cycloaddition reaction of alkynes, halides and azides
78–94
10–20 nm
—

101



9

L-Proline-NH2-SiO2@Fe3O4
H2O, 30 °C, 12 h
Asymmetric aldol reaction
96
14 nm
—

103



10
Pd@urea
H2O, 30 °C, 3 h
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction
95–100
5 nm
—

105



11
Pd-rGOF
H2O, 100 °C, 0.5 h
Tsuji–Trost reaction
>99
3–4 nm
—

107



12
Pd@CD
H2O, 90 °C, 14–24 h
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction and Heck–Mizoroki cross-coupling reaction
72–95
∼12 nm
—

109



13
H3PW12O40@SiO2@Fe2O3
H2O, rt, 5 min
Mannich reaction
95
∼75 nm
—

112



14
Mn(TPP)OAc@SMNP
H2O, 60 °C, 4–12 h
Epoxidation of olefins, oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons, alcohols, and sulfides in water
40–90
10–20 nm
—

113



15
PCA-GNS-Pd
H2O, 90 °C, 2–18 h
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling and Heck–Mizoroki cross-coupling reaction
80–98
4–5 nm
—

110











40–90








16
MNPs@BiimCu(I)
H2O, reflux, 1.5 h
Synthesis of propargylamines and 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles
90–99
∼15 nm
67–82

115















145–165




17
Pd(0) PzC
H2O, 90 °C, KOH, TBAB, 2 h
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions
84–96
2 nm
—

106



18
[PPh3]4 Pd
H2O, 80 °C NaOCH3, 3 h, under argon
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions
55–87
>5 nm
—

111



19
MNP-CuBr
H2O, 80 °C, PEG, MW 15–25 min
Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles
89–96
10–20 nm
—

116





4.7. Metal–organic framework (MOF)-supported NPs
Over the past decades, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have become highly promising functional hybrid materials due to their highly porous large surface area. The crystalline porous structure of MOFs restricts the aggregation of metal NPs in aqueous media and they are thus especially applicable in gas sorption and storage.117 Moreover, the importance of safe and efficient storage of hydrogen has increased tremendously in recent years. Singh and Xu synthesized MOF-supported Ni–Pt bimetallic nanoparticles as a highly efficient catalyst for hydrogen generation from hydrazine in aqueous solution at 50 °C.118 So far, there have been limited examples of MOF-supported monometallic NPs and only a few reports on MOF-supported bimetallic NPs. In this report, highly dispersed Ni–Pt bimetallic NPs with controlled size and an average diameter of 2 nm were successfully immobilized by the frameworks of ZIF-8, exhibiting high catalytic activity for hydrogen generation from hydrous hydrazine in the presence of NaOH. The authors prepared different molar ratio (95:5, 90:10, 90:20, and 50:50) solutions of nickel chloride and potassium tetrachloroplatinate for the synthesis of the MOFs, among which the ratio of 80:20 shows the highest TOF among the catalysts. The morphology of the synthesized MOF-supported Ni–Pt NPs was characterized by PXRD and TEM, which provide direct evidence of the highly dispersed NPs being effectively immobilized by ZIF-8 with a size of ∼2 nm. Further, the XPS spectra of the catalysts exhibit characteristic signals for Ni and Pt, indicating the coexistence of both metals. The specific surface areas were analyzed by BET analysis with different Ni–Pt ratios. The authors observed an appreciable decrease in the surface area, which indicates that the cavities of the host framework with the locally distorted environment are possibly occupied by highly dispersed Ni–Pt NPs and/or blocked by the Ni–Pt NPs, which are located at the surface and hence exhibit high catalytic performance for hydrogen generation from the decomposition of hydrous hydrazine. Recently, from a literature survey, we found that several bimetallic alloy NPs based on nickel and another metal (Rh, Pt, Ir, or Fe) are promising catalysts for the selective decomposition of hydrazine in aqueous solutions.89 Relative chart for metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs for organic transformations in an aqueous medium with respective catalyst used, aggregation, method of separation, etc. is displayed in Table 5.
Table 5 Relative chart of metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media




Characteristics
Metal NPs
Metal oxide NPs
Bimetallic NPs
Supported NPs




1. Catalyst used
Cu,16 Au,13 Pt,24 Pd17 (noble) metals used.
All type of metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.28
Combination of any two metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.59
All type of metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.86


2. Catalyst in reaction medium
(i) Homogeneous16,21
(i) Homogeneous26 or
(i) Heterogeneous39
(i) Truly heterogeneous109




(ii) Heterogeneous9,39
(ii) Heterogeneous39






3. Aggregation of catalyst
Observed20
Observed48
Less83
Very less105,117


4. Methods used for separation of catalyst
(i) Centrifuge
(i) Centrifuge51
(i) Centrifuge
(i) Centrifuge






(ii) Magnetically68
(ii) Magnetically77
(ii) Magnetically112










(iii) Simple filtration method97


5. Leaching of the catalyst (after completion of reaction)
Less25
Less
Less76
Very less94


6. Recyclability
Recyclable
Recyclable
Recyclable
Recyclable


7. Efficiency
High TON9
High TON36
High TON
High TON95




5. Conclusion
We are entering a new “nanoscale” age where scientists no longer simply observe the internal structure of matter but are now able to manipulate it as well to produce new type of materials with desired chemical properties. Recent advances in the preparation of various types of NPs have proved that a vast variety of NPs such as metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs can be synthesized through different routes and mixed together (as supported or bimetallic) to overcome their limitations. In this review, we present an introduction to the field of different types of nanocatalysts and their use in organic transformations in aqueous media. Researchers began by preparing NPs from the basic units of metals and metal oxides and are now preparing bimetallic and supported NPs similar to those in nature. In addition, the application of various types of NPs for organic transformations in water is advantageous from a green and sustainability point of view. It is expected that more promising studies will be conducted on applications of NPs as catalysts in industrial processes to develop new effective and selective catalysts in the coming years.
Author contributions
Suraj R. Attar: conceptualization, collection of information, interpretation of results, and writing the manuscript. Santosh B. Kamble: supervision, design and implementation of the research, editing the manuscript, and overall research and planning.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. R. Attar is thankful to the Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Research and Training Institute (MAHAJYOTI), Government of Maharashtra, India, for the Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Research Fellowship (MJPRF 2021). This work was supported by the Department of Science Technology-Science and Engineering Research Board (DST-SERB) and University Grants Commission (UGC) as major research project, RUSA-sponsored minor research project and Y.C.I.S. Satara (Autonomous) as seed money.
References
M. B. Gawande, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Nano-magnetite (Fe 3 O 4) as a support for recyclable catalysts in the development of sustainable methodologies, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(8), 3371–3393 RSC .
R. Breslow, Determining the geometries of transition states by use of antihydrophobic additives in water, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37(7), 471–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Li and L. Chen, Organic chemistry in water, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35(1), 68–82 RSC .
V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Green chemistry by nano-catalysis, Green Chem., 2010, 12(5), 743–754 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. Bonifácio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Benign by design: catalyst-free in-water, on-water green chemical methodologies in organic synthesis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(12), 5522–5551 RSC .
N. Parikh, S. R. Roy, K. Seth, A. Kumar and A. K. Chakraborti, ‘On-Water'multicomponent reaction for the diastereoselective synthesis of functionalized tetrahydropyridines and mechanistic insight, Synthesis, 2016, 48(04), 547–556 CAS .
A. Z. Halimehjani, S. E. Hooshmand and E. V. Shamiri, Synthesis of α-phthalimido-α′-dithiocarbamato propan-2-ols via a one-pot, three-component epoxide ring-opening in water, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55(40), 5454–5457 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Baig, B. R. Vaddula, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, The copper–nicotinamide complex: sustainable applications in coupling and cycloaddition reactions, Green Chem., 2015, 17(2), 1243–1248 RSC .
M. Saha, A. K. Pal and S. Nandi, Pd (0) NPs: a novel and reusable catalyst for the synthesis of bis (heterocyclyl) methanes in water, RSC Adv., 2012, 2(16), 6397–6400 RSC .
D. Astruc, Palladium nanoparticles as efficient green homogeneous and heterogeneous carbon- carbon coupling precatalysts: A unifying view, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46(6), 1884–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kitanosono, K. Masuda, P. Xu and S. Kobayashi, Catalytic Organic Reactions in Water toward Sustainable Society, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(2), 679–746,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00417 .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chemistry and properties of nanocrystals of different shapes, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105(4), 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Praharaj, S. Nath, S. K. Ghosh, S. Kundu and T. Pal, Immobilization and recovery of Au nanoparticles from anion exchange resin: resin-bound nanoparticle matrix as a catalyst for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol, Langmuir, 2004, 20(23), 9889–9892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Itoh and T. Mase, A novel practical synthesis of benzothiazoles via Pd-catalyzed thiol cross-coupling, Org. Lett., 2007, 9(18), 3687–3689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahammed, A. Saha and B. C. Ranu, Hydrogenation of azides over copper nanoparticle surface using ammonium formate in water, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76(17), 7235–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Alonso, Y. Moglie and G. Radivoy, Copper Nanoparticles in Click Chemistry, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(9), 2516–2528,  DOI:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00293 .
P. Devendar, R.-Y. Qu, W.-M. Kang, B. He and G.-F. Yang, Palladium-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions: A Powerful Tool for the Synthesis of Agrochemicals, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66(34), 8914–8934,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jafc.8b03792 .
J. Zhao, J. Ye and Y. J. Zhang, Stereospecific Allyl-Aryl Coupling Catalyzed by in situ Generated Palladium Nanoparticles in Water under Ambient Conditions, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355(2–3), 491–498,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.201200704 .
P. M. Uberman, L. A. Pérez, S. E. Martín and G. I. Lacconi, Electrochemical synthesis of palladium nanoparticles in PVP solutions and their catalytic activity in Suzuki and Heck reactions in aqueous medium, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(24), 12330,  10.1039/c3ra47854h .
T. N. Ansari, 
            et al., Shielding Effect of Nanomicelles: Stable and Catalytically Active Oxidizable Pd(0) Nanoparticle Catalyst Compatible for Cross-Couplings of Water-Sensitive Acid Chlorides in Water, JACS Au, 2021, 1(9), 1506–1513,  DOI:10.1021/jacsau.1c00236 .
W. Guo, R. Pleixats and A. Shafir, Water-Soluble Gold Nanoparticles: From Catalytic Selective Nitroarene Reduction in Water to Refractive Index Sensing, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10(11), 2437–2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Monti, N. M. Correa, R. D. Falcone, G. F. Silbestri and F. Moyano, Gold Nanoparticles Stabilized by Sulfonated-Imidazolium Salts as Promising Catalyst in Water, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4(46), 13496–13502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Nanostructured Pt-alloy electrocatalysts for PEM fuel cell oxygen reduction reaction, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39(6), 2184–2202,  10.1039/B912552C .
N. Erathodiyil, H. Gu, H. Shao, J. Jiang and J. Y. Ying, Enantioselective hydrogenation of a-ketoesters over alkaloid-modified platinum nanowires, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3070–3074,  10.1039/C1GC15606C .
R. Saha and G. Sekar, Selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids/ketone in water by using reusable binaphthyl stabilized Pt nanoparticles (Pt-BNP) as catalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 325–336,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.03.052 .
D. Astruc, F. Lu and J. R. Aranzaes, Nanoparticles as recyclable catalysts: the frontier between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44(48), 7852–7872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deol, G. Singh, M. Kumar and V. Bhalla, Metal nanoparticles embedded in AIEE active supramolecular assemblies: robust, green and reusable nanocatalysts, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48(15), 4769–4773 RSC .
T. Guo, M.-S. Yao, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, A comprehensive review on synthesis methods for transition-metal oxide nanostructures, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17(19), 3551–3585 RSC .
U. Y. Qazi and R. Javaid, A review on metal nanostructures: preparation methods and their potential applications, Adv. Nanopart., 2016, 5(1), 27–43 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, H. Lu and L. Li, Nanoscale ultraviolet photodetectors based on onedimensional metal oxide nanostructures, Nano Res., 2015, 8(2), 382–405 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and J. Liu, Sensors and biosensors based on metal oxide nanomaterials, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 121, 115690 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Miller, S. A. Akbar and P. A. Morris, Nanoscale metal oxide-based heterojunctions for gas sensing: a review, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 204, 250–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Dizaj, F. Lotfipour, M. Barzegar-Jalali, M. H. Zarrintan and K. Adibkia, Antimicrobial activity of the metals and metal oxide nanoparticles, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 44, 278–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Anjum, H. Ali, W. Q. Khan, J. Zhao and G. Yasin, Metal/metal oxide nanoparticles as corrosion inhibitors, in Corrosion Protection at the Nanoscale, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 181–201 Search PubMed .
A. V. Nikam, B. L. V. Prasad and A. A. Kulkarni, Wet chemical synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles: a review, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20(35), 5091–5107,  10.1039/C8CE00487K .
S. R. Attar, B. Shinde and S. B. Kamble, Enhanced catalytic activity of bio-fabricated ZnO NPs prepared by ultrasound-assisted route for the synthesis of tetraketone and benzylidenemalonitrile in hydrotropic aqueous medium, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2020, 46(10), 4723–4748 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, G. Li and L. Li, CeO2 nanocrystals: Seed-mediated synthesis and size control, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43(4), 990–995,  DOI:10.1016/j.materresbull.2007.04.019 .
T. Raj, 
            et al., ‘Solvent-less’ mechanochemical approach to the synthesis of pyrimidine derivatives, ACS Sustainable Chem.
Eng., 2017, 5(2), 1468–1475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zaera, Nanostructured materials for applications in heterogeneous catalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(7), 2746–2762 RSC .
P. P. Ghosh and A. R. Das, Nanocrystalline and Reusable ZnO Catalyst for the Assembly of Densely Functionalized 4 H-Chromenes in Aqueous Medium via One-Pot Three Component Reactions: A Greener ‘NOSE’ Approach, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78(12), 6170–6181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shinde, 
            et al., pH-Transformed ZnO-NPs/NaPTS: The First Room-Temperature Brisk Synthesis of Flavanones in Aqueous Medium, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3(46), 13197–13206 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, D. Saxena and M. K. Gupta, Nanoparticle catalyzed reaction (NPCR): ZnO-NP catalyzed Ugi-reaction in aqueous medium, Green Chem., 2013, 15(10), 2699,  10.1039/c3gc41101j .
D. Astruc, Transition-metal nanoparticles in catalysis: from historical background to the state-of-the art, Nanopart. Catal., 2008, 1, 1–48 Search PubMed .
A. Saha, S. Payra and S. Banerjee, On water synthesis of pyran–chromenes via a multicomponent reactions catalyzed by fluorescent t-ZrO 2 nanoparticles, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(123), 101664–101671 RSC .
R. Shrestha, K. Sharma, Y. R. Lee and Y.-J. Wee, Cerium oxide-catalyzed multicomponent condensation approach to spirooxindoles in water, Mol. Divers., 2016, 20(4), 847–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhattacharjee and M. Ahmaruzzaman, CuO nanostructures: facile synthesis and applications for enhanced photodegradation of organic compounds and reduction of p-nitrophenol from aqueous phase, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(47), 41348–41363,  10.1039/C6RA03624D .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, M. Maham and S. M. Sajadi, Green synthesis of CuO nanoparticles by aqueous extract of Gundelia tournefortii and evaluation of their catalytic activity for the synthesis of N-monosubstituted ureas and reduction of 4-nitrophenol, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 455, 245–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Payra, A. Saha, S. Guchhait and S. Banerjee, Direct CuO nanoparticle-catalyzed synthesis of poly-substituted furans via oxidative C–H/C–H functionalization in aqueous medium, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(40), 33462–33467 RSC .
A. Gedanken, Using sonochemistry for the fabrication of nanomaterials, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2004, 11(2), 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chowdhury, A. Khan and M. H. Rashid, Green synthesis of CuO nanoparticles using Lantana camara flower extract and their potential catalytic activity towards the aza-Michael reaction, RSC Adv., 2020, 10(24), 14374–14385 RSC .
B. Shinde, 
            et al., ‘In water'exploration of Alpinia zerumbet-fabricated CuO NPs in the presence of NaPTS at room temperature: green synthesis of 1, 8-dioxooctahydroxanthene derivatives, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2021, 47(3), 1221–1237 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, 
            et al., Copper-Catalyzed Three-Component Reactions of α-Ketoaldehyde, 1,3-Dicarbonyl Compound, and Organic Boronic Acid in Water: A Route to 1,4-Diketones, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86(14), 9914–9923,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.1c01100 .
M. A. Nasseri, F. Ahrari and B. Zakerinasab, Nickel oxide nanoparticles: a green and recyclable catalytic system for the synthesis of diindolyloxindole derivatives in aqueous medium, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(18), 13901–13905 RSC .
R. N. Baig and R. S. Varma, Organic synthesis via magnetic attraction: benign and sustainable protocols using magnetic nanoferrites, Green Chem., 2013, 15(2), 398–417 RSC .
B. Karami, S. J. Hoseini, K. Eskandari, A. Ghasemi and H. Nasrabadi, Synthesis of xanthene derivatives by employing Fe3O4 nanoparticles as an effective and magnetically recoverable catalyst in water, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2(2), 331–338 RSC .
S. Pagoti, S. Surana, A. Chauhan, B. Parasar and J. Dash, Reduction of organic azides to amines using reusable Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles in aqueous medium, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3(3), 584–588 RSC .
J. Safari, Z. Zarnegar and M. Heydarian, Magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles as efficient and reusable catalyst for the green synthesis of 2-amino-4 H-chromene in aqueous media, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85(12), 1332–1338 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rostamnia, A. Nuri, H. Xin, A. Pourjavadi and S. H. Hosseini, Water dispersed magnetic nanoparticles (H2O-DMNPs) of γ-Fe2O3 for multicomponent coupling reactions: a green, single-pot technique for the synthesis of tetrahydro-4H-chromenes and hexahydroquinoline carboxylates, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54(26), 3344–3347 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, M. D. Porosoff and J. G. Chen, Review of Pt-based bimetallic catalysis: from model surfaces to supported catalysts, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112(11), 5780–5817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and X. Liu, Bimetallic Nanoparticles: Kinetic Control Matters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(14), 3311–3313,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201108661 .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Core/Shell Nanoparticles: Classes, Properties, Synthesis Mechanisms, Characterization, and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112(4), 2373–2433,  DOI:10.1021/cr100449n .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Towards the computational design of solid catalysts, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1(1), 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hudson, Y. Feng, R. S. Varma and A. Moores, Bare magnetic nanoparticles: sustainable synthesis and applications in catalytic organic transformations, Green Chem., 2014, 16(10), 4493–4505,  10.1039/C4GC00418C .
R. N. Baig and R. S. Varma, Organic synthesis via magnetic attraction: benign and sustainable protocols using magnetic nanoferrites, Green Chem., 2013, 15(2), 398–417 RSC .
I. P. Beletskaya, F. Alonso and V. Tyurin, The Suzuki-Miyaura reaction after the Nobel prize, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 385, 137–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Handa, J. D. Smith, M. S. Hageman, M. Gonzalez and B. H. Lipshutz, Synergistic and Selective Copper/ppm Pd-Catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura Couplings: In Water, Mild Conditions, with Recycling, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(12), 8179–8183,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.6b02809 .
B. Maleki, M. Baghayeri, S. M. Vahdat, A. Mohammadzadeh and S. Akhoondi, Ag@TiO2 nanocomposite; synthesis, characterization and its application as a novel and recyclable catalyst for the one-pot synthesis of benzoxazole derivatives in aqueous media, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(58), 46545–46551,  10.1039/C5RA06618B .
B. Nakhjavan, 
            et al., Ni@ Fe 2 O 3 heterodimers: controlled synthesis and magnetically recyclable catalytic application for dehalogenation reactions, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(15), 4571–4577 RSC .
J. H. Park and Y. K. Chung, Cobalt–rhodium heterobimetallic nanoparticle-catalyzed reactions, Dalton Trans., 2008,(18), 2369–2378 RSC .
K. Mishra, N. Basavegowda and Y. R. Lee, Access to enhanced catalytic core–shell CuO–Pd nanoparticles for the organic transformations, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(33), 27974–27982,  10.1039/C6RA03883B .
M. Mousavi, A. Habibi-Yangjeh and S. R. Pouran, Review on magnetically separable graphitic carbon nitride-based nanocomposites as promising visible-light-driven photocatalysts, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29(3), 1719–1747 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Gabriel, 
            et al., Sustainable and Scalable Fe/ppm Pd Nanoparticle Nitro Group Reductions in Water at Room Temperature, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21(2), 247–252,  DOI:10.1021/acs.oprd.6b00410 .
S. Handa, Y. Wang, F. Gallou and B. H. Lipshutz, Sustainable Fe-ppm Pd nanoparticle catalysis of Suzuki-Miyaura cross-couplings in water, Science, 2015, 349(6252), 1087–1091,  DOI:10.1126/science.aac6936 .
R. Hudson, C.-J. Li and A. Moores, Magnetic copper–iron nanoparticles as simple heterogeneous catalysts for the azide–alkyne click reaction in water, Green Chem., 2012, 14(3), 622,  10.1039/c2gc16421c .

          P. Perlmutter, Conjugate addition reactions in organic synthesis, Elsevier,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. Payra, A. Saha and S. Banerjee, On-water magnetic NiFe2O4 nanoparticle-catalyzed Michael additions of active methylene compounds, aromatic/aliphatic amines, alcohols and thiols to conjugated alkenes, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(98), 95951–95956,  10.1039/C6RA21160G .
B. A. Kumar, K. H. V. Reddy, B. Madhav, K. Ramesh and Y. V. D. Nageswar, Magnetically separable CuFe2O4 nano particles catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of 1, 4-disubstituted 1, 2, 3-triazoles in tap water using ‘click chemistry’, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53(34), 4595–4599 CrossRef .
A. S. Kumar, M. A. Reddy, M. Knorn, O. Reiser and B. Sreedhar, Magnetically Recoverable CuFe2O4 Nanoparticles: Catalyzed Synthesis of Aryl Azides and 1, 4-Diaryl-1, 2, 3-triazoles from Boronic Acids in Water, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013,(21), 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS .
H. Naeimi, Z. Rashid, A. H. Zarnani and R. Ghahremanzadeh, Efficient synthesis of novel spiro-furo-pyrido-pyrimidine-indolines by manganese ferrite nanoparticles as a highly active magnetically reusable nanocatalyst in water, New J. Chem., 2014, 38(1), 348–357 RSC .
R. Ghahremanzadeh, Z. Rashid, A. H. Zarnani and H. Naeimi, Synthesis of novel spirooxindoles in water by using MnFe2O4 nanoparticles as an efficient magnetically recoverable and reusable catalyst, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 467, 270–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. Naeimi and A. Didar, Efficient sonochemical green reaction of aldehyde, thiobarbituric acid and ammonium acetate using magnetically recyclable nanocatalyst in water, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 34, 889–895,  DOI:10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.07.021 .
L. Wang, 
            et al., Electric field induced simultaneous change of transport and magnetic properties in multilayered NiO x/Pt nanowires, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(8), 1996–2003 RSC .
B. Shinde, S. B. Kamble, H. S. Jadhav, B. K. Karale, K. G. Kanade and A. S. Burungale, The Calotropis procera Transformed Green NiO and Fe–NiO Nanoparticles for Diaryl Pyrimidinones Synthesis in Hydrotropic Medium at Room Temperature, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3(46), 13140–13153,  DOI:10.1002/slct.201802374 .
B. Shinde, 
            et al., Novel catalytic application of Ni@ZnO nanoparticles and ZnO nanoflakes in aqueous solution of NaPTS hydrotrope at room temperature via a green synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44(5), 3097–3113,  DOI:10.1007/s11164-018-3295-2 .
A. Sapkal and S. Kamble, Greener and Environmentally Benign Methodology for the Synthesis of Pyrazole Derivatives, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5(42), 12971–13026 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, R. Luque, V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Supported metal nanoparticles on porous materials. Methods and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(2), 481–494,  10.1039/B802654H .
M. J. Ndolomingo, N. Bingwa and R. Meijboom, Review of supported metal nanoparticles: synthesis methodologies, advantages and application as catalysts, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55(15), 6195–6241 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Karande, S. A. Jadhav, H. B. Garud, V. A. Kalantre, S. H. Burungale and P. S. Patil, Green and sustainable synthesis of silica nanoparticles, Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2021, 6(2), 1–14 Search PubMed .
B. K. Singh, S. Lee and K. Na, An overview on metal-related catalysts: metal oxides, nanoporous metals and supported metal nanoparticles on metal organic frameworks and zeolites, Rare Met., 2020, 39(7), 751–766 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Monyoncho, S. Ntais, N. Brazeau, J.-J. Wu, C.-L. Sun and E. A. Baranova, Role of the metal-oxide support in the catalytic activity of Pd nanoparticles for ethanol electrooxidation in alkaline media, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3(2), 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Santos, C. Megías-Sayago, S. Ivanova, M.Á Centeno and J. A. Odriozola, Structure-sensitivity of formic acid dehydrogenation reaction over additive-free Pd NPs supported on activated carbon, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127641 CrossRef CAS .
M. d'Halluin, 
            et al., Graphite-supported ultra-small copper nanoparticles–Preparation, characterization and catalysis applications, Carbon, 2015, 93, 974–983 CrossRef .
V. Shah, 
            et al., Fate and impact of zero-valent copper nanoparticles on geographically-distinct soils, Sci. Total Environ., 2016, 573, 661–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Baig and R. S. Varma, A facile one-pot synthesis of ruthenium hydroxide nanoparticles on magnetic silica: aqueous hydration of nitriles to amides, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(50), 6220–6222 RSC .
A. Boffi, 
            et al., The Heck Reaction of Allylic Alcohols Catalyzed by Palladium Nanoparticles in Water: Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of (R)-(−)-Rhododendrol, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3(2), 347–353,  DOI:10.1002/cctc.201000260 .
J. Deng, L.-P. Mo, F.-Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Zhang and S.-X. Liu, One-pot, three-component synthesis of a library of spirooxindole-pyrimidines catalyzed by magnetic nanoparticle supported dodecyl benzenesulfonic acid in aqueous media, ACS Comb. Sci., 2012, 14(5), 335–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Borah, D. Dutta, P. P. Saikia, N. C. Barua and D. K. Dutta, Stabilization of Cu(0)-nanoparticles into the nanopores of modified montmorillonite: An implication on the catalytic approach for ‘Click’ reaction between azides and terminal alkynes, Green Chem., 2011, 13(12), 3453,  10.1039/c1gc16021d .
X. Gao, R. Liu, D. Zhang, M. Wu, T. Cheng and G. Liu, Phenylene-Coated Magnetic Nanoparticles that Boost Aqueous Asymmetric Transfer Hydrogenation Reactions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20(6), 1515–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, Y. Lian, L. Yan, X. Qi and R. L. Smith, Cellulose-derived superparamagnetic carbonaceous solid acid catalyst for cellulose hydrolysis in an ionic liquid or aqueous reaction system, Green Chem., 2013, 15(8), 2167–2174 RSC .
Y. Huang, 
            et al., Visible light-driven selective hydrogenation of unsaturated aromatics in an aqueous solution by direct photocatalysis of Au nanoparticles, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8(3), 726–734,  10.1039/C7CY02291C .
S. R. Kale, S. S. Kahandal, M. B. Gawande and R. V. Jayaram, Magnetically recyclable γ-Fe 2 O 3−HAP nanoparticles for the cycloaddition reaction of alkynes, halides and azides in aqueous media, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(22), 8184–8192 RSC .
R. Mahrwald, Diastereoselection in Lewis-acid-mediated aldol additions, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99(5), 1095–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, R. Tan, L. Zhao and D. Yin, L-Proline supported on ionic liquid-modified magnetic nanoparticles as a highly efficient and reusable organocatalyst for direct asymmetric aldol reaction in water, Green Chem., 2013, 15(9), 2422–2433 RSC .
Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Porous covalent–organic materials: synthesis, clean energy application and design, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(8), 2691–2718 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Chen, H. Zhong and R. Wang, Urea-Based Porous Organic Frameworks: Effective Supports for Catalysis in Neat Water, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20(11), 3050–3060,  DOI:10.1002/chem.201304046 .
A. Verma, K. Tomar and P. K. Bharadwaj, Nanosized Bispyrazole-Based Cryptand-Stabilized Palladium(0) Nanoparticles: A Reusable Heterogeneous Catalyst for the Suzuki–Miyaura Coupling Reaction in Water, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58(2), 1003–1006,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b03015 .
J. Liu, 
            et al., Rational synthesis of Pd nanoparticle-embedded reduced graphene oxide frameworks with enhanced selective catalysis in water, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(5), 2787–2794,  10.1039/C5NR07835K .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Graphene-based composites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(2), 666–686,  10.1039/C1CS15078B .
C. Putta, V. Sharavath, S. Sarkar and S. Ghosh, Palladium nanoparticles on β-cyclodextrin functionalised graphene nanosheets: a supramolecular based heterogeneous catalyst for C–C coupling reactions under green reaction conditions, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(9), 6652–6660,  10.1039/C4RA14323J .
V. Sharavath and S. Ghosh, Palladium nanoparticles on noncovalently functionalized graphene-based heterogeneous catalyst for the Suzuki–Miyaura and Heck–Mizoroki reactions in water, RSC Adv., 2012, 4, 48322–48330,  10.1039/C4RA06868H .
F. Wang, 
            et al., A Polyphenylene Support for Pd Catalysts with Exceptional Catalytic Activity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(33), 8645–8648,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201404912 .
E. Rafiee and S. Eavani, H3PW12O40 supported on silica-encapsulated γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles: a novel magnetically-recoverable
catalyst for three-component Mannich-type reactions in water, Green Chem., 2011, 13(8), 2116–2122 RSC .
A. Rezaeifard, P. Farshid, M. Jafarpour and G. K. Moghaddam, Silica-coated magnetite nanoparticles stabilized simple Mn-tetraphenylporphyrin for aqueous phase catalytic oxidations with tert-butyl hydroperoxide, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(18), 9189–9196 RSC .
S. A. Bakunov, 
            et al., Synthesis and antiprotozoal activity of cationic 1,4-diphenyl-1H-1,2,3-triazoles, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 53(1), 254–272,  DOI:10.1021/jm901178d .
M. Tajbakhsh, M. Farhang, S. M. Baghbanian, R. Hosseinzadeh and M. Tajbakhsh, Nano magnetite supported metal ions as robust, efficient and recyclable catalysts for green synthesis of propargylamines and 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles in water, New J. Chem., 2015, 39(3), 1827–1839,  10.1039/C4NJ01866D .
X. Xiong and L. Cai, Application of magnetic nanoparticle-supported CuBr: a highly efficient and reusable catalyst for the one-pot and scale-up synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles under microwave-assisted conditions, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3(5), 1301,  10.1039/c3cy20680g .
P.-Z. Li, K. Aranishi and Q. Xu, ZIF-8 immobilized nickel nanoparticles: highly effective catalysts for hydrogen generation from hydrolysis of ammonia borane, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(26), 3173–3175 RSC .
A. K. Singh and Q. Xu, Metal–Organic Framework Supported Bimetallic Ni–Pt Nanoparticles as High-performance Catalysts for Hydrogen Generation from Hydrazine in Aqueous Solution, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5(10), 3000–3004,  DOI:10.1002/cctc.201300233 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Suraj R. Attar	Mr Suraj Rafik Attar received his M.Sc. from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India, in 2009. He is pursuing his Ph.D. under the guidance of Dr Santosh B. Kamble at the Y. C. Institute of Science (Autonomous), Satara, India. He is a recipient of the Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Research Fellowship (2021) from the Government of Maharashtra, India. His current research interest is focused on the synthesis of nanocatalysts and their use in organic transformation for sustainable development. He has worked as an Assistant Professor at Yashwantrao Chavan College of Science, Karad and Krishna Mahavidyalaya Rethare Bk. Karad, M.S., India.
Santosh B. Kamble	Dr Santosh B. Kamble received his M.Sc. and Ph.D. from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. The main focus of his PhD thesis was organic transformation involving hydrotropic solutions as a green and sustainable methodology under the guidance of Prof. Mrs R. S. Salunkhe. He is a recipient of the Raman Post-Doctoral Fellowship from the University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi, India. Under the guidance of Prof. Richard Weiss at Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA, he completed his post-doctoral study. His main research interests include the synthesis of biologically important scaffolds via green and sustainable methodology, synthesis and applications of low-molecular weight organic gelators and use of nanocatalysts for organic transformations. He is currently working as an Assistant Professor at Y. C. Institute of Science, Satara, India.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of metal, metal oxide, bimetallic and supported NPs for organic transformations in aqueous media.	 

 	Scheme 1  Reduction of aryl azides to corresponding amines.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of bis(heterocyclic) methane derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 3  Allyl–aryl coupling of secondary allylic carbonates.	 

 	Scheme 4  Suzuki reaction.	 

 	Scheme 5  Heck reaction.	 

 	Scheme 6  Coupling of acid chlorides.	 

 	Scheme 7  Reduction of p-nitrobenzene to aniline.	 

 	Scheme 8  Reduction of 1,4-dinitrobenzene.	 

 	Scheme 9  Enantioselective hydrogenation of α-ketoesters.	 

 	Scheme 10  Selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids/ketones.	 

1	Cu (0.5 eq.)	100 °C, 7–8 h, H2O	Hydrogenation of azides	83	6–8 nm	—	
15

2	Cu NPs (4.3 mol%)	70 °C, 1–9 h, H2O	Click reaction	50–98	∼3 nm	—	
16


	*Cu NPs/C (0.5 mol%)	70 °C, 1–9 h, H2O	Click reaction	71–92	∼6 nm	—	
16

3	Pd(0) (0.04 mmol)	100 °C, 70 min, H2O	Domino Knoevenagel condensation followed by Michael addition	89	20–50 nm	2225	
9

4	Pd(0) 1 mol% (0.005 mmol)	25 °C, 4 h, H2O	Stereospecific allyl–aryl coupling of secondary allylic carbonates with aryl boronic acids	53–97	1.5–2.5 nm	2475	
18

5	Pd(0) (0.0008 mol%)	90 °C, 2–24 h, EtOH:H2O	Suzuki and Heck reaction	73–95	8 nm	104–105	
19

6	Pd(0) NPs (3 mol%)	Na2CO3, PS-750-M, rt, H2O, 3 h	Cross-coupling of acid chlorides	71–90	2.5 nm	—	
20

7	Au NPs (0.5 mol%)	NaBH4, rt, H2O, 1 h	Nitroarene reduction	99	1.1 nm	30 min−1	
21

8	Au NPs	rt, H2O, 1 h.	Reduction of aromatic nitro compounds	—	9–15 nm	—	
22

9	Pt NWs	H2O, H2, 25 °C, 6 h	Enantioselective hydrogenation of α-ketoesters	74–78	1–2 nm	—	
24

10	Pt BNPs (0.064 mol%)	TBHP, O2, H2O, 80 °C	Selective oxidation of alkylarenes to aromatic acids	79–95	5–8 nm	30.75–60.33	
25


 	Fig. 2  Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of ZnO NPs from plant extract and by the chemical method. (a) Isoazadirolide. (b) Flavones. (c) Organic acids. (d) Quinone. (e) Azadirachtin. Copyright 2015, Springer. Reprinted from ref. 31 with permission.	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of benzylidenemalononitrile.	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of tetraketone.	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthesis of flavanone.	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthesis of 2-arylamino-2-phenyl-acetimidamine.	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis of chromene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of furan derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of xanthene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of 1,3/1,4-diketones.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of oxindole derivatives.	 

1	ZnO NPs (10 mol%)	NaPTS, H2O, rt, 5–10 min	Tetraketone and benzylidenemalononitrile derivatives	85–95	45–56 nm	114	
36

2	ZnO NPs (10 mol%)	55 °C, H2O, 40–65 min	Synthesis of 4H-chromenes	85–93	∼10 nm	—	
40

3	ZnO NPs (5 mol%)	Hydrotrope, rt, H2O 5–10 min	Synthesis of flavanone	92–96	∼90 nm	—	
41

4	ZnO NPs	rt, H2O	Ugi reaction	90	<50 nm	—	
42

5	ZrO2 NPs (10 mol%)	80 °C, H2O	Synthesis of pyran-fused chromene derivatives	88–94	12 nm	—	
44

6	CeO2 NPs (30 mol%)	H2O	Spirooxindole derivatives	93	—	—	
45

7	CuO	—	Reduction of p-nitrophenol	
	30 nm	
	
46

8	CuO NPs (10 mg)	Reflux, EtOH:H2O 2–3 h	Furan derivatives	75–91	10 nm	—	
48

9	CuO NPs (10 mol%)	NaBH4, H2O, rt	Reduction of p-nitrophenol	94	30–40 nm	—	
47

10	CuO NPs (2 mg)	H2O, 60 °C, 9 h	Aza-Michael reaction	70	13–28 nm	—	
50

11	CuO NPs	NaPTS, H2O, rt, 1 h	Synthesis of 1,8-dioxooctahydroxanthenes	96	8 nm	—	
51

12	CuO NPs	H2O, reflux	Synthesis of 1,4-diketones	23–87	40 nm	—	
52

13	NiO NPs (0.004 g)	H2O, 70 °C, 0.5–1.5 h	Diindolyloxindole derivatives	80–98	11 nm	—	
53

14	Fe3O4 (1 mol%)	H2O, 80 °C, 6–68 min	Synthesis of xanthene derivatives	86–96	13 nm	—	
55

15	Fe3O4 (50 mol%) 116 mg 0.5 mmol	N2H4, H2O, 120 °C, 1.5–5 h	Reduction of organic azides to amines	99	10.14 nm	—	
56

16	Fe3O4	H2O, rt, 25 min	Synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromene	80	18 nm	—	
57

17	γ-Fe2O3 (5 mol%)	H2O, rt, 2.5 h	Synthesis of tetrahydro-4H-chromenes and hexahydroquinoline carboxylates	95	30 nm	—	
58


 	Fig. 3  2D (a) and 3D (b) AFM images of the synthesized Ag@TiO2 composite particles. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  2D (a) and 3D (b) AFM images of 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzoxazole deposited on Ag@TiO2. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission.	 

 	Scheme 21  Click reaction.	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthesis of 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles.	 

 	Scheme 24  Synthesis of spiroindole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 25  Synthesis of spiroindole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 26  Synthesis of pyrimidine derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 27  Synthesis of diaryl pyrimidinone derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 28  Synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones.	 

1.	Copper/ppm Pd	H2O	Suzuki–Miyaura coupling	84	—	—	
66

2.	Ag-h-TiO2	H2O	Photocatalytic degradation of nitrobenzene, metronidazole, and methylene blue dye	—	24 nm	—	
67

3.	CuO-Pd (2 mol%)	Reflux, 30 min, H2O	Synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones and spirooxindole derivatives	92–98	5 nm	—	
70

4.	Fe/Pd NPs	H2O, rt	Nitro group reduction	80–98	—	—	
72

5.	Fe/Pd NPs	H2O, 45 °C, 24 h	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling	60–90	<50 nm	—	
73

6.	NiFe2O4	
	Michael addition of active methylene compounds	89–98	20 nm	—	
76

7.	Cu@Fe (5 mol%)	H2O, rt, 12 h	Azide–alkyne click reaction	93	—	—	
74

8.	CuFe2O4	H2O, 70 °C, 3–9 h	Synthesis of 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles	74–86	—	—	
77

9.	CuFe2O4 (10 mol%)	H2O, rt, 7 h	Synthesis of aryl azides and 1,4-diaryl-1,2,3-triazoles from boronic acids	75–85	10–30 nm	—	
78

10.	MnFe2O4 (10 mol%)	H2O, reflux, 2 h	Synthesis of novel spiro-furo-pyrido-pyrimidine-indolines	84–86	25–30 nm	—	
79

11.	MnFe2O4 (5 mol%)	H2O, 90 °C, 6 h	Synthesis of novel spirooxindoles	74–82	33 nm	—	
80

12.	CuFe2O4 (10 mol%)	H2O, ))), 40 W, 4 min	Synthesis of pyrido[2,3-d:6,5-d]dipyrimidines	98	45–50 nm	—	
81

13.	Fe-NiO (5 mol%)	H2O, rt, NaPTS 5 min	Synthesis of diaryl pyrimidinone derivatives	98	20–25 nm	—	
83

14.	Ni@ZnO	H2O, rt, NaPTS 1.4–3 h	Synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones	84–96	80 nm	—	
84


 	Scheme 29  Synthesis of amide via the hydration of nitrile.	 

 	Scheme 30  Synthesis of spirooxindole pyrimidine derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 31  Click reaction.	 

 	Scheme 32  Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthetic route and proposed formation mechanism of 3D Pd-rGOF. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted from ref. 101 with permission.	 

1.	Fe@SiO2Ru	H2O, MW, 100 °C, 60 min	Hydration of nitriles to amides	>99	15–30 nm	—	
94

2.	Pd@FSG	H2O, 2 mL NaHCO3 (1.5 M), 100 °C, 3–48 h	Heck reaction	98	3–4 nm	49500	
95

3.	Cu(0)@montmorillonite	H2O, rt, 1 h	Click reaction	95	4–6 nm	—	
97

4.	γ-Fe2O3@SiO2-DDBSA	H2O, reflux, 3 h	Synthesis of spirooxindole pyrimidines	95	∼50 nm	—	
96

5	Fe3O4@phenylene	H2O, 40 °C, 0.5–5 h	Asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of aromatic ketones	>99	370 nm	—	
98

6	PCM-SO3H	H2O, 180 °C, 2 h	Cellulose hydrolysis	68.9	100–200 nm	—	
99

7	Au@ZrO2	H2O, hν, 40–80 °C	Hydrogenation of unsaturated aromatics	7–100	7 nm	—	
100

8	γ-Fe2O3-HAP	H2O, 100 °C, 5 h	Cycloaddition reaction of alkynes, halides and azides	78–94	10–20 nm	—	
101

9	
L-Proline-NH2-SiO2@Fe3O4	H2O, 30 °C, 12 h	Asymmetric aldol reaction	96	14 nm	—	
103

10	Pd@urea	H2O, 30 °C, 3 h	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction	95–100	5 nm	—	
105

11	Pd-rGOF	H2O, 100 °C, 0.5 h	Tsuji–Trost reaction	>99	3–4 nm	—	
107

12	Pd@CD	H2O, 90 °C, 14–24 h	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction and Heck–Mizoroki cross-coupling reaction	72–95	∼12 nm	—	
109

13	H3PW12O40@SiO2@Fe2O3	H2O, rt, 5 min	Mannich reaction	95	∼75 nm	—	
112

14	Mn(TPP)OAc@SMNP	H2O, 60 °C, 4–12 h	Epoxidation of olefins, oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons, alcohols, and sulfides in water	40–90	10–20 nm	—	
113

15	PCA-GNS-Pd	H2O, 90 °C, 2–18 h	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling and Heck–Mizoroki cross-coupling reaction	80–98	4–5 nm	—	
110


	
	
	
	40–90	
	
	

16	MNPs@BiimCu(I)	H2O, reflux, 1.5 h	Synthesis of propargylamines and 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles	90–99	∼15 nm	67–82	
115


	
	
	
	
	
	145–165	

17	Pd(0) PzC	H2O, 90 °C, KOH, TBAB, 2 h	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions	84–96	2 nm	—	
106

18	[PPh3]4 Pd	H2O, 80 °C NaOCH3, 3 h, under argon	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions	55–87	>5 nm	—	
111

19	MNP-CuBr	H2O, 80 °C, PEG, MW 15–25 min	Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles	89–96	10–20 nm	—	
116


1. Catalyst used	Cu,16 Au,13 Pt,24 Pd17 (noble) metals used.	All type of metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.28	Combination of any two metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.59	All type of metals (transition, inner transition, etc.) used.86
2. Catalyst in reaction medium	(i) Homogeneous16,21	(i) Homogeneous26 or	(i) Heterogeneous39	(i) Truly heterogeneous109

	(ii) Heterogeneous9,39	(ii) Heterogeneous39	
	

3. Aggregation of catalyst	Observed20	Observed48	Less83	Very less105,117
4. Methods used for separation of catalyst	(i) Centrifuge	(i) Centrifuge51	(i) Centrifuge	(i) Centrifuge

	
	(ii) Magnetically68	(ii) Magnetically77	(ii) Magnetically112

	
	
	
	(iii) Simple filtration method97
5. Leaching of the catalyst (after completion of reaction)	Less25	Less	Less76	Very less94
6. Recyclability	Recyclable	Recyclable	Recyclable	Recyclable
7. Efficiency	High TON9	High TON36	High TON	High TON95

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
