Thermoresponsive and antifouling hydrogels as a radiative energy driven water harvesting system   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00584C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00584C
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 917-928Thermoresponsive and antifouling hydrogels as a radiative energy driven water harvesting system†

        
          
            Diego 
            Combita
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Marya 
            Ahmed
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 University Ave., Charlottetown, PE C1A 4P3, Canada
bDepartment of Chemistry and Faculty of Sustainable Design Engineering, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 University Ave., Charlottetown, PE C1A 4P3, Canada. E-mail: marahmed@upei.ca
Received 
      11th August 2020
    , Accepted 11th November 2020First published on 11th November 2020AbstractHygroscopic and temperature-responsive hydrogels with the potential to harvest water from air followed by its release in liquid or vapor form have seen much interest as water harvesting materials for arid regions. However, the purification of water from wastewater remains a major challenge and only a handful of technologies are being investigated for their potential to purify water from polluted resources. In this study, we explore the synthesis of antifouling and radiative heat driven water-harvesting hydrogels that are capable of absorbing clean water from resources polluted with organic waste, followed by its release, mainly in liquid form, as a function of temperature. The new thermoresponsive hydrogels are comprised of hygroscopic and antifouling vitamin B5 analogous monomers (B5AMA) and 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA) and are evaluated for their kinetics of water uptake and release capacity. The poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels are further evaluated for their ability to recycle clean water from organic polluted wastewater resources and for their potential to develop a radiative energy driven water harvesting system. The hydrogels synthesized are found to be extremely hygroscopic and can recycle 6.84 g of water per g of hydrogel (∼85% water recycling efficiency) upon heating at 60 °C. The hydrogels are also extremely antifouling and can repel 1.5 × 109 bacterial cells per mL of wastewater. The water release rate of the hydrogels is dependent upon the time and temperature and can be tuned to develop a solar fueled water harvesting system.
Introduction
Despite the presence of excess liquid water on the earth's surface (∼71% of the total earth's surface), the supply of consumable water remains a major challenge for growing population across the globe.1,2 Recently, much interest has focused on the development of cost-effective and efficient methods for harvesting clean water from both air and wastewater resources. The removal of bacteria,3 organic contaminants4 and salts5,6 from wastewater is not only critical for the quality of drinking water, but is also required to avoid the problems associated with biofouling and corrosion in industrial processes. Purification of wastewater by membrane filtration is a well-established and widely utilized approach to meet the demands of fresh water supply in both developed and underdeveloped countries; however, the process is energy consuming and accumulation of fouling materials over time on the surface of the membrane reduces the performance and lifetime of membranes.7 Recently, magnetically responsive nanoscavengers have been fabricated and their potential applications in water disinfection techniques are demonstrated.8
Stimuli responsive hydrogels are another example of water harvesting materials, which have been the focus of intense research to collect water from both air and wastewater resources, store it for a long period of time and release the water with the expense of minimal energy and in the presence of external stimuli.9,10 These water harvesting hydrogels are three dimensional networks of stimuli responsive polymers such as poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (p-NIPAAm) that can absorb water in liquid or moisture form, followed by its release as a function of temperature.11–14 The water absorbed by the hydrogels can be released in either the liquid14 or vapor state;15 however, hydrogels that can preferably release water in the liquid state are considered more efficient, as the conversion of water vapor into the reusable liquid form requires extra energy consuming steps such as incorporation of a condenser in the system. Furthermore, the change in temperature of hydrogels can be mediated by a variety of energy sources, and efficient and sustainable low-grade heat recovery systems and solar heating systems have recently gained much research interest.16 A variety of p-NIPAAm based hygroscopic interpenetrating networks are well-documented for their moisture absorption capabilities and are an emerging energy-efficient solar energy driven water purification platform for reliable water supply in arid regions.17–19 For example, Zhao et al. reported the synthesis of super moisture-absorbent gels (SMAG) composed of hygroscopic chloride-doped polypyrrole particles dispersed in a p-NIPAAm matrix. Upon heating of these hydrogels from 40 to 60 °C by solar radiative energy, this material could release 3.9 grams of water per gram of dry polymer.18
However, applications of stimuli responsive hydrogels for purification of water from waste resources are still in their infancy. A handful of ionic liquid based hydrogels have been reported for their water recycling efficacies,20,21 but purification of water from polluted resources often requires complex modifications of the hygroscopic polymeric materials. For example, a complex network of a melamine foam skeleton and a p-NIPAAm modified graphene filter membrane was developed as solar energy powered technology for purification of water from polluted resources. This modified filter membrane was used in a continuous water flow system and could purify water at a rate of 4.2 kg m−2 h−1.19
Recently, we have reported the development of new biomimetic, thermoresponsive hydrogels with potential water recycling applications.22 These hygroscopic hydrogels are comprised of vitamin B5 analogous methacrylamide (B5AMA) monomers and are found to be non-toxic and antifouling, and can recycle a fraction of the absorbed water as a function of temperature and the cross-linking density of the hydrogels. Poly(B5AMA) hydrogels were found to be extremely hygroscopic, but provided limited water release efficacies, possibly due to the strong interactions between water molecules and hydrophilic polymer chains of B5AMA monomers. In this study, we focus on improving the water recycling efficacies of antifouling poly(B5AMA) hydrogels by incorporating relatively hydrophobic and temperature responsive monomers such as (2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA), and further explore their applications as radiative energy driven water harvesting and purification materials. The temperature responsive properties of poly(oligoethyleneglycol methacrylate) based polymers were first reported by Lutz et al.;23–25 however, these PEG based antifouling materials have not yet been evaluated for water harvesting applications.
To improve the water recycling properties of poly(B5AMA) hydrogels, B5AMA and (2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA) based hydrogels of random configuration are prepared by free radical polymerization, in the presence of N,N-methylene bisacrylamide and potassium persulfate as a cross-linker and initiator, respectively (Scheme 1). The stimuli responsive hydrogels produced are optimized for their water absorption and release kinetics, as a function of the concentration of MEO2MA monomers and their cross-linker densities. Poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels of optimized compositions are then studied for their water absorption and desorption kinetics, and are tested for their potential to purify water from contaminated resources. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report where a simple one step free radical polymerization strategy is employed to develop potentially non-toxic and antifouling water recycling hydrogels for separation of bacteria and proteins from wastewater resources.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the statistically polymerized poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogel synthesis, their antifouling properties and their water harvesting application. 
Experimental section
Materials
2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA), potassium persulfate (KPS), N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMEDA), N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS), (R)-(−)-pantolactone, N-vinylcaprolactam, diacetone acrylamide, poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The vitamin B5 based monomer (B5AMA) was synthesized according to a previously established procedure. The monomer was purified by silica column chromatography to remove free pantolactone and catalysts used for the synthesis of B5AMA22 (see the ESI† for details).
Methods
Synthesis of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels
The poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were prepared by a free radical polymerization method. B5AMA (0.48 M), MEO2MA (0.66 M), crosslinker N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS) (5 mol%) and initiator potassium persulfate (KPS) (7 mol%) were dissolved in deionized water and the solution was degassed with an ultrasonic bath for 5 minutes. Next, the catalyst N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMEDA) was added (23 mol%). The reagent solution was transferred to cylindrical molds to form the gels. The formation of the hydrogels was confirmed by a vial inversion test after 4–5 minutes. The prepared hydrogels were left overnight, and then were removed from the mold and washed using 2 liters of deionized water at room temperature for 24 hours to remove the unreacted monomers and amine based catalysts. The hydrogels obtained were freeze-dried and the percent monomer conversion was calculated to be 90%.
Water release measurements
The hydrogels used for the water release experiments using direct heating in a temperature regulated oven had a cylindrical shape and were 9.4 ± 0.3 mm in diameter and 9.3 ± 0.4 mm in height. The hydrogels were removed from the water after the washing step and the excess water on the surface was wiped off. Then, the hydrogels were placed inside a vial, were incubated in an oven at the desired temperature and the amount of water released was collected after the specified time periods. The amount of water released provides a measure to determine the swelling ratios (S.R.) of the hydrogels and was determined as follows: (1)where Wg is the weight of the swollen hydrogel and Wd is the weight of the freeze-dried hydrogel. The tests were repeated at least twice to ensure the reproducibility of the data.
For the water release experiments using radiative energy, visible light from a halogen lamp was used to heat the system.26 Hydrogels with a cylindrical shape of 24 mm in diameter and 12 mm in height were placed in the middle of a closed container, which was specially modified with a glass window, for efficient heating from the top. The height of the lamp over the window was adjusted to generate a temperature profile inside the container that was similar to the temperature profiles reported for solar-powered devices.19,27,28 The temperature inside the container was constantly recorded to maintain the desired heating condition, and the amount of water released was collected in a vial, which was continuously recorded with the help of a balance.
Water uptake kinetics
The freeze-dried hydrogels were immersed in deionized water at room temperature (23 °C) and were removed at regular time intervals. The excess water on the surface was wiped off, and the hydrogels were weighed until equilibrium was reached. The water uptake capacity (W) was determined as follows: (2)where Wt is the weight of the hydrogel at regular time intervals, and Wd is the weight of the freeze-dried hydrogel. The tests were performed in triplicate to ensure the reproducibility of the data.
Water release kinetics
The water release kinetics of the hydrogels was analyzed using an initial rate method with the assumption of first-order kinetics. Samples of the hydrogels were incubated for 24 hours at 37, 45, 50, 55, and 60 °C. The amount of water released by the samples at 5, 10, 15 and 30 minutes was used to calculate the values of k from the slope of the straight-line graph of vs. time. The activation energy was determined using the Arrhenius equation, defined as follows: (3)Here S.R.t is the swelling ratio at time t, S.R.∞ is the equilibrium swelling ratio at 24 hours at each temperature, S.R.0 is the swelling ratio of the fully swelled gels, k is the rate constant, A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The activation energy was determined from the slope of a straight line fit to the Arrhenius plot, that is, ln(k) vs. T−1. The water release tests were repeated three times to ensure the reproducibility of the data.
Volume transition temperature
To determine the phase transition behavior, a sample of the fully hydrated hydrogel was prepared inside a 1 cm glass cuvette. The sample was equilibrated at the prescribed temperature submerged in a temperature-controlled water bath for 30 minutes and then transferred to a Hewlett Packard 8453 UV-visible spectrophotometer for the measurement of the absorbance at 657 nm, using deionized water at the same temperature as the reference.
Differential scanning calorimetry
To study the thermal transition behavior of the hydrogels, poly(B5AMA) hydrogels and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels synthesized with a B5AMA to MEO2MA ratio of 1.37 and 5 mol% of crosslinker were used. DSC measurements were performed using a Mettler Toledo DSC3+ (Solid State Pharma Inc.) Hydrated hydrogels and freeze dried samples of the hydrogels (1–6 mg) were weighed directly in a 40 μL hermetic aluminum pan with a pin-hole and analyzed with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 in the temperature range from −20 to 60 °C (hydrated samples) and from 5 to 240 °C (freeze dried samples), under an N2 flow at 60 mL min−1.
Scanning electronic microscopy
The porous structure and the surface topography of the freeze-dried hydrogels were observed using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The hydrogels were equilibrated at 23, 37, 50 and 60 °C for 24 hours, and then cooled in liquid nitrogen to quench the polymeric network. The frozen gels were then freeze dried. Samples of the dried hydrogels were mounted on SEM stubs using an adhesive sticker. The mounted samples were then sputter coated with gold and palladium to a thickness of approximately 300 angstroms using a Denton Vacuum Desk II sputter coater. Finally, the coated specimens were digitally imaged using a Hitachi TM3000 SEM and imaging software. The average pore size was measured using NIH ImageJ software and was averaged for at least 150 measurements.
Antifouling properties of the hydrogels

E. coli bacteria were grown in nutrient broth media overnight and a stock solution of bacteria was prepared in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) at a concentration of 1.0 × 109 cells per mL. Freeze dried poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were immersed in 1 mL of bacteria stock solution in triplicate overnight at room temperature. 1 mL of bacterial solution was sufficient to completely submerge the hydrogels. The next day, the hydrated hydrogels were collected, rinsed with sterilized water and heated at 37 °C for 4 hours. The water released from the hydrogels was collected and was plated on a nutrient agar plate overnight. The numbers of colonies on the agar plates were recorded and were compared with the stock solution of bacteria in PBS prepared in the absence of the hydrogels.
To evaluate the antifouling properties of the hydrogels in the presence of proteins, bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as a model protein. Freeze dried poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were immersed in 0.75 mg mL−1 of protein stock solution in PBS overnight. The next day, the gels were rinsed with PBS and were transferred in a clean vial. The adsorbed PBS was harvested from the hydrogels at 37 °C and the amount of protein in the harvested solution was analyzed by BCA assay.
Results and discussion
Poly(B5AMA) hydrogels are hygroscopic materials, which can retain more than 90% of their own weight in the form of liquid water.22 These hygroscopic materials, however, show limited water desorption efficacies, due to the strong affinity of the hydrophilic functional groups of hydrogels for water molecules. In comparison to traditional hygroscopic materials such as silica and alginate, which are typically incorporated into a stimuli responsive network of p-NIPAAm to aid their water desorption efficacies, poly(B5AMA) hydrogels exhibit inherent thermoresponsive behavior as a function of temperature and the cross-linking density of the hydrogels and ∼15% of the loosely bound water can be recycled at 37 °C. Further heating of the hydrogels at higher temperatures, however, leads to irreversible loss of the hydrogel architecture and is not a desirable approach to develop an efficient water recycling system. The desorption of water from hydrophilic polymer chains is a well-documented bottleneck for most water harvesting technologies and modification of the hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance in polymer chains of hydrogels is one approach to modulate their water release profiles.
To understand the role of hydrophobicity in the water release properties of poly(B5AMA) hydrogels and to tune their thermoresponsive behavior towards an efficient water recycling system, we first prepared hydrogels of B5AMA with monomers of different hydrophobicity and screened for their water release properties at different temperatures.
Optimization of the hydrogel chemistry for efficient water recycling technology
Five different monomers, namely N-vinylcaprolactam,29 diacetone acrylamide,30 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate,31 poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate25 and 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate,23 were copolymerized with B5AMA monomers in the form of hydrogels and their water release properties at 37 °C were compared with the water release efficacies of poly(B5AMA) hydrogels (ESI,† Table S1). The results indicate that in comparison to the poly(B5AMA) hydrogels, all hydrogels prepared in the presence of comonomers showed an increase in water release capacity, suggesting that the strong hydrophilicity of B5AMA monomers is one limitation in the relatively low water release rate of these hydrogels. However, the improvements in the water release efficacies of the copolymerized hydrogels were rather modest and the copolymerized hydrogels exhibited only 1.2 to 1.7 fold higher water release rates than those of the homo poly(B5AMA) hydrogels. The only exception to this trend was the hydrogels copolymerized with B5AMA and 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA) monomers, and the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels prepared at a B5AMA to MEO2MA molar ratio of 1:1.37 showed an 8.8 fold increase in the water release capacity when compared with the original poly(B5AMA) hydrogels (ESI,† Table S1). Scheme 1 depicts the synthesis of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels and their temperature-controlled water absorption and release properties.
MEO2MA is a type of methacrylate-based monomer which is considered a safe alternative to p-NIPAAm for development of thermoresponsive materials. The temperature responsive behavior of poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate based polymers is highly dependent on the length of the ethylene glycol chain of the monomer and has gained much interest in the field of nanotechnology and regenerative medicine to develop stimuli responsive materials for drug delivery and tissue engineering; however, the water recycling properties of these materials are not reported elsewhere. MEO2MA can undergo facile polymerization by free radical and anionic polymerization mechanisms,32 and the linear poly(MEO2MA) produced is reported to be highly biocompatible,25 with a lower critical solution temperature of 28 °C.23
Poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were further optimized for their water absorption and release efficacies as a function of the comonomer and cross-linker concentration. The results indicated that the amount of water released by the hydrogels increased proportionally with the increase in MEO2MA segments in the hydrogels and reached a maximum when the MEO2MA/B5AMA molar ratio was 1.37. A further increase in the MEO2MA/B5AMA molar ratio to 2.49 in the hydrogels decreased their water release properties (Fig. 1A), possibly due to the compromise between the water absorption properties of the hydrophilic chains of poly(B5AMA) and the temperature responsive behavior of MEO2MA of the hydrogel.33
 Fig. 1  Water release properties of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels, measured at 37 °C after a 24 hours time period (A) as a function of the MEO2MA to B5AMA molar ratio and (B) as a function of the cross-linking density of the hydrogels. 
In addition to the monomer type, the crosslinking density of thermoresponsive hydrogels is an important parameter to maintain the integrity of hydrogels and to modulate their water absorption and desorption properties. An increase in the crosslinking density is well-documented to improve the mechanical properties of hydrogels but also reduces the free volume within the hydrogel structures and as a result the swelling capacity of the hydrogels decreases.34 Hence, an optimized balance between hydrogel integrity and water recycling properties is critical for their further application as water harvesting materials. To evaluate the effect of the cross-linker (BIS) concentration, poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels of MEO2MA/B5AMA molar ratio 1.37 were prepared at cross linker concentrations ranging from 3 to 10 mol% and their water absorption and release properties were evaluated. As expected, the hydrogels showed crosslinker concentration dependent physical stability and water release properties. The poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels prepared at 3 mol% BIS showed the highest water release of 9.75 g of water per g of hydrogel; however, the hydrogels prepared were very soft and fragile. The increase in the BIS concentration of the hydrogels to 5 mol% decreased the water release capacity to 2.83 g of water per g of hydrogel and a further increase in the crosslinker concentration of the hydrogels led to only marginal changes in their water release properties and structural integrity (Fig. 1B). Due to the improved physical stability and optimized water release properties, the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels prepared at an MEO2MA/B5AMA molar ratio of 1.37 and 5 mol% BIS concentration were used further to evaluate their thermoresponsive behavior, kinetics of water absorption and desorption profile, for their antifouling properties and to develop a radiative energy driven water purification system.
Thermal analysis of the hydrogels
Phase transitions in thermoresponsive polymeric samples are typical results of the delicate balance of hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions present between the polymeric network and water molecules. For example, p-NIPAAm and poly-oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (POEGMA) hydrogels are well-documented to undergo a phase transition in water at 32 and 28 °C,23,24 respectively. The thermoresponsive behavior of hydrated and freeze-dried samples of poly(B5AMA) and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels was evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and volume transition temperature (VTT) analysis (Table 1 and ESI,† Fig. S2–S4). The hydrated hydrogels of poly(B5AMA) and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) showed no endothermic transitions at all studied temperatures, possibly due to the presence of high water content (>90%) within the hydrogel matrix (ESI,† Fig. S2).21 The freeze dried hydrogels of poly(B5AMA) and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA), however, showed distinct endothermic peaks in the DSC thermograms, indicating the dominance of hydrophobic functional groups (methyl and methoxy groups of the monomers) over the hydrophilic nature of hydroxyls and ether functionalities within the polymeric network (ESI,† Fig. S3).35 The remarkable feature of the poly(B5AMA) hydrogels is the presence of an exceptionally broad (from 39.9–145 °C) thermal event with a maximum peak at 104 °C, indicating the stimuli responsive behavior of the poly(B5AMA) hydrogels in the absence of any other thermoresponsive moiety (ESI,† Fig. S3). The significant broadness of DSC peaks for stimuli responsive hydrogels has previously been attributed to the high hydrophilicity of the functional groups within polymer chains, which may prevent their phase transition and hinder the collapse of the hydrogel network in a narrow temperature range.36,37 The incorporation of the MEO2MA comonomer in the hydrophilic network of the poly(B5AMA) hydrogels maintained the distinct broad endothermic transitions of the poly(B5AMA) hydrogel, but a shift in the transition peak towards a lower maximum temperature (87 °C) was observed, suggesting that addition of the hydrophobic component in the hydrophilic matrix of poly(B5AMA) decreased the thermal transition of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels towards lower temperature.31
Table 1 Summary of DSC, VTT and kinetic analysis of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels indicating the thermal transitions in the hydrogel network and their kinetic parameters




Sample
Thermal analysis
Water absorption kinetics
Water desorption kinetics


Endothermic transition by DSC (°C)
VTT (°C)

W
∞Exp


W
∞Theor


K


R
2


E
a (kJ mol−1)




Poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels
27.4–135 with a maximum at 87
37
6.84
6.69
8.23 × 10−3
0.987
28.9




To evaluate the thermal profile of the hydrogels in the presence of water molecules, hydrated poly(B5AMA) and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were analyzed for their VTT values by monitoring the change in opacity of the samples at 657 nm as a function of temperature (ESI,† Fig. S4). The VTT transitions in the poly(B5AMA) and poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogel networks were recorded at 50 and 37 °C, respectively, and were in close agreement with the temperatures that indicate the initiation of thermal events of these hydrogels in the DSC thermogram. The thermal analysis of these hydrogels suggests the potential of the hydrated hydrogels to desorb water at a range of different temperatures and this has also been reported previously for poly(B5AMA) hydrogels.22
Kinetics of water absorption and desorption
Freeze-dried samples of thermoresponsive poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were immersed in deionized water and were evaluated for their swelling and deswelling kinetics, as a function of time at room temperature (Fig. 2). The swelling rate of the hydrogels was exceptionally fast initially, and the hydrogels absorbed ∼31.5% of the total water content (1.89 g per g of hydrogel) within one minute of immersion. The swelling capacity of the hydrogels increased to 50% (3.2 g of water per g of hydrogel) within 15 minutes of immersion, followed by a slow decrease as a function of time. The swelling ratio of the hydrogels was calculated to be 70% after 90 minutes, while complete hydration of the hydrogels required up to 24 hours.
 Fig. 2  (A) Water uptake kinetics of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels in water at 23 °C. (B) Linear regression of the swelling behavior of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels, according to second-order kinetics. (C) Swelling ratio of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels as a function of temperature after 24 hours at the prescribed temperature. (D) Liquid water release rate as a function of temperature. (E) Natural logarithm of the rate (k) versus the reciprocal of the absolute temperature for liquid water release from the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels (Arrhenius plot). 
The kinetics of the swelling behavior of the hydrogels demonstrated that water absorption into the hydrogels does not represent first order kinetics. The integrated form of first-order kinetics is described by the equation below:38 (4)where W∞ is the water uptake capacity of the hydrogels at equilibrium, W is the water uptake at time t, and k is the proportionality constant. The experimental data plotted for vs. time for the poly(B5AMA-co-MeO2MA) hydrogels does not fit to a straight line, possibly due to the rapid initial water absorption rate (more than 30% water uptake in 1 minute), which increased the resistance of the hydrated polymer network and slowed down the swelling process of the hydrogels as a function of time (ESI,† Fig. S5). The swelling behavior of cellulose, gelatin and NIPAM based hydrogels demonstrated similar deviation from first order kinetics. It has been suggested that during the swelling of these hydrogels two different phenomena, namely the diffusion rate and stress relaxation, control the swelling rate of the hydrogels. The swelling of the hydrogels occurs under the effect of osmotic pressure and can be described by second-order kinetics. At the beginning of the swelling process, the water uptake rate of the hydrogels is high and the diffusion of the water inside the polymeric network is the rate determining process. At later times, the water present near hydrophilic domains of the network creates an osmotic pressure and this imposes stress on the hydrogel structure. The osmotic stress in the hydrogel architecture is released by the rupture of the hydrogen bonds between the polymeric chains, by the insertion of water between the polymer chains and by the formation of new hydrogen bonds between the water and the hydrophilic polymeric chains. This process induces an additional expansion of the network, increasing the water uptake of the hydrogels slowly, and hence controls the swelling rate at later times. Finally, the osmotic pressure cannot swell the hydrophobic regions of the polymer and these regions prevent dissolution of the hydrogels in water.39,40
Others have shown that Fickian diffusion of water molecules within a hydrogel is only applicable if the geometry of the material remains constant during the process, which is typically not the case for swellable polymeric materials. During the swelling of the hydrogel, the dimensions of the hydrogel change, which changes the diffusion coefficient and rate constant ‘K’ and hence deviations from first order kinetics are observed.38 The role of the hydrogel geometry in the water adsorption kinetics can be explored by Schott's equation and is described below:41 (5)
A plot of t W−1 against time yielded a straight line with a slope of W−1∞ and an intercept of K−1W−2∞ (Fig. 2B and Table 1), indicating that swelling of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels follows second-order kinetics. The theoretical swelling capacity, as obtained by Schott's equation, was 6.69 g per g of hydrogel and was in close agreement with the experimentally obtained value (6.84 g per g of hydrogel) at 23 °C, with the rate constant, the K value, recorded as 8.23 × 10−3 g of hydrogel per g of water per min (Table 1). Diez-Pena et al. reported the second order swelling kinetics of p-NIPAAm based hydrogels at 14 °C; however, the theoretical swelling capacity of these hydrogels was always higher than the experimentally obtained values, suggesting that slower stretching of the polymeric network due to the high cross-linker concentration may have resulted in lower W∞exp values.40 The close approximation of W∞exp with W∞Theor (6.69 versus 6.84 g per g of hydrogel) for the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels and their exceptionally low K values suggest an optimized cross-linking density of the hydrogels, which facilitates their rapid swelling and high water uptake capacity.
The swelling and deswelling capacity of the thermoresponsive hydrogels at different temperatures were further investigated and are depicted in Fig. 2C and D. The hydrogels exhibited a classical temperature dependent equilibrium swelling ratio, with an increase in the swelling capacity at lower temperature and vice versa. The heating of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels at temperatures above their VTT decreased their water uptake capacity. For example, the swelling capacity of the hydrogels reduced to 50% when the temperature was increased to 37 °C (Fig. 2C). A further increase in the temperature of the hydrogels proportionally decreased their swelling capacity and the swelling capacity of the hydrogels at 50 and 60 °C was 1.32 and 1.04 g per g of hydrogel, respectively. Hence, the difference between the swelling capacity of the hydrogels at room temperature and at 60 °C represents a release of 85% of the initial water absorbed. The results obtained are in agreement with previously reported literature, where swelling ratios of p-NIPAAm hydrogels in pure water at different temperatures showed similar temperature dependent water uptake capacity of the hydrogels. At 26, 35, 50 and 60 °C, the swelling ratios of p-NIPAAm hydrogels were 7.6, 4.6, 2.4, and 1.4 g per g of hydrogel, respectively.42
Deswelling of hydrogels is a major bottleneck in water harvesting applications of these materials. The kinetics of water release of the hydrogels were further investigated as a function of time and temperature. Heating of the hydrogels above the VTT resulted in their rapid deswelling and the rate of water release from the hydrogel network followed first order kinetics, initially (ESI,† Fig. S7). The water release from the hydrogels decreased with time and reached equilibrium after 15 hours and the initial water release rate calculated for the first 30 minutes of deswelling was 0.05 gwater per gdrygel per min at 50 °C (Fig. 2D). This is comparable to the water release rate for p-NIPAAm hydrogels, which was reported to be 0.02 gwater per gdrygel per min at 50 °C.43 The water release rate also increased sharply with the temperature and followed a first order type behavior. The Arrhenius plot of ln(k) vs. T−1 yielded a straight line between 21 and 60 °C and the activation energy of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels was calculated to be 29 kJ mol−1 (Fig. 2E and Table 1). The lower activation energy of these water harvesting hydrogels as compared to the existing thermoresponsive hydrogels suggests the potential of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels as water harvesting materials.44
The mechanism of the thermoresponsive swelling/deswelling capacity of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels was elucidated and it is proposed that, at room temperature, the high hydrophilicity of the polymeric network of the hydrogels due to the presence of hydroxyls, ethers, and amides favors high water absorption and contributes to the exceptional water retention capacity of these hydrogels (Scheme 1 and ESI,† Fig. S8). With the increase in temperature, the functional hydrophilic groups of the copolymers dehydrate and the hydrophobic backbone of the copolymers tends to interact with the other hydrophobic portions of the pendant polymer chains, shrinking the structure of the materials, reducing the size of the cavities, releasing the stored water and minimizing their water uptake capacity.
To monitor the structural changes in the hydrogel network as a function of temperature, SEM micrographs of hydrogel samples treated at different temperatures were obtained. The SEM images of freeze-dried hydrogels prepared at different temperatures exhibited a proportional decrease in the pore size with an increase in temperature and the pore sizes of the hydrogels reduced from 2.58 μm at 23 °C to 0.61 μm, 0.3 μm and less than 0.05 μm at 37, 50 and 60 °C, respectively (Fig. 3). High temperatures are well-documented to collapse the surface layer of hydrogels during the early stages of hydrogel shrinking, which restricts the out and inflow of water into the three dimensional polymer network, and was seen as diminishing the pore sizes in SEM micrographs.45 In comparison to traditional thermoresponsive materials such as p-NIPAAm, which possesses a sharp LCST response with shrinkage of the hydrogels occurring above the LCST, the broad endothermic peak of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels and their progressively reduced pore sizes as a function of temperature suggest rather gradual temperature dependent changes in the hydrogel architecture and hence the possibility to use these materials as water harvesting technology at a range of different temperatures (37–60 °C).
 Fig. 3  (A) SEM images and (B) average pore size of the freeze-dried hydrogels at different temperatures. 
Reusability and antifouling properties
For practical applications of hydrogels as water harvesting materials from polluted water resources, evaluation of the antifouling properties and the reusability of these materials is considerably important. We have previously reported antifouling behavior of poly(B5AMA) hydrogels and have shown that these hydrogels do not retain proteins within their hydrogel matrix. In this study, we further evaluated the antifouling behavior of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels by immersing these hydrogels in bacteria and protein loaded foul water and by evaluating the quality of water recycled through the hydrogels. Escherichia coli, a bacterium present abundantly in the atmosphere and in polluted water, and bovine serum albumin (BSA), a highly hydrophobic protein with high adsorption capacity on different surfaces, were used as organic waste models for this experiment. Freeze dried samples of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were subjected to BSA and E. coli contaminated water, followed by the harvesting of absorbed water from the hydrogel structure and its analysis for the presence of bacteria and the protein in recycled water. The results indicated that the hydrogels can selectively absorb water from bacteria laden stock solution and can release clean water at elevated temperatures. The presence of all the bacteria in the rinsing solution suggests the loose attachment of bacteria around the periphery of the hydrogels and their poor uptake in the hydrogel meshwork (Fig. 4A). Similarly, the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels successfully repelled BSA from the stock solution and could imbibe liquid water from the protein contaminated stock solution (Fig. 4B). These results are consistent with previous reports, where B5AMA based materials are reported for their superior antifouling properties.46,47
 Fig. 4  (A) Antifouling and water recycling properties of the hydrogels as reusable materials for water purification from polluted wastewater resources. (A) Bacteria contaminated water is passed through the hydrogels and the numbers of bacteria in the purified collected water are evaluated by colony count assay. (B) Bovine serum albumin contaminated water is passed through the hydrogels and the amount of protein in the harvested water is calculated by BCA assay. (C) Water released by the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels after 5 repeated cycles of water absorption (at 23 °C) and water desorption (at 37 °C). 
To further evaluate the hydrogel reusability as water harvesting materials, poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels were subjected to repeated cycles of water absorption and desorption (Fig. 4C). These cyclic tests were performed by successive stages of: (1) water absorption at room temperature for 24 hours and (2) water release at 37 °C for 24 hours, and the procedure was repeated 5 times with the same set of hydrogel samples to ensure the reproducibility of the data. In general, the hydrogels exhibit good reusability capacity after repeated cycles and can release an average of 38% of the absorbed water at 37 °C. The amount of water released from the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels at 37 °C is 9.6-fold higher than the amount released from the poly(B5AMA) hydrogels. To analyze the stability of the hydrogels in an exigent environment, another set of hydrogels was prepared and was subjected to five cycles of water absorption and desorption using the same steps as described above. The water desorption experiments were performed at 60 °C and the morphology of the hydrogels was analyzed at the micro and macroscale. The results indicate that after each cycle of water desorption, the hydrogels shrink in size. The diameter of the hydrogels changes from 8.5 ± 0.12 to 6.6 ± 0.14 mm and the height changes from 7.7 ± 0.31 to 5.7 ± 0.55 mm (ESI,† Fig. S9(A)). However, after each cycle of deswelling and swelling, the hydrogels retrieve their original size and no sign of erosion or breakage in the hydrogel architecture was observed. The microstructure of the hydrogel samples after five cycles of water absorption and desorption was also analyzed by SEM. As expected, the micrographs reveal similar pore size domains to those observed in the original configuration hydrogels and the net pore size was 2.1 ± 1.0 μm (ESI,† Fig. S9(B)).
Radiative heating water harvesting system
To evaluate the performance of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels in a radiative energy-fueled water release process, a water collection device was fabricated. Fig. 5A illustrates the structure of the collection device consisting of a plastic box with a hermetic and transparent lid. Inside the box a funnel centered below the lid contains the hydrogel sample (cylindrical shape of 24 mm in diameter and 12 mm in height). The stem of the funnel runs through the bottom of the box to discharge the released water inside a vial placed on a scale to continuously weigh the amount of released water. A 70 W halogen lamp is installed at the optimized height (12 cm) to obtain a temperature of 50–55 °C in 45 minutes. The setup was equipped with temperature and humidity sensors to monitor the heat dependent changes in water collection. After 5–7 minutes of turning on the lamp, drops of water begin to accumulate in the vial. At this point the temperature in the funnel was close to 33 °C. As expected, the water release rate increased with time and temperature, and plateaued at 45 minutes. The cumulative amount of water collected was plotted versus time (Fig. 5B) and was in close agreement with the deswelling behavior of hydrogels studied at different temperatures. Furthermore, the rapid increase in temperature with time increased the relative humidity (R.H.) inside the container from 15% to 50% and a fraction of water condensed onto the walls of the container. Fig. 5C shows the temperature and R.H. profiles inside the container. After 60 minutes the lamp was turned off and the hydrogel was recovered and weighed. The amount of water released as vapor was calculated as the difference between the initial weight of the hydrogel and the sum of the final weight of the hydrogel and the weight of the released water. The process was repeated three times upon immersion of the used hydrogel samples in water for 2 hours and data were collected and are plotted in Fig. 5D.
 Fig. 5  (A) Left: Radiative energy-fueled water release device. Right: Details of the sample set up; a ceramic funnel was used to contain the sample and the water was discharged in a vial. (B) Cumulative water release profile for the three cycles tested. (C) Average temperature and relative humidity (R.H.) profiles inside the device were recorded during the water release tests and (D) summary of the radiative energy-fueled water release experiment for three cycles of absorption–desorption. 
After 60 minutes of heating in the radiative heating device the hydrogels released an average of 47% of the initially absorbed water and 39% of the water was collected in liquid form, while 8% was in the vapor state. These values show good agreement with the amount of water released under direct heating at 50 °C, where 37% of the initially absorbed water was released in 60 minutes (ESI,† Fig. S7). After 50 minutes of heating in the radiative heating device, the temperature reached 50 °C and the water release in liquid form stopped, likely due to the rapid evaporation of water at elevated temperatures inside the device.
In summary, one water purification cycle using our hydrogel-based technology requires 3 hours for completion and each cycle can produce 3.3 gwater per gdryhydrogel (liquid + vapor). To translate this system into real life applications, it can be safely estimated that the hydrogels can purify up to 26 gwater per gdryhydrogel daily (in 24 hours). These values are in agreement with the previously reported water purification technologies in the literature.18,19 Furthermore, 1 kg of dry hydrogel could harvest 26 L of water per day, which is considered sufficient and is in agreement with the amount suggested by the World Health Organization (WHO). According to the WHO, a water harvesting system should be capable of producing about 20 liters of water per capita per day to ensure basic hygiene needs and basic food hygiene of personnel.48
Conclusions and future directions
We present a new thermoresponsive, radiative energy driven hydrogel based system that combines the superior hydrophilicity and antifouling properties of B5AMA with the thermoresponsive behavior of 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate (MEO2MA). Poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels are extremely hygroscopic, can retain more than 90% of their own weight in the form of water and can recycle 3.03 g of water per g of hydrogel at 37 °C and 6.04 g of water per g of dry hydrogel (85% of the absorbed water) at 60 °C. This unique water harvesting behavior of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels is attributed to the endothermal transitions of the hydrogels, which are rather gradual and are observed over a range of temperatures (from 37–87 °C). The gradual endothermal transitions in the hydrogel architecture result in subsequent changes in pore size as a function of temperature and could be tuned to optimize the water-harvesting rate of these materials at different temperatures. Furthermore, the repeated water absorption and desorption efficacies of the hydrogels, their excellent antifouling behavior, and the superior water harvesting capability under a radiative heating heat source suggest their application as an energy efficient water purification system from wastewater resources. Future work will focus on the development of inorganic nanoparticle embedded poly(B5AMA) hydrogels of improved mechanical properties and on their application as a continuous flow water purification system.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank National Science and Engineering Council of Canada and Atlantic Spring Board Funds for the completion of this project. The authors would also like to thank Dr Christian Lacroix for providing access to the SEM imaging facility.
Notes and references
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Four billion people facing severe water scarcity, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef .

          World Economic Forum, The Global Risks Report 2018, 13th edn, Geneva, Switzerland,  2018 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Mahendra, D. Y. Lyon, L. Brunet, M. V. Liga, D. Li and P. J. J. Alvarez, Antimicrobial nanomaterials for water disinfection and microbial control: potential applications and implications, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4591–4602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sheng and L. Xing, Organics removal and protein recovery from wastewater discharged during the production of chondroitin sulfate, Water Sci. Technol., 2013, 68, 1582–1590 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Darre and G. S. Toor, Desalination of Water: A Review, Curr. Pollut. Rep., 2018, 4, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Architecting highly hydratable polymer networks to tune the water state for solar water purification, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mansouri, S. Harrisson and V. Chen, Strategies for controlling biofouling in membrane filtration systems: challenges and opportunities, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4567–4586 RSC .
M. Zhang, X. Xie, M. Tang, C. S. Criddle, Y. Cui and S. X. Wang, Magnetically ultraresponsive nanoscavengers for next-generation water purification systems, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1866 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Hydrogels and Hydrogel-Derived Materials for Energy and Water Sustainability, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Hydrogels as an Emerging Material Platform for Solar Water Purification, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Zhu, M. M. R. M. Hendrix, N. J. H. G. M. Lousberg, G. de With, A. C. C. Esteves and J. H. Xin, Temperature-Triggered Collection and Release of Water from Fogs by a Sponge-Like Cotton Fabric (Adv. Mater., 8/2013), Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1149 CrossRef .
P. Jiang, X. Sheng, S. Yu, H. Li, J. Lu, J. Zhou and H. Wang, Preparation and characterization of thermo-sensitive gel with phenolated alkali lignin, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14450 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, F. Liu, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Geng, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, A Microstructured Graphene/Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) Membrane for Intelligent Solar Water Evaporation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16343–16347 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsumoto, N. Sakikawa and T. Miyata, Thermo-responsive gels that absorb moisture and ooze water, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2315 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Highly efficient solar vapour generation via hierarchically nanostructured gels, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Materials for solar-powered water evaporation, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
S. J. Lee, N. Ha and H. Kim, Superhydrophilic–Superhydrophobic Water Harvester Inspired by Wetting Property of Cactus Stem, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10561–10569 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Dai and G. Yu, Super Moisture-Absorbent Gels for All-Weather Atmospheric Water Harvesting, Adv.
Mater., 2019, 31, 1806446 CrossRef .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma and C. Li, Plant leaves inspired sunlight-driven purifier for high-efficiency clean water production, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef .
Y. Deguchi, Y. Kohno and H. Ohno, Design of Ionic Liquid-Derived Polyelectrolyte Gels Toward Reversible Water Absorption/Desorption System Driven by Small Temperature Change, Aust. J. Chem., 2014, 67, 1666–1670 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deguchi, Y. Kohno and H. Ohno, Reversible water uptake/release by thermoresponsive polyelectrolyte hydrogels derived from ionic liquids, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9287–9290 RSC .
A. Kabir, M. J. Dunlop, B. Acharya, R. Bissessur and M. Ahmed, Water recycling efficacies of extremely hygroscopic, antifouling hydrogels, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 38100–38107 RSC .
J.-F. Lutz and A. Hoth, Preparation of Ideal PEG Analogues with a Tunable Thermosensitivity by Controlled Radical Copolymerization of 2-(2-Methoxyethoxy)ethyl Methacrylate and Oligo(ethylene glycol) Methacrylate, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Lutz, Ö. Akdemir and A. Hoth, Point by Point Comparison of Two Thermosensitive Polymers Exhibiting a Similar LCST: Is the Age of Poly(NIPAM) Over?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13046–13047 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Lutz, J. Andrieu, S. Üzgün, C. Rudolph and S. Agarwal, 
            Macromolecules, Biocompatible, Thermoresponsive, and Biodegradable: Simple Preparation of “All-in-One” Biorelevant, Polymers, 2007, 40, 8540–8543 CAS .
D. Kim, E. Lee, H. S. Lee and J. Yoon, Energy efficient glazing for adaptive solar control fabricated with photothermotropic hydrogels containing graphene oxide, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7646 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qi, T. Wei, W. Zhao, B. Zhu, G. Liu, P. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang and J. Zhu, An Interfacial Solar-Driven Atmospheric Water Generator Based on a Liquid Sorbent with Simultaneous Adsorption–Desorption, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903378 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Alsaedi, M. Wu, L. Shi and P. Wang, Hybrid Hydrogel with High Water Vapor Harvesting Capacity for Deployable Solar-Driven Atmospheric Water Generator, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11367–11377 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Cortez-Lemus and A. Licea-Claverie, Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam), a comprehensive review on a thermoresponsive polymer becoming popular, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 53, 1–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, R. Song, R. Feng, G. Dai, Y. Liang, D. Pu, X. Zhang and Z. Ye, Thermoresponsive behavior of graft copolymers based on poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide-co-diacetoneacrylamide) side chains, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47051 CrossRef .
M. Micic, Z. Rogic Miladinovic and E. Suljovrujic, Tuning the thermoresponsive properties of poly(oligo(propylene glycol) methacrylate)hydrogels via gradient copolymerization with 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2016, 65, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishizone, A. Seki, M. Hagiwara, S. Han, H. Yokoyama, A. Oyane, A. Deffieux and S. Carlotti, Anionic Polymerizations of Oligo(ethylene glycol) Alkyl Ether Methacrylates: Effect of Side Chain Length and ω-Alkyl Group of Side Chain on Cloud Point in Water, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2963–2967 CrossRef CAS .
R. París, J. García and I. Quijada-Garrido, Thermo- and pH-sensitive hydrogels based on 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate and methacrylic acid, Polym. Int., 2011, 60, 178–185 CrossRef .
X.-Z. Zhang, D.-Q. Wu and C.-C. Chu, Effect of the crosslinking level on the properties of temperature-sensitive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogels, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 582–593 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Olejniczak, K. Piechocki, M. Kozanecki, K. Koynov, A. Adamus and R. A. Wach, The influence of selected NSAIDs on volume phase transition in poly(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate) hydrogels, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1528–1534 RSC .
L.-H. Gan, W. Cai and K. C. Tam, Studies of phase transition of aqueous solution of poly(N,N-diethylacrylamide-co-acrylic acid) by differential scanning calorimetry and spectrophotometry, Eur. Polym. J., 2001, 37, 1773–1778 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hanyková, J. Spěváček, M. Radecki, A. Zhigunov, H. Kouřilová and Z. Sedláková, Phase transition in hydrogels of thermoresponsive semi-interpenetrating and interpenetrating networks of poly(N,N-diethylacrylamide) and polyacrylamide, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 85, 1–13 CrossRef .
I. Katime, J. L. Velada, R. Novoa, E. D. de Apodaca, J. Puig and E. Mendizabal, Swelling kinetics of poly(acrylamide)/poly(mono-n-alkyl itaconates) hydrogels, Polym. Int., 1996, 40, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schott, Kinetics of swelling of polymers and their gels, J. Pharm. Sci., 1992, 81, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
E. Díez-Peña, I. Quijada-Garrido, P. Frutos and J. M. Barrales-Rienda, Analysis of the swelling dynamics of crosslinked P(N-iPAAm-co-MAA) copolymers, the corresponding homopolymers and their interpenetrating networks. Kinetics of water penetration into the gel above the pKa of MAA comonomeric units, Polym. Int., 2003, 52, 956–965 CrossRef .
H. Schott, Swelling kinetics of polymers, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 1992, 31, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lue, C.-H. Chen and C.-M. Shih, Tuning of Lower Critical Solution Temperature (LCST) of Poly(N-Isopropylacrylamide-co-Acrylic acid) Hydrogels, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2011, 50, 563–579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kaneko, S. Nakamura, K. Sakai, T. Aoyagi, A. Kikuchi, Y. Sakurai and T. Okano, Rapid Deswelling Response of Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) Hydrogels by the Formation of Water Release Channels Using Poly(ethylene oxide) Graft Chains, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 6099–6105 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Alam, K. K. Childress, K. Pastoor and C. V. Rice, Characterization of free, restricted, and entrapped water environments in poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) hydrogels via1H HRMAS PFG NMR spectroscopy, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 1521–1527 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reichelt, T. Schmidt, D. Kuckling and K.-F. Arndt, Structural characterization of temperature-sensitive hydrogels by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), Macromol. Symp., 2004, 210, 501–511 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nazeer and M. Ahmed, Hydrophilic and salt responsive polymers promote depletion aggregation of bacteria, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 119, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kabir and M. Ahmed, Elucidating the Role of Thermal Flexibility of Hydrogels in Protein Refolding, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3(7), 4253–4262 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Reed and B. Reed, How much water is needed in emergencies, Geneva, Switzerland,  2013 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table S1 and Fig. S1–S8, as mentioned in the text. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00584cThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the statistically polymerized poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogel synthesis, their antifouling properties and their water harvesting application.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Water release properties of poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels, measured at 37 °C after a 24 hours time period (A) as a function of the MEO2MA to B5AMA molar ratio and (B) as a function of the cross-linking density of the hydrogels.	 


Poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels	27.4–135 with a maximum at 87	37	6.84	6.69	8.23 × 10−3	0.987	28.9

 	Fig. 2  (A) Water uptake kinetics of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels in water at 23 °C. (B) Linear regression of the swelling behavior of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels, according to second-order kinetics. (C) Swelling ratio of the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels as a function of temperature after 24 hours at the prescribed temperature. (D) Liquid water release rate as a function of temperature. (E) Natural logarithm of the rate (k) versus the reciprocal of the absolute temperature for liquid water release from the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels (Arrhenius plot).	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (A) SEM images and (B) average pore size of the freeze-dried hydrogels at different temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Antifouling and water recycling properties of the hydrogels as reusable materials for water purification from polluted wastewater resources. (A) Bacteria contaminated water is passed through the hydrogels and the numbers of bacteria in the purified collected water are evaluated by colony count assay. (B) Bovine serum albumin contaminated water is passed through the hydrogels and the amount of protein in the harvested water is calculated by BCA assay. (C) Water released by the poly(B5AMA-co-MEO2MA) hydrogels after 5 repeated cycles of water absorption (at 23 °C) and water desorption (at 37 °C).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Left: Radiative energy-fueled water release device. Right: Details of the sample set up; a ceramic funnel was used to contain the sample and the water was discharged in a vial. (B) Cumulative water release profile for the three cycles tested. (C) Average temperature and relative humidity (R.H.) profiles inside the device were recorded during the water release tests and (D) summary of the radiative energy-fueled water release experiment for three cycles of absorption–desorption.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table S1 and Fig. S1–S8, as mentioned in the text. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00584c

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
