Understanding the nature of remnant polarization enhancement, coercive voltage offset and time-dependent photocurrent in ferroelectric films irradiate ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM32102E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32102E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12592-12598Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUnderstanding the nature of remnant polarization enhancement, coercive voltage offset and time-dependent photocurrent in ferroelectric films irradiated by ultraviolet light

        
          
            Dawei 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fengang 
            Zheng
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Fang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            Dong
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Mingrong 
            Shen
          
        
      *a
aJiangsu Key Laboratory of Thin Films and Department of Physics, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhfg@suda.edu.cn; mrshen@suda.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-0512-69157059;   Tel: +86-0512-69157059
bJiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, People's Republic of China
Received 
      4th April 2012
    , Accepted 16th April 2012First published on 18th April 2012AbstractIt is widely accepted that ultraviolet (UV) light illumination of ferroelectric films can result in polarization imprint because of the accumulation of photoinduced carriers on the domain walls and/or on the electrode–film interfaces, and then the decrease of the reversible remnant polarization. In this paper, however, the enhancement of remnant polarization was exhibited in Pb(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 (PZT) films when irradiated by UV light. The time-dependent photocurrent and hysteresis loop of PZT films indicated that the transient behavior of photocurrent and coercive voltage offset were closely related to the polarization states, moveable defect charge (mainly oxygen vacancy) density, and aging time. Based on the observation of piezoresponse force microscopy, the mechanism behind the observed photoelectric and ferroelectric phenomena was proposed.
1. Introduction
While silicon-based diodes have been the dominant solar cell type, novel photovoltaic mechanisms are being explored in pursuit of lower cost or improved efficiency. Ferroelectrics, such as Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT),1–4 (Pb,La)(Zr,Ti)O3 (PLZT),5,6 BiFeO3 (BFO)7–15 and Bi2FeCrO6,16 present an alternative pathway for charge separation of photoinduced carriers. The photovoltaic properties of ferroelectric films have become a research focus because they have larger photocurrent densities and higher power-conversion efficiencies than bulk materials.6 For the moment, it is widely accepted that the photovoltaic effect of ferroelectric films includes two major factors: the polarization effect2,9 and the interface Schottky contact effect.7 In ferroelectric films, as we know, current is often affected by the defect charges existing in grain boundaries, ferroelectric domain walls and/or film–electrode interfaces, so the true bulk current may not be always dominant. However, the influence of defect charges on the photocurrent is less studied.17
It is often observed that the hysteresis behaviors of ferroelectric films exhibit large coercive voltage (Vc) shifts and significant deformation (also called the imprint effect), which is intuitively induced by electrode configuration,18 elevated temperatures,19,20 or ultraviolet (UV) light.19,21 Some groups attributed it to the large internal stress induced by oxygen loss,18 a thin non-ferroelectric layer on the ferroelectric/electrode interface,22 or the internal field caused by trapped charge carriers.23 Although the exact mechanisms are not known, it is widely accepted that the imprint results from the trapped charges, charged defects, and other defect dipole complexes, as well as stress gradients.24 Furthermore, some previous papers21,25 reported that UV light illumination can induce inhibition of poling, which was often attributed to the accumulation of photoinduced carriers between the domain walls and/or on the electrode–film interface. As a result, the reversible remnant polarization decreased.
However, in this paper, we report on a quite different result that photoinduced enhancement of remnant polarization was observed in a PZT film when irradiated by UV light. We found that, in a polycrystalline PZT ferroelectric system, most of the defect charges on the grain boundary and/or domain walls can be removed by poling and UV lighting. The defect charges are mainly oxygen vacancies, and lead vacancies are usually compensated for by adding excess lead when the PZT film is prepared.26 Furthermore, we found that a small part of the defect charges in the film can be expelled by poling, and a large part of them is excited by UV lighting, which is verified by the evolution of polarization loops of PZT films by poling and UV lighting. We proposed that these excited defect charges can be pulled back into the film after the poling voltage was removed, so the time-dependent Vc offset and photocurrent were studied. Here we defined the aging effect as the evolution of the Vc offset and photocurrent with time. The time-dependent photocurrent and ferroelectric behavior of polycrystalline PZT films are studied contrastively in order to clarify the effect of oxygen vacancies on the photocurrent. Similar to the time-dependent photocurrent, the time-dependent Vc offset was closely related to the polarization state, moveable defect charge density, and aging time. Note that during aging time no lighting and no poling voltage are added. Based on piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM), the mechanism behind the above interesting photocurrent and ferroelectric phenomena is proposed.
2. Experimental
A simple solution method and spin-coating process were used for preparation of the PZT films. Lead acetate trihydrate Pb(CH3COO)2·3H2O, tetrabutyl zirconium Zr(C4H9O)4, and tetrabutyl titanate Ti(C4H9O)4 were dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol to get the precursor solution (0.2 M) of Pb(Zr0.20Ti0.80)O3 in air, and 10 mol% excess Pb was used to compensate for the volatile Pb. After aging for 3 weeks in air, the PZT precursor solution was spin-coated on the Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate to form multilayered precursor nanocomposite films. After each spin-coating step, the films were dried at 150 °C for 5 min, and pre-annealed at 400 °C for 10 min to remove organic components. Finally, the precursor films were crystallized at 650 °C in O2 (PZTO) and N2 (PZTN) atmosphere for two hours, respectively, in order to control the density of defect charges (mainly oxygen vacancy) in the PZT films.27,28
X-ray diffraction (XRD Rigaku D/max-RB) with CuKα radiation was used for structure analysis of the films. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, a NTMDT Solver P47-PRO) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S4700) were used for the observation of interface and surface morphology of the film. Punctate Pt electrodes with a diameter of about 300 μm were deposited on the PZT films by sputtering at room temperature for electric and photocurrent measurements. Electric characterization was carried out on Keithley 6517. Polarization properties were measured using a Radiant Precision ferroelectric analyzer.
A positive (or negative) voltage applied on the bottom electrode indicated that the film was in a polarization-up state (or polarization-down state). After an external voltage (±10 V) was applied on the bottom electrode for about 5 s, the poling voltage was removed. Then, the top and bottom electrodes were connected to Keithley 6517, and the current was recorded from the bottom electrode. Because the band gap of the PZT film is about 3.5 eV, the visible and even longer wavelength light cannot be absorbed by it. In our experiment, a filter (ZWB2, wavelength within 280–400 nm, center wavelength 350 nm17) was added between the PZT sample and the mercury lamp in order that the visible light of the mercury lamp (50 W in power) can be cut off. The final intensity of the UV light was 10 mW cm−2. The whole installation was placed in a dark room, in which the environmental temperature was controlled at room temperature. So, the temperature of the PZT film remains almost unchanged after the film is illuminated by UV light. The time-dependent domain evolution of PZT films was investigated using piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM), which was realized during atomic force microscope (AFM) scanning of the ferroelectric film surface using a NTMDT Solver P47-PRO in the contact AFM mode. The local electrical field is applied by a conductive probe.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Structure and leakage current behavior
The XRD patterns of PZTO and PZTN films show that there is no obvious difference between these two films, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1. Both films are typical polycrystalline perovskite structures. The thicknesses of the PZT films are both about 330 nm calculated from the SEM cross-sectional picture of the PZTO film presented as the inset in Fig. 1. AFM pictures show that PZTO and PZTN films have similar surface morphology and grain size (about 70 nm, not shown here). So, we think that the use of different gases during annealing causes little difference in the crystallinity for the PZT films. However, dark current–voltage curves show, in Fig. 1, that the leakage current of PZTN is about two orders of magnitude larger than that of PZTO. Many groups have reported that annealing in N2 atmosphere may lead to the increase of oxygen vacancies in ferroelectric materials, such as PZT,28 BaTiO3,29 and Bi3.15Nd0.85Ti3O12,30 which in turn enhances the leakage current.17,31 Therefore, we propose that the density of defect charges (mainly oxygen vacancies32) in PZTO is lower than that in PZTN.
 Fig. 1  Current–voltage curves of PZTO and PZTN, respectively. The insets are XRD patterns of both films (left) and SEM cross-sectional picture of the PZTO film (right). 
The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey spectra of the film surfaces were measured in order to evaluate the relative concentration of oxygen vacancies, which is exhibited in Fig. 2. The photoelectron spectra of PZTO and PZTN films are very similar. Both spectra show the photoelectron peaks of Pb (Pb4p, Pb4d, Pb4f, and Pb5d), Ti (Ti2p and Ti3p), Zr (Zr3s, Zr3p, and Zr3d), and O (O1s). The valence states of Pb, Zr, and Ti in both films are +2, +4 and +4 respectively. The atom percentages of Pb/Zr/Ti are about 20.5/4.2/15.9 and 20.2/4.0/16.2 for PZTN and PZTO films respectively, which are close to our pre-designed 20.0/4.0/16.0. The high-resolution XPS spectra of the O1s (529.4 eV, the oxygen on the crystal lattice) and oxygen vacancy (531.4 eV33) signal were measured, too. The oxygen vacancy peak of the PZTN film is obviously stronger than that of the PZTO film. The intensity ratios (Ioxygen vacancies/IO1s) are about 0.11 and 0.29 for PZTO and PZTN films respectively, which proves that the relative concentration of oxygen vacancies in the PZTN film is larger than that in the PZTO film.
 Fig. 2  XPS survey spectra of the PZTO and PZTN films. The inset is the signals associated with Pb, Ti, Zr, and O elements detected for both samples. 
3.2 Ferroelectricity

Fig. 3 shows the evolution of P–V hysteresis loops of PZTO films with the relationship of poling voltage, UV lighting, and aging time. In the as-grown state, the first measured polarization loop shows obvious deformation as can be seen in Fig. 3(a). Such deformation has been verified due to the charge trapping at the electrode interfaces and/or at the grain boundary in the film, which accompanies grain growth and electrode fabrication and can be removed by thermal annealing.34 The second and third polarization measurements show that the deformation can be improved a little. Fig. 3(b) presents the dependence of Vc on the poling direction. After a positive poling voltage was applied on the bottom electrode (polarization-up state), Vc shifts negatively. On the contrary, Vc shifts positively when the film is in the polarization-down state. If the poling voltage stays unchanged, Vc offset remains unchanged, too. Once the poling voltage changes to the opposite direction, the voltage offset can be recovered completely, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Although the exact mechanisms of imprint are not known,24 in general, the Vc offset of the hysteresis loop in ferroelectric materials arises from near-interfacial charge trapping in the ferroelectric materials.35 The impetus behind the offset is the net polarization, determined by the aligned defect-dipole components. Recent papers show that the Vc offset could be attributed to oxygen vacancies.18,20,36 Note that the remnant polarization (2Pr) is enhanced about 10% and the saturation polarization (2Ps) remains almost unchanged, compared with that of the as-grown state. Obviously, the enhancement of remnant polarization cannot be attributed to the injecting charges during poling, which often results in polarization suppression.23,25
 Fig. 3  Polarization loops of the PZTO film: (a) in the as-grown state, (b) poled by positive and negative field, respectively, (c) poled by positive and negative field, alternatively, (d) in the polarization-up (down) state without and with UV lighting, (e) in the polarization-up state of various lighting times, (f) in the polarization-down state of various lighting times, (g) in the polarization-up state of various aging times, and (h) in the polarization-down state of various aging times. 
After the film is illuminated by UV light, the Vc offset enhances greatly whether the film is in the polarization-up or down state, and 2Pr is enhanced obviously, as shown in Fig. 3(d). Fig. 3(e) and (f) illustrate that the Vc offset and enhancement of remnant polarization tend to be saturated after the processes of poling and lighting repeat several times. It is interesting that the Vc offset is independent of the lighting time, which seems to occur immediately when the film is illuminated by UV light. However, it depends clearly on the aging time after the poling field is removed. Fig. 3(g) and (h) show the relationship of Vc offset with aging time when the PZTO film is in polarization-up and down states, respectively. From Fig. 3(e) and (g), we can find that the maximum Vc offset ΔVT (ΔVT = Vup − Vup_T, Vup is the negative Vc value of hysteresis loops in remnant polarization-up state without UV lighting when the aging time is 1 s, which is limited by the switching of our measurement apparatus between the poling voltage source and Keithley 6517; Vup_T is that of hysteresis loops in the same state, which was measured when the aging time is 2 h) is always a little lower than ΔVL (ΔVL = Vup − Vup_L, Vup_L is the negative Vc value of hysteresis loops in the polarization-up state with UV lighting for 600 s) due to UV lighting no matter how long the aging time is. Note that 2Ps still stays at a steady value.
As shown in Fig. 3(e), the maximum ΔVL (1.41 V) is also much larger than the Vc offset (ΔVS) due to the alternation of the polarization state in the PZTO film (ΔVS = Vdown − Vup = 0.37 V; Vdown is the negative Vc value of hysteresis loops in the polarization-down state without UV lighting, as shown in Fig. 3(f)). As we know, the Vc offset of the hysteresis loop is attributed to the additional field built in the ferroelectric film because the additional charges appear at the top and bottom film surfaces, which is beneficial to stabilize remnant polarization along one direction.37,38 Our results suggest that the additional charges presented on the top/bottom due to UV lighting are more than those due to the alternation of the polarization direction.
In the PZTN film, the enhancement of 2Pr and 2Vc can also be observed, as shown in Fig. 4. After the films are fully poled and lighted, the 2Pr of the PZTN film is enhanced 94.6% than that of the as-grown state, which is 47.4% larger than that of the PZTO film. However, it is bewildering that the 2Vc of the PZTN film is enhanced 41.8% compared to that of the as-grown state, which is 55.7% lower than that found in the PZTO film. Furthermore, in the PZTN film as shown in Fig. 4(e) and (f), ΔVL (0.78 V) is lower than ΔVS (1.15 V), which is contrary to that found in the PZTO film. A detailed discussion will be given in the following section.
 Fig. 4  Polarization loops of the PZTN film, similar to that in Fig. 3. 
3.3 Photocurrent

Fig. 5 shows the time-dependent photocurrent of PZT films in as-grown, polarization-up and down states, respectively. When the PZTO sample is in the as-grown state, a steady photocurrent can be observed in Fig. 5(a) when the film is irradiated by UV light from the top, which decreases to zero when the UV light is off. This photocurrent has been verified to result from the self-polarization2 and the difference between the top and bottom Schottky contact.4,5 After the film is fully poled, a transient peak photocurrent is observed whether the film is in the polarization-up or down state. However, such a transient behavior of photocurrent does not appear in the PZTN sample (Fig. 5(b)). Furthermore, in the PZTO sample as shown in Fig. 5(a), once the poled film was irradiated by UV light, only the steady photocurrent can be observed when the UV light is turned on again. Note that the steady photocurrent can be sustained one year or even longer,39 which suggests that the remnant polarization can last effectively for a very long time after the poling voltage is removed. Until now, the mechanism behind this photocurrent peak is not very clear. Choi et al.8 proposed that the pyroelectric effect is the main reason because the ferroelectric film may be heated when the light illuminates the film.8 However, this explanation gives rise to much controversy,40 and cannot be used to explain our result as follows.
 Fig. 5  Time-dependent photocurrent of PZTO and PZTN in as-grown, remnant polarization-up, and remnant polarization-down states, respectively. 

Fig. 6 shows the aging time-dependent photocurrent when the films are in polarization-up states. In Fig. 6, each curve is obtained after the film is fully poled along the same direction. After removing the poling field, we wait for a certain time (e.g., aging time), and then turn on the UV light and record the photocurrent. From Fig. 6(a), we can find that the peak current decreases with the aging time. Furthermore, from Fig. 6(a) and (b), the steady photocurrent that is attributed to the remnant polarization8,17 decreases with the aging time, too. When the aging time is 2 hours, these steady photocurrent values of PZTO and PZTN films decrease by 10.7% and 17.6%, respectively, compared with those recorded when the aging time is 1 s. However, hysteresis loops show that the remnant polarization is not dependent on the aging time and stays almost constant.
 Fig. 6  Time-dependent photocurrent of remnant polarization-up state in (a) PZTO and (b) PZTN film, respectively, with the relationship of various waiting times of 1 s, 60 s, 600 s, 0.5 h, 1 h and 2 h. Each curve of the photocurrent is obtained after the film is fully poled on the same contact. 
3.4 Mechanism of the above phenomena
We illustrate in Fig. 7 the influence of poling and lighting on 2Pr enhancement and Vc offset behavior, where the indigenous defect charges in the top or bottom film/electrode are neglected, which have been verified to result in the asymmetry of the top and bottom Schottky barrier.2–5 In as-grown polycrystalline ferroelectric films, the domains are random and some domains are pinned by defect-dipoles formed by the trapped charges at various defect levels,41–43 as shown in Fig. 7(a). When the film is poled by a poling field, a part of the defect-dipoles that is not in the deep defect level is separated, and the charges are driven to the top or bottom film–electrode interface as illustrated in Fig. 7(b).41 When the polarization loops are measured, both domains and defect-dipoles can be aligned under the strong external field, resulting in the saturation polarization. Once the external field decreases to zero, some domains along with some defect-dipoles return to the disorder state immediately (local switching44) because of the forceful electrostatic interaction between the polarization charges and defect charges, so the remnant polarization is much lower than the saturation polarization. When the film is illuminated by UV light almost all defect-dipole charges are excited and expelled to the top or the bottom film/electrode by the poling field (Fig. 7(c)). This conclusion is deduced from the two experimental results: one is the saturation of the increase of remnant polarization and the other is that polarization loops are similar to those of single crystalline PZT films, which have little defect charges in the film.45Fig. 7(d) is the case after the poling field is removed. The electrostatic repulsion occurs immediately between the polarization charges and defect charges on the film–electrode interfaces, and these defect charges at one interface are expelled to the opposite interface by the depolarization field due to the alignment of polarization. (This point is different from that in the single crystal case,32 in which the defect charges can stay in the interface because of the very low conductivity of the single crystal.) As a result, the sign of net defect charges is opposite to the sign of polarization charges at the same interface. These charges destroy the electrostatic equilibrium of the top or the bottom interface, and an additional field is built in the film, whose direction is the same as that of the aligned polarization. This additional field is beneficial to stabilize polarization, resulting in an enlarged Vc. When the film is illuminated by the UV light, the ‘residual’ defect charges on the electrode–film interfaces, whose sign is the same as that of the polarization charges, are compensated quickly (about 10 s) by the photoinduced carriers (Fig. 7(e)). Thus the concentration of net defect charges increases and a larger Vc offset occurs. If the aging time is adequate after the poling field is removed, these ‘residual’ defect charges can also be driven slowly to the opposite electrode–film interface under the depolarization field in the film, which is attributed to the uncompensated polarization charges,39 so the Vc offset increases with the increase of aging time. In the meantime, the film, which is in a single-domain state due to poling, tends to be in poly-domain states,46 as shown in Fig. 7(f), resulting in some defect charges being re-trapped on the domain wall or grain boundary. This point can be verified by that ΔVT is always lower than ΔVL, whether in PZTO or in PZTN films.
 Fig. 7  Sketch map of the polarization behavior in a ferroelectric film: (a) in the as-grown state, (b) when poling voltage is applied, (c) fully poled and lighted, (d) after the poling voltage is just removed, (e) illuminated by UV light, and (f) with a long aging time after the poling voltage is removed. 
We suggest that, in the PZTN film, more defect charges are excited by UV lighting and driven to the top or bottom film–electrode interface by the poling field, and more defect charges are expelled to the opposite interface by the depolarization field because the PZTN film is more leaky and has better conductivity, a higher 2Pr enhancement and larger ΔVS than the PZTO film. At the same time, there are more re-trapped charges in the PZTN film than that in the PZTO film after removing the poling field, which are random and cannot contribute to the coercive voltage, so a lower Vc enhancement is observed in the PZTN film. This re-trapping of defect charges, accompanied with the formation of poly-domains, is so acute that the majority of the ‘residual’ defect charges are re-trapped in the film. Therefore, the Vc offsets (ΔVL and ΔVT) are lower than those in the PZTO film. On the contrary, in the PZTO film, the re-trapping of defect charges occurs slowly because of the poor conductivity, which is implied by that the Vc offset depends clearly on the aging time. This issue can be verified by the time-dependent PFM image evolution of ferroelectric domains after the poling field is removed (see below).
This model can also be used to explain well the time-dependent photocurrent. When a freshly poled PZTO film is illuminated by UV light, a large photocurrent can be observed (seen in Fig. 6(a)). Meanwhile, the ‘residual’ defect charges of the interface are compensated quickly (about 10 s) by the photoinduced carriers as shown in Fig. 7(e); as a result, the net electrical field in the film was reduced, which is due to both remnant polarization and defect charges. So, a peak current occurs and the photocurrent decreases. When the film tends to be poly-domain after the poling voltage is removed, as shown in Fig. 7(f), some ‘residual’ defect charges are re-trapped on the domain wall or grain boundary. It is reasonable that this re-trapped defect charges may reduce the depolarization field or act as a recombination center, so the steady photocurrent decreases with the aging time. We suggest that, in the PZTN film, the poly-domain formation and charge re-trapping are so acute that a peak photocurrent cannot be observed, which is consistent with the observed larger ΔVS. On the contrary, in the PZTO film, the obvious time-dependent voltage offset suggests that the re-trapping of defect charges occurs slowly so that the peak photocurrent can be observed.
3.5 Piezoresponse force microscopy
The re-distribution of defect-dipoles can result in the change of the domain wall in a ferroelectric film.41–43,46,47 In order to observe the evolution of the poled regions as a function of the aging time, a series of the piezoresponse PFM images have been taken from the same small area (1 × 1 μm2) of PZT films. In Fig. 8(a), the PFM images are obtained with a bias voltage of 10 V and thus the film is poled. The other pictures in Fig. 8 are obtained after the poling field was removed. The amplitude images display clear dark or light areas, indicating that the resolution of the measurement is sufficient to determine the real shape of each scanned region. These areas make it easy to trace out the same regions in the amplitude and phase images guided by green squares in Fig. 8. From the phase images of the PZTO film (left), we can find that the domain evolution is very slow. We observe that the domains highlighted by the blue circles in Fig. 8(b) change little compared with those in Fig. 8(a). However, in the PZTN film (right), the huge difference between the phase images of Fig. 8(a) and (b) indicates that the domains change acutely after the poling field is removed, as highlighted by the white circle. With further increase of aging time, the domains almost stay unchanged in the PZTN film (right), as shown in Fig. 8(c)–(e), which is responsible for the disappearance of the transient photocurrent peak in the PZTN film. From the phase images of Fig. 8(b) and (f), whether in the PZTO or in the PZTN film, we can find that the aging time is so adequate that a small change of domain can be observed, which can be used to explain the steady photocurrent decrease with the increase of aging time.
 Fig. 8  Amplitude and phase of PFM in PZTO and PZTN films under a poling field (a), and PFM image evolution of the same scanned area as a function of aging time after the poling field is removed: (b) 5, (c) 10, (d) 30, (e) 60, and (f) 120 min of both PZT films. Each scanned area is 1 × 1 μm2. Green squares indicate the same area of each scan image, and blue (PZTO) and white (PZTN) circles highlight the evolution of ferroelectric domains. 
4. Conclusions
Based on the analysis of time-dependent photocurrent and polarization behavior of Pt sandwiched PZT films, we ascribed the photoinduced enhancement of remnant polarization and coercive field to the trapped defect charges excited by the UV light and driven by the electric field to the top or bottom electrode–film interface. Furthermore, we report on the first experimental evidence of defect charge effect on the photocurrent of ferroelectric polycrystalline films, which is related closely to the process of poly-domain formation due to the re-distribution of the excited defect charges after the poling field is removed. We believe that the interesting phenomena on photocurrent reported here are likely to be observed in other ferroelectric polycrystalline materials,3,8 which can help us understand well the photovoltaics of the ferroelectrics that requires further research.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 50702036), Suzhou Science and Technology Project (No. SYG201041), Innovation Plan for Graduate Students in the Universities of Jiangsu Province (No. CXZZ11_0087) and a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
Notes and references
L. Pintilie, M. Alexe, A. Pignolet and D. Hesse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 342 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Zheng, J. Xu, L. Fang, M. R. Shen and X. L. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 172101 CrossRef .
D. W. Cao, J. Xu, L. Fang, W. Dong, F. G. Zheng and M. R. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 192101 CrossRef .
D. W. Cao, H. Zhang, L. Fang, W. Dong, F. G. Zheng and M. R. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 102104 CrossRef .
M. Qin, K. Yao, Y. C. Liang and B. K. Gan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 092904 CrossRef .
M. Qin, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 122904 CrossRef .
S. Y. Yang, L. W. Martin, S. J. Byrnes, T. E. Conry, S. R. Basu, D. Paran, L. Reichertz, J. Ihlefeld, C. Adamo, A. Melville, Y. H. Chu, C. H. Yang, J. L. Musfeldt, D. G. Schlom, J. W. Ager and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 062909 CrossRef .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S. W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seidel, D. Fu, S. Y. Yang, E. A. Llado, J. Q. Wu, R. Ramesh and J. W. Ager, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 126805 CrossRef .
R. K. Katiyar, A. Kumar, G. Morell, J. F. Scott and R. S. Katiyar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 092906 CrossRef .
R. Guo, L. You, L. Chen, D. Wu and J. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 122902 CrossRef .
W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 094115 CrossRef .
D. Lee, S. H. Baek, T. H. Kim, J. G. Yoon, C. M. Folkman, C. B. Eom and T. W. Noh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 125305 CrossRef .
H. T. Yi, T. Choi, S. G. Choi, Y. S. Oh and S. W. Cheong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3403 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Licoccia, E. Traversa, A. Ruediger, A. Pignolet and F. Rosei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 202902 CrossRef .
J. Xu, D. W. Cao, L. Fang, F. G. Zheng, M. R. Shen and X. L. Wu, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 113705 CrossRef .
F. Chen, X. L. Tan, Z. Huang, X. F. Xuan and W. B. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 262902 CrossRef .
W. L. Warren, D. Dimos, G. E. Pike, B. A. Tuttle, M. V. Raymond, R. Ramesh and J. T. Evans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 866 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, D. S. Lee, C. S. Hwang, D. J. Kim and A. I. Kingon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 3036 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Kholkin, S. O. Iakovlev and J. L. Baptista, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2056 Search PubMed .
Z. Ye, M. H. Tang, Y. C. Zhou, X. J. Zheng, C. P. Cheng, Z. S. Hu and H. P. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 042902 CrossRef .
A. Q. Jiang, Y. Y. Lin and T. A. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 202906 CrossRef .
M. B. Okatan and S. P. Alpay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 092902 CrossRef .
C. L. Sones, A. C. Muir, Y. J. Ying, S. Mailis, R. W. Eason, T. Jungk, Á. Hoffmann and E. Soergel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 072905 CrossRef .
R. V. Wang and P. C. McIntyre, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 023508 CrossRef .
V. Chikarmane, C. Sudhama, J. Kim, J. Lee, A. Tasch and S. Novak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 2850 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Deng, G. R. Li, A. L. Ding and Q. R. Yin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 192905 CrossRef .
J. B. Babu, G. Madeswaran, X. L. Chen and R. Dhanasekaran, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 156, 36 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. L. Zhong, S. H. Xie, Y. Zhang, J. B. Wang and Y. C. Zhou, Europhys. Lett., 2011, 94, 37002 CrossRef .
V. Chikarmane, C. Sudhama, J. Kim, J. Lee, A. Tasch and S. Novak, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1992, 10, 1562 CAS .
Y. Xiao, V. B. Shenoy and K. Bhattacharya, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 247603 CrossRef .
E. R. Moore, P. Ferrari, D. E. D. Droguett, D. Lederman and J. T. Evans, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 014108 CrossRef .
E. G. Lee, D. J. Wouters, G. Willems and H. E. Maes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1223 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Pike, W. L. Warren, D. Dimos, B. A. Tuttle, R. Ramesh, J. Lee, V. G. Keramidas and J. T. Evans, Jr., Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 484 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Wu, K. H. Wong and C. L. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5013 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Wu, K. H. Wong, G. K. H. Pang and C. L. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 072904 CrossRef .
T. Friessnegg, S. Aggarwal, R. Ramesh, B. Nielsen, E. H. Poindexter and D. J. Keeble, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 127 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Delimova and V. S. Yuferev, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 084110 CrossRef .
A. Kholkin, O. Boiarkine and N. Setter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 130 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Warren, G. E. Pike, B. A. Tuttle and D. Dimos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2010 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Genenko, J. Glaum, O. Hirsch, H. Kungl, M. J. Hoffmann and T. Granzow, Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 224109 CrossRef .
R. F. Klie and N. D. Browning, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 3737 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bintachitt, S. T. McKinstry, K. Seal, S. Jesse and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 042906 CrossRef .
L. Pintilie, I. Vrejoiu, D. Hesse, G. LeRhun and M. Alexe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 104103 CrossRef .
W. Li, A. P. Chen, X. M. Lu and J. S. Zhu, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 024109 CrossRef .
M. I. Morozov and D. Damjanovic, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 034106 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Current–voltage curves of PZTO and PZTN, respectively. The insets are XRD patterns of both films (left) and SEM cross-sectional picture of the PZTO film (right).	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS survey spectra of the PZTO and PZTN films. The inset is the signals associated with Pb, Ti, Zr, and O elements detected for both samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  Polarization loops of the PZTO film: (a) in the as-grown state, (b) poled by positive and negative field, respectively, (c) poled by positive and negative field, alternatively, (d) in the polarization-up (down) state without and with UV lighting, (e) in the polarization-up state of various lighting times, (f) in the polarization-down state of various lighting times, (g) in the polarization-up state of various aging times, and (h) in the polarization-down state of various aging times.	 

 	Fig. 4  Polarization loops of the PZTN film, similar to that in Fig. 3.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-dependent photocurrent of PZTO and PZTN in as-grown, remnant polarization-up, and remnant polarization-down states, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time-dependent photocurrent of remnant polarization-up state in (a) PZTO and (b) PZTN film, respectively, with the relationship of various waiting times of 1 s, 60 s, 600 s, 0.5 h, 1 h and 2 h. Each curve of the photocurrent is obtained after the film is fully poled on the same contact.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sketch map of the polarization behavior in a ferroelectric film: (a) in the as-grown state, (b) when poling voltage is applied, (c) fully poled and lighted, (d) after the poling voltage is just removed, (e) illuminated by UV light, and (f) with a long aging time after the poling voltage is removed.	 

 	Fig. 8  Amplitude and phase of PFM in PZTO and PZTN films under a poling field (a), and PFM image evolution of the same scanned area as a function of aging time after the poling field is removed: (b) 5, (c) 10, (d) 30, (e) 60, and (f) 120 min of both PZT films. Each scanned area is 1 × 1 μm2. Green squares indicate the same area of each scan image, and blue (PZTO) and white (PZTN) circles highlight the evolution of ferroelectric domains.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
