Emerging 2D pnictogens for catalytic applications: status and challenges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA04068A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04068A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12887-12927Emerging 2D pnictogens for catalytic applications: status and challenges

        
          
            Xiang 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiyuan 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chenyang 
            Xing
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Keqiang 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weichun 
            Huang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ni 
            Xie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Qiu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobing 
            Yan
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjian 
            Xie
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, Institute of Microscale Optoelectronics, and Otolaryngology Department and Biobank of the First Affiliated Hospital, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: zjxie2011@163.com; hzhang@szu.edu.cn
bNational-Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of New Energy Photovoltaic Devices, Key Laboratory of Digital Medical Engineering of Hebei Province, College of Electron and Information Engineering, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, P. R. China. E-mail: yanxiaobing@ime.ac.cn
cCenter for Stretchable Electronics and Nanoscale Systems, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China
dNantong Key Lab of Intelligent and New Energy Materials, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, Jiangsu, P. R. China
eKey Laboratory of Marine Chemistry Theory and Technology (Ocean University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao, 266100, P. R. China
Received 
      15th April 2020
    , Accepted 4th June 2020First published on 5th June 2020AbstractThe exfoliation of phosphorene from black phosphorus to afford mono-elemental two-dimensional (2D) materials (Xenes) has caused a boom in various fields since 2014. Among the Xenes, an emerging class of material, 2D pnictogens, which includes phosphorene, arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene, has drawn a great deal of attention in the field of catalysis owing to their high specific surface area, mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and optical and electrical performance. With the development of interdisciplinary research, it has become a new trend of scientific research, especially the application of catalysis in medicine, to break the barriers between disciplines and achieve multidisciplinary joint investigation. Herein, firstly, the structures, general properties, and synthetic methods of 2D pnictogen (group VA) materials are reviewed. Then, we summarize the various state-of-the-art catalytic applications of the 2D pnictogen family, such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and medical catalysis, especially in terms of strategies to improve their catalytic performance, such as doping, functionalization, and heterostructures. We also shed some light on the cross-subject of photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes for biomedical applications. Finally, we summarize the research progress, outlooks, and challenges for these 2D catalysts in terms of their catalytic performance, characterization, reaction mechanisms, exploration of new systems, and commercial applications. This review aims to highlight the catalytic effects of 2D pnictogen materials in enhancing the performance of reactions.
1. Introduction
In the past decades, since the exfoliation of graphene from graphite was reported in 2004,1 interest in ultra-thin 2D materials has grown explosively due to their anisotropic, optical and electronic properties.2–5 Ultra-thin 2D materials are nano-thick planar crystals formed by monolayer or few-layer stacking. Inspired by the great impact of graphene, researchers have developed a variety of ultra-thin 2D materials and applied them to various property-related applications, such as optoelectronic devices,6–18 energy storage,19–23 catalysis,24–26 environmental science,27–29 and biomedicines.30–37 In recent years, research of ultra-thin 2D materials has entered a stage of rapid development. Increasing numbers of 2D family members have been theoretically predicted and successfully prepared in the laboratory.38,39 The exploration of graphene-like 2D materials is also evolutionary. For example, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), 2D layered alloy materials (2DLAMs), metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), and monoelemental materials (Xenes) are typical 2D materials that are similar to graphene. Because they have similar structural properties to graphene but different compositions, they have versatile properties. The continuous exploration of graphene-based and graphene-derived 2D materials has further enriched the 2D materials family with new members, such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),40–42 perovskites,43–45 black phosphorus (BP)46 and their derivatives, which reveal controllability of their physical, chemical, optical, and electronic properties. As a result, 2D materials have impressive advantages in the aforementioned applications.
Recently, emerging mono-elemental 2D materials (Xenes) have aroused substantial interest.47–54 Similar to graphene, the atoms of these materials are arranged in a puckered honeycomb lattice due to the interactions of sp2 and sp3 hybrid bonds. Since it was discovered in 2014, BP has aroused enormous research interest due to its unique structure as well as its useful properties.55–58 Only two years after the synthesis of BP, through theoretical and experimental explorations, these pnictogen materials were predicted to have stable 2D structures, which not only enriches our elementary knowledge of these 2D semiconductors but also indicates their potential in various technology applications.59 This wave of interest has brought the suspended 2D mono- or few-layer pnictogen elements into the focus of current research. These emerging 2D pnictogen materials may overcome the deficiencies of other materials in optoelectronic applications, such as the low carrier mobility of TMDs, the limited bandgap of MXenes, the zero bandgap of graphene, and the insulating properties of h-BN. The 2D material family of pnictogens are different from group IVA60,61 materials, which have semi-metallic properties, and group IIIA materials, which have metallic properties.62 The 2D materials of pnictogens are semiconductors with significant fundamental and tunable layer-dependent bandgaps; therefore, they are potential candidates for photoelectric applications. In the ultraviolet (UV) and near-infrared (NIR) regions, their layer-dependent behaviors endow them with greater photo-redox capability and excellent optical properties,63–66 which confer great promise for modern technology.
In the last few years, the number of publications on 2D pnictogens has grown exponentially. Although some reviews focus on the unique mechanical, chemical, and photoelectric properties of 2D pnictogens (mainly emphasizing phosphorene),67–72 few of these reviews discuss the catalytic applications of 2D pnictogen materials. Undoubtedly, catalysis is a crucial phenomenon that occurs in nature and in artificial chemical transformations; it affects the chemical industry and shapes our world. The advantages of these 2D materials for catalysis include the following: (1) high specific surface area, (2) mechanical properties, (3) optical and electrical performance. 2D materials have maximal surface-to-volume ratios and high-density surface active sites, which are beneficial for surface active performance. Also, due to their excellent mechanical properties, the catalysts are durable, and their thermal conductivity promotes the diffusion of heat generated in exothermic reactions. Additionally, the tunable optical and electronic properties of 2D materials exhibit great potential for catalysis.73,74 To date, these materials have been studied in various reactions, such as water splitting, degradation, nitrogen fixation, hydrogenation, reduction of carbon dioxide, and medical catalysis. Because the success of a catalytic application begins with design of the catalyst and understanding of its catalytic mechanism, it is important to explore all aspects involved. In recent years, there has been much innovative research in the catalytic area of 2D pnictogens, which inspired us to launch this comprehensive review project. This review first summarizes the latest studies on 2D pnictogen materials for catalytic applications. Furthermore, this is the first time that their biomedical applications involving catalytic processes have been summarized. To start, we emphasize the structure and general properties of the 2D pnictogens and their layer bulk counterparts, followed by discussions of the most effective preparation methods and characterization techniques. After that, we focus our attention on advanced studies of 2D pnictogen-based materials in catalytic applications (Fig. 1). We systematically describe the design, characterization, performance, and reaction mechanisms of the catalysts. The 2D pnictogen materials are brand new members of the 2D family. We also point out that the bio-catalysis systems can be guided by photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes. Finally, we present outlooks and challenges for the next stage of catalytic applications for 2D pnictogen-based materials.
 Fig. 1  An overview showing the various catalytic applications of 2D pnictogen materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, ref. 26, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, ref. 169, copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH, and ref. 301, copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
2. Structure of pnictogens
Apart from nitrogen, which is a gas, the pnictogens (phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth) form layered bulk solids. The layered bulk materials of the pnictogens are structurally diverse; they are typical allotropes.66 Among the pnictogens, the 2D mono-layer materials of phosphorus (P), arsenic (As), antimony (Sb), and bismuth (Bi) are named phosphorene, arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene, respectively.
2.1. Structure of bulk pnictogens

2.1.1. Phosphorus. 
The allotropes of phosphorus (P) include red phosphorus (RP), white phosphorus (WP), gaseous phosphorus (GP), violet phosphorus (VP), blue phosphorus (BuP), black phosphorus (BP), and other several amorphous forms (Fig. 2).75 WP and RP are considered to be the two major common allotropes. WP is composed of tetrahedral P4 molecules and tends to be formed by sintering calcium phosphate with coke and silica. WP is a translucent wax-like solid that rapidly turns yellow when exposed to light; therefore, it is also called yellow phosphorus. It emits green light when exposed to oxygen in the dark. WP is extremely flammable and self-igniting when in contact with air. Hence, it requires a water seal for storage. RP is a derivative of tetrahedral P4 molecules; it has a polymer-like chain structure. RP can be obtained by heating WP to 300 °C without air or by exposing WP to sun irradiation in an amorphous network. VP can be fabricated by dissolving WP in molten lead at 500 °C for 18 hours in a sealed tube. GP, also known as diphosphorus (P2), is a gaseous allotrope of P, and it is produced by the thermal decomposition of tetrahedral P4 (WP) at 800 °C. BuP is a previously unknown phosphorus phase which was recently predicted by theoretical simulations. In 2016, through the molecular beam epitaxy process, a mono-layer of BuP was obtained by epitaxial growth on Au (111) with BP as the precursor.76
 Fig. 2  Schematic of phosphorus allotropes and their transformation reactions. 
BP, the most stable thermodynamic allotrope, was first synthesized in early 1914 by processing WP at 200 °C and 1.2 GPa.77 This bulk form is composed of vertically stacked 2D nanosheets, each of which is called phosphorene. It consists of parallel puckered atomic layers with an orthogonal structure which belongs to the Cmca space group (Fig. 3).78 Also, under about 5 GPa, BP tends to transform into a β phase with the Rm space group, which is composed of a large number of wrinkles, interlocks, and six-membered rings (Fig. 3). Bulk BP possesses a layered structure and exhibits high anisotropy, a small bandgap (∼0.3 eV), and high carrier mobility (103 cm2 V−1 s−1).79
 Fig. 3  (a) Typical honeycomb structures (from α to ε) and non-honeycomb structures (from ζ to ι) of 2D pnictogen allotropes. (b) The average binding energies (ΔE) of the 2D pnictogen allotropes. The β phases show energetic stability by calculation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 


2.1.2. Arsenic. 
There are three common allotropes of bulk arsenic (As), which are gray, black, and yellow As. Among the three allotropes, gray As shows a rhombohedral layered structure, which belongs to β phase with the Rm space group, and it is the most thermodynamically stable allotrope. The rhombohedral structures of As are shown in Fig. 3. The orthorhombic structure of As belongs to the α phase, space group Cmca; it can be formed by heating As to approximately 100 °C. Orthorhombic As is a narrow bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of approximately 0.3 eV. As can form a cubic modification composed of the As4 structure (that is, yellow As), which is a soft waxy crystal that is soluble in carbon disulfide, and it can be converted to gray As even at room temperature. Yellow As is formed by quenching As vapor in liquid nitrogen conditions. Black As is a glassy amorphous allotrope of As that is obtained by the condensation of As vapors at 100 °C to 200 °C.


2.1.3. Antimony. 
Gray, black, and explosive antimony (Sb) are the three allotropes that exist under normal conditions. Gray Sb has the rhombohedral structure and is the most stable form of the allotropes (Fig. 2). Gray As shows typical semimetallic features in its layered bulk structures; its bandgap was calculated to be up to 2.28 eV. Compared to amorphous black As, black Sb is significantly less stable. It can be easily converted to a more stable allotrope of gray Sb at approximately 100 °C, even under vacuum conditions. When it is placed under mechanical stress or heating conditions, explosive Sb tends to vigorously transform into gray As.


2.1.4. Bismuth. 
For bulk bismuth (Bi), the rhombohedral structure (β phase, space group Rm, Fig. 2) is the only stable form. It has a naturally layered structure like gray As and Sb; however, layered Bi shows metallicity. The experimentally determined bulk gap value reported by Bi in the literature is approximately 0.8 eV.80 Bi is the last element in group VA; it has the largest atomic number in the column, resulting in enhanced spin–orbit coupling (SOC). Compared with the group IVA materials, their stronger SOC leads to topological insulator properties, which will promote the development of spintronic devices. Among the pnictogens, the best air-stability of Bi was proved by Raman spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM);81 this stability is likely related to its electron affinity.82 In addition, Bi thin layers were evaluated in a toxicity experiment, and Bi was considered to show mild cytotoxicity.83 Note that superior air-stability and non-toxicity are essential in commercial applications.

2.2. Structures of 2D pnictogens

2.2.1. Phosphorene. 
Research related to BP has not flourished as expected, mainly owing to the harsh conditions required, and studies of its preparation, properties, and applications are limited. With the advancement of synthesis and technical tools, and researchers' efforts to find novel 2D materials, especially to solve the problems related to graphene-based systems, the study of next-generation materials (that is, 2D black phosphorus) has been revived. Within a mono-layer, each P atom contains five valence electrons which come from the 3s and 3p orbitals, and three covalent bonds are formed by hybridizing with adjacent atoms. One covalent bond is almost perpendicular to the atomic plane, and the rest of the covalent bonds are parallel to the atomic plane. Each layer is composed of two layers of in-plane and out-of-plane P–P bonds (Fig. 4a).46 Phosphorene has a puckered structure in the armchair direction but has a double-layered configuration in the zigzag direction, leading to highly anisotropic properties (Fig. 4b).84,85 The in-plane bond is short (R2 = 2.224 Å) and connects to the adjacent P atoms; meanwhile, the out-plane bond is longer (R1 = 2.244 Å) and connects the P atoms from the top and bottom of the mono-layer.86 The lattice constants were found to be different in the two perpendicular directions. “a” and “b” are shown in Fig. 4c, that is, a = 4.52 ± 0.05 Å and b = 3.31 ± 0.03 Å, depending on the number of layers. However, the in-plane bonds and out-of-plane bonds are not affected by the number of layers.56,87 For mono-layer phosphorene, the values of R1 and R2 are very close, which can be attributed to the fact that the covalent bonds come from the 3p orbitals of phosphorus. In few-layer BP, the distance of the P–P bonds between the interlayers is significantly longer than that of the covalent bonds, which indicates that non-binding interactions cause the layers to pile together. Also, the distance between layers is approximately 5.3 Å.88 In addition, the number of layers slightly affects the dihedral angle (θ1 = 103.51° and 102.42° for mono-layer phosphorene and its bulk counterpart, respectively) and the hinge angle (θ2 = 96.00° and 96.16° for mono-layer phosphorene and its bulk counterpart, respectively).89 This non-binding interaction is due to van der Waals interactions between the interlayers. Therefore, the geometric properties of phosphorus can be adjusted according to the number of layers.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the puckered structure of few-layer phosphorene. (b) Top viewpoint of mono-layer phosphorene on the x- and y-axes. (c) Side viewpoint of bilayer phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2. Heavy 2D pnictogens. 
As described above, the mono-layer material derived from phosphorus is called phosphorene. In the following text, the heavy 2D pnictogens beyond phosphorene are called arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene, respectively. Note that in the 2D materials family, the suffix “ene” is often used to indicate a mono-layer material, and we follow this nomenclatural rule.
Arsenene has both orthorhombic (α phase) and rhombohedral (β phase) structures, while antimonene and bismuthene tend to be rhombohedral in structure (β phase). In fact, there are other potential allotropes of 2D pnictogens; however, they are unstable and have not yet been synthesized or observed.78,90 The structural configurations of the heavy 2D pnictogens are shown in Fig. 3a. In terms of this issue, Zheng et al. revealed a class of mono-layer 2D pnictogen allotropes, including five typical honeycomb (from α to ε) and four non-honeycomb (from ζ to ι) structures, which were calculated by comprehensive density functional theory (DFT) calculations, as shown in Fig. 3a.78 The calculations of the binding energies of the possible 2D pnictogen configurations are presented in Fig. 3b. Note that the most stable structure corresponds to the lowest-energy configuration, which is in accordance with the previous discussion. However, there are three types of bismuthene (that is, α, β, and ζ phase) which have similar average binding energies by the same theoretical calculation. To date, two typical forms of layered phases of the 2D pnictogens experimentally exist, namely α-P, β-P, α-As, β-As, β-Sb, and β-Bi.63,91–97

3. Synthesis and characterization of 2D pnictogens
3.1. Phosphorene
The upsurge in the synthesis of 2D pnictogens arose from the successful fabrication of phosphene in 2014. In general, the synthetic methods mainly consist of two categories, namely top-down and bottom-up fabrication methods (Fig. 5).98,99
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthetic methods of 2D pnictogen materials. 
Mechanical exfoliation was the first method introduced to exfoliate bulk BP to phosphorene due to its weak van der Waals interlayer interactions.55 Like graphene, through the scotch tape and plasma-thinning process, uniform phosphorene was generated in a controllable manner. The phosphorene produced by mechanical cleavage has a fine structure and high optical and electrical performance. However, its yield was too low to meet practical applications.
Fortunately, liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) technology has recently been used to fabricate 2D pnictogen materials and has achieved high yield production of phosphorene. Brent et al.100 developed the first preparation of LPE, which is a comparatively facile and inexpensive process. In LPE, the key is to choose the appropriate solution to obtain effective exfoliation and maintain a stable dispersion of the substrate. Organic solvents have been widely used for exfoliating BP. Brent et al. fabricated phosphorene using the LEP of BP in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). Afterward, Guo et al.101 created a basic-NMP solvent in which sodium hydroxide was added to NMP solvent. The method certainly has merits, such as controllable size, tunable layer number, and high yield. The adsorption of OH ions on the phosphorene resulted in a negative charge, and the zeta potential of the suspension exceeded 30 mV. Other organic solvents (e.g., DMSO, DMF, IPA, and ethanol) have also been used, and their performance in preparing phosphorene has been compared.102,103 Zhao et al.104 used ionic liquid solvents to perform a stable and high yield exfoliation process. The prepared dispersion remained stable for up to one month without significant precipitation and aggregation in the ambient atmosphere. Kang et al.105 reported a new exfoliation technology in which a deoxygenated aqueous surfactant was beneficial to produce excellent phosphorene dispersion in an aqueous solvent with high optical absorbance and low zeta potential.
In addition to the top-down approaches, bottom-up fabrications are utilized. CVD tends to control the doping content and thickness of phosphorene to produce super-large phosphorene with good crystallinity.106,107 In addition, a wet-chemical solvothermal method was used to fabricate phosphorene from bulk BP precursors.108 Furthermore, many other methods, such as tip-sonication-based exfoliation,109 shear mixing,110 plasma-assisted methods,111,112 pulsed laser deposition,113 and electrochemical exfoliation,114 have been widely investigated.
Raman spectroscopy and AFM are regarded as the most efficient and convenient techniques in term of characterization of layered phosphorene. However, owing to the faster degradation of mono-layer phosphorene, AFM fails to obtain sufficient data before obvious sample degradation. In Raman spectroscopy, the phosphorene tends to be destroyed by the high-power laser.112,115 Fortunately, Yang et al.116 developed phase-shifting interferometry (PSI) technology, which is noninvasive, fast, and can accurately identify the number of layers in 2D semiconductors. Compared to the highly focused and high-power lasers used in Raman systems, PSI utilizes unfocused and low-density light from light emitting diode (LED) light sources for fast imaging, which protects the phosphorene sample from damage.
3.2. Heavy 2D pnictogens
The heavy 2D pnictogens are very brittle and tend to be easily pulverized; they can be exfoliated by ultrasonic or other mechanical operations by the “top-down” method.117,118 Ares et al.119 used an optimized scotch tape method to obtain ultra-thin materials. The LPE method was used to exfoliate heavy 2D pnictogen materials in aqueous or organic solvents. Recently, Gusmão et al.64 proposed aqueous shear exfoliation, in which rotating blade mixers were utilized to exfoliate rhombohedral layered arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene in the aqueous surfactant sodium cholate. There was no need to purge the system or use a glove box during processing. The highest yield was obtained for bismuthene (up to 8.8%), which is consistent with the calculation of its lowest binding energy. Lu et al.120 developed an electrochemical exfoliation process of ultra-thin antimonene. This process avoided the introduction of chemicals by using electrochemical activation, thereby providing easier purification. They also reported a sonochemical exfoliation procedure to fabricate high quality and stable bismuthene nanosheets.81 Hussain et al.121 fabricated bismuthene from Bi nanoparticles by a hot-pressing method. The Bi nanoparticles were processed using suitable pressure and heating to the optimal temperature.
Other approaches have been used to fabricate 2D pnictogens. Using the deposition of ultra-thin layers of elements under ultra-high vacuum conditions, these methods are generally based on “bottom-up” processes, which can avoid contamination. Additionally, in situ surface analysis techniques were used to control the process of crystal growth. Tsai et al.122 developed a plasma-assisted procedure which was capable of synthesizing few-layer arsenene on an InAs substrate. The thickness was modified by controlling the plasma exposure time. They also extended the plasma-assisted method to synthesize multiple layers of antimonene on an InSb substrate. This low-cost synthesis process has been used to prepare several 2D materials (e.g. graphene, germanene, phosphorene, arsenene, and antimonene); therefore, it has great potential for industrialization.123 Ji et al.124 reported that high-quality 2D antimonene with a rhombohedral structure could be synthesized by van der Waals epitaxy. This technique uses traditional epitaxial materials to perform epitaxial growth on a substrate, thereby preventing dangling bonds from forming on the surface. In addition, Lei et al.125 and Wu et al.126 reported effective molecular beam epitaxy technology to yield high-quality antimonene with air-stability on Bi2Te3, Sb2Te3, and PdTe2 substrates. These surfaces were chosen because antimonene tends to grow smoothly, with small lattice mismatches. Reis et al.80 synthesized mono-layer bismuthene by an epitaxial growth approach. Bismuthene was epitaxially grown on a SiC substrate, which favored stability of the bismuthene mono-layer and achieved a large bandgap. Using molecular beam epitaxy, Yamada et al.127 successfully fabricated ultrathin Bi layers on a 1T-TaS2 substrate. By comprehensive characterization, they found that the film on the substrate changed from Bi (111) to Bi (110) with reducing film thickness, accompanied by a sharp change in the band structure. We classify and summarize the recent advances of the emerging 2D pnictogens in terms of their fabrication methods in Table 1. Some reviews have comprehensively summarized 2D semiconductor preparation approaches.30,64–66,117,128
Table 1 Summary of the synthetic methods of 2D pnictogens




2D pnictogen
Synthesis method
Ref.


Top-down
Bottom-up




Phosphorene
Scotch-tape exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method

100–114 and 129



Liquid phase exfoliation
Chemical vapor deposition


Shear exfoliation
Wet-chemistry method


Tip-sonication-based exfoliation
Pulsed laser deposition


Electrochemical exfoliation




Arsenene
Scotch-tape exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method

64 and 122



Shear exfoliation


Antimonene
Scotch-tape exfoliation
van der Waals epitaxy

64, 119, 120 and 123–126



Liquid phase exfoliation
Molecular beam epitaxy


Shear exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method


Bismuthene
Sonochemical exfoliation
Epitaxial growth

64, 80, 81, 121, 130 and 131



Shear exfoliation
Molecular beam epitaxy


Hot-pressing method
Pulsed laser deposition




Wet-chemistry method




4. General properties of 2D pnictogens
In order to exploit the potential applications of 2D pnictogens, it is first necessary to understand their properties. We systematically introduce these properties in this section.
4.1. Intrinsic properties
Owing to their anisotropic honeycomb structures, 2D pnictogens have strong anisotropic mechanical, thermal, optical, and electronic properties, which have been verified through theoretical and experimental studies. As demonstrated experimentally, a significant bandgap and high stability can be predicted. 2D pnictogen materials are regarded as potential candidates for electronics, optoelectronics, and thermoelectric applications.132 In addition, the details of the intrinsic properties of 2D pnictogens are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the intrinsic properties of 2D pnictogens




2D material
Charge mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Bandgap (eV)
On/off ratio
Electrical conduction type
Young's modulus (GPa)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Ref.




Phosphorene
103 to 104
0.3–2.0
103 to 105
Semiconductor
44–166
24–84

56 and 133–136



Arsenene
∼103
1.0–2.5
∼104
Semiconductor
80–120
7.8–30

137–140



Antimonene
∼103
∼2.3
106 to 108
Semiconductor
10–11
15

78, 123 and 141



Bismuthene
∼102
0.08–0.2
<10
Semiconductor
26
4.0

142–145





4.2. Physical properties
The 2D pnictogen materials have unique physical properties owing to their wrinkled and buckled structures. Wei et al.133 first reported that for phosphene, the maximal and minimal Young's modulus values of 166 and 44 GPa were along the zigzag and armchair directions, respectively; therefore, phosphorene is among the most flexible materials. Jiang et al.134 proposed that a Poisson's ratio of −0.027 was found for phosphene in the out-plane direction; this is caused by its puckered configuration. These unique characteristics endow phosphene with great potential; it tends to be used as a vibration and sound absorber material. Controlling heat transfer by modifying 2D pnictogen materials is an important procedure for their thermal application. Through theoretical simulations and experimental approaches, the thermal conductivity of 2D pnictogen materials has been extensively studied.146–148 The anisotropy properties of phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth confer asymmetric thermal conductivity and thermoelectric efficiency.
The 2D pnictogens have high surface-to-volume ratios, thereby providing high-density surface active sites, which facilitates the utilization of surface sites. Due to their excellent mechanical properties, 2D catalysts are more durable, and the high thermal conductivity promotes the diffusion of heat generated during exothermic reactions. In other words, compared with their bulk materials, the robust mechanical structures, large surface areas, and high densities of active sites in 2D catalysts have advantages in terms of catalyst stability and activity.149–151
4.3. Optical properties
Due to the optical properties of 2D pnictogens and their efficient absorption and conversion of light, they play key roles in various photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications.69 The 2D pnictogen materials with fundamental bandgaps in the NIR and visible light regions have promising photoelectric properties which greatly increase their utilization of sunlight and their applications in photocatalysis and biomedical fields.47 In particular, the wide tuning range of the BP bandgap allows for wide absorption in the infrared, visible light, and UV regions; therefore, BP demonstrates excellent optical performance compared to other 2D materials. Also, the emerging 2D pnictogens have excellent photo-thermal conversion efficiency, and they can be triggered by external light irradiation to enable remotely controlled photocatalytic reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation for the application of photodynamic therapy (PDT).29,33 In addition, the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) phenomenon was observed in 2D pnictogens; thus, they are promising candidates for SPR sensor technology.30 Considering their inherent biocompatibility, 2D pnictogen materials are expected to be a safe and effective treatment approach.
4.4. Electronic properties
Compared with other types of 2D materials, the electrical properties of 2D pnictogens depend on the different characteristics and functions of each element. In order to explore the unique electronic properties of 2D pnictogens, a number of theoretical and experimental studies were introduced to research their structures.152 In terms of the optical and electronic applications of 2D pnictogen materials, an appropriate and tunable bandgap is an outstanding feature of these emerging 2D materials. Zhang et al.78 summarized the calculated bandgap of 2D pnictogens, based on the Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) functional and the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional as well as the Green's function and screened Coulomb interaction (GW) methods. Interestingly, a direct tunable bandgap can be found in phosphorene, and this property depends on the number of layers. The tunable property of these 2D materials provides attractive prospects for various applications. When the thickness of BP is reduced from bulk to mono-layer, a tunable bandgap from 0.3 eV to 2.0 eV is obtained based on the calculation results of the GW method, which is in accord with experimental results. The heavy 2D pnictogens of arsenene and antimonene were predicted to be wide bandgap semiconductors which undergo indirect to direct bandgap transition during tensile strain. As the last element of the 2D pnictogens, the mono-layer bismuthene semiconductor has a narrow bandgap. In addition, because antimonene, bismuthene, and their compounds exhibit large SOC effects, these heavy pnictogens have attracted special interest; they exhibit topologically non-trivial states under specific conditions. Note that phosphorene, arsenene, and bismuthene have carrier mobilities of up to several thousand cm2 V−1 s−1. At present, it is highly desired for scientists to synthesize a series of novel 2D semiconductors with appropriate bandgaps as well as high carrier mobilities.
Theoretical calculations have shown that defects can effectively impact the electronic properties of 2D pnictogens and their generated magnetic properties.153,154 Generally speaking, because defects structure prevents free electron movement, more defects lead to lower electrical conductivity. Functionalization is regarded as an effective method to modify the inherent characteristics of 2D pnictogens, including physical adsorption as well as chemical functionalization processes. Note that physical adsorption includes doping of metal atoms, non-metal atoms, and small molecules. Through elemental doping, these defects are introduced into 2D pnictogens to change their electronic properties. Compared with physical adsorption, chemical functionalization leads to the large-scale reconstruction of 2D materials which are functionalized with halogen, O, OH, CH3 and other functional groups.155–160 The functionalization induces novel physical, optical, and electronic properties as well as topological edge states.161–163 Heterostructure 2D materials have been widely studied; they consist of two different layered materials, such as TMDs/Xenes, BN/Xenes, and CN/Xenes.164–166 These heterostructure composites have many novel electronic and optical properties that are highly superior to those of their individual components, and they are considered as an approach to combine the properties of their individual components to improve optoelectronic performance.
Under certain activation conditions, such as light and electrical excitation, 2D pnictogen materials are capable of generating active electrons and vacancies, leading to further application in redox reactions. This function is a vital process for catalytic application and ROS generation, which may further their application in photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and medical catalysis. Additionally, the tunable electronic properties of 2D pnictogens enable tailoring of their catalytic performance.
5. Catalytic application of 2D pnictogen-based materials
Catalysts are regarded as the basis of numerous chemical processes because of their ability to accelerate reaction rates and reduce activation energies. As the first example of a 2D mono-layer crystal, graphene has unique mechanical, optical, and electronic properties that have been widely studied for catalytic applications.167–169 Since then, other 2D materials and their possible catalytic applications have drawn great attention. Compared with their 3D bulk materials, the electronic structures of 2D materials undergo tremendous changes, and their physical and chemical structures can be modified, which provides new opportunities for using 2D materials in various chemical reactions.151,170–172 The latest progress in the preparation and characterization of 2D pnictogen materials also offers new possibilities for catalysis. In addition, numerous nanocatalysts, such as TiO2, CeO2, Fe3O4 nanoparticles, and 2D nanosheets, have been applied in vivo to initiate chemical reactions in recent decades, providing efficient treatment strategies for therapeutics.173–175 This trend has promoted the intersection of catalysis and biomedicine, leading to the emergence of advanced therapies and techniques (nanocatalytic medicine).176 However, there is still a lack of a comprehensive overview and in-depth discussion of the current status and prospects of 2D pnictogen materials in the field of catalysis. Therefore, we discuss the design, performance, and mechanism of 2D pnictogen-based photocatalysts and electrocatalysts. Further, we outline the application of these nanocatalysts in medical fields.
5.1. Photocatalysis
As a renewable energy source, solar energy has the advantages of being clean, universal, and durable and the disadvantages of dispersion, instability, and low density. Specifically, solar energy does not pollute the environment, the sun shines on the earth, and there is no geographical restriction. The solar radiation energy reaching the Earth's surface every year is equivalent to 130 trillion tons of coal, and this energy transfer can be maintained for hundreds of millions of years without interruption.177–179 Although many technologies for utilizing solar energy for chemical reactions are still in the laboratory development stage, increasing studies have shown that photocatalytic technology has much room for development in the future.180–182 In recent years, with the rapid development of various 2D nano-semiconductor materials, photocatalytic technology is being implemented into real life applications with increasing speed. It is foreseeable that photocatalysis will become a reliable technology to promote the healthy development of human society in the near future.

5.1.1. Photocatalytic hydrogen production. 
Since Fujishima and Honda first discovered the formation of H2 and O2 through water splitting using an n-type TiO2 electrode in 1972, many semiconductor photocatalysts have been explored in this field.183 As shown in Fig. 6, for the photocatalytic reaction, the semiconductor first generates electron–hole pairs under light irradiation. Once the energy of light irradiation is equal to or greater than the bandgap energy of the semiconductor (ΔEg), the electrons tend to be excited from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), and the holes remain in the VB. The photogenerated electrons and holes may be further involved in the following processes. First, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs are successfully transferred to the surface of the semiconductor. Then, they are captured by the defect sites in the bulk or on the surface of the semiconductor. Finally, they recombine to release energy in the form of light or heat. Because the photogenerated electron–hole pairs cannot be utilized in chemical reactions, recombination is regarded as an inactivation procedure. Note that charge carriers can be applied to chemical reactions when they reach the surface of the semiconductor.184–186
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the photocatalytic procedures on a photocatalyst. 
Due to the high specific surface area, good charge carrier mobility, and tunable bandgap of BP, it is considered to be a rising star in photocatalysis.67,69,70,72,187 For photocatalytic water splitting, the bandgap should be greater than 1.23 eV. According to DFT calculations,188 the CB level of BP is higher than the redox potential of H+/H2, which guarantees that the H2 evolution reaction can occur; meanwhile, the VB level is not more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O, indicating that O2 cannot be formed by water splitting (Fig. 7a). However, the redox potential of water relies on the pH in the photocatalysis water splitting system, and the redox potential positions of phosphorene are connected to strain engineering. Sa et al.188 reported that the oxidation potential and the reduction potential favor water splitting under both ambient conditions and tensile strain in solution at pH 8.0 (Fig. 7b). This finding indicates that in theory, phosphorene can be readily used in photocatalytic water splitting. However, beyond these theoretical studies, there are virtually no published literature reports that prove the water-splitting ability of phosphorene on a laboratory scale.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the thermodynamic limits of hydrogen and oxygen evolution in water splitting. (b) The CB and VB positions under ambient conditions (pH 8.0, 5% and 6% tensile strain along the a axis and b axis, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Because bare BP only generates trace amounts of H2, the enhanced photocatalytic activity of modified BP structures has become an active topic of research, such as effective separation of electron–hole pairs, inhibiting the recombination of photogenerated pairs and the availability of active sites on the catalyst. Vishnoi et al.189 modified phosphorene with three different organic groups (that is, indium(III) chloride, tris(pentafluorophenyl) borane, and a benzyl group). As shown in Fig. 8a and b, they adopted different strategies to functionalize solvent-exfoliated few-layer phosphorene. The functionalized multi-layer phosphorene showed significantly improved stability and water dispersibility compared to the pristine phosphorene under ambient conditions (Fig. 8c–e). For these reasons, the photocatalytic performance of the compounds was significantly higher than that of the bare BP. Zhao et al.190 studied the effects of a series of non-metal dopants on the photocatalytic activity of single-layer BP. Using first-principles calculations, the effects of non-metal doping on the geometry structure, formation energy (Ef), and electronic, optical, and photocatalytic properties of BP were studied. F-doped BP may be the most suitable visible light photocatalyst because it has a lower recombination rate, more photocatalytic active sites, and a larger visible light absorption area than BP doped with other dopants.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the preparation of phosphorene from BP by exfoliation. (b) Schematic of the functionalization procedures of the nanosheets with InCl3, B(C6F5)3, and PPh3. (c–e) Raman spectra of pristine phosphorene, P·InCl3, and P·CH–C6H5; the spectra were scanned for the sample from 0 to 20 days of exposure to air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Constructing heterostructures not only captures and stabilizes more photons with different wavelengths but also facilitates interfacial charge transport between the two semiconductors.191,192 Committed to designing efficient heterostructure photocatalysts and applying them to photocatalytic applications, researchers believe that heterostructures are effective methods to achieve the goal of improving photocatalytic performance. Wu et al.193 reported photocatalytic water splitting of a BP/TiO2 heterostructure for the first time. The presence of BP also triggered hydrogen release of TiO2 under visible light. They explained that the photocatalytic mechanism of BP/TiO2 was due to the Z-scheme structure, in which the reduction site was on the BP side. Recently, Elbanna et al.194 developed BP nanosheets/TiO2 meso-crystals loaded with Pt nanoparticles (BP NS/Pt/TMC composites, Fig. 9a and b), which tended to absorb light from the UV to the NIR regions, and the Z-scheme heterostructure improved the efficiency of charge separation. Pt as a common co-catalyst on BP could efficiently catalyze the subsequent H2 evolution from other systems (Fig. 9c).195,196 In addition, they found that reducing the layers of BP nanosheets could enhance the rate of electron transfer from the BP nanosheets to the TiO2 meso-crystals.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of BP/TiO2. (b) TEM image of BP/TiO2. (c) Schematic of the band alignment and the Z-scheme mechanism of BP/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186, copyright 2018, Springer International Publishing AG. 
Recently, Yuan et al.197 demonstrated an innovative strategy for preparing Co2P/BP nanosheets as photocatalysts with atomic-level interfaces. Co2P nanosheets were grown around the edge positions of exfoliated BP nanosheets to form strong Co–P chemical bonds between the BP and Co2P nanosheets. Fig. 10a shows the synthetic method of the Co2P/BP photocatalyst. The TEM images display that Co2P grew near the edge positions of the BP, and the HR-TEM images show two lattice fringes that correspond to the (021) plane of Co2P and the (040) plane of BP.198,199 Electrochemical experiments reveal that the Co2P/BP nanosheets significantly reduced the energy barrier of the H2 evolution reaction. The J–V shuttered curves indicate that charge separation was enhanced in the Co2P/BP photocatalyst. According to theoretical simulations, the Co–P bond facilitates the charge flow at the atomic level, which tends to enhance the transfer of charge carriers, thereby increasing the photocatalytic performance of the Co2P/BP photocatalyst. Furthermore, due to the Co2P located at the edge of the BP nanosheets, oxygen molecules fail to react with the defect sites of the BP, leading to improved stability of the photocatalytic reaction.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Co2P/BP photocatalyst. (b and c) TEM images of the catalyst. (d and e) HR-TEM images of BP and Co2P scanned from the square position in (c), respectively. (f) Linear scan voltammogram (LSV) curves of the various samples. (g) The performance of photocatalytic H2 evaluation over various catalysts under visible light. (h) J–V shuttered curves of the catalysts under visible light. (i) Cycling curves of the Co2P/BP catalyst for H2 generation under visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the abovementioned catalysts, the heterojunctions between BP and other materials were explored to promote the photocatalytic performance and durability of phosphorene, such as LaTi2O7,200 ZnIn2S4,201 Mo2S,202,203 CdS, ZnxCd1−xS,204 Ag3PO4,205 Bi2WO6,206 BiVO4,207 and red phosphorus.208
Metal co-catalysts are commonly used to enhance performance in catalytic applications. However, metal-based co-catalysts are constrained by high costs as well as negative environmental effects.209–211 Therefore, there is great potential for the development of high-activity and low-cost metal-free co-catalysts for use in large-scale photocatalytic applications under sun irradiation. Wen et al.212 synthesized a BP/CN catalyst by a ball-milling procedure that could produce a few grams of product at a time (Fig. 11a). The TEM image in Fig. 11b–d shows that the BP nanoparticles are in contact with the CN nanosheets. Also, the high-angle circular dark field (HAADF) image and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps prove the composition of the heterostructure (Fig. 11b and c). The HR-TEM image displays a lattice space (0.262 nm) that is attributed to the BP nanoparticles (Fig. 11d). As shown in Fig. 11f, the BP/CN heterostructure generates H2 more consistently than bare BP or CN. With increasing BP content from 1 to 10 wt%, the release rate of H2 increases. The optimal 10 wt% BP/CN catalyst was cycled three times to evaluate its stability, and continuous H2 evaluation was observed without significant degradation (Fig. 11g). A possible reaction mechanism in the photocatalytic H2 evaluation system is depicted in Fig. 11e. Both the CN and the BP are activated to produce photogenerated electron–hole pairs under visible irradiation, and the photogenerated electrons in the CB of the CN migrate to the CB of the BP, which acts as an electron acceptor, thereby inhibiting recombination of the electron–hole pairs. Also, the electrons of the BP are captured by the interface P–N bonds for accelerated H2 generation. In brief, the metal-free heterostructure shows wide light absorption in the UV and NIR regions, which improves the efficiency of charge separation, provides numerous active sites, and affords excellent photocatalytic performance. Based on the above study, choosing a suitable semiconductor to build a heterostructure photocatalyst is a new avenue to enhance photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthetic method of the BP/CN heterostructure. (b) TEM image of BP/CN. (c) HAADF image of BP/CN and corresponding elemental maps of C, N, and P. (d) HR-TEM image of BP/CN. (e) Schematic of the mechanism of photocatalytic H2 evolution. (f) Time course of photocatalytic H2 evolution from various samples in water. (g) Cyclability of BP/CN for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
To the best of our knowledge, only theoretical calculation has been applied to study the photocatalytic performance of heavy 2D pnictogens for H2 production. For example, the DFT and GW methods associated with extrapolation procedures have been used. Niu et al.213 calculated the energy barrier of oxygen dissociation on the surface of arsenene (Fig. 12a). There are two possible dissociation paths, with energy barriers that are much higher than the energy barrier of BP oxidation (0.56 eV).214 Therefore, arsenene has higher oxidation resistance than phosphorene. In addition, they demonstrated that the band edge position is located in the appropriate redox potential range of water splitting. Fig. 12b displays that the band edge of As is higher than that of the other materials, which facilitates the efficiency of charge separation. Under solar irradiation, the photogenerated electrons in As tend to transfer to other layers of the heterostructure, and the holes move in the opposite direction. Those heterostructures have good stability and effective light absorption ability in ambient atmosphere; thus, As is a potential candidate as a photocatalyst for water splitting. Subsequently, N. Som et al.92 studied the catalytic activity of doped arsenene for the water splitting process, including the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) as well as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), by DFT. A series of dopants of metal and non-metal atoms were shown to promote catalytic performance by replacing one As atom in the structure of arsenene. Compared with the bare arsenene, the HER activity of O-doped arsenene increased by 82% and that of B-doped arsenene was enhanced by 87%. However, the challenges of translating these computational simulations into actual laboratory-scale applications cannot be overstated.
 Fig. 12  (a) Energy barrier of oxygen dissociation on arsenene containing two dissociation paths. (b) Schematic of the charge migration over a series of As-based catalysts in the water splitting process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


5.1.2. Photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction. 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is widely regarded as a major greenhouse gas that causes global environmental issues. Global consumption of limited fossil fuels not only accelerates their consumption but also leads to excess CO2 production. In this regard, converting CO2 to fuel is a promising approach to address both energy and environmental issues. In 1979, Japanese researchers Fujishima and Honda first reported a method for photo-electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to high value-added products using semiconductor catalysts such as SiC, GaP, and TiO2.215 Since that time, tremendous research has focused on developing new semiconductor materials for reducing CO2. Due to the lower CB position of BP, it is expected to drive various photocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions.
Han et al.216 applied BP quantum dots (BPQDs)-modified g-C3N4 to the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO for the first time. The BP@g-C3N4 catalyst showed a higher photocurrent response and smaller Nyquist arc radius than bare g-C3N4. This indicates that the BPQDs improved the light absorption, photogenerated electron transfer, and efficiency of charge separation (Fig. 13a and b). Time-resolved fluorescence spectra reveal that the lifetime of photogenerated carriers in BP@g-C3N4 (4.39 ns) is longer than that in g-C3N4 (3.10 ns), which reflects significant separation efficiency of the photogenerated carriers (Fig. 13c). In addition, transient absorption spectra (Fig. 13d) show that the BP@g-C3N4 structure results in a lower photogenerated carrier concentration and longer lifetime. In all, the composites have higher charge separation efficiency and electronic utilization. As a result, 1 wt% BP@g-C3N4 demonstrated the highest activity for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO (6.54 μmol g−1 h−1); in addition, a small amount of CH4 was generated (0.29 μmol g−1 h−1) (Fig. 13e).
 Fig. 13  (a–d) Photocurrent response, electrochemical impedance, time-resolved photoluminescence, and transient absorption curves of g-C3N4 and BP@g-C3N4. (e) Time course of CO generation over BP@g-C3N4 with different BP loading amounts under irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, copyright 2018, Springer International Publishing AG. 
As a CO2 photo-reduction catalyst, the greatest challenge for 2D BP is its low stability in the presence of air and humid conditions, which is due to the fact that the lone pair electrons on the P atom are easily oxidized to PxOy.217,218 Then, PxOy is consumed by H2O, and the lone pair electrons are exposed to the atmosphere again.219 Zhu et al.220 developed in situ modification procedures to form stable mono-layer BP, which was used as a photocatalyst to realize photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light irradiation. The charge distribution model and Bader method reveal that the charge density around dioxygen significantly decreases on the surface of M-BP-OH (Fig. 14a), thereby restraining the oxidation of BP. As observed in Fig. 14b, for the M-BP-OH catalyst, the rate of CO generation is highest, and the selectivity to CO reaches 90.8%. To verify the origin of generated CO, 13C-labeled isotope experiments were carried out (Fig. 14c). The results directly prove the reduction of CO2 as a carbon source to produce CO. In situ FT-IR spectra indicate that the key intermediates of the CO2− species increase visibly with the reaction time, and the peaks of the HCO3− and b-CO32− species also increase significantly (Fig. 14e). According to the above results, the photogenerated electrons can insert into the adsorbed CO2 molecules to produce CO2− species, which then interact with the surface protons to generate COOH*. COOH* is the key intermediate during the photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Based on DFT calculations (Fig. 14f), the catalytic CO2 reduction involves two intermediates of COOH* and CO*. As shown in Fig. 14g, the stability of the catalyst to CO2 photoreduction was proved by cyclic experiments.
 Fig. 14  (a) The charge density plots for the M-BP and M-BP-OH catalysts. The blue and yellow regions represent electron accumulation and depletion. (b) The rate of CO production over various BP materials. (c) The rate of CO generation over a series of photocatalysts under visible light. (d) The isotope results of the GC-MS spectra from 13CO2 to 13CO. (e) In situ FT-IR spectrum of photocatalytic CO2 reduction over the M-BP-OH catalyst. (f) Free energy diagram of the catalysts. (g) Cycle experiments of photocatalytic CO2 reduction over the catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
While the other 2D layered pnictogen materials have been fabricated, theoretical and experimental findings show that antimonene has a suitable bandgap for photocatalytic applications. Very recently, Ji et al.221 showed that antimonene (AM) composited with BP nanosheets (HNSs) enhanced photo/biocatalytic CO2 reduction by the Z-scheme mechanism. As shown in Fig. 15a, both AM and BP nanosheets were fabricated by the LPE method. An electron mediator (M, [Cp*Rh(phen)Cl]Cl (Cp* = C5Me5 and phen = 1,10-phenanthroline)) functionalized the AM and BP nanosheets. The XPS spectra of P 2p, Sb 3d5/2, and Sb 3d3/2 indicate that the excited electrons from the BP surface transfer to the AM nanosheets owing to strong interfacial interactions between the AM and BP nanosheets (Fig. 15b and c). In order to develop effective catalytic performance, the bio-catalytic system could be directly combined with the photocatalytic system. The AM/M/BP HNSs catalyst showed reproducible photoregeneration performance of NADH that reached 89%. Note that a quantum efficiency (QE) of 18% and a turnover frequency (TOF) of 0.5 h−1 were obtained (Fig. 15d). The yield of NADH reached 90%, which derived from the catalytic photo-regeneration with FateDH. Also, a formic acid formation rate of 45625 μmol h−1 g−1 was observed under visible light irradiation (Fig. 15e). Fig. 15f displays that more than 80% of the original activity of the catalysts was retained after 5 cycles of reuse. Optical, photochemical, and electrochemical characterizations of the catalyst with the Z-scheme mechanism were used to verify its effects.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedures of the AM/M/BP HNSs composites. (b and c) Sb 3d and P 2p core-level XPS spectra of the catalysts. (d) Time course of the catalytic photo-regeneration of NADH from NAD+. (e) Time course of formic acid production from CO2. (f) Cyclability of the catalysts for the photo/biocatalytic CO2 reduction process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Overall, the 2D pnictogens are regarded as promising catalysts for fuel conversion, and next generation 2D material catalysts may provide a solution to energy shortage.


5.1.3. Photocatalytic environmental remediation. 
With the continuous development of industrialization, wastewater containing various organic pollutants, such as dyes, antibiotics, pharmaceuticals, and endocrine-disrupting chemicals, is increasingly discharged into the natural environment, causing serious environmental pollution problems.222,223 Also, many technologies have been explored to remove these pollutants from wastewater, such as adsorption, Fenton oxidation, electrochemical processes, and biodegradation.224,225 The rise of low-cost, high-efficiency, and non-secondary photocatalytic technology has provided a new way for society to combat these pollutants.226,227
Lee et al.228 firstly prepared few-layer BP and then embedded TiO2 into the BP layered structure (BP@TiO2) by a one-pot method at room temperature. The catalyst fully inherited the advantages of BP, such as insolubility, non-flammability, and thermodynamic stability. The BP@TiO2 catalyst showed photocatalytic activity for Reactive Black 5 (RB5) and rhodamine B (RhB) degradation. Lately, Barrio et al.229 reported van der Waals sandwich materials (CNSbx) that were measured for their photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. The 2D–2D heterostructure between g-CN and antimonene flakes forms a type I heterojunction, which can improve light absorption and charge separation under irradiation. After photoexcitation in g-CN, both electrons and holes migrate to the CB and the VB of Sb, respectively (Fig. 16a). Fig. 16b shows that in the presence of CNSb0.25, RhB can be completely degraded in only 20 minutes. Although environmental remediation using 2D pnictogens is still far from practical application, all the mentioned evidence extends their application prospects to treatment of wastewater containing organic pollutants. Table 3 summarizes the recent reports on 2D pnictogens for application in environmental remediation.
 Fig. 16  (a) Band alignment of the CNSbx heterostructures. (b) RhB degradation rates of the CNSbx heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
Table 3 Summary of the 2D pnictogen-based catalysts for catalytic applications




2D catalyst
Application
Performance parameters
Ref.





Photocatalysis



BP·InCl3
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 2058, 6597, 5691 (λ > 350 nm)

189



BP·B(C6F5)3
AQE (%): 0.8, 2.1, 8.4


BP·CH–C6H5




BP/TiO2
Photocatalytic H2 production
AQE (%): 18.2 at 365 nm

193



BP NS/Pt/TMC
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 950 (λ > 420 nm), 205 (λ > 780 nm)

194



Pt/BP crystalline
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 138 (λ > 420 nm)

196



BP NSs/Pt
Photocatalytic H2 production
AQE (%): 0.57 at 500 nm

195



Co2P/BP
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1191 (λ > 420 nm)

197



BP–Au/La2TiO2O7
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 740 (λ > 420 nm), 300 (λ > 780 nm)

200



BP–Pt/RGO
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 7329 (λ > 420 nm), 1800 (λ > 780 nm)

315



Pt/BP/ZnIn2S4
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1278 (λ > 420 nm)

201



CdS/BP–MoS2
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 183240 (λ > 420 nm)

203



BP/MoS2
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1286 (λ > 420 nm)

202



AQE (%): 1.2 at 420 nm


BP/CdS
Photocatalytic H2 production
AQE (%): 34.7 at 420 nm

204



NYF@Ag3PO4@BP
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 146 at 980 nm

205



BP/ZnxCd1−xS
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 9326 (λ > 420 nm)

316



AQE (%): 21.5 at 420 nm


BP/CN
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 786 (440–445 nm)

212



BP/CN
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 429 (λ > 420 nm), 102 (λ > 780 nm)

317



Phosphorene/g-C3N4
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 571 (λ > 400 nm)

318



Ni2P@BP/CN
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 858 (λ > 420 nm)

319



BP/PCN
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 7380 (λ > 400 nm)

320



BP/Pt/RGO
Photocatalytic H2 production
AQE (%): 8.7 at 420 nm, 1.5 at 780 nm

315



BP/Bi2WO6
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 4208

206



BP/RP
Photocatalytic H2 production
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 330 (λ > 420 nm)

208



BP/BiVO4
Photocatalytic water splitting
H2, O2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 160, 102 (λ > 420 nm)

207



BP@g-C3N4
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
CO, CH4 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 6.54, 0.29

216



M-BP-OH
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
CO yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 112.6 (λ > 420 nm)

220



AQE (%): 0.21 at 400 nm


AM/M/BP HNSs
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
HCOOH yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 45625

221



(λ > 420 nm)


BP@TiO2
Reactive black5 (RB5) and rhodamine B (RhB) degradation
Rate constant (h−1): 4.28, 4.46 (UV), 2.38, 2.05 (Vis)

228



BPQDs
Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation
Rate constant (h−1): 0.81 (Vis)

321



BP@MoS2
Methylene blue (MB) degradation
Rate constant (min−1): 0.085 (Vis)

322



CeO2/BP
Bisphenol A (BPA) degradation
82.3% within 180 min

323



BPQDs/ATP
Bisphenol A (BPA) degradation
90% within 180 min

324



GR/BP
2-Chlorophenol (2-CP) degradation
87% within 180 min (Vis)

325



ZIF-8/BP
Methylene blue (MB) degradation
Rate constant (min−1): 0.045 (Vis)

326



Ag–BPNS/GO
Methylene blue (MB) degradation
Rate constant (min−1): 0.031 (Vis)

327



BP–Ag/TiO2
Methylene blue (MB) degradation
Rate constant (min−1): 0.029 (Vis)

328



CNSbx
Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation
100% within 20 min at 554 nm

229



BPQDs/MoS2
Methylene orange (MO) degradation
Rate constant (min−1): 0.052 (NIR)

329



2D-BP
Dibutyl phthalate (DBP) degradation
45% within 6 h

330



BPCNS
Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation
NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 347.5 (λ > 420 nm)

235



PtNPS
Photocatalytic hydrogenation of styrene
TOF: 5900 h−1 (λ > 420 nm)

239







Electrocatalysis



Ni2P@BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 107 mV

256



Tafel slope: 38.6 mV dec−1


BP–Pt
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 70 mV

257



Current density: 82.89 mAcm−2


BP–MoS2
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 110 mV

331



Tafel slope: 144 mV dec−1


NH2–BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 290 mV

332



Tafel slope: 63 mV dec−1


BP/PB
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 148 mV

333



Tafel slope: 79 mV dec−1


PtRu NCs/BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 22mV

334



Tafel slope: 19 mV dec−1


Ni2P/BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 70 mV

335



Tafel slope: 81 mV dec−1


MoSe2–BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 200 mV

336



Tafel slope: 97 mV dec−1


MoS2–BP
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 85 mV

337



Tafel slope: 68 mV dec−1


EBP@NG
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 191 mV

338



Tafel slope: 76 mV dec−1


BP/Co2P
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Onset overpotential: 100 mV

198



Tafel slope: 62 mV dec−1


FL Sb
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 578 mV

264



Tafel slope: 217 mV dec−1


Ru–S–Sb/antimonene
Hydrogen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 153 mV

258



Tafel slope: 118 mV dec−1


BP–CNT
Oxygen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 1.49 V

262



Tafel slope: 72.88 mV dec−1


NiOOH/BP/BiVO4
Oxygen evolution reaction
Photocurrent density: 4.48 mA cm−2

263



Co3O4@BP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 400 mV

339



Tafel slope: 63 mV dec−1


Co(OH)2/BP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 276 mV

340



Tafel slope: 57 mV dec−1


BP/Co2P
Oxygen evolution reaction
Onset overpotential: 300 mV

198



Tafel slope: 78 mV dec−1


Co/BP NSs
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 310 mV

341



Tafel slope: 61 mV dec−1


Te-doped BP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Onset overpotential: 1.49 V

342



FL BP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 1.45 V

343



Tafel slope: 88 mV dec−1


FPQDs
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 1.66 V

344



Tafel slope: 48 mV dec−1


CoOx–BPQDs
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 360 mV

345



Tafel slope: 58.5 mV dec−1


Ni3N/BP–AG
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 233 mV

346



Tafel slope: 42 mV dec−1


Ni3N|Ni2P|BP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 247 mV

347



Tafel slope: 79 mV dec−1


Ag–TLBP
Oxygen evolution reaction
Onset potential: 0.87 V

282



CoPx–NPC
Oxygen evolution reaction
Current density: 4.7 mA cm−2

348



FL-Sb
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 2.23 V

264



Tafel slope: 261.3 mV dec−1


EBP@NG
Oxygen evolution reaction
Overpotential: 310 mV

338



Tafel slope: 89 mV dec−1


2L-Bi
Carbon dioxide electroreduction
Current density: 10 mA cm−2 (theoretical calculation)

267



ED-Bi dendrites/BP
Carbon dioxide electroreduction
Tafel slope: 149 mV dec−1

268



HCOOH yield (μmol dm−3 g−1): 22.7


FL-BP
Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation
NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1):1845

278



BP@SnO2−x
Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation
NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 2875

279



FL-Sb
Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation
NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 10612

280



Pd/ATN–BP
Ethanol oxidation reaction
Onset potential: 0.41 V

281



Tafel slope: 144 mV dec−1


Ag–TLBP
Oxygen reduction reaction
Onset potential: 0.69 V, 0.78 V

282



Au–TLBP
Tafel slope: 110 mV dec−1, 142 mV dec−1






Medical catalysis



2D BP
Photodynamic therapy

1O2 quantum yield: 0.91

288



UCNPs–BPS
Photodynamic therapy
Highest 1O2 generation at 808 nm

290



BPs@Au@Fe3O4
Photodynamic therapy
Highest 1O2 generation at 650 nm

291



BPQDs
Photodynamic therapy
Highest 1O2 generation at 410 nm

289



Au@BP
Sonodynamic therapy
Highest 1O2 generation and superior tissue permeability

301



Ti–PPMS–EPO/BPS
Antibacterial therapy
Antibacterial rate: 99.3% against E. coli, 99.2% against S. aureus

307







Others



Pd–BP
Selective hydrogenation
From chloronitroarenes to chloroanilines

308



Conversion (%): 99.5


Selectivity (%): 97.3


BP
Pyro-catalytic hydrogen evolution
H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 22.5

309



Pyro-catalytic decomposition of RhB
99% after 5 thermal cycles






5.1.4. Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. 
Ammonia (NH3) is considered to be an important precursor for the manufacture of fertilizers and chemicals. With population growth and the development of industry, the demand for NH3 has dramatically increased.230 Synthesizing NH3 from naturally abundant nitrogen not only has great significance for synthetic chemical processes but also provides a promising new approach to solve the severe energy and environmental crisis. Conventionally, artificial NH3 is prepared via high-temperature (350–550 °C) and high-pressure (150–350 atm) procedures (that is, the Haber–Bosch process). Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop alternative processes that may overcome the limitations of the traditional process. However, nitrogen is difficult to use as a precursor because the NN bond has a high bond energy of up to 940 kJ mol−1, which is required for activation and cleavage.231 There is high demand to develop artificial nitrogen fixation technology with low energy consumption under mild conditions. Lately, as a sustainable and economical technology, photocatalysis is regarded to have great potential to utilize solar energy as a driving force to activate NN bonds in the process of nitrogen fixation.232–234
Recently, Qiu et al.235 synthesized 2D black phosphorus composited with graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets (BPCNS) for the first time via a post calcination process. As shown in Fig. 17a, compared with BP nanosheets and CN nanosheets, the BPCNS show significantly improved photocatalytic activity in nitrogen fixation, and the highest photocatalytic performance was observed for 0.05% BPCNS. The FTIR results indicate that the exfoliation of CN and the combination between BPNS and CN do not change the chemical structure of CN (Fig. 17b). As presented in Fig. 17c, compared with bare BP, the spectrum of the BPCNS displays three peaks centered at 19.20, 0.06, and −11.09 ppm. Those peaks correspond to the P atoms in BP, in PxOy, and bonded with C atoms, respectively. In addition, compared with the spectrum of BP, the BP peak in the BPCNS spectrum shifts to a high field, which indicates that the electron density of the P atom in the BPCNS is redistributed. The EPR results reveal that owing to the formation of the C–P band, the π-conjugate system of CN has changed and the electrons of the BPCNS are excited (Fig. 17d and e). The photo-luminescence (PL) spectra imply that due to the effective transfer of the electrons through the C–P bond, the recombination of photo-generated carriers is inhibited (Fig. 17f). In summary, the C–P bond in the BPCNS inhibits the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers and restrains the oxidation of BP by decreasing the number of oxygen reaction sites. To date, there have been few reports on the introduction of 2D materials as photocatalysts for nitrogen fixation. As a sustainable and economical technology, we believe that increasing numbers of 2D pnictogen-based materials will be developed for application in nitrogen fixation.
 Fig. 17  (a) The rates of NH3 production over various catalysts. (b) FTIR spectra of a series of catalysts. (c) 31P NMR spectra of various samples. (d) EPR spectra of various catalysts and (e) corresponding increments of intensity. (f) PL spectra of the various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 


5.1.5. Photocatalytic hydrogenation. 
Hydrogenation is generally the addition of hydrogen molecules to an unsaturated substrate. The process has a variety of industrial purposes and promising applications in the synthesis of platform chemicals for large-scale production.236 However, large amounts of thermal energy are consumed in most commercial reactions, and the consumption of non-renewable fossil energy sources can cause environmental issues. Photocatalysis can be used to convert solar energy into chemical energy, thus providing a promising method for solving this issue.237,238
Bai et al.239 developed ultra-small Pt nanoparticles coupled with BP nanosheets (PtNPS), in which the strong Pt–P interactions produced PtPxOy species on the surface of the BP nanosheets with strongly enhanced stability. By an in situ reduction process, PtNPs were grown on the surface of BP in elevated temperature ethanol with a controlled oxygen concentration. PtNPs with a mean diameter of 1.1 nm were uniformly dispersed on the surface of the nanosheets (Fig. 18a–f). The XPS spectrum of Pt 4f shows an apparent peak at 72.9 eV, which indicates that an additional bond is formed between P and Pt atoms (Fig. 18g). The P 2p spectrum demonstrates the strong Pt–BP interactions (Fig. 18h). The weak oxidation peak at 530.5 eV in the O 1s spectrum may arise from the Pt–O bond (Fig. 18i). Fig. 18j shows the turnover frequencies (TOFs) of Pt composited with various supports in styrene hydrogenation, and the Pt/BP catalyst exhibits excellent photocatalytic activity (TOF reaching 5900 h−1). The ratio of the reaction rates (KH/KD) is 3.2 (Fig. 18k), suggesting that the insertion of Had atoms into styrene is the rate-limiting step in the photocatalytic hydrogenation. Because the photogenerated electrons significantly reduce the insertion barrier of hydrogen, the performance of hydrogenation is dramatically improved (Fig. 18l). Overall, this study indicates that the transformation and accumulation of photogenerated electrons enhance the photocatalytic performance of the heterostructures. This research achievement provides profound understanding of the design of efficient photocatalysts and widens the horizon of future photocatalytic hydrogenation.
 Fig. 18  (a and b) TEM and HAADF-STEM images of the Pt/BP catalyst. Inset: particle size distribution of Pt. (c) HR-HAADF image of Pt/BP. (d) HRTEM image of Pt/BP. (e and f) STEM-EDS elemental mappings of P and Pt. (g) Pt 4f core-level XPS spectra of the various samples. (h and i) P 2p and O 1s core-level XPS spectra of BP and Pt/BP. (j) TOFs of various samples for the hydrogenation reaction under different irradiation and thermal conditions. (k) Primary isotope effect over the catalyst in the hydrogenation reaction. (l) Insertion barrier of Had atoms for the α- and β-carbons of styrene with and without an additional 0.5 electrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 

5.2. Electrocatalysis
With the decreasing supply of fossil fuels and the increasing attention to global warming, environmental issues and energy shortage, exploring clean and sustainable energy has become one of the greatest challenges to economic and ecological sustainability. One potential target is to develop an electrochemical process that converts molecules in the environment into higher-value products by green and economical renewable processes. Electrocatalysts are considered to play a vital role in technologies involving energy conversion because they increase the efficiency of the reactions and the selectivity of the target products. Since the first report in 2004, 2D materials have been utilized in various electrochemical applications.240–242 Recently, the development of Xenes has upgraded the exploration of 2D catalysts; they have attracted great interest in electrocatalysis owing to their low cost, attractive intrinsic structures, and electronic characteristics.243

5.2.1. Hydrogen evolution reaction. 
Hydrogen evolution from water electrolysis is one of the most classic electrochemical reactions, and the process is also used to produce high-purity hydrogen fuels. The application of hydrogen is not limited to energy; it is also used as an important raw material for production of the world's most demanding chemicals, such as ammonia and metal refining.244,245 Therefore, designing high-performance electrocatalysts for the HER is essential for the development of clean energy at the fundamental and application levels.246,247 In the following sections, we summarize the latest advances in applying 2D pnictogen materials to HER.
The HER consists of a multi-step reaction, including adsorption, reaction, and desorption processes. The elementary steps of HER are divided into the following three parts.248,249
(1) Hydronium ion is absorbed at the surface active sites of the catalyst; then, adsorbed hydrogen is generated.
Volmer step:H+ + e− + A → AH(A represents the active site of the catalyst, and AH represents H adsorbed on the active site)
(2) Subsequently, the AH is combined to form H2 molecules by a Heyrovsky or Tafel step. In the Heyrovsky process, the H2 molecules are generated by combining adsorbed H with hydronium ion. Meanwhile, during the Tafel step, two adsorbed H on the catalyst combine to produce H2 molecules.
Heyrovsky step:A + H+ + e− + AH → H2 + A
Tafel step:2AH → H2 + 2A
(3) In the last step, the obtained H2 is released from the surface of the catalyst.
In practice, these pathways depend to a large extent on the basic characteristics of the electrocatalyst surface. Moreover, to evaluate the HER performance of electrocatalysts, obtain in-depth understanding of the catalytic mechanism, and study the rate determination steps of the entire HER reaction, measurement of the reaction rate is crucial. Calculating the Tafel slope and analyzing the slope value can reveal the HER performance and the catalytic pathway mechanism of an electrocatalyst.
In 2016, Sofer et al.135 first studied the electrochemical activity of BP in the HER theoretically and experimentally. According to first-principles calculations, it was found that the electron transmission rate at the edge plane of BP was much faster than the transmission rate at the basal plane, which indicates the semiconductor properties of the basal plane and the metal characteristics of the edge plane. The results of the HER show that significant differences in the catalytic activities were observed between basal-plane and edge-plane BP. Guided by pioneering theoretical studies,250–255 the rising star 2D pnictogens have been studied in the HER, especially phosphorene. Luo et al.256 reported a 0D–2D heterostructure (Ni2P@BP) for the HER for the first time. The heterostructure was synthesized using BP nanosheets as precursors to react with NiCl2 so that Ni2P NCs with a mean size of 5 nm were uniformly dispersed on the BP nanosheets (Fig. 19a and b); this improved the electrical conductivity by controlling the charge carrier concentration and reduced the thermal conductivity at 300 K (Fig. 19d and e). As a result, the catalyst showed excellent HER performance, with an overpotential of 107 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 38.6 mV dec−1. Very recently, Wang et al.257 demonstrated surprisingly strong activation of BP with Pt co-catalysts; the BP modulates the electronic structure of Pt and enhances its electrocatalytic performance in the HER. Pt 4f XPS (Fig. 19f and g) results indicate that the content of Pt–P can be tuned by changing the amount of BP; therefore, changing the amount of BP is a clever means of manipulating the electronic structures of catalysts. This research reveals a general strategy for obtaining Pt-based catalysts with tunable electronic structures and also provides profound understanding of the effects of BP on Pt-based catalysts to optimize the catalytic performance.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the preparation procedure of the Ni2P@BP catalyst. (b) TEM image of Ni2P@BP. (c) TEM images of Ni2P@BP with EDS mapping of Ni and P. (d) Electrical conductivities and (e) total thermal conductivities versus temperature over various catalysts. The dotted lines indicate simulated curves to reveal the trends of T−3 and T−1 in different temperature regions. (f) Pt 4f core-level XPS spectra of the BP–Pt/GR catalysts with different amounts of BP. (g) Chemical state contents of Pt versus the amount of BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH, and ref. 250, copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
Computational predictions indicate that antimonene will retain its metallicity even if the layered structure Sb is cut to three layers.63 This will effectively promote the activation of the catalyst when it complexes with the nano-catalyst. Antimonene should be an ideal catalyst support and is worthy of exploratory research. However, antimonene-related catalysis studies are still rare. Recently, Li et al.258 prepared a hybrid electrocatalyst of RuS2 nanodots-modified antimonene, which formed a large number of Ru–S–Sb bonds on the surface of the Sb. The XPS spectra of Ru 3d (Fig. 20a) indicate strong interactions between RuS2 and Sb. The atomic ratio of Ru:S is quite close to the stoichiometry of RuS2 based on the XPS analysis (Fig. 20b and c), and strong interactions of Ru–S–Sb are observed in XAFS (Fig. 20d). Systematic characterization, electrochemical, and DFT studies indicated that the Ru–S–Sb bonds formed on Sb changed the electronic structure of RuS2. Therefore, the charge density between the Ru–H bonds significantly increased, which is beneficial for promoting the HER process. Possible improvements of the HER can be performed, such as heteroatom doping, functionalization, and coating on 2D nanosheets, as summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 20  (a–c) Ru 3d, S 2p, and Sb 3d core-level XPS spectra of various catalysts. (d) FT-EXAFS analysis results showing the corresponding two-body backscattering path. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.2.2. Oxygen evolution reaction. 
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the crucial reaction for fuel cells, water splitting, and metal–air battery systems. Therefore, developing efficient, stable, and economic catalysts for the OER is one of the main themes of renewable energy in the present study.259–261 For the OER under alkaline conditions, the multi-electron reaction consists of a series of steps, including adsorption, electron transfer, chemical reaction, and desorption. The following possible mechanisms are proposed:A + OH− → AOH + e−AOH + OH− → AO + H2O + e−2AO → 2A + O2orAO + OH− → AOOH + e−AOOH + OH− → A + O2 + H2Owherein A represents the active site of the electrocatalyst and AOH, AO, and AOOH represent OH, O, and OOH adsorbed on the catalyst. The overall OER reaction pathway involves 4 electron transfer steps. Generally speaking, the OER process involves two possible pathways of direct combination of adsorbed O and formation of OOH intermediates. The OER pathway of a specific electrocatalyst can also be determined by the experimentally estimated Tafel slope, which is closely related to the electronic behavior involved in the reaction. The electrocatalytic reaction is necessary to experimentally evaluate the Tafel slope, and a smaller slope usually represents a highly efficient electrocatalyst.
For the first time, Wang et al.262 revealed the application of BP composited with CNT by a novel thermal-vaporization transformation (TVT) method in the OER. BP was grown directly on Ti foil and a CNT matrix through the TVT method, which produced various forms of BP, such as BP films and BP nanoparticles, on the support. The BP–CNT catalyst showed OER performance with an onset potential of 1.49 V, which is similar to the performance of most metal oxide-based electrocatalysts. A small Tafel slope of 72.88 mV dec−1 and high stability for the OER were observed on the catalyst. The facile, efficient, and scalable TVT method has broad prospects for the exploitation of low-cost and high-efficiency BP-based electrocatalysts for the OER process. Lately, Zhang et al.263 first inserted exfoliated BP nanosheets between BiVO4 photo-anodes and conventional OEC (OEC:NiOOH, MnOx, and CoOOH) layers and applied the composite to improvement of the OER. According to XPS characterization and density of states (DOS) calculations, Fig. 21a displays the possible bandgap shifts and intrinsic potential of the BP/BiVO4 heterostructure. In Fig. 21c, BP significantly increases the ηsep of BiVO4 in the entire voltage region, which may be due to surface passivation of the BP layer to reduce recombination. Then, the introduction of a NiOOH overlay on BP/BiVO4 is essential to improve the ability of the holes to effectively oxidize water. These results suggest that there is a strong synergy between the NiOOH and the BP. Fig. 21d indicates that layer-BP enhances charge separation and then transfers the generated holes to the NiOOH surface. The NiOOH/BP/BiVO4 photoanode exhibits excellent performance, with a photocurrent density of 4.48 mA cm−2 (Fig. 21b).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the energy diagram of the BP/BiVO4 heterojunction interface. (b) Photocurrent density stability over various samples, measured at 1.23 V vs. RHE in KPi electrolyte. (c) Charge separation efficiencies of the catalysts. (d) Charge transfer efficiencies of the catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
For the first time, Ren et al.264 studied electrocatalytic water splitting involving the OER and HER processes of few-layer antimonene nanosheets (Fig. 22a–d). In terms of the full water splitting process, the catalyst showed OER performance with an overpotential of 0.81 V at 10 mA cm−2, while the OER performance showed a potential change of 2.3 V at 1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 22e). In 5 hours of continuous testing, antimonene showed excellent stability, with negligible reduction in current density (Fig. 22f). The theoretical calculation of the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) indicates that the ΔGOH value of 1.6 eV is close to optimum under the limitation of the linear relationship of the adsorption free energy, which tends to demonstrate high OER activity. This work provides an in-depth understanding of the application of few-layer antimonene in electrocatalytic devices. The other 2D pnictogen-based electrocatalysts for the OER are summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of the Sb nanosheets. (b) HADDF image of few-layer antimonene. (c and d) EDX mapping of Sb element. (e) Water splitting characteristics of the catalyst with a two-electrode configuration. (f) Stability testing of Sb nanosheets under different bias potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


5.2.3. Carbon dioxide electroreduction. 
The electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) is a potential process to convert CO2 into renewable electricity-driven fuels and chemicals.265,266 Over the past decades, many metal-based electrocatalysts have been studied for their effectiveness in this reaction. With the development of preparation techniques for 2D metal-free materials, their unique properties render them attractive candidates for various catalytic applications. However, study of the CO2RR has rarely been reported. Recently, Wang et al.267 reported based on DFT calculations and microkinetic simulations that bilayer bismuthene showed the best catalytic performance for the CO2RR because its strong SOC effect contributes considerable stabilization energy. Fig. 23a shows that the SOC effect plays an important role in driving the reaction mechanism of 2D catalysts containing heavy elements. Note that bilayer bismuthene exhibits the highest catalytic performance due to its most significant SOC effect. Fig. 23b and c indicate that the intrinsic SOC of bismuthene contributes significantly to the electronic density of states near the Fermi level, which is generally beneficial to enhance its bonding capacity with the adsorbed species. In Fig. 23d, the theoretical simulation of bilayer bismuthene shows a current onset of −0.47 V and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at −0.68 V; this catalyst exhibits the highest CO2RR activity by microkinetic simulations.
 Fig. 23  (a) Theoretical calculation of the adsorption free energy of OCHO* versus the layer number of Bi with and without the existence of the SOC effect. (b) Stabilization energy contributed by the SOC as a function of the number of layers of bismuthene, and (c) the corresponding projected p-orbital DOS for the bismuthene active site. The Fermi level region is highlighted in gray. (d) Theoretically calculated polarization curves for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 over different layers of bismuthene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, for the first time, Huang et al.268 applied 2D BP to the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formic acid (HCOOH). Bi metal was electrodeposited on the surface of BP to synthesize Bi/BP NSs composites. The formation rates of formic acid and the faradaic efficiencies are displayed in Fig. 24a–d; note that BP NSs is regarded as an excellent substrate for improving the activity and the selectivity of HCOOH. The ED-Bi/BP NSs catalyst exhibits the highest yield of HCOOH, which is almost twice that of ED-Bi. In Fig. 24e, for the ED-Bi/BP NSs catalyst, the lowest charge-transfer resistance is observed compared with ED-Bi because the electrons are transferred from the BP NSs to ED-Bi. Also, the catalyst shows the lowest Tafel slope of 149 mV dec−1, which indicates that the catalyst has the fastest kinetic activity for CO2 reduction (Fig. 24f). Overall, the abovementioned research enriches the electrochemical application of 2D pnictogens and demonstrates that these materials have enormous potential in the CO2RR process.
 Fig. 24  (a and b) The yields of HCOOH and (c and d) the faradaic efficiencies of HCOOH at different potentials for 5 h over various samples. (e) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the various catalysts. (f) Tafel plots of the various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


5.2.4. Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation. 
Currently, the electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) requires a highly active electrocatalyst, such as noble metal catalysts, in order to cleave NN bonds.269–273 However, the low abundance and high cost of these elements have prevented their extensive applications. Recently, phosphorene as a 2D non-metal elemental material has shown abundant valence electrons and weak hydrogen adsorption; it can be used to provide suitable nitrogen active sites compared with metals and carbon-based materials.274–277 Zhang et al.278 proposed that few-layer BP should be considered as an excellent metal-free electrocatalyst for the NRR. The electronic structure of BP is similar to that of nitrogen (that is, 3s23p3 and 2s22p3, respectively); additionally, it has an anisotropic lattice structure. This inherent characteristic should facilitate the chemical adsorption of N2 molecules and provide enough electrons to activate the inert NN bond. Furthermore, DFT calculations indicate that zigzag and diff-zigzag edges of few-layer BP can be used as nitrogen adsorption centers as well as sites for NN bond activation, which allows N2 to be electrocatalytically reduced to NH3 through alternate hydrogenation pathways. Therefore, this work not only firstly proved the feasibility of metal-free catalysts for the NRR but also systematically studied the reaction mechanism of nitrogen on the catalyst. Afterward, Liu et al.279 developed BP@SnO2−x nanotube electrocatalysts for ambient nitrogen fixation. BP QDs were loaded on SnO2−x nanotubes via low-temperature NaBH4 reduction. Through this self-assembly method, the BP QDs were stably dispersed on the SnO2−x nanotubes owing to strong Sn–P coordination, thereby forming a dual-active catalyst (Fig. 25a and b). Altered electron density and electron screening effects were found in the XPS spectra of Sn 3d and P 2p due to the robust interactions between the BP QDs and the SnO2−x nanotubes (Fig. 25c and d). In Fig. 25f, the BP@SnO2−x catalyst exhibits the highest ammonia yield (48.87 μg h−1 mgcat−1) compared with the bare BP QDs and the SnO2−x nanotubes. The strong aggregation tendency and poor conductivity of the BP QDs inevitably weaken their the NRR performance. The SnO2−x nanotubes were decorated with BP QDs, which effectively alleviated their aggregation tendency. Also, oxygen vacancies formed at the heterogeneous interfaces could create atomic defects, which provided a built-in driving force to enhance the transfer of interface charges. In addition, the BP@SnO2−x catalyst has no significant attenuation during five cycles, which reveals its outstanding recyclability in the NRR process (Fig. 25e).
 Fig. 25  (a and b) TEM images of a BP@SnO2−x catalyst. Inset: HRTEM image of BP QD. Scale bar: 5 nm. (c and d) Sn 3d and P 2p core-level XPS spectra of the BP@SnO2−x catalyst. (e) Recycling experiments of the BP@SnO2−x catalyst. (f) The yields of ammonia over various catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
Few-layer antimonene (FL-Sb) nanosheets were also proved to be efficient NRR electrocatalysts under ambient conditions. Recently, Bat-Erdene et al.280 showed that FL-Sb nanosheets without any supporting catalyst demonstrated a high NH3 formation rate of 180.4 μg h−1 mgcat−1 at a potential of −0.1 V in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. According to DFT calculations, during the NRR process, the Sb2O3 (010) surface can be regarded as an active species due to oxidized antimonene, which facilitates activation of the NN bond. We are confident that the research results mentioned above will provide new ideas for the development of 2D pnictogen-based catalysts for electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation.


5.2.5. Other electrocatalysis. 
In addition to the extensively studied electrocatalytic applications in the HER, OER, CO2RR, and NRR, electrochemical energy technology also includes applications in the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).
The EOR is a key process in ethanol-based fuel cells, which can directly and effectively convert chemical energy into electrical energy. Wu et al.281 fabricated a Pd/ATN–BP hybrid catalyst to enhance the performance of the EOR. A support of BP nanoflakes and anatase titanium dioxide nanosheets (ATN) were hybridized by a ball-milling method. Note that reconstruction of the support of the ATN–BP hybrid improved its electrolyte permeability and electron transport capability. Then, Pd nanoparticles were anchored on the support by liquid in situ reduction. The heterointerfaces between the Pd nanoparticles and ATN–BP hybrids have strong synergistic interactions, which result in the stripping of intermediate species. As a result, the Pd/ATN–BP catalyst exhibits high activity and remarkable durability of the EOR.
In addition to the EOR, the ORR also regarded as a critical step in electrochemical energy applications, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells. For example, Peng et al.282 investigated the catalytic performance of different metals (M = Pt, Ag, Au) supported on thin-layered black phosphorus (TLBP). According to XPS characterization and DFT calculations (Fig. 26a–f), the interfacial charge transfer from BP to metal nanoparticles is controllable. The ORR performance of the catalysts is shown in Fig. 26g–i; improved ORR activity is observed on the Ag–TLBP and Au–TLBP catalysts owing to their enhanced binding of oxygen intermediates. However, it is possible for the binding of oxygen species to become too strong; thus, the Pt–TLBP catalyst exhibits poor performance.
 Fig. 26  (a–c) Pt 4f, Au 4f, and Ag 3d core-level XPS spectra of Pt–TLBP, Au–TLBP, and Ag–TLBP. (d–f) DFT calculations of charge transfer from TLBP to Pt, Au, and Ag nanoparticles. (g–i) The ORR activity of Pt–TLBP, Au–TLBP, and Ag–TLBP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

5.3. Medical catalysis
Traditionally, catalysis and medicine have been regarded as two separate research areas, with each studying their scientific issues. The fast-developing domain of nano-chemistry in recent years has promoted the rapid cross-section of these two fields. A large number of catalysts, such as nano-enzymes, photocatalysts, and electrocatalysts, have been applied in the medical field. Biological microenvironments are changed by initiating specific catalytic reactions in pathological areas to achieve effective treatment of major diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and wound infection. Researchers have strived to achieve high conversion and selectivity of catalysis in the last few decades, and they can skillfully transform these benefits into high therapeutic efficacy and reduced side effects to guide catalysis to obtain the best therapeutic effects using “nano-catalytic medicine”. The development of nano-catalytic systems will certainly accelerate the exploration of their biomedical application. By introducing non-toxic or less toxic nano-catalysts in pathological areas, the concept of catalysis can be applied to treat diseased areas in a more biocompatible and durable manner.176,283,284
Research of 2D materials in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis can be used as a guide for medical catalysis research. Due to their simple mechanisms of metabolism and degradation in biological systems, the emerging mono-elemental 2D pnictogen materials have unique advantages over other multi-elemental 2D materials.

5.3.1. Photodynamic therapy. 
In section 5.1, we stated that the general properties of phosphorene have been widely applied in photocatalysis. Under the irradiation of a light source, a photocatalyst tends to generate electron–hole pairs, which further react with O2 and H2O to generate various ROS.283 ROS are chemically functional molecules which are highly reactive owing to their unpaired valence electrons. For example, superoxide radical (O2˙−), hydroxyl radical (˙OH), and singlet oxygen (1O2) have great potential in biological fields. PDT has the advantage of low systemic toxicity and is considered to be a less invasive technology; it is widely used in the fields of cancer therapeutic modality and nanomedicine.285–287 In the presence of a photocatalyst, PDT is regarded as a process of generating photocatalytic ROS, and its advancement also benefits from the theoretical and experimental progress of photocatalytic applications. Therefore, it is vital to introduce high-performance photocatalysts into the PDT field, such as emerging phosphorenes with wide light absorption, high ROS quantum yields, and superior biocompatibility.
In 2015, for the first time, Wang et al.288 demonstrated that exfoliated 2D BP can generate 1O2 for applications in PDT under visible light. According to in vitro and in vivo studies, 2D BP showed significant cell and tumor growth inhibition at low dosage and a short light exposure time. Lately, Guo et al.289 reported that BP QDs demonstrated remarkable photodynamic effects under light irradiation and tended to effectively produce the ROS to kill cancerous cells. Compared with other metal-free biocatalysts, BP can be easily degraded into biocompatible phosphorus oxides without any residue, which provides great potential in cancer treatment. However, the absorption wavelength of BP in the field of visible light tends to produce strong tissue interference. Its limited penetration depth greatly hinders its practical biomedical applications. Therefore, Lv et al.290 designed a UCNPs-BPS catalyst by combining 2D BP nanosheets with small up-conversion luminescent (ULC) materials (NaGdF4:Yb, Er@Yb@Nd@Yb). The UCNPs convert NIR (808 nm) into visible light through an up-conversion energy transfer process. Therefore, both radiation and emitted light tend to contribute energy to generate ROS. The BPS was stabilized by PEG-NH2, and the UCNPs were modified with PAA. Then, the BPS and UCNPs composites were combined by electrostatic interactions (Fig. 27a). The antitumor effect against HeLa cells was further tested in vitro and in vivo. UCNPs-BPS exhibits weak toxicity to cells and high anticancer efficiency under irradiation with different wavelengths of light (Fig. 27b). In Fig. 27c, the UCNPs-BPS show the strongest tumor-suppressive effect under 808 nm light irradiation, while the effect of 808 nm light alone on the therapy is negligible; this is highly consistent with the experimental results of the in vitro models. Additionally, the tumor sizes decreased for all the groups (Fig. 27d), and the tumors were almost completely inhibited in the presence of the catalyst under 808 nm light irradiation.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the synthetic method of UCNPs-BPS. (b) Viability of HeLa cells incubated with UCNPs-BPS under different experimental conditions. (c) Images of mice and tumors on day 14. (d) Normalized tumor volumes with prolonged time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Although BP has made new progress in the field of tumor therapy, enhancing its therapeutic efficiency is still challenging. In 2017, Yang et al.291 proposed a higher therapy effect by combination of PDT and photothermal therapy (PTT) under single light irradiation. PTT usually relies on a photothermal agent, which converts the absorbed strong light energy into heat energy, resulting in thermal ablation of target cells.292–294 BP was combined with Fe3O4 and Au nanoparticles to form a BPs@Au@Fe3O4 catalyst by one-step electrostatic attraction procedures (Fig. 28a). Due to their multifunctional performance, such as the photodynamic effect of BPs, the photothermal effect of Au, and the tumor targeting and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) guidance capabilities of Fe3O4, these materials have significantly enhanced therapeutic effects and higher selectivity compared with traditional therapies. In vitro, the catalyst shows the highest heating rate under 650 nm laser irradiation compared with the other composites. Also, the catalyst was used for cancer treatment in vivo. After injection of the catalyst, a rapid increase in the temperature of the tumor location of the mice was detected under 650 nm laser irradiation and a magnetic field (Fig. 28b and c). As shown in Fig. 28d, the catalyst has no acute toxicity to HeLa cells in vitro in a broad range of concentrations. Additionally, the nanoparticles show the highest inhibitory effect under laser irradiation, which is consistent with the results of the ROS evaluation. The performance of PDT and PTT synergistic therapy was evaluated in vivo to inhibit tumors in tumor-bearing U14 mice. The experimental results reveal the great potential clinical applications of the BPs@Au@Fe3O4 catalyst as cancer therapeutics (Fig. 28e–g).
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of the preparation procedures of BPs@Au@Fe3O4. (b) The infrared thermal temperature versus irradiation time for HeLa cells incubated with various samples under 650 nm laser irradiation. (c) The infrared thermal temperature versus irradiation time for tumor-bearing mice injected with the samples. (d) Viabilities of HeLa cells incubated with various samples at different concentrations under laser irradiation and a magnetic field. (e) In vivo tumor volumes of U14 tumors under different conditions versus treatment time. (f) Images of tumor-bearing mice treated with various samples under different experimental conditions. (g) Images of representative mice on day 14. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. 
Overall, PDT has been widely studied as a photocatalytic therapy to enhance its therapeutic efficacy by designing photocatalysts through modifying research strategies related to photocatalysis and biological compatibility. It can be expected that both theoretical and experimental research of photocatalysis will be beneficial to further advancement of the clinical application of PDT.


5.3.2. Sonodynamic therapy. 
In the past decades, researchers have made extensive efforts in the study of PDT, in which cytotoxic 1O2 is generated under light irradiation to induce apoptosis. However, the poor tissue penetration of the light irradiation severely restricts the efficacy of PDT in deep tumors.295,296 As an alternative to PDT, sonodynamic therapy (SDT) can utilize ultrasound (US) as an external physical trigger for sonochemical reactions, and the US promotes the production of ROS in the presence of nano-catalysts. With respect to the high tissue permeability of US, SDT has been regarded as an alternative treatment to overcome the tissue penetration limitation of PDT. However, the mechanism of sonochemical reactions is still in the elementary stage.296–298 To date, SDT catalysts are limited to organic molecules (e.g., porphyrin) and TiO2-derived materials, which suffer from low stability in the biological milieu and poor 1O2 generation efficiency.299,300
Ouyang et al.301 fabricated Au@BP composite as a 2D sonosensitizer; Au nanoparticles (Au NPs) were in situ grown on BP nanosheets as a robust support to further enhance their sonodynamic performance (Fig. 29a). Fig. 29b and c display that the 1O2 production efficiency of the Au@BP composite under ultrasonic activation is 4.7 times that of NIR light irradiation. The US promotes diffusion of O2 in the solution, which increases the interaction between O2 and the Au@BP composite, thereby generating 1O2. In addition, 1O2 generation under US irradiation retains 93% of its efficiency under pork skin. Therefore, the US not only improves the 1O2 generation efficiency of the Au@BP composite but also has excellent tissue permeability. The sonodynamic performance was investigated in vivo in 4T1-tumor-bearing mice. Fig. 29d and e exhibit that the tumor growth was dramatically inhibited by the Au@BP composite under US, and the SDT performance with the Au@BP composite was much better than that in the rest of the groups, especially PDT. This exploration is regarded as a pioneer example of a 2D sonosensitizer, which provides new strategies for the development of safe and effective SDT.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the preparation of Au@BP. (b) Mechanism of singlet oxygen (1O2) production by Au@BP under US activation. (c) Relative 1O2 generation content over Au@BP with or without pork skin under 660 nm NIR light and ultrasound activation. (d) Tumor volume versus treatment time over various samples under different conditions; (e) corresponding photographs of representative mice after the treatments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The utilization of light and US as means of stimulation in therapeutics has inspired researchers to explore other external triggers. Recently, electrocatalysts have been used in electricity-triggered therapeutics for cancer treatment due to advancement in electrocatalysis. For example, electricity-triggered Pt nanoparticles were used under an alternating current, which is called electrodynamic therapy (EDT).302 To date, however, no one has studied the application of 2D materials in EDT. This is a new region to introduce electrocatalysis in EDT, which provides new ideas for future nanomedicine-based therapeutic methods.


5.3.3. Antibacterial therapy. 
Auxotrophic bacteria depend on parasitism of other living organisms in nature to obtain essential nutrients; this may cause pathogens to infect human wounds and other susceptible interfaces, resulting in the production of a large number of toxins, which may seriously interfere with the healing process.303 In order to resolve this problem, new antibiotics and various antibacterial agents have successfully applied to prevent colonization of pathogens.304,305 However, traditional antibacterial agents such as Ag nanoparticles have chronic toxic tissue effects on human health as well as environmental contamination.306 Recent advances in medical catalysis provide a feasible tool for manipulating the reactions that produce ROS, thus initiating effective toxic effects on various pathogenic bacteria. Pathogens can be destroyed by these ROS, such as 1O2 produced by photosensitizers that transfer electrons to molecular oxygen under light.
In 2018, Tan et al.307 reported the compositing of poly(4-pyridonemethylstyrene) (PPMS) with BP (Ti-PPMS-EPO/BPS) as a system to store and release ROS for disinfection. Note that BP is regarded as a photosensitizer to generate 1O2 for antibacterial therapy, and the PPMS can store the 1O2 and subsequently release it via thermal decomposition without side effects. The nanocomposite shows significantly improved stability due to protection of the hydrophobic PPMS and oxide layer on the surface of BP (Fig. 30a). Antibacterial experiments in vitro exhibit efficient bactericidal ability of the samples with or without irradiation (Fig. 30b). In vitro antibacterial ability was evaluated on S. aureus-infected mice, which is consistent with the in vitro antibacterial behavior. These results demonstrate that the samples exhibit significant antibacterial effects in the presence or absence of light in vivo (Fig. 30c and d). Therefore, development of photocatalysis has also improved the performance of various photocatalysts in antibacterial applications. It is expected that nano-catalysts with ultrasonic, electric, and photo-triggered ROS generation capabilities will also be used for antibacterial therapy in the future.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of the sample with or without light irradiation and the improved stability of BPS by PPMS. (b) In vitro spread plate and antibacterial rates over various samples under different conditions. (c) In vivo spread plate results and antibacterial rates over various samples and under different conditions. (d) H&E and Giemsa staining images showing the tissue infection degrees of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 

5.4. Other catalytic applications
In addition to photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and medical catalysis that have been extensively studied, the research of 2D pnictogen materials has been extended to other catalytic applications, such as selective hydrogenation and pyro-catalytic processes.
Vanni et al.308 prepared highly dispersed Pd nanoparticles with a 2D BP support which showed excellent performance in the catalytic hydrogenation of chloronitroarene to chloroaniline. Conversion of 99.5% and selectivity of 97.3% toward chloroaniline were observed for the ortho-isomer (Fig. 31a). For the first time, EXAFS measurements proved the existence of covalent Pd–P coordination bonds with a short Pd–P distance of 2.26 Å (Fig. 31b and c). In addition, the Pd–P coordination number was approximately 1.7, suggesting that 2D BP acts as a polydentate phosphine ligand on the surface of Pd atom. Therefore, the BP prevents agglomeration of Pd nanoparticles and maintains the stability of the catalyst structure. You et al.309 reported the pyro-electric properties of wrinkled 2D BP, which exhibited a pyro-catalytic reaction.310 The pyro-electric charge generated under ambient cold–hot alternation conditions was used for hydrogen evolution from water and organic RhB decomposition. As shown in Fig. 31d, the cold–hot alternation tends to cause a net change (q+ + q−) in the electric dipole moment of the catalyst, which causes charge compensation on the surface of the catalyst. The mechanism of hydrogen evolution is as follows: (1) 2H+ + 2q− → H2(2)
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the hydrogenation reaction of chloronitroarenes to chloroanilines. (b) EXAFS spectra at the Pd K-edge and (c) the corresponding Fourier transforms. (d) Schematic of H2 generation through the pyro-electric process. (e) The decomposition ratio versus the number of thermal cycles. Inset: photograph showing pyro-catalytically decomposed RhB dye solutions of BP at different stages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society, ref. 300, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to pyro-catalytic hydrogen evolution, the catalysts were evaluated for the pyro-catalytic decomposition of RhB (Fig. 31e). The pyro-catalytic dye decomposition process is shown below: (3) O2 + q− → O2˙−(4) OH− + q+ → ˙OH(5) ˙OH (or O2˙−) + dye → decomposition(6)
Overall, the potential application of 2D pnictogen-based materials can be further explored, extended, designed, and applied to other catalysis processes through rationally adjusting their structure–activity correlations and general properties.
6. Challenges and outlook
2D materials open new territory into unknown areas of material space. On the one hand, due to their ultra-thin structures, they are extremely promising in energy, medical, and device applications. On the other hand, their mono- or few-layer structures endow them with physical properties which are enormously different from those of their counterpart bulk materials, thus providing new degrees of freedom. Due to the unique properties of the 2D structures, a burgeoning research boom has recently emerged, with strong momentum of development and potential practical applications. This boom started with graphene, TMDs, and MXenes; recently, the rising star 2D pnictogen family has come into the spotlight. In this review, we systematically classify and summarize advanced research of the emerging 2D pnictogen materials in light of their structural allotropes, general properties, preparation methods, characterization, and performance. With respect to their intrinsic properties, they are semiconductors with a broad bandgap range, which provides opportunities to discover their photocatalytic and electrocatalytic applications.
Among the 2D pnictogen family, phosphorene is one of the most studied 2D materials in electrical and optical devices due to its wide light absorption and high carrier mobility. Additionally, phosphorene has impressive properties, such as high surface area, small electric resistance, robust structure, excellent thermal conductivity, and unique anisotropy. Due to these remarkable properties, it is a promising candidate for photocatalysis or electrocatalysis. The scalable production of 2D pnictogen materials will certainly be vital to promote their commercial application. There are numerous methods to prepare 2D pnictogens and their heterostructures in the laboratory. However, low-cost and environmentally safe mass production remains challenging. Note that high-quality and large-area preparation methods are necessary to facilitate the commercial application of these materials. Phosphorene has been intensively explored for less than a decade, and interest in the heavy 2D pnictogens has grown rapidly. However, to date, only a few catalytic applications have been reported. Some theoretical and calculation models offer extremely broad prospects for future applications. Recently, Xu et al.311 developed an innovative fabrication strategy to obtain large-area and highly crystalline black phosphorus films by controlling nucleation and lateral growth. This novel fabrication method provides a new method for the large-scale production of high-quality black phosphorus films. In addition, the heavy pnictogens have strong SOC effects and high stability under ambient conditions. Therefore, heavy 2D pnictogen-based catalysts should be valued and explored in catalytic applications in the next few years. There are still many undiscovered catalysts and catalytic systems, and even known catalytic systems have potential to be greatly improved. It is expected that there will be further development of 2D pnictogen materials in various catalytic systems and bring them closer to practical applications.
Recent advances based on the modification of 2D pnictogen materials (e.g., doping, functionalization, and heterostructures) provides new possibilities in catalysis. Modified 2D pnictogen-based materials are considered to be good candidates for a range of catalytic applications, from photocatalysis and electrocatalysis to medical catalysis. In particular, the concept of catalysis is gradually being reflected in the field of nano-medicine. The performance of a catalyst can be skillfully translated into efficacy and targeted therapy. In terms of the mentioned properties of phosphorene, its high biodegradability overcomes the shortcomings of most inorganic materials; thus, it is expected that the theoretical and experimental basis of catalysis will guide its further development in biomedical applications.
Although the enormous catalytic application prospects of 2D pnictogens are encouraging and promising, their catalytic performance is still in the infancy stage in the laboratory, and there is much room for improvement. Many critical issues still require systematic investigation. Indeed, 2D pnictogen-based materials provide a well-defined model in experimental research; additionally, theoretical simulation has developed rapidly in recent decades. However, there is still a large gap between experimental systems and actual application. The current research usually focuses on improving the catalytic performance but rarely explores the catalytic mechanism in depth. Due to the lack of advanced characterization techniques and in-depth theoretical calculation to guide the design of efficient 2D-based catalysts, most of the catalytic systems are still in the trial and error stage. It is necessary to develop in situ characterizations and calculating models which are close to realistic experimental conditions. Nano-catalytic medicine can be instructed by the catalytic process, which benefits from the theoretical and experimental advancement in the fields of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. However, it is still difficult to elucidate the in vivo mechanisms of nano-catalysts through this theoretical and experimental research. The biological environment is complex and different from the experimental environment; thus, the precise use of catalysis in the body to achieve the desired therapeutic results is a difficult task. Frankly speaking, we only know the result, not the process. Recently, multifunctional optical probes have been extensively developed that have high sensitivity and specificity for detecting the concentration and distribution of biochemicals in the biological environment. These diagnostic methods are considered to be useful for accurately characterizing the catalytic process in vivo, and they will ultimately enable scientists to fully clarify the structure–function relationship of medical catalysts.312–314
The rising star 2D pnictogen materials offer a novel platform to study their electronic and optoelectronic applications. In the post-graphene era, pioneering research on the 2D pnictogen materials and their heterostructures provide bright prospects, particularly in terms of their ambient atmosphere stability and photochemical and electrochemical characteristics, which are undoubtedly important in catalysis and biomedical applications. We are convinced that understanding the catalytic properties of 2D materials via theoretical calculations, in situ characterization, and efficient preparation techniques will result in their commercial and clinical applications in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the State Key Research Development Program of China (Grant No. 2019YFB2203503), National Natural Science Fund (Grant No. 61875138, 61961136001, and U1801254), and Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (KQTD2015032416270385, JCYJ20170811093453105, JCYJ20180307164612205, and GJHZ20180928160209731). The authors also acknowledge the support from the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shenzhen University (Xili Campus).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5979–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, J. Gong, J. Chen, Z. Zeng, W. Huang, K. Pu, J. Liu and P. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808283 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0014 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Burch, D. Mandrus and J.-G. Park, Nature, 2018, 563, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, L. Miao, S.-T. Han, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Peng, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 997–1019 RSC .
Y. Song, S. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Li, L. Zhao, H. Zhang and D. Tang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 25933–25942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Chen, X. Zhu, G. Hu, P. Peng, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, S. H. Wang, Z. X. Wu, Z. X. Wang, D. H. Wang, H. Huang, F. Zhang, Y. Q. Ge and H. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 22750–22760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Miao, G. Jiang, S. Chen, J. Liu, X. Fu, C. Zhao and H. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 7681–7693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mu, Z. Wang, J. Yuan, S. Xiao, C. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Xue, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, D. Tang, L. Zhao, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Opt. Commun., 2010, 283, 3334–3338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Chen, P. Tang, C. Xu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 6418–6427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Liang, Y. Song, Y. Zou, H. Zeng, S. Xu, H. Zhang and D. Fan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701166 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, Z. Yang, C. Si, Z. Liang, X. Chen, R. Cao, Z. Guo, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, M. Zhang, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1466–1476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Song, H. Zhang, D. Y. Tang and D. Y. Shen, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 27283–27289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, X. Tang, Z. Yang, Z. Liang, Y. Chen, K. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700026 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, R. Hu, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Zhu, J. Yan, K. Ye, K. Cheng, G. Wang and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5363–5372 RSC .
B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 471–487 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, J. Zhao, J. Zou, Z. He, C. Xu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Dong, L. Wang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3538–3548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Xu, X. Ren, Z. Li, X. Qi, K. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6581–6588 RSC .
R. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, X. Chen, W.-J. Ong, X. Zhao and N. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 18–50 CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gu, S. Zhang, X. Li, X. Wang, T. Wen, R. Jehan, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. Wang, Environ. Pollut., 2018, 240, 493–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 8229–8244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, Y. Duo, Z. Lin, T. Fan, C. Xing, L. Yu, R. Wang, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L.-P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, W. Lu, J. Li, Y. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807326 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, Y.-P. Peng, L. Yu, C. Xing, M. Qiu, J. Hu and H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900400 CrossRef .
J. Chen, T. Fan, Z. Xie, Q. Zeng, P. Xue, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Luo and H. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2020, 237, 119827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, S. Chen, Y. Duo, Y. Zhu, T. Fan, Q. Zou, M. Qu, Z. Lin, J. Zhao, Y. Li, L. Liu, S. Bao, H. Chen, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22129–22140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song, Q. Xiong, S. Shi, Z. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, L. Mei and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Cui, Y. Zhou, W. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602896 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, G. Jing, X. Liang, M. Qiu, Z. Li, R. Cao, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8096–8101 RSC .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6091–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Li, A. Aljarb, Y. Shi and L. J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6134–6150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Qu, H. Zhang, T. Wen, H. Wang, S. Chen, L. Song, X. Zhang, L. Jing, R. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803402 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, L. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. He, W. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, W. Lü, Y. Li, Q. Wen, J. Li, J. Feng, S. Ruan, Y. J. Zeng, X. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800561 CrossRef .
S. B. Alahakoon, S. D. Diwakara, C. M. Thompson and R. A. Smaldone, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1344–1356 RSC .
P. Li, Y. Chen, T. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Lin, Y. Xu, L. Li, H. Mu, B. N. Shivananju, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, S. Li, D. Tang, B. Jia, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12759–12765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ou, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. A. Yuwono, R. Wang, Z. Dai, W. Li, C. Zheng, Z. Q. Xu, X. Qi, S. Duhm, N. V. Medhekar, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705792 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qi, Y. Zhang, Q. Ou, S. T. Ha, C. W. Qiu, H. Zhang, Y. B. Cheng, Q. Xiong and Q. Bao, Small, 2018, 14, 1800682 CrossRef .
W. Lei, G. Liu, J. Zhang and M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3492–3509 RSC .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
M. Z. Mohamad Nasir and M. Pumera, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 121, 115696 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li, Z. Yang, B. Dong, J. Qu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705833 CrossRef .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
L. Wu, Z. Xie, L. Lu, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Ge, F. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Guo, J. Liu, Y. Xiang, S. Xu, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700985 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, F. Zhang, Z. Liang, T. Fan, Z. Li, X. Jiang, H. Chen, J. Li and H. Zhang, Photon. Res., 2019, 7, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, D. Wang, T. Fan, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Tao, L. Liu, S. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4747–4755 RSC .
W. Huang, Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Wu, D. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Ge, Z. N. Huang, X. Dai, Y. Xiang, J. Li, X. Zhu and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9582–9593 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, S. Chen, M. Qiu, X. Liang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, Z. Li, Z. Xie, D. Wang, B. Dong, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2018, 7, 1701510 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, X. Ye, C. Wang, C. Xing, Q. Miao, Z. Xie, X. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and L. Mei, J. Contr. Release, 2019, 296, 150–161 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hartman and Z. Sofer, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8566–8576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Wang, T.-Y. Lü, H. Q. Wang, Y. P. Feng and J. C. Zheng, Front. Phys., 2019, 14, 33403 CrossRef .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer, D. Bouša and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14417–14422 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ersan, D. Kecik, V. O. Özçelik, Y. Kadioglu, O. Ü. Aktürk, E. Durgun, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 021308 Search PubMed .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6964–6989 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9648–9653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, K. Hu, D. Yan, R. Chen, Y. Zou, H. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800295 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, C. Lai, G. Zeng, D. Huang, L. Qin, M. Zhang, M. Cheng, X. Liu, H. Yi, C. Zhou, F. Huang, S. Liu and Y. Fu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804565 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Huang, C.-X. Liu, R. Shi and Y. Chen, Chem.–Eur J., 2019, 26, 4449–4460 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and W. Sun, Chem.–Eur J., 2020, 26, 6437–6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakthivel, X. Huang, Y. Wu and S. Rtimi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, D. Deng and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606967 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
J. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Han, Z. Wang, S. Zhong, S. Sun, R. Guo, X. Zhou, C. D. Gu, K. D. Yuan, Z. Li and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4903–4908 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Xie, F. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li, E. Kan, W. Liu, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1666–1669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, Z. T. Sun, D. K. Sang, X. G. Han, H. Zhang and C. M. Niu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13384–13403 RSC .
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer and R. Claessen, Science, 2017, 357, 287 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang, F. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photon. Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Chia, N. M. Latiff, R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur J., 2019, 25, 2242–2249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mao, J. Tang, L. Xie, J. Wu, B. Han, J. Lin, S. Deng, W. Ji, H. Xu, K. Liu, L. Tong and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8586–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Akhtar, C. Zhang, M. Rajapakse, M. R. K. Musa, M. Yu, G. Sumanasekera and J. B. Jasinski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 7298–7304 RSC .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Döbbelin, A. Ciesielski, S. Haar, S. Osella, M. Bruna, A. Minoia, L. Grisanti, T. Mosciatti, F. Richard, E. A. Prasetyanto, L. De Cola, V. Palermo, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi, R. Lazzaroni, A. C. Ferrari, D. Beljonne and P. Samorì, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11090 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z. X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Xu, E. G. Wang, C. S. Ting and W. P. Su, Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter, 1993, 48, 17271–17279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1574–1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Som, V. Mankad and P. K. Jha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 21634–21641 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ares, J. J. Palacios, G. Abellán, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703771 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Wang, S. Li, Z. Sun, J. Yu, W. Tang and M. Sun, Physica E Low Dimens. Syst. Nanostruct., 2019, 108, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Hao, F. X. Luo, S. W. Zhai, Q. L. Meng, J. G. Wu, L. Zhang, T. Z. Li, Y. Z. Jia and M. Zhou, Nano Futures, 2019, 3, 8 CrossRef .
M. Y. Liu, L. Gong, Q. Y. Chen, W. Z. Li, C. Cao and Y. He, J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 2020, 32, 035501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Kowalczyk, S. A. Brown, T. Maerkl, Q. Lu, C. K. Chiu, Y. Liu, S. A. Yang, X. Wang, I. Zasada, F. Genuzio, T. O. Menteş, A. Locatelli, T. C. Chiang and G. Bian, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1888–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, W. Jang and A. Soon, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10465–10474 RSC .
S. Anju, J. Ashtami and P. V. Mohanan, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2019, 97, 978–993 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, S. J. Haigh, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338–13341 RSC .
Z. Guo, H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Wang, S. Tang, J. Shao, Z. Sun, H. Xie, H. Wang, X. F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6996–7002 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Woomer, T. W. Farnsworth, J. Hu, R. A. Wells, C. L. Donley and S. C. Warren, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8869–8884 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Z. Xue, J. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Zhao and T. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27608–27612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. A. Wells, J. D. Wood, J. H. Lee, X. Liu, C. R. Ryder, J. Zhu, J. R. Guest, C. A. Husko and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2016, 113, 11688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Smith, D. Hagaman and H. F. Ji, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 215602 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, J. Yuan, L. Fei, X. Wang, Q. Bao, Y. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5000–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Rui, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wei, S. Chen, W. R. Leow, W. Li, Y. Liu, J. Deng, B. Ma, Q. Yan and X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502409 CrossRef .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K. S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, B. H. Ge, J. Chen, A. Nathan, L. H. L. Xin, H. Y. Ma, H.
H. Min, C. Y. Zhu, W. W. Xia, Z. R. Li, S. L. Li, K. H. Yu, L. J. Wu, Y. P. Cui, L. T. Sun and Y. M. Zhu, 2d Mater., 2016, 3, 025005 CrossRef .
J. Jia, S. K. Jang, S. Lai, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J. H. Park and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8729–8736 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, H. Nan, J. Hong, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Liang, X. Ma, Z. Ni, C. Jin and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Hao, S. Yuan, S. Lin, H. M. Yau, J. Dai and S. P. Lau, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10443–10445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, P. Liu, B. L. Zhou, X. Y. Zhou and G. H. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 12, 064025 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, R. Xu, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Lu, Light Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e312 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Y. Sun, X. Jiang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25712–25771 RSC .
C. Xing, W. Huang, Z. Xie, J. Zhao, D. Ma, T. Fan, W. Liang, Y. Ge, B. Dong, J. Li and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Díaz-Tendero, M. Alcamí, F. Martín, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332–6336 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Wu, Z. Li, G. Jing, B. Dong, S. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
N. Hussain, T. Liang, Q. Zhang, T. Anwar, Y. Huang, J. Lang, K. Huang and H. Wu, Small, 2017, 13, 1701349 CrossRef .
H. S. Tsai, S. W. Wang, C. H. Hsiao, C. W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y. L. Chueh, H. C. Kuo and J. H. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Tsai, C. W. Chen, C. H. Hsiao, H. Ouyang and J. H. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8409–8412 RSC .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang, Z. Ni, Y. Hao and H. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lei, C. Liu, J. L. Zhao, J. M. Li, Y. P. Li, J. O. Wang, R. Wu, H. J. Qian, H. Q. Wang and K. Ibrahim, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 015302 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. L. Wang, J. T. Sun, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, Z. L. Liu, S. Y. Zhu, Y. Q. Wang, S. X. Du, Y. G. Shi, K. Ibrahim and H. J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yamada, S. Souma, K. Yamauchi, N. Shimamura, K. Sugawara, C. X. Trang, T. Oguchi, K. Ueno, T. Takahashi and T. Sato, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3235–3240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Shi, X. Shi, K. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14491–14527 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, A. S. Nia and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, S. Zhang, S. Guo, B. Cai, S. A. Yang, F. Shan, M. Pumera and H. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 263–285 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Wu, Y. Lyu and J. Hao, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 98–107 CrossRef .
R. Jain, R. Narayan, S. P. Sasikala, K. E. Lee, H. J. Jung and S. O. Kim, 2d Mater., 2017, 4, 042006 CrossRef .
Q. Wei and X. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 251915 CrossRef .
J.-W. Jiang and H. S. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubský, Š. Huber, J. Luxa, D. Bouša, C. Boothroyd and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3382–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2884–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jamdagni, A. Thakur, A. Kumar, P. K. Ahluwalia and R. Pandey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 29939–29950 RSC .
J. Du, C. Xia, T. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Tan and S. Wei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 378, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeraati, S. M. Vaez Allaei, I. Abdolhosseini Sarsari, M. Pourfath and D. Donadio, Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter, 2016, 93, 085424 CrossRef .
B. Chen, L. Xue, Y. Han, X.-Q. Li and Z. Yang, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 22, 100791 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Zhou, H. Zou, M. Li and F. Ouyang, Phys. Status Solidi Rapid Res. Lett., 2018, 12, 1800038 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, J. Chen, P. Bai, S. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Song, L. Tao and H. Zeng, Research, 2019, 2019, 1046329 Search PubMed .
A. Taheri, C. Da Silva and C. H. Amon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27611–27620 RSC .
Y. Guo, F. Pan, M. Ye, X. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Pan, Z. Song, J. Yang and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23128–23140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Aghdasi, R. Ansari, S. Rouhi and M. Goli, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 135, 106242 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Ong, Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25272–25277 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 055701 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, G. Zhang and B. Li, Phys. Rev. B, 2014, 90, 214302 CrossRef .
T. M. Su, Z. Z. Qin, H. B. Ji and Z. L. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 502002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Liu and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
S. Zhang, S. Guo, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Gao, J. Gómez-Herrero, P. Ares, F. Zamora, Z. Zhu and H. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 982–1021 RSC .
R. Zhang, B. Li and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2871–2878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Du, J. Yu and W. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173104 CrossRef .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 992–1000 RSC .
X. Sui, C. Si, B. Shao, X. Zou, J. Wu, B. L. Gu and W. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10059–10063 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ersan, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14345–14355 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Xu, Y. Yu, H. Du, K. Zhen, J. Wang, L. Luo, H. Qiu and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 362–370 RSC .
L. F. Yang, Y. Song, W. B. Mi and X. C. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 022103 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and T. Heine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1083–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, S. Guo, X. Liu, B. Cai, X. Song, Z. Zhu and S. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, J. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Zhang and Z. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5149–5155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12289–12297 RSC .
Z. Yang and J. Hao, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700296 CrossRef .
H. Ghodrati, N. Antonatos and Z. Sofer, Small, 2019, 15, 1903495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Naghdi, K. Y. Rhee and S. J. Park, Carbon, 2018, 127, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Ma, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Wei and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11538–11550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tang, G. Hu, M. Li and D. Ma, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6948–6958 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, X. Guo, M. Muzzio, C. T. Seto and S. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 23–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, X. Xiong, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1972–2010 RSC .
Y. Xi, J. Zhuang, W. Hao and Y. Du, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2841–2851 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Durmus, E. N. Taylor, K. M. Kummer and T. J. Webster, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5706–5713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Kim, T. Kim, I. Y. Choi, M. Soh, D. Kim, Y. J. Kim, H. Jang, H. S. Yang, J. Y. Kim, H. K. Park, S. P. Park, S. Park, T. Yu, B. W. Yoon, S. H. Lee and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11039–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Rozhkova, I. Ulasov, B. Lai, N. M. Dimitrijevic, M. S. Lesniak and T. Rajh, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3337–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901778 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shahsavari and M. Akbari, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2018, 90, 275–291 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
A. H. Elsheikh, S. W. Sharshir, M. Abd Elaziz, A. E. Kabeel, W. Guilan and Z. Haiou, Sol. Energy, 2019, 180, 622–639 CrossRef .
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Z. Wang, M. Lyu, B. Luo, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801369 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Buzzetti, G. E. M. Crisenza and P. Melchiorre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3730–3747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Guan, J. Huang, Q. Li and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7960–7966 RSC .
L. J. Zhang, S. Li, B. K. Liu, D. J. Wang and T. F. Xie, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3724–3729 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, J. C. Yu and X. Fu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 244, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
B. Sa, Y. L. Li, J. Qi, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26560–26568 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vishnoi, U. Gupta, R. Pandey and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6631–6637 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Ning, X. Hu, J. Tu, W. Zou, X. Ruan, Y. Li, Y. Xu and L. He, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 505, 144488 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
J. Wu, S. Huang, Z. Jin, J. Chen, L. Hu, Y. Long, J. Lu, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 16557–16566 CrossRef CAS .
O. Elbanna, M. Zhu, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3618–3626 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, S. Min and F. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 21873–21881 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, T. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Wu, B. Huang and X. Hao, Small, 2017, 13, 1602243 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Yuan, Z. K. Shen, S. Song, J. Guan, L. Bao, L. Pei, Y. Su, S. Wu, W. Bai, Z. T. Yu, Z. Ji and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7801–7807 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, M. Wen, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2600–2604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, F. Shi, X. Xiao, X. Wu, K. Huang and S. Feng, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 2179–2183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, X. Cai, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2064–2068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Cao, F. Yang and W.-L. Dai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144366 CrossRef .
Y. J. Yuan, P. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu, W. Bai, Y. Su, J. Guan, S. Wu, J. Zhong, Z. T. Yu and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 242, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Reddy, E. H. Kim, M. Gopannagari, Y. Kim, D. P. Kumar and T. K. Kim, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 241, 491–498 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, B. Zhu and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10373–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, S. H. Park, X. Kong, X. Lan, Z. Song and J. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, D. Chen, Z. Mo, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He, H. Xu and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2073–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Z. Sun, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2160–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, R. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, C. M. Che and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11791–11795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, H.-M. Cheng, Y. Gogotsi, M. M. Titirici and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806128 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji, H. Dong, C. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13489–13508 RSC .
Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803762 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wen, J. Wang, R. Tong, D. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Yu, Z. K. Zhou, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801321 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Niu, Y. Li, Q. Zhou, H. Shu and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42856–42861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, J. Li, Z. Ma, H. Xie, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Ye and T. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 1159–1166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Xiao, Y. Xu, Z. Guo, H. Xie, J. Shao, Z. Sun, W. Han, X. F. Yu, P. Li and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5003–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, S. Huang, Q. Yu, Y. She, J. Yang, G. Zhou, Q. Li, X. She, J. Deng, H. Li and H. Xu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2020, 269, 118760 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, Y. Kang, T. Fan, Q. Xiong, S. Zhang, W. Tao and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 323–333 RSC .
P. Chowdhary, A. Raj and R. N. Bharagava, Chemosphere, 2018, 194, 229–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu and B. Lin, J. Clean. Prod., 2019, 206, 356–364 CrossRef .
M. K. Sushma and A. K. Saroha, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 228, 169–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ali, A. A. Basheer, X. Y. Mbianda, A. Burakov, E. Galunin, I. Burakova, E. Mkrtchyan, A. Tkachev and V. Grachev, Environ. Int., 2019, 127, 160–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Dunnill and I. P. Parkin, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 1635–1640 RSC .
A. H. Mamaghani, F. Haghighat and C. S. Lee, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2017, 203, 247–269 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uk Lee, S. C. Lee, J. Won, B. C. Son, S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, H. S. Kim, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Barrio, C. Gibaja, J. Tzadikov, M. Shalom and F. Zamora, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2019, 3, 1800138 CrossRef .
B. M. Hoffman, D. Lukoyanov, Z.-Y. Yang, D. R. Dean and L. C. Seefeldt, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4041–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Martín, T. Shinagawa and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem, 2019, 5, 263–283 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, N. Li, Z. Kong, W.-J. Ong and X. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 9–27 RSC .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Medford and M. C. Hatzell, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2624–2643 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qiu, C. Xu, N. Zhou, H. Chen and F. Jiang, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2018, 221, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, Z. Rao, K. Mao, Y. Li, C. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Y. Li, X. Wu and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2425–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
Z. Yin, Y. Wang, C. Song, L. Zheng, N. Ma, X. Liu, S. Li, L. Lin, M. Li, Y. Xu, W. Li, G. Hu, Z. Fang and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 864–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, X. Wang, S. Tang, Y. Kang, J. Wang, Y. Yu, Z. K. Zhou, C. Ma, X. Zhang, J. Jiang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803641 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804672 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Bentley, M. Kang and P. R. Unwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2179–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Singh, K. Takeyasu and J. Nakamura, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804297 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pudukudy, Z. Yaakob, M. Mohammad, B. Narayanan and K. Sopian, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 743–757 CrossRef .
J. O. M. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 2579–2588 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11053–11077 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, N. Yang, H. Huang, S. Jin, J. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37787–37795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, J. Gao, S. Chen, Q. Ke, G. Zhang and Y. W. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8948–8956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gan, X. X. Xue, X. X. Jiang, Z. W. Xu, K. Q. Chen, J. F. Yu and Y. X. Feng, J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 2020, 32, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Shen, Y. Gan, X. X. Xue, J. M. Wei, L. M. Tang, K. Q. Chen and Y. X. Feng, Appl. Phys. Express, 2019, 12, 5 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. H. Qi, Y. Xu, J. Dai, X. C. Zeng, W. Guo and J. Ma, WIRES Comput. Mol. Sci., 2019, 9, e1387 Search PubMed .
S. B. Pillai, S. D. Dabhi and P. K. Jha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 21649–21654 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Luo, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Z. Li, A. Abutaha, X. L. Wu, Q. Xiong, K. A. Khor, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. Xu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601285 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Lu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, P. K. Chu, S. Ramakrishna and X. F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 19060–19066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Chen, J. Huang, Y. Hou, L. Lei, W. Lin, Y. Lian, X. Zhonghua, H. H. Yang and Z. Wen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10884–10887 RSC .
K. Zhu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1252–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3181–3192 RSC .
Z. Cai, X. Bu, P. Wang, J. C. Ho, J. Yang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5069–5089 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Xu, N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13849–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, B. Jin, C. Park, Y. Cho, X. Song, X. Shi, S. Zhang, W. Kim, H. Zeng and J. H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2001 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, Z. Li, H. Qiao, W. Liang, H. Liu, F. Zhang, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, D. Zhang, J. Li, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4774–4781 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. F. Khosrowabadi Kotyk and S. W. Sheehan, Chem, 2018, 4, 2571–2586 CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Zhu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4663–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Guo, J. Yang and L. Wang, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 38, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nazemi, S. R. Panikkanvalappil and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. H. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606550 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1496–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L. X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 5, 204–214 CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Nash, J. Anibal, M. Dunwell, S. Kattel, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6073–6076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, G. F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. X. Ding, G. F. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2612–2616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Liu, D. Li, J. Yu and B. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16439–16444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bat-Erdene, G. Xu, M. Batmunkh, A. S. R. Bati, J. J. White, M. J. Nine, D. Losic, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Ma and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4735–4739 RSC .
T. Wu, J. Fan, Q. Li, P. Shi, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701799 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, N. Wang, J. E. Lu, C. Li, Y. Ping and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24707–24714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4881–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1938–1958 RSC .
B. M. Luby, C. D. Walsh and G. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2558–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Lee and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1174–1188 RSC .
S. Monro, K. L. Colón, H. Yin, J. Roque, P. Konda, S. Gujar, R. P. Thummel, L. Lilge, C. G. Cameron and S. A. McFarland, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 797–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Guo, Y. Wu, Y. Lin, X. Xu, H. Lian, G. Huang, J. Z. Liu, X. Wu and H. H. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702815 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lv, D. Yang, P. Yang, J. Xu, F. He, S. Gai, C. Li, Y. Dai, G. Yang and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4724–4734 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, G. Yang, P. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, C. Li, F. He and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700371 CrossRef .
S. Liu, X. Pan and H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 5943–5953 CrossRef .
H. S. Jung, P. Verwilst, A. Sharma, J. Shin, J. L. Sessler and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2280–2297 RSC .
Y. Chen, L. Wang and J. Shi, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 292–308 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Xu, C. Wang, R. Yang, Q. Zhuang, X. Han, Z. Dong, W. Zhu, R. Peng and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4463–4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qian, Y. Zheng and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8097–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rengeng, Z. Qianyu, L. Yuehong, P. Zhongzhong and L. Libo, Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther., 2017, 19, 159–166 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lafond, S. Yoshizawa and S.-i. Umemura, J. Ultrasound Med., 2019, 38, 567–580 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lv, J. Zheng, Q. Zhou, L. Jia, C. Wang, N. Liu, H. Zhao, H. Ji, B. Li and W. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, X. Qian, Y. Chen, L. Yu, H. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Zhu and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1275–1284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ouyang, L. Deng, W. Chen, J. Sheng, Z. Liu, L. Wang and Y.-N. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2874–2877 RSC .
T. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, L. Cheng, L. Feng, H. Zhang, X. Li, G. Han and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806803 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zengler and L. S. Zaramela, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2018, 16, 383–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Le Ouay and F. Stellacci, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 339–354 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xin, H. Shah, A. Nawaz, W. Xie, M. Z. Akram, A. Batool, L. Tian, S. U. Jan, R. Boddula, B. Guo, Q. Liu and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Heymann, Cell, 2006, 124, 671–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, J. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, K. W. K. Yeung, H. Pan, Y. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703197 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vanni, M. Serrano-Ruiz, F. Telesio, S. Heun, M. Banchelli, P. Matteini, A. M. Mio, G. Nicotra, C. Spinella, S. Caporali, A. Giaccherini, F. D'Acapito, M. Caporali and M. Peruzzini, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5075–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. You, Y. Jia, Z. Wu, F. Wang, H. Huang and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2889 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, W. Luo, H. Zhang and Y. Jia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 513, 145630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Shi, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Huang, X. Xu, J. Guo, H. Zhang, L. Sun, Z. Zeng, A. Pan and K. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chan, S. C. Dodani and C. J. Chang, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 973–984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, X. Tian, I. Shin and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4783–4804 RSC .
X. Zhen and K. Pu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 5258–5280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Osakada, S. Kim, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl.
Catal. B Environ., 2017, 217, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, X. Wang, B. Zhu and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9882–9885 RSC .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Boppella, W. Yang, J. Tan, H.-C. Kwon, J. Park and J. Moon, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 242, 422–430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Ji, Z. Mo, N. Li, Q. Xu, Y. Li, H. Xu, D. Chen and J. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4408–4414 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, S. Yang, P. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Li, D. Chen, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 960–963 RSC .
R. H. Jeong, J. W. Lee, D. I. Kim, J. W. Yang, S. Park and J. H. Boo, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 155704 CrossRef PubMed .
C. He, H. Qian, X. Li, X. Yan, S. Zuo, J. Qian, Q. Chen and C. Yao, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 593–599 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Li, X. Lu, S. Zuo, Z. Zhuang and C. Yao, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2017, 10, 1750078 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, D. He, H. Liu, M. Ren, Y. Zhang, J. Qu, N. Lu, J. Guan and X. Yuan, Environ. Pollut., 2019, 245, 950–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Xu and J. Weng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 69033–69039 RSC .
X. Wang, B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Song, R. Hu and J. Qu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 769, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Xiang, B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, R. Hu, L. Liu, J. Song and J. Qu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Feng, W. Lei, X. Sui, X. Liu, X. Qi, K. Tang, G. Liu and M. Liu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2018, 238, 444–453 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, J. He, C. Wang and Y. Zuo, Mater. Lett., 2018, 212, 311–314 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vishnoi, K. Pramoda, U. Gupta, M. Chhetri, R. G. Balakrishna and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27780–27787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, H. Sun, L. Miao, X. Chen, M. Han, J. Sun, S. Liu, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2494–2499 RSC .
X. Xia, L. Liu, X. Li, S. Gao and T. Yang, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Pei, J. He, K. Liu, W. Qi, X. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Gao, J. He, J. Zhao, J. Hu, T. S. Chan, Z. Li, G. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10870–10875 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Pan and J. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 7951–7956 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, D. Liu, N. Yang, J. Wang, M. Huang, L. Liu, X. Peng, G. Wang, X. F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, K. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Li, X. Wang and S. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17459–17466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Liao, K. Tang, N. Zhang, W. Qi, H. Xie, J. He, K. Yin, Y. Gao and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, Z. Geng, K. Huang, Q. Liang, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Cao and S. Feng, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800575 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Khurram, Z. Sun and Q. Yan, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4098–4103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700396 CrossRef .
R. Prasannachandran, T. V. Vineesh, A. Anil, B. M. Krishna and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11511–11519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batmunkh, M. Myekhlai, A. S. R. Bati, S. Sahlos, A. D. Slattery, T. M. Benedetti, V. R. Gonçales, C. T. Gibson, J. J. Gooding, R. D. Tilley and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12974–12978 RSC .
X. Wang, Q. Li, P. Shi, J. Fan, Y. Min and Q. Xu, Small, 2019, 15, 1901530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, S. Zhang, K. Bu, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, T. Lin, J. Huang, Y. Li and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22063–22069 RSC .
K. K. Lu, X. F. Song, L. H. Xu, W. L. Xin and D. Shan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 475, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  An overview showing the various catalytic applications of 2D pnictogen materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, ref. 26, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, ref. 169, copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH, and ref. 301, copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of phosphorus allotropes and their transformation reactions.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Typical honeycomb structures (from α to ε) and non-honeycomb structures (from ζ to ι) of 2D pnictogen allotropes. (b) The average binding energies (ΔE) of the 2D pnictogen allotropes. The β phases show energetic stability by calculation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the puckered structure of few-layer phosphorene. (b) Top viewpoint of mono-layer phosphorene on the x- and y-axes. (c) Side viewpoint of bilayer phosphorene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthetic methods of 2D pnictogen materials.	 


Phosphorene	Scotch-tape exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method	
100–114 and 129

Liquid phase exfoliation	Chemical vapor deposition
Shear exfoliation	Wet-chemistry method
Tip-sonication-based exfoliation	Pulsed laser deposition
Electrochemical exfoliation	

Arsenene	Scotch-tape exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method	
64 and 122

Shear exfoliation
Antimonene	Scotch-tape exfoliation	van der Waals epitaxy	
64, 119, 120 and 123–126

Liquid phase exfoliation	Molecular beam epitaxy
Shear exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method
Bismuthene	Sonochemical exfoliation	Epitaxial growth	
64, 80, 81, 121, 130 and 131

Shear exfoliation	Molecular beam epitaxy
Hot-pressing method	Pulsed laser deposition

	Wet-chemistry method

Phosphorene	103 to 104	0.3–2.0	103 to 105	Semiconductor	44–166	24–84	
56 and 133–136

Arsenene	∼103	1.0–2.5	∼104	Semiconductor	80–120	7.8–30	
137–140

Antimonene	∼103	∼2.3	106 to 108	Semiconductor	10–11	15	
78, 123 and 141

Bismuthene	∼102	0.08–0.2	<10	Semiconductor	26	4.0	
142–145


 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the photocatalytic procedures on a photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the thermodynamic limits of hydrogen and oxygen evolution in water splitting. (b) The CB and VB positions under ambient conditions (pH 8.0, 5% and 6% tensile strain along the a axis and b axis, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the preparation of phosphorene from BP by exfoliation. (b) Schematic of the functionalization procedures of the nanosheets with InCl3, B(C6F5)3, and PPh3. (c–e) Raman spectra of pristine phosphorene, P·InCl3, and P·CH–C6H5; the spectra were scanned for the sample from 0 to 20 days of exposure to air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of BP/TiO2. (b) TEM image of BP/TiO2. (c) Schematic of the band alignment and the Z-scheme mechanism of BP/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186, copyright 2018, Springer International Publishing AG.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Co2P/BP photocatalyst. (b and c) TEM images of the catalyst. (d and e) HR-TEM images of BP and Co2P scanned from the square position in (c), respectively. (f) Linear scan voltammogram (LSV) curves of the various samples. (g) The performance of photocatalytic H2 evaluation over various catalysts under visible light. (h) J–V shuttered curves of the catalysts under visible light. (i) Cycling curves of the Co2P/BP catalyst for H2 generation under visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthetic method of the BP/CN heterostructure. (b) TEM image of BP/CN. (c) HAADF image of BP/CN and corresponding elemental maps of C, N, and P. (d) HR-TEM image of BP/CN. (e) Schematic of the mechanism of photocatalytic H2 evolution. (f) Time course of photocatalytic H2 evolution from various samples in water. (g) Cyclability of BP/CN for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Energy barrier of oxygen dissociation on arsenene containing two dissociation paths. (b) Schematic of the charge migration over a series of As-based catalysts in the water splitting process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–d) Photocurrent response, electrochemical impedance, time-resolved photoluminescence, and transient absorption curves of g-C3N4 and BP@g-C3N4. (e) Time course of CO generation over BP@g-C3N4 with different BP loading amounts under irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, copyright 2018, Springer International Publishing AG.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The charge density plots for the M-BP and M-BP-OH catalysts. The blue and yellow regions represent electron accumulation and depletion. (b) The rate of CO production over various BP materials. (c) The rate of CO generation over a series of photocatalysts under visible light. (d) The isotope results of the GC-MS spectra from 13CO2 to 13CO. (e) In situ FT-IR spectrum of photocatalytic CO2 reduction over the M-BP-OH catalyst. (f) Free energy diagram of the catalysts. (g) Cycle experiments of photocatalytic CO2 reduction over the catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedures of the AM/M/BP HNSs composites. (b and c) Sb 3d and P 2p core-level XPS spectra of the catalysts. (d) Time course of the catalytic photo-regeneration of NADH from NAD+. (e) Time course of formic acid production from CO2. (f) Cyclability of the catalysts for the photo/biocatalytic CO2 reduction process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Band alignment of the CNSbx heterostructures. (b) RhB degradation rates of the CNSbx heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 


Photocatalysis

BP·InCl3	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 2058, 6597, 5691 (λ > 350 nm)	
189

BP·B(C6F5)3	AQE (%): 0.8, 2.1, 8.4
BP·CH–C6H5	

BP/TiO2	Photocatalytic H2 production	AQE (%): 18.2 at 365 nm	
193

BP NS/Pt/TMC	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 950 (λ > 420 nm), 205 (λ > 780 nm)	
194

Pt/BP crystalline	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 138 (λ > 420 nm)	
196

BP NSs/Pt	Photocatalytic H2 production	AQE (%): 0.57 at 500 nm	
195

Co2P/BP	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1191 (λ > 420 nm)	
197

BP–Au/La2TiO2O7	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 740 (λ > 420 nm), 300 (λ > 780 nm)	
200

BP–Pt/RGO	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 7329 (λ > 420 nm), 1800 (λ > 780 nm)	
315

Pt/BP/ZnIn2S4	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1278 (λ > 420 nm)	
201

CdS/BP–MoS2	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 183240 (λ > 420 nm)	
203

BP/MoS2	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 1286 (λ > 420 nm)	
202

AQE (%): 1.2 at 420 nm
BP/CdS	Photocatalytic H2 production	AQE (%): 34.7 at 420 nm	
204

NYF@Ag3PO4@BP	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 146 at 980 nm	
205

BP/ZnxCd1−xS	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 9326 (λ > 420 nm)	
316

AQE (%): 21.5 at 420 nm
BP/CN	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 786 (440–445 nm)	
212

BP/CN	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 429 (λ > 420 nm), 102 (λ > 780 nm)	
317

Phosphorene/g-C3N4	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 571 (λ > 400 nm)	
318

Ni2P@BP/CN	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 858 (λ > 420 nm)	
319

BP/PCN	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 7380 (λ > 400 nm)	
320

BP/Pt/RGO	Photocatalytic H2 production	AQE (%): 8.7 at 420 nm, 1.5 at 780 nm	
315

BP/Bi2WO6	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 4208	
206

BP/RP	Photocatalytic H2 production	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 330 (λ > 420 nm)	
208

BP/BiVO4	Photocatalytic water splitting	H2, O2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 160, 102 (λ > 420 nm)	
207

BP@g-C3N4	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	CO, CH4 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 6.54, 0.29	
216

M-BP-OH	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	CO yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 112.6 (λ > 420 nm)	
220

AQE (%): 0.21 at 400 nm
AM/M/BP HNSs	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	HCOOH yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 45625	
221

(λ > 420 nm)
BP@TiO2	Reactive black5 (RB5) and rhodamine B (RhB) degradation	Rate constant (h−1): 4.28, 4.46 (UV), 2.38, 2.05 (Vis)	
228

BPQDs	Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation	Rate constant (h−1): 0.81 (Vis)	
321

BP@MoS2	Methylene blue (MB) degradation	Rate constant (min−1): 0.085 (Vis)	
322

CeO2/BP	Bisphenol A (BPA) degradation	82.3% within 180 min	
323

BPQDs/ATP	Bisphenol A (BPA) degradation	90% within 180 min	
324

GR/BP	2-Chlorophenol (2-CP) degradation	87% within 180 min (Vis)	
325

ZIF-8/BP	Methylene blue (MB) degradation	Rate constant (min−1): 0.045 (Vis)	
326

Ag–BPNS/GO	Methylene blue (MB) degradation	Rate constant (min−1): 0.031 (Vis)	
327

BP–Ag/TiO2	Methylene blue (MB) degradation	Rate constant (min−1): 0.029 (Vis)	
328

CNSbx	Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation	100% within 20 min at 554 nm	
229

BPQDs/MoS2	Methylene orange (MO) degradation	Rate constant (min−1): 0.052 (NIR)	
329

2D-BP	Dibutyl phthalate (DBP) degradation	45% within 6 h	
330

BPCNS	Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation	NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 347.5 (λ > 420 nm)	
235

PtNPS	Photocatalytic hydrogenation of styrene	TOF: 5900 h−1 (λ > 420 nm)	
239



Electrocatalysis

Ni2P@BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 107 mV	
256

Tafel slope: 38.6 mV dec−1
BP–Pt	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 70 mV	
257

Current density: 82.89 mAcm−2
BP–MoS2	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 110 mV	
331

Tafel slope: 144 mV dec−1
NH2–BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 290 mV	
332

Tafel slope: 63 mV dec−1
BP/PB	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 148 mV	
333

Tafel slope: 79 mV dec−1
PtRu NCs/BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 22mV	
334

Tafel slope: 19 mV dec−1
Ni2P/BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 70 mV	
335

Tafel slope: 81 mV dec−1
MoSe2–BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 200 mV	
336

Tafel slope: 97 mV dec−1
MoS2–BP	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 85 mV	
337

Tafel slope: 68 mV dec−1
EBP@NG	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 191 mV	
338

Tafel slope: 76 mV dec−1
BP/Co2P	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Onset overpotential: 100 mV	
198

Tafel slope: 62 mV dec−1
FL Sb	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 578 mV	
264

Tafel slope: 217 mV dec−1
Ru–S–Sb/antimonene	Hydrogen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 153 mV	
258

Tafel slope: 118 mV dec−1
BP–CNT	Oxygen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 1.49 V	
262

Tafel slope: 72.88 mV dec−1
NiOOH/BP/BiVO4	Oxygen evolution reaction	Photocurrent density: 4.48 mA cm−2	
263

Co3O4@BP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 400 mV	
339

Tafel slope: 63 mV dec−1
Co(OH)2/BP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 276 mV	
340

Tafel slope: 57 mV dec−1
BP/Co2P	Oxygen evolution reaction	Onset overpotential: 300 mV	
198

Tafel slope: 78 mV dec−1
Co/BP NSs	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 310 mV	
341

Tafel slope: 61 mV dec−1
Te-doped BP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Onset overpotential: 1.49 V	
342

FL BP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 1.45 V	
343

Tafel slope: 88 mV dec−1
FPQDs	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 1.66 V	
344

Tafel slope: 48 mV dec−1
CoOx–BPQDs	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 360 mV	
345

Tafel slope: 58.5 mV dec−1
Ni3N/BP–AG	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 233 mV	
346

Tafel slope: 42 mV dec−1
Ni3N|Ni2P|BP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 247 mV	
347

Tafel slope: 79 mV dec−1
Ag–TLBP	Oxygen evolution reaction	Onset potential: 0.87 V	
282

CoPx–NPC	Oxygen evolution reaction	Current density: 4.7 mA cm−2	
348

FL-Sb	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 2.23 V	
264

Tafel slope: 261.3 mV dec−1
EBP@NG	Oxygen evolution reaction	Overpotential: 310 mV	
338

Tafel slope: 89 mV dec−1
2L-Bi	Carbon dioxide electroreduction	Current density: 10 mA cm−2 (theoretical calculation)	
267

ED-Bi dendrites/BP	Carbon dioxide electroreduction	Tafel slope: 149 mV dec−1	
268

HCOOH yield (μmol dm−3 g−1): 22.7
FL-BP	Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation	NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1):1845	
278

BP@SnO2−x	Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation	NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 2875	
279

FL-Sb	Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation	NH3 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 10612	
280

Pd/ATN–BP	Ethanol oxidation reaction	Onset potential: 0.41 V	
281

Tafel slope: 144 mV dec−1
Ag–TLBP	Oxygen reduction reaction	Onset potential: 0.69 V, 0.78 V	
282

Au–TLBP	Tafel slope: 110 mV dec−1, 142 mV dec−1


Medical catalysis

2D BP	Photodynamic therapy	
1O2 quantum yield: 0.91	
288

UCNPs–BPS	Photodynamic therapy	Highest 1O2 generation at 808 nm	
290

BPs@Au@Fe3O4	Photodynamic therapy	Highest 1O2 generation at 650 nm	
291

BPQDs	Photodynamic therapy	Highest 1O2 generation at 410 nm	
289

Au@BP	Sonodynamic therapy	Highest 1O2 generation and superior tissue permeability	
301

Ti–PPMS–EPO/BPS	Antibacterial therapy	Antibacterial rate: 99.3% against E. coli, 99.2% against S. aureus	
307



Others

Pd–BP	Selective hydrogenation	From chloronitroarenes to chloroanilines	
308

Conversion (%): 99.5
Selectivity (%): 97.3
BP	Pyro-catalytic hydrogen evolution	H2 yields (μmol h−1 g−1): 22.5	
309

Pyro-catalytic decomposition of RhB	99% after 5 thermal cycles

 	Fig. 17  (a) The rates of NH3 production over various catalysts. (b) FTIR spectra of a series of catalysts. (c) 31P NMR spectra of various samples. (d) EPR spectra of various catalysts and (e) corresponding increments of intensity. (f) PL spectra of the various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a and b) TEM and HAADF-STEM images of the Pt/BP catalyst. Inset: particle size distribution of Pt. (c) HR-HAADF image of Pt/BP. (d) HRTEM image of Pt/BP. (e and f) STEM-EDS elemental mappings of P and Pt. (g) Pt 4f core-level XPS spectra of the various samples. (h and i) P 2p and O 1s core-level XPS spectra of BP and Pt/BP. (j) TOFs of various samples for the hydrogenation reaction under different irradiation and thermal conditions. (k) Primary isotope effect over the catalyst in the hydrogenation reaction. (l) Insertion barrier of Had atoms for the α- and β-carbons of styrene with and without an additional 0.5 electrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 
H+ + e− + A → AH
A + H+ + e− + AH → H2 + A
2AH → H2 + 2A

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the preparation procedure of the Ni2P@BP catalyst. (b) TEM image of Ni2P@BP. (c) TEM images of Ni2P@BP with EDS mapping of Ni and P. (d) Electrical conductivities and (e) total thermal conductivities versus temperature over various catalysts. The dotted lines indicate simulated curves to reveal the trends of T−3 and T−1 in different temperature regions. (f) Pt 4f core-level XPS spectra of the BP–Pt/GR catalysts with different amounts of BP. (g) Chemical state contents of Pt versus the amount of BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH, and ref. 250, copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a–c) Ru 3d, S 2p, and Sb 3d core-level XPS spectra of various catalysts. (d) FT-EXAFS analysis results showing the corresponding two-body backscattering path. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
A + OH− → AOH + e−
AOH + OH− → AO + H2O + e−
2AO → 2A + O2
AO + OH− → AOOH + e−
AOOH + OH− → A + O2 + H2O

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the energy diagram of the BP/BiVO4 heterojunction interface. (b) Photocurrent density stability over various samples, measured at 1.23 V vs. RHE in KPi electrolyte. (c) Charge separation efficiencies of the catalysts. (d) Charge transfer efficiencies of the catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of the Sb nanosheets. (b) HADDF image of few-layer antimonene. (c and d) EDX mapping of Sb element. (e) Water splitting characteristics of the catalyst with a two-electrode configuration. (f) Stability testing of Sb nanosheets under different bias potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Theoretical calculation of the adsorption free energy of OCHO* versus the layer number of Bi with and without the existence of the SOC effect. (b) Stabilization energy contributed by the SOC as a function of the number of layers of bismuthene, and (c) the corresponding projected p-orbital DOS for the bismuthene active site. The Fermi level region is highlighted in gray. (d) Theoretically calculated polarization curves for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 over different layers of bismuthene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a and b) The yields of HCOOH and (c and d) the faradaic efficiencies of HCOOH at different potentials for 5 h over various samples. (e) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the various catalysts. (f) Tafel plots of the various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a and b) TEM images of a BP@SnO2−x catalyst. Inset: HRTEM image of BP QD. Scale bar: 5 nm. (c and d) Sn 3d and P 2p core-level XPS spectra of the BP@SnO2−x catalyst. (e) Recycling experiments of the BP@SnO2−x catalyst. (f) The yields of ammonia over various catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a–c) Pt 4f, Au 4f, and Ag 3d core-level XPS spectra of Pt–TLBP, Au–TLBP, and Ag–TLBP. (d–f) DFT calculations of charge transfer from TLBP to Pt, Au, and Ag nanoparticles. (g–i) The ORR activity of Pt–TLBP, Au–TLBP, and Ag–TLBP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the synthetic method of UCNPs-BPS. (b) Viability of HeLa cells incubated with UCNPs-BPS under different experimental conditions. (c) Images of mice and tumors on day 14. (d) Normalized tumor volumes with prolonged time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of the preparation procedures of BPs@Au@Fe3O4. (b) The infrared thermal temperature versus irradiation time for HeLa cells incubated with various samples under 650 nm laser irradiation. (c) The infrared thermal temperature versus irradiation time for tumor-bearing mice injected with the samples. (d) Viabilities of HeLa cells incubated with various samples at different concentrations under laser irradiation and a magnetic field. (e) In vivo tumor volumes of U14 tumors under different conditions versus treatment time. (f) Images of tumor-bearing mice treated with various samples under different experimental conditions. (g) Images of representative mice on day 14. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the preparation of Au@BP. (b) Mechanism of singlet oxygen (1O2) production by Au@BP under US activation. (c) Relative 1O2 generation content over Au@BP with or without pork skin under 660 nm NIR light and ultrasound activation. (d) Tumor volume versus treatment time over various samples under different conditions; (e) corresponding photographs of representative mice after the treatments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of the sample with or without light irradiation and the improved stability of BPS by PPMS. (b) In vitro spread plate and antibacterial rates over various samples under different conditions. (c) In vivo spread plate results and antibacterial rates over various samples and under different conditions. (d) H&E and Giemsa staining images showing the tissue infection degrees of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 
	(1)
2H+ + 2q− → H2	(2)

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the hydrogenation reaction of chloronitroarenes to chloroanilines. (b) EXAFS spectra at the Pd K-edge and (c) the corresponding Fourier transforms. (d) Schematic of H2 generation through the pyro-electric process. (e) The decomposition ratio versus the number of thermal cycles. Inset: photograph showing pyro-catalytically decomposed RhB dye solutions of BP at different stages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society, ref. 300, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(3)
O2 + q− → O2˙−	(4)
OH− + q+ → ˙OH	(5)
˙OH (or O2˙−) + dye → decomposition	(6)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
