Is overprotection of the sulfur cathode good for Li–S batteries?   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CC03753K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CC03753K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12459-12462Is overprotection of the sulfur cathode good for Li–S batteries?†

        
          
            Tian 
            Gao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Shao‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Xingxing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guobin 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiujian 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuyao 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qunting 
            Qu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Honghe 
            Zheng
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China. E-mail: qtqu@suda.edu.cn; hhzheng@suda.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China
Received 
      6th May 2015
    , Accepted 29th June 2015First published on 29th June 2015AbstractHow to restrain the dissolution of polysulfides from the sulfur cathode is the current research focus of Li–S batteries. Here, we find that moderate dissolution of polysulfides is of great importance for high-efficiency and stable discharge/charge cycling. Both overprotection and inadequate protection of the sulfur cathode are unfavorable for the cycling of Li–S batteries.
Due to the extremely high theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1, abundant resource, low cost, and environmental benignity of the element sulfur, Li–S batteries are being considered as the most promising power sources for the next-generation electric vehicles.1 Nonetheless, the practical applications of Li–S batteries are currently being hindered by their short cycling life arising from the high solubility of intermediate discharge products from the sulfur cathode (polysulfides Li2Sx, 2 < x ≤ 8) in organic electrolytes and the resulting ‘shuttling effect’.2–9 Accordingly, extensive efforts have been devoted to resolving this problem during the past few years.
One of the most effective approaches is to fabricate advanced sulfur-based composite cathodes by dispersing or trapping sulfur into other matrices that are capable of physically adsorbing or chemically binding with sulfur or its intermediate polysulfides. A large variety of carbon materials,10–14 electronically conductive polymers,15–17 metal oxides,18–22 and metal organic frameworks23,24 have been used as the matrices to inhibit polysulfide dissolution, presenting a great success in improving the cycling life of Li–S batteries. Another effective and simple approach recently demonstrated by Manthiram and coworkers is the implementation of a new cell construction through inserting a porous carbon interlayer between the separator and the sulfur cathode.2,25,26 The carbon interlayers can be multiwalled carbon nanotubes,27 microporous carbon,25 treated Toray carbon paper,28 carbonized Kimwipes,29 or electrospun carbon nanofibers,30 which function as a filter to intercept/adsorb the dissolved polysulfides and confine the polysulfides to the cathodic region. This approach provides an alternative to the manufacture of high-performance Li–S batteries.
In this context, it is assumed that the combination of the above-mentioned two approaches should produce Li–S batteries that perform considerably better from the perspective of restraining polysulfide dissolution. Therefore, in this work, we first investigated the performance of Li–S batteries which simultaneously employed a thermally-treated carbon black/sulfur composite cathode and had carbon interlayers (electrospun carbon nanofibers papers) inserted during the cell assembly. However, to our surprise, the double protection of the sulfur cathode results in an extremely low capacity after the first discharge process due to the infinitesimal dissolution of polysulfides. In the cells without the carbon interlayers there is too severe dissolution of polysulfides and this leads to rapid capacity fading during repeated cycles. The cells with the carbon interlayers and a conventional untreated sulfur cathode allow a moderate dissolution of the polysulfides in the electrolytes, and high-efficiency cycling of Li–S batteries can be achieved. Thus this communication provides a new insight into the importance of moderate polysulfide dissolution for efficient Li–S battery cycling.
The carbon black/sulfur (C/S) composite cathode was prepared by thermally treating a mixture of C/S with a weight ratio of 6/4 at 155 °C, followed by the conventional preparation procedures of electrode disks in Li-ion batteries (see ESI†). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the C/S composites are shown in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†). The flexible carbon paper derived from the pyrolysis of electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN) paper was cut into small disks (see the image in Fig. 1a) and used as the interlayer to assemble coin cells. The construction of the Li–S coin cells with the carbon interlayer sandwiched between the separator and sulfur cathode is shown in Fig. 1b. The SEM image of the as-prepared PAN paper (Fig. 1c) reveals that it is composed of intertangled nanofibers with diameters of about 200–500 nm, which is the typical morphology of materials obtained through the electrospinning technique. After the pyrolysis of the PAN paper at a temperature of 1000 °C, the obtained carbon paper maintains the nanofibers structure perfectly but with a rough and porous surface due to the partial decomposition of PAN during pyrolysis (Fig. 1d and Fig. S3, ESI†). The thickness and area mass of the carbon paper is 200 μm and 2.5 mg cm−2. N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the carbon paper (Fig. S4, ESI†) present the type-I isotherms with a sharply increased adsorption at a low relative pressure, which is characteristic of microporous materials. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area of the carbon paper is determined to be 550 m2 g−1, suggesting the presence of a highly porous structure. The porous and conductive carbon paper is expected to intercept/adsorb the dissolved polysulfides from sulfur cathode when it is sandwiched between the cathode and the separator.
 Fig. 1  (a) Images of the as-prepared carbon paper and carbon disks for the use as interlayers in coin cells. (b) Construction of a Li–S coin cell with a carbon interlayer sandwiched between the separator and the sulfur cathode. SEM images of (c) electrospun PAN nanofibers and (d) carbon nanofibers. 
The galvanostatic discharge/charge behavior of the C/S cathode-based Li–S cells with the carbon interlayer inserted between the cathode and the separator was first studied so the double protection against polysulfides dissolution could be considered. The initial three discharge/charge curves at a current rate of 0.2 C are shown in Fig. 2a. To our surprise, this Li–S cell construction undergoes irreversible electrochemical cycling after the first discharge. The discharge capacity of the first cycle based on the mass of sulfur is 1605 mA h g−1, extremely close to the theoretical value generated from the two-electron conversion of sulfur to Li2S (1675 mA h g−1). However, the subsequent charge processes present a negligible capacity of less than 10 mA h g−1. We assembled five cells with the same construction and obtained similar results, and so excluded the possibility of a failure of the cell-assembly (Fig. S5, ESI†). In contrast, normal reversible discharge/charge behavior is observed for the C/S cathode-based Li–S cell without the carbon interlayer (Fig. 2a), which presents a reversible (charge) capacity of 643, 579, and 541 mA h g−1 in the first, second, and third cycle, respectively. The capacity evolutions of C/S cathode-based Li–S cells during long-term cycling in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer are compared in Fig. 2b. Although the capacity of the Li–S cell without the carbon interlayer decreases rapidly during repeated cycling, it can be cycled more effectively when compared to the Li–S cell with the carbon interlayer.
 Fig. 2  (a) The initial three discharge/charge curves and (b) the long-term cycling performance of the C/S cathode-based Li–S cells in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer. The insets in (a) are the images of the separators obtained from the disassembled coin cells after long-terms cycling. 
The distinct discharge/charge behavior of the two cells can be explained from the perspective of polysulfide dissolution. In the case of the C/S cathode-based Li–S cell with the carbon interlayer, dissolution of polysulfides can be doubly restrained. First, the thermally treated C/S composite possesses a strong coupling interaction between carbon black and sulfur, inhibiting polysulfide dissolution. Once some of the long-chain polysulfides dissolve into the electrolyte, the porous and electrically conductive carbon interlayer functions as the second safeguard to intercept, reutilize, and convert the polysulfides into Li2S.25 As a result, the double protection of the sulfur cathode leads to a high conversion efficiency during the first discharge with a capacity approximating to the theoretical value. The extremely low capacity during the following charge suggests that the deposited Li2S cannot convert back into long-chain polysulfides/sulfur under this double protection circumstance. The reason for this phenomenon should be the absence of polysulfides in the electrolyte, which are expected to serve as the intermediates for the conversion reaction of Li2S to sulfur.31–33 The white color of the separator obtained from the disassembled coin cell after long-terms cycling (see inset in Fig. 2a) verifies that polysulfide dissolution is not obvious under the double protection of the C/S cathode and the carbon interlayer. For the C/S cathode-based Li–S cell without the carbon interlayer, the C/S cathode itself cannot prevent dissolution of the polysulfides thoroughly, leading to a considerably lower discharge capacity than the theoretical value. During the following charge, the partially dissolved polysulfides in the electrolyte serve as the intermediates to accelerate the conversion reaction dynamics of Li2S to sulfur, allowing an effective electrochemical cycle of this Li–S cell. Dissolution of polysulfides can be clearly observed from the yellow colored separator of the disassembled cell after electrochemical cycles (see inset in Fig. 2a). The obvious capacity decline during long-term cycling should result from the excessive dissolution of polysulfides. The resulting ‘shuttling effect’ of the polysulfides gradually brings about the pollution of the cathode surfaces, making them unavailable for the following electrochemical reaction.
In order to confirm the above concept, we also measured the discharge/charge performances of another two thermally treated mesoporous carbon/sulfur cathode and activated carbon/sulfur cathode based Li–S cells, and similar results were obtained (Fig. S6 and S7, ESI†). In the presence of the carbon interlayer, these Li–S cells cannot be effectively charged after the first discharge, whereas normal discharge/charge cycling is observed for the cells without the carbon interlayer. More interestingly, in the presence of the carbon interlayer, the capacity of the mesoporous carbon/sulfur cathode gradually increases from 50 mA h g−1 to 470 mA h g−1 during the initial 20 cycles (Fig. S8, ESI†), suggesting that the gradual dissolution of polysulfides in this cell construction could activate the electrochemical reaction. All these results demonstrate the importance of polysulfide dissolution for the effective cycling of Li–S batteries.
Next, we investigated the discharge/charge behavior of sulfur cathode-based Li–S cells in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer. Sulfur powder without undergoing any thermal treatment was directly used as the active material to prepare the cathode disks. The initial three discharge/charge curves of the Li–S cells with and without the carbon interlayer are shown in Fig. 3a. Interestingly, the sulfur cathode manifests excellent discharge/charge performance in the presence of the carbon interlayer. The discharge capacities of the initial three cycles are 1362, 1416, and 1379 mA h g−1, respectively, which are slightly lower than the theoretical value of 1675 mA h g−1. The reason is believed to be related to the slight dissolution of polysulfides under the single protection of the carbon interlayer. The light yellow color of the separator after long-term cycling validates this point (see inset in Fig. 3a). The corresponding reversible (charge) capacities are extremely close to the discharge ones, suggesting the high reversibility of the sulfur/Li2S conversion reaction in this cell construction. In contrast, the sulfur cathode in the absence of the carbon interlayer undergoes normal electrochemical cycling during the initial cycles, but with a considerably lower capacity than the one in the presence of the carbon interlayer. As indicated by the much darker yellow color of the separator when compared to the one in the presence of the carbon interlayer (see inset in Fig. 3a), the severe dissolution of polysulfides in the cell without any protection is believed to be the reason for the low capacity of the sulfur cathode. These comparative results suggest that the carbon interlayer is able to intercept and reutilize the dissolved polysulfides and improve the utilization efficiency of the sulfur cathode.25 On the other hand, when compared to the S/C cathode-based Li–S cell that cannot be cycled effectively in the presence of the carbon interlayer, the single protection of the sulfur cathode-based cell by the carbon interlayer is unable to intercept all of the dissolved polysulfides, leaving a small amount of the long-chain polysulfides in the electrolyte as indicated by the light yellow color of separator. As a result, the conversion reaction of Li2S to sulfur proceeds smoothly with the assistance of polysulfide intermediates and the high-efficiency cycling of the Li–S cell is achieved.
 Fig. 3  (a) The initial three discharge/charge curves and (b) the long-term cycling performance of sulfur cathode-based Li–S cells in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer. The insets in (a) are the images of the separators obtained from the disassembled coin cells after long-terms cycling. 
The long-term cycling performance of the sulfur cathode-based Li–S cells with and without the carbon interlayer is shown in Fig. 3b. The cell with the carbon interlayer exhibits excellent cycling stability with 1070 mA h g−1 of capacity retained after 100 continuous cycles. It is notable that the capacity retention ability of this Li–S cell is comparable to or even better than those of various high-performance carbon/sulfur or metal oxide/sulfur composite-based Li–S cells.11,13,20,21 The excellent discharge/charge behavior of the Li–S cell with the single protection of the carbon interlayer indicates that the slight dissolution of polysulfides endows the cell with the reversible conversion reaction of sulfur/Li2S, and at the same time exerts an insignificant ‘shuttling effect’. For the Li–S cell without the protection of the carbon interlayer, excessive dissolution of the polysulfides leads to a serious ‘shuttling effect’ and rapid capacity fading during long-term cycling.
In conclusion, the effects of the C/S composite cathode and the carbon paper interlayer on the discharge/charge behavior of Li–S cells were investigated. Under the double protection of the C/S cathode and the carbon interlayer, the Li2S product formed in the first discharge cannot be reversibly converted back into polysulfides/sulfur due to the absence of polysulfide intermediates. Moderate dissolution of polysulfides for the Li–S cell under the single protection of the carbon interlayer allows highly efficient and stable discharge/charge cycling. Excessive dissolution of polysulfides in the unprotected Li–S cell leads to a serious ‘shuttling effect’ and rapid capacity fading during long-term cycling. Thus it can be concluded that both overprotection and inadequate protection of the sulfur cathode are unfavorable for the cycling of Li–S batteries, and realizing the moderate dissolution of polysulfides is the key to exploring high-performance Li–S batteries.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC No. 21203133, 21301124, 21473120, and 51272168) and The Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK2012186).
Notes and references
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Y. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018 RSC .
Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, J. Xiao, Y. Y. Shao, J. M. Zheng, W. D. Bennett, D. P. Lu, L. V. Saraf, M. Engelhard, L. W. Ji, J. Zhang, X. L. Li, G. L. Graff and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3343 Search PubMed .
D. Bresser, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10545 RSC .
D. W. Wang, Q. C. Zeng, G. M. Zhou, L. C. Yin, F. Li, H. M. Cheng, I. R. Gentle and G. Q. M. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9382 CAS .
W. Y. Li, G. Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Z. Fu and Y. S. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Jiang, L. X. Yuan, Z. Q. Yi, C. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Strasser and Y. H. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N. H. Zhao, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Zhou, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xi, S. Cao, X. Y. Peng, C. Ducati, R. V. Kumar and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2192 RSC .
W. D. Zhou, H. Chen, Y. C. Yu, D. L. Wang, Z. M. Cui, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Wang, W. K. Wang, A. B. Wang, K. G. Yuan, L. X. Miao, X. L. Zhang, Y. Q. Huang, Z. B. Yu and J. Y. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10263 RSC .
W. Y. Li, Q. F. Zhang, G. Y. Zheng, Z. W. Seh, H. B. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Zhou, Y. C. Yu, H. Chen, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, W. Y. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P. C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Hart, Q. Pang, A. Garsuch, T. Weiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5682 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Tao, J. G. Wang, Z. G. Ying, Q. X. Cai, G. Y. Zheng, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, Y. Xia, C. Liang, W. K. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, T. Gao, H. Zheng, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, Y. Han, J. Shao and H. Zheng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500048 Search PubMed .
H. B. Yao, G. Y. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, D. S. Kong, J. J. Cha, W. Y. Li, Z. W. Seh, M. T. McDowell, K. Yan, Z. Liang, V. K. Narasimhan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3943 CAS .
B. K. Guo, T. Ben, Z. H. Bi, G. M. Veith, X. G. Sun, S. L. Qiu and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4905 RSC .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, F. Nouar, C. Davoisne, T. Devic, D. Gonbeau, R. Dominko, C. Serre, G. Ferey and J. M. Tarascon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Su, Y. Z. Fu, B. K. Guo, S. Dai and A. Manthiram, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Zu, Y. S. Su, Y. Z. Fu and A. Manthiram, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2291 RSC .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4184 RSC .
R. Singhal, S. H. Chung, A. Manthiram and V. Kalra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4530 CAS .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, Gangulibabu, A. Gueguen, R. Dedryvere and J. M. Tarascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 176 CAS .
S. R. Chen, F. Dai, M. L. Gordin and D. H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3540 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms, SEM image, XPS spectra, discharge/charge curves and cycling performance of Li–S cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc03753k‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Images of the as-prepared carbon paper and carbon disks for the use as interlayers in coin cells. (b) Construction of a Li–S coin cell with a carbon interlayer sandwiched between the separator and the sulfur cathode. SEM images of (c) electrospun PAN nanofibers and (d) carbon nanofibers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The initial three discharge/charge curves and (b) the long-term cycling performance of the C/S cathode-based Li–S cells in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer. The insets in (a) are the images of the separators obtained from the disassembled coin cells after long-terms cycling.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The initial three discharge/charge curves and (b) the long-term cycling performance of sulfur cathode-based Li–S cells in the presence and absence of the carbon interlayer. The insets in (a) are the images of the separators obtained from the disassembled coin cells after long-terms cycling.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms, SEM image, XPS spectra, discharge/charge curves and cycling performance of Li–S cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc03753k
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
