Graphene-based polyaniline nanocomposites: preparation, properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA13462H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13462H
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4491-4509Graphene-based polyaniline nanocomposites: preparation, properties and applications

        
          
            Li 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xingping 
            Lu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengbin 
            Lei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yonghai 
            Song
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Functional Small Organic Molecule, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang 330022, P. R. China. E-mail: yhsonggroup@hotmail.com;  Fax: +86 791 88120862;   Tel: +86 791 88120862
bKey Laboratory of Microsystems and Microstructures Manufacturing, Ministry of Education, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150080, P. R. China
Received 
      31st August 2013
    , Accepted 5th November 2013First published on 5th November 2013AbstractGraphene is very popular in recent years, due to its unique electrical, thermal, mechanical, optical and electrochemical properties. With these useful advantages, graphene has been used as a substance to incorporate various kinds of functional materials. Among them, graphene-based polyaniline (PANI) nanocomposites have attracted a great deal of interest due to their new properties or enhanced performance during the past few years. This is because PANI is a useful conducting polymer that has been widely used for electronic, optical and electrochemical applications owing to its low cost, good environmental stability, interesting electroactivity, high pseudocapacitance and unusual doping/dedoping chemistry. This review discusses the current development of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. After introduction of the properties of graphene, we summarize various methods to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, as well as their enhanced properties. Finally, the applications of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, such as supercapacitors, sensing platforms, fuel cells, solar cells, electrochromic devices, lithium ion batteries and so on, are described.Li WangLi Wang received her Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. She is currently working as a professor at Jiangxi Normal University. Her current research interest is focused on nanomaterials and their applications in biosensors and supercapacitors.Xingping LuXingping Lu received her science bachelor in chemistry in 2012 from Jiangxi Normal University, China. She is working for her master's degree in Jiangxi Normal University, China. Her research interests are nano-materials and their applications in sensors.Yonghai SongYonghai Song received his Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. He is currently working as a professor at Jiangxi Normal University. His current research interests focus on nanomaterials and their applications in biosensors.
1. Introduction
Graphene has attracted tremendous attention in recent years owing to its unique electrical, thermal, mechanical, optical and electrochemical properties.1–3 It has a large theoretical specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1),4 high carrier mobility at room temperature (∼10000 cm2 V−1 S−1),5 good thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m−1 K−1),6 high Young's modulus (∼1.0 TPa),7 and good optical transmittance (∼97.7%).8 With these useful advantages, graphene has been used as a substance to incorporate various kinds of functional materials, such as metal nanoparticles,9,10 polymers,11–13 metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)14,15 and so on. One of the most common graphene-based nanocomposites is graphene-based polymer nanocomposites, which show superior thermal, electrical, mechanical, optical and electrochemical properties compared with the neat polymer or graphene.3,6,13,16,17 For example, graphene oxide (GO) doped PANI exhibited an improved conductivity of 10 S cm−1 and specific capacitance of 531 F g−1 as compared to 2 S cm−1 and 216 F g−1 of pure PANI.13 Therefore, graphene-based polymer nanocomposites are intensively explored in applications such as supercapacitors,18 sensing platforms,19 fuel cells,20,21 solar cells22 and so on. PANI is a useful conducting polymer that has been widely used for electronic, optical and electrochemical applications due to its low cost, good environmental stability, interesting electroactivity, and unusual doping/dedoping chemistry.23–25 The graphene-based PANI nanocomposites have attracted a great deal of interest during the past few years owing to their new properties or enhanced performance. This review discusses the current development of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. After introduction of the properties of graphene, we will discuss the various methods to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, as well as their enhanced properties. Lastly, the applications of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, such as supercapacitors, sensing platforms, fuel cells, solar cells, electrochromic devices, lithium ion batteries and so on, will be described.

Fig. 1 summarizes the scope of this review. Graphene-based PANI nanocomposites share the unique properties of graphene and PANI, and accordingly show various enhanced properties (electrical conductivity, electrocatalytic activity, thermal stability, etc.). Therefore, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites are widely used in various applications, e.g. supercapacitors, sensing platforms and electrochromic devices. There are various methods (in situ chemical oxidative polymerization, in situ electropolymerization, interfacial polymerization, etc.) to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with different morphologies, such as nanoparticles, nanowires, nanofibers, hollow spheres, nanotubes, and so on. Correspondingly, the different morphologies of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites can be employed in specific fields.
 Fig. 1  Overview of properties, preparation methods and applications of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. 
2. Properties of graphene
2.1 Synthesis and structural features
Graphene is a 2D monolayer of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms with hexagonal lattice structure.1 Two carbon atoms are bonded together with a σC–C bond, which is an extremely strong bond in materials.2,26,27 Each carbon atom has a π orbital that contributes to a delocalized network of electrons. The π bond provides not only the electron conduction of graphene, but also the weak interaction among graphene layers or between graphene and substrate.26,27 Moreover, graphene has some structural ‘defects’, including vacancies, edges/cracks, adatoms, adsorbed impurities, and so on.2
Chemically reduced graphene oxide (rGO), which involves the oxidation of graphite to GO in the presence of strong acids and oxidants followed by the reduction of GO to rGO using chemical reducing agents such as hydroquinone and hydrazine hydrate, is becoming a promising method with some advantages such as ease of chemical modification.28,29 The GO sheets can approximately exhibit a C:O ratio of 2:1,30 because the sp2-bonded carbon network of graphite is strongly disrupted and a significant fraction of this carbon network is bonded to hydroxyl groups or participates in epoxide groups. Minor components of carboxylic or carbonyl groups are thought to populate the edges of the layers in GO.29 While rGO sheets show a C:O ratio of over 10:1, which indicates that rGO sheets still contain some oxygen-containing functional groups, e.g., hydroxyl, epoxy, and carboxylic groups.30 With these special structural characteristics, the electrical conductivity of GO (0.53 ± 0.39 × 10−3 S m−1) or rGO (6.87 ± 0.07 × 102 S m−1) is orders of magnitude lower compared to the pristine graphene (35100 S m−1) due to the presence of residual oxygenated groups, which is detrimental to electronic transmission.31 However, the reactive surfaces of GO and rGO provide tunability in electronic and optoelectronic properties via chemical reactions, good dispersibility in water and the feasibility for composite incorporation through chemical functionalization,18,31 π–π interaction,32,33etc.
2.2 Electronic properties
The electronic properties of graphene have received the most attention. Suspended graphene shows extremely high low-temperature charge carrier mobility, with a value approaching 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1,34 making it an outstanding conductor of electricity. This excellent conductivity is due to the remarkable property of graphene that its charge carriers behave as massless relativistic particles or Dirac fermions, and electrons can travel distances in the order of micrometers without scattering under ambient conditions.5 This unique behavior has led to other phenomena in graphene. As a zero-band gap 2D semiconductor, graphene exhibits a strong ambipolar electric field effect and the concentration of charge carriers can be as high as 1013 cm−2, with room temperature mobilities of up to 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1 having been measured.2,5 Moreover, an unusual half-integer quantum Hall effect (QHE) in graphene has been observed at room temperature.35
2.3 Thermal properties
The thermal conductivity of suspended single-layer graphene at room temperature has been measured in the range ∼(4.84 ± 0.44) × 103 to (5.30 ± 0.48) × 103 W m−1 K−1.6 The superior thermal conduction property of graphene is beneficial for making graphene as an excellent material for thermal management. Recently, it has been reported that the thermal conductivity of monolayer graphene exfoliated on a silicon dioxide support is still as high as about 600 W m−1 K−1,36 exceeding those of metals such as copper and silicon, which are used in electronics today. It is lower than that of suspended graphene because of the leaking of phonons across the graphene-SiO2 support interface and strong interface-scattering of flexural modes.36 In another study, the thermal conductivity of large-area, monolayer graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on a Au-coated SiNx porous membrane can reach about ∼2500 W m−1 K−1 at 350 K.37
2.4 Mechanical properties
The intrinsic mechanical properties including the fracture strength and Young's modulus of free-standing monolayer graphene membranes are measured based on nanoindentation using atomic force microscopy (AFM).7 The breaking strength of defect-free graphene is 42 N m−1 and the Young's modulus is 1.0 TPa, suggesting the strongest material ever measured. Using state-of-the-art density functional theory calculations combined with classical elasticity theory considerations, the ultra-narrow graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) have a remarkable Young's modulus value of ∼7 TPa and a pronounced electromechanical response towards bending and torsional deformations.38 Moreover, monolayer graphene can be subjected to various degrees of axial compression by employing a cantilever beam.39 Both stress uptake and compression buckling strain in single flakes of different geometries were measured in this work. As a result, the mechanical response is monitored by simultaneous Raman measurements through the shift of either the G or 2D phonons of graphene. In other works, the average elastic modulus and the highest fracture strength of GO paper obtained were ∼32 GPa and ∼120 MPa, respectively;40 the elastic modulus of rGO determined through tip-induced deformation experiments was 0.25 TPa.41
2.5 Optical properties
The suspended single-layer graphene is found to absorb a significant (πα = 2.3%) fraction of incident white light with only a minute portion of it being reflected (<0.1%), and the transmittance linearly decreases with the number of layers for n-layer graphene.8 These are consequences of graphene's unique electronic property of non-interacting massless Dirac fermions. Using infrared spectroscopy, it is found that monolayer and bilayer graphene have strong interband transitions and that their optical transitions can be substantially modified through electrical gating, which holds promise for new applications in infrared optics and optoelectronics.42 What is more, the optical contrast of graphene on various substrates such as SiC,43 SiO2/Si,44 and Al2O3/Si45 has also been studied. The number of layers (<10 layers) for graphene on Si substrate with a 285 nm SiO2 capping layer can be easily determined by using contrast spectra, which were generated from the reflected light of a white light source.44 The contrast spectrum method is a rapid, nondestructive, clear, and easily implemented way to determine the numbers of layers of a graphene sheet.44
2.6 Electrochemical properties
Graphene shows excellent electrochemical properties, such as fast electron-transfer kinetics,46 superior electrical conductivity,47 good electrocatalytic activity,47,48 a broad electrochemical window,48 high capacitance,49,50 outstanding cycling performance51 and so on. The electron transfer-rate constant (k) of a graphene sheet for the edge-plane oxidation is 0.022 cm s−1, whereas that for the basal-plane reaction is less than 10−9 cm s−1.46 Using a four-point probe technique, the electrical conductivity of graphene is found to be 64 mS cm−1, which is approximately 60 times better than that of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs).47 Furthermore, graphene exhibits high charge density because a large number of negative charges are formed on the graphene surface during the synthesis of graphene from graphite.47 Hence, graphene electrodes possess a good electrocatalytic activity towards different kinds of important inorganic and organic compounds, e.g. dopamine,47 free bases of DNA, glucose and hydrogen peroxide.48 Graphene electrodes also show reasonable performance as electrochemical supercapacitors and exhibited very high capacitance value of 14900 F when they were fabricated using the coil-based device geometry.49 The specific capacity of graphene is found to increase with the number of layers, in which 1–2 graphene layers have up to 80 μF cm−2, while that of multilayer graphene is much higher (394 μF cm−2).50
3. Graphene-based polyaniline nanocomposites
During the past few years, PANI has attracted a great deal of interest due to its low cost, interesting electroactivity, good environmental stability, and unusual doping/dedoping chemistry.23–25 When PANI is combined with graphene, the nanocomposites exhibit enhanced performance compared with pure PANI.52–54 There are various methods to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with different enhanced properties. As far as we know, these graphene-based PANI nanocomposites are widely employed in various fields, such as supercapacitors,13,18,25,55–64 sensing platforms,19,65–71 fuel cells,20,21 solar cells22,72,73 and so on.
3.1 Preparation methods
The graphene-based PANI nanocomposites have been fabricated by various methods in the presence of graphene, GO or rGO, and the PANI is in the form of nanoparticles,74,75 nanowires,19,64 nanofibers,13,66,76 hollow spheres,60 or nanorods.58,77,78 Most of the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites were prepared by using in situ polymerization approaches, including in situ chemical oxidative polymerization20,63,64 and in situ electropolymerization.19,58,69 Other preparation methods, such as interfacial polymerization,77 solution mixing,55,61,62 self-assembly approach,52,60,76 Pickering emulsion polymerization74 and so on, have also been used to prepare graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.

3.1.1 
            In situ chemical oxidative polymerization. 
The in situ chemical oxidative polymerization with ammonium persulfate (APS) as an oxidative agent, is often used to prepare graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.18,20,22,25,63,64,79–90 This method is very common, and graphene can be modified by PANI through various interactions, including covalent functionalization, non-covalent functionalization and so on. By controlling the reaction conditions, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with different structures can be obtained, such as nanowires,64 nanofibers,13,80 nanoparticles,63,75 nanotubes80 or nanorods.78
For example, GO/PANI nanocomposites with controllable morphologies were prepared through an in situ chemical oxidative polymerization method.80 Firstly, a suitable amount of aniline monomer was added into the GO solution and sonicated to produce a stable solution mixture. Next, APS solution was mixed with different acidities of the above solution. Finally, the solutions were put in an ultrasonic water bath at different temperatures to obtain GO/PANI nanocomposites with different morphologies. A molar ratio of [aniline]/[APS] equal to 0.8:1 was applied to all reactions. The specific reaction parameters, including solution acidity, aniline concentration and reaction temperature, were used to control the final shape of the composite product. Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the GO/PANI samples obtained from different polymerization conditions. TEM images were additionally provided as insets in Fig. 2a and b for better distinction. When polymerization was carried out in 0.1 M aniline and 0.05 M HCl solution at 0 °C for 90 min, nanotubes with an outer diameter of 250 nm could be obtained (Fig. 2a). However, the outer diameter of the nanotubes decreased to only 45 nm with the decrease of aniline concentration from 0.1 to 0.06 M (Fig. 2b), indicating that aniline concentration was a critical factor determining the diameter of the nanotubes. With the increase of solution acidity from 0.05 M to 0.2 M, a nanosphere shape was found (Fig. 2c), revealing that solution acidity also affected the morphology of the products. When the reaction temperature was increased to 50 °C, aligned nanofiber arrays could be observed (Fig. 2d), which clearly demonstrated the effect of reaction temperature.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the GO/PANI nanostructures: (a) nanotubes obtained from 0.1 M aniline solution, (b) nanotubes obtained from 0.06 M aniline solution, (c) nanospheres, and (d) aligned nanofiber arrays. The reaction temperature is 0 °C for both nanotubes and nanospheres while it is 50 °C for nanofiber arrays. The insets in (a) and (b) are TEM images of the nanotubes. Figure from Y. F. Huang et al.80 Reproduced with permission from Polymer, 2012, 53. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012). 
The growth mechanisms of GO/PANI nanotubes, nanospheres and aligned nanofiber arrays could be expressed as follows. At low solution acidity, the oxidation of aniline monomers produced intercalated PANI chains with a phenazine-like aniline head unit, which can serve as the axis, and the protonation of emeraldine aniline unit can provide the driving force for the formation of a nanotube through a self-curling process. While at high solution acidity, the oxidation of aniline monomers formed linear PANI chains at first and these linear chains may serve as the template for the growth of rod-like objects on GO surfaces. As the reaction proceeds, these rod-like objects may continue to grow and turn into nanospheres if low reaction temperature is applied. On the other hand, if high reaction temperature and low aniline concentration are applied, the secondary growth of the rod-like objects can be effectively inhibited and an aligned nanofiber array will consequently be formed.80
K. Zhang et al. used a similar protocol to prepare graphene/PANI nanofiber nanocomposites.79 The process is illustrated in Fig. 3a. The aniline monomer was first mixed with different mass ratios (10%, 50%, and 80%) of GO in aqueous solution by sonicating to form a homogeneous suspension. Then, APS was added to this mixture to obtain the homogeneous composites of GO/PANI nanofibers which were designated as PAGO10, PAGO50, and PAGO80, respectively. Finally, the composites were reduced to graphene by hydrazine and followed by reoxidation and reprotonation to give the composites of graphene/PANI nanofibers which were correspondingly designated as PAG10, PAG50, and PAG80, respectively. Fig. 3b and c show the representative SEM and TEM images of PAG80, respectively. It was found that graphene and PANI nanofibers formed a uniform nanocomposite with the PANI fibers absorbed on the graphene surface and/or filled between the graphene sheets. It was concluded that the oxidation of aniline monomers formed linear PANI chains and absorbed onto the graphene surface through hydrogen bonding, π–π interactions and electrostatic interactions. Such a uniform structure together with the observed high conductivities afforded high specific capacitance and good cycling stability during the charge–discharge process when used as supercapacitor electrodes.
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the process for preparation of graphene-PANI composites. (b) Representative SEM image of PAG80. (c) Representative TEM image of PAG80. Inset is the selected area electron diffraction patterns of the composites. Figure from K. Zhang et al.79 Reproduced with permission from Chem. Mater., 2010, 22. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). 
In addition, hierarchical nanocomposites of PANI nanowire arrays on GO sheet substrate are also successfully fabricated by this method.64Fig. 4a illustrates a formation mechanism of PANI-GO nanocomposites. In the chemical oxidation polymerization process of PANI, two possible nucleation sites (that is, bulk solution and solid substrates) compete with each other. When a concentration of aniline less than 0.05 M is employed, most active nucleation sites were generated on the GO nanosheet surface at the initial stage of the polymerization process by heterogeneous nucleation, which was beneficial to the subsequent growth of PANI on the GO substrates. Subsequently, PANI nanowires would further grow along the initial nuclei and formed aligned PANI nanowires. However, when the concentration was higher (e.g., 0.06 M), homogeneous nucleation will take place after the initial nucleation on the solid surface and produce randomly connected PANI nanowires by using aniline micelles as “soft template”. The SEM image of PANI-GO nanocomposite at 0.05 M aniline (Fig. 4b) reveals that the nucleation and growth processes only occurred on the surface of GO sheets and formed aligned PANI nanowire arrays. The composite structure was further proved by its FT-IR spectrum (Fig. 4c). Compared with GO, several new peaks attributed to PANI appeared in the spectrum of PANI-GO. The new peaks at 1575, 1490, 1307, and 800 cm−1 are attributed to the vibrations of CN, CC, C–N, and C–H, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowire arrays: (1) heterogeneous nucleation on GO nanosheets; (2) homogeneous nucleation in bulk solution. (b) SEM image of PANI-GO nanocomposite. Conditions: aniline = 0.05 M, aniline/APS = 1.5 (molar ratio), HClO4 = 1 M, GO = 0.36 mg mL−1, and the reaction was carried out at −10 °C for 24 h. (c) FT-IR spectra of pristine GO, randomly connected PANI nanowires, and PANI-GO nanocomposite. Figure from J. J. Xu et al.64 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). 
Instead of noncovalent mixing/adsorption, PANI can be covalently grafted to reduced graphene oxide (PANI-g-rGO) by in situ chemical oxidative polymerization.18 The fabrication of PANI-g-rGO essentially includes three steps, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In order to form covalent bonds, GO was acylated in the presence of excess SOCl2 and then reacted with amine-protected 4-aminophenol. The primary reason for selecting the amine-protected phenol derivative is to ensure that the covalent bonding happens through the hydroxyl groups and not through the amine moieties in the derivative. Upon subsequent deprotection of N-(tert-butoxycarbonyl) groups by hydrolysis with trifluoroacetic acid, PANI-g-rGO was prepared from in situ oxidative polymerization of aniline in the presence of APS and amine-terminated rGO (rGO-NH2) as an initiator. Since the composite is covalently functionalized and the GO was in situ reduced to a certain extent, the compatibility of rGO with the PANI matrix is ensured, and hence phase separation is minimized. Some other covalently functionalized graphene-based PANI composites have also been reported.56,84,88
 Fig. 5  Schematic governing the preparation of PANI-g-rGO with a digital picture of the sample in the middle. Figure from N. A. Kumar et al.18 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2012, 6. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012). 


3.1.2 
            In situ electropolymerization. 
On the other hand, a graphene-based PANI composite can be prepared by in situ electropolymerization19,58,69,70,72,91–100 which includes constant current method,19 constant potential method,72,97–99 dynamic potential scanning method69,70,91–96 and pulse galvanostatic method.58 Unlike what has been reported for in situ chemical oxidative polymerization, the in situ electropolymerization method has the advantages of short reaction time, operational simplicity and it does not need an oxidant. However, PANI obtained by electropolymerization is more likely to form thin film and irregular structures.
Take PANI/GO nanocomposite films for example, the materials were fabricated by electropolymerization of aniline monomers onto GO coated indium tin oxide (ITO) glass slides.94 Briefly, the GO transparent film was prepared by drop casting about 2 mL 0.5 wt% GO dispersion onto the ITO glass. The electropolymerization of aniline onto GO film was performed using a typical electrochemical cell consisting of three electrodes. In this process, an Ag/AgCl electrode, a Pt wire and GO coated ITO glass slide served as the reference, counter and working electrodes, respectively. PANI was in situ electropolymerized on GO for 30 cycles scanned back and forth from 0 to +1.3 V versus Ag/AgCl at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution containing 0.1 M aniline. AFM images show that the PANI/GO nanocomposite film displays a uniform structure. The increased thickness of the PANI/GO film (125 nm) compared to that of pure PANI (80 nm) is attributed to the thickness of GO substrate though less polymer was electropolymerized onto GO coated ITO. The structures result from the adsorption and intercalation of PANI on the GO sheets through hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking and electrostatic interactions, which served as a template in the process of electropolymerization. Moreover, GO with abundant oxygen-contenting groups can provide a large number of active sites for the nucleation of PANI and sequential growth.
Recently, freestanding and flexible graphene/PANI paper was prepared by an in situ electropolymerization of PANI film98 or PANI nanorods99 on graphene paper. Graphene paper was directly used as the working electrode, and Pt plate as the counter electrode. PANI film was in situ electropolymerized on the graphene paper at a constant potential of 0.75 V versus SCE for different periods in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.05 M aniline mixed solution.98 PANI nanorods was electropolymerized on the graphene paper in 1 M H2SO4 solution (volume ratio of water and ethanol 1:1) and 0.1 M of aniline at a potential of 0.8 V versus Ag/AgCl electrode with different deposition times.99 Schematic illustrations in Fig. 6 visually describe the preparation procedures of the flexible PANI film/graphene paper (a) and PANI nanorod/graphene paper (b). These kinds of materials are wonderful. Because most of the graphene-based PANI composites are powders and a binder (e.g., Nafion) has to be used as an additive to stick the materials onto the surface of the electrode, this not only makes the procedures more complex, but also hinders the electrical conductivity and wastes energy on unwanted inner resistance.99 Thus, the freestanding graphene-PANI composite paper was directly used as the working electrode with enhanced electrical conductivity and larger capacitance. What is more, the freestanding paper electrode has favorable mechanical strength which is a vital component of a flexible supercapacitor.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene/PANI film composite paper (GPCP). Figure from D.-W. Wang et al.98 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2009, 3. Copyright American Chemical Society (2009). (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene/PANI nanorod composite paper. Figure from H.-P. Cong et al.99 Reproduced with permission from Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2013). 


3.1.3 Interfacial polymerization. 
Another useful technique for the preparation of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites is the interfacial polymerization method.77,101–104 Different from in situ polymerization, the reaction is carried out at the interface of two phases (water and organic phase). Usually, aniline is dissolved in an organic solvent such as toluene, chloroform, or benzene, while an oxidative agent (e.g. APS) is dissolved in an acid solution, such as H2SO4, HCl or HClO4. Graphene and its derivatives can be dissolved in either an organic solvent or a water phase. For comparison, the in situ polymerization generally yields insoluble powders that are difficult to be treated, while the interfacial polymerization method can solve this problem.101 Through this route the resulting material was spontaneously formed as a self-standing film at a water/organic interface, and could be removed and easily deposited over any kind of substrate. For the synthesis of the graphene/PANI nanocomposites, graphene was dispersed in a toluene solution of aniline. Then, the resulting mixture was transferred to a round-flask containing HCl aqueous solution in which a suitable amount of APS was previously dissolved. The two-phase system was maintained under magnetic stirring. Finally, a continuous, self-standing, homogeneous and transparent graphene/PANI nanocomposite film was spontaneously formed at the interface.
PANI nanofibers/GO nanocomposites with excellent interfacial interaction and elongated fiber structure are also synthesized via a facile interfacial polymerization method.103 The synthesis procedures are briefly described as follows. First, aniline (16 mmol) was dissolved in chloroform (100 mL) as organic phase, and the water phase was GO aqueous solutions with three different concentrations (0.035, 0.070 and 0.140 g) in which APS (4 mmol) and p-toluenesulfonic acid (PTSA, 50 mmol) were dissolved (100 mL). Then, the water phase was transferred to the organic phase for interfacial polymerization at room temperature. For convenience, these three collected PANI nanofibers/GO nanocomposites were named as IP-1, IP-2 and IP-3, respectively. The reaction process was monitored and recorded with a camera at different reaction times of 0 min, 10 min, 0.5 h and 2 h, Fig. 7(a)–(d), respectively. As the reaction proceeded, the whole GO phase turned from brown to dark brown, the organic phase turned to light orange and the interfacial area became dark green, indicating the efficient exchange of materials at the interface. Fig. 7(e)–(g) show the TEM microstructures of IP-1, IP-2 and IP-3, respectively, which revealed that the PANI nanofibers were observed to be randomly attached on the GO surface. The reason for interfacial polymerization of the PANI nanofibers/GO nanocomposites is that the GO contains different oxygen-containing groups, and aniline could be protonated by PTSA at the H2O/CHCl3 interface or directly protonated by the carboxylic groups grafted on the GO sheets to form a polymerization initiation site. As a result, GO was completely coated by a thin layer of PANI. Meanwhile, the PANI coated GO could serve as seeding templates to grow the nanofiber structure when exposed to the interfacial area.
 Fig. 7  Interfacial polymerization of PANI nanofibers/GO nanocomposites recorded at (a) 0 min, (b) 10 min, (c) 0.5 h, and (d) 2 h. TEM microstructures of (e) IP-1, (f) IP-2, (g) IP-3. Figure from J. Zhu et al.103 Reproduced with permission from Polymer, 2012, 53. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012). 


3.1.4 Solution mixing. 
Solution mixing is one of the most simple and direct methods for preparation of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.55,61,62,105–108 During the process, graphene-based materials and PANI are usually previously prepared, and then they are mixed under stirring or ultrasonication. Hence, it is inevitable that composites are unstable and easy aggregate. In order to avoid aggregation, re-stacking and instability of nanocomposites, surface functionalization of graphene or rGO before solution mixing was used to provide good solubility and stability.61,105 For example, PANI-graphene hybrids were obtained by grafting PANI nanofiber onto graphene nanosheet with the amide group through solution mixing method.105 At first, GO was functionalized by acyl chlorination reaction. Then, the as-prepared PANI nanofiber solution was mixed with functionalized GO under moderate stirring to prepare PANI-GO. Finally, PANI-GO was reduced by N2H4, and PANI-graphene hybrid was obtained. The same group also reported preparation of an amide group-connected graphene-PANI nanofiber hybrid in another paper.61 Actually, these methods not only provided good solubility, but also made PANI connected to graphene through chemical bonds, which are stronger than van der Waals forces and allowed a more intimate interaction between graphene and PANI. This intimacy decreased interfacial resistance and improved the electrochemical performance.
Wu et al. reported a solution mixing method for preparing stable aqueous dispersions of chemically converted graphene/PANI-nanofibers (NFs) composite, which was named as G-PNF.55 The G-PNF composite dispersion (left) was so stable that little precipitate was found after standing for over 1 month or centrifugation under 1500 rpm for 10 min (Fig. 8a). In comparison, the purified PANI-NFs dispersion (right) was largely precipitated after aging for 2 weeks. As shown in Fig. 8b, the SEM image reveals that PANI-NFs are uniformly sandwiched between graphene layers. Moreover, the composite film exhibited better mechanical properties and conductivity than those of pure PANI-NF films. Actually, in this method, most of the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites were obtained through physical absorption between as-prepared PANI and graphene.
 Fig. 8  (a) G-PNF composite stably dispersed in an ammonia solution (pH = 9) (left) and pure PANI-NFs precipitated from the same medium after aging for 2 weeks (right). (b) SEM images of the G-PNF composite. Figure from Q. Wu et al.55 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). 


3.1.5 Self-assembly approach. 
The self-assembly approach is also widely employed to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.52,60,76,109–113 Generally, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites were composed via electrostatic adsorption between negatively charged graphene derivatives and positively charged PANI materials. This method is often used to prepare graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with encapsulated, sandwich or core–shell structures. It was reported that graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers were prepared by assembly of negatively charged GO with positively charged aqueous dispersible PANI nanofibers in an aqueous dispersion, followed by the reduction of GO.76Fig. 9(a) illustrates the possible procedures to prepare graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers. GO sheets might wrap PANI nanofibers to form the hybrid due to the favorable flexibility and strength of GO nanosheets and the electrostatic interactions existing between them. Then graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers paper can be obtained via reducing the GO-wrapped PANI nanofibers paper by exposing it to hydrazine vapor in a sealed vessel at 95 °C for 4 h. The TEM image of graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers (Fig. 9(b)) obviously revealed that PANI nanofibers were successfully decorated by graphene layers, and in some case, the neighboring PANI nanofibers were linked by the graphene layers. The nanocomposite showed better energy density and power density than that of pure PANI. Because a PANI nanofiber is covered by graphene layers, the electrons will pass along the outer surface of each nanofiber to form a continuous transport path in the whole hybrid, resulting in the reduced resistance of electrode materials. A low internal resistance is of great importance in energy storage devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the possible procedures to prepare the graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers. (b) TEM image of graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers. Figure from S. P. Zhou et al.76 Reproduced with permission from Carbon, 2013, 52. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012). 
PANI hollow spheres (PANI-HS)@electrochemical reduced graphene oxide (ERGO) hybrids with core–shell structures have also been fabricated via a self-assembly approach.60 The PANI-HS were first synthesized by utilizing polystyrene (PS) spheres as hard templates. The resultant PANI-HS were positively charged in their emeraldine salt form and subsequently the negatively charged GO sheets can wrap onto the PANI-HS via electrostatic interactions. The wrapped GO was finally reduced to ERGO by electrochemical reduction, leading to the final PANI-HS@ERGO hybrids. The TEM image indicated that the GO wrapped PANI-HS is of core–shell structure. The surface of the PANI-HS is rough and some ribbon or sheet like features can be found between adjacent hollow spheres. This kind of hollow nanostructure greatly enlarged the specific surface area of PANI, and provided highly electroactive regions and short diffusion lengths for both charge and ion transport. Furthermore, the wrapping of ERGO sheets on the PANI-HS offered highly conductive pathways by bridging individual PANI-HS together, thus facilitating the rate and cycling performance of supercapacitors.


3.1.6 Pickering emulsion polymerization. 
The Pickering emulsion polymerization method was first used to prepare PANI/GO composites with a novel structure consisting of PANI nanoparticles covered by GO nanosheets.74 In the process, the organic phase containing azodiisobutyronitrile (the initiator), toluene and aniline was dispersed in distilled water by ultrasonication. Then GO solution and hydrazine were added into the above solution. After sonication for a further 30 min, a Pickering emulsion stabilized by GO sheets was obtained. Then the emulsion solution was heated to 60 °C for 30 min in order to partially reduce GO and initiate preliminary polymerization. Finally, APS was dissolved in HCl (0.5 M) aqueous solution, and then added to the above mixture with vigorous stirring for 4.5 h at room temperature. The PANI/GO composites with a novel structure of PANI nanoparticles covered by GO sheets were obtained after washing and drying. The main combination mode of the PANI/GO composite includes hydrogen bonding and π–π interactions between PANI and GO. This composite exhibited remarkably higher initial specific capacitance and better cycling stability than pure PANI.


3.1.7 Other preparation methods. 
In addition to the above methods, there are other preparation approaches that have been used to prepare graphene-based PANI nanocomposites for various applications. For instance, the PANI modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was prepared by casting PANI suspension (10 μL) on the GCE surface and then dried. GO suspension (10 μL) was dripped onto the surface of the PANI/GCE and then naturally dried in the air. Finally, the GO film was electrochemically reduced in a phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7.0) for 500 s at −1 V to form graphene/PANI/GCE.66,71 But in another work, a graphene/PANI nanocomplex modified microbial fuel cell anode was fabricated by electrochemically reducing GO at first and then immersing in PANI nanofibers solution.21 What is more, graphene/PANI composite nanosheets can also be synthesized with the aid of polymerized ionic liquid, and both individual nanosheets and stable aqueous dispersions of the nanosheets can be obtained.114Table 1 summarizes and compares the advantages and disadvantages of different preparation methods for graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.
Table 1 Comparison of advantages and disadvantages of different preparation methods for graphene-based PANI nanocomposites




Preparation methods
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.





In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
This method is relatively mature. Graphene can be modified by PANI through various interactions, such as covalent functionalization, non-covalent functionalization. Graphene-based PANI composites can be easily obtained with various regular structures.
It often takes a long time, especially when graphene is modified by PANI through covalent functionalization, the process is very complex and takes a longer time. The reaction condition is very strict.

18, 20, 22, 25, 63, 64 and 79–90




In situ electropolymerization
This method is operationally simple and does not need an oxidant. It takes a short reaction time.
The morphology of the composite cannot be controlled, and it is more likely to form thin film and irregular structures.

19, 58, 69, 70, 72 and 91–100



Interfacial polymerization
This method has fast reaction rate and mild reaction condition. Graphene-based PANI nanocomposite is spontaneously formed as a self-standing film at the interface, and could be removed easily. The nanocomposite shows good water-solubility.
The morphology of the composite is difficult to control.

77 and 101–104



Solution mixing
This method is very operationally simple; there is only the need to mix graphene and PANI under stirring or ultrasonication.
The composites are unstable and easily aggregate and re-stack.

55, 61, 62 and 105–108



Self-assembly
This method is advantageous to prepare encapsulation, sandwich or core–shell structures of nanocomposites.
It is difficult to achieve other structures.

52, 60, 76 and 109–113



Pickering emulsion polymerization
It reduces PANI aggregation and prevents the PANI chains from swelling and shrinking.
The process is tedious, and the morphology is different to control.

74






3.2 Enhanced properties
The electrochemical properties, such as electrical conductivity, electrocatalytic activity, electrochemical stability and specific capacitance have shown significant improvement in graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.18,52,74,107,108,115–119 For example, electrical conductivity of PANI-g-rGO showed a value as high as 8.66 S cm−1, which was higher than pure PANI.18 The enhancement was attributed to the large specific surface area, the π-conjugated 2D conducting surface of rGO, and the covalent bonding between PANI and rGO formed conductive networks which was beneficial to the electronic transmission. Coincidentally, the electrical conductivity was 25.6 S cm−1 for sulfanilic acid sulfonated graphene/PANI, which was 20 times higher than that of pristine PANI (1.42 S cm−1).115 The improvement in conductivity in sulfonated graphene-doped PANI can be due to the graphene sheets acting as a bridge for the electronic hopping between PANI chains. Another kind of sulfonated PANI (SPANI) modified graphene (SPANI/r-G) showed enhanced electrocatalytic activity and improved electrochemical stability.116 As shown in Fig. 10, the CVs of both SPANI- and SPANI/r-G-modified electrodes in acidic electrolyte (a) and PBS (b) indicated that SPANI/r-G has better electroactivity and stability than SPANI in both acidic and neutral media. The better electroactivity and stability were possibly due to the strong interactions between SPANI chains and the basal planes of graphene combined with the aggregation of graphene sheets, which resulted in the formation of a crosslinked 3D network.116 The specific capacitance was also enhanced in graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. For example, a specific capacitance of 1046 F g−1 was obtained at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 for graphene nanosheet (GNS)/PANI composite compared to 115 F g−1 for pure PANI.63 The greatly enhanced specific capacitance was due to the synergistic effect between GNS and PANI, in which the GNS not only provided a highly conductive path, but also served as a high surface area support material for the deposition of nanometer-sized PANI. And the small nanometer-sized PANI exhibited enhanced electrode/electrolyte interface areas, providing highly electroactive regions and short diffusion lengths. The good electrical conductivity, excellent electrocatalytic activity, long-term electrochemical stability and high specific capacitance of graphene-based PANI composites ensure their potential applications, such as supercapacitors, sensing platforms, fuel cells, solar cells and lithium ion batteries.
 Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of SPANI (dashed line) and SPANI/r-G (solid line) modified electrodes in 1.0 M H2SO4 (a) and 0.1 M PBS (b). Potential scan rate = 50 mV s−1. Figure from H. Bai et al.116 Reproduced with permission from Chem. Commun., 2009. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2009). 
Graphene-based PANI composites can improve the thermal stability of the PANI as well.18,74,106,120–122 For example, the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) thermograms of PANI-g-rGO nanocomposite in air atmosphere exhibit the oxidative degradation of the PANI-g-rGO at around 250 °C, while PANI starts to decompose at a relatively low temperature of less than 150 °C.18 This increased thermal stability of the PANI-g-rGO composite could be due to the deposited PANI on the rGO layers and the concomitant thermal reduction of GO during the preparation of rGO-NH2.18 Besides, the TGA of PANI and PANI/graphene nanocomposites also shows that the thermal stability of PANI/graphene films is higher, and the decomposition of PANI started at around 450 °C, which is much higher than in pure PANI (∼400 °C).106 This increased stability may be due to some stabilizing interaction between PANI and graphene.106 In the PANI and GNS modified with poly(sodium 4-styrensulfonate) (PANI/PSS-GNS) nanocomposite, the degradation temperature of PANI is significantly increased to 460 °C from 360 °C in neat PANI.120 Moreover, PANI/GO composites synthesized by Pickering emulsion polymerization method also exhibit better thermal stability than pure PANI.74 The enhanced thermal stability clearly indicates that the interactions including π–π stacking, electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding existing between PANI and graphene are strong enough to prevent the degradation of the PANI.
Thermoelectric properties have also been enhanced in graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.122,123 The thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) of the PANI/exfoliated graphene nanoplatelets (GNP) nanocomposites is 2 orders of magnitude higher than either of the constituents, exhibiting a significant synergistic effect.122 Because PANI has a strong affinity for GNP due to π-electron interactions it would form a uniform nanofibril coating on the surface of GNP and lead to the PANI/GNP nanocomposites. Then the PANI nanofibril coating would make the polaron mobility easier, and the presence of GNP can also bridge the carrier transport between interchains through a tunneling mechanism and lead to a improved electrical conductivity for the resulting PANI/GNP composites.122 Meanwhile, a low thermal conductivity of the PANI/GNP composites is mainly attributed to the poor thermal conductivity of PANI and phonon scattering from the substantial grain boundaries between the PANI and GNP in bulk materials. As a consequence, the PANI/GNP composites show a higher ZT value than that of pure PANI. For another work, the highest ZT value of 1.95 × 10−3 has been obtained for the PANI/GNS composite containing 30 wt% GNS at 453 K, which is about 70 times higher than that obtained from the PANI.123 The graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with good thermoelectric properties are of great interest for applications as power generators and cooling systems.
In addition, electrochromic properties have also shown enhancement in graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.52,92,94,112 The sulfonic acid-grafted rGO (S-rGO)/PANI multilayer films prepared via layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly exhibit much faster electrochromic switching kinetics than those of corresponding spin-coated PANI thin films.52 It can be attributed to the incorporation of S-rGO, which not only has high electrical conductivity but also bears sulfonic acid groups that are good ionic conductors. Subsequently, the enhanced electron and ion movements in the films during the redox processes improve the electrochromic switching of PANI.52 Aa another example, PANI/GO nanocomposite films show multi-color electrochromism at different potentials arising from PANI. A coloration efficiency of 59.3 cm2 C−1 is obtained for the composite film, higher than that of the pure PANI thin films, 50.0 cm2 C−1.94 The enhanced electrochromic properties of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites show promising potential for the electrochromic device applications.
Other than the mentioned properties, such as electromagnetic properties,53,124–126 giant magnetoresistance properties,54 dielectric properties,54,127,128 field emission properties,129 electrorheological properties130–132 and so on, have also shown significant improvement in graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. For example, the electromagnetic absorption properties of the graphene/PANI nanorod arrays nanocomposite are significantly enhanced.53 The maximum reflection loss reaches −45.1 dB at 12.9 GHz for the graphene/PANI nanorod arrays with a thickness of only 2.5 mm, whereas it is −29.9 dB at 8.1 GHz for the PANI nanorods with a thickness of 4 mm. It may be related to the special structural characteristics, in which PANI nanorods arrays are grown on the surface of the graphene sheets and could be regarded as being in a parallel connection as an external field is applied. While pure PANI nanorods are disordered and tangled with each other, and thus part of the nanorods could be regarded as being in a series connection as an external field is applied.53 In another paper, the electron field emission property of graphene-PANI composite showed marked improvement compared to pristine PANI fibers with a turn-on field as low as 3.91 V μm−1 at a current density of 1 μA cm−2.129 The field enhancement factor was found to be 7012 which is much higher for the case of a polymer based composite. Table 2 summarizes and compares graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with various morphologies and enhanced properties through different preparation methods.
Table 2 Comparison of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with various morphologies and enhanced properties through different preparation methods




Methods and Materials
Conditions
Morphology
Enhanced properties
Ref.





a Oriented graphene hydrogel.
b Expanded graphite nanosheets.
c Carboxyl-functionalized graphene oxide.
d Graphene/PANI film composite paper.
e Sulfonated graphene nanosheets.
f Chemically converted graphene.
g Graphene derivative containing acyl chloride groups.
h Polyaniline emeraldine base.







In situ chemical oxidative polymerization



PANI-g-rGO

Reagents: rGO-NH2, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 5 h
Fibrillar/rod-like structures
Electrochemical properties, thermal stability

18



Graphene/PANI

Reagents: GO, ethylene glycol, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 1 h
Nanoparticles
Electrochemical properties

25



PANI@OGHa film

Reagents: OGH film, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 0.5 h
Porous film
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

59



PANI nanowire arrays/GO

Reagents: GO, aniline, HClO4, ethanol and APS; temperature: −10 °C; time: 24 h
Nanowire arrays
Electrochemical properties

64



PANI nanorod arrays/EGb

Reagents: EG, aniline and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 24 h
Nanorod arrays
Electrochemical properties

78



Graphene/PANI nanofiber

Reagents: GO, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: room temperature; time: 12 h
Nanofiber
Electrochemical properties, thermal stability

79



CFGOc-PANI

Reagents: CFGO, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: room temperature; time: 24 h
Nanowire
Electrochemical properties, thermal stability

84



GO/PANI

Reagents: GO, aniline and APS; temperature: 10 °C; time: over 30 min
Nanotube
Thermal stability

121



 




In situ electropolymerization



Graphene/PANI

Reagents: aniline and HCl; current density: 0.06, 0.03 and 0.015 mA cm−2; time: 0.5, 3 and 3 h
Nanowires
Electrochemical properties

19



Porous nanorod PANI-graphene

Reagents: graphene, aniline and HNO3; current density: 1 mA cm−2; time: ton:toff = 1:1
Porous nanorod
Electrochemical properties

58



ERGO-PANI

Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; scan rate: 50 mV s−1; potential range: 0 to 0.65 V
3D porous
Electrochemical properties

93



GPCPd

Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; potential range: 0.75 V; time: 60, 300 and 900 s
Film
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

98



Graphene-PANI paper

Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; potential range: 0.8 V; Time: 2, 5, 10 and 15 min
Nanorod arrays
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

99



 



Interfacial polymerization



sGNSe/PANI
Organic phase: chloroform; water phase: HClO4 solution; temperature: 0 °C; time: 24 h
Nanorod arrays
Electrochemical properties

77



Graphene/PANI
Organic phase: toluene; water phase: HCl solution; temperature: 21 to 24 °C; time: 22 h
Film
Electrical conductivity, optical property

101



PANI nanofibers/GO
Organic phase: chloroform; water phase: PTSA solution; temperature: room temperature; time: 2 h
Nanofibers
Electrochemical properties, thermal stability

103



 



Solution mixing



Graphene/PANI nanofibers film

Reagents: CCGf sheets and PANI nanofiber; sonication for 2 h
Nanofibers
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

55



Graphene/PANI

Reagents: PANI nanoparticles, GO and hydrazine solution; stirring and heat treating at 90 °C for 24 h.
Nanoparticles
Electrochemical properties

62



PANI-graphene

Reagents: GDSg, tetrahydrofuran and PANI nanofibers; stirring for 24 h at 0 °C with protection of nitrogen
Nanofibers
Electrochemical properties

105



PANI/GO

Reagents: GO, m-cresol, ethanol and PANI-EBh; stirring for 10 h
Layered nanostructures
Electrical conductivity

108



 



Self-assembly



PANI-HS@ERGO

Reagents: GO and PANI-HS suspension; sonication for 2 h
Hollow spheres
Electrochemical properties

60



Graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers

Reagents: GO, PANI nanofibers, hydrazine, acetone and HCl; stirring for 12 h, then keeping at 95 °C for 4 h, then stirring for 48 h
Nanofibers
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

76



Graphene@PANI nanoworm

Reagents: GO, worm-like PANI, PAH and hydrazine; Stirring at 0 °C for 5 h, then heating at 98 °C for 1 h
Nanoworm
Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength

110



 



Pickering emulsion polymerization



PANI/GO

Reagents: GO, hydrazine, PANI, azodiisobutyronitrile, toluene, APS and HCl; sonication for 30 min, then heating at 60 °C for 30 min, finally, stirring for 4.5 h at room temperature
Nanoparticles
Electrochemical properties, thermal stability

74





4. Applications
As discussed above, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites exhibited many unique properties, e.g. high electrical conductivity, good electrocatalytic activity, admirable thermoelectric properties and good electrochemical stability. These properties pave the way for their applications in many fields, such as supercapacitors,13,18,25,55–64 sensing platforms,19,65–71,85,91 fuel cells,20,21 solar cells,22,72,73 electrochromic devices,92etc.
4.1 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors have drawn much attention in recent years due to their high power density, relatively high energy density, reversibility, long cycle life, and small environmental impact.133,134 Generally, they can be divided into two basic types according to their charge storage mechanism. The electric double layer capacitance (EDLC) type generates capacitance from charge separation at the electrode/electrolyte interface,133 while the pseudocapacitance type generates capacitance from fast Faradaic reactions in the electrode material.135 Therefore, it is essentially important to use electrode materials with good conductivity and large specific surface areas in EDLCs, and excellent conductivity, high capacitance and fast charge–discharge kinetics in pseudocapacitors. The graphene and its derivatives are advantageous in terms of large specific surface areas, high carrier transport mobility and excellent thermal/mechanical stability.136 In addition, the aggregated graphene sheets exhibit an open-pore structure, which allows for the easy access of electrolyte ions to form electric double layers.137 PANI is a highly promising electrode material for supercapacitors due to its low cost, easy synthesis, good conductivity, fast redox rate, and high pseudocapacitance. When the PANI is combined with graphene, the nanocomposites exhibit enhanced performance, such as electrical conductivity, specific surface areas, cycle life, and electrocatalytic activity compared with the pure PANI.52 To date, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites are broadly applied to supercapacitors.13,18,25,55–64,75–79
Hierarchical nanocomposites of PANI nanowire arrays on GO sheet substrate were used as supercapacitor electrodes.64 CV curves (Fig. 11a) showed that two pairs of redox peaks appeared for PANI-GO and pristine PANI, while there were nearly no peaks for GO. Galvanostatic charge–discharge plots (at 1 A g−1) of PANI and PANI-GO nanocomposite (Fig. 11b) showed a capacitive behavior with almost symmetric charge–discharge curves. As shown in Fig. 11c, the specific capacitance of the PANI-GO nanocomposite could reach as high as 555 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.2 A g−1, which was much higher than the 298 F g−1 of randomly connected PANI nanowires obtained under the same conditions. In fact, the cycle life of PANI-GO composite was also much better than that of randomly connected PANI nanowires (Fig. 11d). The results demonstrated that well-ordered GO-PANI nanowire arrays supported a highly electrolytic accessible surface area of redox-active PANI, provided a direct path for electrons, reduced the ionic diffusion path, and improved utilization of electrode materials. Such a three-dimensional (3D) porous and ordered nanostructure composite is very promising for the next generation of high-performance supercapacitors. It provides a larger contact surface area for the intercalation/deintercalation of protons into/out of active materials and shortens the path length for electrolyte ion transport.
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical capacitance performance of PANI-GO obtained at 0.05 M of aniline. (a) CV curves of pristine GO, randomly connected PANI nanowires, and PANI-GO nanocomposite within the potential window −0.2 to 0.8 V vs. SCE at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (b) Charge–discharging curves of PANI and PANI-GO. (c) Specific capacitance of PANI and PANI-GO at different current densities. (d) Stability of PANI and PANI-GO. Figure from J. J. Xu et al.64 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). 
The PANI hollow spheres (PANI-HS)@electrochemical reduced graphene oxide (ERGO) hybrids with core–shell structures fabricated via a self-assembly approach were used as novel hybrid electrode materials for supercapacitor applications.60 The specific capacitance of PANI-HS@ERGO hybrids can reach 614 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Furthermore, the capacitance of the PANI-HS@ERGO hybrids maintains 90% after 500 charging–discharging cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1, indicating a good cycling stability. As far as we know, most of the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites can be used for supercapacitors. For clarity, Table 3 summarizes and compares the performance of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites for applications as supercapacitor electrodes.
Table 3 Comparison of the performance of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites in supercapacitors




Materials
Preparation methods
Current density (A g−1)
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Ref.





a Carbon fiber paper.
b Sulfonated graphene nanosheet.
c Carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotube.





PANI-g-rGO

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
—
250

18



Graphene/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
0.1
1126

25



NH2-rGO/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
—
500

56



rGO-PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
1
533

57



30
466


Porous nanorod PANI-graphene

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
1
878.57

58



PANI@OGH film

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
10
1739

59



GNS/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
—
1046

63



PANI nanowire arrays/GO

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
0.2
555

64



GNS/CNT/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
—
1035

75



PANI nanorod arrays/EG

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
1
1665

78



GNS/PANI NFs

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
—
1130

83



CFGO-PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
0.3
525

84



Ag NP-PANI-graphene/CFPa

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
1.5
828

89



CoFe2O4/graphene/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
0.1
767.7

90



ERGO-PANI

In situ electropolymerization
0.47
716

93



4.2
502


GO/PANI

In situ electropolymerization
—
1136.4

95



GPCP

In situ electropolymerization
—
233

98



Graphene-PANI paper

In situ electropolymerization
1
763

99



sGNSb/PANI
Interfacial polymerization
0.2
497

77



PANI NFs/GO
Interfacial polymerization
0.2
79.5

103



sGNS/cMWCNTc/PANI
Interfacial polymerization
1
107

104



Graphene/PANI NFs film
Solution mixing
0.3
210

55



Graphene-PANI NF
Solution mixing
0.3
579.8

61



1
361.9


Graphene/PANI
Solution mixing
0.1
257

62



PANI-graphene
Solution mixing
0.3
623.1

105



PANI-HS@ERGO
Self-assembly
1
614

60



Graphene-wrapped PANI NFs
Self-assembly
0.5
250

76



PANI/rGO
Self-assembly
0.5
375.2

109



Graphene@PANI nanoworm
Self-assembly
0.5
488.2

110



PANI/rGO bilayers
Self-assembly
3
584

111



PANI/GO
Pickering emulsion polymerization
0.1
487.2

74





4.2 Sensing platforms
Graphene-based PANI nanocomposites have also been used as sensing platforms due to their good electrocatalytic activity, high specific surface area, excellent reliability, and low cost properties.19,65–71,85,91,102,138–148 These composites are successfully used for DNA,19,66,71,145 4-aminophenol,67 dopamine,68 artesunate,69 hydrogen peroxide70 and hydrazine91 detection, as well as hydrogen (H2),65 methane (CH4)139 and ammonia (NH3)140 gas sensing.
For instance, an impedimetric and freely switchable DNA sensor based on an electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ERGO) and PANI film was presented, where ERGO was prepared on PANI modified GCE.71 The fabricated biosensor exhibited excellent performance for the detection of a specific DNA sequence with a wide linear range from 1.0 × 10−15 to 1.010−8 mol L−1 and a low detection limit of 2.5 × 10−16 mol L−1 due to the synergistic effect of ERGO/PANI nanocomposites. Huang et al. presented a useful NH3 gas sensor based on rGO-PANI hybrids.140 PANI nanoparticles were successfully anchored on the surface of rGO sheets by using rGO-MnO2 hybrids as both template and oxidant for aniline monomer during the process of polymerization. The rGO-PANI hybrid device exhibited much better response (3.4 and 10.4 times, respectively, with the concentration of NH3 gas at 50 ppm) to NH3 gas than those of the bare PANI nanofiber sensor and bare graphene device (as shown in Fig. 12a). The response of the rGO-PANI hybrids sensor to different concentrations of NH3 gas (5–50 ppm) over a period of 18 min at room temperature has been further studied (as shown in Fig. 12b). The combination of the rGO sheets and PANI nanoparticles facilitated the enhancement of the sensing properties of the final hybrids, and paves a new avenue for the application of rGO-PANI hybrids in the field of gas sensing.140Table 4 summarizes the applications of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites as various sensing platforms.
 Fig. 12  (a) The response curves of rGO-PANI hybrids (red), bare PANI nanofibers (green) and bare rGO (black) to NH3 gas at a concentration of 50 ppm. (b) The response curves of the hybrid sensor to NH3 gas at concentrations of 5–50 ppm. Figure from X. L. Huang et al.140 Reproduced with permission from J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012). 
Table 4 Graphene-based PANI nanocomposites for applications as various sensing platforms




Materials
Preparation methods
Kinds of sensing platforms
Ref.





a Polyaniline nanowires.
b Sulfonated polyaniline.
c Carbon paste electrode.
d Horseradish peroxidase.
e Exfoliated graphene oxide.
f Graphene sheets.
g Fluorinated tin oxide glass.





PANIwa/graphene/GCE

In situ electropolymerization
DNA

19



ERGO/PANI/GCE
Casting
DNA

66 and 71



SPANIb-GO/CPEc

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
DNA

145



Graphene-PANI/GCE

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
4-Aminophenol

67



Aptamer/graphene-PANI/GCE

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Dopamine

68



GO/PANI/HRPd/ITO

in situ electropolymerization
Artesunate

69



EGOe/PANI/GCE

In situ electropolymerization
H2O2

70



PANI/GO

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Methanol

85



Pt/PANI-HPMo-GSf

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Methanol

147



PANI/graphene/FTOg

In situ electropolymerization
Hydrazine

91



Pt/PANI/GNS/GCE
Interfacial polymerization
H2O2 and glucose

102



Au NPs/PANI/graphene/GCE

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Glucose

143



GO-PANI/GCE

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Dopamine/ascorbic acid/uric acid

138



gGraphene/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
H2 gas

65



Graphene/PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
CH4 gas

139



rGO-PANI

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
NH3 gas

140



GO/PANI/CdSe

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Cyt C

141



Graphene-PANI/GCE

In situ chemical oxidative polymerization
Estradiol

142



Pd/graphene-PANI/GCE

In situ electropolymerization
Hydroquinone and catechol

144



PANI-rGO-TiO2/ITO
Solution mixing
Gallic acid

146



SPANI-GO/CPE
Solution mixing
Adenine and guanine

148





4.3 Fuel cells
The fuel cell is another field for application of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.20,21,149,150 Fuel cells are considered to be a promising technology for green energy generation and generate electricity via reactions between a fuel (anode) and an oxidant (cathode), which are continuously supplied from external sources.3,149 However, the high cost of the catalyst, the inherent oxygen crossover from anode to cathode, and sluggish oxygen reduction reaction kinetics at the cathode hinder their widespread commercialization.149 Graphene-based PANI composites have been applied to fuel cells owing to their low cost, good electrocatalytic activity and fast electron transfer.
Recently, a macroporous and monolithic microbial fuel cell (MFC) anode based on PANI hybridized 3D graphene has been demonstrated.20 The maximum power density obtained from the 3D graphene/PANI MFC (∼768 mW m−2) is about 4 times higher than that from the carbon cloth (CC) MFC (∼158 mW m−2), and the specific power density is about 212 times higher than CC (256 mW g−1vs. 1.2 mW g−1). The reason that the graphene/PANI modified MFC electrode outperforms the planar carbon electrode is due to its abilities to form a 3D interface with the bacterial biofilm, facilitate electron transfer, enhance electrical properties and provide multiplexed and highly conductive pathways.20 More recently, a novel MFC with the PANI-ERGO/CC anode yields a maximum power density of 1390 mW m−2, which is 3 times larger than that of the MFC with the CC anode.21 The great improvement is attributed to the large specific surface area and high conductivity of PANI-ERGO and its ability to integrate with bacterial biofilm, which may greatly increase the bacterial biofilm loading and the charge transfer efficiency.21
4.4 Solar cells
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have received much attention as an alternative to silicon-based solar cells due to their low cost, easy fabrication, and respectable energy conversion efficiency.151,152 In DSSCs, it is important to increase the loading of dye molecules, enlarge the interface area of dye/electrolyte, and improve the conductivity of electrons at the semiconductor layer to compete with charge recombination.3 Graphene and its derivatives have also been composited with PANI nanostructures to enhance the above mentioned factors.22,72,73,153,154
Hierarchically porous hybrids of PANI nanoparticles anchored on rGO sheets have been used as counter electrodes for DSSCs. The hybrid named M-PANI@rGO has been developed via in situ chemical oxidative polymerization of aniline by MnO2 under acidic conditions.73 The conversion efficiency (η) of the DSSC with M-PANI@rGO hybrid is measured to be 6.15%, which is comparable to 6.73% for the cell with a Pt counter electrode under the same experimental conditions. Therefore, this M-PANI@rGO hybrid electrode could be an ideal candidate to replace platinum as a counter electrode for DSSCs.73 In another study, graphene/PANI nanocomposite was deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide glass and applied as the counter electrode of DSSCs.22 The conversion efficiency reached 6.09%, which is also comparable to 6.88% of the cell with Pt counter electrode.
4.5 Electrochromic devices
Electrochromic devices change light transmission or reflection properties during electrochemical redox processes and they can be used as large area displays, smart mirrors and windows.155 PANI materials have been widely used as active layers of electrochromic devices since they can reversibly change color upon electrochemical doping and de-doping treatments, as well as having high environmental stability. However, the main barrier to the commercial use of PANI as an electrochromic material is that it has electroactivity only in aqueous solutions with low pH values.156 What is worse, indium tin oxide (ITO), the most widely used transparent conducting electrode, is unstable in an acidic medium. Graphene-based PANI composites have been developed to overcome these problems.92,112,155,157 For example, transparent, conductive and uniform graphene films have been prepared and used as electrodes of the electrochromic devices of PANI.155 PANI films were fabricated on both graphene and ITO electrodes. The results showed that graphene electrodes exhibited much higher electrochemical stability than ITO in aqueous acidic electrolytes. The performances of the electrochromic devices with graphene electrodes exhibited a slight decrease upon voltage switching while those of the devices with ITO electrodes decreased dramatically. After 300 cycles, the electrochromic devices with graphene electrodes showed much larger optical contrast and shorter switching time than those of the devices with ITO electrodes.155 Another study of layer-by-layer assembly of graphene/PANI multilayer films and their application for electrochromic devices showed the similar conclusion that graphene/PANI composite films are promising electrode materials for electrochromic devices.112
4.6 Lithium ion batteries
Rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIB) are considered as one of the most promising storage systems for applications in portable electronic devices and electric and hybrid vehicles.3 Good electrode materials mean long cycle life, high energy density, and excellent rate capability performance, and therefore, high reversible storage capacity for Li+ and rapid Li+ transport.158 Until now, many metal oxide nanostructures have been composited with graphene aiming for LIB electrode materials. Recently, graphene-based PANI composites have also been tested as anode materials for LIBs.157–159 A three-layer-structured hybrid nanostructure consisting of TiO2 nanoparticles sandwiched between PANI and graphene nanosheets (termed as PTG) can serve as a promising LIB anode material, which enables fast discharge and charge by simultaneously hindering the agglomeration of TiO2 nanoparticles and enhancing the conductivity. The discharge capacity reaches 149.8 mA h g−1, accompanied by a Coulombic efficiency of 99.19% at a current density of 5 C (1000 mA g−1) after 100 cycles, which is significantly superior to pure TiO2.158
4.7 Other applications
In fact, except the applications mentioned above, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites have also been explored in other applications, such as photocatalysis,160 field emission,129 anticorrosion coatings,161 CO2 capture,162 rewritable-memory device,163 adsorbent164,165 and so on. Chang et al. have presented the first demonstration of PANI/graphene composites for corrosion protection coatings.161 The composites display outstanding barrier properties against O2 and H2O compared with neat PANI and PANI/clay composites. Mishra et al. have demonstrated a PANI-graphene nanocomposite as a CO2 capture candidate for the first time.162 The capture capacity of the nanocomposite was measured using a high pressure Sievert's apparatus. FTIR spectroscopy was used to confirm the possible CO2 capture mechanism in the nanocomposite. CO2 adsorption capacities at a pressure of 11 bar and different temperatures of 25, 50 and 100 °C were experimentally found to be 75, 47 and 31 mmol g−1, respectively. This nanocomposite shows much higher CO2 capture capacity compared to pure graphene and shows a high degree of recyclability.
5. Conclusions and outlook
PANI has attracted a great deal of interest due to its good stability, interesting electroactivity, high capacitance and unusual doping/dedoping chemistry, especially when combined with graphene, the performance of nanocomposites is greatly improved. As a consequence, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites can be widely employed in various applications. The research about graphene-based PANI nanocomposites is very enthusiastic in recent years.
To date, various preparation methods have been developed to synthesize graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, such as in situ chemical oxidative polymerization, in situ electropolymerization, interfacial polymerization, solution mixing, self-assembly and so on. Table 1 summarizes and compares the advantages and disadvantages of different preparation methods. In fact, the properties of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites depend very much on their morphologies and preparation methods. It is important to control the nanocomposites with an ordered structure to enhance their performances by choosing a suitable preparation method, since ordered graphene-based PANI nanocomposites could provide both a larger contact surface area for the intercalation/deintercalation of protons into/out of PANI and a highly porous structure for the fast access of ions to electrolytes.78 Thus, future efforts are still needed to develop the preparation methods. It is still a challenge to prepare the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with ordered structures and various enhanced properties. Furthermore, most of the graphene-PANI nanocomposites are connected by non-covalent bonds, such as hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions and π–π stacking. The process is simple and results in less damage to the structure and properties of graphene, but the interaction between graphene and PANI is weaker. On the contrary, the covalent bond is stronger, which can make the interaction between graphene and PANI more intimate and accordingly results in the decreased interfacial resistance and improved electrochemical performance.61 Hence, the residual functional groups in GO and rGO could be fully utilized to graft PANI. The covalent bond would be extensively used in the future to prepare graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with ordered structures and various enhanced properties. In addition, significant progress has been made on the understanding of the mechanisms of aniline polymerization, but the major drawback is the lack of experimental for confirmation. It is still a challenge to develop new methods to identify the mechanisms.
Up to now, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites have shown enhanced electrochemical properties, thermal stability, thermoelectric properties, electrochromic properties, etc. The enhancement was attributed to the large surface area and unique properties of graphene and the good electrocatalytic activity of PANI, as well as their cooperative effects. A lot of attention has focused on the enhanced electrical and electrochemical properties, but for mechanical, optical or other properties, there are rarely reports. It is a new field to explore the mechanical, optical or other properties of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites. For example, the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with good mechanical strength may be used in metallic muscles. The investigations on these properties are expected to increase in the future. Moreover, the electrical and electrochemical properties could be further enhanced through improving preparation methods to obtain ordered structures.
With these enhanced properties, graphene-based PANI nanocomposites are widely employed in applications, such as supercapacitors, sensing platforms, fuel cells, solar cells, electrochromic devices, lithium ion batteries, photocatalysis, anticorrosion coatings, CO2 capture and so on. Most of the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites are used as supercapacitors. However, they suffer from limited energy density. More attention to overcome this problem is still needed. A potential alternative is carbonized graphene-based PANI nanocomposite, which is rarely reported at present. The graphene-based PANI nanocomposites with different morphologies can be considered as appropriate precursors for carbon nanomaterials containing nitrogen, which are favourable for electrochemical energy storage. In addition, it is also very important and meaningful to develop other applications, e.g. fuel cells, solar cells, anticorrosion coatings, CO2 capture, and adsorbents. These applications are also of great benefit to the environment and daily life. In other words, greater efforts should be made to improve the performances of the graphene-based PANI nanocomposites, enlarge their applications and realize commercialization in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21065005, 21165010 and 21101146), Young Scientist Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20112BCB23006 and 20122BCB23011), Foundation of Jiangxi Educational Committee (GJJ13243 and GJJ13244), the State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry (SKLEAC201310), the Open Project Program of Key Laboratory of Functional Small organic molecule, Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University (no. KLFS-KF-201214; KLFS-KF-201218).
Notes and references
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jasuja and V. Berry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2358–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mulhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Potts, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuilla, S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N. H. Kim, S. Bose and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1350–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao, J. X. Yang and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14487–14495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, G. Luo, Z. Fan, C. Zheng, J. Yan, C. Yao, W. Li and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2296–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, W. Hong, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kumar, H. J. Choi, Y. R. Shin, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1715–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bo, H. Yang, Y. Hu, T. Yao and S. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, Z. Liu and P. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 139–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, S. Zhuo and W. Xing, Mater. Lett., 2012, 69, 27–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, J. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 135–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Ryu, K. M. Kim, N.-G. Park, Y. J. Park and S. H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2002, 103, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2164–2170 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, J. Li and Y. Lin, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 205–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, R. D. Piner, I. Jung, D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6592–6594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hao, W. Qian, L. Zhang and Y. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6576–6578 RSC .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Seol, I. Jo, A. L. Moore, L. Lindsay, Z. H. Aitken, M. T. Pettes, X. Li, Z. Yao, R. Huang, D. Broido, N. Mingo, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Science, 2010, 328, 213–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, A. L. Moore, Y. Zhu, X. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1645–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Hod and G. E. Scuseria, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2619–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Frank, G. Tsoukleri, J. Parthenios, K. Papagelis, I. Riaz, R. Jalil, K. S. Novoselov and C. Galiotis, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3131–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gomez-Navarro, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2045–2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie and Y. R. Shen, Science, 2008, 320, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. L. Abergel, A. Russell and V. I. Falko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 063125 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Ni, H. M. Wang, J. Kasim, H. M. Fan, T. Yu, Y. H. Wu, Y. P. Feng and Z. X. Shen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2758–2763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1625–1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Davies, M. E. Hyde and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5121–5126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alwarappan, A. Erdem, C. Liu and C.-Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8853–8857 CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. Tian, M. Zhu, K. Tian, J. J. Wang, F. Kang and R. A. Outlaw, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1208–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liang and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5871–5878 RSC .
J. Lu, W. Liu, H. Ling, J. Kong, G. Ding, D. Zhou and X. Lu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10537–10543 RSC .
H. Yu, T. Wang, B. Wen, M. Lu, Z. Xu, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, X. Xue, C. Sun and M. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21679–21685 RSC .
J. Zhu, H. Gu, Z. Luo, N. Haldolaarachige, D. P. Young, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10246–10255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lai, H. Yang, L. Wang, B. K. Teh, J. Zhong, H. Chou, L. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Shen, R. S. Ruoff and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5941–5951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi and H. N. Alshareef, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4134–4138 RSC .
L. Hu, J. Tu, S. Jiao, J. Hou, H. Zhu and D. J. Fray, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15652–15656 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Yang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 477–481 CAS .
W. Fan, C. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, K. P. Pramoda, C. He and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3382–3391 CAS .
L. Jianhua, A. Junwei, Z. Yecheng, M. Yuxiao, L. Mengliu, Y. Mei and L. Songmei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2870–2876 Search PubMed .
Z. F. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Sun, L. Stanciu and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2685–2691 CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S. Z. Zu, B. H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Al-Mashat, K. Shin, K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. D. Plessis, S. H. Han, R. W. Kojima, R. B. Kaner, D. Li, X. Gou, S. J. Ippolito and W. Wlodarski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16168–16173 CAS .
M. Du, T. Yang, X. Li and K. Jiao, Talanta, 2012, 88, 439–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, J.-H. Liu, C.-P. Yang, M. Yu and P. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 669–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Xing, J. Yu, W. Lian, J. Li, M. Cui and J. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 36, 186–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Radhapyari, P. Kotoky, M. R. Das and R. Khan, Talanta, 2013, 111, 47–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Ramesha, A. V. Kumara and S. Sampath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13997–14004 CAS .
T. Yang, Q. Li, X. Li, X. Wang, M. Du and K. Jiao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 42, 415–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Liu, K.-C. Huang, P.-H. Chung, C.-C. Wang, C.-Y. Chen, R. Vittal, C.-G. Wu, W.-Y. Chiu and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, T. Peng, Y. Liu, S. Xu, J. Yuan, S. Guo and X.-Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2762–2768 CAS .
J. Sun and H. Bi, Mater. Lett., 2012, 81, 48–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang, X. Shen and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, H. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Li and F. Wang, Carbon, 2013, 52, 440–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, X. Zhou, H. Bao, X. Li and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 36–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Zhao, P. Yu and Q. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 493–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Huang and C. W. Lin, Polymer, 2012, 53, 2574–2582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Huang and C. W. Lin, Polymer, 2012, 53, 1079–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, P. Liu and Q. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 62–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Xie, Y. Li, J. Liu and Z. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10775–10781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Deng, Z. Wang and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13619–13624 RSC .
S. Konwer, A. K. Guha and S. K. Dolui, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 48, 1729–1739 CrossRef .
Y. M. Shulga, S. A. Baskakov, V. V. Abalyaeva, O. N. Efimov, N. Y. Shulga, A. Michtchenko, L. Lartundo-Rojas, L. A. Moreno-R, J. G. Cabañas-Moreno and V. N. Vasilets, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Chen, S. M. Shau, T. Y. Juang, R. H. Lee, C. P. Chen, S. Y. Suen and R. J. Jeng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14563–14569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, K. Singh, S. K. Dhawan, K. Tharanikkarasu, J. S. Chung, B.-S. Kong, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hur, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 231, 397–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sawangphruk, M. Suksomboon, K. Kongsupornsak, J. Khuntilo, P. Srimuk, Y. Sanguansak, P. Klunbud, P. Suktha and P. Chiochan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9630–9636 CAS .
P. Xiong, H. Huang and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 937–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ameen, M. S. Akhtar and H. S. Shin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 173, 177–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Dong, J. Zhang, Y. Ding, X.-F. Chu and J. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20968–20976 RSC .
H. Wei, J. Zhu, S. Wu, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1820–1831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, N. Wu, S. Luo, C. Liu, K. Wang and L. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1780–1786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhong, Y. Song, Y. Li, C. Ma, X. Zhai, J. Shi, Q. Guo and L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 6–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 CAS .
Z. Gao, W. Yang, J. Wang, H. Yan, Y. Yao, J. Ma, B. Wang, M. Zhang and L. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 185–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Domingues, R. V. Salvatierra, M. M. Oliveira and A. J. Zarbin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2592–2594 RSC .
J. D. Qiu, L. Shi, R. P. Liang, G. C. Wang and X. H. Xia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7950–7959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Chen, H. Qu, X. Zhang, H. Wei, Z. Luo, H. A. Colorado, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Polymer, 2012, 53, 5953–5964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, C. Yang, X. Li and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8467–8476 CAS .
J. An, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, H. Zhao, Y. Ma, M. Li, M. Yu and S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19699–19708 CAS .
M. O. Ansari, S. K. Yadav, J. W. Cho and F. Mohammad, Composites, Part B, 2013, 47, 155–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, W. Zhang, Y. Li and X. Jing, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1107–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, M. Wan, D. Wang and L. Jiang, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lee, T. Yun, B. Park, B. Sharma, H.-K. Song and B.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21092–21099 RSC .
Y. Luo, D. Kong, Y. Jia, J. Luo, Y. Lu, D. Zhang, K. Qiu, C. M. Li and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5851–5859 RSC .
A. K. Sarker and J. D. Hong, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12637–12646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sheng, H. Bai, Y. Sun, C. Li and G. Shi, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5567–5572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sarker and J.-D. Hong, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 436, 967–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, T. Wu, B. Hu, G. Yang and B. Han, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3663–3665 RSC .
E. Coşkun, E. A. Zaragoza-Contreras and H. J. Salavagione, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2235–2243 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bai, Y. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667–1669 RSC .
C. Vallés, P. Jiménez, E. Muñoz, A. M. Benito and W. K. Maser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10468–10474 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, J. Chen, J. Yang, Q. Xue and P. Miele, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2521–2529 CAS .
D. Majumdar, M. Baskey and S.
K. Saha, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1277–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Tung, T. Khai, M. Jeon, Y. J. Lee, H. Chung, J.-H. Bang and D. Sohn, Macromol. Res., 2011, 19, 203–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Rana and S. Malik, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10862–10864 RSC .
J. Xiang and L. T. Drzal, Polymer, 2012, 53, 4202–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Song and F. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 238–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Singh, A. Ohlan, V. H. Pham, B. R. S. Varshney, J. Jang, S. H. Hur, W. M. Choi, M. Kumar, S. K. Dhawan, B. S. Kong and J. S. Chung, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2411–2420 RSC .
C. Basavaraja, W. J. Kim, P. X. Thinh and D. S. Huh, Mater. Lett., 2012, 77, 41–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Dhakate, B. P. Singh, R. B. Mathur and T. K. Gupta, Nanoscale, 2014 10.1039/c3nr04565j .
J. Shang, Y. Zhang, L. Yu, X. Luan, B. Shen, Z. Zhang, F. Lv and P. K. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 884–890 CAS .
M. Li, X. Huang, C. Wu, H. Xu, P. Jiang and T. Tanaka, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23477–23484 RSC .
S. Goswami, U. N. Maiti, S. Maiti, S. Nandy, M. K. Mitra and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2245–2252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Zhang, Y. D. Liu and H. J. Choi, Carbon, 2012, 50, 290–296 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Zhang, B. J. Park and H. J. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5596–5598 RSC .
J. Yin, X. Wang, R. Chang and X. Zhao, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 294–297 RSC .
E. Frackowiak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1774–1785 RSC .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen and L. Dai, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 272–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bao, J. Song, Y. Mao, D. Han, F. Yang, L. Niu and A. Ivaska, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 878–884 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, X. Chen, S. Zhu, Z. Zhou, Y. Yao, W. Quan and B. Liu, IEEE Sens. J., 2013, 13, 777–782 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, N. Hu, R. Gao, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Yang, E. Siu-Wai Kong, H. Wei and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22488–22495 RSC .
X. W. Hu, C. J. Mao, J. M. Song, H. L. Niu, S. Y. Zhang and H. P. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 372–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Liu, J. Yu, W. Lian, M. Cui, W. Xu and J. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 188, 99–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, S.-X. Gu, L. Jin, Y.-e. Zhou, Z. Yang, W. Wang and X. Hu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 562–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Y. Du, Q. Feng, Z. Wang and C. Wang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 353–354, 80–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, L. Meng, X. Wang, L. Wang and K. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10889–10894 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, D. Han, S. Gan, N. Zhang, S. Liu, T. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Dong and L. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7842–7844 RSC .
Z. Cui, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6687–6692 CAS .
T. Yang, Q. Guan, Q. Li, L. Meng, L. Wang, C. Liu and K. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2926–2933 RSC .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
C. Zhao, P. Gai, C. Liu, X. Wang, H. Xu, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12587–12594 CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chiba, A. Islam, Y. Watanabe, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638–L640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, R. K. Layek and A. K. Nandi, Carbon, 2013, 52, 509–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niu, S. Zhang, Q. Ma, S. Qin, L. Wan, J. Xu and S. Miao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17228–17235 RSC .
L. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Xu, T. Qiu, L. Zhi and G. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 491–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prakash, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 83, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, D. Chao, X. Qi, Q. Xiong, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Cao, D. Yue, J. Zhang and M. Qu, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 9544–9551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5004–5006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ameen, H.-K. Seo, M. Shaheer
Akhtar and H. S. Shin, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 210, 220–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, T.-C. Huang, C.-W. Peng, T.-C. Yeh, H.-I. Lu, W.-I. Hung, C.-J. Weng, T.-I. Yang and J.-M. Yeh, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5044–5051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Mishra and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3708–3712 RSC .
B. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Ren, L. Q. Xu, G. Liu, E. T. Kang, C. Wang, C. X. Zhu and K. G. Neoh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 6265–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. Zeng, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Li, J. Xu and X. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 7854–7858 RSC .
R. Li, L. Liu and F. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 229, 460–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Li Wang	Li Wang received her Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. She is currently working as a professor at Jiangxi Normal University. Her current research interest is focused on nanomaterials and their applications in biosensors and supercapacitors.
Xingping Lu	Xingping Lu received her science bachelor in chemistry in 2012 from Jiangxi Normal University, China. She is working for her master's degree in Jiangxi Normal University, China. Her research interests are nano-materials and their applications in sensors.
Yonghai Song	Yonghai Song received his Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. He is currently working as a professor at Jiangxi Normal University. His current research interests focus on nanomaterials and their applications in biosensors.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of properties, preparation methods and applications of graphene-based PANI nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the GO/PANI nanostructures: (a) nanotubes obtained from 0.1 M aniline solution, (b) nanotubes obtained from 0.06 M aniline solution, (c) nanospheres, and (d) aligned nanofiber arrays. The reaction temperature is 0 °C for both nanotubes and nanospheres while it is 50 °C for nanofiber arrays. The insets in (a) and (b) are TEM images of the nanotubes. Figure from Y. F. Huang et al.80 Reproduced with permission from Polymer, 2012, 53. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the process for preparation of graphene-PANI composites. (b) Representative SEM image of PAG80. (c) Representative TEM image of PAG80. Inset is the selected area electron diffraction patterns of the composites. Figure from K. Zhang et al.79 Reproduced with permission from Chem. Mater., 2010, 22. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowire arrays: (1) heterogeneous nucleation on GO nanosheets; (2) homogeneous nucleation in bulk solution. (b) SEM image of PANI-GO nanocomposite. Conditions: aniline = 0.05 M, aniline/APS = 1.5 (molar ratio), HClO4 = 1 M, GO = 0.36 mg mL−1, and the reaction was carried out at −10 °C for 24 h. (c) FT-IR spectra of pristine GO, randomly connected PANI nanowires, and PANI-GO nanocomposite. Figure from J. J. Xu et al.64 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic governing the preparation of PANI-g-rGO with a digital picture of the sample in the middle. Figure from N. A. Kumar et al.18 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2012, 6. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene/PANI film composite paper (GPCP). Figure from D.-W. Wang et al.98 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2009, 3. Copyright American Chemical Society (2009). (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene/PANI nanorod composite paper. Figure from H.-P. Cong et al.99 Reproduced with permission from Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2013).	 

 	Fig. 7  Interfacial polymerization of PANI nanofibers/GO nanocomposites recorded at (a) 0 min, (b) 10 min, (c) 0.5 h, and (d) 2 h. TEM microstructures of (e) IP-1, (f) IP-2, (g) IP-3. Figure from J. Zhu et al.103 Reproduced with permission from Polymer, 2012, 53. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) G-PNF composite stably dispersed in an ammonia solution (pH = 9) (left) and pure PANI-NFs precipitated from the same medium after aging for 2 weeks (right). (b) SEM images of the G-PNF composite. Figure from Q. Wu et al.55 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the possible procedures to prepare the graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers. (b) TEM image of graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers. Figure from S. P. Zhou et al.76 Reproduced with permission from Carbon, 2013, 52. Copyright Elsevier Ltd (2012).	 


In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	This method is relatively mature. Graphene can be modified by PANI through various interactions, such as covalent functionalization, non-covalent functionalization. Graphene-based PANI composites can be easily obtained with various regular structures.	It often takes a long time, especially when graphene is modified by PANI through covalent functionalization, the process is very complex and takes a longer time. The reaction condition is very strict.	
18, 20, 22, 25, 63, 64 and 79–90


In situ electropolymerization	This method is operationally simple and does not need an oxidant. It takes a short reaction time.	The morphology of the composite cannot be controlled, and it is more likely to form thin film and irregular structures.	
19, 58, 69, 70, 72 and 91–100

Interfacial polymerization	This method has fast reaction rate and mild reaction condition. Graphene-based PANI nanocomposite is spontaneously formed as a self-standing film at the interface, and could be removed easily. The nanocomposite shows good water-solubility.	The morphology of the composite is difficult to control.	
77 and 101–104

Solution mixing	This method is very operationally simple; there is only the need to mix graphene and PANI under stirring or ultrasonication.	The composites are unstable and easily aggregate and re-stack.	
55, 61, 62 and 105–108

Self-assembly	This method is advantageous to prepare encapsulation, sandwich or core–shell structures of nanocomposites.	It is difficult to achieve other structures.	
52, 60, 76 and 109–113

Pickering emulsion polymerization	It reduces PANI aggregation and prevents the PANI chains from swelling and shrinking.	The process is tedious, and the morphology is different to control.	
74


 	Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of SPANI (dashed line) and SPANI/r-G (solid line) modified electrodes in 1.0 M H2SO4 (a) and 0.1 M PBS (b). Potential scan rate = 50 mV s−1. Figure from H. Bai et al.116 Reproduced with permission from Chem. Commun., 2009. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2009).	 




In situ chemical oxidative polymerization

PANI-g-rGO	
Reagents: rGO-NH2, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 5 h	Fibrillar/rod-like structures	Electrochemical properties, thermal stability	
18

Graphene/PANI	
Reagents: GO, ethylene glycol, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 1 h	Nanoparticles	Electrochemical properties	
25

PANI@OGHa film	
Reagents: OGH film, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 0.5 h	Porous film	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
59

PANI nanowire arrays/GO	
Reagents: GO, aniline, HClO4, ethanol and APS; temperature: −10 °C; time: 24 h	Nanowire arrays	Electrochemical properties	
64

PANI nanorod arrays/EGb	
Reagents: EG, aniline and APS; temperature: 0 °C; time: 24 h	Nanorod arrays	Electrochemical properties	
78

Graphene/PANI nanofiber	
Reagents: GO, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: room temperature; time: 12 h	Nanofiber	Electrochemical properties, thermal stability	
79

CFGOc-PANI	
Reagents: CFGO, aniline, HCl and APS; temperature: room temperature; time: 24 h	Nanowire	Electrochemical properties, thermal stability	
84

GO/PANI	
Reagents: GO, aniline and APS; temperature: 10 °C; time: over 30 min	Nanotube	Thermal stability	
121

 


In situ electropolymerization

Graphene/PANI	
Reagents: aniline and HCl; current density: 0.06, 0.03 and 0.015 mA cm−2; time: 0.5, 3 and 3 h	Nanowires	Electrochemical properties	
19

Porous nanorod PANI-graphene	
Reagents: graphene, aniline and HNO3; current density: 1 mA cm−2; time: ton:toff = 1:1	Porous nanorod	Electrochemical properties	
58

ERGO-PANI	
Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; scan rate: 50 mV s−1; potential range: 0 to 0.65 V	3D porous	Electrochemical properties	
93

GPCPd	
Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; potential range: 0.75 V; time: 60, 300 and 900 s	Film	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
98

Graphene-PANI paper	
Reagents: aniline and H2SO4; potential range: 0.8 V; Time: 2, 5, 10 and 15 min	Nanorod arrays	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
99

 

Interfacial polymerization

sGNSe/PANI	Organic phase: chloroform; water phase: HClO4 solution; temperature: 0 °C; time: 24 h	Nanorod arrays	Electrochemical properties	
77

Graphene/PANI	Organic phase: toluene; water phase: HCl solution; temperature: 21 to 24 °C; time: 22 h	Film	Electrical conductivity, optical property	
101

PANI nanofibers/GO	Organic phase: chloroform; water phase: PTSA solution; temperature: room temperature; time: 2 h	Nanofibers	Electrochemical properties, thermal stability	
103

 

Solution mixing

Graphene/PANI nanofibers film	
Reagents: CCGf sheets and PANI nanofiber; sonication for 2 h	Nanofibers	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
55

Graphene/PANI	
Reagents: PANI nanoparticles, GO and hydrazine solution; stirring and heat treating at 90 °C for 24 h.	Nanoparticles	Electrochemical properties	
62

PANI-graphene	
Reagents: GDSg, tetrahydrofuran and PANI nanofibers; stirring for 24 h at 0 °C with protection of nitrogen	Nanofibers	Electrochemical properties	
105

PANI/GO	
Reagents: GO, m-cresol, ethanol and PANI-EBh; stirring for 10 h	Layered nanostructures	Electrical conductivity	
108

 

Self-assembly

PANI-HS@ERGO	
Reagents: GO and PANI-HS suspension; sonication for 2 h	Hollow spheres	Electrochemical properties	
60

Graphene-wrapped PANI nanofibers	
Reagents: GO, PANI nanofibers, hydrazine, acetone and HCl; stirring for 12 h, then keeping at 95 °C for 4 h, then stirring for 48 h	Nanofibers	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
76

Graphene@PANI nanoworm	
Reagents: GO, worm-like PANI, PAH and hydrazine; Stirring at 0 °C for 5 h, then heating at 98 °C for 1 h	Nanoworm	Electrochemical properties, mechanical strength	
110

 

Pickering emulsion polymerization

PANI/GO	
Reagents: GO, hydrazine, PANI, azodiisobutyronitrile, toluene, APS and HCl; sonication for 30 min, then heating at 60 °C for 30 min, finally, stirring for 4.5 h at room temperature	Nanoparticles	Electrochemical properties, thermal stability	
74


 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical capacitance performance of PANI-GO obtained at 0.05 M of aniline. (a) CV curves of pristine GO, randomly connected PANI nanowires, and PANI-GO nanocomposite within the potential window −0.2 to 0.8 V vs. SCE at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (b) Charge–discharging curves of PANI and PANI-GO. (c) Specific capacitance of PANI and PANI-GO at different current densities. (d) Stability of PANI and PANI-GO. Figure from J. J. Xu et al.64 Reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2010, 4. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 


PANI-g-rGO	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	—	250	
18

Graphene/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	0.1	1126	
25

NH2-rGO/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	—	500	
56

rGO-PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	1	533	
57

30	466
Porous nanorod PANI-graphene	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	1	878.57	
58

PANI@OGH film	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	10	1739	
59

GNS/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	—	1046	
63

PANI nanowire arrays/GO	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	0.2	555	
64

GNS/CNT/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	—	1035	
75

PANI nanorod arrays/EG	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	1	1665	
78

GNS/PANI NFs	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	—	1130	
83

CFGO-PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	0.3	525	
84

Ag NP-PANI-graphene/CFPa	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	1.5	828	
89

CoFe2O4/graphene/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	0.1	767.7	
90

ERGO-PANI	
In situ electropolymerization	0.47	716	
93

4.2	502
GO/PANI	
In situ electropolymerization	—	1136.4	
95

GPCP	
In situ electropolymerization	—	233	
98

Graphene-PANI paper	
In situ electropolymerization	1	763	
99

sGNSb/PANI	Interfacial polymerization	0.2	497	
77

PANI NFs/GO	Interfacial polymerization	0.2	79.5	
103

sGNS/cMWCNTc/PANI	Interfacial polymerization	1	107	
104

Graphene/PANI NFs film	Solution mixing	0.3	210	
55

Graphene-PANI NF	Solution mixing	0.3	579.8	
61

1	361.9
Graphene/PANI	Solution mixing	0.1	257	
62

PANI-graphene	Solution mixing	0.3	623.1	
105

PANI-HS@ERGO	Self-assembly	1	614	
60

Graphene-wrapped PANI NFs	Self-assembly	0.5	250	
76

PANI/rGO	Self-assembly	0.5	375.2	
109

Graphene@PANI nanoworm	Self-assembly	0.5	488.2	
110

PANI/rGO bilayers	Self-assembly	3	584	
111

PANI/GO	Pickering emulsion polymerization	0.1	487.2	
74


 	Fig. 12  (a) The response curves of rGO-PANI hybrids (red), bare PANI nanofibers (green) and bare rGO (black) to NH3 gas at a concentration of 50 ppm. (b) The response curves of the hybrid sensor to NH3 gas at concentrations of 5–50 ppm. Figure from X. L. Huang et al.140 Reproduced with permission from J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012).	 


PANIwa/graphene/GCE	
In situ electropolymerization	DNA	
19

ERGO/PANI/GCE	Casting	DNA	
66 and 71

SPANIb-GO/CPEc	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	DNA	
145

Graphene-PANI/GCE	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	4-Aminophenol	
67

Aptamer/graphene-PANI/GCE	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Dopamine	
68

GO/PANI/HRPd/ITO	
in situ electropolymerization	Artesunate	
69

EGOe/PANI/GCE	
In situ electropolymerization	H2O2	
70

PANI/GO	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Methanol	
85

Pt/PANI-HPMo-GSf	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Methanol	
147

PANI/graphene/FTOg	
In situ electropolymerization	Hydrazine	
91

Pt/PANI/GNS/GCE	Interfacial polymerization	H2O2 and glucose	
102

Au NPs/PANI/graphene/GCE	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Glucose	
143

GO-PANI/GCE	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Dopamine/ascorbic acid/uric acid	
138

gGraphene/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	H2 gas	
65

Graphene/PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	CH4 gas	
139

rGO-PANI	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	NH3 gas	
140

GO/PANI/CdSe	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Cyt C	
141

Graphene-PANI/GCE	
In situ chemical oxidative polymerization	Estradiol	
142

Pd/graphene-PANI/GCE	
In situ electropolymerization	Hydroquinone and catechol	
144

PANI-rGO-TiO2/ITO	Solution mixing	Gallic acid	
146

SPANI-GO/CPE	Solution mixing	Adenine and guanine	
148


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
