Sustainable bio-derived materials for addressing critical problems of next-generation high-capacity lithium-ion batteries  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00255D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00255D
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 5932-5953Sustainable bio-derived materials for addressing critical problems of next-generation high-capacity lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Han Yeu 
            Ling
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenzhen 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luke 
            Hencz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shangshu 
            Qian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianhu 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tiefeng 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Shanqing 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Catalysis and Clean Energy, and School of Environment and Science, Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, QLD 4222, Australia. E-mail: s.zhang@griffith.edu.au
bNational Engineering Research Centre for Advanced Polymer Processing Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450002, China
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China. E-mail: tiefengliu@zjut.edu.cn
Received 
      15th February 2021
    , Accepted 7th May 2021First published on 5th June 2021AbstractSustainable, non-toxic, and low-cost bio-derived materials (BDMs) have interesting structures, complex compositions, and unique functional groups and have been used as electrode materials, separators, interlayers, and binders in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). More and more BDMs have been used to tackle the critical challenges of high theoretical capacity LIBs, low ionic and electronic conductivity for high-capacity active materials, the large volume expansion of lithium-conversion active materials (e.g., Si anode), the uncontrollable side reactions and lithium dendrites in the lithium metal anode, and the shuttle effect of lithium–sulfur like systems. In this work, we systematically review the preparation, mechanisms, and the applications of BDMs and summarize the role they play in resolving these challenges so that larger capacity, higher power density and longer cycle life of next-generation LIBs can be achieved in a green and sustainable manner.
Han Yeu Ling
Mr Han Yeu Ling obtained his BE (2000) and ME (Hons) (2001) in Materials Engineering at University of Wollongong, Australia. He continued his career in a professional engineering and managing role in consumer electronics and automotive industries before starting his doctoral degree in 2017 at Griffith University, Australia. His current interests include biomaterials, energy storage, manufacturing, and project management.
Hao Chen
Mr Hao Chen was awarded bachelor's and master's degrees in chemistry from Central South University, China, in 2014 and 2017, respectively. Since 2017, he has been a chemistry PhD student at the School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Australia. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of functional binders, and solid-state electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries and lithium–sulfur batteries.
Tiefeng Liu
Prof. Tiefeng Liu received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2017. He is currently a professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering at the Zhejiang University of Technology and an external PhD supervisor at Griffith University, Australia. His main research interests are focused on the green design of lithium/sodium-ion batteries and battery recycling.
Shanqing Zhang
Professor Shanqing Zhang obtained a BSc in Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University (1990), China, PhD of Griffith University (2001), Australia, Future Fellow of the Australian Research Council, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and Fellow of Royal Australia Chemical Institute (FRACI). He is currently the leader of Sustainable Energy Research in the Centre for Clean Environment and Energy and a professor in the School of Environment and Science of Griffith University.
Introduction
Modern society and economic development are heavily dependent on the continuous energy supply. However, the consumption of limited fossil fuels brings environmental and ecological concerns, which is not sustainable.1 Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and tides are unlimited and clean, but their naturally inconsistent energy output requires energy storage to preserve the power generated and to supply when needed.2 Apart from the stationary grid energy storage, electrochemical portable energy storage gets crucial with the increasing dependency and demand for the mobile electronic devices and electric vehicles.3 Among the electrochemical portable energy storing systems, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) receive the most significant attention due to their light weight, high gravimetric and volumetric capacity, high power density, and long cycle life.4 However, most commercially available LIBs nowadays that use graphite anodes and LiCoO2-like layered structural cathodes with the lithium-ion intercalation mechanism to store the energy are gradually becoming insufficient for the market needs.5 Hence, tremendous efforts are being continuously made for exploring high-capacity materials for LIBs.6,7
Abundantly available silicon (Si), with a considerably high theoretical specific capacity of 3590 mA h g−1 in the Li15Si4 alloying phase at room temperature, is not only low cost and safe to handle, but also has a low average discharge voltage. It is the most well-known alternative for the traditional graphite anode (372 mA h g−1).8–10 However, the great volume change (∼300%) during lithiation/delithiation hinders the real commercialization of the Si anode.11,12 The stress introduced can cause Si particle pulverization, and in addition to its intrinsically low electrical conductivity and the forming–breaking–reformation of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI), can increase both the electrolyte consumption and impedance, resulting in an overall fast capacity fading.13–15 Another popular graphite anode replacing candidate is lithium (Li) metal due to its extremely high theoretical specific capacity of 3860 mA h g−1, the lowest negative electrochemical potential of −3.04 V (vs. the standard hydrogen electrode), and low density (0.59 g cm−3).16–18 Regrettably, uncontrollable dendrite formation might cause safety concerns such as short circuit, thermal runaway, and low coulombic efficiency during Li deposition/stripping and therefore limit the industrialization of the Li metal anode.19–21
Low-cost sulfur (S) has attracted great attention as one of the most promising cathodes, because it is rich in the Earth's crust and can deliver a high theoretical specific capacity of 1675 mA h g−1 with an average discharge voltage of 2.15 V. A Li–S cell can potentially deliver an overall theoretical specific capacity of ca. 1167 mA h g−1 and theoretical gravimetric energy density of ca. 2510 W h kg−1 which has made this system very attractive nowadays.22–24 Nonetheless, S cathode commercialization was inhibited by the shuttle effect of polysulfides that could lead to active material loss, serious lithium corrosion and short cycle life.25–27
Apart from the active electrode materials of LIBs, other components, like the separator, and binder within the battery, are also crucial for keeping a battery running smoothly. Petroleum-derived polyolefins, like polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), and their blends, are very stable in battery operation and low in cost, which has made them commercially successful in the existing battery systems.28 However, polyolefin separators can lose their mechanical strength and malfunction at a higher operating temperature, which could lead to battery failure and safety worries.29,30 Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) has been the most successful binder for the electrodes due to its high adhesion and electrochemical stability.31 Unfortunately, PVDF could lose its adhesion when soaked with the electrolyte and be unable to maintain the integrity of the electrodes, particularly with high capacity active materials mentioned above.32
Bio-derived materials (BDMs) could be obtained from living organisms and plants. They are usually green, non-toxic, abundant, low-cost, biodegradable and often referred to as sustainable materials. As an example of BDMs, carbohydrates, the key structural building blocks of cells, could play an important role in enhancing the performance of future LIBs.33,34 The structure of the collaborative carbohydrate molecules can usually be distinctive, orientated, and/or porous and hence they enable potentially low-cost and environmentally friendly electrode fabrication.35–37 The compositional complexity of carbohydrates and their functional groups make them unique biopolymeric materials with water-solubility and interesting physiochemical properties meaning that they could be important existing polymeric substitutions in battery construction and fabrication.38–40 In this regard, we will briefly review the recent advancement of using bio-derived materials to overcome the critical challenges with the future high-capacity Li-based batteries (see Fig. 1), and start from (1) anode and cathode electrode active material altering, to (2) separator or interlayer revamping, and then (3) binder substitution.
 Fig. 1  An illustration of the critical challenges (including ionic and electronic conductivity, lithium dendrites, shuttle effects, and volume variation), that could be addressed by the applications (anode and cathode materials, separator and interlayers, and functional binders) of the bio-derived materials (BDMs). 
Bio-derived materials as carbonaceous and active materials
The major challenges for the future high-capacity active electrode materials (AEMs) include (1) poor electronic conductivity for nonmetal AEMs, (2) the large volume variation during the lithiation/delithiation process in AEMs, (3) the uncontrollable side reactions and lithium dendrites in the Li-metal anode, and (4) the dissolution of sulfur in the organic electrolyte. Carbohydrates, a BDM, can be easily converted into a highly conductive carbonaceous material through pyrolysis, which is often used to enhance electron transfer and accelerate the electrochemical reactions of the nonmetal AEMs.41–43 Furthermore, the unique intrinsic structure of the biomaterial can also act as a scaffold for forming an interesting carbonaceous architecture that holds active materials, such as core/yolk–shell like structures, and porous bio-derived carbon and active material composites.44–48 These architectures can either encapsulate or trap active materials and tolerate the volume variation during lithiation/delithiation. In addition, organic biomaterials usually consist of oxygen and nitrogen elements, so the carbonized structure can be rich with heteroatoms that facilitate the lithium ion and/or electrochemical intermediate adsorption, like N-doped carbon, are also extensively reviewed.49–51 Hence, through careful manipulation, the BDMs can be useful to solve the challenges that high-capacity active materials are facing.

Bio-derived materials for anode electrodes. 
Silicon has drawn tremendous attention as an anode substitute due to its abundancy, low-cost, safety, high theoretical capacity, and low average discharge voltage, but it suffers from a large volume variation of ca. 300% during lithiation/delithiation with the resulting adverse effects preventing it from achieving large-scale commercialization.13 To mitigate these effects, both nanosizing the Si particles15,52,53 and utilizing smart framework designs, including porous structures54–57 and nanowires,58 have been applied in silicon electrodes. Encapsulated composite structures, such as yolk–shell,59–65 and carbon cages66–68 are also capable of retaining the electrode integrity and improving the conductivity at the same time.
Glucose, for instance, has been commonly used as the carbon source to wrap or coat a silicon anode in many studies.69–73 For instance, Hu et al. wrapped Si@SiOx with glucose through hydrothermal carbonization that greatly improved capacity retention and cycle life when compared with non-coated nano-Si.69 The ca. 40 nm in size Si@SiOx/C composite exhibits a high reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles with above 99% coulombic efficiency, whereas the uncoated Si nanoparticles can only survive for a few cycles. Their study shows that the glucose-derived carbon coating can enhance the electronic and ionic conductivity and help with the SEI formation to achieve a better cycle life.
BDMs with unique structures are also widely explored and utilized as conductive frameworks for hosting active materials.74–77 For instance, Shen et al. fabricated a 3D conductive framework from sugarcane bagasse with a loaded dopamine wrapped Si nanoparticle anode composite (Fig. 2a).74 The as-prepared 3D active carbon/silicon composite and bare Si nanoparticles were cycled at a current rate of 200 mA g−1, and the composite electrode showed a stable discharge capacity of 1014 mA h g−1 at the 11th cycle which slipped to 503 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles whereas it was only 13.7 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles for the bare Si nanoparticles electrode. Niu et al. used biomass lignin to crosslink the Si nanoparticles via a facile self-assembly method (Fig. 2b).75 The as-prepared SiNPs@Lignin electrode demonstrates an excellent capacity retention of 89% after 100 cycles at a 300 mA g−1 charge and discharge rate and a residual capacity of 3000 mA h g−1 that is much better than that of unwrapped Si nanoparticles (Fig. 2c). They further assembled the as-prepared electrode with a LiCoO2 cathode into a flexible full battery to show that even great bending/deformation of the battery will not affect the performance of the anode electrode (Fig. 2d). This indicates that carbonaceous materials can help to mitigate the effect of volume variation during charge/discharge, facilitate electronic conductivity, and then enhance the overall performance of the batteries.
 Fig. 2  Examples of bio-derived conductive frameworks for hosting anode active materials. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of 3D AC-Si composite. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process and synergistic effect of the SiNPs@Lignin composites. (c) Cycling performance of the SiNPs@Lignin composite compared with pure SiNPs and CE of SiNPs@Lignin composite electrode cycled at a current density of 300 mA g−1 for 100 cycles. (d) The optical image of the flexible full battery based on the Si anode. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2017, IOP. 
Plants could take up minerals from the soil that may be converted into an interesting combination of natural carbon structure with the active material composite.78,79 The successful conversion of biosilica from unwanted biomass into nano-silicon via the magnesiothermic reduction and its use as the anode in LIBs has been explored for a while.80–82 For instance, Xing et al. successfully used magnesiothermic reduction to convert the biosilica within unwanted rice husk into a highly porous Si anode with the large specific surface area for LIBs (Fig. 3a), and achieved a capacity retention of 1220.2 mA h g−1 at a current of 1000 mA g−1 after 100 cycles.82 Liu et al. utilized a similar reduction method to recover the nano-Si to obtain various shapes of Si in the end.81 The obtained bio-derived Si anode can still deliver a stable 1750 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.5 C after 150 cycles. Yu's group had synthesized a 3D porous Si⊂C structure from the silica-rich reeds that could be found abundantly in the wetland with a glucose-derived carbon coating.79 Apart from the precursor that could be easily accessed, the recovered silicon within the naturally grown 3D structure can also mitigate the pulverization during the charge and discharge process. At the same time, the carbon-coating can enhance the overall structural stability and electronic conductivity. This composite can deliver a high-capacity retention of 1050 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.5 C and could also maintain stable under 10 C and 20 C with the reversible capacities of 745 and 398 mA h g−1, respectively. Furthermore, this bio-derived composite can be cycled 4000 times under a current density of 10 C which indicates that the natural structure of reed leaf and glucose-derived carbon coating can both alleviate the effect of the volume expansion and enhance the good electronic conductivity.
 Fig. 3  Examples of anode materials that extracted directly from the biomass materials. (a) The rice husk (waste) is used as the source of biosilica generated in rice by the unique biological process from silicic acid. This biosilica was transformed via a simple process into mesoporous silica, which is then reduced by a magnesiothermic reaction into mesoporous Si and used as a high-performance anode material for Li-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthetic process of Corn–Si anode material from natural corn leaves, and SEM images of the derived SiO2 precursor and the Corn–Si composite materials. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (c) Scheme of the synthetic process of the SiOx/C (SC) composite from bamboo charcoal. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Another method worth mentioning is obtaining the active silicon materials via aluminothermic reduction.83,84 Su et al. obtained highly porous silicon from the biomass, corn leaves, with the aluminothermic reduction (Fig. 3b) and the as-prepared Corn–Si electrode exhibits a capacity retention near 100% and a discharge capacity of 2100 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles.83 Kuang et al. converted the commercial bamboo charcoal into 3D porous SiOx/C composites via an in situ top-down synthesis that involves carbonization and aluminothermic reduction (Fig. 3c).84 The as-prepared composite anode had delivered a specific capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at a loading of 200 mA g−1, and 700 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles when the loading had increased to 1 A g−1. These examples again demonstrate that BDMs can help develop high-capacity LIBs with lower cost and greener processing methods.
A lithium–sulfur battery (LSB) consists of a sulfur cathode and a lithium metal anode with an extremely high theoretical energy density.27,85–89 However, major challenges for the lithium metal anode are the degradation by the corrosion of the electrode caused by polysulfides and uncontrollable dendrite formation, leading to serious safety concerns.27 The corrosion and dendrites can be minimized by proper structural designs, i.e., adding a protective layer, which could potentially solve the unwanted dendrites at the same time.90–92 For instance, Zhang et al. developed an interesting channel-guided Li metal anode with carbonized wood (C-wood) to mitigate the corrosion and undesired dendrite growth.91 The Li/C-wood electrodes were prepared by lithium infusing the ZnO coated C-wood with highly aligned channels (Fig. 4a–e). The as-prepared electrode can withstand a high current density loading of 3 mA cm−2 and be cycled for 225 cycles with stable stripping/plating platforms, whereas the bare Li metal cell shows an overpotential increase along with the cycle number. Similarly, Song et al. had used a wood-derived carbon (WDC) frame to fabricate a dendrite-free composite Li anode assisted by silver (Ag) nanoparticles (Fig. 4f) that shows an excellent cyclic performance over 450 h at 1 mA cm−2 and over 300 h when the loading had increased to 3 mA cm−2.92
 Fig. 4  Examples of lithium metal anodes with help from bio-derived materials. (a) A schematic of the material design and the subsequent synthesis of the Li/C-wood composite from C-wood (left) to ZnO-coated C-wood (middle), and, finally, to the Li/C-wood composite (right). (b) The corresponding digital images of C-wood, ZnO-coated wood, and Li/C-wood (size is 5 mm × 7 mm), showing the successful infusion of Li metal into C-wood. (c–e) The corresponding SEM images of (c) C-wood, (d) ZnO-coated C-wood, and (e) Li/C-wood composite, which indicates Li infused into the C-wood channels completely. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. (f) Schematic diagram of dendrite-free Li composite anode with Ag-wood-derived carbon (Ag-WDC). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


Bio-derived materials for cathode electrodes. 
LSB is a promising candidate for next-generation energy storage devices due to its high theoretical capacity of the sulfur cathode when compared with metal oxide cathodes in commercialized LIBs.93,94 However, before the commercialization of the LSB, certain technical challenges must be addressed.95 LSBs suffer from poor electronic conductivity of the cathodic active material and its discharge product (sulfur and Li2S, respectively), sluggish reaction kinetics related to the solid-state steps of the electrochemical reaction, a large volume expansion of active materials, which leads to structural damage during cycling, and most troubling, the polysulfide (PS) shuttle effect which results in rapid electroactive material loss and capacity fading in the LSB cell.96 Rationally designed sulfur hosts have been widely applied in LSB cathodes to remedy the aforementioned technical challenges by providing an electronically conductive framework for the active material, ample pore volume to accommodate active material expansion and PS retention through physical blocking and chemical retardation of PS migration during cycling.97,98 Biochar, obtained from a carbonization process of a biomass precursor, has many appealing properties for use as sulfur hosts in LSBs, including high electronic conductivity, a suitable distribution of micro/mesopores, inherent heteroatom doping for chemical PS restriction, as well as low environmental and economic costs.99 Typically, for LSB applications, the obtained biochar is subjected to an activation process to provide the material with abundant micropores for enhanced PS restriction at the cathode. Activation is commonly carried out in either two steps (carbonization followed by activation) or a one-step combined carbonization/activation process, generally utilizing KOH as the porogen100 with some exceptions.101,102
Among the wide variety of source materials for the biomass precursors, plant derived biochars, a kind of BDMs, tend to be the most popular. Biomass sources include kapok fiber,103 bamboo,104 catkin,51,105 seaweed,100 agaric,106 lignin,107 and reed flowers108 to name a few. A particularly impressive example of a plant derived biochar application in LSBs was provided by Manthiram's group.109 Natural cotton fibers were annealed in a N2 atmosphere to obtain a free-standing and robust cotton carbon network, which, after catholyte infiltration, allowed for a binder and current collector free cathode system (Fig. 5a). The obtained cells displayed a remarkably high sulfur loading of 61.4 mg cm−2 with a reversible discharge capacity of 724 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1 C.
 Fig. 5  Examples of bio-derived materials for LSB cathode applications. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of the carbon-cotton cathode and its electrochemical performances. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) The preparation process of the S/MGC composite from peanut shells. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the puffed rice derived carbon (PRC) fabrication, an optical image of an individual rice, puffed rice, and a series of images of the PRC synthesis process. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
As a way of further reducing the environmental impact associated with the sources of biomass precursors for LSB biochar, researchers have looked towards waste products. Due to the abundant supply, food waste is a popular choice as a biomass source. Examples include fruit peel,50,110–112 vegetable peel,113,114 nut shells,101,102,115 expired milk powder,116 tea leaves from used teabags,117,118 fish scales,119,120 crab shells,121 eggshell membrane,122 and pig bones.123 Zhou and co-workers used peanut shells as a biomass precursor in a one-step carbonization and activation process using K2FeO4 as both the activating and graphitization agent (Fig. 5b).102 The resulting biochar material displayed an ultra-micropore (<0.7 nm) volume of 0.65 cm3 g−1 that served as a host for short-chain polysulfides (S2–4). When cycled with a carbonate electrolyte, the assembled lithium–sulfur cells delivered a specific discharge capacity of 826 mA h g−1 at 1 C after an outstanding 1000 charge/discharge cycles. Byproducts of industrial processes are also a rational source of biomass which would otherwise be waste. To this end, Tesio et al. used waste from the beer brewing process as a biomass precursor for LSB cathode hosts.124 After a nonactivating pyrolysis process, the LSBs fabricated from the after brewing waste carbon delivered a discharge capacity of 498 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles at the high discharge current of 5 C.
In addition to direct applications as a sulfur host material in LSB cathodes, carbonized biomass has been used as a carbon skeleton in the construction of modified biochar frameworks for sulfur cathodes. Many such examples exist, including a wheat flour biochar modified with g-C3N4,125 wood fiber carbon subjected to atomic layer deposition of Al2O3,126 tissue paper carbon as a growth medium for MoS2,127 among others.128–132 Zhong et al. used an instant puffing process to expand the rice precursor into a highly porous macrocellular structure, as shown in Fig. 5c.133 After a carbonization process, the puffed rice carbon (PRC) was obtained, which served as a carbon support skeleton for transition metal catalysts, namely Ni nanoparticles. The rationally designed structure allowed a reversible discharge capacity of 813 mA h g−1 to be obtained after 500 cycles at 0.1 C. All in all, biochar derived from the carbonization of biomass precursors are shown to greatly improve the performance of lithium–sulfur batteries, whether they were used directly as host materials or as skeletons for further modification.

Bio-derived materials for separator or interlayers
BDMs show great promise to be used as separators and interlayers because of their abundant functional groups and excellent mechanical properties. In terms of separators in LIBs, several key factors should be considered, including porosity, mechanical strength, thermal stability, chemical/electrochemical stability, wettability, etc. The current commercial separator market has been dominated by polyolefins such as polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), and their blends, which exhibit significant advantages in their outstanding stability in battery operation as well as low cost. However, these commercial separators suffer from severe function failure at high temperature, which may cause safety concerns.134,135 In addition, these commercial separators have inferior wettability with organic electrolytes, which is detrimental to the rate capability of LIBs.136,137 Conversely, BDMs can offset the drawbacks of polyolefin-based separators as they possess good mechanical properties and many polar groups which endow them with good affinity for liquid electrolytes. Recently, a wide spectrum of BDM-based separators has emerged for advanced LIBs. In this section, we will discuss the development of BDM-based separators as well interlayers considering that interlayers can be regarded as extended parts of separators.

Bio-derived materials for separators. 
Cellulose and cellulose-derived materials are the most commonly used sources for biomass-based separators because of their abundant functional groups, including carboxyl groups (–COOH) and hydroxyl groups (–OH), leading to superior wettability with liquid electrolytes. More importantly, the cellulose fibers endow the separators with a well-controlled nanoporous structure. As shown in Fig. 6a, compared to the slit-like pores in a commercial PP/PE/PP separator, the cellulose-derived separators exhibited nano-sized pores. Moreover, the porous architectures of cellulose-derived separators are tunable by controlling the water concentration during the preparation process. When applied in lithium-ion batteries, the as-prepared separator showed higher ionic conductivity and improved electrolyte wettability and thermal stability than the polyolefin-based separator due to the polarity and thermal stability.138 However, the unusual pore sizes and low mechanical strength of pure cellulose-derived separators have a great impact on the safety and lifespan of LIBs due to the formation of lithium dendrite and battery self-discharge.139,140 In this regard, Xu et al. adopted a composite membrane composed of cellulose and polysulfonamide (PSA) as a LIB separator.141 The obtained cellulose/PSA composite nonwoven membrane exhibited excellent tensile strength up to 17 MPa, because the cellulose skeleton was well bonded with PSA for improving the mechanical properties (Fig. 6b). Another strategy to improve the mechanical strength of cellulose-based separators is to add inorganic fillers. Kim et al. introduced colloidal silica nanoparticles into cellulose nanofiber paper (CNP) separators for lithium-ion batteries. As shown in Fig. 6c, the incorporation of SiO2 nanoparticles in the cellulose nanofibers (CNF) suspension is an effective way to control nanoscale labyrinth structure (i.e., nanoporous structure) of CNP separators. Because of its highest ionic conduction arising from the well-balanced properties between the porous structure and separator thickness, the cells using CNP separator with appropriate SiO2 content (5 wt%) showed improved C-rate capability and excellent cycling performance.140 Moreover, the rice paper (RP) consisting of tortuous cellulose fibers demonstrated excellent thermal stability and high-voltage stability.142
 Fig. 6  Examples of bio-derived separators for LIBs. (a) FE-SEM photographs of PP/PE/PP separator, cellulose-derived CNP separator (IPA–water = 60/40 vol/vol%), CNP separator (IPA–water = 95/5) and CNP separator (IPA–water = 100/0). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.138 (b) Stress–strain curves of cellulose/PSA composite separators with the different mass ratios. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration demonstrating SiO2 content-directed morphological variation in the S-CNP separators and its influence on ionic transport of the separators. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the Li–O2 cell architecture comprised of three layers: 5 μm Li anode/separator/carbon cathode. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Cycle performance of the LNMO/Li cells using PP separator and CA separator at 55 °C. (f) A schematic illustration is demonstrating the capability of carboxyl groups to chelate with Mn2+. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Chitin is another main source of biomass for separators in lithium-ion batteries. For example, Kim et al. reported a hierarchical regenerated chitin fiber (Chiber) as a nonwoven mat-type Chiber separator to mitigate lithium dendrites in lithium metal batteries. Results suggested that the chitin molecule showed a stronger Li-ion affinity than conventional battery separators due to unique coordination with functional groups, leading to greatly improved coulombic efficiency with Li metal mitigation (Fig. 6d).143 Alginate, obtained from brown seaweeds, is an ideal material for separators for high-voltage lithium batteries owing to its strong polymer binder, good electrochemical stability, and special carboxyl structure. Wen et al. explored the feasibility of alginate as a separator for high-voltage LIBs. They demonstrated that the prepared alginate nonwoven separator (abbreviated as “CA separator”) exhibited superior electrochemical stability, high ionic conductivity, and improved electrochemical performance. Additionally, because of abundant carboxyl groups in the alginate structure and its capability to chelate with Mn2+, the CA separator could significantly improve the cycling performance of a high-voltage (5 V) LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode at 55 °C (Fig. 6e and f).144 In summary, the biomass-based separators for LIBs show some common properties, including favourable separator surface and interface wettability by electrolyte, high ionic conductivity and large scale production with low cost.


Bio-derived materials for interlayers. 
Functional interlayers are usually employed in Li–S batteries to solve the diffusion of polysulfides and shuttle effect issues, and lithium anodes to prevent lithium dendrite growth. An ideal interlayer is expected to meet the following requirements:145 (1) strong adsorption ability to suppress polysulfide diffusion; (2) efficient diffusion pathway for lithium ions; (3) protecting lithium anode from polysulfide attack; (4) reutilizing the confined active materials by acting as an upper current collector; (5) maintaining electrode integrity by buffering the volume changes; (6) sufficient mechanical strength for preventing pulverization during cycling; and (7) reasonable thickness for easy assembly and high total volumetric energy density.
BDMs are appropriate sources to synthesize functional interlayers for Li–S batteries because bio-mass-derived interlayers possess high surface area and unique nanostructure, which is beneficial for accommodating polysulfides. To date, many BDMs have been explored for functional interlayers, including cellulose paper,150,151 leaf,152 eggshell membrane,153 bacterial cellulose,154 cassava,155 fungus,147,156 bamboo,146etc. Inspired by the unique tissue and functions of leaves, Chung et al. synthesized a natural carbonized leaf (CL) as a functional interlayer for Li–S batteries. After carbonization under inert gas protection at high temperature, the obtained CL could retain the thin-film shape and exhibited sufficient mechanical strength. The structural gradient and the micro/mesoporous adsorption sites of CL could effectively intercept/trap the migrating polysulfides and facilitate their reutilization.152 Similarly, Gu et al. prepared a bamboo carbon fiber membrane (BCFM) from waste bamboo stick (Fig. 7a). The unique robust fiber network and macro/micropores of BCFM could obtain high electrolyte uptake, facilitate rapid transportation of electrons and ions as well as provide physical space for efficient confinement of sulfur. As a result, the BCFM interlayer could greatly improve the cycling performance and electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries.146 Additionally, it is quite easy to fabricate a heteroatom doped carbon material from BDMs. For example, Chai et al. synthesized N and O-doped fungus carbon fiber (GFC) embedded with graphene as interlayer for Li–S batteries. The GFC film serves as the conductive interlayer to greatly improve the performance of Li–S batteries including capacity retention and rate capability (Fig. 7b).147
 Fig. 7  Examples of bio-derived interlayers for LIBs. (a) A schematic configuration of the Li–S cell with a BCFM interlayer. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Illustration of function of the GFC inserting Li–S batteries to improve the performance of Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the CNF–GA composite. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Illustration of PSNF interlayer for filtration of polysulfides in Li–S cells. (e) Critical properties for achieving a high-performance PSNF. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Besides carbon materials carbonized from BDMs, some BDMs can be used as interlayer directly. For instance, Tu et al. incorporated a natural polymer of Gum Arabic (GA) onto the conductive support of a carbon nanofiber (CNF) film as a polysulfide shielding interlayer (Fig. 7c). The GA possesses precise oxygen-containing functional groups that can induce a strong binding interaction toward lithium polysulfides and thereby effectively suppress the shuttling behavior.148 Inspired by air filtration, Fu et al. reported a protein-based nanofilter for effectively trapping polysulfides but facilitating Li+ transport. Interestingly, the gelatin protein could drive unique self-assembly of CB particles, resulting in a 3D porous structure (Fig. 7d). Additionally, the backbone oxygen atoms and carboxyl groups from the end chains of the protein showed notable electrostatic interactions with Li ions in polysulfides, which showed significant advantages in improving the battery performance.149
BDMs have also been integrated into artificial solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) films to suppress the dendrite propagation, given that the BDMs show a great ability to manipulate the mechanical properties by macromolecular chains as well as regulate Li ion flux and distribution by lithiophilic functional groups.47 For example, Zhang et al. used a uniform agarose film to protect the lithium anode. The high ionic conductivity, high elasticity, and chemical stability of this natural biopolymer provided a fast Li-ion transfer and feasibility to accommodate the volume change of lithium anode. In contrast to the dead lithium formed on the pure Cu electrode, the tough and elastic agarose polymer film could relieve the volume change and prevent the overgrowth of Li dendrites during the Li deposition and dissolution process (Fig. 8a and b). As a result, a dendrite-free anode and a stable interface were obtained, resulting in enhanced electrochemical performance in full cells.157 Additionally, Kimwipe (KW) paper composed of a 3D fibrous framework of virgin wood fibers could also realize a dendrite-free surface and improve the reversibility of the Li anode. As shown in Fig. 8c and d, due to the abundant polar functional groups in KW paper to adhere to Li ions, the SEI interlayer provided excellent wettability and impeded the aggregation of Li ions around protrusions, resulting in a homogeneous deposition of Li ions on the surface.158 Therefore, the natural polymers with abundant surface polar groups exhibit outstanding ability to regulate lithium deposition and inhibit lithium dendrite growth. However, some issues should be considered in terms of natural polymers in the SEI interlayer, including the compatibility of natural polymers with organic solvents and the chemical/electrochemical stability of natural polymers against lithium metal.
 Fig. 8  Examples of bio-derived materials for enhancing the SEI for LIBs. A schematic illustration of the protection of the growth of the Li dendrite by using AG as the protective layer, (a) Cu and (b) AG–Cu electrodes. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. Illustrations of (c) the Li-dendrite growth in the control cell and (d) the dendrite-suppressing behaviour in the KW-protected cell. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

Bio-derived materials for binding
In addition, the precursor design based on the BDMs, the binder, which is the essential component of the electrode, directly uses the biomass materials.46,47 Recent achievements of the binders highlight the increasing competitiveness of high-energy-density electrodes for energy storage.159,160 In this Section, we explore BDM-based functional binders for the fabrication of Si and S electrodes.

Functional binders for Si anodes. 
As aforementioned, silicon, with the high theoretical specific capacity and suitable average discharge voltage, is considered as the most promising alternative to the graphite at the anode.161 However, the Si material suffers from the large volume variation of Si (for Li4.4Si) during lithiation/delithiation. The stress generated during repeated charge/discharge results in the pulverization of the electrode, eventually leading to the performance decay of the Si-based anode.39,162,163 In addition, such a volume variation is also detrimental for the electrode conductivity due to the lost connection between Si particles and conductive fillers. These difficulties are challenging the industrial prospects of Si-based anodes. To this end, research efforts have focused on the design of functional binders to overcome the above difficulties, which is well buoyed by the low cost of polymeric binders and the good compatibility with conventional battery processing.
In earlier studies for the Si-based anode, some natural materials have been explored for replacing the PVDF binder. Typically, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) with carboxy groups is demonstrated to be favorable for the enhanced electrochemical behaviors of the Si-based anode. In the year 2011, the battery scientists suddenly became aware that the binder design could be more feasible for high-stability Si-based anodes compared with other creative yet costly wrapping techniques or structural changing methods. Luzinov and Yushin jointly proposed sodium-alginate (SA) be used as the binder for the Si-based anode (Fig. 9a–c).164 Meanwhile, the concept of hydrogen bonding between the binder and Si materials has been demonstrated and cited by the battery community. Subsequently, various bio-mass binders with tailor-made functions, such as binding strength, electronic conductivity, flexibility, and wettability, have been explored to improve the cycling performance of Si anodes. For example, Ling et al. reported the application of naturally abundant gum arabic (GA),165 composed of polysaccharides and glycoproteins, as a dual-function binder for the Si-based anode (Fig. 9d). This is attributed to the combination of a large amount of hydroxyl groups, which are essential in ensuring strong binding to Si, and existing long chain glycoproteins providing robust mechanical tolerance to large volume variation by Si nanoparticles upon lithiation. Therefore, the Si anodes can deliver the reversible capacity of ca. 2000 mA h g−1 and a long lifespan of 500 cycles.
 Fig. 9  Examples of bio-derived binders for the Si anode in LIBs. (a) Giant kelp forest (Macrocystis pyrifera algae) in the Pacific Ocean, photographed near the coast of California, USA. The insets show the chemical structure of mannuronic (left) and guluronic (right) acids. (b) Reversible Li-extraction capacity of nano-Si electrodes with alginate, CMC, and PVDF binders versus cycle number collected for the current density of 4200 mA g−1 for cells cycled in the potential window of 0.01 to 1 V versus Li/Li+. (c) Galvanostatic discharge profiles of the nano-Si electrode at different current densities between 0 and 1 V. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2011, The American Association of the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematics of the concept to address the volume change issue in battery materials. GA with the dual functionality could keep both the strong chemical bonding and the ductile property to tolerate the expansion during lithiation/delithiation processes. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the Si anode using the hard and soft composite binder. The 3D network based on hard and soft polymers conformally coats Si particles for stable cycling performance of anode. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the direct utilization of biomass materials as a binder, the bio-derived polymer monomers to form polymer resins are designed to serve as functional binders for the LIB electrode.166–168 Liu and coauthors reported a facile strategy of exploiting in situ self-polymerization of furfuryl alcohol to adhere to the Si-based anode (Fig. 9e).166 Regrettably, the resultant poly(furfuryl alcohol) cannot address the destructive volume variation of Si anodes by itself due to the inherent property of high stiffness. Tuning the mechanical properties of the binder is a practical approach for addressing the above problem. When combined with the soft PVA constituent, the resultant 3D network binder has been interweaved to enable a high areal-density Si-based anode with a stable cycling life simultaneously. Such a strategy of interweaving hard and soft polymers has been a demonstration in the research realm of SiOx and metal oxides anode,169 which opens up a new view to develop environmentally benign binder technology employed in the high-performance Li-storage anodes with large volume change.
Beyond the enhanced bonding affinity, the functionality of the biomass binder is worthy of discussion. The electric conductivity could be obtained by partially carbonized polymer binders. Li et al. proposed the increasing electronic conductivity stemming from the electron delocalization over the chain and in the length of the poly-conjugation without sacrificing bonding ability.170 The CMC was thermally treated by an optimum temperature of 250 °C in the air atmosphere. When the partially carbonized CMC acted as the binder for the Si-based anode, the specific capacity of over 2000 mA h g−1 and areal capacity of 1.39 mA h cm−2 can still be achieved in the absence of conductive additive. This partial carbonization binder is feasible to scale up due to the facile heat-treatment process. Similarly, some small-molecule cross-linkers have been recently documented to design robust water-soluble network binders for stable Si anodes. These small molecules have good flexibility and wettability to adhere to the surface of Si particles. These advantages are attributed to extremely abundant chemical structures of the cross-linkers and tuned physicochemical properties such as melting point that greatly affect the mechanical properties of the network binder. Li and coauthors used a small molecule of epichlorohydrin (ECH) to enhance the mechanical strengthen of peach gum with Si particles.171 The resultant PG-c-ECH composite binder has durable interfacial adhesion and outstanding mechanical properties to stabilize the structural integrity of the Si anode.


Functional binders for S cathodes. 
Sulfur, when used for Li storage, has appealing electrochemical properties, including a high theoretical capacity of 1672 mA h g−1 and an average cell voltage of 2.15 V (vs. Li/Li+) being suitable for the cathode.172–175 Regrettably, its intrinsic drawbacks, such as low electrical conductivity, large volume change upon lithiation, and the shuttle effect of lithium polysulfide (LiPS) dissolved in the electrolyte, have seriously hindered its practical applications. Many efforts have been devoted to the rational design of S-based nanostructure and overall electrode architectures,176,177 including core/yolk–shell morphologies, multistage porosity, and functional interlayer, to name but a few. In parallel, the battery scientists are also increasingly aware of the importance of keeping the S-based cathode integrity via the binder design. Typically, when a gelatin macromolecule was used for Li–S batteries,176 biological gelatin has advantages in the preparation of sulfur cathodes. Its rich ionizable groups such as COOH and NH2 allow for the gelatin to have great hydrophilic capability for trapping dissolving LiPSs. In addition, the gelatin comes from the natural sources and thereby is easier scaled up. In earlier studies, various studies of the bio-based binders,89,178–180 such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), have been also investigated for the sulfur cathode, confirming their beneficial roles in enhancing cycling stability of the electrode.
Sodium-alginate (SA), a natural polysaccharide extracted from brown algae, has been widely investigated as the binder for the LIBs.164,181 In 2013, Zhang and co-authors initially investigated its effects in S-based cathodes and exhibited resultant electrochemical evidence.181 Compared with the PVDF binder, the SA binder enables sulfur cathodes with a higher specific capacity and better cycling stability. It is attributed to the benefits of robust mechanical properties, which effectively buffered volume expansion of sulfur particles during discharge/charge processes, and porous structure, being favorable for electrolyte permeation and thus fast Li-ion transfer. Subsequently, Min et al. reported the novel design of gum arabic (GA) as binder for the S-based cathode (Fig. 10a).182 GA is known as a natural polymer derived from Acacia senegal and comprises massive highly branched polysaccharides. These components provide rich hydroxyl, carboxyl, and ether functional groups that not only form the network for the stronger bonding in response to the volume variation, but also chemically function to restrain the shuttle effect of soluble lithium polysulfide (LiPS). Consequently, the GA binder is confirmed to enable the S-based cathode with a high initial specific capacity of 1157 mA h g−1 and stable cycle life over 500 cycles (Fig. 10b).182 A further demonstration has been also performed in the case of soy protein (SP),183 which has abundant polar groups, such as amine and carboxyl groups (Fig. 10c). The S-based cathode using the SP binder exhibits a remarkable specific capacity even at high mass loading (Fig. 10d). These studies have also reminded the battery scientists that the vital role of the bio-based binder's polysaccharides in enhancing the electrochemical performance of the S-based cathode should be ignored in the subsequent modifications.
 Fig. 10  Examples of bio-derived binders for S cathodes in LIBs. (a) Proposed chemical structure of GA with the background of Acacia senegal. (b) The long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the S@GA electrode with the sulfur loading of 75 wt% in sulfur/carbon composites at C/5. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) A schematic illustration of the design strategy for a robust and multi-functional binder (SP-PAA) via the incorporation of two functional materials. (d) Voltage profiles of S cathodes with SP-PAA with high S loading of 5.6 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic of the intermolecular binding effect between GG and XG; (f) schematic of the polymer network formed by the intermolecular binding effect; (g) cycling performance of the S@N-GG-XG electrode with sulfur loading of 11.9 mg cm−2 at 1.6 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
There are some references worthy of discussion in the literature. Zhang and Lin jointly proposed a concept of using incorporation of various biopolymers as a binder network for the S-based cathode. They simply mixed guar gum (GG) and xanthan gum (XG), which are low-cost, non-toxic, sustainable natural products. Benefiting from the intermolecular binding effect between GG and XG, a resultant binder network exhibits the strong bonding affinity between sulfur particles and conductive filler as well as between sulfur particles and current collectors (Fig. 10e and f). In addition, its rich oxygenous functional groups provide the remarkable adsorption for trapping the dissolved polysulfides, and realizing an ultrahigh areal specific capacity of 11.9 mA h cm−2 (Fig. 10g).174 These results show that a high-energy-density Li–S batteries can be easily obtained using a biomass binder.

Conclusion
Sustainable bio-derived materials with unique structures, compositions, and functional groups for enhancing the performance of LIBs are briefly reviewed in this article. The critical problems of high-capacity LIBs are the generally low ionic and electronic conductivity of active materials, the great volume change in Li-conversion type AEMs (Si anode), the uncontrollable side reactions and dendrites in the Li metal anode, and the shuttle effect of the sulfur cathode.
Bio-derived materials now in various designs and forms can mitigate these problems and potentially bring the realization of those high-capacity active materials a step forward by carbonaceous hosting materials and/or active materials sources, functional spacers and interlayers, and functional binders with desired mechanical properties. As to the further improvement of the overall volumetric capacity density of the batteries, there are more studies required for BDMs, such as better control and manipulation of the carbonaceous architectures to perfect or match the actual size required for anode and cathode materials, reduce the thickness for the separators and/or the interlayers, and lessen the amount of the binding materials used. These all require the enhancement of the fabrication and/or extraction techniques, the understanding of the BDMs in terms of the specific properties and functions that they can bring, and the scale-up trial with quantitative and qualitative analysis because the bio-sources could vary seasonally and locationally. In short, the increasing attention paid to the use of greener and more sustainable bio-derived materials for solving the challenges of replacing the existing battery systems is underway and requires more in-depth studies and research. More bio-derived materials or related green processes/techniques could be invented and/or discovered for high-performance LIBs in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Projects (DP210103266 and DP1701048343), and the Griffith University PhD Scholarships. It was also financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52002352 and 52071295).
References

          T. B. Johansson, H. Kelly, A. K. Reddy and R. H. Williams, Renewable Energy: Sources for Fuels and Electricity, Island Press, Washington, DC,  1993 Search PubMed .

          G. Boyle, Renewable Energy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, UK,  2004 Search PubMed .
A. Tomaszewska, Z. Chu, X. Feng, S. O'Kane, X. Liu, J. Chen, C. Ji, E. Endler, R. Li and L. Liu, Lithium-ion battery fast charging: A review, ETransportation, 2019, 1, 100011 CrossRef .
X. Feng, M. Ouyang, X. Liu, L. Lu, Y. Xia and X. He, Thermal runaway mechanism of lithium ion battery for electric vehicles: A review, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 246–267 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, B. Mao, S. I. Stoliarov and J. Sun, A review of lithium ion battery failure mechanisms and fire prevention strategies, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2019, 73, 95–131 CrossRef .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Li-ion battery materials: present and future, Mater. Today, 2015, 18(5), 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, Z. Chen, S. Zhong, J. Meng, F. Lai, Z. Li, C. Cheng, L. Zhang and T. Liu, Na-substitution induced oxygen vacancy achieving high transition metal capacity in commercial Li-rich cathode, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105622 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Silicon-based nanomaterials for lithium-ion batteries: a review, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(1), 1300882 CrossRef .
B. Liang, Y. Liu and Y. Xu, Silicon-based materials as high capacity anodes for next generation lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 469–490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feng, M. Li, W. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli, X. Xiao, M. Cai and Z. Chen, Silicon-based anodes for lithium-ion batteries: from fundamentals to practical applications, Small, 2018, 14(8), 1702737 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Kamali and D. J. Fray, Review on carbon and silicon based materials as anode materials for lithium ion batteries, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2010, 13(2), 147–160 CAS .
M. Salah, P. Murphy, C. Hall, C. Francis, R. Kerr and M. Fabretto, Pure silicon thin-film anodes for lithium-ion batteries: A review, J. Power Sources, 2019, 414, 48–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, T. Yamaguchi, S. Matsumoto, H. Hoshikawa, T. Kumagai, N. L. Okamoto and T. Ichitsubo, Circumventing huge volume strain in alloy anodes of lithium batteries, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ashuri, Q. He and L. L. Shaw, Silicon as a potential anode material for Li-ion batteries: where size, geometry and structure matter, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(1), 74–103 RSC .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, 25th anniversary article: understanding the lithiation of silicon and other alloying anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(36), 4966–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Toward safe lithium metal anode in rechargeable batteries: a review, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(15), 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Reviving the lithium metal anode for high-energy batteries, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12(3), 194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, C. Guo, A. Naveed, J. Lei, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Recent progress and perspective on lithium metal anode protection, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 199–221 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. Zhang, A review of lithium deposition in lithium-ion and lithium metal secondary batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, X. Wang and Y. S. Meng, Key issues hindering a practical lithium-metal anode, Trends Chem., 2019, 1(2), 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, Problem, status, and possible solutions for lithium metal anode of rechargeable batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(3), 910–920 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kaiser, Z. Han, J. Liang, S.-X. Dou and J. Wang, Lithium sulfide-based cathode for lithium-ion/sulfur battery: recent progress and challenges, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 1–15 CrossRef .
A. N. Mistry and P. P. Mukherjee, “Shuttle” in polysulfide shuttle: friend or foe? The, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(42), 23845–23851 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, W. Ma, S. Zhang and B. Tang, Recent advances in shuttle effect inhibition for lithium sulfur batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 707–732 CrossRef .
P. Barai, A. Mistry and P. P. Mukherjee, Poromechanical effect in the lithium–sulfur battery cathode, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2016, 9, 359–370 CrossRef .
K. Zhu, C. Wang, Z. Chi, F. Ke, Y. Yang, A. Wang, W. Wang and L. Miao, How far away are lithium–sulfur batteries from commercialization?, Front. Energy Res., 2019, 7, 123 CrossRef .
A. Fotouhi, D. J. Auger, L. O’Neill, T. Cleaver and S. Walus, Lithium–sulfur battery technology readiness and applications—a review, Energies, 2017, 10(12), 1937 CrossRef .
J. Dai, C. Shi, C. Li, X. Shen, L. Peng, D. Wu, D. Sun, P. Zhang and J. Zhao, A rational design of separator with substantially enhanced thermal features for lithium-ion batteries by the polydopamine–ceramic composite modification of polyolefin membranes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(10), 3252–3261 RSC .
M. F. Lagadec, R. Zahn and V. Wood, Designing polyolefin separators to minimize the impact of local compressive stresses on lithium ion battery performance, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(9), A1829 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, C.-H. Chiu and P.-H. Chou, Safety assessment of polyolefin and nonwoven separators used in lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Buqa, M. Holzapfel, F. Krumeich, C. Veit and P. Novák, Study of styrene butadiene rubber and sodium methyl cellulose as binder for negative electrodes in lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161(1), 617–622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Qi, T. Sun and X. Li, Unveiling the roles of binder in the mechanical integrity of electrodes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(9), A1502 CrossRef CAS .
I. Elizabeth, B. P. Singh, S. Trikha and S. Gopukumar, Bio-derived hierarchically macro-meso-micro porous carbon anode for lithium/sodium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 412–421 CrossRef CAS .
M. Culebras, H. Geaney, A. Beaucamp, P. Upadhyaya, E. D. Dalton, K. M. Ryan and M. N. Collins, Bio-derived carbon nanofibers from lignin as high performance Li-ion anode materials, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12(19), 4516–4521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bakierska, M. Lis, J. Pacek, M. Świętosławski, M. Gajewska, A. Tąta, E. Proniewicz and M. Molenda, Bio-derived carbon nanostructures for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, Carbon, 2019, 145, 426–432 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Panda, D. P. Dutta and S. Mitra, Bio-derived mesoporous disordered carbon: An excellent anode in sodium-ion battery and full-cell lab prototype, Carbon, 2019, 143, 402–412 CrossRef .
B. Campbell, R. Ionescu, Z. Favors, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Bio-derived, binderless, hierarchically porous carbon anodes for Li-ion batteries, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. B. Schon, A. J. Tilley, C. R. Bridges, M. B. Miltenburg and D. S. Seferos, Bio-Derived Polymers for Sustainable Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(38), 6896–6903 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, A. Moretti, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, Alternative binders for sustainable electrochemical energy storage–the transition to aqueous electrode processing and bio-derived polymers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(11), 3096–3127 RSC .
M. Murase, N. Yabuuchi, Z. J. Han, J. Y. Son, Y. T. Cui, H. Oji and S. Komaba, Crop-Derived Polysaccharides as Binders for High-Capacity Silicon/Graphite-Based Electrodes in Lithium-Ion Batteries, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5(12), 2307–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T.-K. Fey and C.-L. Chen, High-capacity carbons for lithium-ion batteries prepared from rice husk, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 47–51 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Z. Schnepp and M. M. Titirici, Rice husk-derived carbon anodes for lithium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(17), 5269–5273 RSC .
K. Yu, Y. Wang, X. Wang, W. Liu, J. Liang and C. Liang, Preparation of porous carbon anode materials for lithium-ion battery from rice husk, Mater. Lett., 2019, 253, 405–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao and F. Wu, Naturally derived nanostructured materials from biomass for rechargeable lithium/sodium batteries, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 91–103 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Gao, Z.-B. Zhai, K.-J. Huang and Y.-Y. Zhang, Energy storage applications of biomass-derived carbon materials: batteries and supercapacitors, New J. Chem., 2017, 41(20), 11456–11470 RSC .
X. Fu and W. H. Zhong, Biomaterials for high-energy lithium-based batteries: Strategies, challenges, and perspectives, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(40), 1901774 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Yuan, X. Tao, Y. Liang, S. J. Yang, J. Q. Huang, T. Q. Yuan, M. M. Titirici and Q. Zhang, Recent progress on biomass-derived ecomaterials toward advanced rechargeable lithium batteries, EcoMat, 2020, 2(1), e12019 CAS .
C. Jin, J. Nai, O. Sheng, H. Yuan, W. Zhang, X. Tao and D. Lou, Biomass-based materials for green lithium secondary batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1326–1379 RSC .
H. Wan and X. Hu, Nitrogen doped biomass-derived porous carbon as anode materials of lithium ion batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 341, 115030 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, G. Li, M. Li, R. Liu, H. Li, P. Ren, Y. Dong, M. Feng and Z. Chen, Biomass-derived nitrogen-doped hierarchical porous carbon as efficient sulfur host for lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 44, 61–67 CrossRef .
L. Fan, Z. Li, W. Kang and B. Cheng, Biomass-derived tube-like nitrogen and oxygen dual-doped porous carbon in the sulfur cathode for lithium sulfur battery, Renewable Energy, 2020, 155, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, B. Liu, J. Zheng, G. Chu, K. Zhong, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, Nano-silicon/carbon composite anode materials towards practical application for next generation Li-ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(14), A2509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, D. Hong, H.-W. Lee and S. Park, Practical considerations of Si-based anodes for lithium-ion battery applications, Nano Res., 2017, 10(12), 3970–4002 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoon, T. Bok, C. Kim, Y. Na, S. Park and K. S. Kim, Mesoporous silicon hollow nanocubes derived from metal–organic framework template for advanced lithium-ion battery anode, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(5), 4808–4815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Three-dimensional metal scaffold supported bicontinuous silicon battery anodes, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(6), 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Entwistle, A. Rennie and S. Patwardhan, A review of magnesiothermic reduction of silica to porous silicon for lithium-ion battery applications and beyond, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(38), 18344–18356 RSC .
W. Wang, T. Wang, X. Fan, C. Zhang, J. Hu, H. Chen, Z. Fang, J. Yan and B. Liu, Freeze-drying-assisted Synthesis of Mesoporous CoMoO 4 Nanosheets as Anode Electrode Material for Enhanced Lithium Batteries, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2019, 35(2), 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, Silicon nanowire fabric as a lithium ion battery electrode material, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(51), 20914–20921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Li, J. Liu, Z. Sun, S. Tang and M. Lei, Dual yolk–shell structure of carbon and silica-coated silicon for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Dou, N. Cheng, D. Cui, Y. Du, P. Liu, M. Al-Mamun, S. Zhang and H. Zhao, A yolk–shell structured silicon anode with superior conductivity and high tap density for full lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(26), 8824–8828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, X. Hu, Y. Hou and Z. Wen, Tunable synthesis of yolk–shell porous silicon@carbon for optimizing Si/C-based anode of lithium-ion batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(48), 42084–42092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, J. S. Chen, X. W. D. Lou, X. Xing and G. Q. M. Lu, Yolk/shell nanoparticles: new platforms for nanoreactors, drug delivery and lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(47), 12578–12591 RSC .
L. Pan, H. Wang, D. Gao, S. Chen, L. Tan and L. Li, Facile synthesis of yolk–shell structured Si–C nanocomposites as anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(44), 5878–5880 RSC .
N. Liu, Z. Lu, J. Zhao, M. T. McDowell, H.-W. Lee, W. Zhao and Y. Cui, A pomegranate-inspired nanoscale design for large-volume-change lithium battery anodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(3), 187–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Wang, R. Yu and D. Wang, Multi-shelled hollow micro-/nanostructures: promising platforms for lithium-ion batteries, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1(3), 414–430 RSC .
M.-G. Jeong, H. L. Du, M. Islam, J. K. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and H.-G. Jung, Self-rearrangement of silicon nanoparticles embedded in micro-carbon sphere framework for high-energy and long-life lithium-ion batteries, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(9), 5600–5606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shu, H. Li, R. Yang, Y. Shi and X. Huang, Cage-like carbon nanotubes/Si composite as anode material for lithium ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8(1), 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, Y. Zhu, F. Han, T. Gao, C. Luo, X. Fan, Y.-S. Hu and C. Wang, Carbon cage encapsulating nano-cluster Li2S by ionic liquid polymerization and pyrolysis for high performance Li–S batteries, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M. M. Titirici, J. O. Müller, R. Schlögl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Superior storage performance of a Si@SiOx/C nanocomposite as anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(9), 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, S. Zheng, S. He, Y. Ye, J. Liang, A. Shi, Z. Wang and Z. Zheng, Preparation of micron Si@C anodes for lithium ion battery by recycling the lamellar submicron silicon in the kerf slurry waste from photovoltaic industry, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 107, 107898 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, C.-J. He, J. Zhang, Y.-L. Hou, W.-J. Meng and D.-L. Zhao, Nitrogen-doped carbon caging silicon nanoparticles for high performance lithium-ion battery anodes, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 860, 158487 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Wu, S.-B. Ji, L.-K. Liu, T. Xie, L. Tan, H. Tang and R.-G. Sun, High-performance SiO/C as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries using commercial SiO and glucose as raw materials, Rare Met., 2020, 1–8 Search PubMed .
P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, C. Yao, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Recent progress on silicon-based anode materials for practical lithium-ion battery applications, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 422–446 CrossRef .
T. Shen, D. Xie, W. Tang, D. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Xia, X. Wang and J. Tu, Biomass-derived carbon/silicon three-dimensional hierarchical nanostructure as anode material for lithium ion batteries, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 340–346 CrossRef CAS .
X. Niu, J. Zhou, T. Qian, M. Wang and C. Yan, Confined silicon nanospheres by biomass lignin for stable lithium ion battery, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(40), 405401 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-L. Vu, J.-S. Seo, H.-Y. Lee and J.-W. Lee, Activated carbon with hierarchical micro–mesoporous structure obtained from rice husk and its application for lithium–sulfur batteries, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(7), 4144–4151 RSC .
X. Fan, S. Li, Y. Cui, L. Lu, C. Zhou and Z. Liu, Fe3O4/rice husk-based maco-/mesoporous carbon bone nanocomposite as superior high-rate anode for lithium ion battery, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21(1), 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Xue, B. Gao, P. Gao, C. Mou and J. Li, Rice husk derived carbon–silica composites as anodes for lithium ion batteries, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(110), 64744–64746 RSC .
J. Liu, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Energy storage materials from nature through nanotechnology: a sustainable route from reed plants to a silicon anode for lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127(33), 9768–9772 CrossRef .
Q. Ma, Y. Dai, H. Wang, G. Ma, H. Guo, X. Zeng, N. Tu, X. Wu and M. Xiao, Directly conversion the biomass-waste to Si/C composite anode materials for advanced lithium ion batteries, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32(1), 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, K. Huo, M. T. McDowell, J. Zhao and Y. Cui, Rice husks as a sustainable source of nanostructured silicon for high performance Li-ion battery anodes, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. Xing, S. Tian, H. Tang, D. Losic and Z. Bao, Mesoporous silicon engineered by the reduction of biosilica from rice husk as a high-performance anode for lithium-ion batteries, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(26), 10145–10149 RSC .
A. Su, J. Li, J. Dong, D. Yang, G. Chen and Y. Wei, An Amorphous/Crystalline Incorporated Si/SiOx Anode Material Derived from Biomass Corn Leaves for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Small, 2020, 16(24), 2001714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuang, D. Xu, W. Chen, X. Huang, L. Sun, X. Cai and X. Yu, In situ construction of bamboo charcoal derived SiOx embedded in hierarchical porous carbon framework as stable anode material for superior lithium storage, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 521, 146497 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, A review of high energy density lithium–air battery technology, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44(1), 5–22 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grande, E. Paillard, J. Hassoun, J. B. Park, Y. J. Lee, Y. K. Sun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, The lithium/air battery: still an emerging system or a practical reality?, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(5), 784–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and H. Zhou, A reversible long-life lithium–air battery in ambient air, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Zhao, N. Deng, J. Yan, W. Kang, J. Ju, Y. Ruan, X. Wang, X. Zhuang, Q. Li and B. Cheng, A review on anode for lithium–sulfur batteries: Progress and prospects, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 347, 343–365 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, T. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Nai, Y. Wang, W. Zhang and X. Tao, A review of biomass materials for advanced lithium–sulfur batteries, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10(32), 7484–7495 RSC .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, A critical review on lithium–air battery electrolytes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(7), 2801–2822 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Luo, C. Wang, Y. Li, C. Chen, J. Song, J. Dai, E. M. Hitz, S. Xu and C. Yang, High-capacity, low-tortuosity, and channel-guided lithium metal anode, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114(14), 3584–3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, X. Chen, G. Zheng, X. Yu, S. Jiang, Z. Cui, L. Du and S. Liao, Dendrite-free composite Li anode assisted by ag nanoparticles in a wood-derived carbon frame, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(20), 18361–18367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Huang, S. Zhang and Y. Hou, Sulfur hosts against the shuttle effect, Small Methods, 2018, 2(6), 1700345 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, T. Schulli and L. Wang, Stabilizing high-voltage cathode materials for next-generation Li-ion batteries, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36(1), 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, W. Lv, C. Zhang, D. W. Wang, G. Ling, Y. He, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Functional carbons remedy the shuttling of polysulfides in lithium–sulfur batteries: confining, trapping, blocking, and breaking up, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(38), 1800508 CrossRef .
L. Hencz, H. Chen, H. Y. Ling, Y. Wang, C. Lai, H. Zhao and S. Zhang, Housing sulfur in polymer composite frameworks for Li–S batteries, Nanomicro Lett., 2019, 11(1), 17 CAS .
H. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Guo, Advances in polar materials for lithium–sulfur batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(38), 1707520 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, M. Yang, N. Yang, J. Wang and D. Wang, Hollow micro-/nanostructure reviving lithium–sulfur batteries, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Emerging applications of biochar-based materials for energy storage and conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(6), 1751–1779 RSC .
L. Hencz, X. Gu, X. Zhou, W. Martens and S. Zhang, Highly porous nitrogen-doped seaweed carbon for high-performance lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52(20), 12336–12347 CrossRef CAS .
A. Benítez, J. Morales and Á. Caballero, Pistachio Shell-Derived Carbon Activated with Phosphoric Acid: A More Efficient Procedure to Improve the Performance of Li–S Batteries, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(5), 840 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Guo, C. Liang, J. Yang, J. Wang and Y. Nuli, Confining small sulfur molecules in peanut shell-derived microporous graphitic carbon for advanced lithium sulfur battery, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, J. Du, H. Xiao, W. Zhang and Y. Gan, Bio-inspired fabrication of carbon nanotiles for high performance cathode of Li–S batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(7), 2290–2296 RSC .
X. Gu, Y. Wang, C. Lai, J. Qiu, S. Li, Y. Hou, W. Martens, N. Mahmood and S. Zhang, Microporous bamboo biochar for lithium–sulfur batteries, Nano Res., 2015, 8(1), 129–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. Konarov, Z. Li and P. Chen, Effect of mesoporous carbon microtube prepared by carbonizing the poplar catkin on sulfur cathode performance in Li/S batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 619, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, H. Li, H. Wen, Y. Zhou, H. Kang, H. Liao, M. Gao, Y. Wang, L. Deng and X. Yi, From agaric hydrogel to nitrogen-doped 3D porous carbon for high-performance Li–S batteries, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55(3), 1136–1147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Guo, B. Zhang, G. Wen, R. Vajtai, L. Wu, P. M. Ajayan and L. Wang, Sustainable Synthesis of N-Doped Hollow Porous Carbon Spheres via a Spray-Drying Method for Lithium-Sulfur Storage with Ultralong Cycle Life, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3(11), 1201–1208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Li, C. Qin and Z. Bakenov, High specific surface area bimodal porous carbon derived from biomass reed flowers for high performance lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 569, 22–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Chung, C.-H. Chang and A. Manthiram, A carbon-cotton cathode with ultrahigh-loading capability for statically and dynamically stable lithium–sulfur batteries, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(11), 10462–10470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Arie, H. Kristianto, E. C. Cengiz and R. Demir-Cakan, Activated porous carbons originated from the Indonesian snake skin fruit peel as cathode components for lithium sulfur battery, Ionics, 2019, 25(5), 2121–2129 CrossRef CAS .
X.-R. Han, X.-T. Guo, M.-J. Xu, H. Pang and Y.-W. Ma, Clean utilization of palm kernel shell: sustainable and naturally heteroatom-doped porous activated carbon for lithium–sulfur batteries, Rare Met., 2020, 39(9), 1099–1106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Xiang, Z. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Xu and G. Du, Biomass derived activated carbon with 3D connected architecture for rechargeable lithium−sulfur batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, Y. Choi, J.-K. Kim, S.-J. Lee, J. S. Bae and E. D. Jeong, Biomass-garlic-peel-derived porous carbon framework as a sulfur host for lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 94, 272–281 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Arie, H. Kristianto, W. Prijadi, R. F. Susanti and J. K. Lee, Onion Peel Based Porous Carbons As Cathode Components for LiS Battery, ECS Trans., 2020, 97(7), 111 CrossRef CAS .
M. del Carmen Rojas, M. L. N. Lobos, M. L. Para, M. E. G. Quijón, O. Cámara, D. Barraco, E. L. Moyano and G. L. Luque, Activated carbon from pyrolysis of peanut shells as cathode for lithium–sulfur batteries, Biomass Bioenergy, 2021, 146, 105971 CrossRef .
R. Khatoon, S. Attique, R. Liu, S. Rauf, N. Ali, L. Zhang, Y.-J. Zeng, Y. Guo, Y. V. Kaneti and J. Na, Carbonized Waste Milk Powders as Cathodes for Long-Term Stable Lithium–Sulfur Batteries with Ultra-Large Capacity and High Initial Coulombic Efficiency, Green Energy Environ., 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.gee.2021.01.007 .
A. A. Arie, H. Kristianto, E. C. Cengiz and R. Demir-Cakan, Waste tea-based porous carbon–sulfur composite cathodes for lithium–sulfur battery, Ionics, 2020, 26(1), 201–212 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, Y.-W. Lin and S.-M. Lee, Manipulation of surface microstructures of porous carbon derived from waste tea leaves for lithium sulfur batteries, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 400, 126228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Li, W. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Gao, X. Xiong, A. Wang, K. Yuan, Y. Huang and F. Wang, A novel porous nanocomposite of sulfur/carbon obtained from fish scales for lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(10), 3334–3339 RSC .
R. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Liu, L. Chen, W. Yu, Y. Yan, Z. Feng and Y. Xu, Decalcified fish scale-based sponge-like nitrogen-doped porous carbon for lithium–sulfur batteries, Ionics, 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
H. Yao, G. Zheng, W. Li, M. T. McDowell, Z. Seh, N. Liu, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, Crab shells as sustainable templates from nature for nanostructured battery electrodes, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(7), 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Eggshell membrane-derived polysulfide absorbents for highly stable and reversible lithium–sulfur cells, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2(10), 2248–2252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Y. Xia and Z. Yu, Pig bone derived hierarchical porous carbon and its enhanced cycling performance of lithium–sulfur batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(3), 736–740 RSC .
A. Y. Tesio, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, J. Morales and A. Caballero, Simple and Sustainable Preparation of Nonactivated Porous Carbon from Brewing Waste for High-Performance Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13(13), 3439–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, Y. Liu, J. Fu, X. Wang, T. Zhang, S. Wang, F. Hou and J. Liang, A wheat flour derived hierarchical porous carbon/graphitic carbon nitride composite for high-performance lithium–sulfur batteries, Carbon, 2020, 170, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, H. Zhu, W. Luo, F. Shen, X. Fan, J. Dai, Y. Liang, C. Wang and L. Hu, Atomic-layer-deposition functionalized carbonized mesoporous wood fiber for high sulfur loading lithium sulfur batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(17), 14801–14807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Razaq, N. Zhang, Y. Xin, Q. Li, J. Wang and Z. Zhang, Dense MoS2 Micro-Flowers Planting on Biomass-Derived Carbon Fiber Network for Multifunctional Sulfur Cathodes, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5(25), 7563–7570 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Pu, J. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Tang, Z. Deng, X. Tao, F. Pan and H. Zhang, Biomimetic bipolar microcapsules derived from Staphylococcus aureus for enhanced properties of lithium–sulfur battery cathodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(12), 1702373 CrossRef .
Y. Zhuang, J. Ma, J. Chen, Z. Shi, F. Leng and W. Feng, Fabrication and electrochemical applications of the Co-embedded N&P-codoped hierarchical porous carbon host from yeast for Li–S batteries, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 545, 148936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faheem, W. Li, N. Ahmad, L. Yang, M. K. Tufail, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, R. Chen and W. Yang, Chickpea derived Co nanocrystal encapsulated in 3D nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon: Pressure cooking synthetic strategy and its application in lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 585, 328–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lei, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Luo, P. Xia, Y. Zou, Z. Ma, Y. Pan and S. Lin, Facile synthesis of Fe3C nano-particles/porous biochar cathode materials for lithium sulfur battery, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 853, 157024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jing, P. Ding, Y. Zhang, H. Liang, S. Yin and P. Tsiakaras, Lithium–sulfur battery cathodes made of porous biochar support CoFe@NC metal nanoparticles derived from Prussian blue analogues, Ionics, 2019, 25(11), 5297–5304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, S. Deng, J. Zhan, R. Fang, Y. Xia, X. Wang, Q. Zhang and J. Tu, Popcorn inspired porous macrocellular carbon: rapid puffing fabrication from rice and its applications in lithium–sulfur batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(1), 1701110 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, G. Cui and L. Chen, Biomass-derived materials for electrochemical energy storages, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 136–164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. Zhang, A review of recent developments in membrane separators for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(12), 3857–3886 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Kong, C. Zhang, S. Pang, L. Yue, X. Wang, J. Yao and G. Cui, Renewable and superior thermal-resistant cellulose-based composite nonwoven as lithium-ion battery separator, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(1), 128–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Liu, M. Guan, Z. Shang, Y. Sun, Z. Lu, H. Li, X. An and H. Liu, Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) as a pore size mediator in the preparation of thermally resistant separators for lithium ion batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(4), 4838–4844 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Chun, E.-S. Choi, E.-H. Lee, J. H. Kim, S.-Y. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Eco-friendly cellulose nanofiber paper-derived separator membranes featuring tunable nanoporous network channels for lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(32), 16618–16626 RSC .
Q. Xu, Q. Kong, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, R. Liu, L. Yue and G. Cui, Polydopamine-coated cellulose microfibrillated membrane as high performance lithium-ion battery separator, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(16), 7845–7850 RSC .
J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, E.-S. Choi, H. K. Yu, J. H. Kim, Q. Wu, S.-J. Chun, S.-Y. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Colloidal silica nanoparticle-assisted structural control of cellulose nanofiber paper separators for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 533–540 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Q. Kong, Z. Liu, X. Wang, R. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Yue, Y. Duan and G. Cui, Cellulose/polysulfonamide composite membrane as a high performance lithium-ion battery separator, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2(2), 194–199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Sun, Z. Hu, C. Yuan and C. Chen, Rice paper as a separator membrane in lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, D. H. Kim, S. H. Joo, B. Choi, A. Cha, K. M. Kim, T.-H. Kwon, S. K. Kwak, S. J. Kang and J. Jin, Hierarchical chitin fibers with aligned nanofibrillar architectures: a nonwoven-mat separator for lithium metal batteries, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 6114–6121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wen, J. Zhang, J. Chai, J. Ma, L. Yue, T. Dong, X. Zang, Z. Liu, B. Zhang and G. Cui, Sustainable and superior heat-resistant alginate nonwoven separator of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li batteries operated at 55 °C, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(4), 3694–3701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Yu, W. Li, M. Dirican, Y. Liu and X. Zhang, Interlayer design based on carbon materials for lithium–sulfur batteries: a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(21), 10709–10735 RSC .
X. Gu, C. Lai, F. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Hou and S. Zhang, A conductive interwoven bamboo carbon fiber membrane for Li–S batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(18), 9502–9509 RSC .
L. Chai, J. Wang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Yu and L. Mai, Porous carbonized graphene-embedded fungus film as an interlayer for superior Li–S batteries, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tu, X. Chen, X. Zhao, M. Cheng, P. Xiong, Y. He, Q. Zhang and Y. Xu, A Polysulfide-Immobilizing Polymer Retards the Shuttling of Polysulfide Intermediates in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(45), 1804581 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fu, C. Li, Y. Wang, L. Scudiero, J. Liu and W.-H. Zhong, Self-Assembled Protein Nanofilter for Trapping Polysulfides and Promoting Li+ Transport in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(10), 2450–2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Zhang, J. Fang, J. Li, F. Qin, Z. Zhang and Y. Lai, From filter paper to carbon paper and toward Li–S battery interlayer, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, A hierarchical carbonized paper with controllable thickness as a modulable interlayer system for high performance Li–S batteries, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(32), 4184–4187 RSC .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, A natural carbonized leaf as polysulfide diffusion inhibitor for high-performance lithium–sulfur battery cells, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7(6), 1655–1661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Carbonized eggshell membrane as a natural polysulfide reservoir for highly reversible Li–S batteries, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(9), 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, B. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Zhu, H. Zhang, D. Sun and Y. Shi, Flexible cathodes and multifunctional interlayers based on carbonized bacterial cellulose for high-performance lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(20), 10910–10918 RSC .
F. Qin, K. Zhang, J. Fang, Y. Lai, Q. Li, Z. Zhang and J. Li, High performance lithium sulfur batteries with a cassava-derived carbon sheet as a polysulfides inhibitor, New J. Chem., 2014, 38(9), 4549–4554 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Peng, W. Yu, H. Wang, T. Wang, B. Deng, L. Chai, K. Zhang and J. Wang, Preparation of a macroscopic, robust carbon-fiber monolith from filamentous fungi and its application in Li–S batteries, Green Chem., 2014, 16(8), 3926–3934 RSC .
S. J. Zhang, Z. G. Gao, W. W. Wang, Y. Q. Lu, Y. P. Deng, J. H. You, J. T. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Huang and X. D. Zhou, A natural biopolymer film as a robust protective layer to effectively stabilize lithium-metal anodes, Small, 2018, 14(31), 1801054 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Chang, S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Dendrite-Free Lithium Anode via a Homogenous Li-Ion Distribution Enabled by a Kimwipe Paper, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1(1-2), 1600034 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Ling, L. Hencz, H. Y. Ling, G. Li, Z. Lin, G. Liu and S. Zhang, Exploring chemical, mechanical, and electrical functionalities of binders for advanced energy-storage devices, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(18), 8936–8982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, T. Liu, X. Ai and C. Liang, Aligning academia and industry for unified battery performance metrics, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–5 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Zhang, T. Liu, X. Gao, S. Li, M. Ling, C. Liang, J. Zheng and Z. Lin, Silicon anode with high initial coulombic efficiency by modulated trifunctional binder for high-areal-capacity lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(20), 1903110 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shpigel, S. Sigalov, M. D. Levi, T. Mathis, L. Daikhin, A. Janes, E. Lust, Y. Gogotsi and D. Aurbach, 
            In situ acoustic diagnostics of particle-binder interactions in battery electrodes, Joule, 2018, 2(5), 988–1003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, G. Wang, S. Li, T. Liu, J. Qiu and H. Li, Recent progress of structural designs of silicon for performance-enhanced lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 125380 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, A major constituent of brown algae for use in high-capacity Li-ion batteries, Science, 2011, 334(6052), 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ling, Y. Xu, H. Zhao, X. Gu, J. Qiu, S. Li, M. Wu, X. Song, C. Yan, G. Liu and S. Zhang, Dual-functional gum arabic binder for silicon anodes in lithium ion batteries, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, C. J. Tong, B. Wang, L. M. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Lin, D. Wang and J. Lu, Trifunctional Electrode Additive for High Active Material Content and Volumetric Lithium-Ion Electrode Densities, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(10), 1803390 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Q. Chu, C. Yan, S. Zhang, Z. Lin and J. Lu, Interweaving 3D Network Binder for High-Areal-Capacity Si Anode through Combined Hard and Soft Polymers, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(3), 1802645 CrossRef .
J.-M. Kim, H.-S. Park, J.-H. Park, T.-H. Kim, H.-K. Song and S.-Y. Lee, Conducting polymer-skinned electroactive materials of lithium-ion batteries: ready for monocomponent electrodes without additional binders and conductive agents, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(15), 12789–12797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Yang, C. Liu, T. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, D. Luo, F. Pan and Z. Lin, In-Situ Polymerized Binder: A Three-in-One Design Strategy for All-Integrated SiO x Anode with High Mass Loading in Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 290–297 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. Ji, Q. Wu, D. Wei, S. Li, T. Liu, Y. He, Z. Lin, M. Ling and C. Liang, A new battery process technology inspired by partially carbonized polymer binders, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Wan, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, L. Yan, J. Ji, H. Wang, Q. Ma, T. Liu and Z. Lin, A robust network binder via localized linking by small molecules for high-areal-capacity silicon anodes in lithium-ion batteries, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105430 CrossRef CAS .
R. Van Noorden, The rechargeable revolution: A better battery, Nat. News, 2014, 507(7490), 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ogoke, G. Wu, X. Wang, A. Casimir, L. Ma, T. Wu and J. Lu, Effective strategies for stabilizing sulfur for advanced lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(2), 448–469 RSC .
J. Liu, D. G. D. Galpaya, L. Yan, M. Sun, Z. Lin, C. Yan, C. Liang and S. Zhang, Exploiting a robust biopolymer network binder for an ultrahigh-areal-capacity Li–S battery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(3), 750–755 RSC .
T. Liu, H. Hu, X. Ding, H. Yuan, C. Jin, J. Nai, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Wan and X. Tao, 12 years roadmap of the sulfur cathode for lithium sulfur batteries (2009–2020), Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 346–366 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Improve rate capability of the sulfur cathode using a gelatin binder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158(6), A775 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, C.-j. Tong, C. Lai, J. Qiu, X. Huang, W. Yang, B. Wen, L.-m. Liu, Y. Hou and S. Zhang, A porous nitrogen and phosphorous dual doped graphene blocking layer for high performance Li–S batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(32), 16670–16678 RSC .
Y. Jung and S. Kim, New approaches to improve cycle life characteristics of lithium–sulfur cells, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9(2), 249–254 CrossRef CAS .
S.-E. Cheon, J.-H. Cho, K.-S. Ko, C.-W. Kwon, D.-R. Chang, H.-T. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Structural factors of sulfur cathodes with poly (ethylene oxide) binder for performance of rechargeable lithium sulfur batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149(11), A1437 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Application of gelatin as a binder for the sulfur cathode in lithium–sulfur batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53(24), 7084–7088 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, Z. Zhang, Y. Gan, X. Wang and J. Lia, Enhanced cyclability of sulfur cathodes in lithium–sulfur batteries with Na-alginate as a binder, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22(5), 790–794 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, M. Ling, Y. Ye, Z. Li, J. Guo, Y. Yao, J. Zhu, Z. Lin and S. Zhang, Acacia Senegal-Inspired Bifunctional Binder for Longevity of Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(21), 1500878 CrossRef .
X. Fu, L. Scudiero and W.-H. Zhong, A robust and ion-conductive protein-based binder enabling strong polysulfide anchoring for high-energy lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(4), 1835–1848 RSC .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Han Yeu Ling
	Mr Han Yeu Ling obtained his BE (2000) and ME (Hons) (2001) in Materials Engineering at University of Wollongong, Australia. He continued his career in a professional engineering and managing role in consumer electronics and automotive industries before starting his doctoral degree in 2017 at Griffith University, Australia. His current interests include biomaterials, energy storage, manufacturing, and project management.

Hao Chen
	Mr Hao Chen was awarded bachelor's and master's degrees in chemistry from Central South University, China, in 2014 and 2017, respectively. Since 2017, he has been a chemistry PhD student at the School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Australia. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of functional binders, and solid-state electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries and lithium–sulfur batteries.

Tiefeng Liu
	Prof. Tiefeng Liu received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2017. He is currently a professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering at the Zhejiang University of Technology and an external PhD supervisor at Griffith University, Australia. His main research interests are focused on the green design of lithium/sodium-ion batteries and battery recycling.

Shanqing Zhang
	Professor Shanqing Zhang obtained a BSc in Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University (1990), China, PhD of Griffith University (2001), Australia, Future Fellow of the Australian Research Council, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and Fellow of Royal Australia Chemical Institute (FRACI). He is currently the leader of Sustainable Energy Research in the Centre for Clean Environment and Energy and a professor in the School of Environment and Science of Griffith University.

 	Fig. 1  An illustration of the critical challenges (including ionic and electronic conductivity, lithium dendrites, shuttle effects, and volume variation), that could be addressed by the applications (anode and cathode materials, separator and interlayers, and functional binders) of the bio-derived materials (BDMs).	 

 	Fig. 2  Examples of bio-derived conductive frameworks for hosting anode active materials. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of 3D AC-Si composite. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process and synergistic effect of the SiNPs@Lignin composites. (c) Cycling performance of the SiNPs@Lignin composite compared with pure SiNPs and CE of SiNPs@Lignin composite electrode cycled at a current density of 300 mA g−1 for 100 cycles. (d) The optical image of the flexible full battery based on the Si anode. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2017, IOP.	 

 	Fig. 3  Examples of anode materials that extracted directly from the biomass materials. (a) The rice husk (waste) is used as the source of biosilica generated in rice by the unique biological process from silicic acid. This biosilica was transformed via a simple process into mesoporous silica, which is then reduced by a magnesiothermic reaction into mesoporous Si and used as a high-performance anode material for Li-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthetic process of Corn–Si anode material from natural corn leaves, and SEM images of the derived SiO2 precursor and the Corn–Si composite materials. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (c) Scheme of the synthetic process of the SiOx/C (SC) composite from bamboo charcoal. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Examples of lithium metal anodes with help from bio-derived materials. (a) A schematic of the material design and the subsequent synthesis of the Li/C-wood composite from C-wood (left) to ZnO-coated C-wood (middle), and, finally, to the Li/C-wood composite (right). (b) The corresponding digital images of C-wood, ZnO-coated wood, and Li/C-wood (size is 5 mm × 7 mm), showing the successful infusion of Li metal into C-wood. (c–e) The corresponding SEM images of (c) C-wood, (d) ZnO-coated C-wood, and (e) Li/C-wood composite, which indicates Li infused into the C-wood channels completely. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. (f) Schematic diagram of dendrite-free Li composite anode with Ag-wood-derived carbon (Ag-WDC). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of bio-derived materials for LSB cathode applications. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of the carbon-cotton cathode and its electrochemical performances. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) The preparation process of the S/MGC composite from peanut shells. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the puffed rice derived carbon (PRC) fabrication, an optical image of an individual rice, puffed rice, and a series of images of the PRC synthesis process. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Examples of bio-derived separators for LIBs. (a) FE-SEM photographs of PP/PE/PP separator, cellulose-derived CNP separator (IPA–water = 60/40 vol/vol%), CNP separator (IPA–water = 95/5) and CNP separator (IPA–water = 100/0). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.138 (b) Stress–strain curves of cellulose/PSA composite separators with the different mass ratios. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration demonstrating SiO2 content-directed morphological variation in the S-CNP separators and its influence on ionic transport of the separators. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the Li–O2 cell architecture comprised of three layers: 5 μm Li anode/separator/carbon cathode. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Cycle performance of the LNMO/Li cells using PP separator and CA separator at 55 °C. (f) A schematic illustration is demonstrating the capability of carboxyl groups to chelate with Mn2+. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples of bio-derived interlayers for LIBs. (a) A schematic configuration of the Li–S cell with a BCFM interlayer. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Illustration of function of the GFC inserting Li–S batteries to improve the performance of Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the CNF–GA composite. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Illustration of PSNF interlayer for filtration of polysulfides in Li–S cells. (e) Critical properties for achieving a high-performance PSNF. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Examples of bio-derived materials for enhancing the SEI for LIBs. A schematic illustration of the protection of the growth of the Li dendrite by using AG as the protective layer, (a) Cu and (b) AG–Cu electrodes. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. Illustrations of (c) the Li-dendrite growth in the control cell and (d) the dendrite-suppressing behaviour in the KW-protected cell. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Examples of bio-derived binders for the Si anode in LIBs. (a) Giant kelp forest (Macrocystis pyrifera algae) in the Pacific Ocean, photographed near the coast of California, USA. The insets show the chemical structure of mannuronic (left) and guluronic (right) acids. (b) Reversible Li-extraction capacity of nano-Si electrodes with alginate, CMC, and PVDF binders versus cycle number collected for the current density of 4200 mA g−1 for cells cycled in the potential window of 0.01 to 1 V versus Li/Li+. (c) Galvanostatic discharge profiles of the nano-Si electrode at different current densities between 0 and 1 V. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2011, The American Association of the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematics of the concept to address the volume change issue in battery materials. GA with the dual functionality could keep both the strong chemical bonding and the ductile property to tolerate the expansion during lithiation/delithiation processes. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the Si anode using the hard and soft composite binder. The 3D network based on hard and soft polymers conformally coats Si particles for stable cycling performance of anode. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Examples of bio-derived binders for S cathodes in LIBs. (a) Proposed chemical structure of GA with the background of Acacia senegal. (b) The long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the S@GA electrode with the sulfur loading of 75 wt% in sulfur/carbon composites at C/5. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) A schematic illustration of the design strategy for a robust and multi-functional binder (SP-PAA) via the incorporation of two functional materials. (d) Voltage profiles of S cathodes with SP-PAA with high S loading of 5.6 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic of the intermolecular binding effect between GG and XG; (f) schematic of the polymer network formed by the intermolecular binding effect; (g) cycling performance of the S@N-GG-XG electrode with sulfur loading of 11.9 mg cm−2 at 1.6 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
