Recent progress in graphene -based nanomaterials as advanced electrocatalysts towards oxygen reduction reaction  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR33839D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR33839D
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1753-1767Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent progress in graphene-based nanomaterials as advanced electrocatalysts towards oxygen reduction reaction

        
          
            Chengzhou 
            Zhu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shaojun 
            Dong
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: dongsj@ciac.jl.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85689711;   Tel: +86-431-85262101
Received 
      27th November 2012
    , Accepted 20th December 2012First published on 3rd January 2013AbstractDevelopment of state-of-the-art electrocatalysts with inexpensive and commercially available materials to facilitate sluggish cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a key issue in the development of fuel cells and other electrochemical energy devices. Although great progress has been achieved in this area of research and development, there are still some challenges in both their ORR activity and stability. The emergence of graphene (GN) provides an excellent alternative to electrode materials and great efforts have been made to utilize GN-based nanomaterials as promising electrode materials for ORR due to the high electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, profuse interlayer structure and abounding functional groups involved. It should be noted that rational design of these GN-based nanomaterials with well-defined morphology also plays an important role in their electrochemical performance for ORR. Considerable attempts were achieved to construct a variety of heteroatom doped GN nanomaterials or GN-based nanocomposites, aiming at fully using their excellent properties in their application in ORR. In this critical review, in line with the material design and engineering, some recent advancements in the development of GN-based electrocatalysts for ORR in electrochemical energy devices (fuel cells and batteries) are then highlighted, including heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials, GN-based nonprecious hybrid nanocomposites (GN/metal oxides, GN/N-M, GN/carbon nitride, etc.) and GN/noble metal nanocomposites.Chengzhou ZhuChengzhou Zhu graduated with a BS degree in chemistry from Shandong Normal University (P.R. China) in 2007. Then, he moved to Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry as a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Shaojun Dong, majoring in analytical chemistry and materials chemistry. He has coauthored over 30 peer-reviewed publications. His scientific interests focus on carbon and metal nanomaterials for electrochemical applications.Shaojun DongShaojun Dong is a Professor of Chemistry at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She has been a Member of the Academy of Sciences of the Developing World since 1999. She has been on the Editorial and Advisory Board of six international journals: Chem. Commun., Biosens. Bioelectron., Electrochem. Commun., Sensors, Bioelectrochemistry and Talanta. Her research interests concentrate on electrochemistry with interdisciplinary fields, such as chemically modified electrodes, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, bioelectrochemistry spectroelectrochemistry and biofuel cells. She has published over 700 papers in peer-reviewed international journals; the citations by others exceed 12000, with an h-index of 54.
1 Introduction
Graphene (GN), a single layer graphite with close-packed conjugated hexagonal lattices, has attracted tremendous attention and research interest since its discovery in 2004, owing to its exceptional electronic, optical, magnetic, thermal and mechanical properties.1–4 Significantly, this unique structure endows GN with various superior properties such as high electrical and thermal conductivities, good transparency, great mechanical strength, inherent flexibility and huge specific surface area (SSA). With these advantages, the rapid development of GN covers chemistry, physics, biology, materials and related interdisciplinary fields. To date, great efforts have been made to develop GN-based nanomaterials and explore their applications in sensors,5–7 electronics and optoelectronics,8–11 electrochemical energy storage,12–15 efficient catalysts,16–18etc. Among them, the emergence of GN provides an excellent alternative to electrode materials and great efforts have been made to utilize GN-based nanomaterials as promising electrode materials with high performance in the field of energy devices due to the high electrical conductivity, large SSA, profuse interlayer structure and abounding functional groups involved.19–23 Furthermore, GN-based nanomaterials derived from graphene oxide (GO) can be manufactured on the ton scale at low cost, making them potentially cost-effective materials for practical application.24,25
Energy demand is expected to increase considerably in the coming years as a result of population growth and economic development. Therefore, more and more researchers have paid great attention to alternative sustainable energy technologies. Various electrochemical energy devices, such as fuel cells (proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells, direct alcohol fuel cells, enzymatic biofuel cells and microbial fuel cells (MFCs)), solar cells, metal–air batteries, Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors, are of utmost concern. For both fuel cells and metal–air batteries, the key component, the cathode catalyst involving the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), plays a vital role in determining the performance characteristics of electrochemical energy devices, including the power output, open circuit, charge–discharge rate, energy efficiency, cycling life, etc.26,27 Pt is widely used as the cathode catalyst for ORR, but at least two important issues must be addressed before Pt-based catalysts can be commercialized for practical applications.28,29 One is the fact that the sluggish ORR kinetics requires high loading of Pt in the cathode for acceptable power density. Also, the Pt-based electrode materials still suffer from their susceptibility to time-dependent drift and CO deactivation, which greatly decrease the cathode potential and reduce fuel efficiency. Furthermore, the high cost of the Pt-based catalysts, together with the limited reserves in nature, has been shown to be the major bottleneck to mass market fuel cells for commercial applications.30 Under these circumstances, the development of cathode catalysts with enhanced ORR activity is highly desired. Owing to the high cost of Pt and declining activity, alternative catalysts based on non-precious metals (Fe, Co, etc.)31–33 or metal oxides (sulfides) (Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Co3O4, Co1−xS, etc.)34–37 as well as carbon materials 38–42 have been also actively pursued.
Based on the unique properties of GN, considerable efforts have been made to synthesize GN-based nanomaterials with enhanced performance towards ORR. On the one hand, both theoretical and experimental studies have revealed that heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials (nitrogen, boron and sulfur) 20,43,44 can tailor their electronic property and chemical reactivity, as well as give rise to new functions, which were regarded to be a class of promising non-precious electrocatalysts towards ORR. A prominent example is N-doped GN (N-GN) that exhibited high electrocatalytic activity and CO tolerance in comparison to conventional Pt catalysts for ORR, and thus holds great promise to replace noble metal catalysts in fuel cells and other electrochemical devices.30 On the other hand, metal or metal oxide catalysts frequently suffer from dissolution, sintering, and agglomeration during operation of the fuel cells, which can result in catalyst degradation. In most cases, the low electrical conductivity of the electrocatalysts constitutes a major obstacle for their applications because the electron transport in the electrodes would be significantly hampered during the ORR process. Considering the excellent electrical and thermal conductivities and the huge SSA mentioned above, GN-based materials have emerged as new-generation catalyst supports. As an important component within these functional nanocomposites, the introduction of GN could efficiently maximize the electroactive surface area of catalysts, enhance the conductivities and improve their catalytic activity and durability. It is noted that GO, the precursor of GN, possesses good solubility in solvents and provides fertile opportunities for the construction of GN-based hybrid nanocomposites and their potential applications as state-of-the-art electrocatalysts towards ORR. Namely, GN itself can not only serve as a high-performance metal-free electrocatalyst but also be adopted as a novel catalyst support for ORR.
It should be noted that rational design of these GN-based nanomaterials with well-defined morphology also plays an important role in their electrochemical performance for ORR. Considerable attempts were made to construct a variety of heteroatom doped GN nanomaterials or GN-based nanocomposites, aiming at fully using their excellent properties in their application in ORR. In this critical review, in line with material design and engineering, some recent advancements in the development of GN-based electrocatalysts for ORR in electrochemical energy devices (fuel cells and batteries) are then highlighted, including heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials, nonprecious GN-based hybrids (GN/metal oxides, GN/N-M, GN/carbon nitride, etc.) and GN/noble metal nanocomposites (Fig. 1). Finally, prospects and opportunities for future research in this field are also discussed.
 Fig. 1  Various GN-based nanomaterials as advanced catalysts for ORR. 
2 ORR catalyzed by heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials
2.1 N-GN nanomaterials
One of the significant advantages of metal-free catalysts in comparison to Pt-based catalysts is their enhanced durability against fuels like CH3OH and CO, especially in an alkaline medium. Importantly, a great part of metal-free catalysts could facilitate an efficient four-electron path oxygen reduction because of their unique electronic structures. Recent advances revealed that doping carbon nanomaterials with nitrogen atoms was demonstrated to be an effective method to intrinsically tailor their electronic properties, which created novel nanomaterials and expanded potential applications.20,39 It is believed that the superior catalytic capabilities of these N-doped carbon nanomaterials are directly related to their unique nanostructures. Among the N-doped structures, pyrrolic and pyridinic nitrogens were reported to play an important role in the enhanced ORR activity. Several research groups have reported enhanced ORR activities of N-doped carbon nanomaterials. For example, vertically aligned N-doped carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) as ORR electrocatalysts were free from anode crossover and CO poisoning and showed a threefold higher catalytic activity and better durability than the commercial Pt/C catalyst.39
Recent years have witnessed the development of various synthetic routes for GN, including mechanical cleavage, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of GN, epitaxial GN grown on SiC, reduction of GO, and so on.22,45 Among them, reduction of GO has been considered as one of the most efficient methods for low-cost, large-scale production of GN.46,47 Accordingly, there are several methods to synthesize N-GN. In general, these methods can be categorized into two groups. Considering the popular way to preparation of GN involving GO reduction, the post-treatment of GO (GN) with N-containing precursors was widely adopted in synthesizing N-GN. The reduction of GO and nitrogen doping were simultaneously completed in these synthesis approaches. For instance, Woo et al. reported that GN synthesized by reduction using hydrazine exhibited high ORR activity in acid media owing to a large amount of edge sites and pyridinic N sites within the product.48 Besides, various chemical and thermal treatments of GO and nitrogen containing compounds, such as NH3,40,49 melamine, 50,51 pyrrole,52–54 aniline,53 urea,55etc.,56 were directed to synthesize N-GN. A representative example was that N-GN as a metal-free catalyst for ORR was synthesized by heat treatment of GN using NH3. Although 2.8% nitrogen was present in N-GN (Fig. 2), the obtained N-GN had a very high ORR activity through a four-electron transfer process.40 Most importantly, the electrocatalytic activity and durability of this material are comparable to or better than commercial Pt/C. Liu's group successfully prepared N-GN from GO and urea, which exhibited high catalytic activity toward ORR and favored a four-electron pathway.55 It is noted that most N atoms involved were covalently linked to the C in GN, producing N-GN with pyridinic, pyrrolic or quaternary N. Interestingly, researchers observed that poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) could be used as an electron acceptor for noncovalently functionalized CNTs57 and GN58 to impart electrocatalytic activity for ORR in fuel cells. Compared with the commercial Pt/C catalyst, these metal-free electrocatalysts towards ORR possessed excellent fuel tolerance and duality, while their electrochemical activities towards ORR still need to be improved. Therefore, synthesis of GN-based nanostructures for ORR with enhanced activity remains a great challenge.
 Fig. 2  (a) The typical SEM image for N-GN synthesized by heat treatment of GN using NH3 (900 °C). (b) The polarization curves of ORR on N-GN and Pt/C (E-TEK) catalysts. Electrolyte: 0.1 M KOH, scan rate: 5 mV s−1, and rotation speed: 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40 ©2011 the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
In addition to nitrogen doping, accurate control of the fine morphologies of the final products also plays a significant role in enhancing their ORR activities. Due to the nature of the 2D material, GN nanosheets tend to stack together through π–π interaction during the application. The stacking blocks a substantial amount of catalytic sites on GN and inevitably decreases the catalytic activity. In this regard, great contributions have been made to design high-performance N-GN nanomaterials aiming to enlarge the SSA, improve the conductivity and further improve their electrochemical activities. Hu et al. fabricated N-GN with good crystallinity and high SSA (719 m2 g−1) via a one-step ultra-rapid thermal expansion–exfoliation process. The limiting current density of ORR on N-GN was ca. 4 times that on Pt-based catalysts.51 GN-based composite sheets possessing a sandwich structure with one GN layer and two nanoporous N-doped carbon layers were prepared by carbonizing a mixture of GO and phenol–melamine–formaldehyde pre-polymer in the presence of a soft template. The resultant composite had a large SSA of 190–630 m2 g−1 and exhibited high electrocatalytic activity, good durability and high selectivity for the ORR.59 As shown in Fig. 3, Feng et al. successfully synthesized N (S)-doped GN with a high surface area via thermal reaction between GO and NH3 (H2S) on the basis of ultrathin GO–porous silica sheets at high temperatures. Combining nitrogen doping with the high BET surface area (816 m2 g−1), the resulting N-GN showed excellent electrocatalytic activity, long durability and high selectivity when they were employed as metal-free catalysts for ORR.60 Recently, GN-based three-dimensional (3D) architectures, such as foam and aerogel, have received great attention due to the tunable hierarchical morphology with high SSA. These properties have provided a new platform characterized by light weight, high porosity, mechanical stability, and electrical conductivity, thus offering great technological promise for a variety of sustainable applications.61,62 Based on these unique 3D nanostructures, Qu and colleagues creatively synthesized a versatile, ultralight, N-GN framework through thermal treatment of GO and pyrrole and subsequent freeze-drying and annealing. Owing to the synergetic function of the 3D open-pore structure and N doping, this 3D N-GN showed high electrocatalytic activity for ORR.54
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of N and S-doped GN. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 60 ©2012 Wiley-VCH.) 
Aside from the post-treatment of GO and nitrogen-containing compounds, alternative ways involving the direct synthesis of N-GN were also reported. Among them, there are some reports for preparation of N-GN using chemical vapor deposition (CVD).20,63 For instance, Dai et al. in Case Western Reserve University first reported on the use of GN as a metal-free catalyst for ORR (Fig. 4a). They synthesized N-GN by CVD of methane in the presence of ammonia. The resultant N-GN was demonstrated to act as a metal-free electrode with a much better electrocatalytic activity, long-term operation stability and tolerance to crossover effect than Pt for ORR via a four-electron pathway in alkaline fuel cells (Fig. 4b).20 Chen et al. reported an easy-to-operate and low-temperature method to synthesize N-GN in gram-scale quantities using a detonation technique with cyanuric chloride and trinitrophenol as reactants.64 In the neutral phosphate buffer solution, the synthesized N-GN exhibited electrocatalytic activity and long-term operation stability for ORR. Significantly, when the product was applied as the cathode catalyst of MFCs, the obtained maximum power density was comparable to that of the conventional Pt catalyst. A one-step direct chemical synthesis of N-GN based on the reaction of tetrachloromethane with lithium nitride was also reported for use as electrocatalysts for ORR.65 The synthesis methods and ORR performances of heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 4  (a) A digital photo-image of a transparent N-GN film floating on water. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms for ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the C-GN electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-GN electrode (blue line). Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20 ©2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Table 1 Summary of heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials as electrocatalysts for ORR




Heteroatom-doped GN materials
Synthetic methods (reaction precursors)
ORR performance vs. Pt/C
Electron transfer number
Refs.




N-GN
Reduction of GO with hydrazine
N-GN shows almost 50% lower ORR activity of Pt in acid media
Not mentioned

48



N-GN
CVD (NH3:CH4:H2:Ar)
Three times higher current density than that of the Pt/C electrode; remarkably good tolerance to the crossover effect
3.6–4 at −0.4 to −0.8 V

20



N-GN
Exposing GN to N2 plasma
Kinetic currents for N-GN and Pt/C at −0.03 V are 65 and 255 mA, respectively; higher durability
Not mentioned

56



N-GN
Lithium nitride/tetrachloromethane
Lower onset potential than Pt/C
Not mentioned

65



N-GN
Detonation technique (cyanuric chloride and trinitrophenol)
Comparable current density and onset potential and good stability
3.69

64



N-GN
Heating GO under NH3 and Ar
Comparable onset potentials and limited diffusion currents and better durability
3.8 at −0.5 V (0.1 M KOH)

40



N-GN
Solution casting and heat treatment (4-aminobenzoyl edge-functionalized graphite)
Not mentioned
3.2–3.5 (0.1 M KOH)

66



N-GN
CVD (C2H4:H2: NH3:He)
Lower onset potential and current density
2 (0.1 M KOH)

63



N-GN
Post-heating the GN under NH3 and Ar
Not mentioned
0.99 (0.1 M LiPF6 in TEGDME)

49



N-GN
Pyrolysis of GO with melamine
Lower onset potential and current density; higher durability
3.3–3.7 at −1 to −0.3 V (0.1 M KOH)

50



N-GN
Pyrolysis of GO with urea
High stability
4.0–3.6 at −0.5 to 1.0 V (0.1 M KOH)

55



N-GN
Thermal treatment of GN/PPy
Higher onset potential, lower limiting current density and superior fuel tolerance and durability
3.7 at −0.65 V (0.1 M KOH)

52



N-GN
Rapid treatment of GO/melamine
Four times higher current density, lower onset potential
4 (0.1 M KOH)

51



N-GN
Heating GN under NH3
Lower activity (lower onset potential)
Not mentioned

67



N-GN
Hydrothermal treatment of GO and dicyandiamide
Lower activity but higher tolerance and durability
4.1 at −0.5 V (0.1 M KOH)

68



N-GN
Hydrothermal treatment of GO and pyrrole
Lower onset potential but higher current density ranging from −0.4 to −0.8 V
3.7 (0.1 M KOH)

54



N-GN
Electrochemical process
Comparable onset potential and higher tolerance and durability
3.6–4.4 at −0.3 to −0.6 V (0.1 M KOH)

69



N(S)-GN
Thermal reaction of GO and NH3(H2S) on the basis of ultrathin GO–porous silica sheets
Comparable onset potential and higher kinetic current density at −0.5 V
∼3.3 (0.1 M KOH)

60



I-GN
Annealing of GO and iodine
Comparable onset potential and higher current density
3.86 at −0.30 V (0.1 M KOH)

70



B-GN
Thermal-annealing of GO and B2O3
Good fuel tolerance and durability
3.5 over −0.4 to −0.9 V (0.1 M KOH)

44



S-GN
Annealing of GO and benzyl disulfide in argon
Comparable onset potential and higher current density at −0.8 V
3.82 at −0.30 V (0.1 M KOH)

71



SN-GN
Annealing of GO/SiO2, benzyl disulfide and melamine
Comparable onset potential and higher kinetic current density at −0.6 V
3.3–3.6 (0.1 M KOH)

43



BN-GN
Thermal annealing of GO in the presence of boric acid and ammonia
Comparable onset potential and higher fuel tolerance and durability
Close to 4 (0.1 M KOH)

72





Although N incorporation is an indispensable factor for the enhanced electrocatalytic activity in N-doped carbons, there is still a controversy on the role of N heteroatom in ORR. However, it is generally accepted that the nitrogen doping facilely modifies materials intrinsically, tailors electronic properties, manipulates surface chemistry and produces local changes to the elemental composition of host materials, which consequently improve the electrocatalytic activity as well. Dai et al. reported that N-doped carbon nanomaterials (GN, CNTs) display higher catalytic activity because of the presence of pyridinic and pyrrolic N species.20,39 In the meantime, quantum mechanics calculations indicated that the high electron affinity of N in the framework can induce positive charge density on an adjacent C atom, which can facilitate oxygen adsorption and subsequently weaken the bonding in the oxygen molecule. Similar conclusions have been arrived at by other research groups.50,66 However, Lin et al. used a CVD method to produce N-GN with pyridinic-N as the dominant dopant. They found that the pyridinic N may not be an effective promoter for ORR activity of carbon materials as previously expected.63 Kurungot and colleagues gave strong evidence that the pyrrolic-N is essential for oxygen adsorption and reduction to water through a four electron mechanism.63 In contrast, Sun et al. confirmed that low nitrogen containing GN (2.8%) showed a very high ORR activity through a four-electron transfer process and quaternary type nitrogen species seemed to play the most important role in ORR activity.40 In light of these conflicting results, Ruoff et al. systematically studied the mechanism on the ORR active sites of N-GN.53 They came to the conclusion that the electrocatalytic activity of N-GN is highly dependent on the graphitic-N content while pyridinic-N species improve the onset potential for ORR. Furthermore, the total atomic content of N in GN did not play an important role in the ORR process. Graphitic-N can greatly increase the limiting current density, while pyridinic N species might convert the ORR reaction mechanism from a 2e dominated process to a four-electron dominated one.53 Obviously, the synergistic effect among these N-containing species within GN was attributed to the enhanced electrochemical activity towards ORR. However, the detailed mechanism should be deeply explored.
2.2 Other heteroatom-doped GN nanomaterials
Uncovering this new ORR mechanism in N-GN is significant as the same principle could be applied to the development of various other metal-free heteroatom-doped catalysts for ORR. In fact, GO could be regarded as the most common O-doped GN due to the large amounts of oxygen-containing groups involved. Considering the similar electronegativity of oxygen and nitrogen, the effects of oxygen-containing functional groups of nanostructured carbon materials on ORR were intensely investigated. It is found that GO integrating with electronically conductive CNTs was explored as an efficient metal-free catalyst for ORR.73 Similar to N-GN, other heteroatom (such as B, S, I and Se)-doped or dual doped GN was also investigated as a metal-free electrocatalyst for ORR.44,70,71,74 It is noticed that there were only a few reports focusing on the synthesis and application of B-doped GN (B-GN) due to the difficulties in synthesis. Xia et al. synthesized B-GN via thermal-annealing of GO in the presence of B2O3.44 As a result, B doping can tailor the electronic structures of GN and consequently improves the electrocatalytic activity towards ORR. As for the mechanism, they proposed that electron-deficient boron atoms doped in GN may function as active sites for oxygen adsorption, activating the O–O bond cleavage. S-GN as an efficient metal-free cathode catalyst for ORR was also reported via annealing of GO and benzyl disulfide.71 As such, the obtained S-GN can also exhibit better catalytic activity than commercial Pt/C in alkaline media. Compared with the small change of atomic charge distribution for S-GN, spin density is the dominant factor to regulate the observed ORR activity in S-GN. I-GN has been also successfully fabricated by annealing GO and iodine.70 GN with a positive charge induced by the electron transfer between atomic iodine and GN is very favorable for adsorbing O2 onto the surface of GN and then promoting ORR.
Recently, Dai et al. in Case Western Reserve University successfully synthesized vertically aligned carbon nanotubes codoped with N and B (VA-BCN) and demonstrated a significantly improved electrocatalytic activity toward ORR.75 Inspired by this interesting finding, they developed a facile approach to BCN GN with tunable N-/B-doping levels through thermal annealing of GO in the presence of boric acid and ammonia instead of the CVD method.72 Due to a synergetic effect arising from N and B codoping, the resultant BCN GN showed enhanced ORR electrocatalytic activities even better than commercial Pt/C. Significantly, the doping-level-dependent electrocatalytic activity was also confirmed by the energy bandgap, spin density, and charge density calculated by the first principles calculations.72 To gain insight into the synergistic effects originating from multiple-element doping, another example is the synthesis of N and S dual-doped GN (N-S-GN) without the formation of any side products (Fig. 5).43 On the one hand, the dual activation of C atoms originated from N and S efficiently enhanced the electrochemical performance, which was evidenced by both experimental data and quantum chemistry calculations. On the other hand, the large mesopores created by the colloidal silica nanoparticles (NPs) are also favorable for ORR since they facilitate mass transfer. The as-synthesized N-S-GN exhibited excellent catalytic activity including a highly positive onset potential and very high kinetic limiting current, which makes it closely comparable to the commercial Pt/C catalyst.43
 Fig. 5  Fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous GN nanosheets from GN. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 43 ©2012 Wiley-VCH.) 
3 ORR catalyzed by GN-based nonprecious hybrids
3.1 GN/metal oxide (sulfide) nanocomposites
Metal oxides (sulfides) are the class of the most pursued alternative electrocatalysts for ORR.37,76–78 As mentioned above, metal oxides frequently suffer from dissolution, sintering, and agglomeration during their electrochemical operation, which can result in catalyst degradation. In searching for more robust and practical catalysts with comparative or even better catalytic performance than Pt, metal oxides supported on GN have attracted much attention. Low intrinsic electrical conductivity of metal oxides can be remarkably improved, which favors their ORR activities. Recent studies on GN–metal interactions revealed that there often exists a charge transfer across the GN–metal interface, depending on the GN–metal spacing and the Fermi level difference between GN and the metal.79 In other words, the synergetic chemical coupling effects between GN and the metal oxides (sulfide) were beneficial to the enhanced electrocatalytic activity on GN supported nanomaterials. Furthermore, it should be noted that further modification of GN, such as heteroatom doping and morphology regulation, could also boost the ORR activity of the as-synthesized nanocomposites.80 Tremendous progress has been made in GN/metal oxide catalysts for ORR. These novel nanostructures possess high ORR activities as well as favorable durabilities, which can compete with commercial Pt and make them highly promising electrode materials in fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
Compared with pure N-GN nanomaterials, controlling the synthesis of GN/metal oxides was limited to the solution reaction based on GO and metal precursors through in situ chemical deposition and direct self-assembly method. Given the large number of functional groups in GO, such as –OH, –COOH, and epoxides, interactions between the metal precursors and functional groups on GO facilitated the nucleation and formation of oxide NPs in solution. A notable contribution by Dai's group in Stanford University was that they reported a series of nanocomposites consisting of Co3O4,80 Mn3O4 (ref. 81) MnCo2O4 (ref. 82) and Co1−xS (ref. 37) nanocrystals grown on GN as an excellent catalyst for ORR (Fig. 6). For example, controlled nucleation of Co3O4 on GO sheets was achieved by the slow hydrolysis of Co(OAc)2 in an ethanol–H2O system and subsequent hydrothermal reaction.80 Moreover, they found that the performance of the hybrid catalyst was greatly enhanced with Co3O4/N-GN made by adding NH4OH during synthesis to afford N-doping in GN. The obtained Co3O4/N-GN favored a four-electron oxygen reduction process, similar to ORR catalysed by a high-quality commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 6a and d). As such, they also successfully fabricated well-defined GN/MnCo2O4 (Fig. 6b and e) and GN/Mn3O4 nanocomposites using the similar synthesis protocol mentioned above; both of them showed high ORR electrocatalytic activities and long stabilities in alkaline media and therefore benefit the design of advanced ORR electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage. They also designed a Co1−xS–GN hybrid via a low-temperature solution-phase reaction followed by a high-temperature annealing step (Fig. 6c and f), which afforded unprecedented high ORR catalytic performance among all cobalt chalcogenide based ORR catalysts in acid medium.37 Feng et al. focused on the preparation of Fe3O4 supported on 3D N-GN networks as ORR catalysts with high performance.83 The unique features of GN endowed them with rich macroporosity and multidimensional electron transport pathways via one-step hydrothermal treatment. To tune the size and morphology of the desired oxide NPs and extend the synthesis strategies of GN-based nanocomposites, Sun's group developed a direct self-assembly method to deposit pre-prepared monodisperse NPs on GN.79 They demonstrated that the optimized GN–Co/CoO NPs have a comparable activity to and better stability than commercial Pt/C and may serve as a promising alternative catalyst for ORR in alkaline solutions.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of Co3O4–N-GN hybrid and (d) CV curves of Co3O4–N-GN hybrid in O2-saturated 0.1 mol L−1 KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 ©2011 Nature Publishing Group.) (b) TEM image of MnCo2O4–N-GN hybrid and (e) RRDE voltammograms of MnCo2O4–N-GN hybrid in O2-saturated 1 mol L−1 KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 ©2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) TEM image of Co1−xS–GN hybrid and (f) RRDE voltammograms of Co1−xS–GN hybrid in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37 ©2011 Wiley-VCH.) 
These novel GN/metal oxide (e.g. Mn3O4,84 Fe2O3 (ref. 85) and CoMn2O4 (ref. 86–88)) nanocomposites not only showed potential as efficient catalysts for ORR, but also possessed enhanced discharge capacities in metal–air batteries. Of them, Kim et al. synthesized ionic liquid modified GN (GN-IL) anchoring Mn3O4via a facile solution-based growth mechanism and applied it to a Zn–air battery as an effective electrocatalyst for ORR.84 A four-electron transfer process similar to Pt/C and a maximum peak power density of 120 mW cm−2 higher than commercial cathode catalysts were easily achieved. Dai et al. synthesized a GN–MnCo2O4 hybrid by a two step solution phase method, which exhibited higher ORR performance than commercial Pt/C, carbon black and a physical mixture of MnCo2O4 and GN in aqueous and non-aqueous media. The inherited excellent catalytic activity of the hybrid led to lower overpotential and longer cycle lives of Li–O2 cells than platinum.86 Additionally, the combination of GN with Cu2O,89 MnO2 (ref. 90) and Ni(Cu)-α-MnO2 (ref. 91) was also reported as advanced electrocatalysts for ORR.
3.2 GN/M–N catalysts
Carbon-supported transition metal/nitrogen (C/M–N) materials (M = Co, Fe, Ni, Mn, etc.) have gained increasing attention due to their promising catalytic activity towards ORR, along with the utilization of abundant, inexpensive precursor materials. High temperature heat treatment procedures during the catalyst synthesis process remarkably enhanced the electrocatalytic activity as well as the catalyst stability.92–94 In general, these catalysts can be synthesized by treating precursors containing nitrogen, Fe or Co salts adsorbed on carbon nanomaterials under optimized condition. Besides transition metal macrocycle compounds, proper metal–nitrogen coordination is of great concern in pursuit of catalytically active C/M–N catalysts with high performance.95,96 Accordingly, researchers have developed comparable active C/M–N catalysts to state-of-the-art Pt/C by rational design of the unique nanostructures. Carbon support composes the key issue that contributes to the high electrocatalytic activity for ORR. Based on the attractive properties, research groups have combined GN with M–N to construct efficient catalysts for ORR. One of the strategies was functionalization of GN with transition metal macrocycle compounds to fabricate a good alternative to Pt-based catalysts.97–99 Jeon et al. prepared cobalt[tetrakis(o-aminophenyl)porphyrin] (CoTAPP) covalently anchored carbon nanomaterials (GN, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)) via diazonium salt reactions and compared the electrocatalytic activity for ORR. Among these materials, GN anchored with CoTAPP showed the best electro-catalytic effect and the most efficient electrocatalytic performance for ORR, further illustrating the advantage of GN as carbon supports.97 Noncovalent functionalization of GN with iron tetrasulfophthalocyanine (FeTsPc) is achieved not only to prevent the aggregation of GN but also form an efficient electrocatalyst for the ORR in MFCs. The maximum power density is close to that of a Pt/C cathode.99
N-GN has been shown to possess high electrocatalytic activity and long-term durability when catalyzing ORR. The high surface area of N-GN provides many active sites for coordination with transition metals, which may lead to enhanced electrochemical performance and hence improve catalysis of ORR. It should be noted that N-GN is only active in alkaline solution; the development of efficient GN/N-M catalysts that can function in acidic solutions is also required for the development of practical applications.100–105 Dai et al. in Stanford University obtained CNTs–GN (NT-G) complexes via partial oxidation of unzipping CNTs followed by a high-temperature reaction with ammonia (Fig. 7a–c). The GN sheets contain extremely small amounts of iron originated from nanotube growth seeds, and nitrogen impurities, which facilitate the formation of catalytic sites and boost the activity of the catalyst both in acid and alkaline solution (Fig. 7d and e).106 GN-rich Co–N-CNTs nanocomposites were reported by the graphitization of polyaniline under the catalysis of a cobalt species using CNTs as a supporting template, which exhibited substantially improved activity for ORR in a nonaqueous lithium-ion electrolyte as compared to those of currently used carbon blacks and Pt/C catalysts.107 Feng et al. developed a cost-effective synthesis of N-GN by using cyanamide as a nitrogen source and GO as a precursor, which led to high and controllable nitrogen contents (4.0% to 12.0%) after pyrolysis and showed a stable methanol crossover effect, high current density and durability when catalyzing ORR in alkaline solution.101 Furthermore, Fe-incorporated N-GN showed almost four-electron transfer processes and superior stability in both alkaline and acidic solutions, which surpassed Pt and GN-based catalysts. Nakanishi's group also developed a one-pot and rapid approach to synthesize GN modified with iron and nitrogen, which could be used as an efficient electrocatalyst for ORR in acidic solutions.104 Through thermal treatment of a mixture of Fe salt, graphitic carbon nitride and GN, Fe–N-GN nanostructures were successfully prepared and showed promising ORR activity.100,108 These methods could be applicable for the mass-production of the cathode catalysts for the improvement of the efficiency of fuel cells and other electrochemical devices.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) TEM images of the NT–G material, showing damaged outer walls and exfoliated GN pieces attached to double- or triple-walled CNTs. (c) Chart showing the percentages of iron, nitrogen and oxygen in the final NT–G material measured by ICP-MS and XPS. RRDE polarization curves of Pt/C (black) and NT–G (red) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (d) and 0.1 M KOH (e). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 ©2012 Nature Publishing Group.) 
3.3 Other nonprecious GN-based nanocomposites
Besides the aforementioned promising nonprecious catalysts, several novel nanostructures were further developed towards applications in ORR. Considering the higher nitrogen content including both pyridinic and graphitic nitrogen moieties that resulted in higher number of active sites, carbon nitride (CN) may serve as a potential metal-free catalyst for ORR. However, one of the main reasons for its limited use is that low electrical conductivity blocks electron transfer and consequently decreases its electrocatalytic activity during ORR. To solve this key issue, employment of GN as an excellent support could enhance the performance of ORR.109,110 Feng et al. demonstrated an effective approach for the fabrication of GN–CN nanosheets. As shown in Fig. 8a, mesoporous GN-based silica nanosheets were first synthesized by the hydrolysis of tetraethylorthosilicate on the surface of GO with the help of a cationic surfactant and subsequent heating treatment. Then, pyrolysis of ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride was carried out to form the final product.110 The prominent features of these nanosheets, including their high nitrogen content, thicknesses, high surface areas, and enhanced electrical conductivity, eventually lead to outstanding electrocatalytic activity, long durability, and high selectivity when they are employed as metal-free catalysts for ORR.110 Loh et al. used pyridine-functionalized GN as a building block to synthesize a GN–metalloporphyrin metal organic framework (MOF) (Fig. 8b). The addition of GN changes the crystallization process of iron–porphyrin in the MOF, increases its porosity, and enhances the electrochemical charge transfer rate of iron–porphyrin and shows a facile four-electron ORR process.111 GN/anthraquinone,112 and GN/Co(OH)2 (ref. 113) nanocomposites were also synthesized and used as nonprecious catalysts for ORR, even though the electrochemical performances should be greatly improved. In addition, there are some reports on fabricating GN/enzyme (microorganism) as cathode materials to construct enzymatic (microbial) fuel cells.114,115 For example, Yuan et al. reported a novel one-pot method for biocathode fabrication in MFCs, by which the microbially reduced GN was implanted into a cathodic biofilm, leading to the in situ construction of GN/biofilm composites with a three-dimensional structure. Compared with a carbon cloth-biocathode, the GN-biocathode could enhance the electrocatalytic activity towards ORR, facilitate the electron transfer between bacteria and the electrode and thus boost power density.114
 Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication of GN-based carbon nitride (GN–CN) and CN nanosheets for ORR. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 ©2011 Wiley-VCH.) (b) Synthetic routes to make GN–porphyrin MOF. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111 ©2012 American Chemical Society.) 
4 ORR catalyzed by GN/noble metal nanocomposites
Although great contribution has been made to devise a series of non-Pt electrocatalysts, the demands of the complex four-electron ORR and the acidic environment of the fuel cell electrode pose major barriers to the outright replacement of platinum by a less-expensive metal. In this context, Pt-based nanostructures are still considered to be the most promising for practical application. A number of previous works revealed that the electrocatalytic activities could be improved by tailoring the morphology of Pt-based catalysts. In the meantime, an alternative approach to improved electrocatalytic activity is the use of Pt bimetallic or trimetallic nanostructures, e.g. alloy and core/shell nanostructures, in place of pure Pt. Compressive strain or the electronic effect between Pt and other elements was believed to be responsible for the better activity and durability of the catalysts.
On the other hand, the structures and properties of the catalyst support have a great effect on the activity and durability of the catalysts. To further maximize the activity of Pt-based nanostructures and minimize the use of previous Pt, it is necessary to load these nanostructures with high activity on the surface of supporting nanomaterials with low cost, high surface area, and good electrical conductivity, which not only maximizes the availability of surface area for electron transfer and decreases the aggregation of the electrocatalysts, but also provides better mass transport of reactants to the electrocatalyst. As expected, two-dimensional GN was proved to be the most promising candidate for catalyst support, and its close contact with catalysts is believed to play an important role in activity enhancement of the catalyst. For example, many research groups have developed various GN–noble metal hybrids and successfully used them as advanced catalysts in fuel cells (methanol/ethanol/formic acid oxidation116–118 and ORR119–121), metal–air batteries,122 electrochemical sensors,123–125 and so on. Significantly, GN supports have exhibited superior ORR characteristics and more robust performance compared to those of CNTs and carbon black supported counterparts, indicating the potential application for catalyst supports in ORR.126
Considerable strategies were adopted to synthesize GN–noble metal hybrids, such as solution synthesis,127–130 electrochemical deposition,131,132 thermal treatment,126,133,134 self-assembly GN and noble metal NPs,135–137 and so on.122 Among them, the most convenient way to prepare GN-loaded noble metal catalysts was based on reduction of metal precursor solutions in the presence of GO(GN). However, there are still some issues to address for GN supported catalysts. Chemical methods such as borohydride reduction usually lead to poor dispersion of NPs on GN,138,139 and also hydrophobic GN tends to aggregate through van der Waals interactions. Moreover, during repeated cycling, the dispersion of NPs on GN becomes impaired and NPs eventually agglomerate causing the decay of the overall ORR performance. With the assistance of positive charge loaded polyelectrolytes140–142 and surfactants,139 noncovalent functionalization of GN could be easily realized, which was favorable for the generation of the GN–noble metal hybrids with uniform size of NPs dispersed on the surface of GN.18,139 Yang et al. synthesized GN supported Pt and Pd–Pt NPs, where metal precursors interacted with PDDA-functionalized GO through static interaction and both of them were then reduced simultaneously by ethylene glycol. The obtained catalysts demonstrated an enhanced ORR durability when PDDA is present, strongly suggesting that PDDA plays a crucial role in the dispersion and stabilization of metal NPs on GN.140 Similarly, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)-functionalized GN as a catalyst support for Pt or PtCo nanoparticle turned out to increase the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) by diminishing NPs agglomeration during cycling as well as to maintain excellent catalytic activity for ORR.139
It is revealed that the catalytic properties of noble metal nanostructures strongly depend on their size, shape and composition.143–145 The desired morphology and composition of noble metal catalysts can also be facilely controlled and the catalysts can be synthesized on the GN-based platform.19 It has been known that various bimetallic Pt alloys were more catalytically active than Pt for ORR. Among the Pt alloys, Pt–Co and Pt–Cr appear to be promising ORR catalysts. To date, GN–Pt alloy nanoparticle hybrids reported previously enhanced the ORR activity and exhibited low overpotential for ORR.128,135,139,140,146,147 Ishikawa et al.146 and Choi et al.139 groups succeeded in synthesizing GN/Pt-based alloy NPs respectively by coreduction of metal precursors in the presence of GN. Significantly, ORR activity of GN/Pt3M (M = Co and Cr) was found to be 3–4 times higher than that of GN/Pt. At the same time, lower overpotential than that of GN/Pt was also observed in GN/Pt3M.146 Aside from the electronic effect between Pt and alloyed elements, strong interaction between NPs and GN supports was beneficial to the enhanced electrocatalytic activity as well as long-term durability for ORR.
Assembly of catalyst NPs on the GN surface was developed as an alternative approach to GN/NPs for ORR with optimized catalysis. A facile solution-phase self-assembly method to deposit FePt NPs on the GN surface was developed.148 The desired size and morphology of NPs can be easily controlled, and as a result, their catalytic activity and durability can also be fully enhanced (Fig. 9). Our group succeeded in constructing a hybrid 3D nanocomposite film by alternatively assembling the GN-IL and Pt NPs.137 The newly prepared 3D nanomaterials containing GN-IL and Pt NPs showed high electrocatalytic activity toward ORR. Furthermore, the electrocatalytic activity of the films could be further tailored by simply choosing different cycles in the layer-by-layer process.
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of GN/Fe22Pt78 NPs. (B) Polarization curves for ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution at 295 K. (C) ORR polarization curves of the GN/Fe22Pt78 NPs before and after 10000 potential sweeps between 0.4 and 0.8 V. The potential scan rate was 10 mV s−1 and the electrode rotation speed was 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 148 ©2012 American Chemical Society.) 
It has been demonstrated that the structures and properties of the carbon supports, such as surface functional groups, graphitizing structure, and surface area, have a large effect on the activity and stability of the catalysts. In fact, the efficient immobilization of NPs onto GN with a uniform distribution remains a big challenge because of the inert nature of the graphitized surface of GN. By assistance of the quantities of oxygen containing groups of GO,25 metal precursors were prone to anchor the surface of GN and then metal NPs could be uniformly dispersed within GN. Extensive studies revealed that the oxygen-containing groups, the doping and size of GN have great effect on the catalytic activity and stabilization of the final product. For example, Mu et al. disclosed a bifunctional effect of both graphitization and the oxygen-containing groups on the catalytic activity and stabilization of metal (such as Pt) NPs on GN,149 namely, the optimized O/C atom ratio of GN is approximately 0.14 to obtain high activity and stability of GN/Pt catalysts for ORR. It is clear that the surface oxygen-containing groups can not only efficiently increase the Pt–support interaction and are beneficial for improving Pt NPs dispersion on GN, but also make the GN surface more hydrophilic, and thus maximum catalyst dispersion is expected to be achieved.149 Furthermore, nitrogen doping efficiently introduces chemically active sites for use in ORR which also act as anchoring sites for metal nanoparticle deposition. Ramaprabhu and colleagues prepared N-GN supported catalyst NPs through nitrogen plasma treatment150 and pyrolysis of polypyrrole,147 which showed enhanced performance compared to nondoped GN because of the improved carbon–catalyst binding, high catalytic activity of the N-GN itself, and increased electrical conductivity brought about by nitrogen doping. Theoretical studies of ORR mechanisms on GN supported Pt NPs have already been conducted. Owing to doping and defects, the strength of the Pt–surface bond increased and thus was beneficial to the activities and durability of the catalysts, which agree well with the experimental data mentioned above.151,152 Besides, Sugimoto et al. found that ORR was strongly affected by the size of GN and smaller sized GN afforded higher mass and specific activity towards ORR.153
Due to the nature of the 2D material, GN nanosheets tend to stack together through the strong van der Waals interactions, even when they are loaded with metal catalysts. In this case, the contribution of the GN support to the catalytic reaction remarkably decreased in that the stacking blocked a substantial amount of catalytic sites and induced higher resistance for the diffusion of reactant molecules. Therefore, great efforts have been made to design high-performance GN/metal NPs aiming to enlarge the SSA, control the layer stacking and distribution of GN and widen the potential applications and thus enhance the electrocatalytic performances for ORR. A typical example is that hybrid composite materials prepared by mixing well carbon black (CB) with Pt-loaded GN could efficiently prevent the stacking of GN and promote diffusion of oxygen molecules through the GN nanosheets and enhancing the ORR electrocatalytic activity.136 It is suggested that the unique 2D profile of GN functioned as a barrier, preventing leaching of Pt into the electrolyte, and the CB in the vicinity acted as active sites to recapture/renucleate the dissolved Pt species. The accelerated durability test (ADT) demonstrates that the hybrid supporting material can dramatically enhance the durability of the catalyst and retain the ECSA of Pt. Electrochemical synergies between GN and CNTs for processing GN–CNTs hybrids have been reported previously.154,155 Exploring these GN-based multi-component hybrids not only avoids the stacking of GN but also provides functional electrocatalysts for ORR. Zheng and co-workers first developed an efficient approach to prepare GN supported Pt NPs by the direct chemical reduction of a Pt precursor in the presence of GN under CO atmosphere.156 As shown in Fig. 10, GN–Pt NPs impregnated with the ionic liquid [MTBD][bmsi], which is more oxygenphilic and less methanolphilic than the exterior aqueous solution, can exhibit both enhanced electrocatalytic activity and excellent methanol tolerance for ORR.156
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of methanol-tolerant ORR on the GN–Pt–ionic liquid composite catalyst. (b) TEM image of the GN–Pt hybrid. (c) ORR polarization curves for GN–Pt and GN–Pt–IL catalysts recorded at room temperature in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (d) CVs of GN–Pt and GN–Pt–IL catalysts modified GCE in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 1 M CH3OH solution at 50 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 156 ©2012 the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Although Pt and Pt alloys are the most active catalysts for ORR, further exploring other noble metals, such as Au, Pd and their alloys as advanced catalysts for ORR, is of significance in both fundamental research and applied technology. In general, GN–Au hybrids cannot compete with Pt-based electrocatalysts for ORR.132,157,158 Very recently, Tang et al. presented a novel and general strategy to grow ultrafine Au clusters and other metal (Pt, Pd) clusters on GN nanosheets without any additional protecting molecule or reductant. As shown in Fig. 11, Au clusters with an average diameter of 1.8 nm are homogenously dispersed on the surface of GN nanosheets. Owing to the small size effect, clean surface of Au clusters and synergetic coupling effect between Au clusters and GN, the GN–Au cluster hybrids exhibited excellent electrocatalytic performance toward ORR, which has a comparable onset potential to the commercial Pt/C catalyst, but superior methanol tolerance and enhanced electrocatalytic stability.159 Uniformly dispersed Pd NPs with a mean diameter of ca. 1.8 nm can be successfully obtained on GN through chemical synthesis. Compared with GN–Pt hybrids, GN-supported Pd catalysts showed high mass and surface area normalized ORR activity in an alkaline solution.160
 Fig. 11  SEM (A) and TEM (B) images of as-synthesized Au–GN hybrids. (C) Scheme of the catalyzing ORR on Au–GN hybrids and RDE curves of commercial Pt/C, Au–GN hybrids, Au NP–GN hybrids, GN sheets, Au clusters in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scanning rate of 50 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 159 ©2012 American Chemical Society.) 
5 Conclusions and perspectives
The collection of many unique properties of GN, along with the low cost and availability for mass production, has opened up a new research area for materials science and diversified technological applications. Particularly, the incorporation of GN into nanocomposites is an efficient avenue for broadening and enhancing the function and performance in electrochemical energy devices. On the other hand, the rapid kinetics of the ORR at the cathode plays a crucial role in improving the energy-conversion efficiency and enhancing the high energy and power density of these electrochemical energy devices. Therefore, these novel GN-based nanostructures have been actively pursued to serve as the advanced electrocatalyst for ORR. To realize the potential, it is vital to achieve rational design of highly active catalysts for ORR. Herein, we have systematically reviewed the synthesis of GN-based nanomaterials and their applications as efficient catalysts for ORR. It has been explored extensively either as a nonprecious catalyst through molecular engineering or as a unique support for noble metal catalysts. Promising results revealed that the unique properties of GN including large surface area, excellent conductivity and good chemical stability as well as the synergistic interaction between GN and other components were attributed to the high electrochemical performance for ORR. We strongly believe that GN is indeed a promising support to improve electrocatalytic activity and durability for practical catalytic applications.
In spite of significant progress made in the area, synthesis of GN-based electrocatalysts for ORR with high performance is highly desired and remains to be a great challenge. Based on our current understanding, we expect that the following research directions are important to the development of highly efficient GN-based catalysts for ORR. First, as for N-GN, the nature of electrocatalytically active sites facilitating ORR and origin of catalytic reactivity are still controversial. Accurate control of nitrogen content and doping sites in GN materials still needs to be investigated in depth. Also, discussion of the catalysis mechanism for future improvements also needs to be provided. Second, development of facile and effective approaches to prepare GN-loaded nanomaterials is highly desired and remains a great challenge for high-performance electrocatalysts for ORR. Of them, the important issue regarding these hybrids (e.g. GN/metal oxide, GN/noble metals) is accurate tuning of the size, morphology and compositions of electrocatalyst NPs on the GN platform to optimize the ORR performance. Furthermore, stability of the catalyst NPs dispersed on GN during cycling as well as maintaining excellent catalytic activity should also be simultaneously considered. Last but not least, restacking of GN during its processing as a result of the strong van der Waals interactions inevitably decreased the electrochemical performance. Enhancing SSA is favorable for the exposure of the active sites within GN-based nanomaterials and improvement of the oxygen molecular–GN nanomaterials accessibility. Exploring GN-based multi-component hybrids and studying their novel properties could provide a promising perspective to develop advanced ORR electrocatalysts. These classes of GN-based nanomaterials may open new avenues for the development of commercially effective catalysts for broader applications, covering fuel cells, batteries, surpercapacitors, biosensors, photocatalysis, and so on.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos. 20935003 and 20820102037) and 973 Project (nos. 2009CB930100 and 2010CB933603).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang and S. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, D. Wen, Y. Zhai, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3959–3968 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, T. Jiang, C. Zhu, Y. Zhai, D. Wang and S. Dong, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 794–799 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and L. A. Ponomarenko, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ng, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 913–918 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang, L. Han, E. Wang and S. Dong, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 648–657 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 72–75 .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stollers and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, L. Han, C. Zhu, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1153–1162 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. J. Lv, Y. M. Li, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, P. Wang, L. Wang, L. Han and S. Dong, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4376–4382 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, J. Zhai, D. Wen and S. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6300–6306 RSC .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6473–6477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li and Y. Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5851–5857 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
R. Cao, J.-S. Lee, M. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 816–829 Search PubMed .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 52–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli, K. Gong, M. B. Vukmirovic, W.-p. Zhou, E. Sutter, S. S. Wong and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9783–9795 CrossRef .
M. K. Carpenter, T. E. Moylan, R. S. Kukreja, M. H. Atwan and M. M. Tessema, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8535–8542 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 Search PubMed .
Z. Wen, S. Ci, F. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Cui, S. Mao, S. Luo, Z. He and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, X. Yang, X. Ren, B. E. Koel, N. Ramaswamy, S. Mukerjee and R. Kostecki, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7404–7410 CrossRef CAS .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J.-P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 426 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, P. Gao and T. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5333–5339 RSC .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, L. Kuai and B. Geng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19132–19138 RSC .
H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Bi, Y. Zhao, L. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5593–5597 Search PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. G. Chen, Y. L. Li, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, S. Y. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 RSC .
H. Zhu, J. Yin, X. Wang, H. Wang and X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201201643 .
Y. W. Ma, L. Y. Sun, W. Huang, L. R. Zhang, J. Zhao and Q. L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24592–24597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 11664–11668 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, H. L. Gao, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, C. Shan, F. Li, D. Han, Q. Zhang and L. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3880–3882 RSC .
K. R. Lee, K. U. Lee, J. W. Lee, B. T. Ahn and S. I. Woo, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1052–1055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Li, J. J. Wang, X. F. Li, D. S. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 18, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Lin, M. K. Song, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, M. L. Liu and C. P. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3381–3387 RSC .
S. Y. Yang, K. H. Chang, Y. L. Huang, Y. F. Lee, H. W. Tien, S. M. Li, Y. H. Lee, C. H. Liu, C. C. M. Ma and C. C. Hu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 39–42 Search PubMed .
S. U. Maraveedu, S. Devulapally, N. Karjule and S. Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23506–23513 RSC .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 54, 11371–11375 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Lin, G. Waller, Y. Liu, M. L. Liu and C. P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 884–888 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. S. Li, G. C. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7496 RSC .
S. Wang, D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5182–5185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, D. Yu, L. Dai, D. W. Chang and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Sun, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12810–12816 RSC .
S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Maraveedu, S. Devulapally, N. Karjule and S. Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23506–23513 RSC .
L. Y. Feng, Y. G. Chen and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9611–9618 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Deng, X. L. Pan, L. A. Yu, Y. Cui, Y. P. Jiang, J. Qi, W. X. Li, Q. A. Fu, X. C. Ma, Q. K. Xue, G. Q. Sun and X. H. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Jeon, D. S. Yu, S. Y. Bae, H. J. Choi, D. W. Chang, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Nakamura and H. S. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6928–6932 RSC .
Y. Zhang, K. Fugane, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6575–6580 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 15–18 .
Z. Yao, H. G. Nie, Z. Yang, X. M. Zhou, Z. Liu and S. M. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1027–1029 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. F. Li, G. Y. Fang, H. G. Nie, Z. Liu, X. M. Zhou, X. Chen and S. M. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, S. Dong, J. Wang, L. Zhang, P. Han, C. Zhang, X. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Lan and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21051–21056 RSC .
Z. Jin, H. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Xu and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6455–6460 RSC .
S. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. Xue, D. Yu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 77–83 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 26–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, D. Susac, M. Teo, K. C. Wong, P. C. Wong, R. R. Parsons, D. Bizzotto, K. A. R. Mitchell and S. A. Campbell, J. Catal., 2008, 258, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, L. Wu and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11770–11773 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Y. Liang, H. Wang, Y. Li, B. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2012, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, Y. G. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, S. B. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, T. Lee, H. K. Song, J. Cho and B. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4148–4154 RSC .
W. Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, C. Xu, H. T. Tan, W. L. Liu, J. X. Zhu, N. Xiao, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, H. E. Hoster, R. Yazami and Q. Y. Yan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8508–8514 RSC .
H. L. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Y. Liang, G. Y. Zheng, Y. G. Li, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7931–7935 RSC .
L. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. Xu, D. Zhang, R. S. Ruoff, K. J. Stevenson and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1379–A1382 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 305–310 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Yan, X. L. Tong, Y. F. Zhang, X. D. Han, Y. Y. Wang, G. Q. Jin, Y. Qin and X. Y. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1892–1894 RSC .
Y. Qian, S. B. Lu and F. L. Gao, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, W. Lu, S. J. Limmer, P. G. Kotula, A. Thuli, M. Hungate, G. D. Ruan, Z. Jin and J. M. Tour, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7931–7933 RSC .
M. Yuasa, A. Yamaguchi, H. Itsuki, K. Tanaka, M. Yamamoto and K. Oyaizu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4278–4281 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X. Zeng, H.-J. Zhang, Z.-F. Ma and C.-Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1754–1755 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. B. Bezerra, L. Zhang, K. Lee, H. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Shi, A. L. B. Marques, E. P. Marques, S. Wu and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7703–7710 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bashyam and P. Zelenay, Nature, 2006, 443, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kim and S. Jeon, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 141–144 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Hao, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7326–7329 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhang, G. Q. Mo, X. W. Li and J. S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Byon, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3421–3428 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 Search PubMed .
R. Z. Jiang, D. T. Tran, J. McClure and D. Chu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 73–76 Search PubMed .
C. W. Tsai, M. H. Tu, C. J. Chen, T. F. Hung, R. S. Liu, W. R. Liu, M. Y. Lo, Y. M. Peng, L. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, D. S. Shy and X. K. Xing, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1349–1357 RSC .
K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10213–10215 RSC .
J. Y. Choi, D. Higgins and Z. W. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B87–B90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li, W. Zhou, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 Search PubMed .
G. Wu, N. H. Mack, W. Gao, S. Ma, R. Zhong, J. Han, J. K. Baldwin and P. Zelenay, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9764–9776 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Li, Y. Y. Hu, Q. Xu, J. Sun, B. Hou and Y. P. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 265–269 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Ma, L. R. Zhang, J. J. Li, H. T. Ni, M. Li, J. L. Zhang, X. M. Feng, Q. L. Fan, Z. Hu and W. Huang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, X. C. Wang and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, G. Zhang, J. Chen, G. e. Yuan, L. Xu, L. Liu and F. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 69–72 Search PubMed .
J. J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wan and B. R. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhuang, Y. Yuan, G. Yang and S. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 21, 69–72 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, S. Alwarappan, Z. Chen, X. Kong and C.-Z. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1829–1833 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Wu, J. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Xie and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3693–3695 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, T. Cui, M.-S. Jun, Q. Zhang, A. Cao, D. S. Su, Z. Zhang, S.-H. Yoon, J. Miyawaki, I. Mochida and F. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, H. Zhou, C. Li, F. Zeng, C. Fu and Y. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1781–1785 RSC .
J.-D. Qiu, L. Shi, R.-P. Liang, G.-C. Wang and X.-H. Xia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7950–7959 Search PubMed .
W. He, H. Jiang, Y. Zhou, S. Yang, X. Xue, Z. Zou, X. Zhang, D. L. Akins and H. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 265–274 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kundu, C. Nethravathi, P. A. Deshpande, M. Rajamathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Shi, Q. F. Zhou, Y. S. Li and Z. W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8584–8592 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, S. Guo, H. Qin, S. Dong and E. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 799–801 RSC .
F. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi, Z. Wen and Z. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1131–1134 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kou, Y. Y. Shao, D. H. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, J. H. Kwak, J. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, C. M. Wang, Y. H. Lin, Y. Wang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 954–957 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Sun, J. Masa, Z. M. Liu, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6972–6978 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, Q. L. Yue, G. F. Chen, Y. L. Zhai, L. Wang, H. S. Wang, J. S. Zhao, J. F. Liu, J. B. Jia and H. B. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 379–389 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Ha, I. Y. Kim, S. J. Hwang and R. S. Ruoff, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, B70–B73 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, M. S. Ahmed and S. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16353–16360 RSC .
Y. J. Hu, H. Zhang, P. Wu, B. Zhou and C. X. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4083–4094 RSC .
Y. J. Hu, J. A. Jin, P. Wu, H. Zhang and C. X. Cai, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 491–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Seo, S. M. Choi, J. K. Seo, S. H. Noh, W. B. Kim and B. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 129, 163–171 Search PubMed .
S. J. Guo and S. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Li, E. B. Zhu, T. McLouth, C. Y. Chiu, X. Q. Huang and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12326–12329 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7614–7618 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Nam, J. Song, K. H. Oh, M. J. Choo, H. Park, J. K. Park and J. W. Choi, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3739–3747 Search PubMed .
W. He, H. J. Jiang, Y. Zhou, S. D. Yang, X. Z. Xue, Z. Q. Zou, X. G. Zhang, D. L. Akins and H. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 265–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Qiu, G. C. Wang, R. P. Liang, X. H. Xia and H. W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15639–15645 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Zhang, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Nie, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. H. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4600–4605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Gong, Y. Xiong, J. Yang, Y. Gao, Y. Liu, X. Lu and Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6894–6896 RSC .
C. Zhu, S. Guo and S. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9152–9153 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2011, 49, 931–936 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3519–3526 Search PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. He, K. Cheng, T. Peng, X. L. Sun, M. Pan and S. C. Mu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21298–21304 RSC .
R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7114–7117 RSC .
M. N. Groves, C. Malardier-Jugroot and M. Jugroot, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10548–10556 Search PubMed .
D. H. Lim and J. Wilcox, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3653–3660 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, K. Higurashi, K. Fukuda and W. Sugimoto, Electrochemistry, 2011, 79, 337–339 Search PubMed .
S. S. J. Aravind and S. Ramaprabhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3805–3810 Search PubMed .
R. I. Jafri, T. Arockiados, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B874–B879 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Tan, C. F. Xu, G. X. Chen, N. F. Zheng and Q. J. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6923–6927 RSC .
F. H. Li, H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022–4025 RSC .
Q. X. Zhang, Q. Q. Ren, Y. Q. Miao, J. H. Yuan, K. K. Wang, F. H. Li, D. X. Han and L. Niu, Talanta, 2012, 89, 391–395 Search PubMed .
H. Yin, H. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8288–8297 Search PubMed .
M. H. Seo, S. M. Choi, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Chengzhou Zhu	Chengzhou Zhu graduated with a BS degree in chemistry from Shandong Normal University (P.R. China) in 2007. Then, he moved to Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry as a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Shaojun Dong, majoring in analytical chemistry and materials chemistry. He has coauthored over 30 peer-reviewed publications. His scientific interests focus on carbon and metal nanomaterials for electrochemical applications.
Shaojun Dong	Shaojun Dong is a Professor of Chemistry at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She has been a Member of the Academy of Sciences of the Developing World since 1999. She has been on the Editorial and Advisory Board of six international journals: Chem. Commun., Biosens. Bioelectron., Electrochem. Commun., Sensors, Bioelectrochemistry and Talanta. Her research interests concentrate on electrochemistry with interdisciplinary fields, such as chemically modified electrodes, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, bioelectrochemistry spectroelectrochemistry and biofuel cells. She has published over 700 papers in peer-reviewed international journals; the citations by others exceed 12000, with an h-index of 54.

 	Fig. 1  Various GN-based nanomaterials as advanced catalysts for ORR.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The typical SEM image for N-GN synthesized by heat treatment of GN using NH3 (900 °C). (b) The polarization curves of ORR on N-GN and Pt/C (E-TEK) catalysts. Electrolyte: 0.1 M KOH, scan rate: 5 mV s−1, and rotation speed: 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40 ©2011 the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of N and S-doped GN. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 60 ©2012 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A digital photo-image of a transparent N-GN film floating on water. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms for ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the C-GN electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-GN electrode (blue line). Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 20 ©2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

N-GN	Reduction of GO with hydrazine	N-GN shows almost 50% lower ORR activity of Pt in acid media	Not mentioned	
48

N-GN	CVD (NH3:CH4:H2:Ar)	Three times higher current density than that of the Pt/C electrode; remarkably good tolerance to the crossover effect	3.6–4 at −0.4 to −0.8 V	
20

N-GN	Exposing GN to N2 plasma	Kinetic currents for N-GN and Pt/C at −0.03 V are 65 and 255 mA, respectively; higher durability	Not mentioned	
56

N-GN	Lithium nitride/tetrachloromethane	Lower onset potential than Pt/C	Not mentioned	
65

N-GN	Detonation technique (cyanuric chloride and trinitrophenol)	Comparable current density and onset potential and good stability	3.69	
64

N-GN	Heating GO under NH3 and Ar	Comparable onset potentials and limited diffusion currents and better durability	3.8 at −0.5 V (0.1 M KOH)	
40

N-GN	Solution casting and heat treatment (4-aminobenzoyl edge-functionalized graphite)	Not mentioned	3.2–3.5 (0.1 M KOH)	
66

N-GN	CVD (C2H4:H2: NH3:He)	Lower onset potential and current density	2 (0.1 M KOH)	
63

N-GN	Post-heating the GN under NH3 and Ar	Not mentioned	0.99 (0.1 M LiPF6 in TEGDME)	
49

N-GN	Pyrolysis of GO with melamine	Lower onset potential and current density; higher durability	3.3–3.7 at −1 to −0.3 V (0.1 M KOH)	
50

N-GN	Pyrolysis of GO with urea	High stability	4.0–3.6 at −0.5 to 1.0 V (0.1 M KOH)	
55

N-GN	Thermal treatment of GN/PPy	Higher onset potential, lower limiting current density and superior fuel tolerance and durability	3.7 at −0.65 V (0.1 M KOH)	
52

N-GN	Rapid treatment of GO/melamine	Four times higher current density, lower onset potential	4 (0.1 M KOH)	
51

N-GN	Heating GN under NH3	Lower activity (lower onset potential)	Not mentioned	
67

N-GN	Hydrothermal treatment of GO and dicyandiamide	Lower activity but higher tolerance and durability	4.1 at −0.5 V (0.1 M KOH)	
68

N-GN	Hydrothermal treatment of GO and pyrrole	Lower onset potential but higher current density ranging from −0.4 to −0.8 V	3.7 (0.1 M KOH)	
54

N-GN	Electrochemical process	Comparable onset potential and higher tolerance and durability	3.6–4.4 at −0.3 to −0.6 V (0.1 M KOH)	
69

N(S)-GN	Thermal reaction of GO and NH3(H2S) on the basis of ultrathin GO–porous silica sheets	Comparable onset potential and higher kinetic current density at −0.5 V	∼3.3 (0.1 M KOH)	
60

I-GN	Annealing of GO and iodine	Comparable onset potential and higher current density	3.86 at −0.30 V (0.1 M KOH)	
70

B-GN	Thermal-annealing of GO and B2O3	Good fuel tolerance and durability	3.5 over −0.4 to −0.9 V (0.1 M KOH)	
44

S-GN	Annealing of GO and benzyl disulfide in argon	Comparable onset potential and higher current density at −0.8 V	3.82 at −0.30 V (0.1 M KOH)	
71

SN-GN	Annealing of GO/SiO2, benzyl disulfide and melamine	Comparable onset potential and higher kinetic current density at −0.6 V	3.3–3.6 (0.1 M KOH)	
43

BN-GN	Thermal annealing of GO in the presence of boric acid and ammonia	Comparable onset potential and higher fuel tolerance and durability	Close to 4 (0.1 M KOH)	
72


 	Fig. 5  Fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous GN nanosheets from GN. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 43 ©2012 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of Co3O4–N-GN hybrid and (d) CV curves of Co3O4–N-GN hybrid in O2-saturated 0.1 mol L−1 KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 ©2011 Nature Publishing Group.) (b) TEM image of MnCo2O4–N-GN hybrid and (e) RRDE voltammograms of MnCo2O4–N-GN hybrid in O2-saturated 1 mol L−1 KOH with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 ©2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) TEM image of Co1−xS–GN hybrid and (f) RRDE voltammograms of Co1−xS–GN hybrid in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37 ©2011 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) TEM images of the NT–G material, showing damaged outer walls and exfoliated GN pieces attached to double- or triple-walled CNTs. (c) Chart showing the percentages of iron, nitrogen and oxygen in the final NT–G material measured by ICP-MS and XPS. RRDE polarization curves of Pt/C (black) and NT–G (red) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (d) and 0.1 M KOH (e). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 ©2012 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication of GN-based carbon nitride (GN–CN) and CN nanosheets for ORR. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 ©2011 Wiley-VCH.) (b) Synthetic routes to make GN–porphyrin MOF. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111 ©2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of GN/Fe22Pt78 NPs. (B) Polarization curves for ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution at 295 K. (C) ORR polarization curves of the GN/Fe22Pt78 NPs before and after 10000 potential sweeps between 0.4 and 0.8 V. The potential scan rate was 10 mV s−1 and the electrode rotation speed was 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 148 ©2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of methanol-tolerant ORR on the GN–Pt–ionic liquid composite catalyst. (b) TEM image of the GN–Pt hybrid. (c) ORR polarization curves for GN–Pt and GN–Pt–IL catalysts recorded at room temperature in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (d) CVs of GN–Pt and GN–Pt–IL catalysts modified GCE in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 1 M CH3OH solution at 50 mV s−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 156 ©2012 the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM (A) and TEM (B) images of as-synthesized Au–GN hybrids. (C) Scheme of the catalyzing ORR on Au–GN hybrids and RDE curves of commercial Pt/C, Au–GN hybrids, Au NP–GN hybrids, GN sheets, Au clusters in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scanning rate of 50 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 159 ©2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
