Perfecting electrocatalysts via imperfections: towards the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03635H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03635H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1722-1770Perfecting electrocatalysts via imperfections: towards the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology

        
          
            Shilong 
            Jiao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianwei 
            Fu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Shuangyin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Lab for Special Functional Materials of Ministry of Education, Collaborative Innovation Center of Nano Functional Materials and Applications, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan Province, P. R. China. E-mail: zhaoyong@henu.edu.cn
bNational & Local Joint Engineering Research Center for Applied Technology of Hybrid Nanomaterials, Henan University, Kaifeng, 475004, China. E-mail: fuxianwei0423@126.com
cState Key Laboratory of Chem/Bio-Sensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, P. R. China. E-mail: shuangyinwang@hnu.edu.cn
Received 
      16th November 2020
    , Accepted 25th February 2021First published on 25th February 2021AbstractAs a potential energy carrier, hydrogen has surged up the priority list as part of broader decarbonization efforts and strategies to build or acquire clean energy economies. Driven by renewable electricity, electrochemical water splitting (WS) promises an ideal long-term, low-carbon way to produce hydrogen, with the ability to tackle various critical energy challenges. To improve the efficiency of electrocatalytic water splitting, electrocatalysts with enhanced conductivity, more exposed active sites, and high intrinsic activity are crucial for decreasing the energy gap for the rate-determining step (RDS) and subsequently improving the conversion efficiency. The incorporation of multidimensional imperfections has been demonstrated to be efficient for modulating the electron distribution and speeding up the electrocatalysis kinetics during electrocatalytic processes and this is now attracting ever-increasing attention. Herein, in this review, we summarize recent progress relating to the regulation of electrical behavior and electron distributions for the optimization of electrocatalytic water-splitting performance via defect engineering. With an emphasis on the beneficial aspects of the hydrogen economy and an in-depth understanding of electron redistribution caused by defect effects, we offer a comprehensive summary of the progress made in the last three to five years. Finally, we also offer future perspectives on the challenges and opportunities relating to water-splitting electrocatalysts in this attractive field.
Shilong Jiao
Shilong Jiao received his PhD degree in materials science from Shandong University. After that, he joined Prof. Yujia Zeng as a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University (2018–2020). He is currently a lecturer at Henan University. His research interests include the preparation and characterization of nanocatalysts with various defects and the relationships between the structural imperfections and the electrocatalytic performance toward renewable-energy-related reactions.
Xianwei Fu
Xianwei Fu received her BS degree from Shanxi Datong University, Datong, China, in 2013, and a PhD degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2018. Now, she is a full postdoc fellow at Hunan University. Her research interests focus on the fabrication and characterization of low-dimensional materials for electrocatalyst and optoelectronic device applications.
Shuangyin Wang
Shuangyin Wang received his BS degree in 2006 from Zhejiang University and his PhD degree in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a professor at the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are plasma technology, defects in various crystals, and their application in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Yong Zhao
Yong Zhao received a PhD in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. After that, he joined Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto as a postdoctoral fellow in Applied Chemistry at the University of Tokyo (2008–2015). He became a full professor at Henan University in 2016. His research focuses on the mechanisms of electrocatalytic reactions and catalyst innovations in fuel cells and Li–O2 batteries.

Broader context
Versatile hydrogen is deemed to be a crucial energy carrier that can facilitate the decarbonization of hard-to-change sectors and the transition of the global energy system, and it is now enjoying unprecedented momentum due to interest from policy makers and commercial companies. Electrocatalysts with cost-effectiveness, high activity, and long-term stability hold promise for further reductions in the cost of green hydrogen and the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology. The incorporation of imperfections with different dimensions into the perfect lattices of electrocatalysts induces significant perturbations of electronic structures and advantageous binding behavior with key intermediates, as well as lowered energy barriers for rate-determining steps. Here, in this review, we offer a comprehensive summary of recent advances achieved relating to defect-featuring electrocatalysts via defect engineering for the enhancement of the electrochemical conversion of water. Special attention is paid to advanced characterization methods for gaining an in-depth understanding of the electronic effects induced by the imperfections. Then, we offer perspectives and future challenges relating to this promising field from our point of view.

1. Introduction
Anthropogenic CO2 emission has caused catastrophic consequences, including but not limited to climate change, sea-level rise, and damage to human health and food security, which has triggered the worldwide transition towards carbon-free or carbon-negative technologies.1–8 Achieving the goals set by the Paris Agreement, which states a limited increase in global temperature to 1.5–2 °C in comparison with the pre-industrial mean by the end of this century, requires an efficient transformation of the global energy system from the traditional fossil-fuel-based one to a renewable-energy-based scenario.9–13 Powered by renewable electricity, hydrogen (H2) generated from at-scale commercial electrolyzers offers the feasibility of integrating variable renewable energies (VREs), including non-transportable solar power, wind power, tidal power, wave power, and run-of-the-river hydroelectricity, into the energy grid and creating a new downstream market for renewable power at the same time, leading to unprecedented political and business momentum for research into clean hydrogen.14–17 Given the present fact that today nearly all H2 is produced from fossil-fuel-based technologies (mainly natural gas and coal), the manufacture of H2 from low/neutral-carbon energy holds the key to the widespread deployment of H2 during the global energy revolution, which requires a further decline in the production cost.17 Broadly, the cost-competitiveness of hydrogen derived from renewable electricity can be secured by combining high electrolyzer utilization rates and low-price renewable electricity, which necessitates the exploitation of low-cost, eco-friendly electrocatalysts with desired intrinsic activity, long-term stability under harsh operating conditions, and fair price of the stock.16,18–20
It is well documented that the water cycle consists of a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the cathode and an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on the anode of the electrolyzer with a theoretical change in the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of ∼237.2 kJ mol−1, which can be converted to a thermodynamical potential of 1.23 V.21 Principally, the HER involves two-electron transfer while the electron transfer number is four in the case of the OER process, which causes sluggish reaction kinetics and induces large energy barriers, thus slowing down the electrocatalytic overall water-splitting kinetics.22,23 Currently, platinum (Pt)-based nanomaterials represent state-of-art HER electrocatalysts, while iridium (Ir)-based electrocatalysts are used for the counterpart electrocatalytic OER process because of their high intrinsic activity and long-term durability.18,21 However, the scarcity and expense of noble metals severely hamper the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology, which necessitates the importance of alternatives.6,7,24–27 In the quest for the desired electrocatalysts, noble metals, carbides, oxides, hydroxides, sulfides, phosphides, and selenides have been proposed as potential alternatives for the electrocatalytic HER, OER, and overall water-splitting processes.8,18–20,22–24,28–31
Despite the high intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts, various strategies, including but not limited to the incorporation of imperfections, generation of strain, alloying with other species, and hybridization with foreign substances, have been adopted to modify the chemical (composition, valent state, etc.), physical (conductivity, surface area, etc.), electronic structure (band alignment, density of states, etc.), and surface properties (exposure of facets, unsaturated sites, etc.) of the electrocatalysts, aiming for further improvement in the electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalysts.6,7,26,32–36 Among the multitudinous options, defect engineering, which features the intentional introduction of imperfections into the perfect crystal lattice, has demonstrated its significance in tuning the surface composition, electronic structure, charge distribution, and conductivity of the electrocatalysts, and the local environment around the active sites, which is now thriving as a promising protocol for the optimization of electrocatalysts.37 Implantation of imperfections with multiple dimensions exhibits significant influences on the electron distribution around the active sites, which includes: (I) optimizing the adsorption behavior of the intermediates; (II) forming an extra band; (III) facilitating favorable electron transfer; (IV) shifting the d-band center and (V) lowering the kinetic energy gap of the rate-determining step (RDS), thus optimizing the electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalysts towards water splitting.8,22,23,37,38 The importance of imperfections with regard to the modulation of the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts has been intensively investigated, which necessitates a comprehensive summary of recent progress in hopes of the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology.
Herein, we intend to provide an overall review and discussion of the progress that has been achieved regarding defect-featuring catalysts from point defects to bulk imperfections, which are applied in the water-splitting reaction, including HER, OER, and overall water electrolysis. We begin by introducing some discussion of the world's energy status and the important role hydrogen plays in the world energy transition to meet the climate goals proposed in the Paris Agreement. The basic mechanisms of hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution are briefly introduced afterwards. An in-depth comprehension of the defect-induced electronic effect in optimizing the electrocatalytic performance of the electrocatalysts follows after. Next, recent developments regarding the optimization of electrocatalysts via the construction of defect-featuring motifs towards versatile electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, and water splitting will be discussed and summarized. Lastly, insights and perspectives on the challenges and opportunities of water-splitting electrocatalysts will be provided.
2. Overview
2.1 The hydrogen economy favors an energy transition towards a carbon-free society
The prosperity of the modern world promises an increase in demand for energy from today's 600 exajoules (EJ) to 710 EJ by 2050, as estimated by the International Energy Agency, which will cause energy-related CO2 emissions of approximately 33 Gt.15 As a matter of fact, the atmospheric abundance of carbon dioxide has witnessed an annual increase of 1.83 ppm on average as a result of anthropogenic large-scale CO2 emission in the last 40 years (Fig. 1a), leading to 416.39 ppm of CO2 today.39,40 Meeting the climate targets proposed in the Paris Agreement requires the global energy system to transform from the current one that depends largely on fossil fuels (natural gas, petroleum, coal, etc.) to an eco-friendly one that relies on a low/neutral-carbon energy system.14 The versatile energy carrier, hydrogen, which can be facilely stored, safely transported, cleanly consumed without any pollutants, and even generated with zero/negative carbon emissions, could be well placed to play a vital role.16 Currently, hydrogen (over 95%) is mainly produced via an energy-intensive, fossil-fuel-based method and supplied for the ammonia manufacturing industry and oil refining sector, causing tremendous CO2 emissions (Fig. 1b).17 Compared with grey hydrogen (hydrogen produced from steam methane reformation), brown hydrogen (hydrogen produced from the gasification of coal or lignite), and blue hydrogen (hydrogen produced from fossil fuels, but where the emissions are dealt with using carbon capture and storage technology), green hydrogen produced by the electrolysis of water using renewable electricity offers unique advantages as an ideal long-term, low-carbon method of hydrogen production.15 Moreover, the LCOE from renewables has witnessed a sharp decline over the past decade, owing to the improved technology level, enlarged market size, increased competitiveness of the supply chains, and enriched abundance of the developer experience, which makes it comparable to its fossil-fuel-based counterpart (Fig. 1c).41 The prices of electrolyzers and electricity are expected to decline over the next decade, making electrolysis of water for hydrogen production a promising approach for global energy transformation and mitigating the climate crisis.
 Fig. 1  (a) The increasing CO2 equivalent mixing ratio, which mainly comes from the continuous emission of CO2 all around the world. (b) Global annual demand for hydrogen from 1975 to 2018, mainly for oil refining and ammonia manufacture for fertilizers. Reproduced with permission,17 International Energy Agency. (c) The LCOE (levelized cost of electricity) values for projects and global weighted average values for concentrating solar power (CSP), solar photovoltaic (PV), onshore and offshore wind from 2010–2022. Continuously declining renewable electricity prices indicate the potential of electrochemical approaches for solving existing crises. Reproduced with permission,12 International Renewable Energy Agency. 
Multiple sources, including fossil fuels (oil, natural gas, biomass, coal, etc) and renewables (solar, hydro, wind, and nuclear energy as the electricity source and water as the hydrogen provider), are applicable for the generation of hydrogen with different purities, which can be potentially applied in a tremendous number of fields, including buildings, industry, the power sector, transport, and refining (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the value chains of the hydrogen economy also promise manifold alliance patterns of supply, handling, and demand techniques, demonstrating its magnificent potential in shaping future energy scenarios and decarbonizing the current economy (Fig. 2). Hydrogen generated from clean electricity has the technical capability for decarbonization in sectors such as industry, transportation, building, and power, and serves as a renewable feedstock by utilizing renewable electricity. Besides, hydrogen can also enable large-scale integration of renewables and power generation by reallocating energy among sectors and regions, and thus serving as a salutary mediator to enhance the resilience of the energy system.17 Owing to the multidimensional role hydrogen can play in the global energy transition, impressive efforts supported by policymakers and industrial companies are converging on the hydrogen sector, promising at-scale deployment of and continuous investment in H2-related technologies (including hydrogen generation, transportation, and applications), especially the electrolysis of H2O.15 By breaking the O-H bonds in water at appropriate potentials, electrocatalysts that feature high conductivity, excellent intrinsic activity, low cost, and eco-friendliness are desperately desired.21,22,28,30
 Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the hydrogen value chain from supply to end-use. With various sources of production and diverse application scenarios, the hydrogen economy offers manifold combinations of supply, handling, and demand technologies, proving its unlimited potential in the future. Reproduced with permission,17 International Energy Agency. 
2.2 Current status of water electrolysis technology
As mentioned above, today's hydrogen generation depends heavily on fossil fuels (natural gas and coal), which account for over 95% of hydrogen production, causing tremendous CO2 emissions. Direct splitting of water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen has been demonstrated as an advantageous approach for the production of hydrogen, which serves as one of the most established technological options to replace its energy-intensive counterparts. Different electrolyzer configurations, including alkaline (ALK) electrolyzers, polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs), and solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs), have been developed to meet the harsh requirements under industrial operating conditions. The ALK technology is fully mature and is deployed on an industrial scale for the generation of hydrogen. Compared with the mature ALK technology, PEM electrolysis is rapidly emerging and entering commercial applications for its advantageous flexibility and reactivity.16 The improved flexibility of PEM electrolyzers offers beneficial overall economics for power-to-hydrogen, which provides alternative revenue streams from multiple electricity markets as compensation for the high cost of the devices.16 The SOEC technology is a potential game-changing strategy because of its enhanced conversion efficiency in comparison with the ALK and PEM technologies.42 Furthermore, the SOEC electrolyzer offers the possibility of the direct production of synthesized gas from CO2 and steam.43,44 However, its low technological readiness level hampers its large-scale applications, and SOECs can only operate on the lab-scale and small demonstration scales. Herein, in this section, we will take the thriving PEM technology as an example to rationalize the development of high-performance electrocatalysts by analyzing the overall hydrogen costs.
Driven by renewable electricity, the electrocatalytic production of hydrogen by splitting water is now thriving as an alternative to energy-intensive traditional approaches. However, the high cost of the present electrolysis technology has hindered its at-scale application due to the continuing high price of industrial electricity. We have estimated the levelized values of hydrogen using the hydrogen analysis (H2A) production model,45 which offers transparent reporting of process design assumptions and a consistent cost analysis methodology for the generation of hydrogen at central and distributed facilities (Fig. 3a). Focusing on the influence of electricity price and overall cell potential on the levelized prices of hydrogen through polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolysis, we carried out a series of calculations by applying default values in the model apart from the notable industrial electricity prices and the cell voltage of the electrolyzer with an operating current density of 1500 mA cm−2. Benefitting from the continuously declining cost of renewable electricity, we further evaluated the impact of the cell voltage in the two-cent scenario and the ideal renewable scenario. As can be observed, the feedstock cost accounts for most of the levelized value of hydrogen for both central electrolysis and distributed electrolysis, which emphasizes the importance of the decrease in the electricity price (Fig. 3b and d). Currently, the estimated price of hydrogen for central electrolysis is 18.48 dollars per gram ($ per kgH2), which is unacceptable for at-scale applications (Fig. 3b). Furthermore, taking renewable electricity as the main feedstock, the price of hydrogen falls to 5.18 and 7.00 $ per kgH2 for central electrolysis and distributed electrolysis, respectively, making it cost-competitive with the fossil-fuel-based counterpart. Increasing the voltage efficiency of the electrolyzer represents another approach for lowering the cost of hydrogen for both central and distributed electrolysis (Fig. 3c and f). For central electrolysis, the levelized prices of hydrogen are calculated to be 7.31 and 4.48 $ per kgH2 for the two-cent scenario and the renewable scenario when the applied voltage of the electrolyzer reaches 1.50 V which further decrease to 6.85 and 4.20 $ per kgH2 under 1.40 V (Fig. 3c). For distributed electrolysis, the levelized values of hydrogen are estimated to be 9.13 and 6.68 $ per kgH2 for the two-cent scenario and the renewable scenario if the cell voltage is set to 1.50 V and further reduce to 8.66 and 6.01 $ per kgH2 under a potential bias of 1.40 V (Fig. 3f).
 Fig. 3  Cost analysis for current water electrolysis technology. (a) A schematic illustration of the process flow for the electrocatalytic generation of hydrogen. (b) Changes in the levelized values of hydrogen with varying electricity prices where the feedstock cost accounts for most of the cost in central polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolysis. (c) The reduction of the cell potential directly reduces the total cost of electrocatalytic hydrogen in both the two-cents scenario and the renewable scenario for central PEM electrolysis. (d) The feedstock cost causes the high price of hydrogen from electrolysis involving distributed PEM electrocatalytic water splitting. (e) The reduction of the cell potential reduces the total cost of electrocatalytic hydrogen in both the two-cents scenario and the renewable scenario for distributed PEM electrolysis. The hydrogen analysis (H2A) production model is adapted for the evaluation of hydrogen costs.45 
As discussed above, further reduction of the hydrogen cost demands the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts, which could potentially reduce the overall cell potential of the electrolyzer. Multiple methods, including defect engineering, generation of strain, alloying with other species, and hybridization, have been developed and great efforts have been devoted to the optimization of the electrocatalytic performance of electrocatalysts.
2.3 Definition and classification of multidimensional defects
Compared with other energy carriers, hydrogen produced through the low/neutral-carbon approach is a preferential option for decarbonizing these hard-to-abate sectors by storing electrical energy through bond breakage and re-formation during the electrolysis process.17,22 Electrocatalysts with high electrical conductivity, the maximum number of active sites, and optimized electronic structures that facilitate the reduction of the kinetic energy barrier of RDS are in high demand for large-scale deployment of electrolysis technology for hydrogen generation.27,29,36,46 Tremendous approaches, including defect engineering, strain optimization, hybridization, and alloying, have been employed to satisfy the rigorous requirements for the operation of electrolyzers under real industrial conditions by tuning the chemical (composition, valent states, etc.), physical (conductivity, electron/charge transport resistance, etc.), electronic structure (band alignment, the density of states, etc.), and surface properties (exposure of facets, unsaturated sites, etc.) of the electrocatalysts.20,24,27,30,33,46–50 Among these, defect engineering, which refers to the intentional incorporation of lattice irregularities into the perfect periodicity of the matrix, stands out as an efficient strategy for the realization of these ambitious requirements because of its promising potential for manipulation and its significant impact on the electrocatalytic performance of the catalysts via an optimized electron distribution status for enhanced intrinsic activity, tuned surface composition for the greater exposure of active sites, enhanced conductivity for facile electron/charge transport and favorable adsorption/desorption of key intermediates due to the preferential micro-environment around the active centers.37,38,51
Crystallographic defects, which are defined as lattice interruptions of long-range periodicity, can be categorized into several types based on their dimensionality or geometry, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Point defects, i.e., zero-dimensional defects, are localized imperfections that occur only at or around one single lattice point in the perfect atomic or ionic periodicity of the crystal structure and are usually generated as a result of thermodynamic equilibrium or intentional incorporation. Typical point defects include vacancies (absence of atoms at the lattice points), substitutional atoms (foreign atoms at the lattice points), interstitial atoms (atoms that occupy the position where no atoms usually exist), Frenkel defects (paired vacancies and interstitial atoms), and Schottky defects (unoccupied anion and cation pairs). Line defects, namely one-dimensional defects, mainly exist in the form of dislocations, around which the atoms in the crystal lattice are misaligned. Typical dislocations include edge dislocations (usually caused by the termination of atoms in the middle of the crystal lattice), screw dislocations (a topological defect of the crystal lattice in which a helical path is traced around the line defects), and mixed dislocations, as the results of the solidification process of the materials. Planar defects, namely two-dimensional defects, represent the discontinuity of the perfect crystal lattice across a plane, thus disrupting the long-range stacking sequence. Commonly investigated planar defects are grain boundaries (abrupt change of crystallographic directions), antiphase boundaries (opposite phases with the same crystallographic direction), stacking faults (local deviation of the stacking sequence), and twin boundaries (mirror-symmetrical arrangement of atoms). Bulk defects, i.e., three-dimensional defects, are pores (small volumes with no atoms present), foreign inclusions (other structures with different compositions or crystalline structure), and other phases. It is commonly argued that a significant influence of the imperfection on the fundamental properties of the materials on the nanoscale can be anticipated due to the more obvious perturbation of the electron/charge distribution than that on the macroscale, thus offering a facile advantage for modulating the electronic structure of the electrocatalyts.37
 Fig. 4  A schematic illustration of the imperfections in nanomaterials. Defects from zero-dimensional vacancies to three-dimensional amorphism commonly exist in nanomaterials and alter the electron distributions of electrocatalysts. 
2.4 Fundamentals of electrochemical water splitting
It is well documented that the electrocatalytic water-splitting process is composed of HER and OER at the cathode and anode, respectively. The overall reaction of the electrolysis of water can be expressed as 2H2O = H2 + O2, which theoretically exhibits an energy difference of ΔG = 237.1 kJ mol−1 at a thermodynamic potential of 1.23 V.28,52 To serve as a potential alternative for the current state-of-the-art hydrogen production technology, such as steam reforming of coal and natural gas, the overall cost of electrolytic water splitting should be greatly reduced. Thus, the reaction mechanisms of both HER and OER in different solutions need to be comprehensively understood to improve the reaction kinetics, and the detailed mechanisms are introduced in the following sections.

2.3.1. The mechanism for the HER. 
The electrochemical HER process involves multiple elementary steps, which differ according to the pH value of the electrolyte (Fig. 5). Generally, the HER process consists of (I) the adsorption of H2O molecules or protons (H+) on the active site (i.e., the Volmer step) and (II) the following desorption of hydrogen molecules from the cathode via either a chemical (i.e., the Tafel step) or an electrochemical (i.e., the Heyrovsky step) route, as illustrated in Fig. 5, forming the Volmer–Tafel mechanism or the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism.33,53,54 In the Volmer step, a hydrated proton (in acid, eqn (1)) or H2O molecule (in alkali, eqn (2)) reacts with an electron at the surface electrocatalytic active center of the material (M), forming adsorbed hydrogen (MHads). Subsequently, the hydrogen can be desorbed from the active species via the Tafel reaction, or the Heyrovsky reaction, or via both approaches. In the Heyrovsky process, another hydrated proton (in acid, eqn (3)) or H2O molecule (in alkali, eqn (4)), accompanied by an extra electron, diffuses to MHads and forms a hydrogen molecule. While in the Tafel step (eqn (5)), two MHads diffuse and react with each other on the surface of the electrocatalyst to evolve H2. The overall HER process can be expressed as follows:
 Fig. 5  The proposed mechanism for the HER in acid and alkaline electrolytes, in which different reaction pathways are presented in the forms of the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism and the Volmer–Tafel mechanism. 
(I) Volmer step (the electrochemical adsorption of hydrogen) H+ + M + e− = MHads (In acid)(1) H2O + M + e− = MHads + OH− (In alkali)(2)
(II) Heyrovsky step (the electrochemical desorption of hydrogen) H+ + MHads + e− = M + H2 (In acid)(3) H2O + MHads + e− = M + H2 + OH− (In alkali)(4)
(III) Tafel step (the chemical desorption of hydrogen) 2MHads = 2M + H2  (In acid or alkali)(5)


2.3.2 The mechanism for the OER. 
In comparison with the two-electron hydrogen evolution process, the oxygen evolution process represents a much more complex oxidation reaction process that involves multistep four-electron transfer and the generation of O2, which results in slow reaction kinetics.36,50 Similar to the HER process, the mechanism for the OER depends heavily on the surface structure of the electrocatalyst and on the pH value of the electrolyte.35,55 As illustrated in Fig. 6, the electrochemical OER process involves the formation of multiple intermediates (i.e., absorbed hydroxyl (M–OH), adsorbed oxo (M–O), and adsorbed peroxide species (M–OOH)), and oxygen can be generated via either the direct diffusion and reaction of two M–O intermediates or the decomposition of the adsorbed peroxide intermediates in both acid and alkali electrolytes. It is proposed that the formation of M–OH serves as the initial step of the OER process by the adsorption of H2O (in acid, eqn (6)) or OH− (in alkali, eqn (7)) on the surface of the electrocatalysts. Further addition of H+ (in acid, eqn (8)) or OH− (in alkali, eqn (9)) generates the M–O intermediate, which can proceed through the formation of oxygen (eqn (10)) by reacting with another M–O intermediate in both acid and alkali or the subsequent creation of M–OOH by reacting with H2O (in acid, eqn (11)) or OH− (in alkali, eqn (12)). Finally, the M–OOH intermediates would decompose to produce oxygen in the acidic electrolyte (eqn (13)) or combine with OH− to generate oxygen and H2O (eqn (14)). It is evident that the oxygen comes from water molecules in the acidic electrolyte and from hydroxyl ions in the alkaline and neutral electrolytes.28 The overall OER process can be expressed as follows:
 Fig. 6  The OER mechanism in acid and alkaline electrolytes. Two different reaction paths that involve the production of peroxide (M–OOH) species as the intermediate and the direct combination of two adjacent oxo (M–O) intermediates are proposed. 
 Fig. 7  Representative polarization curves for the OER (left) and HER (right) processes and the derived parameter matrix for the evaluation of electrocatalytic performance. 
(I) Formation of M–OH intermediate M + H2O = M–OH + H+ + e− (In acid)(6) M + OH− = M–OH + e− (In alkali)(7)
(II) Formation of M–OM–O intermediate M–OH = M–O + H+ + e− (In acid)(8) M–OH + OH− = M–O + H2O + e− (In alkali)(9)
(III) Formation of M–OOH intermediate or direct production of oxygen 2M–O = 2M + O2 (In acid or alkali)(10) M–O + H2O = M–OOH + H+ + e− (In acid)(11) M–O + OH− = M–OOH + e− (In alkali)(12)
(IV) Decomposition of M–OOH for the production of oxygen M–OOH = M–O2 + H+ + e− (In acid)(13) M–OOH + OH− = M + O2 + H2O + e− (In alkali)(14)


2.3.3 Parameters for the evaluation of electrocatalytic performance. 
To comprehensively evaluate the electrocatalytic performance of electrocatalysts in the HER or OER process, some important parameters, including overpotentials (η), onset potentials (Eonset), exchange current density (j0), Tafel slope, electrochemically active surface area (ECSA), turnover frequency (TOF), long-term stability, and mass or specific activity (MA or SA), are often calculated and compared.6,7,23,32,34,36 A brief definition of and introduction to these parameters are discussed in the following section.
As one of the most important descriptors to evaluate electrocatalytic performance, the overpotential (η) is expressed as the difference between the actual potential and the thermodynamic value under equilibrium conditions at an appropriate current density, which can be written in the form of eqn (15). To match a photoelectrochemical water-splitting efficiency of 12.3%, a specific current density (i.e., 10 mA cm−2) is usually taken for the calculation and comparison of overpotentials, namely η10.34 Another parameter that often appears is the onset potential (Eonset), which represents the overpotential from which the measured current density (usually 1.0 or 0.5 mA cm−2) starts to rise.56,57 η = Eapplied − E0 − iR(15)where Eapplied is the potential that is actually applied, E0 represents the theoretical value at equilibrium, and iR represents the Ohmic correction under the same conditions.
What needs our attention is the fact that η@10 mA cmgeo−2 does not necessarily reflect the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts due to the different mass loadings of the active materials.58,59 Previous work has validated the influence of mass loading on the values of η@10 mA cmgeo−2, which indicates that a higher mass loading on the electrode results in lower overpotential values.58 To exclude the influence of mass loading, turnover frequency and specific activity, which will be discussed in the following sections, are proposed to replace η@10 mA cmgeo−2 to offer a reasonable descriptor for the evaluation of the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalyst. However, the difficulty in identifying the real number of active sites that participate in the electrochemical process has made the evaluation of TOF ambiguous. The specific activities represent the current density per unit surface area, and the ECSA or Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area is typically used in the evaluation process. Another attempt involves taking the mass activity at a certain overpotential as a potential descriptor of the intrinsic activity.60 However, the choice of potential/overpotential has a significant influence on the mass activities and no universal standards have been established. Further investigation and development of descriptors for evaluation of the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts are required.
The Tafel slope (b in eqn (16)) derived from the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curve represents an important index that is related to the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts in the HER or OER process and determines the reaction mechanism.7,33 A low Tafel slope value often implies a smaller potential rise to deliver the same current density, which indicates faster electron-transfer kinetics. Further, the attained current density at η = 0 in the Tafel curve, j0, depicts the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of an electrocatalyst in the case of reversible conditions. In essence, a high-performance electrocatalyst for HER or OER always exhibits a high j0 value and a smaller Tafel slope value at the same time. (16)where b is the Tafel slope value, j is the current density measured by the experimental device, j0 is the exchange current density, R represents the gas constant (i.e., 8.3145 J mol−1 K−1), T represents the temperature, n is the number of transferred electrons during the electrochemical redox reaction, F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), and α is the charge transfer coefficient.
Defined as the number of generated products normalized on the number of electrochemically active centers per unit time, the turnover frequency (i.e., TOF (eqn (17))) represents another notable indicator that is related to the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of a nanocatalyst. Although it is not easy to precisely access the TOF value for most solid-state catalysts, especially for some complex architectures, it still offers a useful approach for comparison of catalytic activities among various catalysts, especially within a similar system. TOF = jA/αnF(17)where j is the current density recorded by the electrochemical devices, A represents the area of the working electrode, n is defined as the quantity of the active material in moles, which can be calculated using the ECSA of the material, and α is the electron number of the electrocatalyst.
The stability or durability of an electrocatalyst stands for a different crucial index to evaluate its practical capability by examining its long-term performance under reaction conditions. One commonly applied method for the evaluation of electrocatalysts is a comparison between the LSV curves at the initial cycle and those after thousands of cyclic voltammetry (CV) cycles. A smaller potential shift at the specific current density implies better stability. Another approach for the examination of stability is chronoamperometry or chronopotentiometry, which depicts the current density change under a certain potential or potential change by maintaining a specific current density. Negligible degradation in terms of the measured potential or current density during a chronic test can be observed for a robust electrocatalyst.
Apart from the parameters mentioned above, the faradaic efficiency (FE), which is calculated as the ratio between the quantity of produced gas obtained in the experiments to the theoretical quantity, ECSA, which represents the electrochemically active surface area, and MA/SA, which is calculated as the measured current normalized on the mass or the ECSA of the electrocatalyst, are also used to assess the catalytic properties.

2.5 In-depth discussion of the influences of imperfections during the electrocatalytic HER/OER process
It is well documented that the carrier concentration, mobility, band alignment, and distribution of electric charge are inner determinants of intrinsic electrical conductivity and reaction energy barriers in the electrocatalytic water–splitting process.22 From such a perspective, regulating parameters can help guide optimization of the limiting factors of electrolytic water performance, especially the intrinsic electrical conductivity and reaction energy barrier,19,31 which necessitate the illustration of different descriptors of electrocatalytic activity for the rational design of electrocatalysts. It is usually demonstrated that the rate of electrocatalytic reactions is strongly related to their outer electronic structure of active sites, which plays a determinant role in deciding their kinetic and thermodynamic factors via tuning the reaction barrier of the RDS. It determines the maximum energy requirement along the reaction path, the intermediate adsorption/desorption behavior, the binding energy of the key intermediates that would finally shape the reaction mechanism, and the activation energy that is related to system complexity.7,23,33,37 The introduction of imperfections with multiple dimensions, which induces the breakage of the long-range periodicity of the perfect lattice, represents one of the most efficient strategies for directly altering the electron distributions. In the following section, a summary of several patterns is provided according to which the defect causes the electron redistribution in the defected catalysts, in order to deliver a deep illustration of the defect-induced electronic structure in the electrocatalytic water-splitting reactions (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of the effects of defects in the modulation of electrocatalytic performance. 
Basically, a high-performance electrocatalyst features the exposure of more active sites, excellent intrinsic activity, and enhanced conductivity, which benefit the electron transfer bond-breakage processes, and can be facilely achieved via a defect engineering strategy.35,37,38,61 Incorporation of imperfections, such as vacancies, dopants, single atoms, amorphism, and interfaces, can preferentially induce perturbation of electron distributions and result in (I) the introduction of intermediate bands; (II) a change in d-band centers; and (III) a narrowing of bandgaps, which can simultaneously improve the density of active centers due to the defects’ multiple roles (directly serving as active sites or indirectly influencing the electronic structure of active sites) in the electrocatalytic process, improve the intrinsic performance of the reactive sites as a result of the optimized electron distribution, and enhance the conductivity by lowering the electron/charge transfer and transportation resistance (Fig. 8)19,28,52 (details are discussed in the following sections). With an eye on the theoretical aspects of the HER/OER/WS reactions, the results of modern computational techniques, mainly density functional theory (DFT), by solving the Kohn–Sham equations using various pseudopotentials and exchange–correlation functionals as approximation approaches, reveal that the defect-featuring electrocatalysts usually exhibit (I) optimized adsorption energy for the intermediates; (II) altered RDS for the electrocatalytic reactions, and (III) a reduced energy gap of the RDS, synergistically accelerating the electrocatalytic reaction rate and offering us highly efficient electrocatalysts (Fig. 8).8,20,29,30,35
3. Defect engineering for the HER/the OER/WS
3.1 Overview
Nowadays, to mitigate climate change, the splitting of water to generate hydrogen that can serve as an alternative energy carrier has been vigorously promoted (Fig. 9). Driven by the clean electricity generated via solar power, hydro-energy, wind energy, nuclear energy, geothermal energy, and so on, electrocatalytic water splitting is now an important approach for hydrogen production, accounting for about 4% of worldwide hydrogen supply.28 Water electrolysis can be performed over a large pH region with a relatively simple overall reaction: 2H2O = 2H2 (cathode) + O2 (anode), requiring a Gibbs free energy gap of 237.1 kJ mol−1. Based on the pH of the electrolyte, the 2e-transfer HER and 4e-transfer OER can proceed via distinct pathways, as depicted in Fig. 7. To further improve the reaction kinetics, introducing imperfections including zero-dimensional to three-dimensional defects into the crystal lattice of electrocatalysts has proved its potential for obtaining high-quality electrocatalysts with excellent conductivity, numerous active sites, high intrinsic activity, and high stability. Here, in this section, we review the recent progress that has been made regarding the HER/OER/WS process through defect engineering.
 Fig. 9  The electrochemical approach for splitting water (including the HER, the OER, and total water splitting) is gaining more attention than ever. These data are based on search results from Web of Science. 
3.2 Multidimensional imperfections for the optimization of electrocatalysts towards the HER
Hydrogen evolution that generates hydrogen on the cathode is relatively simple, and proceeds via two-electron transfer by the depletion of H+ (2H+ + 2e− = H2) in an acidic electrolyte or generation of OH− (2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−) in an alkaline electrolyte. Inspired by the potential of the hydrogen economy, various electrocatalysts including precious metals, oxides, sulfides, phosphides, and carbides, have been investigated in detail in a combination of the incorporation of vacancies, dopants, single atoms, interfaces, and amorphization, by which highly efficient electrocatalysts towards HER have been proposed and prepared62–72 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  A summary of the performance of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) a single-atom catalyst (SAC), and (d) an interface towards hydrogen evolution under acidic and alkali conditions in terms of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope values. 
Removing atoms from their lattice points to generate vacancies represents an effective method for modulation of the electron distribution inside electrocatalysts, which has been widely applied in the optimization of HER kinetics in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 10a).63,73,74,76–82 Taking transition metal disulfides as an example, Huang et al. proved that introducing sulfur vacancies into the MoS2 basal plane has a positive influence on the binding energy of the hydrogen intermediates, which approaches an optimum value of ΔG = 0, thus enhancing the electrocatalytic HER activity with an overpotential of 119 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 50.7 mV dec−138 (Fig. 11a and b). As expected, the concentration of vacancies also matters and the appropriate concentration promotes HER to the maximum effect. Chhowalla et al. found that the activity of an individual vacant site increases with its concentration and peaks at a concentration of 5.7 × 1014 cm−2, where the intrinsic turnover frequency and Tafel slope exhibit the best values73 (Fig. 11c). As argued by the authors, the improved charge-transfer kinetics and thermodynamics of the vacancies and the induced strain account for the enhanced HER activity in an acidic electrolyte (Fig. 11d). As further demonstrated by Zhang et al., an S-vacancy of 12.5% gives the highest electronic state density near the Fermi level (EF), compared with those of lower or higher concentrations74 (Fig. 11e). And a suitable configuration of S-vacancies offers much more intensive electron delocalization, which yields a better ΔGH* and facilitates hydrogen adsorption onto the MoS2 surface, leading to enhanced HER performance (Fig. 11f). In an alkaline electrolyte, Pv-modified Ni12P5 has shown efficient HER activity according to its decreased overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, and a low Tafel slope via the generation of phosphorus vacancies75 (Fig. 11g). DFT-based results attribute the outstanding electrocatalytic performance to the facilitated intermediate desorption (potential-determining-step, PDS) behavior due to the enriched electron density of nickel and phosphorus atoms around Pv, which is achieved by weakening the hybridization of nickel 3d and phosphorus 2p orbitals (Fig. 11h).
 Fig. 11  The vacancy type, concentration, and configuration hold the key to the vital role played in optimizing the electronic structure of an electrocatalyst. (a) An atomic-resolution high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of 1D-DRHA MoS2 with multiple defects. (b) A diagram of the Gibbs free energy for the HER on perfect and defect-rich 2H-MoS2 surfaces. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Polarization curves for 2H-MoS2 with various vacancy concentrations measured in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (d) HADDF-STEM observations of local strain and atomic structure in single-layer MoS2 with a vacancy concentration of 5.7 × 1014 cm−2. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) The DOS of MoS2 with single S-vacancies at concentrations of 0–18.75%. (f) Top-view and side view electron density difference maps for the Mo atoms of P-MoS2, MoS2-FGJK, and MoS2-EGMO. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Polarization curves for Pv samples. (h) DFT-calculated reaction pathways. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Besides vacancies, another zero-dimensional defect, namely, dopants, serves as an additional approach for the adjustment of the electrocatalytic activity of the catalysts by regulation of electron distribution in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 10b).66–68,85,87–109 The adsorption energy of the intermediate hydrogen is often adopted as the key descriptor for characterization of HER performance, which promises the highest intrinsic activity under the condition where ΔG = 0, according to the volcano plot.26,32,33,110–112 Yu et al. report a phase transition from cubic to orthorhombic CoSe2 due to the doping of phosphorus, as a result of which the obtained electrocatalyst delivers an overpotential of 104 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 12a).83 The remarkable energetics stem from the favorable electronic structure, which exhibits an optimal binding of reaction intermediates (ΔG = 0.08 eV), and thus an enhanced water reduction ability (Fig. 12b). Non-metal element doping, such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, has an obvious influence on tuning the electron distribution of the electrocatalyst and is now thriving as a beneficial approach.103,104,113 By doping carbon atoms into the NiO matrix, the obtained C–Ni1−xO shows a decreased bandgap from 1.5 eV to ∼0.6 eV, which can be ascribed to the downshift of the conduction band minimum (CBM) below the Fermi energy and the overlap of its density of states (DOS) with the valence band maximum (VBM), as reported by Li et al.84 (Fig. 12c). Further analysis indicates that the enhanced H adsorption activity, together with the appearance of newly active H adsorption sites accounts for the ultrahigh hydrogen evolution performance with an ultralow overpotential of 27 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope value of 36 mV dec−1 (Fig. 12d). Zhao et al. report that a unique configuration of active sites can be readily generated by implanting copper atoms in the Ni electrodes (Ni(Cu)VOx) and the Ni–O–VOx sites can promote electron redistribution from Ni to VOx, which greatly weakens the H-adsorption and H2 releases free energy over Ni, leading to excellent HER activity comparable to that of benchmark Pt/C catalysts85 (Fig. 12e). Compared with single-element doping, synergistically doping more than one element into the nanomaterials offers new opportunities for the preparation of the desired electrocatalysts.86,104,106 By co-trapping selenium in the electrocatalyst surface and cobalt in the inner layer, Deng et al. prepared an MoS2 nanofoam catalyst, which exhibits an ultra-high large-current-density HER activity surpassing all previously reported heteroatom-doped MoS2.86 The inner layer-confined cobalt atoms stimulate neighboring sulfur atoms, while surface-confined selenium atoms stabilize the structure, which cooperatively enables a significant increase in abundance of active sites in the basal plane and edges of the electrocatalyst with optimized hydrogen adsorption activity (Fig. 12f).
 Fig. 12  Dopant induced phase transitions, unique configurations of active sites, tuned hydrogen adsorption, and optimized ΔG values have been proved to be effective in designing HER electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes. (a) Polarization curves for the HER on c-CoSe2, annealed c-CoSe2, o-CoSe2|P, and commercial Pt/C catalysts. (b) Calculated charge density distributions for o-CoSe2|P (up) and c-CoSe2 (down) catalysts and the calculated free energy diagrams. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) DOS plots of the Ni 3d and O 2p orbitals of the first three layers from the O-surface and C-surface. (d) Correlation between the atomic charge difference (ΔQ), number of Ni atoms that H binds to, and Gibbs free energy change of H adsorption (ΔGH). Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e) The calculated ΔGH* diagram of the HER at the equilibrium potential for various Ni(111) catalysts and the deformation electronic density of V–Ni(111). Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) The adsorption free energies of H* (ΔGH*) at in-plane, Mo-edge, and S-edge sites of pure, Co-doped, Se-doped, and Co/Se-codoped MoS2, denoted as MoS2, Co-MoS2, SeMoS2, and Co/Se-MoS2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Incorporating many advantageous features of homogeneous and heterogeneous electrocatalysts, single-atom catalysts (SACs) are now thriving as an innovative method for enhancing the electrocatalytic HER performance by dispersing transition metal atoms or noble metal atoms in the supporting matrix (Fig. 10c).64,118–136 Immobilized by the as-formed Mo vacancies, single-atomic platinum species can be readily implanted on MXene nanosheets (Mo2TiC2Tx), as reported by Wang et al. (Fig. 13a).114 The as-prepared Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA exhibits superior electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance with an impressive overpotential as low as 30 mV when the current density reaches 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13b). The implanted single-atomic platinum species can significantly enhance the DOS of the d-electron nearby the Fermi energy, resulting in an optimal value of ΔGH* and subsequently enhanced HER activity (Fig. 13c). By incorporating Co atoms into the framework of phosphorized carbon nitride (PCN), a Co1/PCN electrocatalyst shows outstanding electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity with a low overpotential of 138 mV under the condition of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13d and e). The unique configuration of a high-oxidization HO–Co1–N2 moiety upon hydroxyl adsorption, which significantly lowers the energy gap of the RDS (i.e., the H2O dissociation step in this case), is considered to be the reason for the superior electrocatalytic HER performance (Fig. 13f). Apart from an oxide or carbon-based matrix, metal can also serve as an alternative substrate for SAC preparation.120 Using a dealloying approach, Duan et al. created platinum nanowires decorated with single nickel atoms, which exhibit the optimum electrocatalytic performance in terms of specific activity and ECSA towards electrocatalytic HER116 (Fig. 13g and h). DFT-based computational results demonstrate that atomically dispersed nickel species that are liganded by two OH groups could electronically enhance the neighboring platinum atoms and improve their intrinsic activity for hydrogen evolution (Fig. 13i). The supporting substrate of the SACs also matters in designing highly efficient HER electrocatalysts.117,124 Using onion-like nanospheres of carbon (OLC) as the substrate, Song et al. successfully anchored Pt single atoms on it and prepared a Pt1/OLC electrocatalyst for HER117 (Fig. 13j). The Pt1/OLC catalyst delivers a low potential of −38 mV vs. RHE under the condition of 10 mA cm−2 and an elevated TOF of 40.78H2s−1 at an overpotential of 100mV, which is superior to those of previously reported SACs with similar Pt loadings on graphene substrates (Fig. 13k). Due to the cured morphology of the support, the tip-enhancement effect of the platinum species that can potentially draw localized electrons from the substrate is suggested to be responsible for the enhanced electrocatalytic performance, which optimizes the adsorption energy of the hydrogen intermediate to the optimum value and thus enhances the electrocatalysis kinetics of the electrocatalytic HER process (Fig. 13i).
 Fig. 13  Single-atom catalysts (SACs) offer the advantages of maximal atom utilization efficiency, unique active sites, and a synergistic effect between the single atoms and the support for the optimization of HER electrocatalysts. (a) A magnified HAADF-STEM image of Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA and its corresponding simulated image. (b) HER polarization curves. (c) Calculated projected density of states (PDOS) and free energy profiles for Mo2TiC2O2 and Mo2TiC2O2-PtSA. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) An atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of Co1/PCN. (e) Electrocatalytic HER performances of Co1/PCN, Co1/CN, PCN, and Pt/C in 1.0M KOH electrolyte. (f) A calculated energy diagram for H2O dissociation for the Volmer step and the electron density difference plot of the OH adsorption structure for Co1/PCN. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g) A HAADF-STEM image of SANi-PtNWs. (h) ECSA-normalized HER LSV curves. (i) Volcano curve for adsorption sites and the corresponding adsorption free energy of hydrogen with model D as a function of URHE for various coverages at pH14. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (j) A TEM image of Pt1/OLC showing a multishell fullerene structure with a layer distance of 0.35nm. (k) Polarization curves of Pt1/OLC. (l) A theoretical investigation of the HER using the Pt1/OLC catalyst. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Apart from the above-mentioned zero-dimensional defects, the construction of two-dimensional defects, i.e., grain boundaries or interfaces, represents another profound strategy towards the rational design of HER catalysts that are equipped with the required performance indexes by tuning the charge distribution (Fig. 10d).69,139–171 Composed of two homo-composition parts but different orientations, the grain boundaries can act as the active species for the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction.137,172 Impressive electrocatalytic HER activity, long-term durability, and versatile universality in both acid and alkali electrolytes are simultaneously achieved via the construction of 2H–2H and 2H–1T boundaries in the MoS2 planes, as reported by Zhang et al.137 (Fig. 14a). DFT-based calculations offer the conclusion that in-plane grain boundaries (2H–2H or 2H–1T phase) of molybdenum disulfide that exhibit different crystal structures on either side can act as effective species during the HER process, which delivers a reduced energy barrier and optimized adsorption energy for the hydrogen intermediates and thus accelerate the reaction kinetics of the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (Fig. 14b). Interfaces composed of (noble) metal and oxide/carbon-based materials represent another type of interface that has been widely investigated in the HER process.158,161,163,173–178 Li et al. report a multi-interfacial nickel/tungsten carbide hybrid that anchors on nitrogen-doped carbon (Ni/WC@NC), which exhibits superior electrocatalytic HER activity over a wide pH region138 (Fig. 14c). The excellent electrocatalytic HER performance is ascribed to the existence of abundant interfaces between nickel and tungsten carbide fragments, which induces electron transfer from the nickel component to the tungsten carbide part, in which case the simultaneously optimized electron distribution on both sides of the interface allows the significant modulation of the adsorption energy of the hydrogen intermediate, resulting in outstanding HER performance (Fig. 14d). Fan et al. obtained a heterostructured Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2 (0 < x < 1) decorated on nitrogen-doped graphene (defined as Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2/NG), which delivers superior HER stability and activity in an acidic electrolyte with a remarkable overpotential of 39 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 and a Pt-comparable Tafel slope of 30 mV dec−1139 (Fig. 14e). The covalently connected Nb–(N,S)–Mo interfaces exhibit excellent chemisorption ability for both H and water and enhanced conductivity (Fig. 14f). The interaction between the organic component and the substrate can also greatly influence the electron distribution, thus altering the HER performance.140,157,179 Guided by theoretical calculations, Qiao et al. designed a Pt-NC/Ni-MOF heterostructure, which features unique Ni–O–Pt interfacial bonds that cause an increase in the *OH adsorption energy, as well as a reduction in the *H binding energy, making it a potential structure for HER140 (Fig. 14g). As validated experimentally, the optimized adsorption energy for H* and OH* of the Pt-NC/Ni-MOF heterostructure provides a superior mass activity of 7.92 mA μg−1 Pt and long-term stability towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (Fig. 14h).
 Fig. 14  Homo/hetero-interfaces cause charge transfer between the components, and the desired electronic structure can be readily obtained. (a) A zoomed-in image of a domain boundary. (b) Theoretical simulations of the initial configurations and calculated adsorption energies. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Polarization curve of Ni/WC@NC in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 5 mV s−1. (d) A Gibbs free energy diagram of the HER on different surfaces. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Polarization curves of MoS2/NG, Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2/NG, Nb4N5−xOx/NG, and Pt/C. (f) A chemisorption model of the H intermediates at S*, N*, and Nb* in the Nb4N5-MoS2 heterostructure and the calculated PDOS. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) The design of a Pt-NC/Ni-metal–organic framework (MOF) heterostructure via theoretical calculations. (h) Plots of mass activity against the overpotential required to offer 10 mA cm−2 of the materials and also some recently reported Pt-based alkaline HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
By breaking the long-range ordering of the lattice atoms, amorphization can boost the electrocatalytic HER activity by exposing more active sites and enhancing conductivity.71,72,180–187 Sun et al. report the synthesis of amorphous RuSx nanoparticles (NPs) on an S-doped graphene oxide (GO) substrate, which delivers low overpotentials of 31 mV in an acidic electrolyte, 46 mV in a neutral electrolyte, and 58 mV in an alkaline electrolyte, to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2.187 As revealed by the computational results, the isolated ruthenium species shows Pt-like adsorption behavior and delivers a similar adsorption energy (−0.21 eV), which is responsible for the excellent intrinsic activity of the amorphous electrocatalyst towards electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Metal glasses (MGs) or amorphous alloys represent another type of amorphous HER electrocatalyst, which is rarely reported. Recently, Liu et al. synthesized an Ir25Ni33Ta42 MG nanofilm exhibiting high intrinsic activity and superior stability during HER activity with an η10 of 99 mV and a low Tafel slope value of 35 mV dec−1, which stems from the synergistic effect of the novel alloy system and amorphous structure, as argued by the authors.72
For a better comprehension of recently achieved developments in electrocatalytic HER, several reported representative defect-featuring electrocatalysts for electrocatalytic HER with their overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and their Tafel slopes are provided in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the electrocatalytic performances of several recently reported representative defect-featuring electrocatalysts for the HER




Catalyst

η@10 mA cm−2 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Defect
Electrolyte
Ref.




a-MoSx
28
40
Amor.
Acid

182



67% Sbr-MoSx,
118
46
Amor.
Acid

184



MoS2/CoMoP2
75
80
Amor.
Alkaline

184



Ni(OH)2-NiMoOx/NF
36
38
Amor.
Alkaline

180



Ir25Ni33Ta42 MG
99
35
Amor.
Acid

185



RuSx NPs
31
40
Amor.
Acid

187



C-Doped NiO
27
36
Doping
Alkaline

84



Ni5P4–Ru
54
52
SAC
Alkaline

56



G-12NP
106
67.3
Doping
Acid

104



Pd, Ru–Mo2−xOHy
45
82
Interface
Acid

166



MoO2–FeP@C
103
48
Interface
Alkaline

153



Nb4N5−xOx/NG
39
30
Interface
Acid

139



Ni2P/MoO2/NF HNRs
34
45.8
Interface
Alkaline

188



Pt/Ti3C2Tx-550
32.7
32.3
Interface
Acid

189



NiPt3@NiS
12
24
Interface
Alkaline

163



Ru/WNO@C
2
33
Interface
Alkaline

158



BPed-Pt/GR
21
46.9
Interface
Alkaline

190



20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2
27
45
Interface
Alkaline

175



Mo2C-MoOx/CC
60
53
Interface
Acid

155



Ni4Mo/MoOx
16
64
Interface
Alkaline

144



Co0.31Mo1.69C/MXene/NC
75
43
Interface
Alkaline

147



Co2N/Co/CF
26
41.6
Interface
Alkaline

142



Au/TaS2
101
53
Interface
Acid

174



PtRu NCs/BP
22
19
Interface
Acid

141



Ni/WC@NC
53
43.5
Interface
Alkaline

138



2D-MoS2/Co(OH)2
128
76
Interface
Alkaline

154



Mo/Mo2C-HNS-750
89
70.72
Interface
Acid

143



Ni2P/MoS2/N: RGO
39.5
39.52
Interface
Acid

148



NixMo1−xO2
43
37
Doping
Acid

90



N-CoP2
38
46
Doping
Acid

108



C-MoS2
45
46
Doping
Alkaline

113



NiO@1T-MoS2
46
52
Doping
Alkaline

106



Ni0.9Co0.1@NTM
43.4
116
Doping
Alkaline

99



MoS–CoS–Zn
72.6
37.6
Doping
Acid

191



(N,PO43−@)-MoS2/VG
95
42
Doping
Acid

192



RuSi
19
30.2
Doping
Acid

193



S-2-cycle
57
44.6
Doping
Acid

194



CoP/Co-MOF
27
43
Doping
Acid

195



B-CoP/CNT
39
50
Doping
Alkaline

196



Co–NiS2 NSs
80
43
Doping
Alkaline

197



Pt–Ni(N)
13
29
Doping
Alkaline

95



O-CoP-2
98
59.9
Doping
Alkaline

94



Cr-Co4N/CC
21
38.1
Doping
Alkaline

93



O,Cu-CoP-2
72
57.6
Doping
Alkaline

198



N–P–Ni
25.8
34
Doping
Alkaline

68



F-Ni3S2/NF
38
78
Doping
Alkaline

67



Mo–NiO/Ni
50
86
Doping
Alkaline

89



RhPd-H
36.6
35.3
Doping
Alkaline

199



S-MoP NPL
86
34
Doping
Acid

200



Pd-1T-SMoS2
140
50
Doping
Acid

87



N-WC nanoarray
113
75
Doping
Acid

201



N-NiCo2S4
41
37
Doping
Alkaline

202



Mn-doped CoS2
43
34
Doping
Acid

203



N-Mo2C NSs
99
44.5
Doping
Acid

92



Mn-hcp Ni/C
80
68
Doping
Alkaline

204



N,Mn-MoS2
66
50
Doping
Alkaline

205



Fe–Ni3C-2%
178
36.5
Doping
Acid

102



Pt1/N–C
19
18.6
SAC
Acid

133



Rh–MoS2-4.8
67
54
SAC
Acid

127



0.1Pt/VS2/CP
77
54.27
SAC
Acid

206



SA Co-D 1T MoS2
42
32
SAC
Acid

132



Ru–NC-700
55
47
SAC
Alkaline

135



Pt1/OLC
38
35
SAC
Acid

117



Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA
33
30
SAC
Acid

114



Co1/PCN
130
52
SAC
Alkaline

115



Pt SASs/AG
12
29.33
SAC
Acid

130



RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx
76
29
SAC
Acid

124



Ru—Au-0.2
24
37
SAC
Alkaline

120



1% Pd-MoS2/CP
76
32
SAC
Acid

136



W-SAC
85
53
SAC
Alkaline

123



Mo1N1C2
132
90
SAC
Alkaline

126



Pd/Cu-Pt NRs
22.8
25
SAC
Acid

125



MoS2-60s
131
48
Vacancy
Acid

74



v-Ni12P5
27.7
30.88
Vacancy
Alkaline

75



N-MoS2/CN
114
46.8
Doping
Acid

207



Sv-MoS2
194
78
Vacancy
Acid

208



Vo-WON
16
33
Vacancy
Alkaline

61



NF + CS + MoS2
56
49
Vacancy
Alkaline

209



1D-DRHA MoS2
119
50.7
Vacancy
Acid

38





3.3 Multidimensional imperfections for the optimization of electrocatalysts towards the OER
The OER process that occurs on the anodic side typically involves the transfer of four electrons, which contributes to the sluggish electrolysis kinetics, thus preventing the energy efficiency of the overall water electrolysis.7,36,55 For the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology, low-cost electrocatalysts consisting of earth-abundant components, including transition metal oxides, layered double hydroxides, borides, perovskites, and carbon-based materials, with multiple defects from zero-dimensional to three-dimensional have been widely investigated.210–221 In this section, recent progress regarding multidimensional imperfections for the optimization of electrocatalysts towards OER is summarized (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  A summary of the performance of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) interfaces, and (d) amorphism towards oxygen evolution under acidic and alkali conditions in terms of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes. 
Generation of uncoordinated sites via the removal of anions or cations from the crystal lattice and subsequent modulation of the vacant sites shows profound potential in designing highly efficient OER electrocatalysts (Fig. 15a).219,224–234 Due to the introduction of vacancies into the benchmark NiFeOOH electrocatalyst, the change in ΔG for the RDS (S–OH → S–O step in this case) can be significantly decreased from 1.78 eV to 1.41 eV222 (Fig. 16a). Benefitting from the decline in ΔG, the oxygen vacancy-rich catalyst yields a more than 2-fold increase in current density (from 100 to 240 mA cm−2) under an overpotential of 270 mV (Fig. 16b). Compared with anion vacancies, cation vacancies can also exert a profound impact on the electron distribution of the electrocatalysts, and thus on the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution performance.223,227,234 As illustrated by Song et al., the α-Ni(OH)2 catalysts show improved activity with increasing VNi concentration223 (Fig. 16c). DFT-based calculations reveal that the introduction of VNi could enhance the intrinsic conductivity of α-Ni(OH)2 catalysts, thereby boosting the formation of true active species to promote electrochemical oxidation processes (Fig. 16d). Further modulation of the coordination environment offers another chance for the optimization of the electron distribution.224,232 Sulfur has been used to modify the oxygen vacancies in iron-cobalt oxide (FeCoOx–Vo) nanosheets, which can substantially stabilize oxygen vacancies (Vo) in the crystal lattice and simultaneously lead to the formation of Co–S coordination with Co active sites, thus lowering the adsorption energy of H2O224 (Fig. 16e). Owing to its modulated electron distribution status, FeCoOx–Vo–S shows outstanding electrocatalytic performance, requiring a low overpotential of 240 mV to achieve 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16f). Further computational calculations reveal the obviously enhanced interaction between the cobalt active species and adsorbed water molecules, which is responsible for the decreased adsorption energy and the accelerated OER kinetics (Fig. 16g).
 Fig. 16  Cation and anion vacancies with a modified local environment enhance the conductivity and lower the energy barrier for the rate-determining step during the OER process. (a) OV effects on the OER catalysis performance predicted by DFT calculations. (b) The OER polarization of electrodes. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) LSV curves for various samples. (d) A simulated distribution of partial charge density at the Fermi level induced by VNi incorporation and the calculated formation energies for γ-NiOOH from α-Ni(OH)2 with different VNi concentrations. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Calculated adsorption energies for H2O molecules on different Co sites. (f) OER polarization curves of RuO2, FeCoOx–Vo, and FeCoOx–Vo–S in 1.0 M KOH to reach a high OER current density. (g) The LDOS of the 3d-orbitals of Co and Fe atoms, and 2p-orbitals of O atoms of FeCoOx-origin, FeCoOx–Vo, and FeCoOx–Vo–S. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Similar to the situation in the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution process, doping the matrix with one or more kinds of heteroatoms can significantly affect the adsorption/desorption behavior of the key intermediates on the active species and accelerate the reaction kinetics during the electrocatalytic OER process96,235,236,238–271 (Fig. 15b). By doping FeOOH with Se atoms into the crystal lattice, the energy barrier for the RDS (M–O to M–OOH) can be significantly reduced, as reported by Wang et al., as far as the energy barrier of the step M–OH to M–O, indicating its potential for boosting OER kinetics235 (Fig. 17a). As expected, an industrial-scale current density of 500 mA cm−2 is achieved at the relatively small overpotential of 348 mV during the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution process, which is comparable to previously reported values (Fig. 17b). Co-doping with more than one element represents another promising approach for the design of OER electrocatalysts.237,246,247,266 Wang et al. reported the simultaneous doping of sp-nitrogen and sulfur atoms into few-layered graphdiyne and investigated its OER performance236 (Fig. 17c). The synergy between the sp-N and S atoms can boost the current density for OER and bring about excellent catalytic activity and faster kinetics (Fig. 17d). Further theoretical investigations imply that Fe3+-doped β-NiOOH co-doped with Cu2+ or Ag3+ will have even more favorable O–O coupling and molecular O2 desorption activity at the Fe sites, which can be ascribed to the lowered ΔGox, enhancing O–O bond formation (Fig. 17e and f).
 Fig. 17  Dopants with single or multiple elements facilitate OER kinetics via a modulated electronic structure that decreases the energy barrier of the RDS. (a) Calculated free energy profiles at 1.23 V for the OER pathway on bare FeOOH and various Se-doped FeOOH models. (b) LSV curves of as-prepared catalysts and a comparison with other electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) High-resolution N 1s and S 2p XPS spectra of the NSFLGDY-900 catalyst. (d) Polarization curves of FLGDY-900, NSFLGDY-900, and RuO2 catalysts. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Mechanism and associated stationary structures for the complete OER catalytic cycle on the FeCu-doped surface. (f) ΔGox values for each reaction step for Fe- and FeCu-doped catalysts. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Atomically dispersing metal atoms onto carbon-based materials, oxides, hydroxides, and selenides could not only activate the substrates but also act as active centers by forming unique single-atom configurations.220,221,272–277 Wu et al. report the atomic anchoring of Fe–Nx sites onto a nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon substrate, and the obtained single-atom catalyst exhibits excellent electrocatalytic OER activity in terms of overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope. Further investigations indicate that the unique Fe–Nx species serve as active species during the electrochemical process and are responsible for the enhanced electrocatalytic performance.275 Yao et al. constructed an atomic dispersion of Pt–Co–Se species by using defected CoSe2 (CoSe2−x) as the substrate. The unique coordination configuration of the Pt–Co–Se moiety induces a profound asymmetry in the electronic structure, which in turn has a significant influence on the adsorption behavior between the cobalt species and the intermediate species (i.e., *OH, *O, and *OOH) during the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution process, as a result of which a 9-fold enhancement in the specific activity is obtained.274 Gu et al. report the synthesis of densely loaded iridium single atoms that anchor on an NiO support with a favorable ∼4+ oxidation state, which could act as active sites during the electrocatalytic process and simultaneously activate the inert NiO matrix surface to provide extra active species.269 As a result, the electrocatalyst delivers a low overpotential of 215 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 and an impressive current density in an alkaline electrolyte during the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction process, which exhibits 57-fold and 46-fold enhancements in comparison with the NiO reference and a commercial IrO2 benchmark at an applied potential of 1.49 V vs. RHE, respectively.
Intentionally introduced interfaces can facilitate the water dissociation process by varying the electronic structure, e.g., alteration of the d-band center, reducing the energy required for the RDS, confining the active species at the interface, and the coupling effect between the components (Fig. 15c).278–295 Hu et al. report the successful preparation of NiSe2/CoSe2 heterostructures with different interfacial densities, which exhibit superior electrocatalytic properties in an alkaline electrolyte with a small overpotential of 286 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2278 (Fig. 18a). Due to the synergy between the inner NiSe2/CoSe2 heterostructure and the electrochemically induced oxides/hydroxides, the energy barrier could be significantly reduced, which in turn accelerates the reaction kinetics of OER (Fig. 18b). Owing to the in situ generation of the hydroxide interfacial layer between layered double hydroxide (LDH) and FeNi foil, the electrocatalyst shows more favorable adsorption of the OH intermediate during OER than the pure LDH, leading to efficient reaction kinetics that deliver an η10 of 130 mV279 (Fig. 18c). As revealed by the computational results, the interfacial interactions between the two components shift the d-band center upwards, which in turn causes an increased number of empty antibonding states and thus an enhanced bond strength between the adsorbate and surface, eventually promoting the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution process (Fig. 18d). Furthermore, the interface between the organic molecules and the matrix was also investigated.280 As reported by Hu et al., the organic small molecule can activate commercial transition metal foam by directly evolving metal nanomeshes embedded in graphene-like films (M-NM@G) through a facile solid-phase migration process280 (Fig. 18e). The as-obtained M-NM@G shows a small overpotential of 284 mV to achieve 100 mA cm−2, which is quite competitive with previously reported state-of-the-art OER electrocatalysts in terms of the overpotentials required at a current density of 100 mA cm−2. (Fig. 18f).
 Fig. 18  
Ex situ and in situ formed hetero-interfaces favor the OER kinetics via the modulation of the adsorption/desorption energies of the intermediates and the energy barrier for the RDS. (a) OER polarization curves of synthesized samples at 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH. (b) The calculated free energy diagrams for the OER on NiSe2/CoSe2@NiOOH/CoOOH, NiSe2@NiOOH, and NiOOH/CoOOH at various potentials. Reproduced with permission.278 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) CV curves of the FeNi LDH for the OER on different substrates such as Ni, Fe, and FeNi alloy foils. (d) A comparison of the d-band center (εd) and d-band density of a Ni atom from a stable adsorption site in FeNi LDH and FeNi LDH with hydroxide interfacial layer slabs. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM images of a single layer of Ni-NM@G-10 nanomesh. (f) OER polarization curves in 1.0 M KOH solution and a comparison with reported Ni-based materials. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The generation of amorphous electrocatalysts with multiple uncoordinated sites and dangling bonds facilitates water oxidation by constructing favorable electronic structures and reducing the energy barrier210,211,296–308 (Fig. 15d). Shao et al. report the preparation of an Ni–Fe-based nanocatalyst with an unusual local structure, which requires an ultrasmall overpotential of 189 mV to achieve the benchmark of 10 mA cm−2 296 (Fig. 19a). Further investigations attribute the excellent electrocatalytic OER performance to the unique structural characteristics that involve distorted Fe octahedra and an elevated nickel valent state, under which conditions the nickel exhibits a +3 state. (Fig. 19b). To tackle the instability of the amorphous phase during the electrocatalytic process, Huang et al. confined the amorphous area into the crystalline surface, which showed an order–disorder–order transition of atoms51 (Fig. 19c). Thanks to the unique structure of the electrocatalyst, a superior electrocatalytic OER performance that requires a small overpotential of 190 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2, as well as a low Tafel slope value of 31 mV dec−1 can be achieved by the space-confined amorphous electrocatalyst. (Fig. 19d). Kang et al. report that a combination of the amorphous cobalt phyllosilicate (ACP) into the layered crystalline motif can substantially reduce the overpotential of the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction process.297 (Fig. 19e). As revealed by the DFT results, the structural flexibility induced by the polysilicate between the Co layers in the layered framework induces a significant reduction in the energy gap to 0.34 eV for the rate-determining step (*O → *OOH in this case) of the electrocatalytic OER process, thus enhancing the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction performance (Fig. 19f and g). In addition, the amorphous material could also serve as the substrate, which would introduce strong coupling between the active sites/species and the substrate due to numerous unsaturated coordination sites and dislocation of the electrons. Yeo et al. present an OER catalytic system that consists of cobalt oxide (CoOx) with adsorbed Fe3+ ions, which significantly lowers the average overpotential to achieve the benchmark 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope values.298 The coordination number of Fe is substantially reduced due to adsorption on the amorphous support, which generates Fe sites with oxygen vacancies, leading to improved OER activity.
 Fig. 19  Amorphous electrocatalysts exhibit unusual local structures due to the absence of long-range order and amorphous sites with dangling bonds serve as active sites in the OER process. (a) LSV curves of LN, LNF, a-LNF(b-u), and a-LNF(t-d) samples. (b) Ni L-edges of a-LNF(b-u) and a-LNF(t-d) samples and the R-space of Ni K-edges. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Intensity profiles recorded from space-confined NiFe-LDH. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.51 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) iR-corrected polarization curves in 1 M KOH for different catalysts. (f) The free energy landscape for the OER at 1.23 V (ideal potential for the OER). (g) ACP bridging 1 site. Reproduced with permission.297 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
For a better understanding of the recent advances that have been made in optimizing the electrocatalytic OER performance, a summary of recently reported defected electrocatalysts in terms of overpotentials to achieve the benchmark current density of 10 mA cm−2 and their Tafel slopes are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 A summary of the electrocatalytic performances of several recently reported representative defect-featuring electrocatalysts for the OER




Catalyst

η@10 mA cm−2 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Defect
Electrolyte
Ref.




Ni10-CoPi
320
44.5
Amor.
Alkaline

308



NiFe0.5Sn-A
260
50
Amor.
Alkaline

302



FeMOFs-SO3
218
36.2
Amor.
Alkaline

303



a-LNF(t-d)
189
36
Amor.
Alkaline

296



Cu1−xNNi3−y/FeNiCu
300
45
Amor.
Alkaline

306



CoOx + Fe3+
309
27.6
Amor.
Alkaline

298



A-CoS4.6O0.6
290
67
Amor.
Alkaline

304



NFP40
219
32
Amor.
Alkaline

301



ACP
367
60
Amor.
Alkaline

297



SCA-NiFe-LDH
190
31
Amor.
Alkaline

51



Zn-CoSe2
286
37
Doping
Alkaline

309



Gd-CoB
230
42
Doping
Alkaline

310



NSFLGDY-900
299
62
Doping
Alkaline

236



ELCMO
329
33.8
Doping
Alkaline

311



N-C@G-900
280
88.1
Doping
Alkaline

261



S-300
188
43.96
Doping
Acid

258



PA-NiO
310
36
Doping
Alkaline

247



Li1.2Ni0.8Fe0.2O2
302
59
Doping
Alkaline

249



Co0.30CuOx
290
57
Doping
Alkaline

242



Co-N/GF-900
313
84.1
Doping
Alkaline

244



Fe0.33Co0.67OOH
266
30
Doping
Alkaline

263



NGO/Ni7S6
380
45
Doping
Alkaline

312



10% VNS
290
45
Doping
Alkaline

251



Co-Cu7S-0.07
270
130
Doping
Alkaline

250



N2-CoS2-400
240
98
Doping
Alkaline

240



IrRu@Te
220
35
Interface
Acid

282



Cu@CeO2@NFC-0.25
230.8
32.7
Interface
Alkaline

288



M-PCBN/CC
232
32
Interface
Alkaline

251



FeOOH2nm/LDH
174
27
Interface
Alkaline

281



FeNi LDH sheet/FeNi
130
39.8
Interface
Alkaline

279



Ni4Ce1/CP
220
81.9
Interface
Alkaline

287



CoO/hi-Mn3O4
378
61
Interface
Alkaline

292



M-Ni2P/Fe2P-O
179
42.7
Interface
Alkaline

292



CoV2O6-V2O5/NRGO-1
239
49.7
Interface
Alkaline

287



AG
275
48
Interface
Alkaline

284



S,N-Fe/N/C-CNT
370
82
SAC
Alkaline

275



sAu/NiFe LDH,
237
36
SAC
Alkaline

220



CoSe2−x–Pt
314
31
SAC
Alkaline

274



Ir18wt%–NiO
215
38
SAC
Alkaline

286



CoO/Co3O4
260
54
Vacancy
Alkaline

313



Co0.5(V0.5)
282
56
Vacancy
Alkaline

218



Co3O4/CeO2 NHs,
270
60
Vacancy
Alkaline

231



PM-LDH
230
47
Vacancy
Alkaline

314



D–U–CoNi–OH
228
57
Vacancy
Alkaline

315



NiCeOx
295
66
Vacancy
Alkaline

226



SnCoFe–Ar
270
42.3
Vacancy
Alkaline

234



Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC
273
63.9
Vacancy
Alkaline

316



CoGa LDH/SSM
258
34.1
Vacancy
Alkaline

317



Reduced NiFe
270
40
Vacancy
Alkaline

222



Co-300
268
38.2
Vacancy
Alkaline

227



P-Co3O4
280
51.6
Vacancy
Alkaline

232



CoFe–LDHs–Ar
266
37.85
Vacancy
Alkaline

318



Water-plasma exfoliated CoFe LDH nanosheets
232
36
Vacancy
Alkaline

229



Fe1Co1-ONS
308
36.8
Vacancy
Alkaline

230



DR-Ni3FeN/N-G NHs
250
38
Vacancy
Alkaline

228





3.4 Multidimensional imperfections for the optimization of electrocatalysts towards overall water splitting
Combining the HER on the cathode and the OER on the anode, the overall water electrolysis follows the reaction: 2H2O = 2H2 + O2. By incorporation of multidimensional defects into the matrix, defect engineering is deemed to be an efficient method for the enhancement of water electrolysis electrocatalysts and has been widely investigated (Fig. 20).8,18–20,23,24,28–30
 Fig. 20  A summary of the performances of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) interfaces, and (d) amorphism towards overall water splitting in acidic and alkaline electrolytes in terms of an evaluation toolbox, including overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slopes towards hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution, and the overall potential to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in a typical two-electrode setup. 
As revealed by various investigations, the vacancies in the electrocatalysts could effectively tune the electron distribution to facilitate the adsorption/desorption behavior of the key intermediates during the electrocatalytic HER and OER process, at the same time216,217,319–324 (Fig. 20a). By engineering the oxygen vacancies of cobalt tungstate nanoparticles, Cai et al. report the superior water electrolysis ability of CoWO4−x@C, which gives a small cell potential of 1.57 V to achieve the benchmark of 10 mA cm−2.216 DFT results imply that the presence of oxygen vacancies could result in a significant reduction in the energy barrier for the rate-determining step (the oxygen desorption step of the OER process in this case) during the electrocatalytic water-splitting process, thus facilitating the overall electrocatalytic reaction (Fig. 21a and b). Besides the often investigated anion vacancies, another type of vacancy, namely cation vacancies, also exhibits promising potential in the rational design of highly efficient electrocatalysts with desired electrocatalytic performance towards overall water splitting, similar to the case of hydrogen evolution or oxygen evolution.217,319 Zhang et al. propose the introduction of Fe vacancies into ultrathin feroxyhyte (δ-FeOOH) nanosheets, which delivers a small cell potential of 1.62 V to reach 10 mA cm−2, together with excellent long-term stability (>60 h)217 (Fig. 21c). Both experimental and computational evidence indicates that the constitution of abundant second neighboring Fe to Fe vacancies in δ-FeOOH nanosheets serve as the electrocatalytically active species for both the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution and the oxygen evolution process, which exhibit optimal adsorption energy for the hydrogen intermediates in the HER and reduce the energy gap for the RDS (formation of *OOH intermediate in this case) (Fig. 21d). Furthermore, Cheng et al. synthesized defective RhCu nanotubes with multiple uncoordinated Cu sites, which exhibit excellent HER and OER performance.319 Theoretical calculations indicate that the RDS changes from the Volmer step to the Heyrovsky step for the defect-rich electrocatalyst in the HER process, and the energy barrier reduces from 1.39 eV to 0.91 eV, implying enhanced electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 21e). As for the OER process, the reduction in the calculated overpotential from 0.69 eV to 0.45 eV due to the existence of defects accounts for the improved reaction kinetics (Fig. 21f). The experimental water-splitting test validates the fact that the defect-rich sample shows superior water-splitting ability at all pH values, which requires a low cell potential of 1.59 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 21g).
 Fig. 21  Vacancies, including cation and anion species, play a vital role in optimizing the adsorption behavior in both the HER and OER processes. (a) OER curves of CoWO4−x@C-4 before and after stability tests. (b) Calculated free energies of CoWO4 and CoWO4−x during the HER and OER. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The LSV curve of the water electrolysis of δ-FeOOH NSs/NF//δ-FeOOH NSs/NF in 1.0 M KOH and an LSV curve after a stability test for 60 h. (d) Standard free energy diagrams of the HER and OER processes. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the HER on Rh3Cu1 (100) and Rh1Cu1 (100). (f) The free energy diagrams for the OER on an Rh3Cu1 (100) surface at the zero electrode potential, equilibrium potential, and onset electrode potential. (g) LSV curves of overall water splitting in a two-electrode system when RhCu NTs were applied as both the anode and cathode. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The dopant can not only serve as the active species/sites but also stabilize the active species during the electrocatalytic reactions by modulation of the electron distribution, enabling the bifunctionality of the electrocatalyst96,214,215,257,325–350 (Fig. 20b). Incorporation of Rh atoms into NiFe-LDH could significantly lower the energy gap required for the RDS (decomposition of the *OOH step in this case) in the electrocatalytic OER process, as reported by S. Francisco et al.325 (Fig. 22a). The electrocatalyst needs only a low cell voltage of 1.46 V to drive the electrocatalysis setup to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which rivals the advanced electrocatalysts that have been previously reported (Fig. 22b). Du et al. propose three main effects that the unique Ir–O–V shows due to the doping of Ir atoms: (I) serving as catalytic sites for H2O dissociation, (II) decreasing the charge density on the bridging oxygen, thus facilitating HER there, and (III) increasing the charge density on V ions, which in turn boosts OER, which can be observed based on the differential-charge densities326 (Fig. 22c). Due to the synergy effect, the NiVIr LDH requires an ultralow cell voltage of 1.49 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in the electrolyzer, surpassing most NiFe-based electrocatalysts (Fig. 2d). By doping dual-cations into NiSe2 nanosheets, Li et al. prepared an Fe0.09Co0.13–NiSe2 porous nanosheet, which exposes more active sites and exhibits the optimum adsorption energy for the key intermediates for the electrocatalytic process, as a result of which the defected electrocatalyst shows impressive electrocatalytic performance for both the hydrogen evolution and the oxygen evolution processes327 (Fig. 22e). When assembled in a two-electrode water-splitting electrolyzer, the setup requires only a low cell potential of 1.52 V to deliver 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 22f).
 Fig. 22  One or more kinds of dopants could change the RDS in the HER/OER process by tailoring the adsorption energies of the intermediates, thus facilitating overall water splitting. (a) Gibbs free energy diagram for the four steps of the OER on *Rh-NiFeRh-LDH. (b) The overall water-splitting properties. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Active sites (top) in the overall water-splitting process and differential-charge densities (bottom) of NiV LDH (left) and NiVIr LDH (right). (d) Polarization curves of NiV LDH, NiVIr LDH, a Pt/C-Ir/C couple, and a NiFe LDH-Ir/C couple for overall water splitting and a comparison with other electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical performances for the OER and HER. (f) Polarization curves before and after 3000 CV cycles during overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission.327 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Atomically dispersed nonmetal or metal sites on the support could potentially function as the active sites and enable the bifunctionality of the electrocatalysts by modulation of the adsorption energies of the key intermediates and lower the reaction barrier.351–359 Huang et al. prepared various single-atom catalysts via a cation exchange strategy, among which Rh SAC-CuO NAs/CF can achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 under a cell voltage of only 1.51 V.357 As argued by the authors, the decreased adsorption energies of the reactive intermediates are responsible for the superior electrocatalytic activity, and the improved reaction kinetics of the Rh SAC–CuO electrocatalyst. Sun et al. propose a synergy between molybdenum single atoms and cobalt-containing supports, which can effectively change the adsorption energies of the key intermediate species. As a result, the overpotential of water splitting can be substantially decreased, and a low cell voltage of 1.56 V is required to achieve the benchmark of 10 mA cm−2 in an alkaline electrolyte.351
The construction of interfaces in electrocatalysts offers the advantage of facile electron transfer, synergy between the hetero-components, and enhanced exposure of active centers, thus enhancing the reaction kinetics in both HER and OER processes212,213,360–382 (Fig. 20c). Mu et al. report the preparation of a multisite Mo-Ni3S2/NixPy/NF electrode with abundant heterogeneous interfaces, which requires an ultralow cell potential of 1.46 V at 10 mA cm−2, where the excellent long-term durability of the electrolysis performance can be well guaranteed212 (Fig. 23a). DFT-based calculations attribute the excellent electrocatalytic performance to the synergistically optimized adsorption energies of key intermediates (*OH, *O, and *OOH) during HER and OER processes, which significantly accelerate the reaction kinetics, thus enhancing the water electrolysis activity (Fig. 23b). The significant electronic coupling at the hetero-interfaces could preferentially optimize the adsorption energies of both HER and OER intermediates, which reduces the energy barrier for the rate-determining step, as illustrated by Wang et al. via the construction of an MoS2/NiFe-LDH superlattice (Fig. 23c). As a result, the MoS2/LDH superlattice requires low cell potentials of ∼1.57, 1.63, and 1.71 V to deliver current densities of 10, 20, and 50 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 23d). G. Kanatzidis et al. designed an MoS2/Co9S8/Ni3S2/Ni electrocatalyst, which delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 under a cell potential of 1.45 V (Fig. 23e). Further computational results attribute the excellent electrocatalytic OER activity to electron transfer at the hetero-interface that extracts electrons from Co9S8 to MoS2, which significantly alters the adsorption energies of the intermediate species and reduces the energy barrier for the rate-determining step from 1.45 eV to 0.52 eV (Fig. 23f).
 Fig. 23  Synergy and electron transfer between different components facilitate the water dissociation process in heterostructures. (a) Polarization curves of an obtained sample toward overall water splitting. (b) Calculated free energy diagrams for the OER and HER. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2020. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Free energy diagrams of the OER and HER on LDH, LDH/G, and MoS2/LDH. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of an MoS2/LDH superlattice and commercial RuO2-Pt/C couple for overall water splitting in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Polarization curves for overall water splitting in a two-electrode configuration. (f) Calculated densities of electronic states and the Gibbs free energy changes for the four steps of the OER. Reproduced with permission.361 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Amorphization of the electrocatalysts provides a unique advantage in boosting the water electrolysis activity by exposing more active sites, a unique three-phase interface, and a tailored energy barrier for the RDS, which has been intensively investigated186,384,386–388 (Fig. 20d). Recently, Huang et al. synthesized amorphous ruthenium–tellurium nanorods, which show enhanced conductivity due to the absence of a bandgap for the p–d electron transition383 (Fig. 24a). Under a U = 1.23 V potential, the overpotentials are 0.23 V (in acid) and 0.29 V (in alkali) (Fig. 24b). As a result, the amorphous ruthenium-tellurium nanorods exhibit extraordinary water electrolysis performance in a two-electrode setup, with a cell voltage of 1.52 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 24c). The amorphous material could also form in situ during the electrocatalytic reaction and act as the active species.384,389,390 Cao et al. argue that amorphous Ni–Fe–Mo (oxy)hydroxide is formed in situ during the electrolysis process and acts as the active species, which exhibits superior electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution performance because of the optimized hydrogen binding energy and lowered overpotential384 (Fig. 24d). Combined with the conductive substrate, which provides rapid electron transfer to the active sites, the electrocatalyst demonstrates a small cell potential of 1.56 V to deliver 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 24e). Wen et al. prove that the superhydrophilic/superaerophobic micro-/nanostructured amorphous CoMoSx/NF offers the advantage of faster mass transfer due to the facile access of electrolytes and the quick release of the products generated during the electrocatalytic process. As a result, when assembled into a two-electrode electrolyzer, the device requires a cell voltage of only 1.89 V to achieve the industrial-level 500 mA cm2385 (Fig. 24f and g).
 Fig. 24  An in situ generated amorphous phase during electrolysis empowers the electrocatalysts with enhanced conductivity, a tailored energy barrier, and unique interfaces between different phases, thus boosting the electrocatalytic activity. (a) The band structure of amorphous RuTe2. (b) The OER pathways under acidic and alkaline conditions at U = 1.23 V. (c) Polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs||a-RuTe2 PNRs and Ir/C||Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 for water splitting. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2020, Springer, Nature. (d) The calculated hydrogen adsorption free energies on different sites in NiFeMoOx for the HER and OER. (e) iR-corrected polarization curves of Ni/NiFeMoOx/NF and Pt/C||IrOx electrolyzers in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.384 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) The design of superhydrophilic/superaerophobic CoMoSx/NF electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. (g) Overall water-splitting polarization curves of CoMoSx/NF, MoSx/NF, IrO2-Pt/C, and pristine NF electrodes. Reproduced with permission.385 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Towards a better comprehension of the defect-featuring catalyst for overall water splitting, we have summarized several recently reported electrocatalysts and their main electrocatalytic performance in terms of their overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in HER/OER, Tafel slope in HER/OER, and the cell potential required to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in an electrolyzer in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the electrocatalytic performances of several recently reported representative defect-featuring electrocatalysts for overall water splitting




Catalyst

η@10 mA cm−2 (mV) for HER
Tafel slope (mV dec−1) for HER

η@10 mA cm−2 (mV) for OER
Tafel slope (mV dec−1) for OER
Potential @ 10 mA cm−2 (V)
Defect
Electrolyte
Ref.




NiCoP/SCW
178
64.4
229
79.5
1.59
Amor.
Alkaline

391



SCFP-NF
26
94
22
55
1.54
Amor.
Alkaline

386



CoSn2/NF
103
78
230
89
1.55
Amor.
Alkaline

390



Fe-H2/O2 Cat
—
77
238
82.7
1.65
Amor.
Alkaline

389



IFONFs-45
—
31
260
45
1.58
Amor.
Alkaline

392



am-Fe-Bi/NF
143
75
158
53
1.56
Amor.
Alkaline

393



NiCoFeB
345
98
284
46
1.81
Amor.
Alkaline

394



Co-P-B-5
145
38
290
42
1.65
Amor.
Alkaline

387



Ni/NiFeMoOx/NF
22
76
255
35
1.50
Amor.
Alkaline

384



a-RuTe2
33
35
245
47
1.52
Amor.
Acid

383



Fe17.5%-Ni3S2/NF
47
95
214
42
1.54
Doping
Alkaline

329



S-CoWP@(S, N)-C
67
—
280
68
1.65
Doping
Alkaline

214



F0.25C1CH/NF
77
99
228
42
1.45
Doping
Alkaline

214



FePx/Fe-N-C/NPC
182
132
325
79
1.58
Doping
Alkaline

337



Ni-Fe-MoN NTs
55
109
228
41
1.513
Doping
Alkaline

333



Co-MoS2/BCCF-21
48
52
260
85
—
Doping
Alkaline

96



Fe0.09Co0.13-NiSe2
92
89
251
63
1.52
Doping
Alkaline

327



Fe-CoP/NF
78
92
190
36
1.49
Doping
Alkaline

329



S-400-H
28
35
241
56
1.47
Doping
Alkaline

388



B,N,S-CoP@C@rGO
143
76
264
69
1.50
Doping
Alkaline

343



CoFeP-0.2
142
65.8
233
53.1
1.533
Doping
Alkaline

331



NiVIr-LDH
41
55.3
203
35.9
1.49
Doping
Alkaline

326



Cr-doped FeN-P/NCN
190
68.51
240
72.36
1.50
Doping
Alkaline

259



Co-RuIr
14
31.1
235
66.9
1.52
Doping
Acid

257



CoFeZr oxides/NF
104
119.3
—
54.2
1.63
Doping
Alkaline

334



NiVRu-LDH
47
40
190
83
1.42
Doping
Alkaline

345



VOOH-3Fe
90
38.2
195
55.3
1.53
Doping
Alkaline

349



N-CoS2
28
42.6
—
55
1.50
Doping
Alkaline

348



NiFe(II,III)-LDH
113
157
140
58
1.54
Doping
Alkaline

347



NMoNi/SWCNT
130
54
225
128
—
Doping
Alkaline

342



CoRu–MoS2
52
55
308
50
—
Doping
Alkaline

346



30% Pt/LiCoO2
61
39.5
285
46.8
1.54
Interface
Alkaline

379



(Ru–Co)Ox
44.1
23.5
171.2
60.8
1.488
Interface
Alkaline

378



V-CoP@ a-CeO2
68
48.1
225
58
1.56
Interface
Alkaline

213



Ni/Ni(OH)2
77
53
270
70
1.59
Interface
Alkaline

369



CoSx@Cu2MoS4-MoS2/NSG
118.1
41.1
351.4
61.5
1.60
Interface
Alkaline

367



Co4N@NC-700
62
37
257
58
—
Interface
Alkaline

364



Meso-Fe-MoS2/CoMo2S4
122
45
290
65
1.62
Interface
Alkaline

395



MoS2/NiFe-LDH
110
46
210
77
1.57
Interface
Alkaline

360



CoMoNiS-NF-31
103
55
228
78
1.45
Interface
Acid

361



NiCo-nitrides/NiCo2O4/GF
71
62
183
56
—
Interface
Alkaline

396



Ni1.5Co0.5@ N-C NT/NF
114
117
243
103
1.57
Interface
Alkaline

371



Co3S4/EC-MOF
84
82
226
120
1.55
Interface
Alkaline

370



Ni/Mo2C(1:2)-NCNFs
143
57.8
288
78.4
1.64
Interface
Alkaline

372



Co4S3/Mo2 C-N SC-2
82.5
61.8
268
61.2
1.62
Interface
Alkaline

380



FeS2/CoS2 NSs
78.2
44
302
42
1.47
Interface
Alkaline

397



FeP/Ni2P
14
24.2
154
22.7
1.42
Interface
Alkaline

398



MoS2/FNS/FeNi
120
45.1
204
28.1
—
Interface
Alkaline

399



N-NiMoO4/NiS2
57
74.2
267
44.3
1.60
Interface
Alkaline

374



Pt-CoS2/CC
24
82
300
58
1.55
Interface
Alkaline

366



O-CoMoS
97
70
272
45
1.60
Interface
Alkaline

363



Ni3S2@MoS2/FeOOH
95
85
234
49
1.57
Interface
Alkaline

400



Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2
50
49
210
72
1.64
Interface
Alkaline

381



Mo-Co9S8@C
98
34.6
370
90.3
1.68
SAC
Acid

351



Ir1@Co/NC
60
119
260
163
1.603
SAC
Alkaline

353



Rh SAC−CuO NAs/CF
44
—
197
71.7
1.51
SAC
Alkaline

357



Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT
26
31.8
250
58.2
1.51
SAC
Acid

356



δ-FeOOH NSs/NF,
108
43
265
53
1.62
Vacancy
Alkaline

217



CoWO4−x@C
46.8
50.1
295
53.5
1.57
Vacancy
Alkaline

216



NF/T(Ni3S2/MnS-O)
116
41
228
46
1.54
Vacancy
Alkaline

322



PNHEMH
84
114.2
220
94.9
1.52
Vacancy
Alkaline

321





As discussed above, imperfections with different dimensions have a significant influence on the electrocatalytic activity of electrocatalysts. By incorporation of irregularities into the perfect lattice, an advantageous electronic structure can be realized, which could potentially lower the energy barrier for the rate-determining step, shift the binding energies of key intermediates towards optimal values and change the RDS, thus boosting the electrocatalytic performance of the electrocatalysts for HER, OER, and WS. The stability of the electrocatalysts represents another metric for the evaluation of the electrocatalytic performance of electrocatalysts. Although most defect-featuring electrocatalysts are demonstrated to be stable in a durability test, the dynamic evolution behavior of the imperfection itself is still under debate. The electrocatalysts would undergo structural and compositional changes under applied potentials, which are demonstrated to exhibit positive influences on the electrocatalytic performance of the electrocatalysts, as discussed in the following section. For transition-metal-based (especially Ni, Fe, and Co) electrocatalysts, the reconstruction behavior has been validated by multiple studies, through which the key intermediates and real active sites are generated, thus accelerating the reaction kinetics.223,299,386,401 Generally, the stability of the electrocatalysts is proved by chronoamperometry or chronopotentiometry, which measures the change in the current density or applied potential for a certain time. Further evidence involves ex situ characterization of the electrocatalysts after a duration test via microscopic and spectroscopic techniques, in which case negligible changes in the electronic states and morphological structures are commonly used to demonstrate the excellent stability of the electrocatalysts. For a better understanding of the role that imperfection plays during electrocatalytic reactions, advanced ex situ, in situ, and operando characterization methods are highly desirable, and will be discussed in the following sections.
4 Advanced characterization techniques for decoding structure–property relationships
4.1 Overview
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to optimization of the electrocatalytic performance of electrocatalysts, and significant advances have been achieved, owing to a combination of the optimized electronic structure of the electrocatalysts, which offers experimental evidence for the efficacy of the defect engineering strategy, and advanced characterization techniques, which rationalize the enhanced electrocatalytic performance and bridge the gap between the structures and the properties of the electrocatalysts. To further reveal the role imperfections play during enhancement in electrocatalytic performance, multiple characterization methods have been developed to reveal the structural or electronic factors that are intrinsically linked to the boosted electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalysts via ex situ, in situ, or operando investigations.402–404 Thus, it is necessary to discuss recent progress achieved toward an in-depth understanding of the water electrolysis process using cutting-edge characterization techniques, including microscopic (high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy, HAADF-STEM) and spectroscopic (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS; X-ray absorption spectroscopy, XAS; Raman spectroscopy and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, FTIR) approaches (Fig. 25). In this section, we offer a brief discussion on the advanced ex situ, in situ, or operando characterization methods that can potentially decode the reaction mechanism during the electrocatalytic process and offer insights into the structure–property relation of the defect-featuring electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 25  Advanced characterization techniques, including microscopic and spectroscopic approaches, have been developed to shed light on the origin of the defect-enhanced electrocatalytic performances of electrocatalysts. Device configurations, fundamental concepts, and the obtained spectra/images are schematically illustrated. 
4.2 Advanced microscopic techniques
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is nowadays essential for a description of the morphology of electrocatalysts at the nanoscale, and offers sufficient information on structure, size, shape, crystallinity, and even composition with the assistance of elemental mapping. Compared with conventional TEM, scanning TEM (STEM) addresses each pixel in series as the probe is scanned across the specimen, offering much higher resolution. HAADF-STEM produces annular dark-field images formed by very high angles, and the intensity of the signal is sensitive to the atomic number of the elements, forming Z-contrast images (Fig. 25). Typically, the intensity of the signal collected by the detector is proportional to Zα, where α is often quoted to be around 1.7 for most devices.7 With the help of advanced HAADF-STEM technology, a clearer description of the imperfections can be readily obtained and sufficient information can be indexed.
HAADF-STEM technology has been frequently applied in the identification of atomic species, including vacancies and single atoms in the electrocatalyst to validate their existence by offering Z-contrast images with extremely high resolution. As illustrated in Fig. 26a, the absence of atoms in the graphene substrate can be observed.405 After trapping the nickel species into the vacancies, the atomically dispersed Ni atom indicates a much higher intensity due to its higher Z number (Fig. 26b). As a result of this, the bright spot in the graphene substrate validates the existence of single Ni atoms. Atomically dispersed transition metal atoms and noble metal atoms are the most frequently investigated in the electrocatalysis area, which maximizes the utilization rate of the corresponding atoms and is now thriving as a promising strategy in various fields.407–409 Another example indicates that MoS2 with atomically anchored Co species exhibits superior activity and selectivity in the hydrodeoxygenation reaction.406 Similarly, the bright spot in the Z-contrast image indicates the existence of single atomic Co species, which is consistent with the simulated results (Fig. 26c and d).
 Fig. 26  With the assistance of advanced microscopic techniques, we can directly observe the imperfections in defect-featuring electrocatalysts. (a) A zoomed-in image of a defective area (vacancy). (b) A zoomed-in image of the defective area (with trapped atomic Ni). Reproduced with permission.405 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) A HAADF-STEM image of Co-SMoS2, showing two bright contrast sites in the MoS2 monolayer. (d) The corresponding simulated image. Reproduced with permission.406 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Apart from HAADF-STEM, other types of microscopic devices, including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and field-emission microscope (FEM),410–415 have also demonstrated their usefulness in energy conversion and storage applications. However, there are rare reports regarding electrocatalysis areas, which makes the exploration of their potential in addressing the challenges in this thriving area intriguing.
4.3 Advanced spectroscopic techniques

4.3.1 X-ray absorption spectroscopy. 
X-ray absorption spectroscopy serves as a useful tool for investigating the local structure around selected elements that are contained within a material at the atomic and molecular scale. Typically, XAS measures the change in the X-ray absorption coefficient μ(E) with the energy of the X-rays. Generally, μ(E) decreases smoothly as the energy increases (approximately as 1/E3), and a sudden increase in μ(E) can be observed at certain energies that are characteristic of the atoms in the material.37 The energy points at which μ(E) increases significantly, namely, the X-ray absorption edges, appear when the energy of the X-ray is sufficient to liberate electrons from the low-energy bound states in the atoms, promoting a photoelectron to the continuum state (Fig. 25). The outgoing and scattered waves interfere in a manner that depends on the geometry of the absorber environment and the photoelectron wavelength, thus offering unique information on the local environment around specific atoms. Three regions of the XAS spectrum, the pre-edge region, the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), and the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), are the most frequently studied.416,417 Due to its unique advantages, XAS has been applied not only to crystals, but also to materials that possess little or no long-range translational order, such as amorphous systems, glasses, quasicrystals, disordered films, membranes, solutions, liquids, metalloproteins, and even molecular gases.417
Due to the sensitivity of XAS spectra to the local environment around the absorbers, in situ/operando XAS technology has been intensively applied for identification of the real active sites during electrocatalytic processes.417,419–423 Wei et al. have identified the formation of the high-valence HO–Co1–N2 structure in the alkaline HER process, which serves as the active site in Co1/PCN (atomically dispersed Co that anchors on the phosphorized carbon nitride) electrocatalyst.115Operando XAS spectra indicate a positive shift of the absorption edge by approximately 0.6 eV under potential bias, which implies an increase in the oxidation state of the Co species during the electrocatalytic HER process (Fig. 27a). Further analysis of the operando EXAFS spectra of Co1/PCN also validates the rearrangement of the local atomic structure around the Co atoms (Fig. 27b). By combining theoretical simulation and operando XAS results, the unique high-valence HO–Co1–N2 structure is deemed to be the origin of the high electrocatalytic activity. Recently, Tang et al. proposed that in situ formed Ni0.5Co0.5OOH0.75 species with high-valence metals and multiple oxygen vacancies in an Ni0.5Co0.5-MOF-74 electrocatalyst serve as the real active centers during the oxygen evolution reaction.418Operando XAS characterization reveals an increase in oxidation state as the applied potentials are elevated (Fig. 27c). Further EXAFS results indicate the formation of the collinear Ni–M–M structure, resulting in a two-step reconstruction process of the Ni0.5Co0.5-MOF-74 electrocatalyst, which involves the formation of the hydroxide analogue at the beginning and subsequent formation of the oxyhydroxide analogue (Fig. 27d). Furthermore, the elevated oxidation states of the metal species and the distorted atomic arrangement of the atoms in the electrocatalysts are found to be responsible for the enhanced electrocatalytic OER activity (Fig. 27e and f). Combined with the ab initio XANES simulations, the unique  -Ni0.5Co0.5OOH0.75 with high-valence metal atoms and abundant oxygen vacancies are proposed as the real active sites during the OER process.
 Fig. 27  XAS spectra offer the ability for a probe of the local environment around the imperfections of electrocatalysts by monitoring changes in the oxidation states and coordination numbers of the absorbers. (a) Operando XANES spectra recorded at the Co K-edge of Co1/PCN at different applied voltages from open circuit conditions to −0.1V during the electrocatalytic HER. (b) k3-Weighted Fourier transform (FT) spectra. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c and d) Ni K-edge XANES spectra and Fourier-transformed k3-weighted EXAFS signals recorded at different potentials in 1 M KOH for Ni0.5Co0.5-MOF-74. (e) Changes in the Ni and Co valence states and OER current as a function of the applied potential. (f) Changes in bond length and coordination number for the Ni–O and Ni–M coordination shells. Reproduced with permission.418 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 


4.3.2 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) represents one well-established surface-sensitive technique for the analysis of solids, which offers atomic and molecular information for the outer 1–10 nm of the specimen. The physics that lies behind XPS technology is the photoelectric effect, which refers to electron emission when subjected to electromagnetic radiation (Fig. 25). The detector in the XPS device measures the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, which carries information on the element species, chemical state, overall electronic structure, surface composition, and density of the electronic states. The samples in an XPS test can take the form of a solid or liquid, which makes it a relatively facile method for the analysis process. Furthermore, the use of synchrotron radiation X-rays could provide the possibility of an investigation of the surface (1–2 monolayers) of the electrocatalyst by tuning the photon energy. The unique advantages of modern XPS technology have meant it has prospered in the electrocatalysis field and they make it an efficient toolkit for an in-depth understanding of the electrocatalytic mechanisms during the electrochemical process.37
The in situ/operando XPS technique offers explicit information on the surface composition, electronic structure, and electron distribution status of electrocatalysts during the electrocatalytic process and has been widely applied in the investigation of the dynamics of the electrolysis reactions.424–430 Using operando ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Sharp et al. validated the chemical and structural transformations of a Co3O4/Co(OH)2 biphasic electrocatalyst under an applied potential bias.424Operando XPS results indicate a shift in the binding energy for O 1s after applying the potential bias, implying variation in the electronic structure of the electrocatalyst (Fig. 28a). Further analysis of the Co 3/2 spectra demonstrates the existence of Co(OH)2 (Co2+) over the Co3O4 mixed (Co2+, Co3+) oxide phase (Fig. 28b). Detailed results from the valence band photoemission spectra indicate the existence of Co2+ and Co3+ under pristine and hydrated conditions and the effective water adsorption behavior under OER potentials, which can be inferred from the broad band at ∼10.1 eV below the Fermi level (Fig. 28c). Furthermore, the surface composition changes with the applied potential, and the surface undergoes a significant chemical transformation, resulting in the formation of the CoO(OH) phase during the OER process, which is responsible for the superior OER activity of the electrocatalyst (Fig. 28d).
 Fig. 28  
Operando XPS spectra probe the variations in electronic structures and surface compositions. (a) Operando ambient pressure XPS (APXPS) evolution of the O 1s photoelectron peak. (b and c) Co 2p3/2 and valence band (VB) spectra (both deconvoluted into chemically shifted spectral components) acquired under hydrated conditions (18 Torr water vapor) and as a function of the applied electrochemical potential, respectively. (d) Evolution of the surface stoichiometry and structure of a biphasic catalyst as a function of the applied potential. Reproduced with permission.424 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3 Raman spectroscopy. 
Raman spectroscopy is based on the Raman effect, which states that when incident light excites molecules, the molecules will reflect light in a different wavelength. The magnitude of the Raman effect is related to the polarizability of the electrons in the molecules, which involves an inelastic scattering process (Fig. 25). The Raman spectrum features multiple peaks, showing the intensity and wavelength position of the Raman scattered light, which offers detailed information about the chemical structure, phase and polymorphy, crystallinity, and molecular interactions in the specimen. Various techniques, such as resonance Raman spectroscopy, tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS), and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), have been proposed to enhance the sensitivity of Raman spectroscopy by several orders of magnitude. It is common sense that the electrocatalytic process happens on the very surface of the electrocatalyst, which offers a suitable platform to reveal the potential of Raman spectroscopy.
As one of the most commonly used analytical methods, Raman spectroscopy has shown a significant effect in identifying active species, the surface reconstruction process, the validation of different reaction pathways, the content of the active phases, and key intermediates during the electrocatalytic process.404,431–433,435–441 With the assistance of operando surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, Zhang et al.431 have identified the sulfur atoms in an Ag@MoS2 electrocatalyst as the real active sites during the electrocatalytic HER process. As illustrated in Fig. 29a, the Raman bands at 2532 cm−1 that correspond to the stretching of the S–H bond gradually appear as the applied potential decreases, which indicates the direct absorption of H onto the S atoms in the Ag@MoS2 electrocatalyst. And ν(D–H) shifts to lower positions in the isotopic substitution experiment. Zhao et al.432 reported a highly efficient NiFeCr electrocatalyst by doping Cr into the NiFe oxyhydroxide substrate, and the operando Raman spectrum is used for qualification of the active species. The operando Raman spectrum reveals that more active β-NiOOH content exists in the NiFeCr electrocatalysts, which can be deduced by the intensity ratio between the peak areas at ∼475 cm−1 and ∼555 cm−1 with a stronger peak at 555 cm−1 implying more β-NiOOH (Fig. 29b). By surveying the Raman spectra under different potentials, the surface reconstruction process can be deduced, from which the key reversible intermediates can be identified, as reported by Xiong et al.433 Taking NiNPS as a model, the irreversible phase transformation from NiNPS to α-Ni(OH)2 can be observed at relatively low potentials (Fig. 29c). And the following reversible phase transition between α-Ni(OH)2 and γ-NiOOH can also be deduced from the operando Raman spectra, which indicates that γ-NiOOH acts as the active phase for the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution process, resulting in a 48-fold enhancement in activity at 300 mV. The reaction pathways can also be decided by carrying out operando Raman investigations, as argued by Hu et al.,434 who investigated the different reaction mechanisms of NiOOH and NiFe layered double hydroxide (LDH) electrocatalysts. As revealed by operando Raman spectra, the NiIII-O bands observed at 455 and 535 cm−1 for both FeOOH–NiOOH and NiFe LDH were redshifted by about 22 cm−1, indicating O isotope exchange at 1.55 V (Fig. 29d). Further evidence indicates a 3 cm−1 isotopic shift of FeOOH–NiOOH under OER potential, implying a partial O exchange of 16% and no oxygen exchange for the NiFe-LDH electrocatalyst (Fig. 29e). In combination with the electrokinetic analysis, the authors conclude that the OER process can proceed in FeOOH–NiOOH via a bifunctional mechanism, and that the RDS is the formation of the O–O bond, which involves attack by OH− on an FeO with a hydrogen atom transfer to an NiIII–O site. Furthermore, Hu et al.435 have identified the cobalt superoxide species as the key intermediate and O2 release as the RDS during the electrocatalytic OER process using amorphous cobalt oxyhydroxide as the electrocatalyst. Operando Raman spectra under higher potentials have validated the existence of disordered CoO2, which exhibits obvious peaks at 581 and 474 cm−1 at 1.50 V (Fig. 29f). Isotope labeling experiments have proved the formation of the key intermediate, namely, the superoxide species (CoOO−), under OER potential, which can be deduced from the redshift of the Raman peaks corresponding to the A1g and so-called active oxygen species (Fig. 29g). In situ Raman spectra recorded at >1.45 V have shown a blue shift of the Raman peaks for both A1g and so-called active oxygen species, indicating the availability of both lattice O and OO− for exchange with the electrolyte during the OER process (Fig. 29h). D-labeling results indicate that the superoxide had hydrogen-bonding interactions with nearby OH groups, which can be deduced from the unchanged Raman position for OO− and the shift of 38 cm−1 in the FT-IR spectrum (Fig. 29i). In combination with the electrokinetic results, the release of O2 molecules from the superoxide intermediate is determined as the RDS during the electrocatalytic OER process.
 Fig. 29  
Operando Raman spectra help with identification of key intermediates, the dynamic evolution of the surface structure, the surface composition, and the reaction pathways during electrocatalytic reactions. (a) EC-SERS spectra of the HER on Ag@MoS2 with a size of 23.4 ± 3.8 nm in 0.1 M HClO4 and DClO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.431 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Operando Raman spectra of NiFe and NiFeCr catalysts under various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.432 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Chronopotentiometry measurements at a low current of 0.5 mA. and the corresponding in situ Raman spectra achieved during chronopotentiometry measurements. Reproduced with permission.433 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d and e) Operando Raman spectra of FeOO–NiOOH and NiFe LDH obtained at various potentials for oxygen isotope labeling in 1 M KOH–H218O solution and subsequent isotope exchange experiments. Reproduced with permission.434 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) In situ Raman spectra of CoOOH at increasing applied potentials from the OCP to 1.75 V (0.1 V per step) in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH. (g) In situ Raman spectra of Co16O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH (black) and of Co18O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 18O-KOH (red) recorded at 1.75 V vs. RHE. (h) In situ SERS of labeled Co18O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH. (i) In situ SERS of Co16OOH in 0.1 M Fe-free KOD. Reproduced with permission.435 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 


4.3.4 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. 
Infrared spectroscopy is a technique based on the vibrations of the atoms of a molecule. The infrared spectrum offers information about the fraction of the incident radiation that is absorbed at a particular energy by measuring the infrared radiation passing through the specimen (Fig. 25). Generally, the energy at which any peak in the FTIR spectrum appears corresponds to the frequency of vibration of a part of a sample molecule. The FTIR spectra can be used to determine the functional groups of molecules relevant to both organic and inorganic chemistry. Due to constant improvement in modern technology, FTIR could potentially make further great strides by being incorporated in various in situ or operando devices to monitor the changes in the substance in real time. To further enhance the signal intensity, attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR-SEIRAS) and synchrotron radiation Fourier transform infrared (SR-FTIR) are frequently used in operando investigations.
By detecting the signal that stems from changes in the dipole moment, the FTIR spectrum has been widely used in detecting surface adsorbates and key intermediates during electrocatalytic reactions.60,442–445 Liu et al.60 have designed lattice-strained noble-metal-free metal–organic frameworks for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis, and operando SR-FTIR is applied in the investigation to identify the key intermediates during electrocatalytic processes. As revealed by the SR-FTIR results, a peak around 1048 cm−1 is observed for both the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen evolution reaction, indicating that similar intermediate species appear for both reactions (Fig. 30a). Further isotope-labeling experiments consolidate the appearance of OOH intermediates for both ORR and OER processes (Fig. 30b). In combination with theoretical simulations, the authors conclude that Ni4+ species are the active sites that generate the key OOH intermediates, which is responsible for the superior mass activity of lattice-strained NiFe MOFs. In another example, Yao et al.442 probed the electrocatalytic intermediates for an Ru–N–C electrocatalyst during the OER process by investigating operando SR-FTIR spectra during the electrochemical reaction. As indicated in Fig. 30c and d, a reversible FTIR peak at ∼764 cm−1 can be observed during the electrocatalytic process, which implies the reversible adsorption and desorption of the key intermediate. Further computational results validate the origin of the new peak, which stems from the adsorption of single atoms on the electrocatalyst. Thus, the authors attribute the high activity and stability of the Ru–N–C electrocatalyst towards OER to the formation of O–Ru1–N4 active species.
 Fig. 30  FTIR spectra have been proved to be a promising toolkit for distinguishing absorbates on the surfaces of electrocatalysts and key intermediates during the electrolysis process. (a) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for 4.3%-MOF. (b) Operando isotope-labeling SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for 4.3%-MOF. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for Ru–N–C during the acidic OER. (d) Enlarged views of the infrared signals at ∼764cm−1. Reproduced with permission.442 Copyright 2019, the authors. 
Apart from the above-mentioned microscopic and spectroscopic approaches, other characterization methods, including but not limited to UV-vis spectra, positron annihilation spectra (PAS), X-ray diffraction spectra, diffuser reflectance infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and modern computational methods, have also been applied in investigations of defect-featuring electrocatalysts on both the experimental and theoretical aspects of the electrocatalysis process.37,446

5. Conclusions and outlook
In conclusion, driven by renewable electricity, the hydrogen produced from the electrolysis of water exhibits unprecedented potential in shifting the global energy system from a traditional energy-based one to a sustainable renewable-energy-based one, which necessitates the exploitation of high-performance electrocatalysts with desired properties. The imperfections of the electrocatalysts play a vital role in modulating the electronic structure of the nanocatalysts and thus enhancing the electrocatalytic activity towards HER, OER, and overall water splitting. Owing to the rapid development of various advanced characterization strategies, significant progress has been made towards an in-depth understanding of the prominent role that imperfections from zero-dimensional to three-dimensional defects play during the electrocatalytic process. Further computational approaches based on quantum mechanics and classical Newtonian mechanics offer a theoretical description of the patterns through which the experimental and theoretical results are linked and matched, which in turn offer instructive guidance for the rational design of highly efficient electrocatalysts with desired intrinsic activity, long-term stability, and practical utility under harsh working conditions. As discussed, the implantation of imperfections into the perfect lattice of electrocatalysts induces the breakage of long-range periodicity and significant perturbation of the electron distribution, as a result of which the electronic structures undergo a beneficial alteration that finally enhances the reaction kinetics of the electrocatalytic processes. The imperfections offer advantageous enhancement of the conductivity that facilitates electron/charge transfer and transport processes and increased exposure of active species/sites that allows facile access to the reactive intermediates. More specifically, the incorporation of irregularity into the crystal lattices could induce extra band alignment, shift the d-band center, or reduce the bandgap of the electrocatalysts by optimizing the electron distribution, which accelerates electrocatalytic reaction kinetics through changing the rate-determining step, lowering the energy gap that is required for the RDS and altering the binding energy of the key intermediates.
Although many advances regarding enhancement of the electrocatalytic performance towards hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, and overall water splitting, as well as an in-depth understanding of the mechanism behind the reinforcement, have been achieved, challenges and obstacles for the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis using defected electrocatalysts remain.
5.1. The controlled generation of defects
Numerous approaches, including but not limited to chemical, physical, and biological methods, have been applied to generate various imperfections from zero-dimensional to three-dimensional defects in crystal lattices. However, current preparation methods realize the incorporation of imperfections via either an in situ method or a post-treatment method, which result in a random arrangement of defects and the presence of multi-type defects, hampering the systematic understanding of the vital role they play during the electrocatalytic reaction. This necessitates the controllable production of imperfections with desired concentration, local coordination environment, and a specific type, which would facilitate the isolation of complex factors that work synergistically during the electrochemical process, paving the way to a comprehensive and incisive understanding of the defect effect. As difficult as it is, several approaches have been proposed and developed for this purpose. Energetic particle etching at the atomic sites has been investigated as a potential method for the controlled preparation of defected electrocatalysts. Furthermore, by elaborate optimization of the operation parameters, atomic layer deposition (ALD) has also been deemed a promising approach. Despite the small steps that have been taken towards the ambitious goal of the controllable production of imperfections, there is still a long road ahead.
5.2. The development of cutting-edge in situ/operando characterization techniques for investigations under real operating conditions
As is well documented, the composition, morphological structure, local environment around the reactive species, and the valent state of the electrocatalysts are dynamically changing during the electrocatalytic conditions, which hinders the clear identification and explicit study of the electrocatalytic active species/sites during the complex reaction process, impeding the rational design of the electrocatalysts. To shed light on the intricate electrochemical process in real time, tremendous in situ/operando techniques have been developed and applied in monitoring the compositional change, valent variation, and the morphological transformation when the electrocatalytic reaction is happening, which reveals the in situ change in the local environment and enables a fundamental comprehension of the electrocatalytic reactions. Currently, the most commonly used in situ/operando characterization techniques are based on spectroscopic and microscopic principles (such as in situ IR, Raman, localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)), which are quite costly and require complicated devices, so limited results have been reported. This necessitates the development and exploitation of low-cost and simple in situ/operando strategies that provide sufficient and veracious information about the dynamic process of the electrocatalytic reactions.
Another concern involves the fact that current research commonly focuses on a fundamental understanding of the defect effect with a preference for point-defects, in which case the electrocatalytic HER/OER/WS activity is often evaluated in the laboratory with small current densities (<200 mA cm−2) and a relatively short-term stability test (<1 week). However, aiming at the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology, the rigorous requirements under real operating conditions should eventually be satisfied. This necessitates the importance of an investigation of the electrocatalytic performance under a large current density (>500 mA cm−2) with an ultralong stability test (>1 month). It is well documented that the electrocatalytic surface would undergo severe reconstruction under real operating conditions, in which the reaction kinetics would be different from those at the lab scale,447 making it another intriguing research area.
5.3. The design of novel electrolyzer configurations for highly efficient water electrolysis processes
For the lab-scale investigation of the electrocatalytic performance of defect-featuring electrocatalysts, three-electrode electrolyzers are typically used, in which case crossover of the products is unavoidable. The crossover of the products could be mitigated by separating the anode and cathode with selective permeation membranes, resulting in an H-type electrolyzer configuration. And the mass transport in the traditional electrolyzers is relatively low, which may hamper the overall energy efficiency when operated under ultrahigh current densities. For the compensation of the mass transfer controlled phenomenon, flowing the electrolyte to and away from the electrode has been proposed as one solution, which is seldom reported in water electrolysis investigations due to the limited current densities that have been reported. A further concern involves the separation of the products after electrolysis, which contributes to the increased expense of high-purity hydrogen.
In the journey from lab-scale investigations to fab-scale applications, a limited mass transfer under high potential and a novel design strategy that maximizes the overall energy efficiency is required. Fortunately, investigations into electrolyzer configurations by optimizing the membranes, gas diffusion electrode (GDE), current collectors, cell bodies, etc. have been reported.448 However, investigations concerning water electrolyzers have rarely been reported, making the search and optimization of the electrolyzer configuration an attractive and promising area. To address product separation problems, the decoupling of water electrolysis represents a promising stategy449,450 and greater efforts should be devoted to the optimization of this approach and other solutions should be explored.
5.4. The at-scale production of cost-effective defect-featuring electrocatalysts with desired imperfections
The production of defect-featuring electrocatalysts with various imperfections in the laboratory remains small scale due to the difficulty in precisely controlling the experimental parameters for the repeatable generation of desired imperfections. Towards the final target of industrial deployment of water electrolysis technology using defect-featuring electrocatalysts, cost-effective methods for the at-scale production of electrocatalysts are highly desired. A facile supersaturated co-precipitation method has been reported as a potential approach for producing amorphous electrocatalysts of ∼515 g in one trial, which retain high activity and stability for electrochemical tests.401 However, the large-scale production of defect-featuring electrocatalysts with desired imperfections and high performance is seldom reported. Thus, searching for preparation strategies for the large-scale generation of electrocatalysts with specific imperfections is highly desired.
In summary, the presence of imperfections in the crystal lattice induces a profound perturbation of the electronic structures of electrocatalysts and provides an advantageous enhancement of the electrocatalytic performance of electrocatalysts towards hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, and overall water splitting, thus powering a future transformation in energy from a carbon-intensive energy system to a low-carbon/carbon-neutral, or even negative-carbon energy system. When addressing the challenges in this lively field, there are chances and opportunities to turn lab-scale devices into fab-scale facilities via overcoming experimental and theoretical difficulties.
Author contributions
Shilong Jiao: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing-original draft, Writing-review & editing, Funding acquisition. Xianwei Fu: Writing-original draft, Writing-review & editing, Funding acquisition. Shuangyin Wang: Supervision. Yong Zhao: Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Abbreviations

AFMAtomic force microscopy
ALDAtomic layer deposition
ALKAlkaline electrolyzers
APXPSAmbient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ATR-SEIRASAttenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy
CBMConduction band minimum
cryo-EMCryogenic electron microscopy
CSPConcentrating solar power
CVCyclic voltammetry
DFTDensity functional theory
DOSDensity of states
DRIFTDiffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FEFaradaic efficiency
FEMField-emission microscope
FTIRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
GDEGas diffusion electrode
H2AHydrogen analysis
HAADF-STEMHigh-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
LCOELevelized cost of electricity
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
MAMass activity
MGMetal glass
MOFMetal–organic framework
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PASPositron annihilation spectrum
PDOSProjected density of states
PDSPotential-determining-step
PEMPolymer electrolyte membrane
PVPhotovoltaic
RDSRate-Determining step
SASpecific activity
SACSingle-atom catalysts
SERSSurface-enhanced Raman scattering
SOECSolid oxide electrolysis cells
SR-FTIRSynchrotron radiation Fourier transform infrared
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
STMScanning tunneling microscopy
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TERSTip-enhanced Raman scattering
TOFTurnover frequency
VBValence band
VBMValence band maximum
VREVariable renewable energies
WSWater splitting
XANESX-ray absorption near-edge structure
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21773055, 51702086, U1604122, 21805070) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M663058 and 2019M652749).
References
C. Le Quéré, J. I. Korsbakken, C. Wilson, J. Tosun, R. Andrew, R. J. Andres, J. G. Canadell, A. Jordan, G. P. Peters and D. P. van Vuuren, Nat. Clim. Change, 2019, 9, 213–217 CrossRef .
G. Luderer, Z. Vrontisi, C. Bertram, O. Y. Edelenbosch, R. C. Pietzcker, J. Rogelj, H. S. De Boer, L. Drouet, J. Emmerling, O. Fricko, S. Fujimori, P. Havlík, G. Iyer, K. Keramidas, A. Kitous, M. Pehl, V. Krey, K. Riahi, B. Saveyn, M. Tavoni, D. P. Van Vuuren and E. Kriegler, Nat. Clim. Change, 2018, 8, 626–633 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rogelj, G. Luderer, R. C. Pietzcker, E. Kriegler, M. Schaeffer, V. Krey and K. Riahi, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5, 519–527 CrossRef .
T. A. Jacobson, J. S. Kler, M. T. Hernke, R. K. Braun, K. C. Meyer and W. E. Funk, Nat. Sustainable, 2019, 2, 691–701 CrossRef .
L. Lu, J. S. Guest, C. A. Peters, X. Zhu, G. H. Rau and Z. J. Ren, Nat. Sustainable, 2018, 1, 750–758 CrossRef .
J. Di, C. Yan, A. D. Handoko, Z. W. Seh, H. Li and Z. Liu, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 749–770 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 8, 1803625 CrossRef PubMed .
Global Energy and CO2 Status Report 2018, 2018, International Energy Agency.

          M. Pérez-Fortes and E. Tzimas, Techno-economic and environmental evaluation of CO2 utilisation for fuel production,  2016, Publications Office of the European Union Search PubMed .

International Energy Outlook 2019, International Energy Agency, 2019.

Renewable power generation costs in 2018, International Renewable Energy Agency, 2018.

Transforming Industry through CCUS, International Energy Agency, 2019.
Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 - Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, 2019, International Energy Agency.

Global Renewables Outlook: Energy Transformation 2050, International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020.

Hydrogen from renewable power: Technology outlook for the energy transition, International Renewable Energy Agency, 2018.

The Future of Hydrogen, International Energy Agency, 2019.
J. Yin, J. Jin, H. Lin, Z. Yin, J. Li, M. Lu, L. Guo, P. Xi, Y. Tang and C. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Luo, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 20, 1903120 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808167 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Xiao, P. Huang, M. Cheng and Y. Xie, Chem, 2018, 4, 1263–1283 CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, L. Yao, L. Deng, C. Bowen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, F. Peng and P. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4178 RSC .
S. Anantharaj and V. Aravindan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Li and S. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1672–1680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Wu, X. Zou, K. Hackenberg, W. Zhou, W. Chen, J. Yuan, K. Keyshar, G. Gupta, A. Mohite, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Mater. Today, 2019, 25, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Güttinger, R. Moré, F. Song, W. Wan and G. R. Patzke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6124–6147 RSC .
J. Yu, Q. He, G. Yang, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and M. Ni, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9973–10011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Henzie, J. Kim, Z. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Bando, Y. Sugahara, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 34, 1807134 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 28, 1807001 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Zhang and S. Guo, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 259 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, W. Zhang, Z. Shi, L. Yang and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802880 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. F. Lu, S. Zang and X. W. (David) Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100833 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao, Z. Yao, F. Xue, Y. Lu, M. Liu, H. Deng, X. Ma, Z. Liu, C. Ma, H. Huang, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117964 CrossRef CAS .
Earth's CO2 Home Page, https://www.co2.earth/, (accessed July 30, 2020).
N. US Department of Commerce, NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Laboratory - THE NOAA ANNUAL GREENHOUSE GAS INDEX (AGGI), https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/aggi/aggi.html, accessed July 30, 2020.

Renewable power generation costs in 2019, International Renewable Energy Agency,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. C. Tucker, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 24203–24218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, C. Zhu, C. Pan, W. Lin, J. P. Lemmon, F. Chen, C. Li and K. Xie, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar5100 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Venkataraman, M. Pérez-Fortes, L. Wang, Y. S. Hajimolana, C. Boigues-Muñoz, A. Agostini, S. J. McPhail, F. Maréchal, J. Van Herle and P. V. Aravind, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 24, 100782 CrossRef .
H2A, https://www.nrel.gov/hydrogen/h2a-production-models.html, accessed December 22, 2020.
Z. Li, X. Zhang, H. Cheng, J. Liu, M. Shao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, H. Zhang and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1900486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Strasser, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2658–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Xie, Z. Chen, Z. Lyu, M. Chi, W. Jin and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, C. Liang, T. H. Lee, D. A. Agyeman, J. Yang, V. W. Lau, S.-I. Choi, H. W. Jang, K. Cho and Y.-M. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 9, 1903225 CrossRef .
S. Jiao, Z. Yao, M. Li, C. Mu, H. Liang, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18894–18899 RSC .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, M. Klingenhof and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 933–942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906481 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, P. Zhao and W. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 7, 1808066 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Z. Cao, X. Zheng, B. Zhang, S. M. Kozlov, P. Chen, C. Zou, X. Kong, Y. Wen, M. Liu, Y. Zhou, C. T. Dinh, L. Zheng, H. Peng, Y. Zhao, L. Cavallo, X. Zhang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2020, 6, 1906806 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. He, D. Tian, H. Jiang, D. Cao, S. Wei, D. Liu, P. Song, Y. Lin and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Li, L. Cao, Z. Lu and D. Zhu, Small, 2020, 16, 1905738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800168 CrossRef .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
W. Cheng, X. Zhao, H. Su, F. Tang, W. Che, H. Zhang and Q. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Hou, Y. Wu, S. Cao, Z. Li, X. Nie, Z. Gao and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803693 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Qin, L. Ries, S. Hong, T. Michel, J. Yang, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, P. Miele, D. Kaplan, M. Chhowalla and D. Voiry, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6824–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, Z. Xu, L. Ren, C. Liu, J. Zhuang, Z. Hu, X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Wang, W. Hao, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4288–4293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Qian, H. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Mu, D. Do, B. Zhou, J. Dong, W. Yan, Y. Qin, L. Fang, R. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Zhang, J. Dong, G. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang and X. Fan, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lu, D. Yi, S. Liu, F. Zhan, B. Zhou, L. Gu, D. Golberg, X. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, L. Zhang, G.-L. Xu, S. Zhu, Q. Wang, M. Gu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, P. B. Balbuena, K. Amine and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9614–9621 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, L. Han, Q. Hao, X. Zheng, Y. Li, J. Zhang, C. Liu, H. Liu and H. L. Xin, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2905–2912 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, X. Liu, S. Chen, A. Vasileff, L. Li, Y. Jiao, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 805–810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Diao, Y. Qiu, S. Liu, W. Wang, K. Chen, H. Li, W. Yuan, Y. Qu and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 11, 1905679 Search PubMed .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu, J. Zhang and X. W. (David) Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900699 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Meng, Y. Cao, F. Yao, Z. He, X. Wang, H. Pan and M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119120 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Wang, M.-X. Li, J.-H. Yu, X.-B. Ge, Y.-H. Liu and W.-H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Wang, M. J. Lagos, V. Manichev, R. Fullon, X. Song, D. Voiry, S. Chakraborty, W. Zhang, P. E. Batson, L. Feldman, T. Gustafsson and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9958–9964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Si, Q. Zhang, J. Wu, L. Gao, X. Wei, Y. Sun, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, K. Ammarah, L. Gu, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4298–4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, C. A. Ortíz-Ledón, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Kim, J. Lee, S. Kang, Y.-W. Son, H. W. Jang, Y. Kang and S. Han, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4508–4515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. Park, H. Abroshan, L. Zhang, J. K. Kim, J. Zhang, J. Guo, S. Siahrostami and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2685–2693 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, Z. Liu, Y. Pan, G. Guo, J. Zou, Y. Xia, Z. Peng, W. Li and A. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. R. Anjum, H. Y. Jeong, M. H. Lee, H. S. Shin and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Guan, L. An, S. Ashraf, L. Zhang, B. Liu, Y. Fan and B. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118775 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, R. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Rao, Y. Yu, S. Chen, Q. Yue, Y. Zhang and Y. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6461–6466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Bai, C. Ling, Q. Zhou, S. Yuan, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800315 CrossRef .
Y.-R. Zheng, P. Wu, M. R. Gao, X.-L. Zhang, F.-Y. Gao, H.-X. Ju, R. Wu, Q. Gao, R. You, W.-X. Huang, S. J. Liu, S.-W. Hu, J. Zhu, Z. Li and S. H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2533 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kou, M. Chen, F. Wu, T. J. Smart, S. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, S. Li, S. Lall, Z. Zhang, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, G. Wang, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Tan, R. K. Hocking, X. Bo, H. Ren, B. Johannessen, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, L. Yu, M. Gao, X. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ma, L. Wu, J. Zhu, X. Meng, J. Hu, Y. Tu, S. Wu, J. Mao, Z. Tian and D. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. M. Lau, S. Wu, R. Kato, T.-S. Wu, J. Kulhavý, J. Mo, J. Zheng, J. S. Foord, Y.-L. Soo, K. Suenaga, M. T. Darby and S. C. E. Tsang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7527–7534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, F. Tian, F. Yu, Z. Yang, B. Yu, S. Chen, Z. Ren and H. Zhou, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1511–1519 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, J. Han, T. Wu, K. Feng, T. Yao, X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhong, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang and B. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 3002–3010 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zeng, S. Chen, Y. Q. Jin, J. Li, J. Song, Z. Le, G. Liang, H. Zhang, F. Xie, J. Chen, Y. Jin, X. Chen and H. Meng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1908 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, K. Ye, O. A. Moses, W. Xu, D. Liu, P. Song, C. Wu, C. Wang, S. Ding, S. Chen, B. Ge, J. Jiang and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11733–11740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, T. Xiong, L. Zhao, F. Wang, H. Liu, R. Hu, J. Zhou, W. Zhou and S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12509–12518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yao, P. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 8, 1902449 CrossRef .
G. Zhou, M. Li, Y. Li, H. Dong, D. Sun, X. Liu, L. Xu, Z. Tian and Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1905252 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, J. Cai, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, X. Zheng, J. Ye, P. Cui, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807780 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P.-F. Liu, L.-R. Zheng, G. Wang, H.-G. Yang, P.-K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-Z. Yang, Y. Gong, P. Manchanda, Y.-Y. Zhang, G. Ye, S. Chen, L. Song, S. T. Pantelides, P. M. Ajayan, M. F. Chisholm and W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803477 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Shang, H. Ren, J. Chi, H. Fu, B. Dong, C. Liu and Y. Chai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905107 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Du, X. Sun, H. Yu, Q. Liang, K. N. Dinh, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, Z. Wang and Q. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900116 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, S. Zhang, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Wei, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, M. Zhao, Q. He, X. Wang, Y. Du, L. Song, S. Yang, A. Nie, X. Zou and Y. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, X. F. Lu, S. Xi, Y. Du and X. W. (David) Lou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fan, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, Z. Dai, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12566–12570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, M. Wang, H. Yang, M. Xu, C. Zuo, K. Feng, M. Xie, J. Deng, J. Zhong, W. Zhou, T. Cheng and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3522–3529 RSC .
H. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, E. Cao, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2697–2705 RSC .
N. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Zeng, L. He, D. Li and Q. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Sun, X. Zheng, T. Aoki, B. Pattengale, J. Huang, X. He, W. Bian, S. Younan, N. Williams, J. Hu, J. Ge, N. Pu, X. Yan, X. Pan, L. Zhang, Y. Wei and J. Gu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Liu, D. Han, X. Song, L. Shi, Y. Song, S. Niu, Y. Xie, J. Cai, S. Wu, J. Kang, J. Zhou, Z. Chen, X. Zheng, X. Xiao and G. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1425 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cai, Y. Song, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, Y. Xie, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaw8113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. Dong, Z. Wang, S. Yin and C. Zhao, Small, 2018, 14, 1704137 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, G. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Yang, Y. Sun and C. Felser, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5042–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj and S. Kundu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1260–1264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. Yan, C. Yang, H. He, Q. Jiang, L. Yang, Z. Lu, Z. Sun, X. Xu, Y. Bando and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, K. Duanmu, C. Wan, T. Cheng, L. Zhang, S. Dai, W. Chen, Z. Zhao, P. Li, H. Fei, Y. Zhu, R. Yu, J. Luo, K. Zang, Z. Lin, M. Ding, J. Huang, H. Sun, J. Guo, X. Pan, W. A. Goddard, P. Sautet, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 495 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, J. Ji, M. Hu, M. Weng, Y. Zhang, H. Yu, J. Tang, J. Zheng, Z. Jiang, F. Pan, C. Liang and Z. Lin, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8213–8223 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, N. Yang, W. Li, W. Ding, K. Chen, J. Li, L. Li, J. Wang, J. Jiang, F. Jia and Z. Wei, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1345–1352 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Wu, Z. Li, R. Zhang, C. Kuai, X. Zhao, C. Dong, S. Qiao, H. Liu and X. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803913 CrossRef .
M. D. Hossain, Z. Liu, M. Zhuang, X. Yan, G.-L. Xu, C. A. Gadre, A. Tyagi, I. H. Abidi, C.-J. Sun, H. Wong, A. Guda, Y. Hao, X. Pan, K. Amine and Z. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803689 CrossRef .
J. N. Tiwari, A. M. Harzandi, M. Ha, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, P. Thangavel, A. N. Singh, P. Sharma, S. S. Chandrasekaran, F. Salehnia, J. Jang, H. S. Shin, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900931 CrossRef .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, J. Mao, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, C. Ma, L. Jiang, R. Si, X. Meng, Y. Tu, L. Yu, X. Bao and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-P. Yin, H.-J. Wang, S.-F. Tang, X.-L. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, P. Yan, C. Zhu, C. Ma, W. Wu, C. Wei, Y. Shen, S. Chu, J. Wang, Y. Du, J. Chen, X. Yang and Q. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. Ouyang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
M. Zhou, S. Bao and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7327–7332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, X. Cui, L. Gu, S. Yu, X. Fan, M. Luo, S. Xu, N. Li, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Gong, F. Lv, K. Wang, H. Huang, W. Zhang, S. Guo, W. Zheng and P. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fang, X. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, S. Wei, Y. Li and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lu, L. Guo, F. Wu, Y. Peng, J. E. Lu, T. J. Smart, N. Wang, Y. Z. Finfrock, D. Morris, P. Zhang, N. Li, P. Gao, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 631 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, Y. Ouyang, H. Zhang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, D. Tang, X. Cao, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2120 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z.-C. Wang, H. Dai, Q. Wang, R. Yang, H. Yu, M. Liao, J. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Wei, N. Li, L. Du, D. Shi, W. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1348 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Y. Ma, Z.-L. Lang, L.-K. Yan, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, K. Feng, Y.-J. Xia, J. Zhong, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2114–2123 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Wang, H.-L. He, W. Yan, L. Fang, Y.-B. Zhang, Y. Qin, R. Long, X.-M. Zhang and X. Fan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4925–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, J. Luo, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem, 2019, 5, 2429–2441 CAS .
Y. Li, W. Pei, J. He, K. Liu, W. Qi, X. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Gao, J. He, J. Zhao, J. Hu, T.-S. Chan, Z. Li, G. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 6 CAS .
F. Song, W. Li, J. Yang, G. Han, T. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Rao, P. Liao, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, J. Li, J. Shi, X. Zhang, N.-T. Suen, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, G. Xu, W. Cai, X. Lei, L. Feng, Z. Yang, L. Huang and H. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 341–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. An, X. Long, M. Ma, J. Hu, H. Lin, D. Zhou, Z. Xing, B. Huang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Cheng, W. Cheong, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Pan and C. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901213 CrossRef .
X. Huang, X. Xu, C. Li, D. Wu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803970 CrossRef .
X. Wu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Liu, W. Pei, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901333 CrossRef .
M. Kim, M. A. R. Anjum, M. Lee, B. J. Lee and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809151 CrossRef .
A. Nairan, P. Zou, C. Liang, J. Liu, D. Wu, P. Liu and C. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903747 CrossRef CAS .
F. Navarro-Pardo, J. Liu, O. Abdelkarim, G. S. Selopal, A. Yurtsever, A. C. Tavares, H. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908467 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Liu, R. Wu, J. Wang, Z. Li, K. C. Chan, H. Wang, Y. Wu and Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, H. Cheng, H. Lv, J. Wang, L. Liu, S. Liu, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703322 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, X. Dong, D. Guo, C. Tian and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, H. Yin, C.-T. He, M. Al-Mamun, P. Liu, L. Jiang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, H.-G. Yang, Z. Tang, D. Wang, X.-M. Chen and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801171 CrossRef PubMed .
L. He, W. Zhang, Q. Mo, W. Huang and Q. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Carroll, H. Zhang, J. R. Dunklin, E. M. Miller, N. R. Neale and J. van de Lagemaat, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1648–1656 RSC .
J. Li, H.-X. Liu, W. Gou, M. Zhang, Z. Xia, S. Zhang, C.-R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2298–2304 RSC .
L.-N. Zhang, Z.-L. Lang, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2569–2580 RSC .
Y. Fu, Y. Shan, G. Zhou, L. Long, L. Wang, K. Yin, J. Guo, J. Shen, L. Liu and X. Wu, Joule, 2019, 3, 2955–2967 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alinezhad, L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, R. F. Webster, M. Roelsgaard, B. B. Iversen, W. Schuhmann, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16202–16207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Gu, Y. Du, F. Song, F. Bu, J. Li, Y. Yuan, R. Luo, Q. Liu and D. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000551 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, M. A. Edwards, Y. Qiu, K. Barman and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8890–8896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Panda, P. W. Menezes, S. Yao, J. Schmidt, C. Walter, J. N. Hausmann and M. Driess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13306–13310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, X.-K. Gu, D. He, Z. Li, W. Liu, Q. Xu, T. Yao, Y. Lin, H.-J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, P. Yin, H. Li, X. Hong, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, Y. Li and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19964–19968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, H. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Jin, Z. Jiang, C. Liu, W. Xing and J. Ge, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nutting, J. F. Felix, E. Tillotson, D.-W. Shin, A. De Sanctis, H. Chang, N. Cole, S. Russo, A. Woodgate, I. Leontis, H. A. Fernández, M. F. Craciun, S. J. Haigh and F. Withers, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, M. Gu, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, A. Jain, F. P. G. de Arquer, P. De Luna, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Cai, B. Z. Gregory, O. Voznyy, B. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sinton, E. J. Crumlin and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang, Q. Qi, M. Sun, F. Zi, M. K. H. Leung and B. Huang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, C. Ai, M. Luo, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Lin, G. Pan, Q. Xiong, Q. Liu, X. Wang, X. Xia and J. Tu, Small, 2019, 15, 1901796 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, P. Tang, Z. Hu, Q. He, C. Zhu, L. Wang, Q. Zeng, P. Golani, G. Gao, W. Fu, Z. Huang, C. Gao, J. Xia, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhu, Q. M. Ramasse, A. Zhang, B. An, Y. Zhang, S. Martí-Sánchez, J. R. Morante, L. Wang, B. K. Tay, B. I. Yakobson, A. Trampert, H. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. J. Wang, J. Arbiol and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 57 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Yu, Y. Wen, Y. Gao, X. Xing, Z. Wei, H. Sun, Y.-W. Zhang and W. Song, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5084–5095 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Luo, S. Qiu, Q. Li, Z. Cai, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Sun and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11874–11881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lao, K. Rui, G. Zhao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5432–5437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rajala, R. Kronberg, R. Backhouse, M. E. M. Buan, M. Tripathi, A. Zitolo, H. Jiang, K. Laasonen, T. Susi, F. Jaouen and T. Kallio, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118582 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Cheng, M. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Li and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118039 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shang, X. Cui, L. Jiao, K. Qi, Y. Wang, J. Fan, Y. Yue, H. Wang, Q. Bao, X. Fan, S. Wei, W. Song, Z. Cheng, S. Guo and W. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2758–2764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Intikhab, L. Rebollar, Y. Li, R. Pai, V. Kalra, M. H. Tang and J. D. Snyder, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6798–6802 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, F. Lin, Y. Yao and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902703 CrossRef CAS .
D. Escalera-López, Z. Lou and N. V. Rees, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802614 CrossRef .
B. Li, L. Jiang, X. Li, Z. Cheng, P. Ran, P. Zuo, L. Qu, J. Zhang and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806229 CrossRef .
Q. Che, Q. Li, X. Chen, Y. Tan and X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118338 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lee, S. Lee, G.-S. Kang, Y.-K. Lee, G. G. Park, D. C. Lee and H.-I. Joh, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117995 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. Fu, J. Wu, J. Rao, S.-C. Liou, X. Xu, B. Shao, K. Liu, E. Liu, N. Kumar, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, J. Gooth, G. Auffermann, Y. Sun, C. Felser and B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj and S. Noda, Small, 2020, 16, 1905779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, X. Duan, S. Wang, L. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Duan, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2019, 15, 1904043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, Y. Jiang, M. Qu, Y. Qin, Y. Wang, W. Shen, R. He, W. Su and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118803 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Qi, S. Wang, T. Ma, L. Zhou, Z. Wu, X. Luan, F.-Y. Lin, M. Chen, J. T. Miller, H. Xin, W. Huang and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5102–5108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Lu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, P. K. Chu, S. Ramakrishna and X. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 19060–19066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yilmaz, T. Yang, Y. Du, X. Yu, Y. P. Feng, L. Shen and G. W. Ho, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900140 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Deng, M. Luo, C. Ai, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, L. Huang, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, J. Wen, J. Wang, G. Pan, X. Xia and J. Tu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16289–16296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Ai, W. Liu, Z. Xie, W. Feng, W. Chen and X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Y. Yang, M. Li, H. Huang, W. Hu, L. Cheng, W. Yan, Z. Yu, K. Mao, G. Xia, J. Lu, P. Jiang, K. Yang, R. Zhang, P. Xu, C. Wang, L. Hu and Q. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 17129 CrossRef .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, G. Cheng, S. Chen, W. Luo and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4679–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Wu, P. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Xie, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4154–4160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, J. Jin, H. Zhang, M. Lu, Y. Peng, B. Huang, P. Xi and C. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18676–18682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, G. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Li, Y. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2750–2756 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, X. Cui, S. Yu, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, F. Meng, Z. Peng, L. Ma, J.-Y. Ma, K. Qi, Q. Bao and W. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12987–12995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, S. Pakhira, Z. Yang, A. Nijamudheen, L. Ju, M. Wang, C. I. Aguirre-Velez, G. E. Sterbinsky, Y. Du, Z. Feng, J. L. Mendoza-Cortes and Y. Yang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 651–659 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, X. Liu, D. Han, X. Song, L. Shi, Y. Song, S. Niu, Y. Xie, J. Cai, S. Wu, J. Kang, J. Zhou, Z. Chen, X. Zheng, X. Xiao and G. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 982 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Sun, P. Xi, S. Peng, D. Gao and D. Xue, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 779–786 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shao, Y. Wang, S. Yang, K. Lu, Y. Zhang, C. Tang, J. Song, Y. Feng, L. Xiong, Y. Peng, Y. Li, H. L. Xin and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2019, 12, 11625–11631 CrossRef .
T. Sun, J. Wang, X. Chi, Y. Lin, Z. Chen, X. Ling, C. Qiu, Y. Xu, L. Song, W. Chen and C. Su, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7585–7592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Cai, X. Yin, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Ma, Y. Ke, Y. Du, S. Xi, A. T. S. Wee, Y. Chai and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5600–5608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Xiao, S. Liu, C.-L. Chiang, X. Kuai, C.-K. Peng, Y.-C. Lin, X. Meng, J. Zhao, J. Choi, Y.-G. Lin, J.-M. Lee and L. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18578–18584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, C. Niu, C. Wei, Y. Jia, C. Li and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2029–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, X. Du, Y. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Li, S. Ding, Z. Song and C. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 117750 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, N. Dubouis, J. Huang, D. A. Dalla Corte, V. Pimenta, Z. J. Xu and A. Grimaud, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4160–4170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, D. Han, W.-B. Xu, Y. Shen, Y. Lu, P. Cao, S. Han, W. Xu, D. Zhu, W. Liu and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001059 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, P. Ji, P. Wang, R. Cheng, D. Chen, C. Lin, J. Zhang, J. He, Z. Shi, N. Li, S. Xiao and S. Mu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903891 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, R. Liu and L. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909618 CrossRef CAS .
B. Weng, C. R. Grice, W. Meng, L. Guan, F. Xu, Y. Yu, C. Wang, D. Zhao and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1434–1442 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oh, H. Y. Kim, H. Baik, B. Kim, N. K. Chaudhari, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805546 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Luo, R. Xu, S. Ma, Q. Zhang, H. Hu, K. Qu, S. Xiao, Z. Yang and W. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118090 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Wang, H.-Q. Peng, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, X. Zhou, C.-S. Lee, H. Zhao and W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803144 CrossRef .
K. Fan, H. Zou, L. Duan and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903571 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, R. Ma, X. Liu, J. Pan, H. Wang, S. Liang, G. Qiu and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1254–1260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sultan, J. N. Tiwari, A. N. Singh, S. Zhumagali, M. Ha, C. W. Myung, P. Thangavel and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900624 CrossRef .
M. Asnavandi, Y. Yin, Y. Li, C. Sun and C. Zhao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, Y. Wan, H. Jiang, Z. Pan, C. Wu, M. Wang, X. Wu, B. Ye, P. M. Ajayan and L. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1373–1380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, Z. Li, M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14664 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, O. Gwon, K. Choi, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Park, J.-W. Yoo, J.-Q. Wang, J. H. Lee and G. Kim, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4664–4670 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Q. Cao, Y. Li, X. Long, S. Yang, J. K. Clark, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and J.-J. Delaunay, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Y.-C. Zhang, L. Pan, G.-Q. Shen, N. Mahmood, Y.-H. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Jia, L. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xu and J.-J. Zou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3803–3811 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, M. Li, M. Han, D. Xu, J. Yang, Y. Lin, N.-E. Shi, Y. Lu, R. Yang, B. Liu and Z. Dai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706018 CrossRef .
R. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701546 CrossRef .
L. Zhuang, L. Ge, Y. Yang, M. Li, Y. Jia, X. Yao and Z. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606793 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Ma, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, P. Pan, L. Gu, D. Xu, J. Bao and Z. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900062 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, Z. Wei, C.-L. Dong, J. Ma, S. Shen, Y. Li and S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2563–2569 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, C. Xie, Z. Liu, S. Du, W. Chen, D. Yan, L. Tao, Z. Shu, G. Zhang, H. Duan, Y. Wang, Y. Zou, R. Chen and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12087–12095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, M. Qiao, Y.-R. Lu, L. Hao, D. Liu, C.-L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8691 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, W.-J. Jiang, Z. Wei, T. Tang, J. Ma, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7005–7013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. Yang, H. Yao, D. Liu, L. Song, J. Zhu, S. Li, L. Gu, K. Lin and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7240–7244 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. P. Martirez and E. A. Carter, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 962–967 CrossRef CAS .
W. Moschkowitsch, K. Dhaka, S. Gonen, R. Attias, Y. Tsur, M. C. Toroker and L. Elbaz, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4879–4887 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Balaghi, C. A. Triana and G. R. Patzke, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2074–2087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Peng, C. Zhang, Z. Huang and W. Shi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4214–4220 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. P. Martirez and E. A. Carter, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2720–2734 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu, J. Shi, L. Ju, Z. Li, N. Orlovskaya, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 12030–12040 CrossRef CAS .
F. Razmjooei, K. P. Singh, D.-S. Yang, W. Cui, Y. H. Jang and J.-S. Yu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2381–2391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, X. Yu, H. Wang, B. Yao, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4637–4644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. C. Kao, Y. Liu, K. Sun, H. Yu, J. Guo, S. Y. H. Liou and M. R. Hoffmann, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4278–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bothra and S. K. Pati, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 858–862 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Niu, L. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 892–898 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, R. Zhang, Y.-C. Wang, G. Shen, I. Aslam, M. A. Qadeer, N. Mahmood, W. Xu, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2177–2182 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, T. Wu, Y. Zhu, X. Li, M. Li, R. Lu, J. Wang, X. Zhu and W. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1654–1660 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, X. Wang, K. Tang, M. Wang, C. Wang and C. Yan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12230–12239 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Q. He, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, Y. Zhang, M. Habib, S. Chen and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11574–11583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-R. Wang, J.-Y. Liu, Z.-W. Liu, W.-C. Wang, J. Luo, X.-P. Han, X.-W. Du, S.-Z. Qiao and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800005 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707522 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Lee, J. Myung, A. B. Naden, O. S. Jeon, Y. G. Shul and J. T. S. Irvine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903693 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706279 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, M. Zhang, Y. Tong, C. Zhong, N. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701584 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shan, T. Ling, K. Davey, Y. Zheng and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900510 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Su, R. Ge, K. Jiang, Y. Dong, F. Hao, Z. Tian, G. Chen and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801351 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Tao, Y. Qing, H. Xu, F. Yang, S. Luo, C. Tian, M. Liu and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900178 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Wen, F. Ni, B. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, S. E. Lowe, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Pang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, P. Liu, K. Zhao, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16511–16515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, P. Chen, T. Zhou, K. Xu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7121–7125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Ye, Z.-X. Shi, J.-X. Feng, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2672–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xing, R. Liu, M. Anjass, K. Cao, U. Kaiser, G. Zhang and C. Streb, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119195 CrossRef CAS .
G.-L. Chai, K. Qiu, M. Qiao, M.-M. Titirici, C. Shang and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1186–1195 RSC .
B. M. Hunter, W. Hieringer, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1734–1743 RSC .
H. Shin, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6745–6748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Huang, Z. L. Zhao, M. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Feng, H. Xu and M. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Small, 2017, 13, 1604103 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dong, X. Zhang, J. Xu, R. Si, J. Sheng, J. Luo, S. Zhang, W. Dong, G. Li, W. Wang and F. Huang, Small, 2020, 16, 1905328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lebedev, R. Ezhov, J. Heras-Domingo, A. Comas-Vives, N. Kaeffer, M. Willinger, X. Solans-Monfort, X. Huang, Y. Pushkar and C. Copéret, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1189–1198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, S. Feng, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1713–1721 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, X. Wang, R. K. Hocking, H. Liu, J. Chen, L. Ge, L. Zhang, M. Li, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, S. Shen, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805581 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Xing, K. Xu, Y. Tong, H. Xie, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 610–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, M. Peng, Y. Yu, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. Jin and A. J. Bard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 12651–12656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, X. Han, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, D. Nordlund, J. Wang, S. Chou, H. Liu, L. Li, C. Zhong, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, F. Li, W. Chen, Y. Ma, Y. Wu, X. Gu, Y. Qin, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang, H. Zhu, T. Deng and J. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2357–2365 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Jiang, S. Niu, H. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Li, G. Huang, L. Jiang, W. Huang, J. Hu and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, F. Zheng, S.-J. Zhang, A. Fisher, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Li, B.-B. Xu, J.-T. Li and S.-G. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11342–11351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Z. Lian, B. Wei, Y. Li, O. Bondarchuk, N. Zhang, Z. Yu, A. Araujo, I. Amorim, Z. Wang, B. Li and L. Liu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3571–3579 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, D. Zhou, Y. Lin, R. Ge, X. Hou, X. Sun and C. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3859–3864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X.-K. Wei, J. D. Costa, J. L. Lado, B. Owens-Baird, L. P. L. Gonçalves, S. P. S. Fernandes, M. Heggen, D. Y. Petrovykh, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, K. Kovnir and Y. V. Kolen’ko, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5450–5455 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Liu, X. Li, S. Yang, M. Y. Zu, P. Liu, B. Zhang, L. R. Zheng, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2257–2263 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Shen, Y. Wang, Y.-J. Tang, S.-L. Li, Y.-R. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Y.-F. Li, Y. Xu and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1327–1333 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Pi, Q. Shao, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6245–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, H. Zhao, B. Huang, L. Xu, M. Luo, J. Wang, F. Luo, Y. Du and C. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, P. Ren, C. Ma, J. Zhao, R. Chen, S. Chen, N. P. Rajan, H. Li, L. Yu, Z. Tian and D. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, C. Wei, Y. Sun, X. Liu, F. Meng, X. Meng, S. Sun, S. Xi, Y. Du, Z. Bi, G. Shang, A. C. Fisher, L. Gu and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, Y. Zheng, J. Ran, F. Xie, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8539–8543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, W. Sun, R. Sui, J. Pei, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5443–5450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, G. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Sun, J. Dai, H. Chu, R. Ran, W. Zhou, R. Cai and Z. Shao, Small, 2020, 16, 2002089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. M. Chen, Z. Hu, S. Hung, N. Ma, J. Dai, H. Lin, C. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900883 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Kim, I. Park, E.-S. Jeong, K. Jin, W. M. Seong, G. Yoon, H. Kim, B. Kim, K. T. Nam and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606893 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gong, X. Y. E. Chng, Y. Du, S. Xi and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 807–814 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kou, Y. Yu, X. Liu, X. Gao, L. Zheng, H. Zou, Y. Pang, Z. Wang, Z. Pan, J. He, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4411–4419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Zheng, M. Xu, Z. Zhuo, W. Yang, L.-W. Wang, L. Dai, J. Lu, K. Amine and F. Pan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 466–473 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, S. Zhu, S. Chen, Y. Li, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Liu, X. Yang, L. Song, X. Yang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606570 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Lu, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Feng, D. Zhang, F. Liu, H. Li, J. Xu, Y. Xia, Y. Li, H. Lin, S. Wang, M. Shao, Z. Kang and J. Zhong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000184 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cai, J. Huang, J. Chen and Z. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4858–4861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li, Y. Wu, D.-P. Liu, W. Li, H.-W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700404 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, Y. Zhong, Y. Chen, N. Ma, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2326 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lyu, J. Zheng, Z. Xiao, S. Zhao, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 1906867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Ren, Q. Liang, K. N. Dinh, R. Dangol and Q. Yan, Small, 2020, 16, 1906766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, G. Zhang, J. Qu and H. Liu, Small, 2020, 16, 1907001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. ul Haq, S. A. Mansour, A. Munir and Y. Haik, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910309 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Zheng, G. Zhao, K. Rui, P. Li, X. Xu, Z. Cheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803482 CrossRef .
K. Jayaramulu, J. Masa, O. Tomanec, D. Peeters, V. Ranc, A. Schneemann, R. Zboril, W. Schuhmann and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700451 CrossRef .
D. He, X. Song, W. Li, C. Tang, J. Liu, Z. Ke, C. Jiang and X. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900881 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, Z. Qi, Z. Wu, Y. H. Lui, T.-H. Kim, X. Tang, L. Zhou, W. Huang and S. Hu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teng, X.-D. Wang, J.-F. Liao, W.-G. Li, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Dong and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1802463 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, C. Dong, Z. Wang, H. Gao, J. Niu, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Small Methods, 2019, c, 1800286 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xie, S. Feng, D. Liu, M. Shao and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5867–5871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cao, H. Xu and D. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903038 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dvořák, L. Szabová, V. Johánek, M. Farnesi Camellone, V. Stetsovych, M. Vorokhta, A. Tovt, T. Skála, I. Matolínová, Y. Tateyama, J. Mysliveček, S. Fabris and V. Matolín, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4354–4363 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, R. Ji, Y. Liu, Y. Pan, B. Cai, Z. Li, Z. Liu, S. Lu, Y. Wang, H. Jin, C. Ma and X. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Fu, H. Zhao, R. Jiang, F. Tian and R. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117899 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chi, X. Tian, Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Jing, Q. Lv, W. Yao, F. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, R. Ji, Y. Liu, Y. Pan, B. Cai, Z. Li, Z. Liu, S. Lu, Y. Wang, H. Jin, C. Ma and X. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119141 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, E. Stavitski, Y. H. Lui, T.-H. Kim, H. Liu, L. Huang, X. Luan, L. Zhou, K. Jiang, W. Huang, S. Hu, H. Wang and J. S. Francisco, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 136–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, C. Xi, Y.-Z. Jin, D. Wu, J.-Q. Wang, T. Liu, H.-B. Wang, C.-K. Dong, H. Liu, S. A. Kulinich and X.-W. Du, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1823–1829 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Xu, Z. Wei, H. Li, T. Zhang, X. Li, W. Cai, J. Ma, H. J. Fan and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802121 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Y. Min, W. Yang, Y. Lian, L. Lin, K. Feng, Z. Deng, M. Chen, J. Zhong, L. Xu and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8882–8892 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Y.-S. Feng, W.-T. Lu, D. He, C.-Y. Wang, Y.-K. Li, X.-Y. Wang and F.-F. Cao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5431–5441 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. Yang, M. Liu, R. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Tang, C. Liu, Z. Mei, H. Chen and F. Pan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5621–5629 CrossRef CAS .
S.-F. Hung, Y. Zhu, G.-Q. Tzeng, H.-C. Chen, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-F. Liao, H. Ishii, N. Hiraoka and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2813–2820 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Sultana, J. D. Riches and A. P. O’Mullane, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804361 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, Z. Yin, W. Lai, Y. Sun, L. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802327 CrossRef .
L. Huang, D. Chen, G. Luo, Y.-R. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Zou, C.-L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901439 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chakraborty, R. Beltrán-Suito, J. N. Hausmann, S. Garai, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001377 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, D. Jia, H. Yu, C. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800175 CrossRef .
Q. Qin, H. Jang, P. Li, B. Yuan, X. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803312 CrossRef .
V. H. Hoa, D. T. Tran, D. C. Nguyen, D. H. Kim, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002533 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Ai, M. Sun, F. Han, Z. Li, Q. Peng, Q. Wang, J. Liu and L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910741 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Cao, Y.-W. Hu, S.-F. Tang, A. Iljin, J.-W. Wang, Z.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800949 CrossRef .
H. Ge, G. Li, J. Shen, W. Ma, X. Meng and L. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 275, 119104 CrossRef CAS .
A. Majeed, X. Li, P.-X. Hou, H. Tabassum, L. Zhang, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118823 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, H. Jia, B. Fei, Y. Ha, H. Li, Y. Guo, M. Liu and R. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118404 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, X. Lv, D. Xing, F. Ma, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118330 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Q. Lu, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3899 CrossRef PubMed .
I. S. Kwon, T. T. Debela, I. H. Kwak, Y. C. Park, J. Seo, J. Y. Shim, S. J. Yoo, J. Kim, J. Park and H. S. Kang, Small, 2020, 16, 2000081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, J. Han, L. Lu, G. Qiu, Z. L. Wang and C. Sun, Small, 2019, 15, 1902551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yao, P. Li, Z. Zhou, R. Meng, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2019, 15, 1901993 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, R. Cui, C. Gao, L. Bian, Y. Pu, X. Zhu, X. Li and W. Huang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, X. Yang, W. Gong, J. Zhang, T. Pan, H. Sun, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Hu, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Small, 2020, 16, 2001098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Duan, X. Liu, J. Gu, R. Si, Y. Qiu, Y. Qiu, D. Shi, F. Chen, X. Sun, J. Lin and J. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, J. Sokolowski, X. Song, Y. He, Y. Mei and G. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902844 CrossRef .
W.-H. Lai, L.-F. Zhang, W.-B. Hua, S. Indris, Z.-C. Yan, Z. Hu, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, M. Liu, R. Liu, Y.-X. Wang, J.-Z. Wang, Z. Hu, K. Liu, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, A. Han, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, Q. Zhang, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, W. Wei, H. Wang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, H. Hu, X. Zhao, Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Xu, T. Kaneko, Y. Yoshida, C. Zhu and W. Cai, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2120–2128 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, T. Liu, S. Bai, L. Li, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5482–5489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, S. K. Matta, G. Will and A. Du, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800419 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800438 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, X. Zhang, H. Wan, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, W. Gao, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4518–4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Yao, Z. Yu, S. M. Islam, H. He, M. Yuan, Y. Yue, K. Xu, W. Hao, G. Sun, H. Li, S. Ma, P. Zapol and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10417–10430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, S. Chen, H. Wang and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802939 CrossRef .
J. Hou, B. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Z. Gao and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 612–4621 Search PubMed .
W. Yuan, S. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Qiu, Y. An and L. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 692–700 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, L. Zhong, C. Du, Y. Luo, J. Zhao, Y. Zheng, J. Xu, J. Ma, C. Liu, S. Li and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7975–7984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, J. Lu, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800935 CrossRef .
D. C. Nguyen, D. T. Tran, T. L. L. Doan, D. H. Kim, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903289 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, H. Jang, P. Li, B. Yuan, X. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 9, 1803312 CrossRef .
L. Dai, Z.-N. Chen, L. Li, P. Yin, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, T. Kong, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806672 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, S. Li, Q. Liu, J. Yin, D. Sun, M. Zhang, L. Xu, Y. Tang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902371 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Wang, N. Pinna and X. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803185 CrossRef .
Q. Shi, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Fang, Z. Liang, G. Shao, B. Tang, W. Yang, L. Qin and X. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903854 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Liu, G.-C. Wang, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805298 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, A. W. Maijenburg, X. Li, S. L. Schweizer and R. B. Wehrspohn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, Z. Cai, L. Wang, C. Tian, X. Zhang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901174 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fester, A. Makoveev, D. Grumelli, R. Gutzler, Z. Sun, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, K. Kern and J. V. Lauritsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11893–11897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang and L. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, P. Cui, Y. Qian, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Luo, C. Zhou, S. Du, D. Zhen, B. Chen, J. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Iru and D. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118197 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Hu and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, D. Jia, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Han, B. Huang, Q. Shao, H. L. Xin and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Lu and F. Cao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shan, J. Liu, H. Mu, Y. Xiao, B. Mei, W. Liu, G. Lin, Z. Jiang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1659–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Zhu, B. Gu, Y. Zhong, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804333 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, O. Bapat, A. Bhide, R. Fernandes, M. K. Patel, V. Bambole, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118051 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, P. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Yang, P. Jiang, C. Wang, S. Liu, S. Gong, L. Hu and Q. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1803009 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Liu, W. Li, L. Gu, H. Liu, P. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Zhang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1139–1152 CAS .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, S. Garai, C. Walter, A. Guiet and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15237–15242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Jothi, R. Bose, H. Rajan, C. Jung and S. C. Yi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802615 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Chen, J. Shi, J. Wang, A. Fan, W. Zan, S. Li, W. A. Goddard and X.-M. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1809 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, T. Xu, T. Li, Y. Wang, H. Liu, J. Feng, S. Ding, Z. Li and M. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802829 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Huang, Y. Sun, M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Wang, C. Li, F. Lv, W. Zhang and S. Guo, Small, 2019, 15, 1804212 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, J. Henzie, B. Jiang, W. Xia, T. Chen, Y. Bando, Y.-M. Kang, Md. S. A. Hossain, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4141–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Tan, D. Liu, X. Liu, J. Xin, J. Xie, M. Zhao, L. Song, L. Dai and H. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801829 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Yin, L. An, M. Lu, K. Sun, Y.-Q. Zhao, D. Gao, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Small, 2018, 14, 1801070 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Sun, F. Qin, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, F. Li, W. Chen, Q. Xiang, Y. Ma, H. Zhu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang, T. Deng and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803151 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zheng, K. Guo, W.-J. Jiang, T. Tang, X. Wang, P. Zhou, J. Du, Y. Zhao, C. Xu and J.-S. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 1004–1012 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, Z. Yu, S. Hu, X. Zheng, C. Zhang, H. Ding, B. Hu, Q. Fu, Z. Yu, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, M. Gao and S. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15772–15777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2521–2531 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang, W. Cai, S. Liu and B. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700395 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, J. Wang, H. Chu, Y.-C. Chu and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1281–1291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M.-J. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y.-C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Su, Y. He, L. Li, S. Zhu, H. Shen, P. Xie, X. Fu, G. Zhou, C. Feng, D. Zhao, F. Xiao, X. Zhu, Y. Zeng, M. Shao, S. Chen, G. Wu, J. Zeng and C. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12217–12314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11900–11955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Hannagan, G. Giannakakis, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12044–12088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C.-L. Wu, L.-M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pető, T. Ollár, P. Vancsó, Z. I. Popov, G. Z. Magda, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, P. B. Sorokin and L. Tapasztó, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1246–1251 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Patterson, Y. Xu, M.-A. Moradi, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk and H. Friedrich, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1495–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Zachman, Z. Tu, S. Choudhury, L. A. Archer and L. F. Kourkoutis, Nature, 2018, 560, 345–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Huang, Y. Li, W. Chiu and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9263–9276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, J. H. K. Pfisterer, D. McLaughlin, C. Csoklich, L. Seidl, A. S. Bandarenka and O. Schneider, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800387 CrossRef .
J. Deng, Q. Zhang, X. Lv, D. Zhang, H. Xu, D. Ma and J. Zhong, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 975–993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Timoshenko and B. Roldan Cuenya, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 882–961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Tan, C.-T. He, P. An, F. Xie, S. Jiang, Y. Zhu, K.-H. Wu, B. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Liu, J. Dong and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 881–890 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. García de Arquer, M. Liu, C. T. Dinh, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Cao, S. M. Kozlov, F. P. García de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Wen, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, P. De Luna, T. Regier, W. Bi, E. E. Alp, C.-W. Pao, L. Zheng, Y. Hu, Y. Ji, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Cavallo, H. Peng and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2020, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Povia, D. F. Abbott, J. Herranz, A. Heinritz, D. Lebedev, B.-J. Kim, E. Fabbri, A. Patru, J. Kohlbrecher, R. Schäublin, M. Nachtegaal, C. Copéret and T. J. Schmidt, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2019, 12, 3038–3052 RSC .
D. Cao, D. Liu, S. Chen, O. Adetunji Moses, X. Chen, W. Xu, C. Wu, L. Zheng, S. Chu, H. Jiang, C. Wang, B. Ge, X. Wu, J. Zhang and L. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 906–915 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Su, S. Gu, R. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Yan, J. Li and S. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 739–746 RSC .
M. Favaro, J. Yang, S. Nappini, E. Magnano, F. M. Toma, E. J. Crumlin, J. Yano and I. D. Sharp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8960–8970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, B. Dai, T. Tong, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802981 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kornienko, J. Resasco, N. Becknell, C.-M. Jiang, Y.-S. Liu, K. Nie, X. Sun, J. Guo, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7448–7455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Tao, Y. Xu, X. Huang, J. Chen, L. Pei, J. Zhang, J. G. Chen and B. Liu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1498–1509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, S. Zhou, Q. Dong, Y. Li, X. Zhang, N. Ta, Z. Liu, J. Zhao, F. Yang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 4665–4669 CrossRef .
J. Liu, E. Jia, L. Wang, K. A. Stoerzinger, H. Zhou, C. S. Tang, X. Yin, X. He, E. Bousquet, M. E. Bowden, A. T. S. Wee, S. A. Chambers and Y. Du, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Baniecki, H. Yamaguchi, C. Harnagea, D. Ricinschi, Z. Gu, J. E. Spanier, T. Yamazaki and H. Aso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803846 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Zhu, M. Su, P. Yin, X. Wu, Q. Lu, C. Tan, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, W. Yang, H. Li, G.-H. Nam, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Huang, P. M. Radjenovic, W. Huang, Z. Tian, J. Li and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7161–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bo, R. K. Hocking, S. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Chen, J. Zhuang, Y. Du and C. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4225–4237 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Rao, C. Wu, Y. Hu, X. Wang, R. Lu, Y. Li and J. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17458–17464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, S. Lee and X. Hu, Angew.
Chem., 2021, 60, 3095–3103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C.-S. Hsu, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11901–11914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, M. Li, Z. Bai, G. Jiang, B. Liu, T. Wu, Z. Chen, K. Amine and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805609 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yan, Y. Shen, C. An, L. Li, R. Si and C. An, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119687 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H.-C. Chen, C.-S. Hsu, T.-S. Lin, C.-J. Chang, S.-C. Chang, L.-D. Tsai and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, K. Banjac, M. Lingenfelder and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 10401–10405 CrossRef .
K. Zhu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1252–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Raman, S. Maisel, M. Grabau, N. Taccardi, J. Debuschewitz, M. Wolf, H. Wittkämper, T. Bauer, M. Wu, M. Haumann, C. Papp, A. Görling, E. Spiecker, J. Libuda, H.-P. Steinrück and P. Wasserscheid, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9499–9507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Liu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Cheng, H. Su, X. Zhao, J. He and Q. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wolski, M. El-Roz, M. Daturi, G. Nowaczyk and M. Ziolek, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117978 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, B. Lu, X. Qu, J. Ye, J. Zhang, S. Yin, Q. Wu, R. Wang, S. Shen, T. Sheng, Y. Jiang and S. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
F. Reikowski, F. Maroun, I. Pacheco, T. Wiegmann, P. Allongue, J. Stettner and O. M. Magnussen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3811–3821 CrossRef CAS .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2021, 36, 101028 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Wallace and M. D. Symes, Joule, 2018, 2, 1390–1395 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, B. Liu, J. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Zhong, Y. Li, C. Sun, X. Han, Y. Deng, N. Zhao and W. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 440–449 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shilong Jiao
	Shilong Jiao received his PhD degree in materials science from Shandong University. After that, he joined Prof. Yujia Zeng as a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University (2018–2020). He is currently a lecturer at Henan University. His research interests include the preparation and characterization of nanocatalysts with various defects and the relationships between the structural imperfections and the electrocatalytic performance toward renewable-energy-related reactions.

Xianwei Fu
	Xianwei Fu received her BS degree from Shanxi Datong University, Datong, China, in 2013, and a PhD degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2018. Now, she is a full postdoc fellow at Hunan University. Her research interests focus on the fabrication and characterization of low-dimensional materials for electrocatalyst and optoelectronic device applications.

Shuangyin Wang
	Shuangyin Wang received his BS degree in 2006 from Zhejiang University and his PhD degree in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a professor at the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are plasma technology, defects in various crystals, and their application in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Yong Zhao
	Yong Zhao received a PhD in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. After that, he joined Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto as a postdoctoral fellow in Applied Chemistry at the University of Tokyo (2008–2015). He became a full professor at Henan University in 2016. His research focuses on the mechanisms of electrocatalytic reactions and catalyst innovations in fuel cells and Li–O2 batteries.

Broader context
Versatile hydrogen is deemed to be a crucial energy carrier that can facilitate the decarbonization of hard-to-change sectors and the transition of the global energy system, and it is now enjoying unprecedented momentum due to interest from policy makers and commercial companies. Electrocatalysts with cost-effectiveness, high activity, and long-term stability hold promise for further reductions in the cost of green hydrogen and the large-scale deployment of water electrolysis technology. The incorporation of imperfections with different dimensions into the perfect lattices of electrocatalysts induces significant perturbations of electronic structures and advantageous binding behavior with key intermediates, as well as lowered energy barriers for rate-determining steps. Here, in this review, we offer a comprehensive summary of recent advances achieved relating to defect-featuring electrocatalysts via defect engineering for the enhancement of the electrochemical conversion of water. Special attention is paid to advanced characterization methods for gaining an in-depth understanding of the electronic effects induced by the imperfections. Then, we offer perspectives and future challenges relating to this promising field from our point of view.


 	Fig. 1  (a) The increasing CO2 equivalent mixing ratio, which mainly comes from the continuous emission of CO2 all around the world. (b) Global annual demand for hydrogen from 1975 to 2018, mainly for oil refining and ammonia manufacture for fertilizers. Reproduced with permission,17 International Energy Agency. (c) The LCOE (levelized cost of electricity) values for projects and global weighted average values for concentrating solar power (CSP), solar photovoltaic (PV), onshore and offshore wind from 2010–2022. Continuously declining renewable electricity prices indicate the potential of electrochemical approaches for solving existing crises. Reproduced with permission,12 International Renewable Energy Agency.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the hydrogen value chain from supply to end-use. With various sources of production and diverse application scenarios, the hydrogen economy offers manifold combinations of supply, handling, and demand technologies, proving its unlimited potential in the future. Reproduced with permission,17 International Energy Agency.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cost analysis for current water electrolysis technology. (a) A schematic illustration of the process flow for the electrocatalytic generation of hydrogen. (b) Changes in the levelized values of hydrogen with varying electricity prices where the feedstock cost accounts for most of the cost in central polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolysis. (c) The reduction of the cell potential directly reduces the total cost of electrocatalytic hydrogen in both the two-cents scenario and the renewable scenario for central PEM electrolysis. (d) The feedstock cost causes the high price of hydrogen from electrolysis involving distributed PEM electrocatalytic water splitting. (e) The reduction of the cell potential reduces the total cost of electrocatalytic hydrogen in both the two-cents scenario and the renewable scenario for distributed PEM electrolysis. The hydrogen analysis (H2A) production model is adapted for the evaluation of hydrogen costs.45	 

 	Fig. 4  A schematic illustration of the imperfections in nanomaterials. Defects from zero-dimensional vacancies to three-dimensional amorphism commonly exist in nanomaterials and alter the electron distributions of electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 5  The proposed mechanism for the HER in acid and alkaline electrolytes, in which different reaction pathways are presented in the forms of the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism and the Volmer–Tafel mechanism.	 
H+ + M + e− = MHads (In acid)	(1)
H2O + M + e− = MHads + OH− (In alkali)	(2)
H+ + MHads + e− = M + H2 (In acid)	(3)
H2O + MHads + e− = M + H2 + OH− (In alkali)	(4)
2MHads = 2M + H2  (In acid or alkali)	(5)

 	Fig. 6  The OER mechanism in acid and alkaline electrolytes. Two different reaction paths that involve the production of peroxide (M–OOH) species as the intermediate and the direct combination of two adjacent oxo (M–O) intermediates are proposed.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representative polarization curves for the OER (left) and HER (right) processes and the derived parameter matrix for the evaluation of electrocatalytic performance.	 
M + H2O = M–OH + H+ + e− (In acid)	(6)
M + OH− = M–OH + e− (In alkali)	(7)
M–OH = M–O + H+ + e− (In acid)	(8)
M–OH + OH− = M–O + H2O + e− (In alkali)	(9)
2M–O = 2M + O2 (In acid or alkali)	(10)
M–O + H2O = M–OOH + H+ + e− (In acid)	(11)
M–O + OH− = M–OOH + e− (In alkali)	(12)
M–OOH = M–O2 + H+ + e− (In acid)	(13)
M–OOH + OH− = M + O2 + H2O + e− (In alkali)	(14)
η = Eapplied − E0 − iR	(15)
	(16)
TOF = jA/αnF	(17)

 	Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of the effects of defects in the modulation of electrocatalytic performance.	 

 	Fig. 9  The electrochemical approach for splitting water (including the HER, the OER, and total water splitting) is gaining more attention than ever. These data are based on search results from Web of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  A summary of the performance of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) a single-atom catalyst (SAC), and (d) an interface towards hydrogen evolution under acidic and alkali conditions in terms of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope values.	 

 	Fig. 11  The vacancy type, concentration, and configuration hold the key to the vital role played in optimizing the electronic structure of an electrocatalyst. (a) An atomic-resolution high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of 1D-DRHA MoS2 with multiple defects. (b) A diagram of the Gibbs free energy for the HER on perfect and defect-rich 2H-MoS2 surfaces. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Polarization curves for 2H-MoS2 with various vacancy concentrations measured in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (d) HADDF-STEM observations of local strain and atomic structure in single-layer MoS2 with a vacancy concentration of 5.7 × 1014 cm−2. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) The DOS of MoS2 with single S-vacancies at concentrations of 0–18.75%. (f) Top-view and side view electron density difference maps for the Mo atoms of P-MoS2, MoS2-FGJK, and MoS2-EGMO. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Polarization curves for Pv samples. (h) DFT-calculated reaction pathways. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dopant induced phase transitions, unique configurations of active sites, tuned hydrogen adsorption, and optimized ΔG values have been proved to be effective in designing HER electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes. (a) Polarization curves for the HER on c-CoSe2, annealed c-CoSe2, o-CoSe2|P, and commercial Pt/C catalysts. (b) Calculated charge density distributions for o-CoSe2|P (up) and c-CoSe2 (down) catalysts and the calculated free energy diagrams. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) DOS plots of the Ni 3d and O 2p orbitals of the first three layers from the O-surface and C-surface. (d) Correlation between the atomic charge difference (ΔQ), number of Ni atoms that H binds to, and Gibbs free energy change of H adsorption (ΔGH). Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e) The calculated ΔGH* diagram of the HER at the equilibrium potential for various Ni(111) catalysts and the deformation electronic density of V–Ni(111). Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) The adsorption free energies of H* (ΔGH*) at in-plane, Mo-edge, and S-edge sites of pure, Co-doped, Se-doped, and Co/Se-codoped MoS2, denoted as MoS2, Co-MoS2, SeMoS2, and Co/Se-MoS2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  Single-atom catalysts (SACs) offer the advantages of maximal atom utilization efficiency, unique active sites, and a synergistic effect between the single atoms and the support for the optimization of HER electrocatalysts. (a) A magnified HAADF-STEM image of Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA and its corresponding simulated image. (b) HER polarization curves. (c) Calculated projected density of states (PDOS) and free energy profiles for Mo2TiC2O2 and Mo2TiC2O2-PtSA. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) An atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of Co1/PCN. (e) Electrocatalytic HER performances of Co1/PCN, Co1/CN, PCN, and Pt/C in 1.0M KOH electrolyte. (f) A calculated energy diagram for H2O dissociation for the Volmer step and the electron density difference plot of the OH adsorption structure for Co1/PCN. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g) A HAADF-STEM image of SANi-PtNWs. (h) ECSA-normalized HER LSV curves. (i) Volcano curve for adsorption sites and the corresponding adsorption free energy of hydrogen with model D as a function of URHE for various coverages at pH14. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (j) A TEM image of Pt1/OLC showing a multishell fullerene structure with a layer distance of 0.35nm. (k) Polarization curves of Pt1/OLC. (l) A theoretical investigation of the HER using the Pt1/OLC catalyst. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  Homo/hetero-interfaces cause charge transfer between the components, and the desired electronic structure can be readily obtained. (a) A zoomed-in image of a domain boundary. (b) Theoretical simulations of the initial configurations and calculated adsorption energies. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Polarization curve of Ni/WC@NC in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 5 mV s−1. (d) A Gibbs free energy diagram of the HER on different surfaces. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Polarization curves of MoS2/NG, Nb4N5−xOx-MoS2/NG, Nb4N5−xOx/NG, and Pt/C. (f) A chemisorption model of the H intermediates at S*, N*, and Nb* in the Nb4N5-MoS2 heterostructure and the calculated PDOS. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) The design of a Pt-NC/Ni-metal–organic framework (MOF) heterostructure via theoretical calculations. (h) Plots of mass activity against the overpotential required to offer 10 mA cm−2 of the materials and also some recently reported Pt-based alkaline HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

a-MoSx	28	40	Amor.	Acid	
182

67% Sbr-MoSx,	118	46	Amor.	Acid	
184

MoS2/CoMoP2	75	80	Amor.	Alkaline	
184

Ni(OH)2-NiMoOx/NF	36	38	Amor.	Alkaline	
180

Ir25Ni33Ta42 MG	99	35	Amor.	Acid	
185

RuSx NPs	31	40	Amor.	Acid	
187

C-Doped NiO	27	36	Doping	Alkaline	
84

Ni5P4–Ru	54	52	SAC	Alkaline	
56

G-12NP	106	67.3	Doping	Acid	
104

Pd, Ru–Mo2−xOHy	45	82	Interface	Acid	
166

MoO2–FeP@C	103	48	Interface	Alkaline	
153

Nb4N5−xOx/NG	39	30	Interface	Acid	
139

Ni2P/MoO2/NF HNRs	34	45.8	Interface	Alkaline	
188

Pt/Ti3C2Tx-550	32.7	32.3	Interface	Acid	
189

NiPt3@NiS	12	24	Interface	Alkaline	
163

Ru/WNO@C	2	33	Interface	Alkaline	
158

BPed-Pt/GR	21	46.9	Interface	Alkaline	
190

20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2	27	45	Interface	Alkaline	
175

Mo2C-MoOx/CC	60	53	Interface	Acid	
155

Ni4Mo/MoOx	16	64	Interface	Alkaline	
144

Co0.31Mo1.69C/MXene/NC	75	43	Interface	Alkaline	
147

Co2N/Co/CF	26	41.6	Interface	Alkaline	
142

Au/TaS2	101	53	Interface	Acid	
174

PtRu NCs/BP	22	19	Interface	Acid	
141

Ni/WC@NC	53	43.5	Interface	Alkaline	
138

2D-MoS2/Co(OH)2	128	76	Interface	Alkaline	
154

Mo/Mo2C-HNS-750	89	70.72	Interface	Acid	
143

Ni2P/MoS2/N: RGO	39.5	39.52	Interface	Acid	
148

NixMo1−xO2	43	37	Doping	Acid	
90

N-CoP2	38	46	Doping	Acid	
108

C-MoS2	45	46	Doping	Alkaline	
113

NiO@1T-MoS2	46	52	Doping	Alkaline	
106

Ni0.9Co0.1@NTM	43.4	116	Doping	Alkaline	
99

MoS–CoS–Zn	72.6	37.6	Doping	Acid	
191

(N,PO43−@)-MoS2/VG	95	42	Doping	Acid	
192

RuSi	19	30.2	Doping	Acid	
193

S-2-cycle	57	44.6	Doping	Acid	
194

CoP/Co-MOF	27	43	Doping	Acid	
195

B-CoP/CNT	39	50	Doping	Alkaline	
196

Co–NiS2 NSs	80	43	Doping	Alkaline	
197

Pt–Ni(N)	13	29	Doping	Alkaline	
95

O-CoP-2	98	59.9	Doping	Alkaline	
94

Cr-Co4N/CC	21	38.1	Doping	Alkaline	
93

O,Cu-CoP-2	72	57.6	Doping	Alkaline	
198

N–P–Ni	25.8	34	Doping	Alkaline	
68

F-Ni3S2/NF	38	78	Doping	Alkaline	
67

Mo–NiO/Ni	50	86	Doping	Alkaline	
89

RhPd-H	36.6	35.3	Doping	Alkaline	
199

S-MoP NPL	86	34	Doping	Acid	
200

Pd-1T-SMoS2	140	50	Doping	Acid	
87

N-WC nanoarray	113	75	Doping	Acid	
201

N-NiCo2S4	41	37	Doping	Alkaline	
202

Mn-doped CoS2	43	34	Doping	Acid	
203

N-Mo2C NSs	99	44.5	Doping	Acid	
92

Mn-hcp Ni/C	80	68	Doping	Alkaline	
204

N,Mn-MoS2	66	50	Doping	Alkaline	
205

Fe–Ni3C-2%	178	36.5	Doping	Acid	
102

Pt1/N–C	19	18.6	SAC	Acid	
133

Rh–MoS2-4.8	67	54	SAC	Acid	
127

0.1Pt/VS2/CP	77	54.27	SAC	Acid	
206

SA Co-D 1T MoS2	42	32	SAC	Acid	
132

Ru–NC-700	55	47	SAC	Alkaline	
135

Pt1/OLC	38	35	SAC	Acid	
117

Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA	33	30	SAC	Acid	
114

Co1/PCN	130	52	SAC	Alkaline	
115

Pt SASs/AG	12	29.33	SAC	Acid	
130

RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx	76	29	SAC	Acid	
124

Ru—Au-0.2	24	37	SAC	Alkaline	
120

1% Pd-MoS2/CP	76	32	SAC	Acid	
136

W-SAC	85	53	SAC	Alkaline	
123

Mo1N1C2	132	90	SAC	Alkaline	
126

Pd/Cu-Pt NRs	22.8	25	SAC	Acid	
125

MoS2-60s	131	48	Vacancy	Acid	
74

v-Ni12P5	27.7	30.88	Vacancy	Alkaline	
75

N-MoS2/CN	114	46.8	Doping	Acid	
207

Sv-MoS2	194	78	Vacancy	Acid	
208

Vo-WON	16	33	Vacancy	Alkaline	
61

NF + CS + MoS2	56	49	Vacancy	Alkaline	
209

1D-DRHA MoS2	119	50.7	Vacancy	Acid	
38


 	Fig. 15  A summary of the performance of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) interfaces, and (d) amorphism towards oxygen evolution under acidic and alkali conditions in terms of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes.	 

 	Fig. 16  Cation and anion vacancies with a modified local environment enhance the conductivity and lower the energy barrier for the rate-determining step during the OER process. (a) OV effects on the OER catalysis performance predicted by DFT calculations. (b) The OER polarization of electrodes. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) LSV curves for various samples. (d) A simulated distribution of partial charge density at the Fermi level induced by VNi incorporation and the calculated formation energies for γ-NiOOH from α-Ni(OH)2 with different VNi concentrations. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Calculated adsorption energies for H2O molecules on different Co sites. (f) OER polarization curves of RuO2, FeCoOx–Vo, and FeCoOx–Vo–S in 1.0 M KOH to reach a high OER current density. (g) The LDOS of the 3d-orbitals of Co and Fe atoms, and 2p-orbitals of O atoms of FeCoOx-origin, FeCoOx–Vo, and FeCoOx–Vo–S. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Dopants with single or multiple elements facilitate OER kinetics via a modulated electronic structure that decreases the energy barrier of the RDS. (a) Calculated free energy profiles at 1.23 V for the OER pathway on bare FeOOH and various Se-doped FeOOH models. (b) LSV curves of as-prepared catalysts and a comparison with other electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) High-resolution N 1s and S 2p XPS spectra of the NSFLGDY-900 catalyst. (d) Polarization curves of FLGDY-900, NSFLGDY-900, and RuO2 catalysts. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Mechanism and associated stationary structures for the complete OER catalytic cycle on the FeCu-doped surface. (f) ΔGox values for each reaction step for Fe- and FeCu-doped catalysts. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  
Ex situ and in situ formed hetero-interfaces favor the OER kinetics via the modulation of the adsorption/desorption energies of the intermediates and the energy barrier for the RDS. (a) OER polarization curves of synthesized samples at 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH. (b) The calculated free energy diagrams for the OER on NiSe2/CoSe2@NiOOH/CoOOH, NiSe2@NiOOH, and NiOOH/CoOOH at various potentials. Reproduced with permission.278 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) CV curves of the FeNi LDH for the OER on different substrates such as Ni, Fe, and FeNi alloy foils. (d) A comparison of the d-band center (εd) and d-band density of a Ni atom from a stable adsorption site in FeNi LDH and FeNi LDH with hydroxide interfacial layer slabs. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM images of a single layer of Ni-NM@G-10 nanomesh. (f) OER polarization curves in 1.0 M KOH solution and a comparison with reported Ni-based materials. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  Amorphous electrocatalysts exhibit unusual local structures due to the absence of long-range order and amorphous sites with dangling bonds serve as active sites in the OER process. (a) LSV curves of LN, LNF, a-LNF(b-u), and a-LNF(t-d) samples. (b) Ni L-edges of a-LNF(b-u) and a-LNF(t-d) samples and the R-space of Ni K-edges. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Intensity profiles recorded from space-confined NiFe-LDH. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.51 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) iR-corrected polarization curves in 1 M KOH for different catalysts. (f) The free energy landscape for the OER at 1.23 V (ideal potential for the OER). (g) ACP bridging 1 site. Reproduced with permission.297 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Ni10-CoPi	320	44.5	Amor.	Alkaline	
308

NiFe0.5Sn-A	260	50	Amor.	Alkaline	
302

FeMOFs-SO3	218	36.2	Amor.	Alkaline	
303

a-LNF(t-d)	189	36	Amor.	Alkaline	
296

Cu1−xNNi3−y/FeNiCu	300	45	Amor.	Alkaline	
306

CoOx + Fe3+	309	27.6	Amor.	Alkaline	
298

A-CoS4.6O0.6	290	67	Amor.	Alkaline	
304

NFP40	219	32	Amor.	Alkaline	
301

ACP	367	60	Amor.	Alkaline	
297

SCA-NiFe-LDH	190	31	Amor.	Alkaline	
51

Zn-CoSe2	286	37	Doping	Alkaline	
309

Gd-CoB	230	42	Doping	Alkaline	
310

NSFLGDY-900	299	62	Doping	Alkaline	
236

ELCMO	329	33.8	Doping	Alkaline	
311

N-C@G-900	280	88.1	Doping	Alkaline	
261

S-300	188	43.96	Doping	Acid	
258

PA-NiO	310	36	Doping	Alkaline	
247

Li1.2Ni0.8Fe0.2O2	302	59	Doping	Alkaline	
249

Co0.30CuOx	290	57	Doping	Alkaline	
242

Co-N/GF-900	313	84.1	Doping	Alkaline	
244

Fe0.33Co0.67OOH	266	30	Doping	Alkaline	
263

NGO/Ni7S6	380	45	Doping	Alkaline	
312

10% VNS	290	45	Doping	Alkaline	
251

Co-Cu7S-0.07	270	130	Doping	Alkaline	
250

N2-CoS2-400	240	98	Doping	Alkaline	
240

IrRu@Te	220	35	Interface	Acid	
282

Cu@CeO2@NFC-0.25	230.8	32.7	Interface	Alkaline	
288

M-PCBN/CC	232	32	Interface	Alkaline	
251

FeOOH2nm/LDH	174	27	Interface	Alkaline	
281

FeNi LDH sheet/FeNi	130	39.8	Interface	Alkaline	
279

Ni4Ce1/CP	220	81.9	Interface	Alkaline	
287

CoO/hi-Mn3O4	378	61	Interface	Alkaline	
292

M-Ni2P/Fe2P-O	179	42.7	Interface	Alkaline	
292

CoV2O6-V2O5/NRGO-1	239	49.7	Interface	Alkaline	
287

AG	275	48	Interface	Alkaline	
284

S,N-Fe/N/C-CNT	370	82	SAC	Alkaline	
275

sAu/NiFe LDH,	237	36	SAC	Alkaline	
220

CoSe2−x–Pt	314	31	SAC	Alkaline	
274

Ir18wt%–NiO	215	38	SAC	Alkaline	
286

CoO/Co3O4	260	54	Vacancy	Alkaline	
313

Co0.5(V0.5)	282	56	Vacancy	Alkaline	
218

Co3O4/CeO2 NHs,	270	60	Vacancy	Alkaline	
231

PM-LDH	230	47	Vacancy	Alkaline	
314

D–U–CoNi–OH	228	57	Vacancy	Alkaline	
315

NiCeOx	295	66	Vacancy	Alkaline	
226

SnCoFe–Ar	270	42.3	Vacancy	Alkaline	
234

Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC	273	63.9	Vacancy	Alkaline	
316

CoGa LDH/SSM	258	34.1	Vacancy	Alkaline	
317

Reduced NiFe	270	40	Vacancy	Alkaline	
222

Co-300	268	38.2	Vacancy	Alkaline	
227

P-Co3O4	280	51.6	Vacancy	Alkaline	
232

CoFe–LDHs–Ar	266	37.85	Vacancy	Alkaline	
318

Water-plasma exfoliated CoFe LDH nanosheets	232	36	Vacancy	Alkaline	
229

Fe1Co1-ONS	308	36.8	Vacancy	Alkaline	
230

DR-Ni3FeN/N-G NHs	250	38	Vacancy	Alkaline	
228


 	Fig. 20  A summary of the performances of representative electrocatalysts that feature (a) vacancies, (b) doping, (c) interfaces, and (d) amorphism towards overall water splitting in acidic and alkaline electrolytes in terms of an evaluation toolbox, including overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slopes towards hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution, and the overall potential to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in a typical two-electrode setup.	 

 	Fig. 21  Vacancies, including cation and anion species, play a vital role in optimizing the adsorption behavior in both the HER and OER processes. (a) OER curves of CoWO4−x@C-4 before and after stability tests. (b) Calculated free energies of CoWO4 and CoWO4−x during the HER and OER. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The LSV curve of the water electrolysis of δ-FeOOH NSs/NF//δ-FeOOH NSs/NF in 1.0 M KOH and an LSV curve after a stability test for 60 h. (d) Standard free energy diagrams of the HER and OER processes. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the HER on Rh3Cu1 (100) and Rh1Cu1 (100). (f) The free energy diagrams for the OER on an Rh3Cu1 (100) surface at the zero electrode potential, equilibrium potential, and onset electrode potential. (g) LSV curves of overall water splitting in a two-electrode system when RhCu NTs were applied as both the anode and cathode. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  One or more kinds of dopants could change the RDS in the HER/OER process by tailoring the adsorption energies of the intermediates, thus facilitating overall water splitting. (a) Gibbs free energy diagram for the four steps of the OER on *Rh-NiFeRh-LDH. (b) The overall water-splitting properties. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Active sites (top) in the overall water-splitting process and differential-charge densities (bottom) of NiV LDH (left) and NiVIr LDH (right). (d) Polarization curves of NiV LDH, NiVIr LDH, a Pt/C-Ir/C couple, and a NiFe LDH-Ir/C couple for overall water splitting and a comparison with other electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical performances for the OER and HER. (f) Polarization curves before and after 3000 CV cycles during overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission.327 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 23  Synergy and electron transfer between different components facilitate the water dissociation process in heterostructures. (a) Polarization curves of an obtained sample toward overall water splitting. (b) Calculated free energy diagrams for the OER and HER. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2020. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Free energy diagrams of the OER and HER on LDH, LDH/G, and MoS2/LDH. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of an MoS2/LDH superlattice and commercial RuO2-Pt/C couple for overall water splitting in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Polarization curves for overall water splitting in a two-electrode configuration. (f) Calculated densities of electronic states and the Gibbs free energy changes for the four steps of the OER. Reproduced with permission.361 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  An in situ generated amorphous phase during electrolysis empowers the electrocatalysts with enhanced conductivity, a tailored energy barrier, and unique interfaces between different phases, thus boosting the electrocatalytic activity. (a) The band structure of amorphous RuTe2. (b) The OER pathways under acidic and alkaline conditions at U = 1.23 V. (c) Polarization curves of a-RuTe2 PNRs||a-RuTe2 PNRs and Ir/C||Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 for water splitting. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2020, Springer, Nature. (d) The calculated hydrogen adsorption free energies on different sites in NiFeMoOx for the HER and OER. (e) iR-corrected polarization curves of Ni/NiFeMoOx/NF and Pt/C||IrOx electrolyzers in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.384 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) The design of superhydrophilic/superaerophobic CoMoSx/NF electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. (g) Overall water-splitting polarization curves of CoMoSx/NF, MoSx/NF, IrO2-Pt/C, and pristine NF electrodes. Reproduced with permission.385 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

NiCoP/SCW	178	64.4	229	79.5	1.59	Amor.	Alkaline	
391

SCFP-NF	26	94	22	55	1.54	Amor.	Alkaline	
386

CoSn2/NF	103	78	230	89	1.55	Amor.	Alkaline	
390

Fe-H2/O2 Cat	—	77	238	82.7	1.65	Amor.	Alkaline	
389

IFONFs-45	—	31	260	45	1.58	Amor.	Alkaline	
392

am-Fe-Bi/NF	143	75	158	53	1.56	Amor.	Alkaline	
393

NiCoFeB	345	98	284	46	1.81	Amor.	Alkaline	
394

Co-P-B-5	145	38	290	42	1.65	Amor.	Alkaline	
387

Ni/NiFeMoOx/NF	22	76	255	35	1.50	Amor.	Alkaline	
384

a-RuTe2	33	35	245	47	1.52	Amor.	Acid	
383

Fe17.5%-Ni3S2/NF	47	95	214	42	1.54	Doping	Alkaline	
329

S-CoWP@(S, N)-C	67	—	280	68	1.65	Doping	Alkaline	
214

F0.25C1CH/NF	77	99	228	42	1.45	Doping	Alkaline	
214

FePx/Fe-N-C/NPC	182	132	325	79	1.58	Doping	Alkaline	
337

Ni-Fe-MoN NTs	55	109	228	41	1.513	Doping	Alkaline	
333

Co-MoS2/BCCF-21	48	52	260	85	—	Doping	Alkaline	
96

Fe0.09Co0.13-NiSe2	92	89	251	63	1.52	Doping	Alkaline	
327

Fe-CoP/NF	78	92	190	36	1.49	Doping	Alkaline	
329

S-400-H	28	35	241	56	1.47	Doping	Alkaline	
388

B,N,S-CoP@C@rGO	143	76	264	69	1.50	Doping	Alkaline	
343

CoFeP-0.2	142	65.8	233	53.1	1.533	Doping	Alkaline	
331

NiVIr-LDH	41	55.3	203	35.9	1.49	Doping	Alkaline	
326

Cr-doped FeN-P/NCN	190	68.51	240	72.36	1.50	Doping	Alkaline	
259

Co-RuIr	14	31.1	235	66.9	1.52	Doping	Acid	
257

CoFeZr oxides/NF	104	119.3	—	54.2	1.63	Doping	Alkaline	
334

NiVRu-LDH	47	40	190	83	1.42	Doping	Alkaline	
345

VOOH-3Fe	90	38.2	195	55.3	1.53	Doping	Alkaline	
349

N-CoS2	28	42.6	—	55	1.50	Doping	Alkaline	
348

NiFe(II,III)-LDH	113	157	140	58	1.54	Doping	Alkaline	
347

NMoNi/SWCNT	130	54	225	128	—	Doping	Alkaline	
342

CoRu–MoS2	52	55	308	50	—	Doping	Alkaline	
346

30% Pt/LiCoO2	61	39.5	285	46.8	1.54	Interface	Alkaline	
379

(Ru–Co)Ox	44.1	23.5	171.2	60.8	1.488	Interface	Alkaline	
378

V-CoP@ a-CeO2	68	48.1	225	58	1.56	Interface	Alkaline	
213

Ni/Ni(OH)2	77	53	270	70	1.59	Interface	Alkaline	
369

CoSx@Cu2MoS4-MoS2/NSG	118.1	41.1	351.4	61.5	1.60	Interface	Alkaline	
367

Co4N@NC-700	62	37	257	58	—	Interface	Alkaline	
364

Meso-Fe-MoS2/CoMo2S4	122	45	290	65	1.62	Interface	Alkaline	
395

MoS2/NiFe-LDH	110	46	210	77	1.57	Interface	Alkaline	
360

CoMoNiS-NF-31	103	55	228	78	1.45	Interface	Acid	
361

NiCo-nitrides/NiCo2O4/GF	71	62	183	56	—	Interface	Alkaline	
396

Ni1.5Co0.5@ N-C NT/NF	114	117	243	103	1.57	Interface	Alkaline	
371

Co3S4/EC-MOF	84	82	226	120	1.55	Interface	Alkaline	
370

Ni/Mo2C(1:2)-NCNFs	143	57.8	288	78.4	1.64	Interface	Alkaline	
372

Co4S3/Mo2 C-N SC-2	82.5	61.8	268	61.2	1.62	Interface	Alkaline	
380

FeS2/CoS2 NSs	78.2	44	302	42	1.47	Interface	Alkaline	
397

FeP/Ni2P	14	24.2	154	22.7	1.42	Interface	Alkaline	
398

MoS2/FNS/FeNi	120	45.1	204	28.1	—	Interface	Alkaline	
399

N-NiMoO4/NiS2	57	74.2	267	44.3	1.60	Interface	Alkaline	
374

Pt-CoS2/CC	24	82	300	58	1.55	Interface	Alkaline	
366

O-CoMoS	97	70	272	45	1.60	Interface	Alkaline	
363

Ni3S2@MoS2/FeOOH	95	85	234	49	1.57	Interface	Alkaline	
400

Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2	50	49	210	72	1.64	Interface	Alkaline	
381

Mo-Co9S8@C	98	34.6	370	90.3	1.68	SAC	Acid	
351

Ir1@Co/NC	60	119	260	163	1.603	SAC	Alkaline	
353

Rh SAC−CuO NAs/CF	44	—	197	71.7	1.51	SAC	Alkaline	
357

Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT	26	31.8	250	58.2	1.51	SAC	Acid	
356

δ-FeOOH NSs/NF,	108	43	265	53	1.62	Vacancy	Alkaline	
217

CoWO4−x@C	46.8	50.1	295	53.5	1.57	Vacancy	Alkaline	
216

NF/T(Ni3S2/MnS-O)	116	41	228	46	1.54	Vacancy	Alkaline	
322

PNHEMH	84	114.2	220	94.9	1.52	Vacancy	Alkaline	
321


 	Fig. 25  Advanced characterization techniques, including microscopic and spectroscopic approaches, have been developed to shed light on the origin of the defect-enhanced electrocatalytic performances of electrocatalysts. Device configurations, fundamental concepts, and the obtained spectra/images are schematically illustrated.	 

 	Fig. 26  With the assistance of advanced microscopic techniques, we can directly observe the imperfections in defect-featuring electrocatalysts. (a) A zoomed-in image of a defective area (vacancy). (b) A zoomed-in image of the defective area (with trapped atomic Ni). Reproduced with permission.405 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) A HAADF-STEM image of Co-SMoS2, showing two bright contrast sites in the MoS2 monolayer. (d) The corresponding simulated image. Reproduced with permission.406 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 27  XAS spectra offer the ability for a probe of the local environment around the imperfections of electrocatalysts by monitoring changes in the oxidation states and coordination numbers of the absorbers. (a) Operando XANES spectra recorded at the Co K-edge of Co1/PCN at different applied voltages from open circuit conditions to −0.1V during the electrocatalytic HER. (b) k3-Weighted Fourier transform (FT) spectra. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c and d) Ni K-edge XANES spectra and Fourier-transformed k3-weighted EXAFS signals recorded at different potentials in 1 M KOH for Ni0.5Co0.5-MOF-74. (e) Changes in the Ni and Co valence states and OER current as a function of the applied potential. (f) Changes in bond length and coordination number for the Ni–O and Ni–M coordination shells. Reproduced with permission.418 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 28  
Operando XPS spectra probe the variations in electronic structures and surface compositions. (a) Operando ambient pressure XPS (APXPS) evolution of the O 1s photoelectron peak. (b and c) Co 2p3/2 and valence band (VB) spectra (both deconvoluted into chemically shifted spectral components) acquired under hydrated conditions (18 Torr water vapor) and as a function of the applied electrochemical potential, respectively. (d) Evolution of the surface stoichiometry and structure of a biphasic catalyst as a function of the applied potential. Reproduced with permission.424 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  
Operando Raman spectra help with identification of key intermediates, the dynamic evolution of the surface structure, the surface composition, and the reaction pathways during electrocatalytic reactions. (a) EC-SERS spectra of the HER on Ag@MoS2 with a size of 23.4 ± 3.8 nm in 0.1 M HClO4 and DClO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.431 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Operando Raman spectra of NiFe and NiFeCr catalysts under various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.432 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Chronopotentiometry measurements at a low current of 0.5 mA. and the corresponding in situ Raman spectra achieved during chronopotentiometry measurements. Reproduced with permission.433 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d and e) Operando Raman spectra of FeOO–NiOOH and NiFe LDH obtained at various potentials for oxygen isotope labeling in 1 M KOH–H218O solution and subsequent isotope exchange experiments. Reproduced with permission.434 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) In situ Raman spectra of CoOOH at increasing applied potentials from the OCP to 1.75 V (0.1 V per step) in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH. (g) In situ Raman spectra of Co16O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH (black) and of Co18O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 18O-KOH (red) recorded at 1.75 V vs. RHE. (h) In situ SERS of labeled Co18O2 in 0.1 M Fe-free 16O-KOH. (i) In situ SERS of Co16OOH in 0.1 M Fe-free KOD. Reproduced with permission.435 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  FTIR spectra have been proved to be a promising toolkit for distinguishing absorbates on the surfaces of electrocatalysts and key intermediates during the electrolysis process. (a) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for 4.3%-MOF. (b) Operando isotope-labeling SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for 4.3%-MOF. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for Ru–N–C during the acidic OER. (d) Enlarged views of the infrared signals at ∼764cm−1. Reproduced with permission.442 Copyright 2019, the authors.	 
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
ALK	Alkaline electrolyzers
APXPS	Ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ATR-SEIRAS	Attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy
CBM	Conduction band minimum
cryo-EM	Cryogenic electron microscopy
CSP	Concentrating solar power
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DFT	Density functional theory
DOS	Density of states
DRIFT	Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FE	Faradaic efficiency
FEM	Field-emission microscope
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
GDE	Gas diffusion electrode
H2A	Hydrogen analysis
HAADF-STEM	High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
LCOE	Levelized cost of electricity
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
MA	Mass activity
MG	Metal glass
MOF	Metal–organic framework
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PAS	Positron annihilation spectrum
PDOS	Projected density of states
PDS	Potential-determining-step
PEM	Polymer electrolyte membrane
PV	Photovoltaic
RDS	Rate-Determining step
SA	Specific activity
SAC	Single-atom catalysts
SERS	Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
SOEC	Solid oxide electrolysis cells
SR-FTIR	Synchrotron radiation Fourier transform infrared
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
STM	Scanning tunneling microscopy
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TERS	Tip-enhanced Raman scattering
TOF	Turnover frequency
VB	Valence band
VBM	Valence band maximum
VRE	Variable renewable energies
WS	Water splitting
XANES	X-ray absorption near-edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
