Sequence-specific electrochemical detection of Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestris DNA using electroconductive polymer -modified fluorine tin oxide elect ...  - Analyst (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B809080G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B809080G
(Paper)
Analyst, 2009, 134, 314-319Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSequence-specific electrochemical detection of Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestrisDNA using electroconductive polymer-modified fluorine tin oxide electrodes

        
          
            Katlin Ivon 
            Barrios Eguiluz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Giancarlo Richard 
            Salazar-Banda
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Maribel Elizabeth 
            Funes-Huacca
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juliana Vieira 
            Alberice
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Emanuel 
            Carrilho
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sergio Antonio 
            Spinola Machado
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Luis Alberto 
            Avaca
          
        
      a
aGMEME – Grupo de Materiais Eletroquímicos e Métodos Eletroanalíticos, Instituto de Química de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, Av. Trabalhador São-carlense, 400, C.P. 780, 13560-970, São Carlos – SP, Brazil. E-mail: gianrsb@gmail.com;  Fax: +55-16-3373-9952;   Tel: +55-16-3373-9924
bBioMicS – Grupo de Bioanalítica, Microfabricação e Separações, Instituto de Química de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, Av. Trabalhador São-carlense, 400, C.P. 780, 13560-970, São Carlos – SP, Brazil
Received 
      29th May 2008
    , Accepted 23rd September 2008First published on 29th October 2008AbstractThis study outlines the quantification of low levels of Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestris in pure cultures, since this bacterium is not inactivated by pasteurization and may remain in industrialized foods and beverages. Electroconductive polymer-modified fluorine tin oxide (FTO) electrodes and multiple nanoparticle labels were used for biosensing. The detection ofA. acidoterrestris in pure cultures was performed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and the sensitivity was further increased by asymmetric nested RT-PCR using electrochemical detection for quantification of the amplicon. The quantification of nested RT-PCR products by Ag/Au-based electrochemical detection was able to detect 2 colony forming units per mL (CFU mL−1) of spores in pure culture and low detection and quantification limits (7.07 and 23.6 nM, respectively) were obtained for the target A. acidoterrestris on the electrochemical detection bioassay.
1. Introduction
One of the most common reasons for consumer rejection of a food product is an unacceptable flavor, and every year the food industry receives complaints from consumers concerning off-flavors or taints in fresh, processed, and packaged foods. Today's consumers have become more aware of quality in foods and have an increased expectation of consistency in all quality parameters. Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestris is currently one of the microorganisms of concern in the fruit juice industry. Their thermophilic and acidophilic characteristics make them resistant to current pasteurization processes, and their ability to produce off-flavors in juice poses potential economic losses for the juice industry.
In recent years, the spoilage of fruit juice by the thermoacidophilic spore-forming bacterium A. acidoterrestris has been observed on a worldwide level.1,2 Fresh orange juice and orange juice concentrate are often contaminated with spores of A. acidoterrestris, which have survived the pasteurization process.3,4 This bacterium is not known to be harmful to health, but it is known to degrade the quality of juices and other products by producing guaiacol, which is responsible for the off-flavor (smoky, phenolic, or medicinal flavor).
The investigation for the presence of A. acidoterrestris in fruit juices by conventional cultural microbiological methods can take days to weeks5,6 and they are not suitable for juice products with limited shelf life. Besides the long time, the outcome of the assay yields only presumptive positive or negative results.
In a separate issue, there is considerable interest in the development of DNA hybridization biosensors due to their important application in clinical diagnosis, medicine, epidemic prevention, environmental protection and bioengineering, etc. Various techniques have been developed for DNA analysis, such as radiochemical,7 electrochemical,8–11 colorimetric,12 and chemiluminescent methods.13 The main advantages of the utilization of electrochemical sensors are: the possibility of in vivo continuous monitoring of different substances of interest, fast and direct measurements of compounds, simplicity of operation, low cost of analysis, high reliability of the analytical information, as well as the fact that they are compatible with DNA biochips.14,15
The electrochemical detection of DNA based on gold nanoparticles and the electrocatalytic deposition of silver on an electrode of indium tin oxide (ITO) was reported by Lee and co-workers.16 Later, the utilization of an oligonucleotide-functionalized electroconducting polymer coupled with this nanoparticle-based hybridization indicator on ITO was developed by Liet al.17 for a sensitive detection of multi-labeled PCR amplicons. The approach had further optimization of the gold nanoparticle size when using ITO surfaces.18 In addition to that, Bonanni et al. reported the silver deposition on streptavidin-coated gold nanoparticles to amplify the impedimetric signal generated in a biosensor detecting a DNA hybridization event using a graphite epoxy composite as the working electrode.19
However, the ITO-coated glass, which is widely used for polymer-based solar cells, is becoming very expensive and an alternative must be found. On the other hand, fluorine tin oxide (FTO) is less expensive than ITO and has been extensively used as the electrode in dye-sensitized TiO2 solar cells.20–22 Moreover, FTO glasses are also superior to ordinary glassy carbon or platinum electrodes regarding cost.23 Furthermore, recently, Qiao et al.24 performed a comparison of FTO and ITO as the transparent electrode for poly(3-octylthiophene)/TiO2 solar cells. Their experimental results showed that the performance of FTO-based devices is better than that of ITO devices in terms of short circuit current density and power conversion efficiency. This could lead to lower cost processing for organic polymer solar cells.
On the other hand, recent investigations have described the potential use of RNA detection by RT-PCR methods to identify and quantify low numbers of viable bacterial cells up to 1 CFU mL−1 of A. acidoterrestris in orange juice.25 Although standard RT-PCR is a remarkably sensitive technique, its sensitivity can be further increased by performing ‘nested’ RT-PCR. Nested PCR is used to confirm the PCR product, and it allows discrimination between specific and non-specific amplification signals. Therefore, the PCR product is re-amplified using another primer pair, located in the inner region of the original target sequence. This involves taking an aliquot of the product from the primary RT-PCR, and using it as a template for a second PCR amplification. To avoid further amplification of primer-dimer artifacts or non-specific products generated in the primary PCR, a different set of primers is employed in the secondary PCR. These nested primers are internal to the primers used in the primary PCR, thus yielding a shorter amplicon.26
The explanation for the increase of sensitivity in the nested-PCR protocol using in food analyses is that any inhibitory substance present in the food would be diluted during the second step of the PCR and eliminating satisfactorily the PCR inhibitors present in the foods. The nested PCR of pathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica in food was satisfactorily investigated in the presence of a high background of microflora, which gave highly sensitive amplifications (detection limit 1 CFU mL−1).27
In this study we have conducted the electrochemical detection of DNA from the A. acidoterrestris bacterium using electroconductive polymer-modified FTO and multiple nanoparticle labeling using a rapid and sensitive nested RT-PCR molecular amplification method.
2. Experimental
2.1. Bacterial strain and culture conditions
The strain of A. acidoterrestris used in this study was isolated in this laboratory and was grown at 45 °C in yeast glucose starch (YGS) media containing: 2.0 g yeast extract, 1.0 g glucose, 2.0 g starch, and 500 mL distilled water. The pH was adjusted to 3.7 with 1.0 M H2SO4. The production of the A. acidoterrestris spores was carried out in slant YGS agar with incubation at 45 °C by 5 days. The spores were removed by stirring and washing each tube after centrifugation with sterile acidic water. The final pellets were resuspended in sterile acid buffer (pH 3.7). The suspension were activated at 80 °C for 10 min and stored at 4 °C until used.
2.2. 
          RNA isolation
All glassware used for RNA extraction reagents was baked at 180 °C overnight and all reagents were treated with 1% diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC). One milliliter of sample was washed once in 1 × PBS buffer, and collected by centrifugation; the cell suspension was used to extract total RNA. The extraction of total RNA was performed using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) and the samples were resuspended in 50 µL of DEPC water. Extracts were treated for 20 min at 30 °C with 1 U DNase I (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The enzyme was inactivated by incubation at 65 °C for 15 min.
2.3. 
          Reverse transcription and PCR amplification
The sensitivity and detection limits of the nested RT-PCR assay for the detection ofA. acidoterrestris were performed first with the RT-PCR. The RT-PCR assay was tested on dilutions 1 : 5 of total RNA treatment with DNAse I (from 4 ng µL−1 to 2.5 fg µL−1) extracted from A. acidoterrestris spores (4 × 106 CFU mL−1). The nested RT-PCR reactions were performed with the products from RT-PCR. In order to construct the standard calibration curves with electrochemical detection, concentration dilutions from 4 × 106 to 2 CFU mL−1 were considered.
For RT-PCR reactions, specific primers were designed for regions identified from a 16S rRNA sequence study.28 The primer pair yielded a PCR product of 294 bp. Primer sequences were: forward (Ba190F) 5′-AC(A/G)GGTAGGCATCTCTTGT-3′ and reverse (Ba490R) 5′-AGGAGCTTTCCACTCTCCTTGT-3′. The reverse-transcription step for the generation of cDNA was performed in a final volume of 20 µL with 1 µL RNA of each dilution digested with 0.5 µM DNase I. Antisense primer (1 µM) and RNA (1 µL) digested with DNase I were denatured for 5 min at 70 °C, then immediately cooled on ice for 5 min and added to 15 µL RT mix [2.0 mM dNTPs, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 × RT buffer and 1 µL ImProm-II™ RT (Promega, Madison, WI)]. The mixture was incubated for 5 min at 25 °C, 60 min at 40 °C, and 15 min at 70 °C. After synthesis of the complementary cDNA strand, PCR was performed in 13 µL total reaction volume containing 3 µL cDNA product, 1 × PCR buffer, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 1 U Taq-DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), and 1 µM of the specific primers. The PCR was performed on a conventional thermocycler (Mastercycler gradient, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and cycle conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 4 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 54 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, with a final extension at 72 °C for 7 min.
2.4. Nested RT-PCR protocol and procedures
It was possible to amplify 294 bp fragments by conventional RT-PCR,28 using the primer pair Ba190F and Ba490R from the region 16S rRNA gene sequence from the A. acidoterrestris strain. The 294 bp amplicon was purified and sequenced on ABI PRISM 3100 Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) for sequence confirmation.
An alignment of the sequenced fragment was performed using the GeneRunner Version 3.05 program. The new set of nested primers was then selected based on the primer design guideline and additional specification of the program. The nested primer pair yielded a PCR product of 191 bp. Primer sequences were: forward (NAtb-F) 5′-biotin-GATGCGTAGCCGACCTGAGAG 3′ and reverse (NAtb-R) 5′ TTGCCACTCTCCTTGTCGCTC 3′ (Invitrogen). In order to develop the method for the electrochemical detection we synthesized the forward primer with Biotin.
The second amplification was an asymmetric nested RT-PCR reaction. This reaction was similar to the symmetric one described above, except for 40 cycles with 10 µM of biotinylated forward primer (NAtb-F) and 1 µM of reverse primer (NAtb-R). The reaction was performed in a 25 µL reaction mixture containing 1 × PCR buffer, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 1 U Taq-DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), 10 µM and 1 µM of each specific primer NAtb-F and NAtb-R, respectively, and 2 µL of the first RT-PCR products as template. Thermal cycling conditions were the same as those used for the first RT-PCR reaction above, except that a 56 °C annealing temperature was used. The asymmetric nested RT-PCR products (191 bp) were verified by electrophoresis in 1.5% agarose gel and quantified by microchip electrophoresis for quantification of each product, previous to the electrochemical determination.
2.5. 
          Electrochemical detection

The electrochemical measurements were carried out in a one-compartment Pyrex® glass cell (using 1 mL of solution) using a conventional three-electrode system, comprised of an FTO-coated glass (Flexitec Eletrônica Orgânica, Curitiba, Brazil) working electrode (sheet resistance in the range from 11 to 20 ohm/sheet), an Ag/AgCl (saturated NaCl) was used as reference electrode and all potentials are referred to this system, and a Pt wire was used as the counter electrode. Chronoamperometry, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were carried out using an EG&G Princeton Applied Research (PAR) Potentiostat/Galvanostat model 273A coupled to an IBM-PC compatible microcomputer and the EG&G PAR model 270 Research Electrochemistry Software. All the chemicals used were purchased from Sigma unless otherwise stated.
The patterned working electrode area of the FTO electrodes was 0.1 cm2. Before the analyses, the FTO electrodes were cleaned according to a procedure reported elsewhere.29 Briefly, they were sequentially sonicated in 0.8% Alconox solution, 2-propanol, and twice in water, where each sonication was 10 min. Then, the FTO electrodes were modified with the detection oligonucleotide (ODN) probe (5′-pyrrole-TTGCCACTCTCCTTGTCGCTC-3′), which had the same sequence as the reverse (NAtb-R) primer, by scanning the electrodes in 1 mL of a polymerization solution (25 mM pyrrole, 0.1 M LiClO4 and the detection ODN 20 µM probe) between 0.0 and 1.0 V at 50 mV s−1 for six cycles. The polypyrrole-ODN-coated electrodes were washed with water to remove any physically adsorbed materials. The asymmetric RT-PCR mixture was incubated on the working electrodes for 2 h, allowing the amplicon to hybridize with the immobilization probe. The electrode was then rinsed with large quantities of washing buffer (300 mM NaCl/30 mM Na3citrate, pH 7.0, 2 × SSC buffer) to remove any non-hybridized products. The 5 nm streptavidin gold nanoparticle label was bound to biotinylated PCR products by incubating with 100 µL gold nanoparticle solution (the stock solution was diluted by 10-fold with HEPES buffer: 0.05 M HEPES and 0.2 M NaCl) at room temperature for 45 min. Unbound gold nanoparticle label was removed by rinsing with phosphate-buffered nitrate solution (PBN, 0.3 M NaNO3/10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.0).

          Cyclic voltammograms were scanned from 1.3 to −0.5 V (scan rate: 50 mV s−1) in KNO3 1.0 M containing silver nitrate 5 mM on the hybridized and non-hybridized (blank) FTO surface. A specific potential for the silver electrodeposition (0.27 V) was chosen as such that only metallic silver would be deposited on the hybridized FTO surface. After the reduction of Ag+ to Ag at this selected potential for 10 s, the amount of silver deposited onto the gold nanoparticle label was determined by measuring the oxidative silver dissolution response during an LSV scan from 0.0 to 0.8 V at 100 mV s−1 in the same silver nitrate solution. It should be noted that all the measurements were taken at room temperature.
In order to test the reutilization of the FTO electrodes, after the electrochemical detection described above, an electrochemical cleaning step was performed applying twice 1.4 V by 60 s in the 1.0 M KNO3 solution and finally rinsing with water.
3. Results and discussion
The electrochemical method detection of DNA with gold nanoparticles with an electrocatalytic deposition process reported elsewhere16 offers a very sensitive detection capability for detecting PCR amplicons and was improved here for greater sensitivity. In this sense, as already demonstrated,18 5 nm streptavidin gold nanoparticles instead of 10 nm streptavidin gold nanoparticles were used and polypyrrole was used in place of the poly(2-aminobenzoic acid).30
In addition, the nanoparticle-based electrical bioassay consists of several steps including: (i) the modification of the electrode with an electroconductive polymer containing the ODN capture probe; (ii) the introduction of the target RNA analyte to the sensor surface and hybridization occurs when the analyte is sequence-complementary to the capture probe; (iii) the binding of the gold nanoparticle label to the hybrid via streptavidin–biotin interaction, and (iv) the silver electrodeposition on the gold nanoparticle surface and direct quantification by scanning the electrode to obtain a signal proportional to the silver oxidation. The assay scheme with the silver-enhanced gold nanoparticle label is illustrated in Scheme 1. Detailed optimization of some of these steps and characterization of the performance of the resulting protocol are described below.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the DNA hybridization assay protocol with the probe immobilized onto the electroconducting polymer-modified FTO electrode using the gold nanoparticle-catalyzed silver electrodeposition approach (silver-enhancement) for signal transduction. 
Conducting polymers such as polypyrrole or polythiophene are the most commonly investigated conducting polymers for biosensor applications functionalized by a DNA probe. Therefore, they have been proven to be a suitable support for oligonucleotide immobilization31,32 and we did optimize it further.
The modification with an electroconductive polymer containing the ODN probe is the initial step for the electrochemical detection of the DNA analyte and it has already been reported on ITO electrode.30 However, the electropolymerization parameters are essentially dependent on the chemical composition of the working electrode and its surface state. Thus, because of the lack of studies concerning the polypyrrole polymerization on surfaces of FTO, an electropolymerization process for the production of the polypyrrole film on the FTO surface was developed using the supporting electrolyte suitable for the detection oligonucleotide incorporation used elsewhere.30
The curves of pyrrole electropolymerization on an FTO electrode, obtained by sweeping the potential between 0.0 and 1.0 V with 50 mV s−1 scan rate, are shown in the Fig. 1. In the electropolymerization of pyrrole, cyclic voltammograms display a gradual increase of the polymer matrix response with an increase of the current density. The growth of the polypyrrole continues with the number of sweepings and in the course of successive cycles monomer oxidation occurs at less and less positive potentials (inset of Fig. 1). It appears that FTO surfaces, modified gradually by polypyrrole, acquire electrocatalytic properties which facilitate pyrrole oxidation.33 A similar phenomenon was reported for aniline oxidation on polyaniline surfaces.34
 Fig. 1  
Polypyrrole electropolymerization and modification of the FTO electrode surface with the detection probe by CV in a polymerization solution (pyrrole 25 mM, LiClO4 0.1 M and the detection probe 20 µM) between 0.0 and 1.0 V at 50 mV s−1 for six cycles. Inset: first and sixth cycles. 
To the best of our knowledge FTO has never been used as an electrodic material, either for DNA detection or for silver deposition. So, the definition of the potential of deposition of silver using 5 mM AgNO3 on hybridized and non-hybridized (blank) FTO surfaces was carried out. Fig. 2 illustrates the cyclic voltammograms of the bare FTO electrode, the hybridized DNA electrode, and modified electrode with the gold nanoparticles. The onset potential of silver deposition, at which the reduction of silver ions to silver metal begins, is more negative for the bare FTO electrode (0.24 V) than for the hybridized and gold nanoparticle-modified FTO electrodes (0.32 V), dashed and solid curves, respectively. In other words, at potentials from 0.24 to 0.32 V, the silver deposition is attributed to the electrocatalytic properties of the gold nanoparticles. By selecting an appropriate potential in between the two onset potentials, only the gold nanoparticle-modified FTO electrode assists the silver electrodeposition. The amount of silver deposited, which is proportional to the amount of gold nanoparticles present on the FTO surface, can then be determined by an anodic scanning of the electrode.
 Fig. 2  
          Cyclic voltammograms of the bare (dashed curve), gold nanoparticle-modified (solid curve) and polypyrrole-ODN-modified in the absence of the target (dotted curve) FTO electrodes taken in 5 mM AgNO3/1 M KNO3 solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. 

Fig. 2 also displays the cyclic voltammogram of the DNA sensor electrode only with the polypyrrole-ODN-coated surface (in the absence of the target, dotted curve). As expected, the onset potential for silver deposition at the gold nanoparticle-bound sensor surface (with the target) is more positive (0.32 V) than the one without the gold nanoparticles (without the target) whose onset potential of deposition was also approx. 0.24 V. Consequently, fixing the potential at 0.27 V, significant silver deposition occurs only for the target-bound gold surface, but not for the probe-only surface.
In this sense, a calibration curve between the concentration of the asymmetric nested RT-PCR amplicon (A. acidoterrestris) and the LSV peak current is shown in Fig. 3. All the analytical experiments were carried out in triplicate using different electrodes and the curve showed in Fig. 3 represents the average values of these measurements. It can be seen that the current response is proportional to the concentration of the asymmetric nested RT-PCR target amplicon, whose concentrations were obtained by microchip electrophoresis (results not shown). The calibration equation of the best-fitted line was y (µA cm−1) = 11.883x (nM) + 68.519 with a correlation coefficient of 0.9982 (n = 6). The detection and quantification limits (DL and QL) calculated by statistical analysis35–37 from the analytical calibration curve (Fig. 3) presented values of 7.07 and 23.57 nM, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Calibration plot of the LSV peak current density against the target sequence concentration in the range from 46.8 to 149.9 nM (from 2 to 4 × 106 CFU mL−1). 
In the analytical curve shown in Fig. 3, the lowest concentration of the asymmetric PCR target used was 46.8 nM, which corresponded to 2 CFU mL−1. This detected concentration value is lower than the lowest concentration used recently on a microsystem strategy for viable Escherichia coli detection (102 CFU mL−1) using an electrochemical method similar to the one used in this study. Certainly, the limit of detection estimated here (7.07 nM) certainly corresponds to a much lower CFU concentration by milliliter (<2 CFU mL−1).
To further demonstrate the applicability of the electrochemical detection approach using FTO electrodes, six measurements performed at a same electrode (before electrochemical cleaning, see the Experimental section) using the same concentration of amplicon (140 nM) were carried out and are shown in Fig. 4. In fact, it is noted that the method presents good repeatability (RSD = 1.11%). In addition, the voltammetric response of the silver stripping observed on a sensor electrode modified only with the polypyrrole-probe and hybridized with the DNA amplicon, but in the absence the gold nanoparticles, is also shown in Fig. 4 (dashed curve). Although the concentrations of the silver and the amplicon are the same for all the sensor electrodes displayed in Fig. 4, the polypyrrole-probe-modified electrode hybridized with the target presents a peak approx. 25 times lower than that obtained using the gold-nanoparticle-label-bound electrodes. This fact demonstrates that the catalytic activity of the gold nanoparticles shifts the potential of silver deposition towards more positive potentials, as observed in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 4  Linear sweep voltammograms for the silver stripping performed on six FTO-target-gold nanoparticle electrodes (solid curves) and on an FTO-target electrode (dashed curve) in 5 mM AgNO3/1 M KNO3 solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The target concentration for the hybridization was the same for all the electrodes (150 nM). 
Likewise, the small signal observed in Fig. 4 (dashed curve) indicates that a small quantity of silver was deposited on some few bare FTO sites (without conductive polymer) even at this positive potential. This small signal can be attributed to a process of underpotential deposition (UPD), which is defined as deposition at potentials before the one predicted by the Nernst equation. That is to say, atoms of a metal can often aggregate, rather than deposit on a foreign surface, and dendrites are formed.38 Although the UPD process has been widely studied on noble metal substrates, studies concerning UPD on other electrodic materials are limited. UPD has only been reported for lithium deposited on carbon,39 and for copper on conductive hydrous ruthenium oxide electrodes.40 However, the UPD of silver usually begins to occur at potentials approximately 0.30 V more positive than the silver bulk deposition onset potential on gold surfaces41 for instance, which is within the potentials used in this study.
Meanwhile, a further improvement is needed for the application of the developed methodology in real samples of orange juices due to the presence of inhibitors in such samples. These studies are underway and will be reported elsewhere.
4. Conclusions

Electrochemical detection approaches have inherent advantages for the integration in miniaturized systems. The electrochemical gold nanoparticle-based DNA detection method with a process of electrocatalytic deposition of silver used in this study offered a very sensitive detection capability for detecting Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestris bacterium DNA obtained using a rapid and sensitive nested RT-PCR molecular amplification method.
In this study, FTO electrodes were tested as electrodic materials for biosensing. The cheap FTO (compared to ITO and noble metals) electrode was shown to be appropriate for the deposition of silver over DNA-labeled gold nanoparticles. The FTO, as an electrodic material, presents a potential for the onset of silver deposition that is more negative than the one presented by FTO electrodes modified with polypyrrole-ODN probe (containing the target bound to 5 nm streptavidin gold nanoparticle labels). As a consequence, using an appropriate potential, a significant amount of silver is deposited only on the target-bound gold surface, which is proportional to the amount of gold nanoparticles present on the FTO surface, and thus, to the analyte concentration. Consequently, this method presented low detection and quantification limits (7.07 and 23.6 nM, respectively) and good repeatability, demonstrating that this simple approach can be further developed and applied for sensitive and selective detection of bacteria and other microorganisms.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the Brazilian Funding Institutions CAPES, CNPq (Proc. 141421/2004-5) and FAPESP (Procs. 06/50692-2 and 01/14391-4) for the scholarships and financial support, and to the Cargill Citrus Ltda. for the training on A. acidoterrestris methodology.
References
M. Eiroa, V. Junqueira and F. L. Schmidt, J. Food Prot., 1999, 62, 883 CAS .
G. L. Pettipher, M. E. Osmundson and J. M. Murphy, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 1997, 24, 185 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Splittstoesser, J. Churey and C. Y. Lee, J. Food Prot., 1994, 57, 1080 .
K. Yamazaki, H. Teduka and H. Shinano, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 1996, 60, 543 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. C. Pinhati, S. Variane, S. Y. Eguchi and G. P. Manfio, Fruit Processing, 1997, 7, 350 Search PubMed .
M. P. Previdi, S. Quintavalla, C. Lusaedi and E. Vicini, Ind. Conserve, 1997, 72, 353 Search PubMed .
S. F. Wolf, L. Haines, J. Fisch, J. N. Kremsky, J. P. Dougherty and K. Jacobs, Nucleic Acids Res., 1987, 15, 2911 CrossRef .
S. Cosnier, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 1701 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, K. Jiao, G. Y. Xu, W. Sun and H. W. Gao, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 2182 CrossRef .
G. A. Rivas, M. L. Pedano and N. F. Ferreyra, Anal. Lett., 2005, 38, 2653 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, C. Soeller, M. B. Cannell, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Cooney and J. Travas-Sejdic, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1727 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Chehab and Y. W. Kan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1989, 86, 9178 CAS .
E. Laios, P. C. Ioannou and T. K. Christopoulos, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, C. Zhang and Z. Gao, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Cai, P. G. He and Y. Z. Fang, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 150 CrossRef CAS .
T.H. M-Lee, H. Cai and I.-M. Hsing, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 1628 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Li, H. Cai, T. M-H. Lee, J. Barford and I.-M. Hsing, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 81 CrossRef CAS .
T. M-H. Lee, H. Cai and I.-M. Hsing, Analyst, 2005, 130, 364 RSC .
A. Bonanni, M. J. Esplandiu and M. del Valle, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4022 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Smestad and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Educ., 1998, 75, 752 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Smestad, S. Spiekermann, J. Kowalik, C. D. Grant, A. M. Schwartzberg, J. Zhang, L. M. Tolbert and E. Moons, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 85 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Tseng, L.-C. Chen and K.-C. Ho, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 738 CrossRef .
Q. Qiao, J. Beck, R. Lumpkin, J. Pretko and J. T. Mcleskey Jr, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1034 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Funes-Huacca, L. C. A. Regitano, O. Mueller and E. Carrilho, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25, 3860 CrossRef CAS .

RT-PCR Protocols – Nested RT-PCR, ed. J. O'Connell, Humana Press Inc., Totowa, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
C. S. M. L. Estrada, L. D. Velazquez, S. di Genaro and A. M. S. de Guzmán, Food Res. Int., 2007, 40, 637 CrossRef .
K. Yamazaki, H. Teduka, N. Inoue and H. Shinano, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 1996, 23, 350 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Armistead and H. H. Thorp, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3764 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Yao and I.-M. Hsing, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1163 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier, H. Korri-Youssoufi, P. Srivastava, B. Mandrad and T. Delair, Synth. Met., 1999, 100, 89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cha, J. I. Han, Y. Choi, D. S. Yoon, K. W. Oh and G. Lim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 18, 1241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aeiyach, B. Zaid and P. C. Lacaze, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 2889 CrossRef CAS .
M. Genies, A. Boyle, M. Lapkowski and C. Tsintaris, Synth. Met., 1999, 36, 139 .

          T. J. Farrant, Practical Statistics for the Analytical Scientist, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  1997 Search PubMed .

          J. C. Miller and J. N. Miller, Statistics for Analytical Chemistry, Ellis Horwood, New York, 5th edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
V. A. Pedrosa, D. Miwa, S. A. S. Machado and L. A. Avaca, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1590 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Phoenix, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
T. Takamura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 75, 21 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Huang, T. N. Arunagiri, O. Ojeda, S. Flores, O. Chyan and R. M. Wallace, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, C107 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chen, S. M. Vesecky and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 151 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the DNA hybridization assay protocol with the probe immobilized onto the electroconducting polymer-modified FTO electrode using the gold nanoparticle-catalyzed silver electrodeposition approach (silver-enhancement) for signal transduction.	 

 	Fig. 1  
Polypyrrole electropolymerization and modification of the FTO electrode surface with the detection probe by CV in a polymerization solution (pyrrole 25 mM, LiClO4 0.1 M and the detection probe 20 µM) between 0.0 and 1.0 V at 50 mV s−1 for six cycles. Inset: first and sixth cycles.	 

 	Fig. 2  
          Cyclic voltammograms of the bare (dashed curve), gold nanoparticle-modified (solid curve) and polypyrrole-ODN-modified in the absence of the target (dotted curve) FTO electrodes taken in 5 mM AgNO3/1 M KNO3 solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calibration plot of the LSV peak current density against the target sequence concentration in the range from 46.8 to 149.9 nM (from 2 to 4 × 106 CFU mL−1).	 

 	Fig. 4  Linear sweep voltammograms for the silver stripping performed on six FTO-target-gold nanoparticle electrodes (solid curves) and on an FTO-target electrode (dashed curve) in 5 mM AgNO3/1 M KNO3 solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The target concentration for the hybridization was the same for all the electrodes (150 nM).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
