One-component cationic photoinitiators based on coumarin scaffold iodonium salts as highly sensitive photoacid generators for 3D printing IPN photopol ...  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0PY00677G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0PY00677G
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 5261-5278One-component cationic photoinitiators based on coumarin scaffold iodonium salts as highly sensitive photoacid generators for 3D printing IPN photopolymers under visible LED sources†

        
          
            Monika 
            Topa
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emilia 
            Hola
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mariusz 
            Galek
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Filip 
            Petko
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Maciej 
            Pilch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roman 
            Popielarz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fabrice 
            Morlet-Savary
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Bernadette 
            Graff
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jacques 
            Lalevée
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Joanna 
            Ortyl
          
        
      *ab
aFaculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, 31-155 Cracow, Poland. E-mail: jortyl@pk.edu.pl
bPhoto HiTech Ltd, Bobrzyńskiego 14, 30-348 Cracow, Poland
cInstitut de Science des Matériaux de Mulhouse IS2 M, UMR CNRS 7361, UHA, 15, rue Jean Starcky, Cedex 68057 Mulhouse, France
Received 
      8th May 2020
    , Accepted 5th July 2020First published on 20th July 2020AbstractThis paper describes the development of four new coumarin chromophore-based iodonium salts as efficient one-component cationic photoinitiators upon light-emitting diode (LED) irradiation with maximum emission under the UV-A region at 365 nm and under visible light at 405 nm. They initiate the cationic polymerization of epoxides, oxiranes, and glycidyl and vinyl ethers upon exposure to a UV-A LED and a visible LED. Even small structural variations of iodonium cations carrying different types of aryl moieties and the same coumarin chromophore can affect their properties. The properties and reactivities of a series of iodonium salts containing various cations were compared in the context of different photopolymerization processes. The relationship between the molecular structure of the coumarin-based iodonium salts and their reaction mechanism during the different photopolymerization processes was also investigated. Based on the results from real-time FT-IR spectroscopy and photo-differential scanning calorimetric experiments, it was concluded that the structures of the cations strongly affect the photopolymerization reaction rate and the final conversion of the monomer. Photopolymerization kinetic data show that kinetic parameters are affected by the presence of substituents in the phenyl ring of coumarin scaffold based iodonium salts. Indeed, the photoinitiating process remains highly efficient during the ring opening cationic photopolymerization of epoxides, oxiranes and glycidyl monomers, as well as during the extremely fast photopolymerization of vinyl monomers. The photochemical mechanisms of these new salts are investigated for the first time through electron spin resonance, laser flash photolysis and steady-state photolysis experiments and the cyclic voltammetry technique. Molecular orbital calculations are also used to shed some light on the initiation mechanisms. In conclusion, we have shown that new cationic iodonium photoinitiators are interesting from an industrial point of view because they can be used as efficient initiators in constructing IPN polymeric materials in the 3D printing area. These insights can encourage the utilisation of new coumarin based iodonium salts as useful photoinitiators in polymer coating synthesis, as well as for 3D printing processes.
Introduction
The light-induced processes of polymerization are considered as a pro-ecological method due to their low energy consumption, lack of solvents and high speed at ambient temperature.1,2 Initially, photopolymerization was used primarily in the printing industry, mainly for UV printing solvent-free inks3 and UV-cured varnishes,4,5 as it allows for printing on paper, plastic or metal. Achieving high polymerization rates within fractions of a second due to the rapid formation of radicals or initiating ions enables a powerful production line throughout. Moreover, the possibility of conducting photopolymerization processes at ambient temperature makes the preparation of polymeric materials by means of photoinduced polymerization processes one of the most efficient technologies for obtaining coating materials in the adhesion materials industry6 and the automotive industry,7 while it also plays an important role in the electronics industry.8 Currently, photopolymerization is used for obtaining cross-linked polymeric materials that have completely novel applications, such as the creation of holographic optical elements,9 the manufacture of microfluidic devices, digital storage10 and solar cells.11 Photopolymerization also plays an increasingly important role in design and material fabrication by additive manufacturing techniques in 2D (surface), 3D (additive manufacturing)12,13 and 4D (stimuli responsive 3D)14,15 materials. Among different photopolymerization 3D printing technologies,16 the most popular processes include the following: 3D printing via stereolithography (SLA – stereolithography apparatus),17 digital light processing (DLP),18 daylight polymer printing (DPP) using LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) screens,19 high-resolution 3D printing via two-photon polymerization (TPP),20–22 continuous liquid interface processing (CLIP)23 and the rapidly developing PolyJet method24 (multi-material and multi-colour technology of incremental light production). All this means that there has been an astonishingly rapid growth not only in photopolymerization-based technology applications,25 but also in the development of new materials26,27 that determines the pace of this growth. Dynamic advances in chemistry and photoinitiated process technologies are leading to increasingly more sophisticated solutions in this field, such as the development of a new generation of photoinitiators or monomers,28–30 new light sources31 and methods for the online monitoring of photopolymerization processes.32–37
From an industrial point of view, depending on the polymerization mechanism, we distinguish two polymerization processes that require different types of photoinitiators: compositions cured by free radical photopolymerization and compositions cured by cationic polymerization mechanisms.38 Free-radical photopolymerizations are well understood and have been investigated for a long time. From economic and industrial points of view, radical photopolymerizations still dominate scholarly interest and industrial applications.39,40 Nevertheless, cationic photopolymerization has also blossomed, especially in recent years, with the main area of interest being fully cationic photoresins with a low shrinkage effect41 for applications in technology related to 3D printing.42
Growing interest in cationic photopolymerization as an easy, economical and environmentally friendly method to prepare photocured polymer materials has dictated the need to develop new efficient photoinitiators.43,44 Fundamentally, cationic photopolymerization is initiated by photoacid generators (PAGs), which generate carbo-cations and protons upon a process of photolysis.45 Among cationic photoinitiators, non-ionic PAGs,46 organometallic salts47 and onium salts48,49 have been extensively studied in the literature.50 The cationic photoinitiators based on ionic salts include diaryliodonium, aryldiazonium, triarylsulphonium, phosphonium, alkoxypyridinium, phenacylaniline, trialkylphenacylammonium, phenacylbenzoylpyridinium and dialkylphenacyl-sulphonium salts. From an industrial application point of view, among such a wide range of compounds intended for the role of cationic photoinitiators, diaryliodonium salts have gained the greatest importance.51 This results directly from their air- and moisture-stabilisation, from the fact that this type of hypervalent iodine compound exhibits high reactivity during cationic photopolymerization, and from their relatively easy and cheap synthesis.52 In addition, the use of iodine salts is particularly important in organic synthesis as versatile reagents for mild and highly selective arylations, alkenylations, alkynylations, and alkylations of various organic and inorganic substrates.53 It is anticipated that this area of application of iodonium salts will continue to attract significant research activity in the future due, in particular, to the usefulness of the reactivity of iodonium salts in these types of organic reactions, combined with their environmentally benign character and commercial availability. Despite such a wide range of applications in organic chemistry, these salts have been applied to photochemical polymerization processes.54,55 The widespread popularity and applicability of iodonium salts in polymer chemistry are the roots of intensive research focused on the development of new iodonium salts characterised by absorption in the range of the long-wave UV spectrum, as well as in the range of the visible spectrum.56,57 This direction of research is fully justified from the point of view of the improvement of kinetics of the photopolymerization process with the use of traditional UV light sources, which are medium pressure mercury (MPM) lamps, and additionally provides the possibility of using cationic photopolymerization processes during the processes initiated with the use of innovative light sources, including UV-LEDs, as well as LED emitters from the visible spectrum range.58 The main strategy, which can be applied to extend the light absorption of cationic photoinitiators to longer wavelengths, includes the structural modification of conventional diphenyliodonium salts by the introduction of electron-donating or highly conjugated groups. Progress in the development of new diaryliodonium salts was achieved in research performing chemical modifications of iodonium salts. To this end, one of the phenyl rings in diphenyliodonium salts has been replaced by a naphthalene59 or a biphenyl group.60 Nevertheless, this modification proved to be insufficient for the bathochromic shift of the absorption characteristics of these new iodonium salts to the UV-A or visible range. Hartwig et al. focused on the development of completely new structures of iodonium photoinitiators.61 The resulting compound in the form of (9-oxo-9H-fluoren-2-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluoroantimonate(V) proved to be an efficient initiator of the cationic polymerization with the ring-opening cationic photopolymerization of epoxide monomers. One of the phenyl rings in iodonium salts was replaced by a 9-fluorenone chromophore. The obtained photoinitiator offsets effectively the absorption characteristics with two new weak bands in the UV-A range with maxima at 380 nm and 394 nm. A significant breakthrough was achieved using the coumarin chromophore, which was covalently linked to iodonium salts, so that the absorption spectra were clearly displaced towards the UV-A and visible regions of the spectrum. As a result, Ortyl et al.62 obtained a series of coumarin-based iodonium salts with different anions in the form of (7-alkoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyl-iodonium and (7-alkoxy-4-methylcoumarin-6-yl)phenyl-iodonium. Replacement of one of the phenyl groups in commercial diphenyliodonium photoinitiators with a coumarin chromophore shifted the absorption spectrum to longer wavelengths, which made the new photoinitiators better matched to the emission characteristics of medium pressure mercury (MPM) lamps, as well as UV-LEDs with maximum emission λmax = 365 nm used in the industry as light sources. More extensive research showed that the proposed coumarin-based iodonium salts initiate the ring opening cationic photopolymerization of epoxides. The cationic photopolymerization of divinylethers was demonstrated on a UV-A-LED source with emission at 385 nm, as well as upon exposure to a visible LED at 405 nm. It was also proven that the new iodonium salt coupled with the coumarin chromophore can be successfully utilised for the initiation of the free-radical photopolymerization (FRP) of methacrylate monomers.63 The coumarin-based iodonium hexafluoroantimonate was used as an efficient component of a ternary photoinitiator system, composed of camphorquinone (CQ) and an amine (ethyl 4-dimethylaminobenzoate – EDAB), for a dental adhesive resin (50 wt% bisphenol A glycidyldimethacrylate (Bis-GMA), 25 wt% triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA), 25 wt% 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA)).64 It was shown that the use of (7-ethoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluoroantimonate as a third component in the photoinitiation system appears to be an interesting alternative to improve the degree of conversion and performance of dental adhesive polymers. This is extremely valuable because traditional bimolecular photoinitiating systems based on CQ/amine, used in the free-radical polymerization of dental adhesives, present some drawbacks dictating research on alternative dental photoinitiator systems. For this reason, the proposed alternative photoinitiator systems with coumarin-based iodonium salts may represent new perspectives for the development of dental materials. The next interesting application of the new coumarin–iodonium photoinitiators was the development of a new and effective route towards obtaining polyalkenamers and polyolefin elastomers by UV-Vis irradiation (under source light emission between 320–500 nm). This approach showed promise in achieving easily processible elastomer materials.65 Another example of the covalent linkage of chromophores to an iodonium salt for expanding the absorption spectral range of this salt can be found in the works of Lalevée et al., who proposed a novel iodonium salt with a naphthalimide moiety.66,67 The new iodonium salts exhibit photoinitiating ability for the cationic photopolymerization of diepoxides, divinyl ethers and a diepoxide/divinyl ether blend under UV-A LEDs at 365 nm and 385 nm.
Contrary to previously reported photoinitiating systems using (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium salts with different anions, all the compounds synthesised in this study differ according to the type of substituent attached to the phenyl ring at the para position of (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)aryliodonium of the cation structure. Here, we would like to explore the role of different types of substituents at the p-position of the phenyl ring in the reactivity of one-component iodonium salts under UV-A and visible light. For this reason, in this paper, the reactivities of a series of coumarin-based iodonium salts containing various cations were compared, and the relationships among the structure, physical properties and reactivity of these salts in the context of photoinitiated cationic polymerization were established. The photochemical generation of reactive species was studied using steady-state photolysis, cyclic voltammetry and electron spin resonance spin trapping (ESR-ST) experiments and molecular orbital (MO) calculations. The photoinitiating ability for cationic and free-radical photopolymerization was also investigated using real-time Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Finally, it was demonstrated that these compounds have a potential application as active components of interpenetrating polymer network photopolymers based on epoxide and acrylate monomer blends for 3D printing application under visible LED sources.
Experimental part
Materials and synthesis
A series of coumarin moieties containing the following iodonium salts were investigated as high-performance cationic photoinitiators: (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-P), (4-cyanophenyl)-(7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-CN-P), (7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)-(4-nitrophenyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-NO2-P), (7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)-(p-tolyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-Me-P) and (4-isopropylphenyl)-(7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-iPr-P). The proposed photoinitiators were synthesised. The detailed physicochemical data of the iodonium salt derivatives are given in the ESI.† The structures of these compounds are shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Investigated compounds. 
Monomers and other chemicals
3,4-Epoxycyclohexylmethyl 3,4-epoxycyclohexanecarboxylate (CADE, commercial name UVACURE® 1500, from Allnex) was applied as a model of a cycloaliphatic epoxide monomer. Triethylene glycol divinyl ether (TEGDVE from Sigma Aldrich) was used as a model of a vinyl monomer, and trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMPTA, from Allnex) was used as an acrylate monomer. Bis[1-ethyl(3-oxetanyl)]methyl ether (OXT-221 from Tagosei Co., Ltd) was used as a model of an oxetane monomer, and trimethylolpropane triglycidyl ether (TMPTGE from Sigma Aldrich) was used as a model of a glycidyl monomer. The monomers were used with the highest available purity (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Monomers and additives for photopolymerization processes. 
Absorption, fluorescence characteristics and photolysis experiments
The absorption spectra of the investigated compounds were recorded in acetonitrile (from Sigma Aldrich, spectroscopic grade), using a SilverNova spectrometer (StellarNet, Inc., USA) in combination with a deuterium light source and a tungsten light source into one compact and lightweight package covering the 200–1700 nm spectral range (SL4-DT produced by Hamamatsu Photonics GmbH, obtained from StellarNet, Inc., USA), and a quartz cuvette with 1.0 cm optical path. The absorbance data were converted into extinction coefficients, expressed in classical units [dm3 mol−1 cm−1].
Photolysis was performed using an EPP2000C spectrometer (from StellarNet, Inc., USA) in combination with a broadband UV-Vis deuterium-halogen light source SL5 (from StellarNet, Inc., USA). A quartz cuvette with an appropriate photoinitiator solution was irradiated under an M365L2 UV-LED and an M405L3 Vis-LED (from Thorlabs Inc., USA), 365 nm, 0.025A (6.78 mW cm−2) and 405 nm, 0.35 A (304.5 mW cm−2), respectively, which were powered by a DC2200 regulated power supply (from Thorlabs Inc., USA) over 22 minutes.
Computational procedure
Molecular orbital calculations were carried out using the Gaussian03 program. The HOMO and LUMO for the investigated iodonium salts were calculated with the time-dependent density functional theory at the B3LYP/LANL2DZ level on the relaxed geometries calculated at the UB3LYP/LANL2DZ level. The C–I bond dissociation energy was calculated from the fully optimised reactants and the free radicals generated to discuss the selectivity of the C–I cleavage process.
Determination of reduction potentials
Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine the reduction potentials (Eredvs. Ag/AgCl) of the studied iodonium salt derivatives. The measurements were carried out in acetonitrile with tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (0.1 M, from Sigma Aldrich), as a supporting electrolyte using an Electrochemical Analyzer M161 and an Electrode Stand M164 (from MTM-ANKO, Poland). The working electrode was a platinum disk, and a silver chloride electrode – Ag/AgCl – was used as a reference electrode.
ESR spin-trapping (ESR-ST) experiments
An X-band spectrometer (EMX-plus, Bruker) was used for ESR-ST experiments. The radicals were generated at room temperature under UV-LED@365 nm exposure. Quartz (6 mm) cylindrical ESR tubes were used, the appropriate photoinitiator was dissolved in toluene, and then samples were purged with nitrogen. Irradiation was carried out inside the cavity (TE102) of the spectrometer. The radicals were trapped with phenyl-N-tert-butylnitrone (PBN, from TCI). The WINSIM software was used for ESR spectra simulations.
Laser flash photolysis (LFP)
Nanosecond laser flash photolysis (LFP) experiments were carried out using a Q-switched nanosecond Nd/YAG laser (λexc = 355 nm, 6–8 ns pulses) from Continuum (Minilite) for excitation, while the analysing system consisted of a pulsed xenon lamp, a monochromator, a fast photomultiplier and a transient digitiser (Luzchem LFP 212). The laser pulse was synchronized for t = 1 μs.
Monitoring the photopolymerization processes by real-time FT-IR

Sample preparation. 
The compositions for real-time FT-IR measurements were prepared by dissolving the iodonium salt derivatives in the appropriate monomer (TEGDVE or CADE) in such proportions so as to obtain a concentration of 1.0% by weight of the iodonium salt. The bond conversion was calculated using the following equation (eqn (1)), based on the decrease in the absorption area band ratio before and after light curing: Conversion % = [1 − At/A0]·100%(1)where At is the area of the characteristic absorbance peak depending on the type of monomer and type of photopolymerization process, and A0 is the initial area of the same characteristic absorbance peak depending on the type of monomer and type of photopolymerization process.


Ring opening photopolymerization of epoxy monomer experiments. 
Photocurable formulations (about 25 μm thick) were deposited on a BaF2 pellet under air for irradiation under different light sources. The evolution of the epoxy group content was continuously monitored by real-time FT-IR spectroscopy (Nicolet™ iS10, from Thermo Scientific, USA) at about 790 cm−1.


Photopolymerization of vinyl ether experiments. 
The experiments were carried out in laminate. Photosensitive formulations were sandwiched between two polypropylene films and deposited on a horizontal holder for the FT-IR spectrometer. The evolution of the double bond content was monitored by real-time FT-IR spectroscopy (Nicolet™ iS10, from Thermo Scientific, USA) at about 1620 cm−1.


Light sources for real-time FT-IR experiments. 
The light sources for the real-time FT-IR experiments were a 365 nm M365L2 diode and a 405 nm M405L3 diode (from Thorlabs Inc., USA) powered by a DC2200 regulated power supply (from Thorlabs Inc., USA). The LED was started ten seconds after the start of spectral registration. The distance between irradiation sources and formulations was 2.1 cm. The incident light intensity at the sample surface was I0 = 1.88 [mW cm−2] (for CADE) and 0.27 [mW cm−2] (for TEGDVE) for UV-LED@365 nm and I0 = 8.62 [mW cm−2] (for CADE) and 4.31 [mW cm−2] (for TEGDVE) for Vis-LED@405 nm.

Monitoring the photopolymerization processes by photo-DSC
Photo-DSC studies were conducted with a Photo-DSC 204 F1 Phoenix® from Netzsch-Gerätebau GmbH (Germany) equipped with a 365 nm LED light spot cure system Bluepoint LED eco (production by Hönle UV Technology, Germany). For comparison, the light intensity was measured using an OmniCure® R2000 radiometer (produced by Excelitas Technologies®, Ontario, Canada) and set to 0.34 [W cm−2] at the tip of the light guide. All measurements were conducted under an inert atmosphere (nitrogen flow of 20 [ml min−1]). The measurements were carried out in the isothermal mode at 25 °C. A sample of 2 ± 0.5 mg was placed in aluminium crucibles, covered with a clear quartz disc and subjected to ten seconds of isothermal conditioning before and 30 seconds after UV exposure. All measurements were performed in duplicate. The heat flow of the reaction was recorded as a function of time. The determination of the conversion (Cphoto-DSC), the time to reach 95% of the conversion (t95%) and the rate of polymerization (Rp) determine the molecular weight, density and theoretical enthalpy per mol of the functional group (ΔHtheoretical-0) of the monomer (for oxetane monomers, this was 107 kJ mol−1 (ref. 68) and for glycidyl monomers, this was 80.6 kJ mol−1).69 The heat liberated during the polymerization reaction was directly proportional to the number of bonds in the system. By integrating the area under the exothermic peak, the conversion of the bonds (Cphoto-DSC) could be calculated with the following equation: (2)where M – molecular mass of the monomer [g mol−1]; f – functionality of the monomer; ΔHo – enthalpy of polymerization [J mol−1] (calculated in one functional group); H – heat flow [W]; and mp – sample mass [g]. The polymerization rate (Rp) was also calculated from the following equation: (3)where dm – density of composition [g ml−1]; ΔHo – enthalpy of polymerization [J mol−1] (calculated in one functional group); H – heat flow [W]; and mp – sample mass [g].
3D printing experiment
For laser writing and 3D printing experiments, a laser diode at 405 nm with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (spot size ∼50 μm) was used for spatially controlled irradiation (NEJE DK-8-KZ 1000 mW Laser Engraver Printer). The photosensitive formulations (2 mm thickness) were deposited onto a microscope slide and were polymerized under air. The generated patterns were analysed using a numerical optical microscope (DSX-HRSU from OLYMPUS Corporation).
Results and discussion
Photochemistry of the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators
In general, the new coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators may be divided into three groups: the first is (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate 7M-P without substituents at the p-position; the second is the compounds with an activating substituent: 7M-Me-P and 7M-iPr-P; and, finally, the third is the group of iodonium salts with a deactivating substituent: 7M-CN-P and 7M-NO2-P. The ground state absorption spectra of the proposed coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators are shown in Fig. 1. It can be seen that the introduction of different substituents to the basic coumarin moiety containing an iodonium salt skeleton had a non-significant influence on the spectroscopic properties of new compounds.
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of the coumarin moiety containing iodonium salts in acetonitrile. 
Nevertheless, the novel iodonium salts, differing in the type of substituent at the para position of the phenyl ring attached to the iodine atom, absorb strongly at the near-UV and visible regions. The maxima and molar extinction coefficients are compared with those of the corresponding coumarin–iodonium salts described previously.62 Remarkably, the investigated compounds are characterised by slightly different absorption maximum values (λmax ∼ 350 nm) and significantly different molar extinction coefficient values (in the range of 18934–22704 [dm3 mol−1 cm−1] in acetonitrile, as presented in Table 1). In contrast to the commercial cationic polymerization photoinitiator (Speedcure 938), which is a diaryliodonium derivative, the absorption characteristics of the investigated (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium derivatives are shifted to longer wavelengths, which allow an efficient matching with the LED@365 nm and LED@405 nm emission spectra. The commercial diphenyliodonium photoinitiator does not absorb light significantly above 300 nm. It only shows an absorption shoulder reaching up to 320 nm (Fig. 1).
Table 1 Light absorption characteristics of the iodonium salt derivatives in acetonitrile, maximum absorption wavelengths (λmax-ab) and molar extinction coefficients (ε) at λmax




Initiator

λ
max-ab [nm]

ε

λmax


ε
365 nm


ε
405 nm


E
red
vs. Ag/AgCl [mV]


[dm3 mol−1 cm−1]




7M-P
350
20444
16658
280
−477


7M-CN-P
352
18934
16802
355
−318


7M-NO2-P
351
19100
16772
457
−288


7M-Me-P
349
22704
18207
238
−532


7M-iPr-P
350
18439
14959
218
−618


IOD
242
16503
0
0
−773




The optimised geometries and frontier orbitals (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital – HOMO, and Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital – LUMO) for the coumarin moiety containing the iodonium salt calculated using the time-dependent density functional theory at the UB3LYP/LANL2DZ level are shown in Scheme 3. In contrast to symmetrical diphenyliodonium salts, where the HOMO and LUMO are localised on the phenyl rings,63 for all studied compounds, the HOMOs are localised on the coumarin moiety and the LUMOs are located on the carbon–iodine bond and the relevant phenyl ring. The lowest energy transition (HOMO → LUMO) characteristics are similar for the studied compounds and exhibit a charge-transfer character. The shapes of the calculated absorption spectra are presented in the ESI.†
 Scheme 3  Molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) of iodonium salts (at the UB3LYP/LANL2DZ level). 

Fig. 2 and 3 present profiles illustrating changes in absorbance over time of the studied iodonium salts at 365 nm, and it can be seen that the photolysis process is over after around 300 s. During the photolysis experiment of iodonium salts, changes in the absorption spectra are also observed. The absorption bands at 350 nm decrease and, simultaneously, the absorption band at 280 nm increases, which is directly associated with the formation of new photo-products. Remarkably, isobestic points are observed suggesting a photochemical process with side reactions (Fig. 4 and 5).
 Fig. 2  Photolysis of 7-M-NO2-P in acetonitrile under LED@365 nm (6.78 mW cm−2); concentration [7-M-NO2-P] = 3.81 × 10−5 [mol dm−3]. 
 Fig. 3  Photolysis of 7-M-NO2-P in acetonitrile under LED@405 nm (304.5 mW cm−2); concentration [7-M-NO2-P] = 3.81 × 10−5 [mol dm−3]. 
 Fig. 4  Profiles illustrating changes in absorbance over time of the studied iodonium salts at 365 nm, upon exposure to LED@365 nm. 
 Fig. 5  Profiles illustrating changes in absorbance over time of the studied iodonium salts at 365 nm, upon exposure to LED@405 nm. 
In the next step, laser flash photolysis (LFP) experiments were carried out on (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-P). In the LFP experiments, strong bleaching of the ground state absorption at 350 nm was observed (Fig. 6), which unambiguously demonstrates the high photosensitivity of these compounds. The very short depletion time (<10 ns) is limited here by the resolution time of the device. The laser flash photolysis data presented in Fig. 6 don't correspond to the absorption of a transient species (indeed, ΔOD is <0) but clearly show photobleaching (in agreement with the ground state absorption spectrum; observation at 350 nm). This shows that the laser pulse (at t = 1 microsecond) immediately leads to bleaching associated with the cleavage process. This is a usual behaviour in Type I Photoinitiator. On a time scale of 40 μs (maximum reliable time with our LFP setup), a full recovery of the ground state absorption is not observed. The transient absorption spectrum for t = 40 μs can be compared to t = 1 μs in Fig. 6 showing only a very low recovery of the ground state absorption. This partial recovery can be ascribed to the recombination of the fragments that regenerate the starting product. The key result here is clearly the repletion of the ground state in a very short time scale in agreement with a cleavage of the C–I bond (again in full agreement with UV-vis photolysis and ESR experiments).
 Fig. 6  Transient absorption recorded at 350 nm for a laser excitation at 355 nm for 7M-P in nitrogen saturated acetonitrile. Inset: The absorbance change spectrum (1 μs after the laser pulse). 
All investigated (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium derivative photoinitiators were photodissociated as a result of light absorption. After irradiating the photoinitiator molecules with the appropriate wavelength, we used LED sources of light with emission at 365 nm and 405 nm wavelength; photodissociation usually took place from the excited singlet state. At the same time, it can be observed that the photodissociation of iodonium salts can occur both through homolytic and heterolytic mechanisms of breaking the carbon–iodine bond (Scheme 4).70
 Scheme 4  Proposed chemical mechanisms for the photochemical reactivity of the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators. 
For this reason, the possible dissociation mechanisms of the investigated coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators were investigated at the uB3LYP/LANL2DZ level. As a result of these processes, free radicals, cations and cation radicals can be formed, as shown in Scheme 4. Usually, the homolytic mechanism dominates. The aryliodonium cation radicals and aryl radicals generated during photolysis are the most reactive of the resulting particles. The aryliodonium cation radical is always coordinated with the counterion present in the form of the anion of the iodonium salt. The resulting cation radical, following the separation of the hydrogen atom from the molecule of any donor (RH) in its environment (this can be a monomer, polymer or other components of the cured composition), undergoes a further reaction to give iodobenzene and a hydrogen cation, which forms a protic acid with a counterion, e.g. acid hexafluorophosphate. Cation radicals and aryl radicals that arise simultaneously can also react with each other, resulting in a combination of two radical centres and subsequent proton cleavage to produce a protic acid. Thus, diaryliodonium salts, used as cationic polymerization photoinitiators, are also commonly known as strong protic acid generators (PAG = Photo-Acid Generators), whose power directly depends on the anion present in the structure of the iodonium salt. The protonic acid obtained by photodissociation of the iodonium salt is an appropriate initiator of cationic polymerization, which, as a result of attachment to the monomer, begins the propagation of the polymer chain. Depending on the type of monomer involved in polymerization, there are cationic photopolymerization chain processes (e.g. vinyl ethers) and ring-opening photopolymerization processes (e.g. epoxy monomers), which will be demonstrated later. Nevertheless, according to molecular orbital calculations, Scheme 5 shows the possible dissociation paths of the studied iodonium salts and the corresponding bond dissociation energy for both possibilities. For all investigated compounds, the coumarin moiety–iodine bond dissociation energy is higher than that of the I–Ph–R (where R = Me, iPr, NO2, CN) bond. This clearly shows that a selective I–Ph–R (where R = Me, iPr, NO2, CN) cleavage reaction occurs.
 Scheme 5  Two possible dissociation pathways of the coumarin-based iodonium salts with the associated C–I bond dissociation energy (BDE) calculated at the B3LYP/LANL2DZ level of theory. 
In addition, ESR spin trapping experiments were conducted to detect the radicals produced from the studied iodonium salts under UV LED irradiation (Fig. 7). The formation of aryl radicals was fully confirmed by the ESR experiment. The aryl radicals (Ar˙) were detected as PBN/Ar˙ radical adducts in ESR-ST experiments (example for 7M-P in Fig. 8, hyperfine coupling constants (hfcs): aN = 14.1 G and aH = 2.2 G). Based on the above investigations, aryl radicals (Ar˙) are formed as a result of a cleavage of the carbon–iodine bond from an I–Ph–R part of the initiator. This fact is in full agreement with computational calculations.
 Fig. 7  ESR-spin trapping spectrum of the radical generated in 7M-P upon LED@365 nm exposure. The first figure show the experiment before irradiation (black spectrum) and experiment after 42 seconds of irradiation (red spectrum) in toluene as a solvent; and the second figure show the experiment (black spectrum) and simulated (red spectrum) in toluene as a solvent. 
 Fig. 8  Photopolymerization profiles (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) measured by real-time FT-IR for the photoinduced ring opening cationic photopolymerization of the CADE monomer upon exposure to LED@365 nm (1.88 mW cm−2) in the presence of different photoinitiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s, thin samples 25 μm, under air conditions. 
Electrochemical properties of the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators
Reduction potentials of the studied iodonium salts were determined using cyclic voltammetry. All results are presented in Table 1. Remarkably, modification of the basic skeleton of the 7M-P salt has an influence on the electrochemical properties of the investigated compounds. Introduction of electron-withdrawing groups (–CN, NO2) to the para position of the phenyl ring attached to iodine increases the reduction potential. Conversely, the introduction of electron-donating groups (Me, iPr) is associated with a decrease in the value of the reduction potential in comparison with a compound without any substituent at the para position of the phenyl ring attached to iodine.
Photoinitiating ability of the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators as photoinitiators for cationic photopolymerization (CP)

Ring opening photopolymerization of epoxy monomers (ROP-CP). 
Photopolymerization via the cationic mechanism, especially the cationic ring-opening polymerization (ROP) of epoxides, provides a lot of benefits, such as good polymer properties, low volume shrinkage and an ability to proceed in the presence of air. For these reasons, the development of efficient photoinitiators for cationic ROP is extremely important. Therefore, in order to evaluate the performance of new coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators as photoinitiators in comparison with the commercial ones, tests of photopolymerization of sample monomers under identical reaction conditions were carried out, using the photoinitiators studied. The cationic photopolymerization of the 3,4-epoxycyclohexylmethyl-3,4-epoxycyclohexane-carboxylate monomer (CADE, commercial name UVACURE® 1500) was carried out under air using firstly a UV-LED source of light with the emission maximum at 365 nm with irradiation at the top of the sample (1.88 mW cm−2). The progress of the photopolymerization process was monitored using real-time FT-IR by monitoring the disappearance of the band at a wavenumber of 790 cm−1 corresponding to the disappearance of oxirane bonds in the monomer. The irradiation of a commercial diaryliodonium photoinitiator – Speedcure 938 – with UV-A or visible light does not induce polymerization. When we irradiated the epoxy monomer-based formulations appropriate for the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators, however, it was shown that these photoinitiators initiate the ring opening cationic photopolymerization efficiently. Nevertheless, based on the tests carried out, it can be seen that the introduction of different substituents to (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium derivatives had significant influence on the degrees of conversion of new compounds. The highest conversion was recorded for the (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-P) compound, and was slightly lower for the (7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)-(p-tolyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-Me-P) and (4-isopropylphenyl)-(7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-iPr-P) initiators. The lowest conversion was recorded for initiators with the following electron-withdrawing substituents: (4-cyanophenyl)-(7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-CN-P) and (7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)-(4-nitrophenyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-NO2-P) (Fig. 8, Table 2).
Table 2 Final conversion of epoxy and vinyl monomers obtained under air upon exposure to different LEDs in the presence of the five different (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium derivatives as cationic photoinitiators




Photo-initiator
Conversions of the epoxy monomer CADE after photopolymerization (after 800 s of irradiation) [%]
Conversions of the vinyl monomer TEGDVE after photopolymerization (after 400 s of irradiation) [%]


365 nm (1.88 mW cm−2)
Induction time [s]
dα/dt
405 nm (8.62 mW cm−2)
Induction time [s]
dα/dt
365 nm (0.27 mW cm−2)
Induction time [s]
dα/dt
405 nm (4.31 mW cm−2)
Induction time [s]
dα/dt




7-MP
58.6
11.2
1.778
53.2
35.7
0.513
86.8
21.6
3.853
83.2
64.0
0.858


7-M-CN-P
21.0
15.2
0.644
25.0
43.8
0.203
77.8
89.5
0.682
23.8
88.3
0.668


7-M-NO2-P
29.3
17.4
0.601
7.4
130.2
0.071
78.7
59.8
0.576
76.2
92.6
0.381


7-M-Me-P
40.2
14.9
1.059
45.8
57.7
0.225
83.1
37.1
1.192
75.9
74.7
0.325


7-M-iPr-P
53.0
13.4
1.442
40.2
68.3
0.134
86.5
19.9
2.520
81.9
58.5
0.401




The same relationship was observed upon exposure to LED@405 nm. Both initiators with electron-donating (Me, iPr) and electron-withdrawing (–CN, NO2) substituents have an adverse effect on the initiation efficiency of epoxy monomer photopolymerization processes (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Photopolymerization profiles (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) measured by real-time FT-IR for the photoinduced ring opening cationic photopolymerization of the CADE monomer upon exposure to LED@405 nm (8.62 mW cm−2) in the presence of different photoinitiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s, thin samples 25 μm, under air conditions. 
All presented coumarin-based iodonium salts have the same anion, which produced the same acid with the same strength. The difference in the performance of the presented salts is caused by their structure and functional groups incorporated into their structure. Salts with cyano (7-M-CN-P) and nitro (7-M-NO2-P) groups are less effective than other salts because these groups undergo protonation (even double protonation) in the presence of a superacid generated during photolysis of salts. These groups compete with the monomer; therefore the effectiveness of salts decreases. Although the overall performance observed during tests is the result of many factors, protonation of photodecomposition products (with cyano and nitro groups) should be considered as the most significant. In the case of salts with alkane groups (7-M-Me-P and 7-M-iPr-P), their lower performance compared to 7-MP is caused by the higher energy of the C–I bond (Scheme 5). In this case, the interaction between the photoinitiator's photodecomposition products and the superacid is less significant.
The slopes (dα/dt) of the kinetic profiles, obtained right after the polymerization started, can be used as quantitative indicators of the polymerization rates, which depend on the photoinitiator performance. The higher the slope, the higher the polymerization rate, because the photoinitiator concentration and the testing conditions were maintained identical. In addition, we have organized our derivatives within a given group from the most effective to the least effective photoinitiator based on the following parameters: the value of the C–I bond dissociation energy (BDE), the value of the slope of the kinetic profile (dα/dt) and additionally the value of the final conversions.


Photopolymerization of vinyl ether monomers (VE-CP). 
The photopolymerization process of vinyl ethers occurs very rapidly and much faster than epoxy monomers. Usually, after a short induction period due to the presence of an alkaline stabiliser, the polymerization of vinyl ethers develops very rapidly, and the reactive functional groups are entirely exhausted obtaining a high final conversion of monomers. For this reason, in terms of further research, the relationship between the UV-A or visible light photoinitiating cationic polymerization efficiency of vinyl monomers (TEGDVE) and the substituents of photoinitiators was also investigated using real-time FT-IR experiments. The progress of the photopolymerization process was monitored by observing the disappearance of double bonds in the monomer at a wavenumber of 1620 cm−1. The cationic photopolymerization of triethylene glycol divinyl ether (TEGDVE) was carried out in laminate upon exposure to a UV-LED source with the emission maximum at 365 nm (the intensity of irradiation at the top of the surface of the sample was 0.27 mW cm−2), and upon exposure to a visible LED source with the emission maximum at 405 nm (the intensity of irradiation at the top of the surface of the sample was 4.31 mW cm−2). In both cases, it was shown that the speed of the photopolymerization process and the induction time decrease in the following order: 7MP > 7M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7M-NO2-P > 7M-CN-P.
Similarly to the cationic photopolymerization of the epoxy monomer, it was also shown that the highest conversion rates and the highest polymerization rates were found for (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-P).
The introduction of electron-donating groups (Me, iPr) and electron-withdrawing groups (–CN, NO2) is associated with the decrease in the value of the degrees of conversion in comparison with compounds without any substituent at the para position of the phenyl ring attached to iodine. The introduction of electron-withdrawing groups (–CN, NO2) to the para position of the phenyl ring attached to iodine reduces the degrees of conversion in comparison with other initiators. Moreover, polymerization is slightly faster upon exposure to LED@365 nm compared to LED@405 nm due to the better absorption properties of these initiators at 365 nm (Fig. 10 and 11). On the basis of the selected parameters determining the ability for initiation, compounds from the effective photoinitiator to the weakest could be ordered. For coumarin based iodonium salts, the following relationships have been established:



dα/dt during epoxy monomer photopolymerization under UV-LED@365 nm:


7-MP > 7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P


 


dα/dt during vinyl monomer photopolymerization under UV-LED@365 nm:


7-MP > 7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P


 


The value of the C–I bond dissociation energy (BDE):


7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-MP > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P



 Fig. 10  Polymerization profiles of TEGDVE (vinyl function conversion vs. irradiation time) upon exposure to LED@365 nm (0.27 mW cm−2) in the presence of different initiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s. 
 Fig. 11  Polymerization profiles of TEGDVE (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) upon exposure to LED@405 nm (4.31 mW cm−2) in the presence of different initiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s. 


Photopolymerization of oxetane and glycidyl ether monomers by isothermal differential scanning calorimetry (photo-DSC). 
Currently, in the polymer industry, a widely used and popular monomer is oxetane resins, which are more reactive than epoxides during the photoinitiated cationic ring-opening polymerizations. Oxetane reactivity is directly related to three major factors, which influence the reactivity of cyclic ethers during cationic ring-opening polymerization. These factors are: basicity, ring strain and steric factors. Therefore, oxetane monomers exhibit lower a pKa value and lower ring strain than the oxirane moiety. All of the above make oxetanes good alternatives to epoxides. Therefore, using isothermal photo-differential scanning calorimetry (photo-DSC), which allows the determination of the degree of monomer conversion during the cationic photopolymerization process of oxetane monomers, the efficiency of the (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate derivatives as photoinitiators was investigated. We used photo-DSC, because it involves measuring the amount of heat generated during the photopolymerization process, and the conversion of photopolymerization for low viscosity monomers. Therefore, the use of the real-time FT-IR method was not possible. The degree of conversion is determined as the ratio of the total amount of heat that is released in the sample at the start of photopolymerization, corrected from thermal effects on the total amount of heat of polymerization (which corresponds to 100% conversion). Therefore, the progress of photopolymerization of a composition consisting of different cationic photoinitiators (1% w/w) and bis[1-ethyl(3-oxetanyl)]methyl ether (OXT-221) as oxetane monomers under a source of light with the maximum emission characteristic at 365 nm was monitored using photo-DSC (Fig. 12 and 13).
 Fig. 12  The time-dependent rate of polymerization for different photoinitiators in the OXT-221 monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm. 
 Fig. 13  Conversion profiles for the photopolymerization reactions for different photoinitiators in the OXT-221 monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm. 
The dependence of the photopolymerization rate of the oxetane monomer using new initiators on time was plotted and the polymerization degrees were determined. The compound without any substituent at the para position (7-MP) of the phenyl ring attached to iodine has the highest degree of conversion. The introduction of electron-withdrawing (–CN, NO2) and electron-donating groups (Me, iPr) to the para position of the phenyl ring attached to iodine decreases the degrees of conversion in comparison with the 7-MP initiator (Fig. 13). This phenomenon is based on different solubilities of these compounds in the OXT monomer.
The new initiators are also suitable for initiating the cationic photopolymerization process of the trimethylolpropane triglycidyl ether monomer (TMPTGE), which was used as a model monomer. Nevertheless, the polymerization rate is much lower than when using the oxetane monomer. Conversion rates for these initiators range from 34.9% to 46.7% (Fig. 14 and 15). This research demonstrated that unsubstituted iodonium salts are more efficient cationic photoinitiators than either their alkyl-substituted (7M-Me-P and 7M-iPr-P) or their electron-withdrawing substituent counterparts (7M-CN-P and 7M-NO2-P). Nevertheless, all the new cationic photoinitiators provide excellent reactivity in the oxetane monomer and good reactivity in the glycidyl ether monomer. Therefore, the combination of oxetane and glycidyl ethers with a cycloaliphatic epoxy resin (e.g. 3,4-epoxycyclohexylmethyl-3,4-epoxycyclohexane carboxylate) can offer lower cost cationic photocuring reactive diluents that have a relatively good cure speed when we used the (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium derivatives as cationic photoinitiators (Table 3).
 Fig. 14  The time-dependent rate of polymerization for different photoinitiators in the TMPTGE monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm. 
 Fig. 15  Conversion profiles for the photopolymerization reactions for different photoinitiators in the TMPTGE monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm. 
Table 3 Photo-DSC parameter results of one-component cationic photoinitiators based on iodonium salts with a coumarin scaffold (1 mol%) in OXT-221 or TMPTGE monomers upon irradiation at 365 nm (the intensity on the surface of sample: 6.7 mW cm−2)




 
OXT-221 monomer
TMPTGE monomer



R
p [mmol dm−3 s−1]

t
95% of conversion [s]

C
photo-DSC [%]

R
p [mmol dm−3 s−1]

t
95% of conversion [s]

C
photo-DSC [%]




7-MP
0.897
502
93.3
0.060
454
46.7


7-M-CN-P
0.500
298
65.2
0.040
542
36.1


7-M-NO2-P
0.383
367
71.9
0.058
531
34.9


7-M-Me-P
0.482
405
71.9
0.071
222
35.9


7-M-iPr-P
0.160
414
70.8
0.071
244
37.1





3D printing experiment using direct visible light induced cationic coumarin-based photoinitiators
Given the wide application and popularity of 3D printing technologies, we also investigated the new coumarin-based photoinitiators as visible photocured stereolithographic systems for 3D printing applications. As, currently, the photocured resin systems employed in 3D printing technologies are mostly based on acrylate and methacrylate monomers and oligomers, we proposed the use of IPN photocurable resins. This is due to the fact that some of the drawbacks of pure acrylate-based systems in 3D printing include the high level of shrinkage and the viscosity of the resins. According to the literature, the solution for these technological problems can be an alternative polymerisation mechanism based on the ring-opening cationic photopolymerization of epoxides. Therefore, the combination of acrylate and epoxide photocurable formulations into a hybrid system can provide benefits, which could not be achieved with either technology alone.71
Thanks to the high efficiency of coumarin-based photoinitiators in cationic and in free-radical photopolymerization processes,63 an interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) can be fabricated through concomitant cationic/radical photopolymerization during a one-step hybrid photocure process using, for example, (7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)-(p-tolyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-Me-P) or (4-isopropylphenyl)-(7-methoxy-4-methyl-2-oxo-chromen-3-yl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (7M-iPr-P) under visible light and under air (Fig. 16 and the ESI†). The results of the 3D printing experiments on laser diode irradiation at 405 nm under air using the studied photoinitiators in TMPTA/CADE and TMPTA/TEGDVE blends are shown in Fig. 16 (additional photos in the ESI†). The high-photosensitivity formulations obtained allow the efficient photopolymerization of thick polymer layers in irradiated areas. In this experiment, samples were obtained with high spatial resolution in a very short time (less than one minute). The obtained samples were analysed by numerical optical microscopy, and the patterns are shown in Fig. 16. The spatial resolution is excellent (only limited by the size of the laser diode beam: spot of 50 μm).
 Fig. 16  The pattern obtained after the 3D printing experiment based on the formulations: (A) 7M-P (1% w/w)/TMPTA/TEGDVE, the pattern “PHT” (abbreviation from Photo HiTech) characterised by numerical optical microscopy and (B) 7M-Me-P (1% w/w)/TMPTA/EPOX, the pattern “JCI” (abbreviation from Jagiellonian Centre of Innovation) characterised by numerical optical microscopy. A 3D printer using a laser diode at 405 nm (size of the spot around 50 μm) with an intensity of 100 mW was used for the spatially controlled irradiation. 
Conclusions
In summary, this research demonstrated that the investigated photoinitiators showed different efficiencies for the photoinitiating polymerization of monomers, which correspond to the structure of these initiators. Real-time FT-IR and photo-DSC revealed the excellent reactivity of the new derivatives of (7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyliodonium photoinitiators in comparison with benchmark substances, which do not initiate photopolymerization under UV-A and visible light sources. New coumarin-based photoinitiators operate as a one-component photoinitiator for the cationic polymerization of epoxides, vinyl ethers, oxiranes and glycidyl monomers, as well as efficient photoinitiators for diepoxide/triacrylate and divinyl/triacrylate blends for the simultaneous initiation of cationic and free-radical polymerization processes under visible LEDs. Optical microscopy experiments show that structures can be printed by 3D stereolithography processes in these hybrid resins with good resolution. We showed that simultaneous cationic and free-radical photoinitiating mechanisms could be hugely beneficial for the advancement of curing hybrid free-radical/cationic formulations and could be very important for 3D printing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Centre for Research and Development (Warsaw, Poland) – INNOCHEM project contract number POIR.01.02.00-00-0038/16-00; project title: ‘A new generation of photoinitiators for photopolymerization processes dedicated to the coating-forming industry and adhesives’. The authors are also grateful to the National Science Centre – Project SONATA [Grant No. UMO-2012/07/D/ST5/02300, 2012] for financing the purchase of a steady-state fluorescence spectrofluorometer and a real-time FT-IR spectrometer, and the Foundation for Polish Science (Warsaw, Poland) TEAM TECH project Grant No. TEAM TECH/2016-2/15 (POIR.04.04.00-00-204B/16-00) for financing the purchase of 3D printing equipment. Moreover, the Polish group acknowledges the support of the PROM programme for the financing of the international internship for PhD students (E. H. and M. T.; no. PPI/PRO/2018/1/00013/U/001), which is co-financed by the European Social Fund under the Knowledge Education Development Operational Programme, and for the financing of the BGF research stay (J. O.), which is co-financed by the French Government Scholarship.
References
Y. Yagci, S. Jockusch and N. J. Turro, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6245–6260 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatani, Ch. J. Kloxin and Ch. N. Bowman, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2187–2201 RSC .
R. S. Davidson and R. J. Holman, Rev. Prog. Color. Relat. Top., 2003, 33, 46–58 CAS .

          K. Dietliker, Chemistry & Technology of UV & EB Formulation for Coatings, Inks & Paints, SITA Technology Ltd., London,  1991 Search PubMed .
M. A. Lago, A. Rodriguez-Bernaldo de Quiroz, R. Sendon, J. Bustos, M. T. Nieto and P. Paseiro, Food Addit. Contam., Part A, 2015, 32(5), 1–20 Search PubMed .
H.-S. Do, Y.-J. Park, H.-J. Kim and J. Adhesion, Sci. Technol., 2006, 20(13), 1529–1545 CAS .

          R. Schwalm, UV Coatings. Basics, Recents Developments and New Applications, Elsevier, Oxford,  2007 Search PubMed .

          K. Nakamura, Photopolymers: Photoresist Materials, Processes, and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1st edn,  2014 Search PubMed .
F.-K. Bruder, R. Hagen, T. Rölle, M.-S. Weiser and T. Fäcke, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 4646–4668 CrossRef .
H. E. Pudavar, M. P. Joshi, P. N. Prasad and B. A. Reinhardt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1338–1340 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bella and R. Bongiovanni, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 16, 1–2 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ligon, R. Liska, J. Stampfl, M. Gurr and R. Mülhaupt, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10212–10290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani, X. Wang and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706344 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhao, R. Yu, X. Li, B. Cheng, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, X. Zhao, Y. Zhao and W. Huang, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 101, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kuang, D. J. Roach, J. Wu, C. M. Hamel, Z. Ding, T. Wang, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29(2), 1805290 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and P. Xiao, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1530–1540 RSC .
P. Wei, H. Leng, Q. Chen, R. Advincula and E. B. Pentzer, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 885–892 CrossRef CAS .
B. Metral, A. Bischoff, Ch. Ley, A. Ibrahim and X. Allonas, ChemPhotoChem, 2019, 3, 1109–1118 CrossRef CAS .
H. Quan, T. Zhang, H. Xu, S. Luo, J. Nie and X. Zhu, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 110–115 CrossRef .
M. Farsari and B. N. Chichkov, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 450–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maruo and J. T. Fourkas, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 100–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tromayer, P. Gruber, A. Rosspeintner, A. Ajami, W. Husinsky, F. Plasser, L. González, E. Vauthey, A. Ovsianikov and R. Liska, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 17273 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. Kelly, K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt, J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin, E. T. Samulski and J. M. DeSimone, Science, 2015, 347, 1349–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hartings and Z. Ahmed, New J. Chem., 2019, 3, 305–314 Search PubMed .
S. Chatani, C. J. Kloxin and C. N. Bowman, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2187–2201 RSC .
E. Hola, M. Pilch, M. Galek and J. Ortyl, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 480–495 RSC .
E. Hola, J. Ortyl, M. Jankowska, M. Pilch, M. Galek, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff, C. Dietlinc and J. Lalevée, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 922–935 RSC .

          Z. Liu and G. Kraus, in Green Materials from Plant Oils, ed. Z. Liu and G. Kraus, The Royal Society of Chemistry, RSC Green Chemistry, Cambridge,  2015, p. 29 Search PubMed .
D. Nowak, J. Ortyl, I. Kamińska-Borek, K. Kukuła, M. Topa and R. Popielarz, Polym. Test., 2018, 67, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nowak, J. Ortyl, I. Kamińska-Borek, K. Kukuła, M. Topa and R. Popielarz, Polym. Test., 2017, 64, 313–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dietlin, S. Schweizer, P. Xiao, J. Zhang, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff, J.-P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3895–3912 RSC .
J. Ortyl, P. Fiedor, A. Chachaj-Brekiesz, M. Pilch, E. Hola and M. Galek, Sensors, 2019, 19, 1668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ortyl and R. Popielarz, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 128, 1974–1978 CAS .
I. Kamińska, J. Ortyl and R. Popielarz, Polym. Test., 2016, 55, 310–317 CrossRef .
I. Kamińska, J. Ortyl and R. Popielarz, Polym. Test., 2015, 42, 99–107 CrossRef .
J. Ortyl, P. Milart and R. Popielarz, Polym. Test., 2013, 32, 708–715 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ortyl, M. Galica, R. Popielarz and D. Bogdał, Pol. J. Chem. Technol., 2014, 16, 75–80 CAS .
M. A. Tasdelen, J. Lalevée and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1111–1121 RSC .

          P. Nesvadba, Encyclopedia of Radicals in Chemistry, Biology and Materials, in Radical Polymerization in Industry Polymers and Materials, 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Shao, Y. Huanga and Q. Fana, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4195–4210 RSC .
Qu. Michaudel, V. Kottisch and B. P. Fors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9670–9679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, N. Corrigan, A. Bagheri, J. Jin and C. Boyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17954–17963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mendes-Felipe, J. Oliveira, I. Etxebarria, J. L. Vilas-Vilela and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800618 CrossRef .
N. Zivic, P. K. Kuroishi, F. Dumur, D. Gigmes, A. P. Dove and H. Sardon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Ortyl, in Photopolymerisation Initiating Systems, ed. J. Lalevée and J.-P. Fouassier, RSC Polymer Chemistry Series,  2018, vol. 3, pp. 74–130 Search PubMed .
E. Torti, G. D. Giustina, S. Protti, D. Merli, G. Brusatin and M. Fagnoni, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 33239–33248 RSC .
X. Meng, H. Lu, Z. Li, Ch. Wang, R. Liu, X. Guana and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 5574–5577 RSC .
J. V. Crivello, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 4241–4254 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Crivello and J. H. W. Lam, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 1979, 17, 977–999 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sangermano, I. Roppolo and A. Chiappone, Polymers, 2018, 10, 136 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Klikovits, P. Knaack, D. Bomze, I. Krossing and R. Liska, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 4414–4421 RSC .

          W. A. Green, Industrial Photoinitiators: A Technical Guide, Taylor & Francis,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Yoshimura and V. V. Zhdankin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3328–3435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nishikawa, A. Kanazawa and S. Aoshima, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1056–1061 RSC .
J. Kabatc, J. Ortyl and K. Kostrzewska, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41619–41629 RSC .
J. Zhang, P. Xiao, C. Dietlin, D. Campolo, F. Dumur, D. Gigmes, F. Morlet-Savary, J.-P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 21, 1214–1227 CrossRef .
J. Shao, Y. Huanga and Q. Fan, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4195–4210 RSC .
P. Xiao, J. Zhang, F. Dumur, M. A. Tehfe, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff, D. Gigmes, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 41, 32–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Slegt, F. Minne, H. Zuilhof, H. S. Overkleeft and G. Lodder, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 5353–5363 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Carroll, V. W. Pikeband and D. A. Widdowson, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 5393–5539 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartwig, A. Harder, A. Lühring and H. Schröder, Eur. Polym. J., 2001, 37, 1449–1455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ortyl and R. Popielarz, Polimery, 2012, 57(7–8), 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mokbel, J. Toufaily, T. Hamieh, F. Dumur, D. Campolo, D. Gigmes, J. P. Fouassier, J. Ortyl and J. Lalevée, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42759 CrossRef .
P. O. Boeira, C. T. W. Meereis, C. E. C. Suárez, S. M. de Almeida, E. Piva and G. da Silveira Lima, Appl. Adhes. Sci., 2017, 5, 1–11 CrossRef .
L. A. Kassekert, C. E. Dingwell, G. X. De Hoe and M. A. Hillmyer, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 712–720 RSC .
J. Lalevée, D. Gigmes, C. Dietlin, F. Dumur, N. Zivic, F. Morlet-Savary, M. Bouzrati, S. Villotte and J. P. Fouassier, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 5873–5879 RSC .
S. Villotte, D. Gigmes, F. Dumur and J. Lalevée, Molecules, 2020, 25, 149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sasaki, J. Photopolym. Sct. Technol., 2000, 13, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
N. Klikovits, P. Knaack, D. Bomze, I. Krossing and R. Liska, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 4414–4421 RSC .
J. V. Crivello, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 4241–4254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lalevée, N. Blanchard, M.-A. Tehfe, M. Peter, F. Morlet-Savary, D. Gigmes and J. P. Fouassier, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1986–1991 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0py00677gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Investigated compounds.	 

 	Scheme 2  Monomers and additives for photopolymerization processes.	 
Conversion % = [1 − At/A0]·100%	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of the coumarin moiety containing iodonium salts in acetonitrile.	 


7M-P	350	20444	16658	280	−477
7M-CN-P	352	18934	16802	355	−318
7M-NO2-P	351	19100	16772	457	−288
7M-Me-P	349	22704	18207	238	−532
7M-iPr-P	350	18439	14959	218	−618
IOD	242	16503	0	0	−773

 	Scheme 3  Molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) of iodonium salts (at the UB3LYP/LANL2DZ level).	 

 	Fig. 2  Photolysis of 7-M-NO2-P in acetonitrile under LED@365 nm (6.78 mW cm−2); concentration [7-M-NO2-P] = 3.81 × 10−5 [mol dm−3].	 

 	Fig. 3  Photolysis of 7-M-NO2-P in acetonitrile under LED@405 nm (304.5 mW cm−2); concentration [7-M-NO2-P] = 3.81 × 10−5 [mol dm−3].	 

 	Fig. 4  Profiles illustrating changes in absorbance over time of the studied iodonium salts at 365 nm, upon exposure to LED@365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  Profiles illustrating changes in absorbance over time of the studied iodonium salts at 365 nm, upon exposure to LED@405 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transient absorption recorded at 350 nm for a laser excitation at 355 nm for 7M-P in nitrogen saturated acetonitrile. Inset: The absorbance change spectrum (1 μs after the laser pulse).	 

 	Scheme 4  Proposed chemical mechanisms for the photochemical reactivity of the coumarin-based iodonium photoinitiators.	 

 	Scheme 5  Two possible dissociation pathways of the coumarin-based iodonium salts with the associated C–I bond dissociation energy (BDE) calculated at the B3LYP/LANL2DZ level of theory.	 

 	Fig. 7  ESR-spin trapping spectrum of the radical generated in 7M-P upon LED@365 nm exposure. The first figure show the experiment before irradiation (black spectrum) and experiment after 42 seconds of irradiation (red spectrum) in toluene as a solvent; and the second figure show the experiment (black spectrum) and simulated (red spectrum) in toluene as a solvent.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photopolymerization profiles (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) measured by real-time FT-IR for the photoinduced ring opening cationic photopolymerization of the CADE monomer upon exposure to LED@365 nm (1.88 mW cm−2) in the presence of different photoinitiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s, thin samples 25 μm, under air conditions.	 


7-MP	58.6	11.2	1.778	53.2	35.7	0.513	86.8	21.6	3.853	83.2	64.0	0.858
7-M-CN-P	21.0	15.2	0.644	25.0	43.8	0.203	77.8	89.5	0.682	23.8	88.3	0.668
7-M-NO2-P	29.3	17.4	0.601	7.4	130.2	0.071	78.7	59.8	0.576	76.2	92.6	0.381
7-M-Me-P	40.2	14.9	1.059	45.8	57.7	0.225	83.1	37.1	1.192	75.9	74.7	0.325
7-M-iPr-P	53.0	13.4	1.442	40.2	68.3	0.134	86.5	19.9	2.520	81.9	58.5	0.401

 	Fig. 9  Photopolymerization profiles (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) measured by real-time FT-IR for the photoinduced ring opening cationic photopolymerization of the CADE monomer upon exposure to LED@405 nm (8.62 mW cm−2) in the presence of different photoinitiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s, thin samples 25 μm, under air conditions.	 
dα/dt during epoxy monomer photopolymerization under UV-LED@365 nm:
7-MP > 7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P
 
dα/dt during vinyl monomer photopolymerization under UV-LED@365 nm:
7-MP > 7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P
 
The value of the C–I bond dissociation energy (BDE):
7-M-iPr-P > 7-M-Me-P > 7-MP > 7-M-CN-P > 7-M-NO2-P

 	Fig. 10  Polymerization profiles of TEGDVE (vinyl function conversion vs. irradiation time) upon exposure to LED@365 nm (0.27 mW cm−2) in the presence of different initiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s.	 

 	Fig. 11  Polymerization profiles of TEGDVE (epoxy function conversion vs. irradiation time) upon exposure to LED@405 nm (4.31 mW cm−2) in the presence of different initiators. Irradiation starts at t = 10 s.	 

 	Fig. 12  The time-dependent rate of polymerization for different photoinitiators in the OXT-221 monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 13  Conversion profiles for the photopolymerization reactions for different photoinitiators in the OXT-221 monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 14  The time-dependent rate of polymerization for different photoinitiators in the TMPTGE monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 15  Conversion profiles for the photopolymerization reactions for different photoinitiators in the TMPTGE monomer at 25 °C under 365 nm.	 


7-MP	0.897	502	93.3	0.060	454	46.7
7-M-CN-P	0.500	298	65.2	0.040	542	36.1
7-M-NO2-P	0.383	367	71.9	0.058	531	34.9
7-M-Me-P	0.482	405	71.9	0.071	222	35.9
7-M-iPr-P	0.160	414	70.8	0.071	244	37.1

 	Fig. 16  The pattern obtained after the 3D printing experiment based on the formulations: (A) 7M-P (1% w/w)/TMPTA/TEGDVE, the pattern “PHT” (abbreviation from Photo HiTech) characterised by numerical optical microscopy and (B) 7M-Me-P (1% w/w)/TMPTA/EPOX, the pattern “JCI” (abbreviation from Jagiellonian Centre of Innovation) characterised by numerical optical microscopy. A 3D printer using a laser diode at 405 nm (size of the spot around 50 μm) with an intensity of 100 mW was used for the spatially controlled irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0py00677g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
