Building next-generation supercapacitors with battery type Ni(OH) 2  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA03262C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA03262C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15542-15585Building next-generation supercapacitors with battery type Ni(OH)2

        
          
            Subramanian 
            Natarajan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mani 
            Ulaganathan
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Vanchiappan 
            Aravindan
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Tirupati, 517507, India. E-mail: aravind_van@yahoo.com
bElectrochemical Power Sources Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi, 630003, Tamil Nadu, India
Received 
      19th April 2021
    , Accepted 23rd June 2021First published on 24th June 2021AbstractElectrochemical energy-storage technologies remain the only key to solve the increasing demands of global energy supply, zero-emission transportation, and grid storage in a greener way. Accordingly, novel strategies and the new promising designs of electrodes attempt to conquer the high energy density of supercapacitors without decreasing their power density and cycle life. In supercapacitors, asymmetric supercapacitors outshine the symmetric supercapacitors (<1.2 V) via the benefit of great energy density through high operating voltage (>2.0 V) in a safer way using aqueous electrolytes. Especially, emerging high energy supercapacitors perfected by suitable low cost-electrode materials are now the crown of energy storage research. Employing battery type Ni(OH)2 as a positive electrode has become a promising approach to building next-generation high energy supercapacitors besides its abundance, cost efficiency, environment friendliness, and high theoretical capacity. This review exclusively elaborates the unnoticed vision into the design, fabrication, mechanism, and investigation of such fascinating Ni(OH)2 based supercapacitors in an asymmetric fashion. Further, this review eventually mitigates the issues associated with the Ni(OH)2 component toward the goal of building next-generation supercapacitors for a sustainable environment.Subramanian NatarajanSubramanian Natarajan is currently a post-doctoral research fellow in Nanomaterials and Systems Laboratory, Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Jeju National University, South Korea. He carried out his work at CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute (CSIR-CSMCRI) with Professor Hari C. Bajaj and earned a PhD degree in chemistry from Maharaja Krishnakumarsinhji Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, India, in 2018. His research interest includes recovering valuable materials from spent Li-ion batteries and their utilization in electrochemical energy storage and conversion applications.Mani UlaganathanMani Ulaganathan, a Ramanujan Fellow, is working in the Electrochemical Power Sources Division (ECPS) at CSIR-CECI, Karaikudi, India, since June 2017. From 2011 to 2017, he served as Research Fellow at Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He has also served as a research scientist at Zeca Powers Pvt. Ltd, Singapore from Dec 2010 to Aug 2011. Earlier, he received his PhD (2011) and Masters (2005) in Physics from School of Physics, Alagappa University, Tamil Nadu, India. His research interest is the development of electrochemical energy storage devices from thin to bulk. He is constantly working in aqueous-based thin film and bulk supercapacitors, batteries, and in-flow batteries.Vanchiappan AravindanVanchiappan Aravindan is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IISER, Tirupati, India. He received his PhD in 2009 at Gandhigram Rural University, Gandhigram, India. His research interest includes the development of high-performance electrodes and electrolytes for Li-ion chemistry and beyond.
1. Introduction
In recent years, intense research efforts have been undertaken to seek clean energy technologies in favor of the environment and natural resources as the Annual Greenhouse Gas Index has increased by more than 40% since 1990, also triggered by the hasty potential reduction of fossil fuels on Earth. The existing alternative renewable sources such as photovoltaic cells, wind turbines, and biomass plants, are inconsistent in electricity production due to the unpredictable climate conditions. Certainly, the resultant smaller electricity production compared to traditional power plants from these technologies cannot fulfill the huge global energy demand, which is rising by ∼3.6% every year.1 Thus, the promising candidates for electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors play crucial roles in overcoming these shortcomings with their superior characteristics. At present, batteries are considered as a good technology with great efficiency, among which lithium-ion battery (LIB) has high energy (100–240 W h kg−1) to store a large amount of charge among various batteries, including Pb–acid, redox-flow, Zn–air, and Na-batteries.2–6 However, the high processing cost of LIBs and the safety-related issues that arise from heat generation and dendrite formation while operating at high power hampers their full success in the energy storage market, which can be perceived from the fire accidents in Tesla cars and Dreamliner airplanes.7,8
Alternatively, supercapacitors or electrochemical capacitors have received spectacular attention owing to their secure supply of high power and have the ability of fast charging (1–10 s) with exceptional super-long cycle lifetimes (500000–1 million cycles) over batteries, resulting in more applications in heavy-duty vehicles, light rail, solar energy warning lights, beacon light, small current backup power supply, small charging products, wind power generation, load-leveling systems, storing and releasing the regenerative braking energy of electric vehicles (EV) and lessening the energy usage in the industrial equipment effectively. However, the lower energy density (∼5–10 W h kg−1) of supercapacitors than batteries (e.g., LIB) overcomes the challenges and extends their range of possible applications, including electric vehicles and grid storage.9–12 For instance, China exploits the supercapacitor as the only power source to operate the Capabus since 2006 for the public transport network, and a company in the UK identified the prototypes of supercapacitor that could store more energy per volume in mobile phones and electric cars than batteries.13,14 In addition, researchers have set the platform to employ supercapacitors as a 3D printed form in the future and intend to develop next-generation lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronics and optoelectronic devices.15 Certainly, the breakthrough would happen in the future effectually not only in electric vehicles but also in portable device technology if the efforts continue in this rapid way.
Thus, the exploration of the high energy density of supercapacitors toward battery performances without dropping the power density and cycle life make it an attractive topic in the energy storage field, which predicts the possibility of replacement of batteries in the market very soon. To rectify the low energy density issue, the development of asymmetric supercapacitors (ASC) is the main objective, including an extensive range of device configurations. Based on the charge-storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be classified into electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC), pseudocapacitors, and “asymmetric supercapacitors (ASCs)”.16–20 Generally, a supercapacitor comprises a positive electrode and a negative electrode dipped in an electrolyte (liquid, solid-state, or redox-active) and a separator that allows the transfer of ions. The charge is stored physically for EDLCs, capacitance is created at the electrode–electrolyte interface efficiently from charge separation, and no charge transfers in the electrode–electrolyte interface occurs. Only the electrostatic attraction involved between the positive electrodes of EDLC and the anions of the electrolytes during the charging process forms the two effective charged layers. In contrast, fast and reversible redox reactions (i.e., faradaic process) transpire at or near the surface of the electrodes, facilitating charge storage in pseudocapacitive materials.19,21–24
Carbon, as an independent material, covers graphite, activated carbon (AC), template porous carbons, carbon aerogels, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene, which are being employed to fabricate the EDLCs typically and bring about a capacitance of ∼100–500 F g−1 based on the high surface area, electrical conductivity, fast charge/discharge rates, electrochemical stability, electrolyte medium, and porosity of the carbon materials.25,26 Pseudocapacitors widely exploit metal oxides and conducting polymers due to their fast reversible redox reactions, displaying great capacitance compared to EDLC devices using the transferred additional charges. Still, pseudocapacitors have trouble in the acquirement of exceptional cycle life due to active material degradation as a consequence of faradaic reactions. The energy density is the major obstacle for both EDLC and pseudocapacitors in their further commercialization in more applications even though they have great advantages for high-power density and respectable cycle life. However, the commercially accessible supercapacitors in the market are all organic-based electrolytes, reaching 2.5–2.85 V with an energy density of ∼5–10 W h kg−1 by consuming organic-based electrolytes but it is not environmentally beneficial. Thus, due to the failure of symmetric supercapacitors containing carbon electrodes to manage the working voltage up to 1.0 V, low-energy-density is obtained in aqueous electrolytes.
Hence, ASCs have recently achieved high working voltage using aqueous electrolytes with the common goal of higher energy and power density, containing one battery-type faradaic electrode (energy source) and another one as a capacitive-type electrode (power source), for example, the integration of carbon-based electrodes with pseudocapacitive electrodes to meet the market demands.27 In addition, another ASC can be structured as redox//redox type to succeed in practical high-energy-density applications. Having the benefits of two dissimilar electrodes in the ASC, which possess different potential windows, permits to expand the operating voltage of the full device beyond 2.0 V.28–31 The higher operating voltage is the deciding factor here for achieving high energy density in the ASC. In general, the maximum energy density (E) collected by the supercapacitors is well-known by the formula:  where C = specific capacitance and V = operating voltage of the full device. Apart from the operating voltage, the capacitance increases the energy and power density in the ASC.32 Generally, the specific capacitance of an ASC can be improved by regulating the inherent properties such as electrical conductivity, porosity, chemical stability of the electrode materials, in addition to the construction of low-dimensional nanostructures such as 1D, 2D, and their hybrids, and tailoring the unique electrode strategies, for instance, heterostructures, core–shells, and composites.17
A huge diversity of methods to prepare all types of electrode materials for an ASC in an aqueous electrolyte is likely to substitute the organic electrolyte-based symmetric supercapacitors in the market owing to their low cost. In a capacitive ASC, RuO2 and MnO2 based capacitance materials are grabbing more attention on pairing with negative carbonaceous materials such as graphene in an aqueous electrolyte, which attains a maximum output voltage up to 2.0 V, in addition to high energy and power density.33 Based on faradaic materials based aqueous hybrid ASC, metal oxides, hydroxides, mixed transition metal-based electrodes, and composite-based faradaic materials/carbon electrodes have revealed excellent electrochemical properties due to combination with negative carbon electrodes.34 However, the dependency of these electrodes is typically related to the Ni and Co-hydroxides and oxides. Due to the high cost and toxicity of Co, the researcher's approval is turning toward Ni-based materials.35 The recent trends in synthesizing Ni(OH)2-based electrode materials have increased sharply due to the high theoretical capacity, lower cost, high chemical stability, definite redox transitions, undisputed high-rate performance, and environmental friendliness.35–37 Apart from their contribution to the traditional primary and secondary alkaline batteries or Ni–MH and Ni–Cd batteries, the current electrochemical capacitor technologies also mostly rely on this battery-type material, increasing the dependency on the energy storage market massively.38–41 In recent years, considerable focus has gradually augmented to build the Ni(OH)2-based cathode electrodes due to their excellent performance with negative carbon electrodes in aqueous electrolytes. In this context, it is mandatory to review the recent progress on Ni(OH)2-based ASCs for further development toward the EV perspective.42,43
In the review, our main focus is only on the battery-type Ni(OH)2 ASC systems to understand their performances that may afford ideas/solutions/concepts/designs to further improve the capacitance, cycle life, energy, and power density of the next-generation devices. First, we briefly summarize the role of the current collector and the impact of the electrolytes in the ASC device in the first section. Further, Section 2 describes the crystal structure, reaction mechanism, and electrochemical properties of Ni(OH)2. Then, the synthetic methods of pristine, mixed Ni(OH)2, a combination of materials including carbon, metal oxides, sulfides, selenides, and phosphides with Ni(OH)2, the resultant materials morphology, synthesis mechanism, design/fabrication of ASC along with their electrochemical performance are elaborately discussed. Further, the same is constructively given for polymers with Ni(OH)2, a combination of polymer–carbon and polymer–metal oxides with Ni(OH)2, and the redox system of Ni(OH)2 (Section 8). Finally, we point out the concerns in the future perspectives based on the reported results for Ni(OH)2-based ASCs to realize the correct combination of electrode materials and high-performance devices for a sustainable earth.
1.1. Role of the current collector
Two important interfaces, such as electrode–electrolyte and the electrode-current collector interfaces, play a vital role in determining the energy density in all kinds of charge storage devices. In any energy storage system, the electrode–electrolyte interface has many choices; thus, it can be easily controlled by selecting structurally controlled electrode active materials and a suitable electrolyte solution.44 At the same time, a limited number of current collectors have been explored in energy storage devices according to the experimental conditions. To enhance the reaction kinetics at the electrolyte–electrode interface, a good current collector should be used. Importantly, the current collector should be electrochemically stable when employed in electrochemical energy storage devices. The better current collector should facilitate a shorter pathway for enhancing the transport of charge carriers (preferably electrons). Thus, the electrical resistance of the current collector should be very less to promote the abovementioned transport behavior. Recent studies have demonstrated that nanostructured current collectors with practical design have shown significant improvement in charge carrier transport.45–47 Generally, the choice of a current collector mainly depends on the medium of the electrolyte used, and most of the current collectors showing reactivity (either mild or severe) with electrolyte influence the cycle life. For instance, Cu and Al have been used as better current collectors in many applications, especially in LIBs; however, their corrosive nature restrains their applications, particularly in acid and alkaline electrolyte medium. An ideal current collector should be chemically robust and stable and should have good electrical conductivity. In such a scenario, carbon-based materials will be the best-suited regardless of the electrolytes and, of course, energy storage devices. High purity stainless steel will also be a good choice; however, it is a little expensive compared to current carbonaceous collectors. Also, the weight of the current collector is an important factor here. These dead masses unnecessarily dilute the net energy density of the system. Therefore, carbonaceous materials would be the manufacturer's choice, as always.
Meanwhile, Cu and Al have also been used in some commercial configurations, in which the electrolyte does not have any direct contact with the current collectors. Since, in the case of three-dimensional foam, the active materials are loaded inside three-dimensional matrixes of the current collectors (CC), the electron transfer will be very facile, which will favor the operation of the device at a very high current rate, i.e., tends to deliver high power capacity. In general, several factors influence the selection of a suitable CC. A better CC should be highly conductive and has an inert nature in a given electrolyte medium to avoid overestimating the charge storage. Thus, three-dimensional Ni foam is well established and preferred by many researchers due to its desirable characteristics such as high conductivity than carbon materials, larger contact area for high mass loading, shorter electron transfer length, and importantly, lightweight. Specifically, the Ni-based current collector has been extensively used, particularly in aqueous supercapacitor applications; simultaneously, Ni foam may not be used for high voltage devices and acid electrolyte medium due to its poor electrochemical stability and corrosive behavior. This can be a potential CC only in alkaline and neutral electrolyte medium; therefore, it is preferred mostly in the case of Ni(OH)2-based active materials.48 As we know, the equivalent series resistance (ESR) is a very important factor in determining the power and rate capability of supercapacitors. Thus, it is very important to have better charge transport efficiency without any loss. However, this can be affected by the resistance stretching at the electrode materials and the current collector interface. Suddenly, this will form an interface between the two electrical layers, and hence, the contact spot is reduced in the actual devices.49,50 To increase the contact spot and avoid such an interface formation, the resistance (lowering the ESR) of the current collector is decreased further by coating graphene on the conventional current collectors. Such modifications have been demonstrated successfully by improving the power and rate capability of the devices.51 Since the present review focuses only on the Ni(OH)2 electrode's electrochemical activity in asymmetric supercapacitor configuration, little discussion is given for current collectors. Amongst current carbon-based collectors, Ni-foam in pristine form or encapsulated with carbon or graphene is the better-suited substrate toward efficient charge transportation, especially Ni(OH)2-based electrodes.
1.2. Influence of the electrolyte
The electrolyte is one of the most important and integral parts of the electrochemical supercapacitors (SCs). Generally, the electrolytes will be prepared by dissolving the salt into the solvent/solute. This solution maintains charge neutrality and provides necessary ionic transportation during the charge–discharge processes. Various electrolytes have been employed in SCs, such as aqueous, organic, and solid-state ceramic electrolytes. Based on electrolyte solutions, supercapacitors are classified and shown in the below Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Classification of electrolytes for electrochemical supercapacitors. 
Among them, organic electrolytes are used in commercial supercapacitors owing to the wider operating potential (2.5 to 3 V), which translates to an enhanced energy density of the system. Mostly, acetonitrile (ACN)-based solutions are employed in such systems. Though the aqueous electrolytes have a confined voltage window (up to 1.23 V), they are less toxic and cost-effective, and safer than the organic configurations. In addition, the mobility is much higher for the case of aqueous-based configuration, irrespective of the salts used in the aqueous electrolyte compared to organic. In other words, such mobility is capable of accelerating the ions at faster rates than that of the ions in the organic electrolytes. Also, the high ionic conductivity is an added advantage for the aqueous-based system. Thus, the ESR will be very low for the aqueous electrolyte-based systems, particularly for alkaline electrolytes. As mentioned, one of the major disadvantages of using the aqueous solution is its limited working potential. Thus, the energy density of the system will be less compared with the organic-based one. Recently, many efforts are being devoted to improving the potential window of the aqueous systems such as water-in-salt and incorporation of additives. The water-in-salt-based electrolyte is one of the successful approaches to widen the working potential window up to 2.3 V, and of course, has been demonstrated successfully.52–54 However, many factors need to be optimized for improving the SC performances. Though the electrolyte has a wide potential window, the electrodes should also have stable redox potential within the limit. Electrolytes, particularly the counter ions (both anion and cation), have a major role in determining the power density and rate capability though these parameters mainly depend on the electrodes' nature. It is worth mentioning here that the electrolytes play a crucial role in determining many characteristics such as internal resistance, ESR, operating temperature range, cycling lifetime, and self-discharge. The characteristics mainly based on the electrolyte are shown below in Fig. 1.55
 Fig. 1  Effects of the electrolyte on the electrochemical supercapacitor performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, aqueous electrolytes can be classified into acid, alkaline, and neutral solutions in which H2SO4, KOH, and Na2SO4 are representatives and the most frequently used electrolytes. The highly concentrated acid-based solutions accelerate the dissolution of the most electro-active materials but it remains one of the best choices as an electrolyte for carbon-based electrode assemblies. At the concentration of 1.0 M H2SO4, the maximum ionic conductivity is realized at 25 °C. At the same time, the current tolerance is very less for the acid electrolyte due to the poor stability of the sulfate ions (SO42−) present in the electrolytes. On the other hand, the neutral electrolyte, Na2SO4 or the Li analog have been used in many cases due to the ion size, which helps to improve the cycle life. However, in such neutral electrolytes, poor ionic conductivity is a prime issue that provides higher values of ESR.56–58 Thus, the neutral electrolyte is not an appropriate option though it offers an extended potential window. KOH is the most preferred choice among alkaline solutions due to its higher conductivity (∼0.6 S cm−1 for 6 M concentration at 25 °C), charge carrier tolerance even at high current, high stability at wide temperature range, etc. A recent report revealed that the Ni-based electro-active materials showed better performance in 2 M KOH electrolyte than the other basic electrolytes such as 2 M LiOH and 2 M NaOH solutions. This is mainly due to the differences in the hydrated radius between the K+ (3.31 Å), Na+ (3.58 Å), and Li+ (3.82 Å) ions59 and also due to the ionic conductivity of K+ ions (73 cm2 Ω−1 mol−1), which is much larger than those of Na+ (50 cm2 Ω−1 mol−1) and Li+ ions (38 cm2 Ω−1 mol−1) at room temperature. Thus, the smaller hydrated radius of the K+ ions helps to promote fast ion transport, larger ionic mobility, and interaction with the active electrode materials.59–61
Therefore, in Ni-based oxides and hydroxides, KOH is the most preferred choice and has been extensively studied because of the reasons stated above. Its the ionic conductivity is directly related to the salt dissolution concentration, an optimum concentration is required to keep the ESR values lower, decent specific capacitance, and controlled oxygen evolution reactions.55,62,63 For instance, in Ni(OH)2 and its composite, 2 M KOH, is predominantly used as the electrolyte solution. Ni(OH)2 is a prominent electrode material used in Ni–Cd and Ni–MH secondary batteries in the presence of KOH as the electrolyte.3,4 Concentration is one of the important factors but unfortunately, different research groups have adopted different concentrations. Therefore, it is very difficult for us to pinpoint the electrochemical activity of Ni(OH)2. Nevertheless, the specific surface area, morphological features, and degree of crystallinity also play a vital role in influencing the electrolyte concentration. Stoyanova et al.64 studied the effect of mixed alkaline ion behavior for the α-Ni(OH)@AC composite. The IR-drop and the discharge capacitances were significantly improved for mixed LiOH–KOH electrolytes compared to KOH. Interestingly, the electrode roughness factor is drastically reduced for the mixed electrolytes, and this eventually enhanced the more homogeneous contact with the electrolyte. As a result, the system delivers a higher specific capacitance. Also, the mixed ion electrolyte encouraged the intercalation of Li-ions, which consequently improved the stability of the layered structure of α-Ni(OH)2 upon cycling. Although the mixed ion electrolyte exhibited better performance, the leakage current, power density, and rate capability must be significantly improved.
2. Crystal structure and reaction mechanism
Generally, the hexagonal-layered structure of Ni(OH)2 allows their existence as two pseudopolymorphs, i.e., α and β phases, which were first branded by Bode et al.65 in 1966. Both the α and β phases have the same hexagonal layered structure; however, they have shown difference in their chemistry between the brucite layers. The β phase with trigonal symmetry is isostructural with brucite Mg(OH)2 and naturally occurs as a theophrastite mineral. Moreover, the brucite layers in β-Ni(OH)2 are impeccably stacked to form a hexagonal structure, while those observed randomly changed the α-Ni(OH)2 structure into a turbostratic order with intercalated water molecules and anionic species. Also, it can be said that the α-Ni(OH)2 hydrotalcite-like structure is wrapped up in a large number of positively charged layers of Ni(OH)2 in the stacked mode, and also intercalated with H2O molecules and anions (carbonate, nitrate, chloride, and sulfonate), creating a wider interlayer spacing (7.2 Å) in its organization, which endows greater electrochemical activity than β-Ni(OH)2. In addition, Ni has an oxidation state of +4 in α-Ni(OH)2 with an average oxidation state of 3.3–3.7, which leads to exhibit superior electrochemical properties compared to β-Ni(OH)2.
The brucite-like structure of β-Ni(OH)2 has an ordered stacking layers of Ni(OH)2 in a neutral composition, deprived of intercalated species.36 The reason behind the highly stacked layers in these Ni(OH)2 is the strong ionic bond among the Ni2+, H+, and O2− ions in every sheet and the weak interactions between the adjacent layers. However, both the phases are shaped by the Ni layers in the hexagonal arrangement through the edge-shared octahedra where the OH− ions are along the c axis.66 It is well-known that the hydrotalcite structure could be obtained from the brucite structure through the partial substitution of Mg/Al and the associated introduction of the interlayer anions.67 Nevertheless, the metastable phase of α-Ni(OH)2 could change to β-Ni(OH)2 rapidly during synthesis or particularly at a low discharge current densities in the course of the charge–discharge process, resulting in substantial capacity loss and poor performance of the supercapacitor.67,68 On the other hand, Ni(OH)2 undergoes phase transformation during the charge–discharge process, as illustrated in Fig. 2, based on the Bode's diagram. In the redox process, both the α-Ni(OH)2 and β-Ni(OH)2 phases transform into γ-NiOOH and β-NiOOH, respectively, with oxidation states of 3.3–3.7 and 2.9 for Ni, which would increase the specific capacitance of electrode material considerably.69,70 Further charging the β-Ni(OH)2 yields γ-NiOOH, comprising water molecules and potassium available from the alkaline electrolyte; at the same time, it can be discharged back to reform Ni(OH)2. Also, when γ-NiOOH is being discharged, the formation of α-Ni(OH)2 occurs in consort with other molecules including CO32− and water either obtained from air or electrolyte, also converting the γ-phase to β-Ni(OH)2via direct discharge after crossing the α-phase.66,71 Also, the electrochemical redox reaction of β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH could not acquire one-electron transfer per Ni atom, whereas the α-NiOOH)/γ-NiOOH pair creates the possibility to involve 1.6 to 1.67 electron transfer per Ni atom72,73 owing to the existence of cations (Li+, Na+, K+, etc.) and anions (CO32−, NO32−, SO42−, Cl−, etc.) in the water layers of their respective phases, which creates non-integral oxidation states for both the phases.66,74,75 This makes the α-NiOOH)/γ-NiOOH pair present superior electrochemical performance compared to the β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH couple. Accordingly, low theoretical capacity (289 mA h g−1) is observed for β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH as compared to the theoretical capacity (462–480 mA h g−1) for α-γ conversion.73 However, the high theoretical capacity and greater electrochemical properties of Ni(OH)2 have compelled researchers to find suitable methods for their preparation with appropriate properties.
 Fig. 2  Bode's diagram scheme for the Ni(OH)2 phase changes in the chemical and electrochemical process. 
3. Pristine Ni(OH)2
In 2006, Iwakura and co-workers76 made a hybrid electrochemical capacitor using commercially available Ni(OH)2 and AC as a positive and negative electrode, respectively, with the prepared polymer hydrogel electrolyte using potassium poly(acrylate) PAAK and KOH. The analysis indicated that this hybrid capacitor succeeded in the large voltage range, and the capacitance was ca. 2.4 times higher than that of the EDLC cell, which consists of two AC electrodes. At a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 20000 cycles, the capacitor lost 10% of its initial capacitance. Due to the poor performance of amorphous Ni(OH)2, the researcher's attention is engaged by crystalline Ni(OH)2 because of its electrochemical properties and tractability to form complex three-dimensional structures. Nevertheless, the amorphous phase of Ni(OH)2 provides a distinct electrochemical behavior, which can be applied to specific device applications. Wang and co-workers77 successfully synthesized the amorphous Ni(OH)2 nanospheres with a size of ∼400 nm using a typical electrochemical method. For this asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC), a maximum specific capacitance of 153 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 was obtained and 81% of the initial capacitance was retained after 10000 cycles (in 1 M KOH solution). Besides, it delivered a specific energy density of 35.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 490 W kg−1. Parallelly, Su et al.78 proposed a simple and convenient approach for preparing amorphous Ni(OH)2 on 3D Ni particles via an electrodeposition technique. The assembled Ni(OH)2@3D Ni/AC-based ASC with 1 M KOH electrolyte showed a specific capacitance of 92.8 F g−1 and specific energy density of 21.8 W h kg−1 with a loss of only 4% after 3000 cycles. To attain high capacitance and good rate performance, Ni(OH)2 nanostructured materials with different morphology have been prepared in an efficient route (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (a) Variation of the specific capacitance of amorphous Ni(OH)2@3D Ni electrodes as a function of the cycle number measured at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte (the left of the inset is an image of the flexible electrode; the right of the inset is the CV curves of the 1st, 500th, 1000th, 1500th, 2000th, 2500th, and 3000th cycles), and (b) Ragone plot of the estimated specific energy and specific power at various charge–discharge rates (5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 A g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Sun et al.79 reported the synthesis of a few layered Ni(OH)2 through the solvothermal method, thereby enhancing the ion diffusion efficiency and charge transfer kinetics. The as-synthesized α-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets comprised of the graphene-sheet-like morphology with the thickness in the range of 4–5 nm also had a high specific area of 114 m2 g−1. Electrochemical studies have shown that the assembled ASC exhibited an excellent performance of 248 F g−1 in 6 M KOH with an energy density of 22 W h kg−1. The capacitance remained 85.7% after 4000 cycles, indicating the good long-term stability of the ASC device. Three types of hierarchical α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres, such as pompon-like, flower-like, and microflower-like microspheres, were prepared via a solvothermal method using solvents such as water, ethanol, and their mixtures, respectively. Among these, mesoporous α-Ni(OH)2 microflower-like microspheres unveiled a high surface area of 101.3 m2 g−1 with in the size range of 2–10 nm. After showing the best capacitance in the three-electrode systems, it was evaluated for practical application with the negative AC electrode. It was reported that the Ni(OH)2/AC supercapacitor can reach a cell voltage of 1.6 V in 6 M KOH and established outstanding electrochemical performances with an energy density of 32.9 W h kg−1.80 Another attempt of fabricating Ni(OH)2/AC obtained a specific energy density and specific power density of 25.8 W h kg−1 and 31.5 kW kg−1, respectively, at 1.6 V.81
Yang and co-workers82 developed a solution-based solvo-thermal-precipitation approach to synthesize Ni(OH)2 and prepared the hierarchically porous carbon in a one-step sintering technique. They found that the as-prepared porous Ni(OH)2 comprises the co-existence of α and β phases with a high specific area of 79.4 m2 g−1. The fabricated ASC can deliver a maximum specific energy density of 40.9 W h kg−1. Tian et al.83 successfully synthesized nano-Ni(OH)2 powder with the mixture of α and β phases via a simple precipitation method under ultrasonication to find the influence of single electrodes in Ni(OH)2/AC-based ASC. Interestingly, the authors assembled two series of a supercapacitor, in which the mass of AC altered, whereas the Ni(OH)2 mass was fixed and excessive, and on the contrary, the mass of Ni(OH)2 was varied while the AC mass was fixed and excessive. Thus, the obtained supercapacitors revealed the highest specific capacitance (189 F g−1) and the poor cycling stability for the lowest mass of Ni(OH)2 (0.40:1). In contrast, the highest mass of Ni(OH)2 (0.71:1) exhibited the lowest capacitance (176 F g−1) and finest cycling stability. Wang and co-workers84 directly grew β-Ni(OH)2 on Ni foam (NF) through a template free-growth process and made an ASC with AC as the negative electrode with 6 M KOH electrolyte. This β-Ni(OH)2–NF/AC might be cycled reversibly between 0 and 1.6 V and exposed the capacitance of 105.8 F g−1. Remarkably, the fabricated supercapacitor could retain 92% of its initial capacitance after 1000 cycles, with a high energy density of 36.2 W h kg−1.
Similarly, in another study,85 Ni(OH)2 was deposited on Ni foam (NHNF) by applying the hydrothermal method to preclude the use of a binder, which diminishes the electrochemical performance. Initially, four different concentrations of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O were prepared, then the cleaned NF was immersed into the metal solutions separately. The as-synthesized β-Ni(OH)2 on NF with 0.12 M concentration after presenting excellent electrochemical performance (2727 F g−1) in a three-electrode cell was then fabricated as an ASC using the commercial AC as a negative electrode in 6 M KOH electrolyte. This ASC device disclosed 31 mA h g−1 capacity with an energy density of 39.2 W h kg−1 with a potential window of 1.6 V. In addition, capacity retention of 84.3% was observed after 3000 charge–discharge cycles. Another effort aimed at the synthesis of β-Ni(OH)2 was described in the literature.86 In the beginning, the β-Ni(OH)2 plates were prepared by the reflux method. In contrast, AC derived from tamarind shell (Tamarindus indica) via chemical activation with KOH had a BET surface area of 657 m2 g−1. A cable-type flexible supercapacitor was constructed using the β-Ni(OH)2/AC as the fiber electrodes, sandwiching PVA–KOH as the gel electrolyte. The electrochemical performance of this device indicated the excellent specific capacitance of 37.5 F g−1. Moreover, 76% of its initial capacitance was retained after 2000 charge–discharge cycles.
Instead of applying Ni(OH)2 as a positive electrode material for ASC, Ni–Ni(OH)2 synthesis has also been attempted through the partial reduction of Ni(II) salt in a basic medium. Ede et al.87 made an effort to develop the synthesis of Ni–Ni(OH)2 nanosheets in one step and achieved it via hydrothermal treatment with the assistance of oleylamine and ethanol. The X-ray diffraction studies confirmed the presence of β-Ni(OH)2 and the nickel–metal nanoparticles in the as-prepared phase. In terms of practical application, the material β-Ni(OH)2, having a specific surface area of 58.13 m2 g−1, was used to fabricate the ASC with AC. It was found that Ni–Ni(OH)2/AC offered a remarkable capacitance with a high capacity (62 F g−1) in the operating voltage window of 0–1.65 V, using 1 M KOH as the electrolyte. Besides, this ASC lost only ∼10% of its initial capacitance after 6000 charge–discharge cycles. Furthermore, a high energy density of 23.45 W h kg−1 was realized.
Meanwhile, another ASC device was created by utilizing the Ni@Ni(OH)2 film as a positive electrode, while the negative electrode comprised the graphene–carbon nanotube film, in which the positive electrode was synthesized by hydrothermal reaction with the aid of pre-prepared Ni nanowires. The acicular structure of the Ni nanowires that improved the surface area (Fig. 4 inset) was acquired by way of a facile liquid-phase method under a magnetic field. Also, the d-spacing of 0.21 nm was matched to the crystal structure of the Ni spacing planes (Fig. 4c). From the HR-TEM image of the Ni@Ni(OH)2 nanofoam (Fig. 4f), several nanosheets and substantial mesopores were observed due to the release of gas in the hydrothermal reaction, leading to a pore size of more than 10 nm, which was higher than the pore size of the Ni nanowires. Then, the volumetric and areal capacitance of the fictitious ASC using 6 M KOH electrolyte were calculated to be 95 F cm−3 and 1.6 F cm−2, respectively. Moreover, the ASC device could maintain its capacitance up to 86% after 4500 cycles. The corresponding energy and power densities were calculated to be 33.9 mW h cm−3 and 200 mW cm−3, respectively.88
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of Ni NWs. Inset is the magnified SEM image, (b) TEM image, and (c) HR-TEM image of Ni NWs: inset is the magnified HR-TEM image, (d) SEM images of Ni@Ni(OH)2 NF: inset is the magnified SEM image, (e) TEM and (f) HR-TEM images of Ni@Ni(OH)2 NF: inset is the magnified HR-TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The Ni(OH)2–3D-Ni positive electrode material was used to fabricate the flexible ASC using MnO2–3D-Ni as a negative electrode through facile hydrothermal and electrodeposition techniques. The PVA–KOH gel electrolyte was used to inject into both the electrodes and sealed for the electrochemical tests. Thus, the fabricated ASC device via an electrodeposition method manifested a high specific capacitance up to 290 F g−1 and maintained 74% capacitance after 1000 cycles. Also, a high energy density of 78 W h kg−1 was achieved for this fascinating configuration. Moreover, under normal bending conditions, this supercapacitor passed as an energy storage device for a wearable watch, demonstrating its flexible performance for practical applications.89
Similar to the previous report, a solid-state ASC was made up of the combination of Mn3O4 and Ni(OH)2 with the PVA–NaOH gel electrolyte. First, a conducting paper NGP (Ni–graphite-paper) was fabricated by spraying a graphite layer on cellulose paper, then the graphite rod was drawn upon the paper to get a uniform graphite layer. Galvanostatic electrodeposition was applied to fabricate the Ni layer on the graphite–cellulose paper finally. Subsequently, Ni(OH)2–NGP and Mn3O4–NGP were prepared via electro-oxidation and electrodeposition methods, respectively. The high areal capacitance of 3.05 F cm−3 ensues from the fabrication of Ni(OH)2 as the positive electrode, Mn3O4–NGP as the negative electrode, and is also usable after 12000 cycles with 83.3% capacitance, revealing the extraordinary cyclability. This ASC device possessed a high volumetric energy density of 0.35 mW h cm−3. The constructed planar and 0.4 mm thin paper ASC device has shown excellent flexibility, as indicated in Fig. 5c–e. This device was tested at 50 mV s−1 at different voltages and could be operated at a high voltage window of 1.3 V (Fig. 5b). In order to apply it practically, two ASC devices were connected in series to light up the green and blue light-emitting diodes (LED) (Fig. 5f and g) for 10 min, which had working voltages of 1.5 V and 2.5 V, respectively, after charging at 4 mA cm−2 for different time durations (60 s and 90 s). After charging at the same current density for 120 s, the four connected ASC in series might be able to power the light bulb for 280 s, as illustrated in Fig. 5h.90
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled Mn3O4/Ni(OH)2–APSC devices and (b) CVs of the APSC device under various electrochemical windows at 50 mV s−1. The assembled APSCs: (c) normal state, (d and e) bending states, (f) a green LED powered by 2 ATFO 4SCs in series, (g) a blue LED powered by 2 ATFSCs in series, and (h) a light bulb powered by 4 ATFSCs in series and parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Dong et al.91 reported another type of ASC, which was wire-shaped and had flexibility, by combining an Ni(OH)2 fiber electrode and an ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) jointly with the PVA–KOH gel electrolyte. Ni(OH)2 on Ni fibers was synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method. An OMC with a specific surface area of 675 m2 g−1 was prepared via the amphiphilic surfactant-templating approach. For fabrication, first of all, two electrodes were tinted using the PVA–KOH–H2O solution and then wrapped together. Further, a wire-shaped and flexible ASC was obtained through the vaporization of water from the gel electrolyte. The ASC device showed a specific capacitance of 32 F g−1.
In addition, 70% of its initial capacitance was retained after 10000 cycles, signifying their cycling life. The Ragone plot revealed that the wire-shaped micro-device presented a high energy density of 0.01 mW h cm−2 (or 2.16 mW h cm−3) at a current of 0.1 mA. When the applied current was increased to 7 mA, the maximum average power density was reached up to 7.3 mW cm−2 (or 1.6 W cm−3). These two wire-shaped micro-supercapacitors, having dimensions of 0.6 mm diameter and a length of 3 cm for each unit, were charged to 3 V in 80 s, which functioned as the red LED light for 40 s. Further, three wire-shaped micro-supercapacitors with a 2 cm length (each unit) after charging to 4 V in 60 s could power the lowest working voltage (2.0 V) of the LED for 30 s, guaranteeing the practical application with their micro-size.
Kang et al.92 described the facile synthesis of ultrathin Ni(OH)2 deposited on a carbon-coated 3D-Cu structure electrode material for ASC application. First, 3D-Cu porous structure was prepared on an Ni-plate by electrodeposition and the hydrogen evolution reaction. Further, glucose was used as a carbon source to deposit on the surface of the 3D-Cu by pyrolysis. The as-prepared carbon-coated 3D-Cu (3D-C/Cu) with bigger pores was believed to avert the oxidation reaction and the dissolution of Cu in the electrolyte. Then, they deposited the Ni(OH)2 layer on the 3D-Cu through electrodeposition. In the presence of 1 M KOH, the ASC was assembled using 3D-Ni(OH)2–C–Cu as the positive electrode and 3D-Mn3O4–C–Cu as the negative electrode with a filter paper as the separator, which delivered a capacitance of 474.3 F g−1. The cycling profile was validated by its initial capacitance retention of 64.9% after 10000 cycles. Through the Ragone plot, the high energy density of 147.9 W h kg−1 was recorded against the power density of 749.9 W kg−1.
In another new approach, Brouse and co-workers93 found that the grafting of 9,10-phenanthrenequinone molecules on the porous carbon surface significantly enhanced the Ni(OH)2-carbon's electrochemical performance compared to the pure carbon material. The strategy in the addition of electroactive phenanthrenequinone (PQ) molecules revealed that the redox peaks of these molecules contributed to the faradaic reactions in the EDLC of the black pearl (BP) carbon material and aided in improving the carbon capacitance. At the same time, it eventually enhanced the total capacity of the ASC. By assembling the Ni(OH)2 as the positive electrode, they have examined the performance of the modified BP and the unmodified BP for the negative electrode to fabricate the ASC device. Based on the analysis, the initial total device capacity was calculated to be 10.4 mA h g−1 for the highest 20% loading of PQ on carbon. The further increase in the PQ molecules on the BP decreased the capacitance retention; however, the device maintained higher than 70% capacitance retention even after 10000 cycles and showed their impact on carbon's grafting. Correspondingly, the PQ-grafting reinforced the device to make the capacitance 1.8 times higher than the unmodified BP and also showed a specific energy 1.5 times higher than that of the unmodified BP after 10000 cycles because it is well-known that the quinone-based molecules could perform as a good negative electrode in an alkaline medium, which has the benefit of exchanging more than one electron on the surface of the carbon.
4. Mixed Ni(OH)2
In recent years, layered double hydroxides (LDH) are known to be two-dimensional metal hydroxides, whose structure screening brucite-layer structure, as mentioned for β-Ni(OH)2 earlier, received greater attention as gifted supercapacitor electrodes on account of their inherent aspects such as large specific surface area, great anion exchange capacity, revocable chemical composition, high chemical stability, and rich redox activity. Nevertheless, the attained capacities could not conquer their theoretical capacity mostly due to the sluggish ion transfer rates and poor electronic conductivity.95 On the other hand, the Ni(OH)2 capacitance is still enriched even though it offered higher capacitance. Then, researchers have come up with an idea to form the complex hydroxides/oxides, fulfilling the goal of high faradaic capacitance due to the redox reactions and electronic conductivities, which could be greater than their hydroxides/oxides. This kind of complex hydroxides/oxides could provide a higher surface area to improve the electroactive sites for faradic reactions with more double-layer charges than individual hydroxides/oxides. Also, the integration of oxides will greatly enhance the electronic conductivity to favor the faradic reactions. This strategy of constructing hybrid assemblies with the aid of the battery-type Ni(OH)2 material would greatly contribute to the asymmetric device's total capacitance capably.
This approach has been attempted by Hui et al. recently. CoAl–LDH@Ni(OH)2, as a binderless electrode, was prepared in a two-step process.94 The inclusion of Co into the LDH is a technique to enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrodes, thereby achieving good capacitance because CoOOH will be formed when Co2+ is oxidized in the redox process, which has a conductivity of 12.8 S cm−1.96–98 Keeping this idea in mind, Al and Co hydroxides were prepared using the hydrothermal method, and Ni(OH)2 was grown on CoAl–LDH (over Ni-foam) using the electrodeposition process for various deposition cycles to ensure the enhanced performance of the composites (Fig. 6). CoAl–LDH@Ni(OH)2 coated up to 6 cycles showed a maximum specific capacitance of 1811 F g−1. Thus, the nanoflake structure improved the interfacial contact between the active material and the electrolyte, leading to more efficient charge transportation. An ASC cell was fabricated using MWCNT as the negative electrode and the PVA–KOH gel served as the electrolyte with the above specific properties. The ASC cell delivered a maximum power density of 16.7 W h kg−1. The cycle life was not provided for the ASC, whereas the cycle life of the individual electrode material showed a decent cycle life (3000 cycles with 76% retention) but it may not be the best profile reported where the Ni(OH)2 composite is concerned.
 Fig. 6  Schematic and SEM illustration of the two-step synthesis of the hierarchical CoAl–LDH@Ni(OH)2 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2018, The Electrochemical Society. 
Later, Jun and co-workers99 conquered this methodology by replacing CoAl–LDH with MnCo–LDH on Ni(OH)2. Here, hydrothermal treatment was used to deposit the mixed hydroxides on NF first, then the flower-like core–shell structure of MnCo–LDH@Ni(OH)2 was obtained in the second time hydrothermal reaction of immersing the resultant NF on Ni solution under the optimized conditions. The dissociated Mn2+ and Co2+ ions in the solution responded to the OH− ions, which were available from urea hydrolysis and produced the [MnCo2(OH)6] precursor in the course of the hydrothermal treatment to perform as a source of the seed crystals after having to cling on the NF. Later, the adjoining nanoparticles led to aggregation as nanowires (Fig. 7a and b) through specific crystal orientation growth caused by surface energy minimization. Afterward, the as-prepared LDH was represented as a platform to exchange the Ni2+ ions with OH− by offering more nucleation sites and finally bloomed the flower-like structure with the continuous growth of the nuclei. The deposition of several Ni(OH)2 nanosheet arrays on the conductive substrate NF can be seen from Fig. 7c and d.
 Fig. 7  Morphologies of the samples: (a and b) FE-SEM images of MnCo–LDH nanowires, (c and d) FE-SEM images of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, (e) top-view FE-SEM image, and (f) cross-section FE-SEM image of the MnCo–LDH@Ni(OH)2 core–shell heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Moreover, the consistent growth of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on the MnCo–LDH nanowires was confirmed from the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 7e and f). This core–shell nanostructure presented many active sites for more redox reactions to attain a high specific capacitance of 2320 F g−1 in 3 M KOH, using AC as the negative electrode. Also, this device could show a good capacitance of 1308 F g−1 under harsh conditions (30 A g−1) in the operating voltage of 1.5 V. The good cycling performance was also revealed with only ∼9% loss after 5000 cycles. Prominently, this device proved to be an excellent one for practical applications by delivering a high energy density of 47.9 W h kg−1 and showed its retention up to 9.8 W h kg−1 at a high power density of 5.21 kW kg−1. The high electrochemical performance of this device is due to the introduction of manganese, which improved the electrochemical activity of the whole device effectively with its various oxidation states.100,101
Thus, the fabrication of electroactive LDHs with non-electroactive materials such as Al–OH or Zn–OH presented a worthy improvement in the ASC performances. Despite this, the cycling stability of the LDHs possessed less than 90% of its original retention typically after 5000 cycles, probably because of the instability of the dopants (e.g., Al and Zn) in the alkaline medium, which led to inferior cycling stability. Until now, it remains a contest to build a hybrid Ni(OH)2 with stable structure/morphology and exceptional pseudocapacitance stability through a facile method. However, one of the promising approaches has been revealed by Guo and co-workers102 very recently via an in situ ion-exchange method to develop hybrid Ni(OH)2 on NF by avoiding additional alkali sources, and heat treatment for OH− production-such as the common procedures, followed in the synthesis of Ni(OH)2 and LDHs. As a sacrificial substrate, Mg(OH)2 was first coated on NF, then immersed in the Ni(NO3)2 solution at room temperature to proceed with an ion-exchange reaction effectively. Thus, the obtained Mg–Ni(OH)2 would be stable in a strong alkaline medium because of Mg(OH)2 and stabilizes the morphology/structure of Ni(OH)2. Accordingly, the BET specific surface area of Mg–Ni(OH)2 was calculated to be 220 m2 g−1, higher than that of dopant-free Ni(OH)2 (42 m2 g−1). As a result of pairing the mixed hydroxide with the negative AC electrode in 6 M KOH, the maximum specific capacitance of 167 F g−1 was attained, and Mg-free Ni(OH)2 displayed a maximum of only 98 F g−1 capacitance. Also, the ASC could maintain a high energy density of 49.6 W h kg−1 at a standard power density of 4.0 kW kg−1 than the fabricated device, containing Mg-free Ni(OH)2 (26.9 W h kg−1). In addition, Mg–Ni(OH)2 outperformed the Mg-free Ni(OH)2 device in the super-long cycling behavior, showing up to 91% retention after 10000 cycles. At the same time, Mg-free Ni(OH)2 faced 52% loss of capacitance only after 3000 cycles at a high current density of 10 A g−1, possibly due to the stable morphology/structure of the large surface area of Mg–Ni(OH)2 on NF, which supplied huge electrochemically active surface area for redox reactions.
5. Ni(OH)2–carbon composites
From the above constructive reports, we can conclude that Ni(OH)2 is the most attractive and active pseudocapacitive electrode in the midst of various transition metal hydroxides/oxides for supercapacitors by way of their electrochemical performance in ASC. Though the poor electrical conductivity reduces its competency, it thereby becomes unsuccessful in the achievement of its theoretical capacity, and also the low cycling life regulated their practical applications in the energy storage market.19,25,103–112 To overcome these obstacles, researchers have introduced carbonaceous materials/conducting additives into the pseudocapacitive Ni(OH)2 material to form nanocomposites so as to succeed in the high electrochemical performance of ASC, preferably extending the calendar life and realizing high power capability. Different kinds of carbon materials with Ni(OH)2 for the ASC are discussed in the forthcoming sections.
5.1 Ni(OH)2–graphene
Revolutionary nanostructured graphene, also termed sp2 bonded carbon material, has π electrons, making it highly electrically conductive and a “hot” material in the energy storage field.113–115 In addition, the excellent properties such as high theoretical specific surface area (∼2630 m2 g−1), high chemical stability, low resistivity (∼10−6 Ω cm), and the excellent energy density of 600–800 W h kg−1 inspired the formulation of promising composites with Ni(OH)2 and showed remarkable results as compared to pristine Ni(OH)2.111,116 Yan et al.117 reported a microwave heating process to obtain a composite, in which flower-like Ni(OH)2 were decorated on graphene sheets. The high surface area (1654 m2 g−1) porous graphene was synthesized via a template chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to fabricate an ASC in a 6 M KOH electrolyte. At a higher voltage window of 1.6 V, this ASC claimed the maximum specific capacitance of 218.4 F g−1 with an energy density of 77.8 W h kg−1. In addition, the Ni(OH)2–graphene/porous graphene-based ASC device suffered long cycling life of 3000 cycles only by the forfeiture of 5.7% of its initial capacitance.
Similarly, NF-supported vertically-oriented graphene or horizontally-oriented graphene nanosheets were used as a substrate for depositing Ni(OH)2, which has the advantages of 0.1–10 mm lateral and vertical dimensions along with few nm thicknesses (sometimes, <1 nm) in each individual graphene nanosheets for improving the specific capacitance by way of their vast surface-to-volume ratio, exclusive orientation, and non-stacking morphology.118,119 By pairing up the β-Ni(OH)2-vertically oriented graphene nanosheets (v-GNs) on NF as the negative electrode and AC as the counter electrode, Zheng and co-workers120 developed a 1.4 V ASC in 6 M KOH electrolyte. First, v-GNs were grown on chemically pre-cleaned NF through plasma-enhanced CVD, and electrodeposition was carried out to grow Ni(OH)2 on the v-GNs in a three-electrode system at slightly elevated temperature conditions (45 °C). The SEM image displayed the growth of Ni(OH)2 nanoflakes vertically on the supported v-GNs-NF, which had a length of typically 50–150 nm, whereas the average thickness of v-GNs was only about 15 nm. The ASC delivered a specific capacitance of 80 F g−1 with a maximum energy density of 11.11 W h kg−1.
Xia and co-workers121 first reported the ASC by introducing the combination of Ni(OH)2 and ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-5) to serve as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. A simple hydrothermal method was used to grow the α-Ni(OH)2 nanowires on the layered graphene, whereas CMK-5 was prepared with a high specific area of 1530 m2 g−1via a template method to build an ASC. During the charging process, the Ni(OH)2 nanowires gave away the protons and cations present in the aqueous electrolyte, which were also concurrently absorbed in the pore structure of CMK-5, which had a pore size of 3.5 nm (Fig. 8). Furthermore, the fabricated ASC with a decent mass loading could achieve a maximum specific capacitance of 157 F g−1. Furthermore, it maintained over 90% of initial capacitance after 5000 charge–discharge cycles at a high current density of 4.5 A g−1. In addition, this ASC device exhibited a maximum energy density of 41.3 W h kg−1 and possessed 17.3 W h kg−1 even at a high power density of 4.08 kW kg−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the operating principle of the developed hybrid supercapacitor based on graphene-supported Ni(OH)2-nanowires (positive electrode) and CMK-5 (negative electrode). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society. 
Moreover, the hybrid supercapacitor α-Ni(OH)2–graphene/AC was assembled using 1 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The α-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates and graphene were obtained via a simple hydrothermal and modified Hummers' method, respectively. The acquired composite using hydrothermal treatment had a higher specific surface area of 164 m2 g−1 than the surface area (132.54 m2 g−1) of pristine α-Ni(OH)2. The thickness of the synthesized graphene nanosheet was calculated to be about 1 nm from the AFM image (Fig. 9a). It can be seen in Fig. 9b that the nanoplates of α-Ni(OH)2 are well-distributed in the large surface area of the ultrathin graphene sheets. Moreover, the TEM image (Fig. 9c) of the composite evidently demonstrated the homogeneous distribution of hexagonal Ni(OH)2 nanoplates throughout graphene and the folded metal hydroxide and graphene could also be observed together. Furthermore, the observed slender nanowires attached in the nanoplates of the Ni(OH)2 could have performed as a conductive matrix, offering high conductivity, pore-volume, and surface area to the composite. The size of the composite was less than 500 nm of the as-prepared Ni(OH)2, mainly owing to graphene, which provided a number of active sites on its surface, thereby enabling the good distribution. The high surface area (2100 m2 g−1) of the AC-based cathode and Ni(OH)2–graphene were used to fabricate an ASC with the diaphragm as a separator in 1 M KOH solution. Interestingly, this ASC device yielded a remarkable specific capacitance of 309 F g−1. Also, there was no loss of capacitance even after 1000 cycles in a wide range of potential windows from 0–1.55 V. At the same time, the ASC reached a maximum energy density of 103 W h kg−1. Further, the ASC was connected in two series cells after charging to 3.1 V, confirming its practical application in powering 2 V LED up to 7 min.122 Such outstanding performance in an aqueous electrolyte is probably because of the high surface area of the composite, high stability of the α-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates, and the electrode materials' mass ratio.
 Fig. 9  Microscopic characterization of the α-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates/graphene composite: (a) AFM image of the as-prepared graphene with the height profile, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, and (d) HR-TEM image. Inset in part c shows the corresponding SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Xie et al.123 fabricated an ASC consisting of a Ni(OH)2–N-doped graphene composite hydrogel-based positive electrode and an N-doped graphene hydrogen film-based negative electrode. Typically, bulk graphene hydrogels comprising of 3D porous configuration facilitate multi-dimensional electron transport and electrolyte-ion diffusion swiftly compared to the graphene sheets, which have the drawback of uncomplicated restacking of the individual sheets that commonly impede electrolyte diffusion into the graphene-based electrode active materials due to their strong van der Waals and π–π interaction. Here, β-Ni(OH)2–N-doped graphene composite hydrogel has been arranged with the availability of a large accessible area using a high-power horn-type ultrasound sonicator, followed by hydrothermal treatment, so as to succeed in maintaining the high conductivity. N-doping renders high capacitance to graphene by providing higher positive charges on a carbon atom close to the doped nitrogen atoms. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) studies also further confirmed N's presence in the atomic ratios of 8.7% in the as-synthesized N-doped graphene.
Moreover, the cylindrical Ni(OH)2–N-doped graphene hydrogel comprises many large sheets with tens of micrometer edge lengths. Further, a two-electrode ASC system was designed with 50 μm thickness of the electrode materials with pure N-doped graphene hydrogel films as the negative electrode utilizing the H2SO4-PVA gel electrolyte. The ASC displayed linearity and symmetry with the specific capacitance of 254.5 mF cm−2 (Fig. 10c) with low charge transfer resistance. The CV measurements validated the flexibility performance of this all-solid-state ASC device at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 under a bending angle of 180°, where no deviation in the CV curves could be observed (Fig. 10e and f). In addition, 92% of its original capacitance was reserved even after 10000 cycles. The Ragone plot disclosed the high energy density of 79.5 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 944.1 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 10  (a) CV curves of the all-solid-state Ni(OH)2–NG/NG SC collected in different scan voltage windows. (b) CV curves at various scan rates and (c) galvanostatic CD curves at various current densities. (d) EIS of the devices with various Ni(OH)2 contents and without Ni(OH)2. The insets are the equivalent circuit and the magnified EIS spectrum. (e) CVs of the device under various bending angles from 0 to 1808 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and (f) the corresponding photographs of the bent device, which indicate the excellent flexibility of the device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Zhang and co-workers124 developed transparent Ni(OH)2–graphene and FeOOH–graphene micro-structured films through a gas–liquid diffusion method. The Ni and Fe salts were first dissolved by an appropriate amount of NH3 separately, and then the film was grown at room temperature with the benefit of flowing air in the fume hood for Fe; however, Ni required various temperatures (50–90 °C) after sealing in an evaporating dish. The Ni film was finally grown in 4 min through a constant ventilation mode once the cover was removed after the reaction temperature turned out to be stable. Both the Ni(OH)2 and FeOOH films were shifted to a transparent ITO–PET substrate individually. Further, the pre-synthesized graphene film was deposited on the respective metal hydroxides to evaluate their electrochemical performance. Then, the electrodes were dipped into the pre-prepared KOH–PVA gel electrolyte. Thus, the fabricated ASC had a total thickness of 111 μm, contributing to a positive electrode of 450 nm, an anode electrode of 550 nm, electrolyte 10 μm, and 0.1 mm of two ITO–PET substrates. The areal capacity of the ASC remarkably increased from 3.3 mF cm−2 (29.5 F g−1) to 17.42 mF cm−2 (155.9 F g−1) while the current density decreased. With the mass loading of 45.2 μg of the positive electrode and 66.5 μg of the negative electrode, this transparent and flexible ASC device exhibited a high volumetric energy density of 0.67 mW h cm−3 with an operating voltage of 1.8 V. Moreover, 85.1% of its original capacitance was retained after 20000 cycles, which prove their cycling stability for real applications.
In general, graphene sheets do not allow the electrolyte ions to utilize their surface area and active sites fully as they are impacted by irreversible sheet-to-sheet restacking, triggered via strong van der Waals force attraction during the drying and heat-treatment process. Consequently, researchers hosted interlayer spacers such as nanoparticles, nanosheets, and nanowires to reduce the agglomeration of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) agglomeration. This strategy has been used by Liu et al.125 recently. With the use of hydrazine as the reducing agent, graphene oxide (GO) was reduced in the chemical reduction method. Further, the enhanced rGO sheets were produced in support of the Ni(OH)2 precursor solution via the hydrothermal reaction, followed by freeze-drying and heat treatment under an Ar atmosphere. Finally, the as-prepared composite was eroded with HCl to remove the ultra-small Ni(OH)2 sacrificial spacers, attaining a high specific area of 443 m2 g−1. The positive electrode, Ni(OH)2–rGO composite, was prepared in the two-step process, which involves the preparation of the Ni–citrate complex and subsequent hydrothermal treatment, followed by freeze-drying, which resulted in a high surface area of 152 m2 g−1 compared to that of pure Ni(OH)2 (109 m2 g−1). Moreover, the poor crystallinity of β-Ni(OH)2 in the obtained composite was expected to enhance the electrochemical performance. Subsequently, Ni(OH)2–rGO/rGO was assembled in a 1.6 V voltage window using the aqueous 2 M KOH electrolyte, which possessed a superb cycling stability of 10000 cycles and retained 89% of the initial capacitance. Furthermore, this device exhibited the remarkable energy density of 75 W h kg−1.
A similar ASC was fabricated and reported by assembling the α-Ni(OH)2–rGO composite as the positive electrode and AC as the negative electrode in 6 M KOH as the electrolyte. In the beginning, the exfoliation of α-Ni(OH)2 was done using sodium dodecyl sulfate in formamide at 25 °C for 5 days after the successful preparation of α-Ni(OH)2 in the hydrothermal reaction. This type of layered composite was prepared to prevent the re-stacking and deposition of the exfoliated α-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets due to the unstable nature when the solvents were removed. Moreover, it was assumed that the exfoliation process helps α-Ni(OH)2 become more hydrated, thereby improving the capacitance through the easy transport of OH− ions. Furthermore, the better electron transport channel rGO will help to improve the electrical conductivity and capacitance of the composite. In this study, α-Ni(OH)2 and GO were mixed first to flocculate and were permitted to stand overnight to complete the aggregation process. Thus, the obtained composite via electrostatic attraction was further subjected to chemical reduction with the backing of hydrazine to acquire the α-Ni(OH)2–rGO composite. The CV curves with the redox peaks measured the maximum capacitance of 168.8 F g−1 for the ASC α-Ni(OH)2–rGO/AC device and still managed to obtain 114.5 F g−1 at higher rates. The synergic contribution from α-Ni(OH)2 and rGO and the large surface area of these materials cemented the superior electrochemical performance of this ASC device; for example, this device divulged only 92.4% of its original capacitance after 2000 cycles, showing a significant cycling life and rate performance. Furthermore, this ASC device grasped an apparent energy density of 76 W h kg−1 and maintained an energy density of 51.5 W h kg−1 even at a high power density of 8.13 kW kg−1, which is recommended for highly promising energy storage applications.126
The flexible solid-state ASC has been fabricated by sandwiching the polymer PVA–KOH electrolyte in between the Ni(OH)2–rGO–Ni wire and rGO–Ni wire fiber electrodes without any binder-conducting additives. The materials' preparation is described as follows: the 3D rGO aerogel was first coated on Ni wire and used as the negative electrode material. The same rGO–Ni wire was dipped into the Ni(NO3)2 solution, heated, and shifted into the mixture of KCl and KOH solution, leading to the deposition of Ni(OH)2 on the rGO–Ni wire. The achieved Ni(OH)2–rGO–Ni composite was further freeze-dried after washing, which performed as the positive electrode. To validate the stable voltage windows of this ASC device, it was examined up to 1.6 V in the CV; there was no distortion observed in the curves; further, the extension leads to the distortion of the CV traces due to the decomposition of the electrolyte. The positive and negative electrode materials had a mass ratio of 2:5 and supplied a high specific capacitance of 69 F g−1 with typical triangular curves. The flexibility studies of the ASC device were proved through CV measurements at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, where no significant changes were observed in the CV curves under different bending conditions, establishing good flexibility and outstanding mechanical stability. The specific volume capacitance of the ASC was also calculated to be 2320 mF cm−3 with a maximum volumetric energy density of 0.83 mW h cm−3. Remarkably, the assembled ASC retained 83% of its initial capacitance after 6000 cycles at a high current density of 10 A g−1.127
In the same fashion, 3D Ni(OH)2–rGO hydrogel was prepared to be used as a binder-free electrode material for ASC by way of merging the as-synthesized 3D rGO hydrogel in 6 M KOH electrolyte. The cylinder-shaped hydrogel of Ni(OH)2–rGO was attained in a two-step approach; at first, the 3D rGO hydrogel was synthesized through the in situ reduction of GO nanosheets using vitamin-C in NaOH solution. Later, Ni(OH)2 was doped into the as-synthesized rGO hydrogel via hydrothermal treatment. The symmetric supercapacitors Ni(OH)2–rGO/Ni(OH)2–rGO and rGO/rGO were assembled for comparison along with the Ni(OH)2–rGO/rGO ASC in a two-electrode system. The ASC rendered the specific capacitance of 94.9 F g−1, which is much higher than that of the symmetric supercapacitors. After 10000 cycles, 90% of the capacitance could be maintained, presenting its good cycling stability with a high energy density of 21.71 W h kg−1.128
Having the benefits of high abundance sources, low cost, environment friendliness, and particularly high theoretical capacitance, manganese-based oxides or hydroxides have been focused on more for a long time as electrode materials in the energy storage field. Besides, these pseudocapacitive materials face trouble in attaining high capacitance due to their low specific surface area, unsuitable crystallinity, shorter pathway for electrons transport, or wettability issues with the electrolyte. Therefore, designing the structure and composition of materials is becoming a key strategy to overcome these problems and achieve higher specific capacitance. Recently, Wu and co-workers129 handled the synthesis of hybrid spheres of Ni(OH)2–MnO2–rGO in a one-step methodology through the hydrothermal reaction, which offers good electrochemical performance by coupling the porous freeze-dried rGO as the negative electrode. Scheme 2 clearly illustrates the possible formation mechanism of this composite. Initially, the Ni2+ and Mn2+ ions were situated on the GO surface because of the electrostatic attraction, and further, the metal ions reacted with the OH− ions of the methanol to yield primary particles, paving the way for deposition on the GO surfaces partly. This continuation process made the aggregation of the amorphous core primary particles on their surface crystallize and produced the primary nanosheets progressively. Moreover, the dissolved oxygen transformed Mn2+ into Mn4+ during this process, and at high temperatures, the GO turns out to be rGO, due to the reaction with methanol. The primary nanosheets of MnO2 might be disorderly stacked with Ni(OH)2 due to the hydrogen bonding interactions and tend to form the hybrid nanosheets and rGO. Further, these hybrid nanosheets triggered the construction of the spherical structures through the self-assembly process. Thus, the obtained material had the composition of α-Ni(OH)2, γ-MnO2, and the graphene layers and the high BET surface area of 147 m2 g−1, while Ni(OH)2–MnO2 only reached 76 m2 g−1. The Ni(OH)2–MnO2–rGO/porous freeze-dried rGO ASC demonstrated good capacitive behavior using 1 M KOH in the range of 0–1.6 V, which also had impressively high energy density of 32.6 W h kg−1. Also, 75% of the original capacitance remained after 2000 cycles, displaying the cycle life of the ASC device.
 Scheme 2  Possible formation mechanism of the Ni(OH)2–MnO2–RGO hybrid sphere and the structural schematic diagram of a single nanosheet in a hybrid sphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society. 
Meanwhile, Shen et al.130 described the simple and effective method for the synthesis of Ni(OH)2–rGO nanohybrids in a formamide medium. At the start, Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were prepared through a facile hydrothermal treatment with the intercalation of dodecyl sulfate ions, and exfoliation was done in a formamide medium. Also, GO was prepared by the modified Hummers' method, and the exfoliation obtained the nanosheets in water. Then, the exfoliated nanosheets were re-dispersed in formamide when freeze-drying was completed and reduced via chemical reduction using hydrazine after re-dispersion in water. Finally, the resultant Ni(OH)2–rGO nanohybrids were developed via freeze-drying, possessing the porous flower-like structure with a specific surface area of 77.7 m2 g−1 and an average pore size of 9.2 nm. The optimized Ni(OH)2–rGO nanohybrids/AC-based ASC showed high specific capacitance of 102.3 F g−1 in 6 M KOH and provided a high energy density of 36.7 W h kg−1. The high electrochemical performance was mainly due to each nanosheet being present in the nanohybrid that would have been contacted with the electrolyte. Besides, graphene in the nanohybrid could have enhanced the electron conduction channels, thereby reducing the inner resistivity. Furthermore, the microstructural characteristics of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets also contributed to the high performance as their sheets are broken harshly and get distorted during the exfoliation/re-organization process, which is facilitated by reducing their size.
Similarly, Zhang and co-workers131 successfully developed the Ni(OH)2–graphene covered carbon fiber paper (CFG) without the assistance of hard templates or any surfactants using a one-pot hydrothermal reaction. The nanostructured CFG was obtained by the addition of GO on the surface of the carbon fiber paper, followed by reduction in the presence of hydrazine hydrate and the freeze-drying process. Subsequently, CFG was added to the Ni salt solution to acquire the vertical and controllable conducting Ni(OH)2 network. The α-Ni(OH)2 phase was determined for the pure Ni(OH)2 and without the peaks, except for carbon, showed the poor crystallinity of the composite. However, the existence of graphene layers led to the high BET surface area of 425.9 m2 g−1 of the composite than that of pure Ni(OH)2 (366.9 m2 g−1) and CFG (184.8 m2 g−1), mostly by enlarging the Ni(OH)2 nucleation sites and also setting a larger electrochemical surface area. The as-prepared composite was assessed as the positive electrode to built the ASC with AC as the counter electrode in a 2 M NaOH solution. To evaluate the stable voltage window, the ASC was analyzed under different potential windows from 0–1.6 V at 10 mV s−1 (Fig. 11). The maximum gravimetric specific energy density of 10.4 W h kg−1 was achieved for this Ni(OH)2–CFG/AC-based ASC. Most importantly, there was no capacitance decay up to 5000 cycles, identifying the stable cycling performance of this ASC.
 Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of the Ni(OH)2-CFG composite/AC in different voltage windows at 10 mV s−1, (b) CV curves, (c) GCD curves of the assembled two-electrode asymmetric supercapacitor at different scan rates or current densities in a 1.6 V voltage window, and (d) the specific capacitance of the Ni(OH)2–CFG composite/AC asymmetric supercapacitor at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.2 Ni(OH)2–graphite or expanded graphite (EG)
Very recently, Ni(OH)2-ultra-thin graphite foam (UGF) has been used as the positive electrode material for ASC. The reasons behind the usage of Ni(OH)2–UGF as the positive electrode material were believed to be as follows. (1) The three-dimensional network of high conductive UGF had the prospect of improving the transportation of electrons to the injected Ni(OH)2 than the other metal current collectors. (2) It was assumed that the porous Ni(OH)2 could shorten the ion-diffusion pathway, thereby enabling the easy movement of electrolyte ions even at higher current densities. (3) The problem of increasing contact resistance between the electrode material and the current metal collectors during the electrochemical process can be avoided by using lightweight UGF foam and supporting the minimization of the total mass of the electrode. Typically, the UGF comprising of ultra-thin graphite struts were prepared through CVD, replacing old-fashioned current collectors such as carbon paper or Ni foam. Further, the homogeneous solution containing Ni-ions and urea was injected into the UGF placed in the filter flask under vacuum. Then, the wetted UGF with all the solutions was subjected to hydrothermal treatment. The resultant composite was merged with the pre-pasted negative electrode material of the activated microwave exfoliated graphite oxide to fabricate the ASC. This ASC displayed a specific capacitance of 119 F g−1. Interestingly, the potential window of this ASC could be extended up to 1.8 V compared to the normally tested window of 1.6 V. Unfortunately, the capacitance loss was found to be 36.8% after 10000 cycles, mainly due to the variations in the volume of the active materials during the cycling process.132
Due to the high-cost of graphene, EG has been explored more in energy storage applications; also, this graphene-like cheap material having good electrical conductivity, chemical stability, and a high surface area compared to graphite inspires researchers to develop low-cost supercapacitors with excellent electrochemical performance. Qu et al.133 made this kind of ASC using Ni(OH)2–EG as the positive electrode and the commercial AC as the negative electrode in 6 M KOH solution. Ni(OH)2–EG was synthesized through the facile microwave-assisted method using ethylene glycol as the solvent in the preparation process. XRD confirmed the structure of the as-synthesized composite; the diffraction peaks were slightly shifted from the standard spectrum of α-Ni(OH)2 because of the substitution of the α-Ni(OH)2 interlayer by the ethylene glycol molecules during the precipitation process; also, the composite further displayed the additional peaks for EG. The ASC was constructed with different mass ratios of AC to α-Ni(OH)2 to conclude the optimal ratio. Among these, the high specific capacitance of 86.4 F g−1 was achieved with a mass ratio of 2.0. This ASC device suffered a loss of 19.9% specific capacitance after 1000 cycles, which is attributed to the increased charge transfer resistance and diffusion resistance of the electrolyte ions in the cycling process. Moreover, the ASC gave a maximum energy density of 37.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 490.9 W kg−1.
Yuan et al.134 also developed a Ni(OH)2–EG composite and analyzed its electrochemical performance as the positive electrode in ASC. For instance, they developed a combination of electrochemical and chemical processes to deposit Ni(OH)2 on a conductive substrate containing EG and then placed its as the positive electrode material in an ASC. During the electrodeposition process, OH− ions were formed on the cathode through the electrochemical reduction of NO3− anions grabbed from the electrolyte of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O. The homogeneous distribution of Ni(OH)2 on the EG afforded the layered structure and aided in the expansion of the interlayer spacing for the easy penetration of the electrolyte ions. As expected, the sandwich-like structure of the ASC (Fig. 12) demonstrated a typical rectangular-shaped CV curves, which is accountable for both EDLC and pseudocapacitance behavior. Correspondingly, the asymmetrical triangular charge–discharge patterns attributed to the valuable capacitive behavior also favored the high coulombic efficiency (Fig. 12c). This ASC assembly rendered a specific capacitance of 64.6 F g−1 but the cycling stability of the ASC suffered as it can achieve an energy density of 32.3 W h kg−1.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device composed of the Ni(OH)2/EG composite and the AC electrodes, (b) CV curves of the ASC device at different scan rates, (c) GCD curves at different current densities of the ASC device, and (d) specific capacitances of the ASC device at various current densities. Inset image shows LED lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
5.3 Ni(OH)2–carbon nanotube (CNT)
Researchers have paid great attention to CNTs (also known as sp2 bonded carbon) for their use as an electrode material for excellent electrochemical performance when graphene was not isolated. The cylindrical structure of CNT has a sheet of graphene along with captivating properties of the high surface area, high stability, and low resistance. Besides, the hollow interior space of the CNT supplies more reaction sites through their conducting channels, consequently bringing about more reports on the development of metal hydroxide or oxide–CNT composites for energy storage applications.25,135–137 Feng and co-workers138 introduced the CNTs matrix into Ni(OH)2 to improve the electrochemical activity of the layered hydroxides. They produced CNTs with a diameter of 15–50 nm via catalytic pyrolysis using the reagent-based Ni and ethylene gas, also having a high surface area of 500 m2 g−1. The spherical-shaped Ni(OH)2 was prepared through a chemical precipitation process with a diameter of about 1–20 μm. Both the electrodes Ni(OH)2 and Ni(OH)2–CNT had shown faradaic redox behavior, as evidenced through the CV results. The specific capacitances of the Ni(OH)2 and Ni(OH)2–CNT were 311 and 137 F g−1, respectively, in a single electrode configuration, which is mainly attributed to the increase in the surface area and active sites of the Ni(OH)2 in the composite. The support of commercial AC as the negative electrode showed 68 F g−1 in the ASC with the composite in 6 M KOH and an energy density of 25.8 W h kg−1.
Salunkhe et al.139 synthesized the composite using a low-cost, one-step, and simple chemical process to implement the growth of a thin layer of Ni(OH)2 coaxially onto oxidized CNT surface (o-CNT), then fabricated the ASC by preparing rGO as the negative electrode. In the precipitation process, the composite Ni(OH)2–o-CNT was formed by the adsorption of positively charged Ni(OH)2 on the negatively charged oxygen functional groups, encompassing o-CNT under the optimized conditions. The uniform distribution of the α and the predominant β phases of the Ni(OH)2 on the o-CNT surface was witnessed. After optimizing the mass ratio and the potential window, the fabricated ASC could deliver a relatively high working voltage of 1.8 V in an aqueous electrolyte. The recorded charge–discharge curves were linear at low current densities and the specific capacitance was estimated to be 78 F g−1. Further, the ASC presented a maximum energy density of 35 W h kg−1; even under harsh conditions (27 kW kg−1), the cell retained a value of 26.24 W h kg−1.
Another effective synthesis of Ni(OH)2–CNT on NF for ASC has been reported in two steps by Gong and co-workers.140 A thermal CVD method was applied to grow the CNTs directly on the NFs in a furnace with the flow of C2H4 gas. The as-grown CNTs–NF was immersed in the mixture of NH3 containing nickel sulfate and potassium persulfate solution to deposit the Ni(OH)2 nanostructures further at room temperature. A 1.8 V ASC was efficiently fabricated by pairing the Ni(OH)2–CNT–NF with a commercial AC to act as the positive and negative electrodes. Moreover, a very rare unseen rectangular CV curve was obtained for this ASC, offering a typical capacitor behavior. Further to the confirmation of the capacitor-like behavior through the discharge curves, the specific capacitance was calculated to be 112.5 F g−1. In an aqueous electrolyte, the superior energy density of 32.5 W h kg−1 was gained due to its high capacitance and higher working potential. In addition, the ASC device was rewarded with a retention of 83% after 3000 cycles.
Stimulated by the advantages of binary composites on CNTs, Yan and co-workers141 developed the 3D Ni(OH)2–MnO2 on the CNT substrate by growing the CNT first on a chemically pre-cleaned NF through catalytic thermal CVD, then the Ni(OH)2–MnO2 was deposited on the prepared template by the solvothermal process using their respective salts in cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and methanol. Generally, the doping of Mn in Ni(OH)2 could be beneficial for the increase in the conductivity, offering a stable crystalline phase in alkaline medium, and the availability of wealthier redox reactions than the individual ones. Also, the CNT could support the high gravimetric and volumetric capacitance of the ASC by upgrading the mass loading of active materials without the damage to its supercapacitor performance. With these benefits, further intending to improve the ASC's performance, AC was prepared with N-doping as the negative electrode via polymerization, carbonization, and KOH activation to design this N-rich AC from polyaniline. The resultant ASC was constructed by pairing this carbon electrode with Ni(OH)2–MnO2@CNT-NF as the positive electrode material. A slight hump owing to the oxygen evolution was observed in the range of 1.7–1.75 V in 1 M KOH. Thus, 1.7 V was selected as the working voltage for this assembled ASC. At high mass loading, the ASC device revealed a high specific capacitance of 315 F g−1 with a typical capacitive behavior. The cycling test was demonstrated and a capacitance retention of 78.2% was detected after 3000 cycles. In this work, the ASC device produced a tremendous gravimetric energy density of 126.4 W h kg−1 and a corresponding volumetric energy density of 10.9 mW h cm−3 based on the device volume, fulfilling the demand requirement of the supercapacitor device.
A simple chemical bath deposition (CBD) process was employed to grow the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets uniformly on the surface of pre-oxidized CNTs to set as the positive electrode toward the fabrication of ASC by Yi et al.142 The mixture of CNTs and urea in metal solution was heated, followed by ageing, resulting in the core–shell nanostructure of the composite. The decomposition of urea during the deposition headed the way to release CO2 and ammonia, which reacted with water and Ni ions to grow the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on the CNT surface, which directed the formation of the core–shell nanostructure as well. Further, the 3D porous graphene hydrogel (3DGN) was prepared to prevent the restacking of the graphene sheets, thus improving the ASC's capacitance as the negative electrode material with a high surface area of 134.7 m2 g−1. The two as-synthesized electrodes were successfully combined and separated using the polypropylene separator in 1 M KOH (Fig. 13) with an optimized mass ratio of 0.36. The assembled CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN-based ASC showed the broad peaks of the CV curves in the potential voltage window of 0.0–1.6 V, indicating the pseudocapacitive nature. Further, the maximum specific capacitance of the ASC was calculated to be 124 F g−1 based on the total mass of both the active materials. The high capacitance was mainly attributed to the porous Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, which offered a high surface area and more active sites for electrolyte transportation. Moreover, 3DGN also contributed to shortening the transport distance between the electrode and the electrolyte to attain a high rate of energy storage. Further, the Ragone chart indicates that the device presented a high energy density of 44.0 W h kg−1 with good cycling stability and 83% capacitance retention after 8000 cycles.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled structure of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC, (b) CV curves of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at various scan rates, (c) GCD curves of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at various current densities, and (d) The specific capacitance of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shi et al.143 created the solid-state fiber-based ASC with Ni(OH)2–CNT as the positive electrode and rGO–CNT as the counter electrode for wearable electronics. For this, they synthesized the structure of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets with ∼2 nm thickness by utilizing the fast precipitation technique where Ni(NO3)2 solution was hastily added to the NaOH solution for precipitation. The as-prepared nanosheets of the XRD diffraction peaks corresponded to the β-Ni(OH)2 planes and unveiled a high surface area of 95 m2 g−1. Also, the interconnected and well-aligned CNT was prepared through the CVD method, which was used to load the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets. Besides, the GO nanosheets were synthesized, dispersed in ethanol, and reduced in hydroiodic acid with CNT. Finally, the solid-state ASC was fabricated by joining these Ni(OH)2–CNT fiber and rGO–CNT fiber using the PVA–KOH gel electrolyte with a non-woven separator capable of working up to 1.3 V (Fig. 14). The ASC exhibited a specific volumetric capacitance of 20.2 F cm−3 in the working voltage of 1.3 V (Fig. 14c) with 71.9% capacitance retention. As shown in Fig. 14d, the device translated much higher energy density than the commercial 63 V/220 μF electrolytic capacitor, MnO2@CNT fibers, and 3 V/300 μF Al electrolytic capacitor. Astonishingly, it showed good cycling activity with less than 7% capacitance decline after 3000 cycles (Fig. 14f), and the ASC, which was woven in a glove (Fig. 14e), showed no capacity loss even after 5000 bending–unbending cycles at 0.8 A cm−3, as evidenced by their excellent flexibility characteristics. Finally, the four ASCs were connected in series and demonstrated the powering of a red LED.
 Fig. 14  (a) CV curve of the hybrid supercapacitor based on Ni(OH)2/CNT and rGO/CNT fiber electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) GCD curves of the hybrid supercapacitor at current densities of 0.4 to 2.0 A cm−3. (c) Current density-dependent CV of the hybrid supercapacitor. (d) Ragone plot to compare the volumetric energy density (EV) and power density (PV) with previously reported studies. (e) Performance of the fiber-shaped supercapacitor at different bending angles (0°–90°–0°). (f) Cycling stability of the hybrid supercapacitor at a current density of 1.0 A cm−3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By in situ loading the nanosized Ni(OH)2 on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), Xia and co-workers144 prepared the Ni(OH)2–MWCNT composites in an alkaline medium to construct the high power ASC. Because the rate capability of Ni(OH)2 mainly depends on the diffusion of protons in the Ni(OH)2 framework, the researchers were compelled to develop nanosized Ni(OH)2 and disseminated Ni(OH)2 on the net-like MWCNT. After balancing the ratio, the established ASC presented a specific capacity of 40 mA h g−1 in 6 M KOH with the commercial AC as the negative electrode. The cycling stability was tested at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, exposing the excellent capacitive retention of 90% after 2000 cycles. Furthermore, it was found that the device displayed a superior energy density of 32 W h kg−1, as calculated from the Ragone plot. The shorter diffusion pathways for protons and the greater surface area of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets favored the easier charge transport; the high electronic conductivity of the MWCNT reduced the electrode resistance, thereby enhancing the overall performance.
Wei et al.145 manually mixed the CNT with 3D interspersed flower-like Ni(OH)2 to improve the electrochemical performance of the ASC. At the outset, the layer-by-layer Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were prepared via the gradual temperature increment approach using the precipitant NH4OH, which was added dropwise into the Ni(NO3)2 solution. Then, the exfoliating agent CTAB with different amounts was selected to prepare the ultrathin Ni(OH)2 nanosheets. After realizing the flower-like Ni(OH)2, it was further mixed with CNT to perform as the positive electrode material. The combination of OH− from the Ni(OH)2 and the spherical micelles of the cetyltrimethylammonium cations seized the responsibility for the gradual formation of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets and then altered it into the 3D interspersed flower-like structure with a high surface area of 45.5 m2 g−1. The AC was employed as the negative electrode to appraise the energy storage performance in a 2 M KOH solution. Thus, the acquired ASC demonstrated a high specific capacitance of 180 F g−1 and offered good capacitive retention of 111.4% after 10000 cycles with a columbic efficiency of above 97%. These astonishing results were mainly credited to the 3D interspersed flower-like nanostructure of Ni(OH)2 and the high conductivity nature of CNTs. The ASC device also possessed a high energy density of 64.2 W h kg−1 and endured 33.5 W h kg−1 at a power density of 2.25 kW kg−1. Aimed at further using it for commercial applications, the two devices were connected in series to examine the lighting of the red LED up to 190 min.
5.4 Ni(OH)2–carbon fibers
Carbon fibers are also generally employed as current collectors and substrates because of their praiseworthy properties such as excellent conductivity, good chemical stability, and high mechanical strength. Importantly, the intrinsic flexibility of the fibers has empowered to change the fabricated fiber-based electrodes into flexible supercapacitors.25,146 Recently, Shi et al.147 reported the coating of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheet ink on the commercial carbon fiber yarns (CFY) to make the ASC wearable. The fast co-precipitation method was adopted to synthesize the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets and the Nafion (Nf)–Ni(OH)2 ink, prepared using ethanol, allowed to impregnate the CFY to design the CFY@Nf–Ni(OH)2, known to be an impregnation-dyeing method. Employing the same method, the commercial hero ink pen was also coated on the CFY to prepare the negative electrode material for this ASC, which is denoted as CFY@CPs. In a thermal plastic tube, fabrication was done using the as-prepared PVA–KOH gel electrolyte to support a non-woven fabric separator. The fabricated ASC could achieve the wide operating voltage of 1.5 V and achieved a volumetric capacitance of 36.3 F cm−3. Due to the high performance and wide working voltage of a single yarn electrode, this ASC device deserved a laudable energy density of 11.3 mW h cm−3. As shown in Fig. 15a and b, this device was tested under different bending angles and observed to have a very slight deviation in the retention characteristics of 96% after 5000 cycles, as evidenced by their applicability in e-textile applications as an energy storage component. Furthermore, the device was examined in series and parallel conditions for its practical applications (Fig. 15c and d). When two devices were connected in series, the voltage window was doubled over, and it was found that the discharge time and output current were increased by a factor of 2 if the two devices were connected in parallel. Finally, they powered the red LED by connecting these three ASC devices in series.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of a yarn-based hybrid supercapacitor woven into a glove at different bending states. (b) Capacitance retention for the hybrid supercapacitor at different bending angles. (c) CV curves of a single and two hybrid supercapacitors connected in series or in parallel. (d) GCD curves of a single and two hybrid supercapacitors connected in series or in parallel. The used current for integrated devices corresponds to 1.5 A cm−3 with respect to a single device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
A direct electrodeposition method was carried out by Kazemi et al.148 to prepare the Ni(OH)2-electro-etched carbon fiber (ECF) in a three-electrode system, and the acquired electrode was further activated in consecutive potential cycling for an ASC to perform as the positive electrode material. The carbon fiber brushed by the AC (AC–ECF) was inspected for the evaluation of electrochemical tests with Ni(OH)2–ECF. During the process of electro-etching, many channels were formed on the carbon fibers, which would enable the surface area to increase and helps to form the hydrophilic sites more on the surface of the electrode to expedite the electrolyte ion transportation. In addition, the mass loading of the active material could increase the current collector with a better connection. The assembled Ni(OH)2–ECF/AC–ECF-based ASC confirmed their stable operating voltage by extending up to 1.6 V in 1 M KOH. The rectangular shape of the CV curves was observed and its shape was retained even at a higher scan rate of 500 mV s−1, implying the device's capacitive behavior. Besides, the device showed a maximum specific capacitance of 88.1 F g−1, mainly due to the binding of Ni(OH)2 on the ECF, which prohibited the detachment of the active materials, and this device inappropriately lost 40% of its original capacitance at a high current density (8 A g−1). At a high power density (800 W kg−1), the device revealed a noticeable energy density of 31.3 W h kg−1.
5.5 Ni(OH)2–carbon nanosheets
As said earlier, the pseudocapacitance functionalities of Ni(OH)2 can be fully exploited by coating the nanostructured Ni(OH)2 on the surface of carbon in an appropriate way. Recently, Xie et al.149 grew Ni(OH)2 on the carbon nanosheets by introducing a simple methodology using Mg(OH)2 as the template and phenolic resin as the precursor. In general, it is not easy to grow the Ni(OH)2 coating on the carbon material directly due to their surface incompatibility. Therefore, researchers have sorted out this issue by oxidative treatment before the coating, which facilitates the growth of metal hydroxides on the surface of carbon materials. In this study, the Ni(OH)2–carbon nanosheets were prepared without any oxidation process for the carbon material for Ni(OH)2 growth. The Mg(OH)2–resin composite was prepared in the impregnation method, carbonized, and immersed in the Ni solution to facilitate the ion-exchange reactions. Thus, the obtained composite had the α-phase of Ni(OH)2 and exposed the mesoporous structure with a larger specific surface area of 278 m2 g−1. To build an efficient ASC, the high surface area (1999 m2 g−1) of commercial AC was chosen as the negative electrode. The ASC disclosed a maximum specific capacitance of 230 F g−1 in 6 M KOH, which is mainly due to the coated 2D structure on the carbon material, which shapes the pathways for electrolyte diffusion and rapid electron transport. Further, the cycling stability for this ASC was assessed with the retention of ∼93% after 10000 cycles. The reason for the good cycling performance would be primarily attributed to the microstructure of the composite as obtained from the doped Mg(OH)2 and the carbon material.
5.6 Ni(OH)2–activated carbon (AC)
While facing issues in achieving specific capacitance and overall cycle stability for ASC due to some limitations, frequent modifications to the synthesized materials have been reported to prevail these struggles. For instance, the fabrication of Ni(OH)2 with the addition of carbon-based materials such as AC and CNT would increase the specific capacitance of the electrode material to accomplish the overall electrochemical performance of the ASC. Among the porous carbon materials, ACs bestows a high specific surface area of 3000 m2 g−1 along with pore sizes ranging from micropores to macropores.150 The low cost, easy accessibility, and most widely employed material has also been combined with Ni(OH)2 to evaluate the electrochemical performance. Recently, Sui et al.151 reported the synthesis of Ni(OH)2–CNT–AC through the facile microwave-assisted heating method in the ethylene glycol medium.
As a consequence of pairing the Ni(OH)2–CNT–AC as the positive electrode and the commercial AC as the negative electrode, it is capable of working up to 1.6 V. The CV curves exposed the broad redox peaks and were not changed when the scan rate increased from 5 to 60 mV s−1, which indicated the virtuous capacitive behavior of the device. With 12.5 mg mass loading of the active materials, the high specific capacitance of 82.1 F g−1 was attained and also translated to the long-term cycling stability (83.5% retention after 1000 cycles). Also, this device exhibited a good energy density of 32.3 W h kg−1 but the specific capacitance of this device was less compared to the ASC, which had 540 F g−1, as fabricated by the commercial Ni(OH)2 and AC.152
5.7 Ni(OH)2–biomass-derived carbon
Among the different carbon materials, graphene, AC, and CNTs, have been explored more as EDLC materials with the combination of Ni(OH)2 to enhance the capacitance and cycle stability of the ASC device. Though efforts are still going on to make the novel carbon materials with a large surface area and high electrical conductivity, which can also afford the effective pathways for the electrons and ion transfer to upsurge the Ni(OH)2 inherent properties, thereby achieving the high electrochemical performance of the ASC.153–157 Recently, biomass materials have attracted researchers as precursors to prepare high surface area carbonaceous materials owing to the active functional groups (hydroxyl and carboxylic) on the surface and naturally abundant heteroatom doping (N, S, etc.), which increases the specific capacitance and eventually enhances the energy and power densities. Li et al.158 exploited willow catkins effectively to prepare the carbon microtubes (CMTs) via a carbonization process. Subsequently, the CMTs were subjected to HNO3 for oxidation, followed by the freeze-drying termed as the acid-treated carbon microtubes (ACMTs), and then consumed to develop the β-Ni(OH)2@ACMTs composite with a large surface area of 155.7 m2 g−1 compared to that of pure Ni(OH)2 (27.3 m2 g−1) in the subsequent process of hydrothermal and freeze-drying. The SEM images of ACMT clearly revealed the 6–10 μm diameter of the hollow tube structure with a wall thickness of 200–400 nm (Fig. 16a and b), which facilitated the growth of the β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets uniformly not only on their external surface but also used the opportunity to grow on the internal surface with 0.5–1 lateral size and thickness of 30 nm (Fig. 16c–f). This type of growth generates several active sites for the redox reactions to occur, which boosts the electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of ACMT (a and b) and β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT (c–f) at different magnifications. TEM image (g) of β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT. TEM image (h) and HRTEM image (i) of an individual Ni(OH)2 nanosheet. The inset is the corresponding SAED pattern of an individual Ni(OH)2 nanosheet. SEM image of β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT (j) and the corresponding elemental mapping images of carbon (k), oxygen (l), and nickel (m). Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Moreover, the formed β-Ni(OH)2 nanoarrays in the composite was calculated to be ∼1 μm, and the single nanosheet of β-Ni(OH)2 was also observed (Fig. 16g) with abundant mesopores in that composite (Fig. 16h). The HR-TEM image (Fig. 16i) elegantly demonstrated the interlayer spacing of 0.27 nm, which agreed with the hexagonal β-Ni(OH)2 plane of (001), and the SAED pattern clarified the single-crystalline nature of the β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheet. Also, the homogenous distribution of C, O, and Ni in the composite was identified from the elemental mapping images (Fig. 16j–m), which would have helped increase the surface area, thereby forming more electro-active sites. In addition, using the CMTs, they prepared the porous CMTs by an activation process with KOH to evaluate it as the negative electrode. In 6 M KOH, the assembled β-Ni(OH)2@ACMTs/porous CMTs-based ASC unveiled a high capacitance of 121 F g−1. Unfortunately, this device lost ∼20% of its initial capacitance within 3000 cycles due to various factors such as unbalanced mass ratio, leakage of electrolyte, and the degradation of active materials. Nonetheless, the Ragone plot derivation established the high energy density of 37.8 W h kg−1 and ensured this device's commercial application in the energy storage market.
5.8 Ni(OH)2–Vulcan XC-72
In different attempts to make an efficient composite with Ni(OH)2, carbon black has also taken place in that list due to their high electrical conductivity and good porosity. Haarberg and co-workers159 designed the Ni(OH)2–Vulcan XC-72 composite, exploiting the microwave-assisted technique with the assistance of ethylene glycol. In this report, the different mass ratio of the negative electrode AC has been varied in the range of 0.5–3 to the positive electrode material Ni(OH)2–XC-72 to estimate the maximum energy density and specific capacitance of the ASC. Moreover, the impact of different separators such as non-woven fabric and glassy fiber were tested by the EIS analysis and concluded the non-woven fabric separator to be a suitable one for this ASC device. The good electrochemical performance was exposed for this device in terms of the worthy specific capacitance of 92.2 F g−1 and an excellent energy density of 36 W h kg−1, using 6 M KOH in the high operating voltage of 1.6 V. This was mainly endorsed by the EDLC nature of the AC and the extreme conductive behavior of Ni(OH)2–XC-72. The cycling profile studies were employed to determine the calendar life of the ASC at a high current density (10 A g−1), which was sustained up to 85% of its original capacitance after 1000 cycles.
6. Ni(OH)2–metal oxides, sulphides, selenides, and phosphides
The greatest electrochemical properties for the ASC could be conquered by picking appropriate nanostructured electrode materials with suitable electrolytes. In this rivalry, different metal oxides, sulfides, selenides, and phosphides with their distinct properties have been tested to form the composite with the battery-type Ni(OH)2 electrode to augment the performance in the ASC. For instance, the substitution of O and S by the lower electronegativity benefit of Se in the transition metal compounds evades the decay of the structure through elongation between the layers and facilitates the electronic transportation in the structure conveniently, leading to the attainment of high electrochemical performance.160 On the other hand, the transition metal oxides and hydroxides also acquire a good capacitance through a rich reversible faradaic reaction with their multiple valence states contributing to the overall electrochemical performance of the ASC.161 As a competitor, transition metal phosphides are also in the row to substitute the conventional electrode materials with their n-type semiconductor structure and provide pseudocapacitance as a faradaic type electrode and an electrically conductive additive in consort with the remarkable properties of superior electrical conductivity and metalloid characteristics.162,163 These different interesting performance outcomes obtained from the reports for positive electrode Ni(OH)2 composite-based ASCs have been well-constructed and discussed extensively in the following sub-sections.
6.1 Ni(OH)2–metal oxides
For the past few years, hydroxides, particularly Ni(OH)2, have received much attention due to their higher specific capacity in an alkaline aqueous medium. The high capacity of such a material is due to the redox reaction associated with the layered structure, in which the metal hydroxide shows a larger interlayer distance. Though it has low redox potential, the high capacity of Ni(OH)2 highly improves the energy density, which is still higher than the metal oxide and carbonaceous electrode materials. In general, metal hydroxides have less surface-dependent activity than metal oxides; thus, the power capability will be straightaway affected. This limits their performance in the SCs in terms of the power. Another critical challenge with this Ni(OH)2 is its poor durability. Since it has a layered structure, the micro-stress linked with the layered structure leads to poor performance upon cycling at a high current response. Thus, the research activities are focused on improving the electrochemical performance such as cycle stability, power capability, and further increasing the Ni(OH)2 using various approaches.164–167 Among the approaches, the formulation of the composite with either metal oxide/sulfide to circumvent the above issues is efficient.
Recently, MnCo2O4@Ni(OH)2 belt-based core–shell nanostructure-based composite was reported to construct high-performance SCs.168 It was observed that the core–shell structure showed much higher specific capacitance (2154 F g−1) than the bare MnCo2O4 and Ni(OH)2. The same trend was observed at higher rates as well. However, Ni(OH)2 into the core–shell structure leads to a marginal increase in the ESR. This implied that the nanosheet morphology of the Ni(OH)2 in the MnCo2O4 compound largely enhanced the electrical contact with the Ni-foam current collector; as a result, the active material was highly utilized. Further, it helps shorten the path lengths for both the electrolyte ions and electrons, promoting the diffusion and migration of electrolyte ions during the rapid charge–discharge process. Although the high specific capacitance was achieved, only 6.5% of the capacitance is extracted when they were explored in ASC with AC. As a result, the energy and power densities of the configuration were limited to 48 W h kg−1 and 14.9 kW kg−1, respectively. Unfortunately, the cycle life of the ASC is limited to 2500 cycles (Fig. 17),168 which clearly showed that the formulation of the composite with MnCo2O4 is not effective for supercapacitors.
 Fig. 17  (a) Cycling performance of the asymmetric supercapacitor, and (b) the SEM image of the MnCo2O4@Ni(OH)2 hybrid nanoflowers after charging-discharging for 2500 times at a current density of 6 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
On the other hand, Pan et al.169 reported the compound by replacing Mn with Zn from MnCo2O4 and the composite (ZnCo2O4@Ni(OH)2) was prepared by an electro-deposition process on Ni foam. A maximum areal capacitance of 4.6 F cm−2 was reported at 2 mA cm−2 for the prepared electrode material in a single electrode configuration. A high-performance ASC device was fabricated with carbonized filter paper and showed a maximum energy density of 49 W h kg−1 at a power density of 428 W kg−1. However, this system rendered even poor durability than the Mn-based ASC during cycling up to 2000 cycles.168 Among the metal oxides, Co and Mn-based analogs have been extensively studied toward the formulation of the composite with Ni(OH)2 and subsequently employed as the active material in the ASC.170–174 For example, hydrogenated CoOx was reported in conjunction with Ni(OH)2 in the core–shell structure for improving the cell performances.175 The nanowire conducting scaffold supported Ni(OH)2 showed a maximum specific capacitance of 2196 F g−1 in highly alkaline conditions (6 M KOH), which is 1.4 times higher that of the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2 composite. The ASC was assembled using H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2 nanowires as the positive electrode and RGO@Fe3O4 nanocomposites on Ni-foam as the negative electrode. The cell delivered a maximum energy density of 45.3 W h kg−1 at a power of 1010 W kg−1. Nonetheless, the cycle life of the asymmetric cell is reported up to 5000 cycles with a promising retention ability of ∼91.8%175 (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  (a) Discharge curves of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC. (b) Cycling performance of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC. (c) Nyquist plots of the first and 5000th cycle for the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC (the inset exhibits high-frequency region Nyquist plots). (d) Ragone plot related to energy and power densities of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC operated at 1.7 V in comparison to the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC, H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/activated carbon ASC, and RGO@Fe3O4/RGO@Fe3O4 (GF/GF) SC (the inset exhibits a small windmill-powered up by an H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC device). Reproduced with permission from ref. 175 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, Feng et al.176 prepared a 3D sponge-like porous structure of Mn2O3 nanosheets grown on the Ni(OH)2–Mn2O3 nanosheet arrays on top of Ni foam and was demonstrated in the quasi-solid state ASC with AC as the counter electrode. The Mn2O3 nanosheets grown on Ni(OH)2–Mn2O3 nanosheets delivered a specific capacitance of 2274 F g−1 and excellent cycling stability over 10000 cycles (∼87% retention) in a single electrode configuration with the liquid electrolyte. In the quasi-solid-state configuration, the cell delivered a maximum energy density of 41.6 W h kg−1 with a marginal reduction in the retention characteristics (∼83%) in the same number of cycles. Earlier, the 3D core–shell Co3O4@Ni(OH)2 nanowire was prepared over Ni-foam, and the ASC cell performances were evaluated at different counter electrodes such as AC and rGO.177 The as-prepared Co3O4@Ni(OH)2 showed a high areal capacitance of 15.83 F cm−2. The as-prepared composite electrode showed a poor cycling profile in a three-electrode system due to the poor adherence of the current collector's active materials, which is evident from the color change. Despite this poor electrochemical activity in the three electrode-setup, the ASC was fabricated under balanced mass loadings with rGO and AC. Interestingly, both the ASC cells displayed more or less the same energy density of ∼41.8 W h kg−1. Unfortunately, limited cycle life was only presented for the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2/rGO-based assembly (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Cycle life test of the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2/rGO asymmetric supercapacitor at a charge–discharge current density of 25 mA cm−2 for 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Regarding the above work, Bai et al.178 studied the performance of the hierarchical binder-free Co3O4@Ni(OH)2 core–shell nanosheet arrays grown over Ni-foam in the solid-state configuration with AC as the negative electrode. The solid-state cell was demonstrated at a cell voltage of 1.7 V in the presence of KOH–PVA as a gel electrolyte. The cell delivered a specific capacitance of 98.4 F g−1 and an energy density of 40 W h kg−1. Importantly, the ASC cell displayed remarkable performance and retained ∼90.5% of its initial specific capacitance after 5000 cycles. Further, the lighting of the LED lamp also demonstrated the use of this fascinating all-solid-state capacitor. The electrodeposition process synthesized a series of layered double hydroxide (LDH), and their electrochemical performances were studied and compared. It was observed that the transition metals in both the individually layered hydroxides (Co(OH)2 and Ni(OH)2) are involved in the redox activity and are clearly evident from the CV curve within the same potential window (0 to 0.6 V vs. SCE). Thus, it will be an added advantage that the LDH will facilitate many active sites, and hence the charge storage capacity will be dramatically increased. Further, this will certainly help to stabilize the active materials during prolonged cell operation. Amongst the LDHs, both Co(OH)2–Ni(OH)2 and Ni(OH)2–Co(OH)2 showed better capacitance than the individual hydroxides179 (Fig. 20). Based on the electrochemical performance in a three-electrode setup, Ni(OH)2–Co(OH)2 and carbon nanofoam paper (CNFP) were used as the positive and the negative electrode, respectively, toward the construction of the ASC. The formulation of a hybrid with Co(OH)2 certainly extended the working potential up to 1.9 V in the ASC, which eventually results in the higher capacity; for example, the specific capacity of 92 and 54C g−1 is observed at a current of 0.18 and 3.5 A g−1, respectively. In addition, the ASC cell still retains 58.7% of its specific capacity when the current rate increased more than 20 times of its initial tested current. Conversely, the CNFP/Ni(OH)2–Co(OH)2-based ASC cell showed a maximum specific energy of 101.3 W h g−1 and 37.8 W h g−1 at specific powers of 0.2 W g−1 and 2.45 W g−1, respectively.179 Despite the very high energy density, the cycle life is very poor and rendered only 63% after 1000 cycles, which is very low retention compared with the other reports discussed here.
 Fig. 20  (a) Cyclic voltammograms at 20 mV s−1 and (b) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at 1 A g−1 of Ni(OH)2, Co(OH)2, Co(OH)2–Ni(OH)2, Ni1/2Co1/2(OH)2, and Ni(OH)2–Co(OH)2 films. Potential windows in the GCD measurements of the hydroxide films were optimized to exclude the less contribution regime to the charge capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Ke et al.180 reported the synthesis of self-supported TiO2@Ni(OH)2 core–shell nanowire arrays on carbon fiber paper via the combination of hydrothermal synthesis and chemical bath deposition. The ASC assembly was fabricated using mesoporous carbon as the negative and TiO2@Ni(OH)2/CFP as the positive electrode. The fabricated cell can work up to 1.8 V and display energy and power densities of 53.54 W h kg−1 and 77.71 W kg−1, respectively. On the other hand, a 3D ZnO@Ni(OH)2 core–shell heterostructure was synthesized via an electrospinning method combined with the hydrothermal approach. ZnO plays a good conductive core, and Ni(OH)2 acts as the high capacitive shell.181 The high conductivity nature of the ZnO substrate could hasten the charge transfer effectively to ensure the attainment of high power density. Further, the ultrathin shells of Ni(OH)2 on the Zn core can expedite ion diffusion and transport by expanding the contact area with the electrolytes. Consequently, the ZnO@Ni(OH)2/porous carbon microfiber-based asymmetric cell was fabricated, and their performance characteristics were evaluated. Ni foam was used as the current collector for the electrodes. The cell voltage was extended to 1.6 V and rendered a maximum energy density of 57.6 W h kg−1. Interestingly, the cell showed a very steady performance up to 2000 cycles with a capacitance retention ability of 94%.
Co-axial fiber-shaped ASC was fabricated using three-dimensionally well-aligned Zn–nickel–cobalt oxide @Ni(OH)2 nanowire arrays on a carbon nanotube fiber (ZNCO@Ni(OH)2 NWAs/CNTF).182 The ZNCO@Ni(OH)2 NWAs/CNTF showed higher areal capacitance (10.678 F cm−2) than the Ni(OH)2/CNTF (2.55 F cm−2) and ZNCO NWAs/CNTF (F cm−2) in the three-electrode assembly. The ASC was assembled using ZNCO@Ni(OH)2 NWAs/CNTF as the positive electrode (inner electrode), and a thin layer of carbon-coated vanadium nitride (VN@C) NWAs on a carbon nanotube strip was used as the negative electrode (outer electrode) with PVA–KOH as the gel electrolyte. The cell delivered a specific capacitance of 573.75 mF cm−2 with an energy density of 204.02 μW h cm−2. Bending experiments were also carried out to ensure the retention of the electrochemical activity (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Electrochemical characterization and flexibility analysis of the as-assembled ASCs. (a) GCD curves collected at different current densities between 0 and 1.6 V. (b) Areal and volumetric specific capacitances calculated from the GCD curves as a function of the current density. (c) GCD curves of the as-assembled ASCs bent at various angles at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (d) Normalized capacitances of our bent 90° for 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
6.2. Ni(OH)2–metal sulphides
Researchers have broadly explored the transition metal hydroxides and oxides for high-performance pseudocapacitors due to their great benefits of low cost, less toxicity, and excellent flexibility in the morphology and structure. Nevertheless, significant methodologies have been developed for three-dimensional conductive nanostructures such as carbonaceous materials to deposit these pseudocapacitive materials, which improved the rate capability and shortened the diffusion pathways for ions and electrons; however, there are a lot of issues that disturb the selection of these backbone materials. For instance, the fabrication of carbon nanomaterials such as graphene could limit their practical applications. Also, the performance of the transition metal oxides such as CoOX in the hybrid materials would hastily decrease with more cycles because of the poor electronic conductivity even though they possess high pseudocapacitance. Similarly, inorganic materials, such as porous Au183 and H–TiO2,184 do not hold a specific capacitance. Therefore, developing the structural hierarchy of these backbone materials with high specific capacitance and good electrical conductivity has been interesting, with high ionic penetrability and specific surface area. Recently, metal sulfides as scaffolds are widely used with pseudocapacitive materials, which could perform as a highly conductive substrate, permit the fast electron/ion transfer effectively, and initiate the active sites rapidly for a higher rate capability.185 Also, apart from the good electrochemical properties, metal sulfides have higher conductivity than their compatible metal hydroxides or oxides due to their narrowband gap.186,187
In a recent study, Zhu and co-workers188 studied the performance of hexagonal prism-such as Co9S8@Ni(OH)2 core–shell nanotubes grown on carbon fibers in ASC configuration. Here, the one-dimensional Co9S8 nanotubes served as an ideal backbone to improve the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets' electrical conductivity and provide a large number of active sites that helped improve the charge storage capacity of the Ni(OH)2. First, a typical CBD process was employed to prepare Co9S8 on the pre-treated carbon fibers, followed by a hydrothermal treatment for sulfide precipitation to attain the nanotube arrays. In the second step, the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were coated on Co9S8 through the electro-deposition process. This formation of Co9S8@Ni(OH)2 core–shell nanotube arrays structure design involves three steps. Briefly, the starting material Co(CO3)0.35·Cl0.20(OH)110·1.74H2O nanoneedle arrays were formed on the carbon fibers when the CoCl2 solution was used in the CBD, and this precursor was transformed into sulfide via an anion exchange reaction using S2− ions in the hydrothermal treatment. Then, the obtained material after the hydrothermal reaction was subjected to calcination under an inert atmosphere, aiding the deposition of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on its conductive scaffold nanotube arrays. It was noted that the optimized composition of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2 electrode showed a high specific capacity of 149 mA h g−1 in 6 M KOH. Impressively, this device can be operated in a high working voltage of 1.8 V, and a further increase in the voltage instigates the significant polarization. Moreover, the specific capacity of 75 mA h g−1 can be achieved for this core–shell electrode of Co9S8@Ni(OH)2. The full-cell with AC showed a maximum energy density of 31.35 W h kg−1 and 97.3% retention of its initial capacity after 5000 cycles. The performance characteristic of the as-fabricated asymmetric cell is shown in Fig. 22. Moreover, this two ASC device has the capacity to power the two red LEDs parallelly for 3 min after connecting it in series if it is charged for 3.2 V, arguing their permanent place in the energy storage market for commercial applications.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the asymmetric supercapacitor configuration adopted by the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2cathode and the AC anode; (b) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2 and the AC electrodes collected at 5 mV s−1 in a three-electrode configuration; (c) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2/AC device collected in different voltage windows; (d) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2/AC device at different scan rates; (e) GCD curves of the ASC device measured at different current densities; (f) variation of the coulombic efficiency of the ASC device during the cycling test. The inset shows the corresponding charge–discharge curves of the first and last 10 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.3. Ni(OH)2–metal selenides
It is imperative to find out the innovative positive and negative electrodes with substantial electrochemical performance to elicit a worthy ASC device. However, the electrode materials being used in the supercapacitors currently, such as carbonaceous materials, conducting polymers, especially transition metal compounds having nanostructures, are receiving prodigious attention because they can store the charge as well afford rich faradaic reactions. These transition metal compounds, including hydroxides, sulfides, and oxides, possess discrimination in good conductivity by increasing the electrodes' charge transfer resistance and sheet resistance. Therefore, discovering a higher conductivity of the ideal electrode materials has become an inevitable issue in the goal of achieving high-performance ASC. Also, it should be noted that the same group elements O, S, and Se in the periodic table express similar electrochemical properties. In particular, Se displays a higher conductivity of 1 × 10−3 S m−1 when S only exhibits a conductivity of 5 × 10−28 S m−1, revealing the greater electroactivity and speedier electrochemical reaction of Se.189,190 Consequently, transition metal selenides have become a great choice for supercapacitors as a faradaic battery-type electrode in recent years due to their intrinsic physicochemical properties such as superior electrical conductivity, various oxidation states, and distinct geometric structures.
Very recently, Kirubasankar et al.191 synthesized a two-dimensional MoSe2–Ni(OH)2 using a one-step hydrothermal process. Here, the authors planned to select β-Ni(OH)2 because its stability in an alkaline medium would help Ni in the redox process with the electrolyte ions to improve the performance. Similarly, among the transition metal diselenides, MoSe2 possesses a layered sandwich structure along with other astonishing features, for instance, larger interlayer spacing (0.65 nm), multiple oxidation states (+2 to +6), small bandgap (1.33–1.72 eV), greater mechanical strength, and most importantly, the electrochemically active unsaturated edges make them shaped as an extra pseudocapacitive behavior electrode. The nanosheet-like morphology was found for this nanohybrid with an average thickness of ∼17 nm, where the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets presented only ∼11.5 nm. However, the MoSe2–Ni(OH)2 exhibited a high specific surface area of 121 m2 g−1 compared to the surface area of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets (72 m2 g−1). The hybrid exhibits a lower capacitance than the metal oxide composites but renders decent performance in the ASC configuration with AC in 6 M KOH. The maximum specific capacitance of 124 F g−1 is observed. The ASC cell showed the maximum energy and power densities of 43 W h kg−1 and 0.817 kW kg, respectively. The cell can work up to 1.6 V with good stability of over 1600 cycles; however, the capacity loss was observed due to the slight increase in the internal resistance. Here, the loss in the capacitance is related to the structure and 85% of the initial capacitance is retained after 5000 cycles. However, this kind of metal diselenides–Ni(OH)2 composite would pave the way of obtaining a high-performance ASC device by pairing with the suitable negative material in different media.
6.4 Ni(OH)2–metal phosphide
In the hybrid-storage materials, transition metal phosphides (MaPb, where M = Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Ni, Co, Cu, and Zn; a = 1 or 2; b = 1, 2, 3, or 4) are anticipated to play major portions as a new interesting class of electrode materials in the improvement of high-performance supercapacitors because of their remarkable properties such as high theoretical specific capacitance, good electrical conductivity, environmentally benign nature, high chemical stability, and great abundance in nature. Remarkably, metal phosphides offer pseudocapacitance as electrode materials, which also act as an electrical conductivity additive, motivating researchers to study the electrochemical properties of these materials by developing the composites, especially with the higher capacitance of transition metal hydroxides as carbonaceous materials such as graphene fail to provide pseudocapacitance to the electrodes. Among these phosphides, cobalt phosphide has a different combination of Co in the structure, in which covalently bonded Co2+ in CoP acquires high capacitance via faradaic reactions after storing the energy, and Co joined by metallic bonds greatly develops the electrical conductivity by providing free electrons that benefit from accomplishing the good rate capability of supercapacitors.163,192
More recently, Fang and co-workers193 successfully synthesized CoP on the carbon cloth first via electrodeposition, followed by vapor phase phosphidation process using sodium hypophosphite at 350 °C for 2 h. Again, the electrodeposition process was carried out to grow Ni(OH)2 on the surface of the CoP nanosheet arrays in a three-electrode system, thereby preparing the porous CoP@Ni(OH)2, thus evading the usage of additives. The two different kinds of combinations of Co in the CoP material have been confirmed through the XPS analysis. As expected, the porous composite exhibited high capacitance (1989 F g−1) compared to CoP (645 F g−1) and Ni(OH)2 (1659 F g−1), which affords upgrading the electrical conductivity and high capacitance of the supercapacitors when the composite is fabricated with AC in an aqueous electrolyte. Unsurprisingly, the ASC extended the working voltage up to 1.8 V with a very good capacitance of 220 and 162.9 F g−1 at current densities of 1 and 20 A g−1, respectively. In addition, the device demonstrated great cycling behavior with 89% of the original capacitance after 4000 cycles at 6 A g−1, which can also be endorsed to the high theoretical capacity of Ni(OH)2 on the CoP that increased the contact with the electrolyte. Also, the energy density can be enhanced to 89.6 W h kg−1 at 0.91 kW kg−1, with a high coulombic efficiency.
6.5 Ni(OH)2–metal doping
Recently, serpent-cactus-like Co-doped Ni(OH)2–Ni3S2 hierarchical structure composed of ultrathin nanosheets were explored for supercapacitor applications.194 It is noted that the half-cell test showed a CV curve of the electrode materials in which the CV curve was recorded from −0.2 to 0.6 V but there was no information about the reference and counter electrodes. Apparently, the high loading of the Co-doped Ni(OH)2–Ni3S2 composite on the Ni foam showed better electrochemical activity in the capacitance and cyclability. A maximum specific capacitance was of about 3023 F g−1 was observed, which is attributed to the ultrathin and open nanoarchitecture, providing a shorter diffusion pathway for charge transfer. An increase in the Co concentration optimizes the complementary effect in the prepared electrode materials. The practical feasibility of such an electrode materials was studied by fabricating the ASC configuration. Co-doped Ni(OH)2–Ni3S2 and AC were used as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The ASC cell showed a maximum energy density of 51.5 W h kg−1 with a decent cycling profile of 89.5% retention after 6000 cycles.194
Recently, the preparation of P-doped Ni(OH)2 over Ni-foams was reported by Li et al.195 From the observation, the P-doped sample showed better areal capacitance, which is mainly attributed to P doping because P doping on Ni(OH)2 enhances the active sites and also improves the conductivity. ASC with AC as the counter electrode rendered the maximum energy density of 81.31 W h kg−1 in the presence of the gel electrolyte PVA–LiOH. Further, the cell can work up to 1.6 V but the cycling stability of this fascinating configuration is given. Lang et al.196 studied the electrochemical performance of α-Ni(OH)2 with Al-substituting. The Al substitution in Ni(OH)2 increased the specific capacitance (2080 F g−1) and enhanced the rate capability in an alkaline electrolyte medium. Further, the Al content is optimized to 7.5% and paired with AC toward the building of the ASC. The obtained specific capacitance is also compared with the AC-based EDLC system. However, the cycle life was limited to 1000 cycles with 18% capacitance attenuation. Despite the 7.5% Al substitution in α-Ni(OH)2, the ASC showed a better electrochemical activity of 42.3 W h kg−1 and is comparable to those of layered structured materials. In order to improve the rate capability, ion transport, and transition metal hydroxides (TMO) and TMO/C interfaces, single-crystalline Ni(OH)2 nanosheets have been vertically aligned on a three-dimensional, bi-continuous nanoporous gold skeleton with epitaxial Au–Ni(OH)2 interfaces (Au–Ni(OH)2).197 As a result of the unique nanoarchitecture, the pseudo-capacitive behavior of Ni(OH)2 dramatically enhances the volumetric capacitance to as high as 2911 F cm3 (2416 F g−1 for the constituent Ni(OH)2) in the Au–Ni(OH)2 electrode with excellent rate capability. Hence, ASC was assembled with Au–Ni(OH)2 as the positive electrode and an AC counter electrode with 1 M KOH as the electrolyte. The ASC exhibits a high gravimetric energy of 31.4 W h kg−1 at an exceptionally high power density of 100 kW kg−1 with excellent cycling stability. Further, the cell Au–Ni(OH)2/AC-based ASC retained 84% of its initial specific capacity after 10000 cycles with a maximum energy of 51.2 W h kg−1.
7. Ni(OH)2–polymers
In the various strategies of preparing a Ni(OH)2 composite electrode for ASC, the development of hybrid materials holding high electrical conductivity with Ni(OH)2 and employing high chemically stable conducting substrates have become an advisable choice to improve the performance as a result of the low electrical conductivity of the Ni(OH)2, displaying only ∼10−15 Ω−1 m−1.198 Accordingly, Ni(OH)2 donates only a small surface for the redox reactions observed, and does not provide accessibility to the electrolyte ions in its more available sites.199 Several attempts have inquired about resolving these downsides affected by the low electrical conductivity, comprising a synthesis of the thin films, porous materials, nanoparticles, and nanosheets to prepare the Ni(OH)2 surface sites for more electrolyte ions transportable.166,200 Besides, the formation of composites with conducting polymer hybrids or carbon materials or the combination of both with Ni(OH)2 could enhance the electrical conductivity by incorporating the effective conductive network, which would be anticipated to provide long cycle life of the ASC. This kind of results has been debated in this section elaborately.
Recently, g-C3N4@Ni(OH)2 honeycomb nanostructure was developed, and its electrochemical supercapacitor performances were studied in 6 M KOH aqueous alkaline electrolyte.201 A class of 1.3 V g-C3N4@Ni(OH)2/rGO-based ASC on Ni-foam was fabricated using the optimized characteristics from the three-electrode system configuration. Here, g-C3N4, a soft polymer having good chemical stability and well-crystallized materials with lamellar structure favor charge transfer along the horizontal direction. This further supports perpendicular charge-transporting direction in the charge–discharge process, facilitating electron transportation along that direction.202–204 An ASC exhibited a maximum cell capacitance of 51 F g−1 and with capacitance retention of 72% after 8000 cycles. Moreover, the high energy density of 43.1 W h kg−1 was realized, which clearly reveals that the inclusion of g-C3N4 is one of the effective approaches to build high-performance supercapacitors.
7.1 Ni(OH)2–polymer–carbon
In the same way, the conductive adhesives of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF)–acetylene black (AB) were engaged to formulate the positive electrode material of MnO2–Ni(OH)2 by covering the NF plates through a seed-induced method for an ASC. At first, the PVdF–AB slurry was placed on the NF via a dip-coating, then the 3D ridge-like structure was obtained with MnO2–Ni(OH)2 after one-step hydrothermal treatment. For comparison, they synthesized the composite without PVdF–AB to know the influence of the conductive adhesives, and MnO2–NF@AB was also synthesized with the elimination of Ni. Here, the PVdF–AB seed layer played a crucial role in the high quantity growth of the hybrid nanostructures. Also, it was understood that the combination of Ni and PVdF–AB could increase the binding force between the MnO2–Ni(OH)2 nanosheets and the low contact resistance of NF so that the hybrid materials might utilize the 3D NF surface to grow the MnO2-based active material by delivering more active sites. Thus, the obtained composite paired the commercial AC as the negative electrode, demonstrated the CV curves without any shape changes with higher sweep rates at 1.6 V, and broadcasted good capacitive behavior.
Similarly, the other two materials mentioned earlier were also evaluated for ASC by joining the same kind of AC. The areal capacitance of this device was estimated to be ∼5.99 F cm−2, which was higher than that of the other two materials. The high areal capacitance than the other two materials was mainly ascribed to the high specific area of the MnO2–NF@AB (111 m2 g−1), and their 3D ridge-like structure offered the larger sheet as a skeleton for electron transport by granting more pathways. Interestingly, the device could retain 86% capacitance after 10000 cycles even in 1 M KOH, which revealed long cycling performance with a high energy density of 37.2 W h kg−1 (Fig. 23).205
 Fig. 23  (a) Nyquist impedance plots of the three ASCs (inset of the equivalent circuit model); (b) the cycling stability of the M–NF/AB ASC, MN–NF ASC, and MN–NF/AB ASC; (c) the cycling stability with increasing current density; (d) Ragone plots of the as-assembled M–NF/AB ASC, MN–NF ASC, and MN–NF/AB ASC, and the inset is the digital photos of the lightened LEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
To improve the conductivity and the cycle life of the Ni(OH)2, ternary matrix composed of multi-walled carbon nanotubes-amorphous Ni(OH)2-(poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate)) (MWCNT-amor-Ni(OH)2-PEDOT:PSS) were synthesized and studied with the rGO–CNT composite as the counter electrode over the carbon cloth current collector.206 The composite prepared exhibits a very high specific capacitance of 3262 F g−1, in which PEDOT:PSS and MWCNT contributed about 3.8 and 5.2%, respectively. Further, the obtained value is slightly higher than that of the prepared MWCNT–Ni(OH)2 composite (3111 F g−1). In addition to the high specific capacitance, MWCNT-amor-Ni(OH)2-PEDOT:PSS has shown high coulombic efficiencies of nearly 100%, with the capacitance retention of 77% after 30000 cycles. So far, this is the maximum value of stability reported for the Ni(OH)2-based system regardless of the approaches utilized to improvize the cycling profile. This indicates that a large fraction of the redox reactions occurred on the surface or near-surface region of amor-Ni(OH)2. In the ASC (MWCNT-amor-Ni(OH)2-PEDOT: PSS/rGO–CNT), only 5.5% of the specific capacitance was retrieved from the obtained specific capacitance, which is extracted from the three-electrode system.206
Interestingly, the ASC showed better cycle life than the three-electrode system, which indicates here that its positive electrode, rGO–CNT, mainly complements the cycling performance of the ASC. Also, the usage of a much larger volume of the aqueous electrolyte solution compared to the two-electrode ASC is also possible for the inferior performance in the three-electrode configuration. When the electrodes are immersed into a larger electrolyte volume, the irreversible dissolution of the active materials into the electrolyte is more likely to happen because of the fast mass transfer. Further, the three-electrode cell test was conducted in an open system where the electrode materials are exposed to the oxygen dissolved in the electrolyte from the air. Further, a drastic decrease in the capacitance was observed up to 3000 cycles, and routine behavior was observed in almost all the reports. However, the cell managed to deliver more than 80% of its initial capacitance even after 30000 cycles206 (Fig. 24). It was noted that the specific energy density of the ASC cell is 58.5 W h kg−1 with an average cell voltage of 1.5 V.
 Fig. 24  30000 charge and discharge cycles in 1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte at 10 A g−1 galvanostatic charge–discharge current with a potential range of 0–1.5 V. The insets show the first and last ten cycles of charge/discharge profiles during the test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
7.2 Ni(OH)2–polymer–metal oxide
Yang et al.207 synthesized porous NiO–Ni(OH)2 composite-PEDOT nanoflowers on Cu–Ni alloy with Ni content from 1 to 44%. ASC was fabricated in the all-solid-state configuration using the ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) as the negative electrode and PVA–KOH as the gel electrolyte. The high specific capacitance of 31.6 mF cm−2 and a high specific energy density of 0.011 mW h cm−2 were obtained for such a flexible fiber-shaped system. Here, the all-solid-state ASC assembly showed an increase in the capacitance trend upon the demonstrated 1400 cycles. Hao et al.208 prepared the polypyrrole-Ni(OH)2-sulfonated graphene oxide (PPy-Ni(OH)2-SGO) ternary composite through a hydrothermal and chemical oxidative polymerization process. Here, both PPy and Ni(OH)2 mainly act as an active material to participate in the electrochemical redox process with proton diffusion,209,210 and the highly conductive SGO with a high surface area mainly serves as a current collector to provide quasi-reversible redox reactions. In an ASC assembly, the prepared composite is used as the positive and AC is used as the negative electrode over Ni foam. A maximum specific capacitance of 224 F g−1 was observed from the three-electrode system. The cycling stability of the P–N–S/AC-based ASC cell retains 60% initial capacitance after 5000 cycles. The phase change mainly causes capacitance decay from α-Ni(OH)2 to β-Ni(OH)2 transition or crystal size growth of the electrode during fast charging and discharging for the first 2000 cycles.68,211 The specific capacitance of the composite electrode increases slightly in the first 3000 cycles. This can be attributed to electrolyte impregnation, which is caused by the increased efficiency or slower participation of the active material in the electrochemical reaction. Among the approaches, conducting polymer, sulfonated GO-covered Ni(OH)2 nanocomposites showed much improved performance than the other techniques such as AC and metal oxide-based core–shell composites. This enhanced performance is mainly attributed to the prevention of the Ni-ions into the electrolyte, and the polymer-wrapped on the Ni(OH)2 surface also preserves the structural degradation of the metal hydroxides. As a result, the ternary composite showed improved cycle performance and rate capability regardless of single or ASC. Further, the synergistic effect between the SGO and pseudocapacitive materials with conducting polymer can be obtained with relatively high specific surface area, high conductivity, and high specific capacitance, thereby improving the energy density, power density, rate capability, and cycle number of ASC, is worth mentioning.212–217
8. Full-redox system
The design of the alternate combination of positive and negative electrodes may possibly explore the high energy density ASC by means of increasing their capacity, along with extending the operating potential window. As discussed above, most studies reviewed the ASC using metal oxides or polymers as the battery-type faradaic positive electrode and high surface area carbonaceous materials as the capacitor-type negative electrode mostly in the configuration to increase the capacity energy density of the full device. However, the outcome of low capacitance from carbon materials restricts the high energy density of a device that makes them inadequate in meeting the demand of high energy and high power ASC. To motivate, the energy density limit of the ASC, new types of negative electrodes are needed in the combination of high capacitance and good conductivity to replace the low capacitance of the EDLC electrodes.33 Keeping this in mind, the higher energy density of the new negative electrodes such as Fe2O3,218 MoO3−x,219 and VN,220 which can work in a negative potential, has been examined with other positive electrodes Ni(OH)2, MnO2,221 and Co3O4.222 In this combination, both electrodes undergo redox reactions which offer more fast surface rich redox reactions to store the charge and represent a positive approach to improve the total energy density of the ASC, which is similar to that of conventional rechargeable batteries charge-storage mechanism.223,224
8.1 Ni(OH)2vs. α-Fe2O3
The convenient voltage window and good theoretical specific capacity in negative potential make iron oxide electrodes a promising anode in ASC besides their low cost, more abundancec, non-toxicity, and chemical stability.218,225–233
Also, this n-type semiconductor (Fe2O3) offers pseudocapacitance in alkaline electrolytes by delivering a capacitance of ∼500 F g−1, making a high-performance ASC using other pseudocapacitive Ni(OH)2.235,236 Zhang and co-workers234 have prepared this ASC by combining the positive ZnO@TiO2@Ni(OH)2 electrode and the negative ZnO@Fe2O3 electrode in 6 M KOH. Using a low-temperature method, ZnO was coated on the carbon cloth first. Subsequently, the deposition of TiO2 was carried out on the surface of the ZnO nanowires via an atomic layer deposition system. The resultant material TiO2-coated ZnO2 further allowed the growth of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on their surface in hydrothermal treatment at 120 °C for 4 h to yield the core–shell positive electrode. Simultaneously, the negative electrode was prepared by immersing the ZnO nanowires in Fe solution at room temperature, followed by annealing (Fig. 25a). The obtained structure of the materials was confirmed by TEM analysis and it was found that the diameter of ZnO nanowires was about 250–350 nm, surrounded by a shell of Ni(OH)2. The different potential windows of positive and negative electrodes allowed to cover the working voltage up to 1.6 V, which can be seen from Fig. 25b–d. Further, the high capacitive of ZnO@TiO2@Ni(OH)2 electrode with the combination of ZnO@Fe2O3 delivered the extreme specific capacitance of 146.8 F g−1 and a maximum energy density of 52.2 W h kg−1. In this case, the carbon textile was used as a current collector for both the electrodes. The cell showed an excellent capacity retention ability of 96.6% after 5000 cycles.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled asymmetric supercapacitor device in 6 M KOH electrolyte. (b and c) Comparative CV curves of ZnO@TiO2@Ni(OH)2 and ZnO@Fe2O3 tested in a three-electrode system in 6 M KOH electrolyte. (d) CV curves of the asymmetric supercapacitors by varying the scan rate from 10 mV s−1 to 80 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8.2 Ni(OH)2vs. γ-Fe2O3
Generally, Fe2O3 exists as two polymorphs, viz., maghemite, which occurs naturally in soils, and the α-Fe2O3 ore termed as hematite. The cubic γ-Fe2O3 named maghemite has an inverse spinel structure with 21 Fe3+ ions, 32 O2− ions, and 2 1/3 vacancies in each unit cell and several oxidation states certify the evaluation with Ni(OH)2 to exhibit the capacitance completely.237–240 As a result, the combination using hierarchical β-Ni(OH)2 nanostructures as the positive electrode and the commercial γ-Fe2O3 nano-hexagons effectively resulted in an ASC device with an aqueous KOH electrolyte. The obtained β-Ni(OH)2 from the chemical precipitation process showed nanorod/sheet-like structures in the length of ∼20 nm and width of ∼5 nm. The sole performance of β-Ni(OH)2 has been tested and found to be 2178 F g−1 at 11 mA cm−2 thanks to the high specific surface area (181.95 m2 g−1). Correspondingly, the commercial γ-Fe2O3 unveiled a superb specific capacitance of 1800 F g−1 at a high current density of 13 mA cm−2. Also, both the electrodes demonstrated non-linear behavior in the GCD curves, signifying the pseudocapacitive nature. Also, its admirable capacitive performance was confirmed by 279.25 F g−1 at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. The high energy density of this ASC was recorded to be 99.28 W h kg−1 with retention up to 89.3% of its initial capacitance at a stable current density of 15 mA cm−2 after 5000 cycles.241 This outstanding electrochemical property might be related to the fast and proficient ion pathways resulting from the great surface area of β-Ni(OH)2 and acquired favorable reaction kinetics.
8.3 Ni(OH)2vs. RuO2
RuO2 has marked its name as the first electrode material to exhibit pseudocapacitive behavior, introducing a new type of electrochemical capacitor in 1971 by involving faradaic processes. Since its discovery, RuO2 have been employed as a positive electrode for an ASC on account of its high theoretical capacity (1358 F g−1), low internal resistance, and high electrical conductivity (3 × 102 Ω−1 cm−1). However, the high cost of RuO2 hampers its large-scale applications even after its approval as a perfect pseudocapacitive material for an ASC.242–246 Hence, researchers have endeavored to produce RuO2 hybrids with other pseudocapacitive materials or carbon that decrease the quantity of high-cost RuO2 and uphold high capacitance simultaneously. Dai and co-workers247 coupled the pseudocapacitive materials Ni(OH)2 and RuO2 to assemble the ASC device in a 1.5 V window. Chemically exfoliated graphene assisted in adorning the single-crystalline hexagonal Ni(OH)2 nano-plates on their nanosheets first via a two-step solution-phase method, which also aided to control the nano-crystalline morphology of Ni(OH)2 that brought up good stability during the cycling process. Further, RuO2–graphene was prepared using the same approach where RuO2 nanoparticles were decorated in <10 nm on graphene nanosheets. The combination of Ni(OH)2–graphene and RuO2–graphene resulted in a high specific capacitance of ∼160 F g−1 in 1 M KOH. Even though a high current density (20 A g−1) was obtained, a handy ∼97 F g−1 was gained mainly due to the discrete properties of electrode materials that contain high theoretical capacitance. Still, the assembled ASC device showed capacitance retention of ∼92% after ∼5000 cycles. Most importantly, this ASC device demonstrated a high energy density of ∼48 W h kg−1 at a power of ∼0.23 kW kg−1.
9. Outlook
For the past few years, Ni(OH)2 has fascinated much more attention due to its proficient high storage capacity and electrochemical catalytic activity toward ORR and OER applications. In this review, the performance of Ni(OH)2 as an energy storage material in the aqueous asymmetric capacitor was examined. A large number of studies focused on this material as a positive electrode due to its high theoretical capacity. Most of the studies are mainly dedicated to aqueous battery application as a positive electrode due to the active potential window of Ni(OH)2. There are various phase structures such as α, β, and γ-Ni(OH)2 phases, which present different characteristics. At the same time, various morphologies such as nanoflower, nanosheets, nanospheres, nanowires, nanoparticles, etc., of α and β-Ni(OH)2-based materials were synthesized and characterized. All the reported morphologies exhibited excellent electrochemical storage behavior than the other metal hydroxides. Since it has a layered structure, the accumulation of charge carriers showed a potential plateau region at a potential window of 0.3 V with high experimental capacitance.
We have comprehensively analyzed the combination of Ni(OH)2 with various materials, including carbon-based nanomaterials, metal oxides, conductive polymers, phosphides, sulfides, and selenides. Primary and binary metal oxides such as Mn2O3, Co3O4, ZnCo2O4, and MnCo2O4 have presented reasonable capacitance as the positive electrode when combined with Ni(OH)2 as the poor electrical conductivity despoils their power density and cycle life. Conductive polymers hold extra advantages of greater conductivity, flexibility, and ease of handling but the composite undergoes volume expansion/shrinking in the course of the charge–discharge processes, which curtails their cycle stability. Carbonaceous materials such as graphene, CNTs, and biomass-derived carbons offer outstanding opportunities due to their distinct properties and structures. The unusual integrated combination in graphene-based materials, viz., electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties, creates more expectations to offer excellent benefits from this nanostructured material, forcing the CNTs in more applications. CNTs have also enticed more with Ni(OH)2 owing to their high electrical conductivity and rapid ion-transport advantages; however, the high processing cost of purification impedes their commercial applications. Both sp2 bonded carbon materials graphene and CNTs face stacking/aggregation issues but can be rectified. Besides, the easy availability, low cost, flexibility in synthesis, and environmental friendliness of biomass-derived carbon captivates their combination with Ni(OH)2, and it has to be developed and explored well. Furthermore, oxides and sulfides have increased the charge transfer resistance while phosphides and selenides present good capacitance and energy density when combined with Ni(OH)2 separately.
Although it exhibits battery-type behavior, most studies have reported the specific capacitance value in the F g−1 unit. Since capacitance is voltage-dependent, it may not be advisable to estimate and report the specific capacitances for such faradaic-type materials. Instead of calculating the specific capacitances, it is much more meaningful and reasonable to estimate the value as “capacity” for the Ni(OH)2 based systems, particularly in three-electrode systems.248 The performance concluded that Ni(OH)2 possesses battery-type faradaic behavior from the CV and galvanostatic studies. However, the charge-storage process in pseudocapacitance occurs from the faradaic mechanism for the electrode, in which the electrochemical behavior reveals a capacitive nature. It is well-understood that charge storage is linearly dependent on the charging potential, which implies the definition of capacitance, also known by dQ/dV.
Consequently, Ni(OH)2 should not be considered as a pseudocapacitive electrode, and the quantity of charge-storage capacities of Ni(OH)2 has to be evaluated in terms of mAh g−1 or C g−1 unit as their electrochemical behavior does not exhibit the capacitance characteristics because of the faradaic charge-storage mechanism and the phase transitions. Fortunately, none of the reports has focused on this point; we forced this here because the layered structural materials may collapse when tested at high current rate. Since the electrochemical capacitors are power-dependent devices, this may not be suitable for high-power applications in practice due to their poor rate capability. This can be improved by preparing a composite with metal oxides and carbonaceous materials before using the high current rate. At the same time, it will be a potential candidate as a positive electrode for higher energy applications due to its high energy density.
On the other hand, poor stability is another prime issue though it delivers high energy to the full device. Many of the studies presented only a limited number of cycles, indicating the poor cycle life of these materials at the high current rate. The cycle life may be increased without altering the structure if it is rated at a low current. Few attempts assist in improving the cycle life of Ni(OH)2; in particular, metal ion-doped composites exhibited better stability. Among these, limited metal dopants such as Ti, Al, and Si are specifically encouraged to use as dopants to enhance the Ni(OH)2 performance. Although several attempts have been made, still the performance of the Ni(OH)2-based ASC is far away from practical applications in terms of cyclability and energy density. There are many reasons such as high ESR, poor rate capability, and cycle life, which restricts their utilization the commercial level. Undoubtedly, one can achieve or overcome these issues; Ni(OH)2 will be a potential positive electrode in electrochemical energy storage applications, particularly in hybrid devices. Thus, we conclude that Ni(OH)2 can be used as a positive electrode in any hybrid device (specifically aqueous) for extracting more energy rather than power.
Out of all the specific factors related to Ni(OH)2, the overall supercapacitor performance is based not only on the specific electrode but also on the fabrication devices and other materials related to the cell performance. For example, most of the lab-scale techniques could not be adopted during the scaling-up process, such as using a binder in the electrode preparation will increase the ESR, and the active materials will easily peel from the substrate upon the degradation of polymer binders. Hence, electrode preparation will play a crucial role in the device's performance. As mentioned, the choice of the electrolyte is also a critical part; this should have high ionic conductivity, wide thermal and electrochemical stability, and inherent safety. In this view, aqueous electrolytes will be the best choice, including the reasons behind the high toxicity of organic electrolytes thought they guarantee a wider operating voltage but also incompatibility of some pseudocapacitive materials with ionic liquids or organic electrolytes. On the other hand, the electrolyte with a pH closer to neutral or neutral will strictly increase the ESR due to the poor conductivity of the electrolyte. Thus, from our observation, Ni(OH)2 exhibits compatibility with an alkaline medium, particularly KOH.
Ni(OH)2 has also been synthesized using electrochemical methods and used as a binder-free electrode in supercapacitor applications. Ni foam is mostly used as a growth substrate for good adhesion and used as a current collector to increase the electrical conductivity; this may be a good option for the time being; however, stability and scalability are questionable while running the cell for a long time. In addition, the high cost of the Ni foam restricts their practical applications; other low-cost substrates such as Al or stainless steel might be a replacement for the fabrication of supercapacitors. Although the recent development of cable/fiber-type energy storage is attractive in terms of the lightweight and good flexibility, they are expected to accommodate more in modern flexible/miniaturized and wearable applications such as electronic skins, flexible mobile phones textiles/fabrics, and on-body sensors, which could pave the way to avoid the metal substrates that tend to increase the weight of the device and show limited flexibility. Hence, electrochemically synthesized electrode materials may not be the right choice for high-end high power applications, and achieving a large capacitance value is also practically impossible due to the experimental limitations.
As discussed above, in diverse applications ranging from electric vehicles to consumer appliances, supercapacitors can influence in providing the demand energy and power density for these applications. At present, supercapacitors having a lower energy density (5–10 W h kg−1) perform a supportive role in some of these applications. However, the recent research progress affords high energy supercapacitors in the range of ∼40–100 W h kg−1, which encouragingly builds the platform for the next choice in energy-storage systems. Though it is especially important to note that the above results are contradictory to each other, investigation is the main drawback here, and still, a huge challenge to conclude the performance of devices as some of the studies have conveyed the capacitance based on the total mass of the active materials and remaining calculated from the total cell of the device. We strongly recommend here to follow the consistency in the calculation of specific capacitance that supports the comparison of the performance of various studies, faciliates the easy categorization based on the devices, and helps to design new electrode materials for an ASC. By considering all these arguments mentioned above in mind, the new ideas for the proper combination of electrode materials have to be constructed to improve the energy density and overall electrochemical performance. In addition, more research activities also must be kept ongoing for the possibility of rolling them out in the industry with high device performance as well. Thus, developing a next-generation supercapacitor with a suitable combination would efficiently store the energy and supply uninterruptible power for a sustainable earth.
Abbreviations

ABAcetylene black
ACActivated carbon
ACMTsAcid treated carbon microtubes
AFMAtomic force microscopy
ASCAsymmetric supercapacitor
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
BPBlack pearls
ACNAcetonitrile
CBDChemical bath deposition
CCCurrent collector
CFGCarbon fiber paper
CFYCarbon fiber yarns
CTABCetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVCyclic voltammetry
CMK-5Ordered mesoporous carbon
CNTCarbon nanotubes
CNFPCarbon nanofoam paper
CNTFCarbon nanotube fiber
CVDChemical vapor deposition
HR-TEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy
ECFElectro-etched carbon fiber
EDLCElectric double layer capacitor
EGExpanded graphite
ESREquivalent series resistance
EVElectric vehicles
GNGraphene hydrogel
g-C3N4Graphitic carbon nitride
GCDGalvanostatic charge–discharge
ITO-PETIndium tin oxide polyethylene terephthalate
IR-dropOhmic resistance
KOHPotassium hydroxide
LDHLayered double hydroxides
LEDLight emitting diode
LIBLithium-ion battery
MWCNTMultiwalled carbon nanotubes
NWAsNanowire arrays
NFNickel foam
NfNafion
Ni-MHNickel–metal hydride
mmMillimeter
nmNanometer
Ni–Cdnickel–cadmium
OMCOrdered mesoporous carbon
o-CNTOxidized carbon nanotube
PAAKPotassium poly(acrylate)
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PPyPolypyrrole
PSSPolystyrene sulfonate
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PVdFPolyvinylidene fluoride
PQPhenanthrenequinone
rGOReduced graphene oxide
SGOSulfonated graphene oxide
TMOTransition metal hydroxides
UGFUltra-thin graphite foam
v-GNsVertically oriented graphene nanosheets
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
Vulcan XC-72Carbon black
C2H4Ethylene
Co3O4Cobalt(II, III) oxide
CoCl2Cobalt chloride
CoOXCobalt oxide
CoOOHCobalt oxy hydroxide
Co(OH)2Cobalt hydroxide
Co9S8Cobalt sulphide
CoPCobalt phosphide
Fe2O3Iron(III) oxide
FeOOHIron oxyhydroxide
H2SO4Sulphuric acid
RuO2Ruthenium oxide
MnO2Manganese(IV) oxide
Mn2O3Manganese(III) oxide
MoSe2Molybdenum selenide
MnCo2O4Manganese cobalt oxide
Na2SO4Sodium sulphate
LiOHLithium hydroxide
NaOHSodium hydroxide
Ni(OH)2Nickel hydroxide
NiOOHNickel oxyhydroxide
Ni(NO3)2Nickel nitrate
Ni3S2Nickel sulphide
TiO2Titanium oxide
ZnOZinc oxide
ZnCo2O4Zinc cobalt oxide
A g−1Ampere per gram
mA h g−1Milli ampere hour per gram
kW kg−1Kilowatt per kilogram
W h kg−1Watt-hour per kilogram
W kg−1Watt per kilogram
VVoltage
sSeconds
F cm−3Farad per cubic centimeter
F cm−2Farad per square centimeter
F g−1Farad per gram
cm2 Ω−1 mol−1Square meter per ohm per mole
m2 g−1Meter square per gram
mF cm−2Millifarad per square centimeter
mV s−1Millivolt per second
mW cm−3Milliwatt per cubic centimeter
mW h cm−3Milliwatt hour per cubic centimeter
mW cm−2Milliwatt per square centimeter
mA cm−2Milliampere per square centimeter
S cm−1Siemen per centimeter
Ω cmOhm centimeter
μmMicrometer
μFMicrofarad

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
MU and VA thank the financial support from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), a statutory body of the Department of Science & Technology (DST), Govt. of India through Ramanujan Fellowship (SB/S2/RJN-082/2016 and SB/S2/RJN-088/2016). VA also acknowledges financial support from the DST through Swarnajayanti Fellowship (DST/SJF/PSA-02/2019-20).
References

          http://www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/electricity-consumption-to-increase-to-over-30-116-b-kwh-globally-in-2030-2009-04-17
        .
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854–7863 RSC .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3518–3539 RSC .
J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 155–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novák, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Soloveichik, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 503–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.economist.com/babbage/2013/01/28/difference-engine-an-innovation-too-far
        .

          https://money.cnn.com/2013/11/07/autos/tesla-fire/
        .
J. B. Goodenough, H. Y. Lee and V. Manivannan, MRS Proceedings, 2011, 548, 655 CrossRef .
R. A. Huggins, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 134, 179–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Proceedings of the IEEE, 2012, 100, 1518–1534 CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.slideshare.net/ResearchIndia/super-capacitor-buses-in-shanghai-5156990
        .

          https://www.newscientist.com/article/2162193-cars-that-run-on-supercapacitors-could-be-charged-in-minutes/
        .

          https://www.power-technology.com/features/featureelectric-vehicles-putting-the-super-in-supercapacitor-5714209/
        .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. Simon, P.-L. Taberna and F. Béguin, in Supercapacitors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 131–165,  DOI:10.1002/9783527646661.ch4 .

          E. Frackowiak, in Supercapacitors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 207–237,  DOI:10.1002/9783527646661.ch6 .

          T. Brousse, D. Bélanger and D. Guay, in Supercapacitors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 257–288,  DOI:10.1002/9783527646661.ch8 .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Mak, G. Wee, V. Aravindan, N. Gupta, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Madhavi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1481–A1488 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cericola and R. Kötz, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 72, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kötz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Young, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Kim, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3546–3558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rajkumar, C.-T. Hsu, T.-H. Wu, M.-G. Chen and C.-C. Hu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2015, 25, 527–544 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Y. Lu, H. Zheng and X. Lu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 3639–3649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Pinero and F. Beguin, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697–1721 RSC .
S. Sarangapani, B. V. Tilak and C. P. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3791–3799 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
S. Natarajan and V. Aravindan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802303 CrossRef .
D. S. Hall, D. J. Lockwood, C. Bock and B. R. MacDougall, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2015, 471, 20140792 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .
K. Naoi, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 825–833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, J.-i. Miyamoto and W. Naoi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9363–9373 RSC .

          K. Naoi and Y. Nagano, in Supercapacitors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 239–256,  DOI:10.1002/9783527646661.ch7 .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J.-i. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Choudhary, C. Li, J. Moore, N. Nagaiah, L. Zhai, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605336 CrossRef .
K. Naoi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, J. Xie and Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1705107 CrossRef .
S. R. Gowda, A. Leela Mohana Reddy, X. Zhan, H. R. Jafry and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1198–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mu, Q. Wen, G. Ou, Y. Du, P. He, M. Zhong, H. Zhu, H. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Li, X. Zhang and H. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4027–4054 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Yang, K. Y. Song and S. K. Joo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19648–19652 RSC .
P. Taheri, S. Hsieh and M. Bahrami, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6525–6533 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Holm, Electric Contacts: Theory and Application,  2000 Search PubMed .
A. Zharbossyn, A. Mukanova, A. Nurpeissova, A. Urazbayev, S.-S. Kim and Z. Bakenov, Eurasian Chem.-Technol. J., 2017, 186 Search PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. k. Thangavel, K. Mahankali, Y. Ding and L. Arava, ECS Meeting Abstracts, 2018, 148 Search PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136–7141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
D. Jiménez-Cordero, F. Heras, M. A. Gilarranz and E. Raymundo-Piñero, Carbon, 2014, 71, 127–138 CrossRef .
H. Wu, X. Wang, L. Jiang, C. Wu, Q. Zhao, X. Liu, B. a. Hu and L. Yi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Jiang, H. Wu, C. Wu and J. Su, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, X. Li, M. Bai, H. Wang, D. Xue, W. Wang and J. Cheng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2124–2130 RSC .
Q. Qu, P. Zhang, B. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Tian, Y. Wu and R. Holze, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14020–14027 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Reddy and R. G. Reddy, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
U. M. Patil, R. R. Salunkhe, K. V. Gurav and C. D. Lokhande, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 2603–2607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J.-W. Tian Ying, R. Xue and Y. I. Bao-Lian, Wuli Huaxue Xuebao, 2011, 27, 479–485 Search PubMed .
L. Soserov, T. Boyadzhieva, V. Koleva, C. Girginov, A. Stoyanova and R. Stoyanova, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6693–6698 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bode, K. Dehmelt and J. Witte, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS .
P. Oliva, J. Leonardi, J. F. Laurent, C. Delmas, J. J. Braconnier, M. Figlarz, F. Fievet and A. d. Guibert, J. Power Sources, 1982, 8, 229–255 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jeevanandam, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 263–266 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, C. Li and H. Gong, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6977–6981 CrossRef CAS .
G.-X. Tong, F.-T. Liu, W.-H. Wu, J.-P. Shen, X. Hu and Y. Liang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5963–5973 RSC .
D. Yang, R. Wang, M. He, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7654–7658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Van der Ven, D. Morgan, Y. S. Meng and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A210–A215 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Corrigan and S. L. Knight, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 613–619 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Young, L. Wang, S. Yan, X. Liao, T. Meng, H. Shen and W. Mays, Batteries, 2017, 3, 6 CrossRef .
C. Delmas, J. J. Braconnier, Y. Borthomieu and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 741–751 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, J. J. Braconnier, Y. Borthomieu and M. Figlarz, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28–30, 1132–1137 CrossRef .
S. Nohara, T. Asahina, H. Wada, N. Furukawa, H. Inoue, N. Sugoh, H. Iwasaki and C. Iwakura, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Li, M. H. Yu, F. X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, C. X. Wang, Y. X. Tong and G. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Su, K. Xiao, N. Li, Z.-Q. Liu and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13845–13853 RSC .
W. Sun, X. Rui, M. Ulaganathan, S. Madhavi and Q. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, B. Guan, Y. Li, D. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Hu, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 737, 238–247 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsu, C.-C. Hu, T.-H. Wu, J.-C. Chen and M. Rajkumar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 759–768 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, X. Chu, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, H. Su, L. Jin, Z. Wang, H. Huang and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, J. Yan, L. Huang, R. Xue, L. Hao and B. Yi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 143, 1164–1170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, P. Xu, D. Cao, X. Zhou, S. Yang, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Zhao, N. Jiang, A. Liu, L. Gao, Y. Li, H. Wang and T. Ma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A882–A890 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Senthilkumar and R. Kalai Selvan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15692–15698 RSC .
S. R. Ede, S. Anantharaj, K. T. Kumaran, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 5898–5911 RSC .
S. Xu, X. Li, Z. Yang, T. Wang, W. Jiang, C. Yang, S. Wang, N. Hu, H. Wei and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27868–27876 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Kim, J.-H. Kang, S.-W. Kim and J.-H. Jang, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 639–646 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Feng, S.-H. Ye, X.-F. Lu, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11444–11451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, Z. Guo, Y. Song, M. Hou, J. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3405–3412 CrossRef CAS .
K.-N. Kang, I.-H. Kim, A. Ramadoss, S.-I. Kim, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 719–727 RSC .
A. Le Comte, T. Brousse and D. Bélanger, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 702–710 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, F. Musharavati, J. Sun, F. Jaber, E. Zalnezhad, K. N. Hui and K. S. Hui, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A407–A415 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, J. Wang, L. Niu, J. Sun, P. Gong and S. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 608, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Z. Hu, X. Shao, P. Cheng, S. Li, W. Yu, W. Lin and D. Yuan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Wang, C. An, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16480–16488 RSC .
J. Li, S. Xiong, X. Li and Y. Qian, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2045–2054 RSC .
S. Liu, S. C. Lee, U. Patil, I. Shackery, S. Kang, K. Zhang, J. H. Park, K. Y. Chung and S. Chan Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1043–1049 RSC .
X. L. Guo, X. Y. Liu, X. D. Hao, S. J. Zhu, F. Dong, Z. Q. Wen and Y. X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 194, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
K. Byungwoo, C. Haegeun and K. Woong, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 155401 CrossRef .
M. Xie, S. Duan, Y. Shen, K. Fang, Y. Wang, M. Lin and X. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 814–819 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande and R. Holze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2446–2454 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gryglewicz, J. Machnikowski, E. Lorenc-Grabowska, G. Lota and E. Frackowiak, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vix-Guterl, E. Frackowiak, K. Jurewicz, M. Friebe, J. Parmentier and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1774–1785 RSC .
G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1592–1605 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Terrones, C. R. Park, R. Mukherjee, M. Monthioux, N. Koratkar, Y. S. Kim, R. Hurt, E. Frackowiak, T. Enoki, Y. Chen, Y. Chen and A. Bianco, Carbon, 2016, 98, 708–732 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inagaki, H. Konno and O. Tanaike, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7880–7903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 1110–1121 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983–5992 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, W. Sun, G. Ning, T. Wei, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2632–2641 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, M. Y. Zhu, R. A. Outlaw, X. Zhao, D. M. Manos, B. C. Holloway and V. P. Mammana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1265–1267 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bo, Y. Yang, J. Chen, K. Yu, J. Yan and K. Cen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5180–5204 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Zhao and W. Zheng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 52, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Zhou, D. Zhao, M. Hou, C. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A98–A104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Liu, F. Chen, H. Wan, Y. Lin, N. Zhang and R. Ma, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1496–1505 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, S. Tang, D. Li, S. Vongehr and X. Meng, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2301–2308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, X. Huang and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 712, 194–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Wang and X. Yan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11095 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bai, H. Yan, Q. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Li, X. Bai, R. Li and J. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 204, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Ma, B. Song and H. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 821–827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Song, W. Liu and L. Yan, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2428–2435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Zhou and L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8621–8630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shen, H. Zhang, S. Zhang and L. Fei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 460, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Zhang, H.-H. Li, C.-Y. Fan, K. Wang, X.-L. Wu, H.-Z. Sun and J.-P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19077–19084 RSC .
J. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Acs Nano, 2013, 7, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qu, S. Tang, X. Qin, J. Yuan, Y. Deng, L. Wu, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 728, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, S. Tang, Z. Zhu, X. Qin, R. Qu, Y. Deng, L. Wu, J. Li and G. M. Haarberg, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18022–18030 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638–654 RSC .
H. Pan, J. Li and Y. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1775–1787 CrossRef CAS .
X.-f. Wang, D.-b. Ruan and Z. You, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2006, 16, 1129–1134 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, J. Lin, V. Malgras, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, C.-h. Tang and H. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1272–1278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, X. Li, L. Wan, K. Liang, B. K. Tay, L. Kong and X. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 668–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yi, H. Wang, Y. Jing, T. Peng, Y. Wang, J. Guo, Q. He, Z. Guo and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19545–19555 RSC .
P. Shi, R. Chen, L. Li, J. An, L. Hua, J. Zhou, B. Liu, P. Chen, W. Huang and G. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5442–5448 RSC .
Y.-g. Wang, L. Yu and Y.-y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A743–A748 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, W. Chen, L. Ding, S. Cui and L. Mi, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3726–3742 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu and G. Yushin, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2014, 3, 424–473 CAS .
P. Shi, R. Chen, L. Hua, L. Li, R. Chen, Y. Gong, C. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Liu, G. Sun and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703455 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Kazemi, H. Kazemi, M. Kabiri-Samani and M. A. Kiani, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2018, 15, 2117–2122 CAS .
M. Xie, Z. Xu, S. Duan, Z. Tian, Y. Zhang, K. Xiang, M. Lin, X. Guo and W. Ding, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu and H. Shi, J. Power Sources, 1998, 74, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sui, S. Tang, Y. Chen, Z. Dai, H. Huangfu, Z. Zhu, X. Qin, Y. Deng and G. M. Haarberg, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, O. O. Park, K. H. Shin, C. S. Jin and J. H. Kim, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, H7–H10 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, M. Li and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4824–4854 RSC .
Y.-P. Gao, Z.-B. Zhai, K.-J. Huang and Y.-Y. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 11456–11470 RSC .
W. Long, B. Fang, A. Ignaszak, Z. Wu, Y.-J. Wang and D. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7176–7190 RSC .
H. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Sustainable Energy & Fuels, 2017, 1, 1265–1281 RSC .
J. Wang, P. Nie, B. Ding, S. Dong, X. Hao, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2411–2428 RSC .
Q. Li, C. Lu, D. Xiao, H. Zhang, C. Chen, L. Xie, Y. Liu, S. Yuan, Q. Kong, K. Zheng and J. Yin, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1279–1287 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sui, S. Tang, Z. Dai, Z. Zhu, H. Huangfu, X. Qin, Y. Deng and G. M. Haarberg, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 9363–9371 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Xu, M. Jia, L. Cui, J. Gao and X.-J. Jin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, E303–E310 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, L. Mi, W. Wei, S. Cui, Z. Zheng, H. Hou and W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4311–4319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Hu, M.-C. Liu, Y.-X. Hu, Q.-Q. Yang, L.-B. Kong, W. Han, J.-J. Li and L. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 1041–1049 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, A. M. Elshahawy, C. Guan and J. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701530 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Lu, J. Liu, X. Lei, Z. Chang, L. Luo and X. Sun, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2013, 23, 351–366 CrossRef .
V. Gupta, T. Kusahara, H. Toyama, S. Gupta and N. Miura, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2315–2319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Zhao, F. Huang, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 5103–5109 RSC .
H. Chen, L. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Yan and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 24, 934–942 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Hu, S. Zhao and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, H. Gao, M. Zhang, L. Li, G. Wang and X. Shan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 497, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q.-P. Feng, X.-H. Wu and G.-W. Huang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 1258–1263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Yu, R. Hu, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Niu, X. Qian and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17417–17425 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. Liu, H. Sun and Q. Lu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 48181–48186 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Song and H. Shi, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 751, 69–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Ye, Z. Tian and C. Liang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5684–5690 RSC .
J. Zhu, L. Huang, Y. Xiao, L. Shen, Q. Chen and W. Shi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6772–6781 RSC .
L. Feng, J. Sun, Y. Liu, X. Li, L. Ye and L. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
C.-h. Tang, X. Yin and H. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10574–10582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, Q. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Jing, P. Liu, J. Wang and R. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 315, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, M. Boudard, M. J. Carmezim and M. F. Montemor, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 39980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ke, M. Zheng, H. Liu, C. Guan, L. Mao and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13940 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Niu, D. Zhou, X. Yang, X. Li, Q. Wang and F. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18413–18421 RSC .
Q. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Sun, Z. Pan, J. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Man, J. Guo, Z. Zhou, B. He, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Xu and Y. Yao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7552–7560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 267–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, L. Wan, S. Yang, F. Xiao and S. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, C. Li, H. Tan, R. Cai, H. Yu, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and Q. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10178–10180 RSC .
J. Wen, S. Li, B. Li, Z. Song, H. Wang, R. Xiong and G. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhu, M. Yan, Y. Liu, H. Shen, Y. Lei and W. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22782–22789 RSC .
Q. Cai, Y. Li, L. wang, Q. Li, J. Xu, B. Gao, X. Zhang, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 1–9 CrossRef .
C.-P. Yang, S. Xin, Y.-X. Yin, H. Ye, J. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8363–8367 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kirubasankar, P. Palanisamy, S. Arunachalam, V. Murugadoss and S. Angaiah, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 881–890 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, M. Liu, Q. Yang, L. Kong and L. Kang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 49–55 CrossRef .
J. Wen, S. Li, T. Chen, B. Li, L. Xiong, Y. Guo and G. Fang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 266–273 CrossRef .
L. Ye, L. Zhao, H. Zhang, P. Zan, S. Gen, W. Shi, B. Han, H. Sun, X. Yang and T. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1603–1613 RSC .
K. Li, S. Li, F. Huang, Y. Lu, L. Wang, H. Chen and H. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 428, 250–257 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lang, L.-B. Kong, M. Liu, Y.-C. Luo and L. Kang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1533–1539 CrossRef .
C. Hou, X.-Y. Lang, Z. Wen, Y.-F. Zhu, M. Zhao, J.-C. Li, W.-T. Zheng, J.-S. Lian and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23412–23419 RSC .
S. Deabate, F. Henn, S. Devautour and J. C. Giuntini, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, J23–J31 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, J. G. Chen and J. Q. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1882–1889 CrossRef PubMed .
U. M. Patil, K. V. Gurav, V. J. Fulari, C. D. Lokhande and O. S. Joo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 338–342 CrossRef .
B. Dong, M. Li, S. Chen, D. Ding, W. Wei, G. Gao and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17890–17896 CrossRef .
L. Xu, J. Xia, H. Xu, S. Yin, K. Wang, L. Huang, L. Wang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 866–874 CrossRef .
C. Pan, J. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Li and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1518–1524 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and W.-D. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xi, G. Wei, J. Li, X. Liu, M. Pang, Y. Yang, Y. Ji, V. Y. Izotov, Q. Guo and W. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 233, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, D. Yu, Q. Zhang, K. Goh, L. Wei, Y. Yong, R. Jiang, J. Wei and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1774–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Hao, S. Zhou, C. Huang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 467–477 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, S. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14025–14032 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, K. Liu, J. Zhou, H. Hu, W. Chen and Y. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 321, 554–563 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, Y. Liu, W. Guo, T. Chen, H. Wang, S. Yu and F. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24866–24876 CrossRef .
S. Li, C. Yu, J. Yang, C. Zhao, M. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Liu, W. Guo and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1958–1965 RSC .
Y. Huang, H. Hu, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, C. Liu, Z. Pei, C. Hao, Z. Wang and C. Zhi, Acs Nano, 2015, 9, 4766–4775 CrossRef .
S. Shahrokhian, P. Hosseini and Z. Kamalzadeh, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 2481–2491 CrossRef .
H. Du, Y. Wang, H. Yuan and L. Jiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 84–91 CrossRef .
L.-X. Yang, Y.-J. Zhu, H. Tong, Z.-H. Liang and W.-W. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2716–2719 CrossRef .
X. Hou, T. Peng, J. Cheng, Q. Yu, R. Luo, Y. Lu, X. Liu, J.-K. Kim, J. He and Y. Luo, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2570–2583 CrossRef .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M.-S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148–3155 CrossRef .
J. Chang, M. Jin, F. Yao, T. H. Kim, V. T. Le, H. Yue, F. Gunes, B. Li, A. Ghosh, S. Xie and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5074–5083 CrossRef .
X. Lu, M. Yu, T. Zhai, G. Wang, S. Xie, T. Liu, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2628–2633 CrossRef .
P. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Li, P. Qiang, M. Ebrahimi, W. Mai, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 731–736 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Perera, B. Patel, J. Bonso, M. Grunewald, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4512–4517 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Balamurugan, T. T. Nguyen, V. Aravindan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804663 CrossRef .
J. Balamurugan, C. Li, V. Aravindan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803287 CrossRef .
V. Aravindan and Y. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702841 CrossRef .
A. Vanchiappan and L. Yun-Sung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702841 CrossRef .
S. Jayaraman, V. Aravindan, M. Ulaganathan, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500050 CrossRef .
K. Karthikeyan, S. Amaresh, S. N. Lee, V. Aravindan and Y. S. Lee, Chem.–Asian J., 2014, 9, 852–857 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Aravindan, N. Arun, N. Shubha, J. Sundaramurthy and S. Madhavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 647–651 CrossRef .
V. Aravindan, S. Nan, M. Keppeler and S. Madhavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 208, 225–230 CrossRef .
D. Mhamane, H.-K. Kim, V. Aravindan, K. C. Roh, M. Srinivasan and K.-B. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1395–1404 RSC .
A. Banerjee, V. Aravindan, S. Bhatnagar, D. Mhamane, S. Madhavi and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 890–896 CrossRef .
V. Aravindan, R. Satish, S. Jayaraman and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5198–5202 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, X. Yan, Y. Sun, Y. Li, M. Li, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17981–17987 RSC .
D. Sarkar, M. Mandal and K. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11995–12004 CrossRef .
G. Binitha, M. S. Soumya, A. A. Madhavan, P. Praveen, A. Balakrishnan, K. R. V. Subramanian, M. V. Reddy, S. V. Nair, A. S. Nair and N. Sivakumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11698–11704 RSC .
D. Maiti, V. Aravindan, S. Madhavi and P. S. Devi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 291–298 CrossRef .
A. Suryawanshi, V. Aravindan, S. Madhavi and S. Ogale, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2193–2200 CrossRef .
V. Aravindan, Y.-S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402225 CrossRef .
H.-C. Chen, C.-C. Wang and S.-Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16955–16962 RSC .
N. Sabari Arul, J. In Han and P. C. Chen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 293–302 CrossRef .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, W. G. Pell and B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 3541–3552 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. McKeown, P. L. Hagans, L. P. L. Carette, A. E. Russell, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4825–4832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. U. Jeong and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 205–208 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. S. Casalongue and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, D. Bélanger and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5185–A5189 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Subramanian Natarajan	Subramanian Natarajan is currently a post-doctoral research fellow in Nanomaterials and Systems Laboratory, Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Jeju National University, South Korea. He carried out his work at CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute (CSIR-CSMCRI) with Professor Hari C. Bajaj and earned a PhD degree in chemistry from Maharaja Krishnakumarsinhji Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, India, in 2018. His research interest includes recovering valuable materials from spent Li-ion batteries and their utilization in electrochemical energy storage and conversion applications.
Mani Ulaganathan	Mani Ulaganathan, a Ramanujan Fellow, is working in the Electrochemical Power Sources Division (ECPS) at CSIR-CECI, Karaikudi, India, since June 2017. From 2011 to 2017, he served as Research Fellow at Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He has also served as a research scientist at Zeca Powers Pvt. Ltd, Singapore from Dec 2010 to Aug 2011. Earlier, he received his PhD (2011) and Masters (2005) in Physics from School of Physics, Alagappa University, Tamil Nadu, India. His research interest is the development of electrochemical energy storage devices from thin to bulk. He is constantly working in aqueous-based thin film and bulk supercapacitors, batteries, and in-flow batteries.
Vanchiappan Aravindan	Vanchiappan Aravindan is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IISER, Tirupati, India. He received his PhD in 2009 at Gandhigram Rural University, Gandhigram, India. His research interest includes the development of high-performance electrodes and electrolytes for Li-ion chemistry and beyond.

 		 

 	Scheme 1  Classification of electrolytes for electrochemical supercapacitors.	 

 	Fig. 1  Effects of the electrolyte on the electrochemical supercapacitor performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Bode's diagram scheme for the Ni(OH)2 phase changes in the chemical and electrochemical process.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Variation of the specific capacitance of amorphous Ni(OH)2@3D Ni electrodes as a function of the cycle number measured at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte (the left of the inset is an image of the flexible electrode; the right of the inset is the CV curves of the 1st, 500th, 1000th, 1500th, 2000th, 2500th, and 3000th cycles), and (b) Ragone plot of the estimated specific energy and specific power at various charge–discharge rates (5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 A g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of Ni NWs. Inset is the magnified SEM image, (b) TEM image, and (c) HR-TEM image of Ni NWs: inset is the magnified HR-TEM image, (d) SEM images of Ni@Ni(OH)2 NF: inset is the magnified SEM image, (e) TEM and (f) HR-TEM images of Ni@Ni(OH)2 NF: inset is the magnified HR-TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled Mn3O4/Ni(OH)2–APSC devices and (b) CVs of the APSC device under various electrochemical windows at 50 mV s−1. The assembled APSCs: (c) normal state, (d and e) bending states, (f) a green LED powered by 2 ATFO 4SCs in series, (g) a blue LED powered by 2 ATFSCs in series, and (h) a light bulb powered by 4 ATFSCs in series and parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic and SEM illustration of the two-step synthesis of the hierarchical CoAl–LDH@Ni(OH)2 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2018, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Morphologies of the samples: (a and b) FE-SEM images of MnCo–LDH nanowires, (c and d) FE-SEM images of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, (e) top-view FE-SEM image, and (f) cross-section FE-SEM image of the MnCo–LDH@Ni(OH)2 core–shell heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the operating principle of the developed hybrid supercapacitor based on graphene-supported Ni(OH)2-nanowires (positive electrode) and CMK-5 (negative electrode). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Microscopic characterization of the α-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates/graphene composite: (a) AFM image of the as-prepared graphene with the height profile, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, and (d) HR-TEM image. Inset in part c shows the corresponding SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) CV curves of the all-solid-state Ni(OH)2–NG/NG SC collected in different scan voltage windows. (b) CV curves at various scan rates and (c) galvanostatic CD curves at various current densities. (d) EIS of the devices with various Ni(OH)2 contents and without Ni(OH)2. The insets are the equivalent circuit and the magnified EIS spectrum. (e) CVs of the device under various bending angles from 0 to 1808 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and (f) the corresponding photographs of the bent device, which indicate the excellent flexibility of the device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 2  Possible formation mechanism of the Ni(OH)2–MnO2–RGO hybrid sphere and the structural schematic diagram of a single nanosheet in a hybrid sphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of the Ni(OH)2-CFG composite/AC in different voltage windows at 10 mV s−1, (b) CV curves, (c) GCD curves of the assembled two-electrode asymmetric supercapacitor at different scan rates or current densities in a 1.6 V voltage window, and (d) the specific capacitance of the Ni(OH)2–CFG composite/AC asymmetric supercapacitor at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device composed of the Ni(OH)2/EG composite and the AC electrodes, (b) CV curves of the ASC device at different scan rates, (c) GCD curves at different current densities of the ASC device, and (d) specific capacitances of the ASC device at various current densities. Inset image shows LED lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled structure of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC, (b) CV curves of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at various scan rates, (c) GCD curves of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at various current densities, and (d) The specific capacitance of the CNT@Ni(OH)2/3DGN ASC at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CV curve of the hybrid supercapacitor based on Ni(OH)2/CNT and rGO/CNT fiber electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) GCD curves of the hybrid supercapacitor at current densities of 0.4 to 2.0 A cm−3. (c) Current density-dependent CV of the hybrid supercapacitor. (d) Ragone plot to compare the volumetric energy density (EV) and power density (PV) with previously reported studies. (e) Performance of the fiber-shaped supercapacitor at different bending angles (0°–90°–0°). (f) Cycling stability of the hybrid supercapacitor at a current density of 1.0 A cm−3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of a yarn-based hybrid supercapacitor woven into a glove at different bending states. (b) Capacitance retention for the hybrid supercapacitor at different bending angles. (c) CV curves of a single and two hybrid supercapacitors connected in series or in parallel. (d) GCD curves of a single and two hybrid supercapacitors connected in series or in parallel. The used current for integrated devices corresponds to 1.5 A cm−3 with respect to a single device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of ACMT (a and b) and β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT (c–f) at different magnifications. TEM image (g) of β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT. TEM image (h) and HRTEM image (i) of an individual Ni(OH)2 nanosheet. The inset is the corresponding SAED pattern of an individual Ni(OH)2 nanosheet. SEM image of β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT (j) and the corresponding elemental mapping images of carbon (k), oxygen (l), and nickel (m). Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cycling performance of the asymmetric supercapacitor, and (b) the SEM image of the MnCo2O4@Ni(OH)2 hybrid nanoflowers after charging-discharging for 2500 times at a current density of 6 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Discharge curves of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC. (b) Cycling performance of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC. (c) Nyquist plots of the first and 5000th cycle for the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC (the inset exhibits high-frequency region Nyquist plots). (d) Ragone plot related to energy and power densities of the H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC operated at 1.7 V in comparison to the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC, H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/activated carbon ASC, and RGO@Fe3O4/RGO@Fe3O4 (GF/GF) SC (the inset exhibits a small windmill-powered up by an H–CoOx@Ni(OH)2/RGO@Fe3O4 ASC device). Reproduced with permission from ref. 175 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  Cycle life test of the Co3O4@Ni(OH)2/rGO asymmetric supercapacitor at a charge–discharge current density of 25 mA cm−2 for 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Cyclic voltammograms at 20 mV s−1 and (b) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at 1 A g−1 of Ni(OH)2, Co(OH)2, Co(OH)2–Ni(OH)2, Ni1/2Co1/2(OH)2, and Ni(OH)2–Co(OH)2 films. Potential windows in the GCD measurements of the hydroxide films were optimized to exclude the less contribution regime to the charge capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 21  Electrochemical characterization and flexibility analysis of the as-assembled ASCs. (a) GCD curves collected at different current densities between 0 and 1.6 V. (b) Areal and volumetric specific capacitances calculated from the GCD curves as a function of the current density. (c) GCD curves of the as-assembled ASCs bent at various angles at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (d) Normalized capacitances of our bent 90° for 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the asymmetric supercapacitor configuration adopted by the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2cathode and the AC anode; (b) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2 and the AC electrodes collected at 5 mV s−1 in a three-electrode configuration; (c) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2/AC device collected in different voltage windows; (d) CV curves of the Co9S8@Ni(OH)2/AC device at different scan rates; (e) GCD curves of the ASC device measured at different current densities; (f) variation of the coulombic efficiency of the ASC device during the cycling test. The inset shows the corresponding charge–discharge curves of the first and last 10 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Nyquist impedance plots of the three ASCs (inset of the equivalent circuit model); (b) the cycling stability of the M–NF/AB ASC, MN–NF ASC, and MN–NF/AB ASC; (c) the cycling stability with increasing current density; (d) Ragone plots of the as-assembled M–NF/AB ASC, MN–NF ASC, and MN–NF/AB ASC, and the inset is the digital photos of the lightened LEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  30000 charge and discharge cycles in 1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte at 10 A g−1 galvanostatic charge–discharge current with a potential range of 0–1.5 V. The insets show the first and last ten cycles of charge/discharge profiles during the test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled asymmetric supercapacitor device in 6 M KOH electrolyte. (b and c) Comparative CV curves of ZnO@TiO2@Ni(OH)2 and ZnO@Fe2O3 tested in a three-electrode system in 6 M KOH electrolyte. (d) CV curves of the asymmetric supercapacitors by varying the scan rate from 10 mV s−1 to 80 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
AB	Acetylene black
AC	Activated carbon
ACMTs	Acid treated carbon microtubes
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
ASC	Asymmetric supercapacitor
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
BP	Black pearls
ACN	Acetonitrile
CBD	Chemical bath deposition
CC	Current collector
CFG	Carbon fiber paper
CFY	Carbon fiber yarns
CTAB	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
CMK-5	Ordered mesoporous carbon
CNT	Carbon nanotubes
CNFP	Carbon nanofoam paper
CNTF	Carbon nanotube fiber
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
HR-TEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
ECF	Electro-etched carbon fiber
EDLC	Electric double layer capacitor
EG	Expanded graphite
ESR	Equivalent series resistance
EV	Electric vehicles
GN	Graphene hydrogel
g-C3N4	Graphitic carbon nitride
GCD	Galvanostatic charge–discharge
ITO-PET	Indium tin oxide polyethylene terephthalate
IR-drop	Ohmic resistance
KOH	Potassium hydroxide
LDH	Layered double hydroxides
LED	Light emitting diode
LIB	Lithium-ion battery
MWCNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
NWAs	Nanowire arrays
NF	Nickel foam
Nf	Nafion
Ni-MH	Nickel–metal hydride
mm	Millimeter
nm	Nanometer
Ni–Cd	nickel–cadmium
OMC	Ordered mesoporous carbon
o-CNT	Oxidized carbon nanotube
PAAK	Potassium poly(acrylate)
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PPy	Polypyrrole
PSS	Polystyrene sulfonate
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PVdF	Polyvinylidene fluoride
PQ	Phenanthrenequinone
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
SGO	Sulfonated graphene oxide
TMO	Transition metal hydroxides
UGF	Ultra-thin graphite foam
v-GNs	Vertically oriented graphene nanosheets
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
Vulcan XC-72	Carbon black
C2H4	Ethylene
Co3O4	Cobalt(II, III) oxide
CoCl2	Cobalt chloride
CoOX	Cobalt oxide
CoOOH	Cobalt oxy hydroxide
Co(OH)2	Cobalt hydroxide
Co9S8	Cobalt sulphide
CoP	Cobalt phosphide
Fe2O3	Iron(III) oxide
FeOOH	Iron oxyhydroxide
H2SO4	Sulphuric acid
RuO2	Ruthenium oxide
MnO2	Manganese(IV) oxide
Mn2O3	Manganese(III) oxide
MoSe2	Molybdenum selenide
MnCo2O4	Manganese cobalt oxide
Na2SO4	Sodium sulphate
LiOH	Lithium hydroxide
NaOH	Sodium hydroxide
Ni(OH)2	Nickel hydroxide
NiOOH	Nickel oxyhydroxide
Ni(NO3)2	Nickel nitrate
Ni3S2	Nickel sulphide
TiO2	Titanium oxide
ZnO	Zinc oxide
ZnCo2O4	Zinc cobalt oxide
A g−1	Ampere per gram
mA h g−1	Milli ampere hour per gram
kW kg−1	Kilowatt per kilogram
W h kg−1	Watt-hour per kilogram
W kg−1	Watt per kilogram
V	Voltage
s	Seconds
F cm−3	Farad per cubic centimeter
F cm−2	Farad per square centimeter
F g−1	Farad per gram
cm2 Ω−1 mol−1	Square meter per ohm per mole
m2 g−1	Meter square per gram
mF cm−2	Millifarad per square centimeter
mV s−1	Millivolt per second
mW cm−3	Milliwatt per cubic centimeter
mW h cm−3	Milliwatt hour per cubic centimeter
mW cm−2	Milliwatt per square centimeter
mA cm−2	Milliampere per square centimeter
S cm−1	Siemen per centimeter
Ω cm	Ohm centimeter
μm	Micrometer
μF	Microfarad

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
