Mobilities of iodide anions in aqueous solutions for applications in natural dye-sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CP01155A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CP01155A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 13038-13046Mobilities of iodide anions in aqueous solutions for applications in natural dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Cassone
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Calogero
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiri 
            Sponer
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Franz 
            Saija
          
        
      b
aInstitute of Biophysics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Královopolská 135, 61265 Brno, Czech Republic. E-mail: cassone@ibp.cz; sponer@ncbr.muni.cz
bCNR-IPCF, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d'Alcontres 37, 98158 Messina, Italy. E-mail: calogero@ipcf.cnr.it; saija@ipcf.cnr.it
Received 
      20th February 2018
    , Accepted 12th April 2018First published on 12th April 2018AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) composed of aqueous electrolytes represent an environmentally friendly, low-cost, and concrete alternative to standard DSSCs and typical solar cells. Although flammable and toxic organic-solvent-based electrolytes have so far been employed more than simpler (iodide) aqueous solutions, recently recorded efficiencies of water-based DSSCs suggest a trend inversion in the near future. Here, we present a study, based on both experiments and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, in which assessments on the efficiencies of three water electrolytes commonly employed in DSSCs (i.e., LiI, NaI, and KI) are reported. In particular, by atomistically tracing the ability of the iodides as charge carriers and by experimentally measuring the generated currents, we demonstrate that NaI aqueous solutions are more efficient electrolytes than LiI and KI – in descending order – in transporting electrons in DSSCs under bias. Monitoring the role played by the hydration shells of the ionic species under an electric field, we interpret, by first-principles, the various iodide mobilities. This finding, when combined with general considerations on the cation-induced effects on the TiO2 electronic structure, is able to account for the distinct efficiencies of the investigated electrolytes.
1 Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) provide a molecular and potentially low-cost approach to photovoltaic solar energy conversion.1–3 Such devices are composed of a photoanode, an electrolyte, and a cathode. Whereas the photoanode – consisting of a conductive (transparent) substrate covered by a thin mesoporous layer of semiconductor nanoparticles sensitized by a dye – allows for the extension of the absorption properties of the semiconductor to the visible region of the solar spectrum, the cathode electrode (CE) is constituted by a conductive substrate on which a catalyst material is deposited.4 Despite the importance of those two components, the electrolyte holds a major place in DSSCs.5 It is indeed responsible for the inner charge carrier transport between the electrodes and continuously regenerates the dye during the DSSC operation. In this way, the electrolyte has a sizable influence both on the conversion efficiency and on the long-term stability of such devices.
The efficiency of a DSSC is determined by its photocurrent density (Jsc), the photovoltage (Voc), and by the fill factor (FF).6 All these parameters are significantly affected by the nature of the electrolyte and by the peculiar interaction between the latter and the electrode interfaces. In fact, whereas Jsc may be affected by the transport of the redox couple components and Voc depends on the redox potential of the electrolyte, the FF may be influenced both by the charge carrier diffusion across the electrolyte and by the charge transfer resistance at the electrolyte/electrode interface.
If, on the one hand, DSSCs have been considered as a valid and concrete alternative to standard solar cells,3 on the other, they are not yet commercialized on a large scale due to issues related to their environmental sustainability and long-term stability.7 In fact, high-efficiency DSSCs are typically prepared with organic-solvent-based liquid electrolytes – e.g., acetonitrile and methoxypropionitrile – and are often characterized by high vapor pressures, toxicity, and flammability.8 However, the last three decades have witnessed some efforts in creating efficient, environmentally friendly, and low-cost DSSCs. In fact, natural dyes and alternative solvent-based electrolytes have been designed. Above all, DSSCs composed of water-based electrolytes represent one of the most promising solutions providing reduced costs, no flammability, high stability, and environmental compatibility.4,9 Whereas water-based electrolytes are solutions that contain 10–60 vol% water in the redox mediator solution thus resulting in hybrid systems, aqueous electrolytes completely avoid the presence of other organic solvents (i.e., the solvent is 100% water).10
Several studies reported that the use of water in traditional DSSCs is disadvantageous since it causes a negative shift of the TiO2 conduction band,11,12 it is responsible for partial dye-desorption,13,14 and it lowers the concentration of triiodide ions in the electrolyte15 as well as the interaction with additives and salts.16 However, in 1988, Grätzel and co-workers17 found a surprisingly broad band sensitization of TiO2 to visible light by means of a ruthenium-based dye. The latter has thus been employed as an anode in a photoelectrochemical cell containing a potassium iodide/iodine water-based electrolyte. Moreover, in order to probe the possibility of obtaining environmentally friendly solar cells, Tekkanone et al.18 reported the first studies on the usage of anthocyanin as a natural sensitizer for water-based DSSCs. Subsequently, Dai and Rabani19–21 investigated the capabilities that natural sensitizers hold in water-based DSSCs and a high efficiency was initially reported in aqueous electrolytes.19,20 In fact, a quantum yield increase of the photocurrent was achieved when cyanin – extracted from pomegranate fruits – was dissolved in water at a pH of 1.0–5.6. Furthermore, Dai and Rabani21 found that anthocyanidin water solutions at pH 1.0, in the presence of water-based electrolytes with high amounts of iodide salt, showed the best performances among other slightly different systems. These findings have been confirmed by our recent works on natural dyes.22
Although the 1991 seminal paper by Grätzel2 shifted the general focus onto aprotic organic solvents rather than on the extensive employment of aqueous solutions in DSSCs, a renewed effort toward the exploitation of water as an additive for electrolytes has been currently recorded. Recently, Leandri et al.23 reported the first organic hydrophilic dye employed for 100% water-based electrolyte DSSCs. Galliano et al.24,25 studied the use of the design of experiments as a useful chemometric technique for the concurrent investigation of a series of experimental factors that directly influence the operation of aqueous photoelectrochemical cells. Moreover, they provided indications on how to identify the relationship between the molecular structure of the dyes and the stability (in water) of the sensitizers, as well as some guidelines to select and design suitable dyes for 100% aqueous DSSCs.24,25 Furthermore, Lin et al.26 reported that aqueous-based DSSCs with a dual TEMPO/iodide electrolyte exhibit high open-circuit voltages (i.e., 0.80–0.88 V). Notwithstanding the relative paucity of information due to the past common view that water could be poisoning for solar cell operation, it appears to be very clear that DSSCs can be re-optimized to work with aqueous electrolytes.10,27 Even more interestingly, although the current efficiency record for aqueous DSSCs (i.e., 5.64%28) remains unbeaten, a novel coumarine dye with a silyl anchoring group reaching an efficiency of 3.7% has been fabricated.29 In addition, the fact that very recently, Bella et al.30 reported a study on the effects due to the concentration of the redox mediator and the type of counterion (i.e., Na+ or K+) affirms, once again, the impelling necessity of increasing efforts toward water-based solar cell development.
In order to unveil the microscopic details underlying the mobility properties of the electron carriers responsible for the efficiency of DSSCs, ab initio molecular dynamics simulations represent a suitable computational approach to be employed. In fact, a subtle balance between electrostatic, quantum mechanical, and thermodynamical aspects governs the apparently simple hydration processes of the iodide species. However, there is no general consensus even on the spatial extent of the effects produced by the inclusion of ions simpler than iodides in bulk water.31–33 On the other hand, the dramatic increase in computational power makes previously unattainable simulations feasible. In this way, the perturbations induced by simple anions on their solvation shells have been carefully clarified by means of first-principles calculations.34 Moreover, the ionic mobilities of protons35 and of alkali metal salts have been fully characterized under the effect of electric fields both in water36,37 and in distinct H-bonded systems.38,39
Here, we report some experimental results from a study executed by employing concentrated aqueous solutions of three alkaline metal-based iodide salts (i.e., LiI, NaI, and KI) as electrolyte for DSSCs sensitized by natural pigments. In addition, we present fundamental (i.e., by first-principles) assessments of the effects produced by those iodide salts in water and determine the respective ionic mobilities under the effect of static electric fields by means of state-of-the-art ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.
2 Methods
2.1 Experiments

2.1.1 Materials and DSSC assembly. 
All chemicals and solvents employed were reagent grade and used as received without any further purification. The conductive glass plate (FTO glass, fluorine-doped SnO2, sheet resistance 7 Ω cm−2) and the Surlyn foils of 25 μm thickness employed for DSSCs were purchased from Solaronix SA while the titania serigraphic paste employed was Dyesol 18 NR-T. FTO-glass plates were cleaned in a detergent solution and washed with a water/ethanol mixture. Then, the cleaned FTO-glass was pre-treated by immersion in 100 ml of a TiCl4/water solution (40 mM) at 70 °C for 30 min, washed again with water and ethanol and, finally, dried in an oven at 80 °C. TiO2 layers were deposited on the FTO conducting glass plates by screen printing coating, stored in ethanol and dried at 125 °C; this latter procedure was repeated several times depending on the required TiO2 thickness. The so prepared TiO2 screen printed plates were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After sintering, the resulting mesoscopic oxide films were transparent, with a thickness of around 8 μm, depending on the number of TiO2 deposited layers (measured by a BRUKER, Detakk profilometer), and a surface area of each spot of 0.181 cm2. After size measurements, the TiO2 film was treated with 40 mM TiCl4 solution, rinsed with water and ethanol and sintered at 500 °C. The cooled screen-printed plates cut in rectangular forms (2 cm × 2 cm) were soaked overnight in a natural dye (i.e., cyanidin, from Cy–chloride) solution at room temperature in the dark. Cy-chloride (purity 97% by HPLC) was supplied by Extrasynthese (see also ref. 40 for further details) and the relative solution was prepared by dissolving 5 mg of the investigated pigment powder in 20 ml of different solvents (H2O D.I.). The cyanidin solution was protected from light exposure and stored in a refrigerator at 5 °C until its use. Finally, after the removal of excess dye by rinsing with water, the photoanodes were dried in an oven (at 80 °C for short time) and stored in the dark at room temperature for later use. To prepare the counter-electrodes, a hole was drilled (1.5 mm diameter) in each FTO-glass plate (2 cm × 2 cm). The perforated substrates were washed and cleaned with water and ethanol in order to remove any residual glass powder and/or organic contaminants. The Pt catalyst was deposited on the conductive face of the FTO glass by dropping H2PtCl6 solution (5 mM in isopropanol) and by heating at 500 °C for 30 min.
The cells, prepared by placing the photoanode and the counter-electrode in a sandwich type arrangement with the electrolyte in between, were sealed using a thermopress with a hot melt gasket of 25 m thickness made of Surlyn ionomer (Solaronix). The aperture of the surlyn frame was larger than the TiO2 area. Three kinds of electrolyte were employed:
• KW (2.1 M KI, 0.1 M I2, in H2O, pH = 1.0);
• NaW (2.1 M NaI, 0.1 M I2, in H2O, pH = 1.0);
• LiW (2.1 M LiI, 0.1 M I2, in H2O, pH = 1.0).
pH was fixed by adding some drops of a HCl (37% conc.) solution to the electrolyte in order to obtain the target pH (i.e., 1.0). The pH of the electrolyte solutions was measured by a Waterproof pHTestr 10 (Eutech instruments – Oakton) calibrated up to three points (pH 4.01, 7.00, and 10.01) using certified single-use pouch NIST buffer set standards, dipped in the electrolyte solutions. Drops of electrolyte solution were introduced into the cell by the vacuum back filling technique through a shaped hole drilled (1.5 mm diameter) in the back of the counter-electrode. Then, the hole was sealed and closed with a thin cover glass.


2.1.2 Instruments and measurements. 
The DSSC photoanode thickness was measured by using a DektakXT profilometer (Bruker) equipped with a diamond-tipped stylus (radius of 2 μm) and selecting a vertical scan range of 524 μm with an 8.0 nm resolution, a programmed scan length of 6000 μm, and a stylus force of 1 mg. Each measure was verified with different runs acquired with different start positions by rotating or translating the sample. A digital Keithley 236 multimeter connected to a PC and controlled by a homemade program was used to obtain the current–voltage (I–V) curves for the constructed DSSCs. Simulated sunlight irradiation was provided by a LOT-Oriel solar simulator (Model LS0100-1000, 300 W Xe-Arc lamp, powered by LSN251 power supply equipped with an AM 1.5 filter, 100 mW cm−2).

2.2 
          Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
We used the software package Quantum ESPRESSO,41 based on the Car–Parrinello approach,42 to perform six ab initio molecular dynamics simulations under the action of static electric fields applied along a given direction (i.e., the z-axis). With the aim of characterizing the behavior of iodide anions in different water solutions, potassium iodide (KI), sodium iodide (NaI), and lithium iodide (LiI) water solutions have been simulated at two different molarities each, i.e., 0.5 M and 2.1 M. All the simulated systems have been investigated starting from the dissociated state, where both cations (K+, Na+, and Li+, respectively) and anions I− are entirely solvated by water molecules. After relatively long dynamics carried out under ambient conditions (i.e., at 300 K), all the numerical samples were exposed to the action of an oriented external static and homogeneous electric field with increasing intensities. Thus, besides the zero-field simulations, the field strength has been raised up firstly at 0.05 V Å−1, then at 0.075 V Å−1 and, finally, at 0.15 V Å−1. Though these intensities appear somewhat high, they are necessary in order to carefully describe the ionic mobilities within the time-scales affordable by state-of-the-art first-principles calculations.36,37,43 The three numerical samples mimicking a salt molarity of 0.5 M contained 111 water molecules and one molecule of a given salt (i.e., KI, NaI, and LiI, respectively) in its dissociated state, thus accounting for 335 atoms placed in cubic cells. Because of the differences between the ionic radii of the cations of the solvated salts, the KI, the NaI, and the LiI simulation boxes at 0.5 M were characterized by edges equal to 15.32 Å, 15.28 Å, and 15.24 Å, respectively. The three numerical samples prepared for a salt molarity of 2.1 M contained 78 water molecules and 3 molecules of the given salt (i.e., KI, NaI, and LiI, respectively) in its dissociated state, accounting for 240 atoms placed in cubic cells. The KI, the NaI, and the LiI simulation box edges at 2.1 M were equal to 14.67 Å, 14.55 Å, and 14.42 Å, respectively. All the structures were replicated in space by using periodic boundary conditions. See the ESI† for further details on all the performed calculations.
3 Results and discussion
According to Fig. 1, when a positive pulsed electrical bias (forward bias) is applied to an illuminated DSSC, electrons are injected from the conduction band of the TiO2 photoelectrode to the redox level of the electrolyte. The following reaction then takes place at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface: I3− + 2e−(TiO2) → 3I−,(1)where plenty of I− ions are produced, as indicated by the red arrows in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, I3− ions are produced in the same amount close to the counter-electrode via a reverse reaction of eqn (1). The positive pulse leads thus to an increment of the concentration of iodide anions near to the TiO2 photoelectrode, whereas the concentration of triiodide anions close to the counter-electrode increases as well. After the pulse, the concentration gradient drives the ions to diffuse back to the initial equilibrium.
 Fig. 1  Cross-section view of an illuminated natural dye (cyanidin) based solar cell operating in the absence (blue lines) and in the presence (red lines) of a bias voltage. Under forward bias (red arrows), electron recombination mainly occurs from the TiO2 conduction band or surface states with the electrolyte (i.e., I3− → I−). Under illumination (blue arrows), electron injection from the LUMO level of the dye to the TiO2 conduction band occurs and I− ions close to the photoelectrode provide the electrons to the oxidized dye. 
When DSSCs operate under illumination, I− ions near the photoelectrode provide the electrons to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the dye to contribute to the photocurrent. For typical liquid electrolytes with a high conductivity, the concentration of I− does not influence the photocurrent of the DSSCs. However, for concentrated and other viscous electrolytes – such as our investigated aqueous electrolytes – their diffusion coefficients are too low to maintain a sufficiently large flux of I−/I3− transport, which limits the photocurrent and, in this condition, the interaction between the cations (i.e., K+, Na+, and Li+) and the water molecules may play a key role. Electron recombination by reduction of the I3− ions at the TCO (transparent conducting oxide) substrate can be neglected under short-circuit conditions (dark current), but it becomes important under open-circuit conditions.
In order to unveil the microscopic details underlying the migration properties of the iodide anions, it is first necessary to depict the molecular environment that surrounds these species. Structural correlations in liquid solutions can be quantified by means of the evaluation of the atomic radial distribution functions (RDFs). In Fig. 2, the iodide–oxygen (IO) and the iodide–hydrogen (IH) RDFs, determined by means of ab initio molecular dynamics at zero-field, for the KI, NaI, and LiI aqueous solutions at a molarity of 2.1 M are shown. From the respective locations of the first peaks of the IO RDFs (Fig. 2a) and those of the IH RDFs (Fig. 2b), it appears clear that the average structure exhibited by the water molecules in the first solvation shell of the iodide anions is characterized by molecular arrangements having, preferentially, one hydrogen atom pointing toward the anion.
 Fig. 2  Iodide–oxygen (a) and iodide–hydrogen (b) radial distribution functions of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at 300 K. 
Useful quantities describing the potential diversity of the solvation properties of a given ion in different solutions – at finite concentrations – are the coordination numbers. These latter numbers can be directly extracted from Fig. S1 of the ESI,† where the IO and the IH running coordination numbers characterizing the hydration shells of I− of the three 2.1 M samples are shown. It turns out that, on average, 6.12, 5.41, and 6.37 water molecules surround the iodide anions in the KI, NaI, and LiI aqueous solutions, respectively. However, it should be noticed that the interactions established by the iodide anions and their solvation shells are weak, as expected and as shown from the first peak heights of the IH RDFs (Fig. 2b). This is partly due to the fact that the ionic radius of the iodide anion is one of the largest among the monoatomic anions (i.e., 2.06 Å).
Although the relative mobilities of common ionic species are well-established within the Kohlrausch limit of independent migration (i.e., for infinite dilution),44 at finite concentrations, the interplay between cationic and anionic entities cannot be a priori excluded when describing their diffusion properties. However, estimates of well-converged diffusion coefficients from molecular dynamics simulations require the accumulation of extremely long trajectories45 that, if performed by first-principles, for such large systems, and under the effect of an electric field, are not yet affordable by modern supercomputers within a reasonably brief human time. On the other hand, the mean square displacement (MSD) represents a useful and rigorous quantity that is capable of tracing the dynamics of atomic or ionic species. This latter variable is observable microscopically and characterizes the ability of charge carriers – such as the iodide species – in electrolyte solutions in DSSCs. In Fig. 3, the MSD of the iodide anions both in the 0.5 M (a) and in the 2.1 M (b) numerical samples under ambient conditions (i.e., in the absence of any electrical perturbation) is displayed. As expected, I− species do not show any preferential direction in which to move. The (small) recorded displacements are indeed typical of the standard three-dimensional rattling ascribable to thermal fluctuations and to intermolecular interactions with their solvation shell molecules. In other words, under ambient conditions, the ionic dynamics is ruled by Brownian motion.
 Fig. 3  Mean square displacement (MSD) along a given axis (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions present in KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at 0.5 M (a) and at 2.1 M (b) under ambient conditions and at zero-field. 
When a static electric field is switched on along a given direction (i.e., the Cartesian z-axis direction), it is to be expected that a diffusive regime of the ionic species dynamics is triggered. However, as shown in Fig. S2 of the ESI,† the dynamics of the iodide ions, when dissolved in a 0.5 M water solution, is described by Brownian motion for all the explored field strengths. This is clearly due to the relatively short time-scale of the current ab initio simulations that are characterized, on the other hand, by the longest achievable time-lengths by means of top modern supercomputers under the presented conditions and for such large systems. The same ionic response – at relatively low field regimes – has been recorded not only in a similar study conducted by some of us concerning metal alkali salts,37 but also for the 2.1 M KI, NaI, and LiI samples for field intensities of 0.05 V Å−1 and 0.075 V Å−1, as shown in Fig. 4 (black and red curves, respectively). However, when the field strength is increased to 0.15 V Å−1, iodide anions start to significantly diffuse along the field direction (blue curves). At a molarity of 2.1 M, the percolation degree of the H-bonded network established by the solvent water molecules is clearly lower than that of the more diluted 0.5 M case. As a result, the iodide ions have better chances to freely migrate under such an environmental condition. In addition, the cationic species K+, Na+, and Li+ of those systems are also able to achieve a diffusive regime at the same field intensity (see Fig. S3 of the ESI†); a behavior that has not been observed for the same cations in the 0.5 M numerical samples.
 Fig. 4  Mean square displacement (MSD) along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions present in the 2.1 M KI (a), NaI (b), and LiI (c) water solutions at different field strengths. Black curves: 0.05 V Å−1; red curves: 0.075 V Å−1; blue curves: 0.15 V Å−1. At this latter field intensity, a diffusive regime of I− is established in all these three samples. 
As far as the iodide anion motion is concerned, it turns out that the NaI sample shows the highest mobility among the investigated systems, whereas the I− species of the LiI and of the KI samples display – in descending order – considerably lower abilities to diffuse, as shown in Fig. 5a. According to old literature, KI water solutions are less viscous than their NaI counterpart, suggesting a faster ion diffusion in the former than in the latter.46 However, this logical inference has been very recently contradicted by thorough experiments performed at disparate salt concentrations (i.e., from 0.5 M up to 6 M).30 In fact, Bella et al. demonstrated that NaI water-based DSSCs are more efficient than those with KI at all molarities, with the exception of concentrations higher than 5.5 M.30
 Fig. 5  (a) Mean square displacement (MSD) along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at a field strength equal to 0.15 V Å−1. I− species solvated in the NaI aqueous solution are so far the most mobile. (b) Drift along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the cations (continuous lines) and the iodide anions (dashed lines) of the 2.1 M KI (black), NaI (red), and LiI (blue) water solutions at a field strength equal to 0.15 V Å−1. The zero-drift dotted line is a guide for the eye in order to better follow the divergent directions taken by ions of opposite charge when exposed to the field action. 
The manifestly high capability of migration of the iodide anions is further highlighted in Fig. 5b, where the individual drifts of all the ionic species of the three samples investigated at a molarity of 2.1 M are shown. It is also straightforward to notice that the sodium cation is the most mobile ion among the cationic species, whereas K+ and Li+ exhibit drifts that are approximately comparable to each other. These findings can be taken into account by considering the respective interactions the cations establish with the applied electrostatic gradient. Indeed, as displayed in Fig. S4a of the ESI,† the average net charge of sodium ions (i.e., 0.8 e) – determined in the hydrated form and under a field strength of 0.15 V Å−1 – confers to this species a stronger electrostatic coupling with the external potential with respect to those of potassium and lithium cations, which are characterized by an average charge of 0.5 e and 0.3 e, respectively. Of course, the more positive charge exhibited by Na+ cations implies that the hydrating water molecules are on average more electrically charged. The fact that despite their different charges, K+ and Li+ are comparably able to migrate along the field direction may be ascribed both to steric and inertial effects.36 Although the fine evaluation of the ionic radii of common ions such as Li+ remains still an open question investigated both by means of experiments47 and computations,48,49 the significant quantitative difference in size and mass that holds between this latter cation and K+ may explain the reported behavior. In fact, potassium ion is characterized by an ionic radius of ∼1.52 Å and an atomic mass of ∼39.10 a.u., both sizably larger than those of the lithium cation, which are equal to ∼0.90 Å and ∼6.94 a.u., respectively.
According to Fig. 5a and b, the NaI water solution displays the largest mobility for I−, followed by LiI and then KI. Although the current density reported elsewhere follows a different trend,1,4,7 it should be noticed that those data represent the short-circuit current measured at 0 V. In order to compare the findings obtained by means of the present ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, a current measured under forward bias (i.e., Jmax) must be experimentally determined. Toward this aim, a similar experiment to those reported by Dai and Rabani19–21 has been performed. As displayed in Table 1, where the results stemming from the current–voltage measurements under 1 sun (AM 1.5) are reported, the current produced by the DSSC under forward bias (i.e., Jmax) increases from the KI solution to the NaI one, in qualitative agreement with our first-principles calculations (see also Fig. S5 of the ESI†). The applied bias decreases the TiO2 Fermi level relative to the chemical potential of the electrolyte.50 This leads to a decrease of the occupancy of the electron acceptor states in TiO2, decreasing, in turn, the density of the conduction band/trap states. Meanwhile, the increment of the mobility of the iodide ions – due to the electric field – increases the rate of regeneration of the oxide dye, increasing, in turn, the current Jmax, which is determined under bias Vmax according to the different ions.51 In addition, the three ions interact with the conduction band of TiO2, further increasing the energy of its Fermi level and incrementing the electron injection. Under short-circuit conditions (i.e., at 0 V), no effects are induced by the bias, and the current uniquely depends on the differences between the ions. Li+, being smaller, can deeply penetrate into the mesoporous TiO2 film and combine with the electrons in its conduction band to form an ambipolar Li+–e− pair, which increases the transport speed of the electrons and enhances the Jsc of the DSSC.11,52,53 The negative influence of the small cations in the TiO2 film resides in the fact that the cations easily combine with triiodide, which leads both to a recombination loss and to a decrease of Voc of the DSSC.52
Table 1 Experimental data for the short-circuit density current Jsc (second column), the density current Jmax (third column), the photovoltage Voc (fourth column), the fill factor FF (fifth column), and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) percentage (sixth column) obtained for the three different water solutions KI, NaI, and LiI at a molarity of 2.1 M




Iodide (mol l−1)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
max (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF
PCE (%)




KI (2.1)
0.213
0.073
209
0.246
0.011


NaI (2.1)
0.258
0.198
209
0.447
0.029


LiI (2.1)
0.314
0.160
209
0.366
0.024




It follows that an exchange of the efficiency ranking between KI and NaI solutions is recorded under short-circuit conditions, whereas the LiI one remains in the same position since Jsc increases inversely with respect to Jmax. In addition, the effect of the pH of the aqueous solution in natural-based DSSCs is remarkable, as reported elsewhere.20 In fact, protons H+ – due to their positive effect on the TiO2 conduction band22 – increase the driving force for the electron injection and decrease the driving force of the back reactions, further improving the current density of DSSCs.
The average electric charge characterizing the iodide anions under the effect of a field strength of 0.15 V Å−1 is almost independent of the nature of the remainder solvated cationic species (Fig. S4b of the ESI†), whose charge propagation in the system is clearly screened by the aqueous environment. However, structural effects induced by the peculiar nature of the cations on the water network play major roles in assisting the transportation properties of the iodide anions. As shown in Fig. 6a, the RDFs mimicking the average local structure of the solvent around the investigated cations are dramatically different. In fact, as also atomistically depicted in Fig. 7a–c, the water environment in the very proximity of those cations is characterized by more or less compacted water structures depending on the specific nature of the ion. The lithium cation, being very small, is a strong structure maker and tends to accumulate a significant “local density” of water molecules around itself at very short distances. The first peak of the lithium–oxygen (LiO) RDF is indeed located at 1.95 Å and, as displayed in Fig. 7c, typical orientations of the nearby water molecules create a strongly over-structured local aqueous environment. Moreover, evident second and third solvation shells are present in the LiO RDF and in the respective running coordination number (Fig. 6b), which describe the interactions it establishes with the oxygen atoms. As is well-known, the water arrangement around structure maker ions is more “ice-like” (i.e., an entropy loss is associated with its typical molecular configuration).54,55 At the same time, this latter phenomenon induces, at longer distances, spatial regions where an entropy gain is associated with the specific water arrangements and depletion zones can thus be found. On the other hand, potassium cations are considered to be moderate structure breaker species. A broader first peak – located at 2.78 Å – emerges from the potassium–oxygen (KO) RDF and, as shown in Fig. 7a, although a charge-induced orientational order of its hydration shell is recorded, no positional order is additionally introduced by the inclusion of this ion in bulk water. In fact, from the analysis of the oxygen–oxygen (OO) RDF characterizing neat bulk water, it has been observed that the latter and the KO RDF are in practice stackable, indicating that potassium cations do not sizably alter the average water structure. The lithium-cation-induced structuring of the aqueous solvent in the proximity of the cations, which in turn generates depletion zones at larger distances, makes the diffusion of the iodide anions easier with respect to the potassium iodide case, as shown in Fig. 5a and b.
 Fig. 6  Potassium–oxygen (KO), sodium–oxygen (NaO), and lithium–oxygen (LiO) radial distribution functions (a) and the respective running coordination numbers (b) of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions under zero-field (continuous lines) and under a field strength of 0.15 V Å−1 (dashed lines). 
 Fig. 7  Solvation shell structures taken from randomly chosen frames of the first-principles molecular dynamics trajectories. Distances (in Å) between the three closest water molecules and K+ (a), Na+ (b), Li+ (c), and I− (d) are displayed. Whereas K+ (a) and I− (d) are moderate and strong “structure breakers”, respectively, inducing – at short distances – more expanded arrangements of the nearby water molecules, Na+ (b) and Li+ (c) are moderate and strong “structure makers”, respectively, introducing more compacted water regions in their proximity with respect to the bulk water case. 
Sodium cations create the “Goldilocks conditions”. On the one hand, indeed, Na+ cations are moderate structure maker species, thus creating depletion zones in the aqueous molecular environment; as shown in Fig. 6a, the first peak and the first dip heights of the sodium–oxygen (NaO) RDF are, respectively, higher and lower than those of the KO (and thus of the OO of pure water) RDF. In addition, the first peak is located at 2.34 Å, a lower value than that found in the OO and in the KO RDFs, once more proving the typical positional over-structuring of the water coordination shells of Na+. This latter evidence, along with the locations and heights of the first two dips of the NaO RDF, clearly shows the ion-induced depletion of the local water structure beyond the first hydration shell. On the other hand, the electric charge of this cation – upon typical solvation and field exposure – is significantly larger (and its distribution sharper) than those characterizing K+ and Li+ under the same conditions (Fig. S4a of the ESI†). When an electric field is applied, this property confers to Na+ a measurable larger mobility than that of the other cations, as shown in Fig. 5b (and in Fig. S3 of the ESI†). The field-induced rapidity of migration of sodium ions allows for fast displacements of the water depletion zones distinguishing the structure maker agent. In this way, within a given time interval, iodide anions in a NaI water solution have higher chances to efficiently migrate through the water environment than in the LiI and KI solutions, in descending order of probability, respectively.
4 Conclusions
In this paper, we have studied – combining both experiments and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations – the efficiencies of various aqueous electrolytes commonly employed in DSSCs (i.e., LiI, NaI, and KI) at two molarities (i.e., 0.5 M and 2.1 M). Our results reveal a clear qualitative agreement between the experiments and the numerical calculations in indicating that, for all the investigated cases, the 2.1 M samples were more efficient in transporting the charge carriers of the DSSCs with respect to their 0.5 M counterparts. In addition, we demonstrate that, among the 2.1 M systems, the NaI aqueous solution manifests the largest mobility of the dissolved ions, followed by the LiI and the KI electrolytes, respectively. Although Bella et al.30 recently reported a similar finding that referred, however, solely to NaI and KI electrolytes, here, we have shown the reasons behind this behavior that typically does not occur in DSSCs in the absence of bias, where KI aqueous solutions are sizably more efficient than their LiI and NaI – in descending order – counterparts. Thus, we have clarified how the application of a bias potential completely reverts the ranking of the mutual efficiencies.
In particular, by means of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, we have been able to atomistically trace the mobilities of the iodide anions and their respective counterions upon electric field exposure. Moreover, by experimentally measuring – under bias – the generated currents, we confirmed our first-principles predictions, proving for the first time that ab initio molecular dynamics techniques in the presence of electric fields can be successfully used for applications in natural dye-sensitized solar cells.
Relevant clues both on the hydration shell behavior of the dissolved ions and on the charges present on these ions emerged. It was found that sodium cations create the “Goldilocks conditions” having, on the one hand, the highest electric charge among the investigated cations (and thus establishing the strongest electrostatic coupling with the external field) and, on the other, being a moderate structure maker species. In this way, Na+ cations, being able to migrate more freely with respect to Li+ and K+, but also being an order maker ion that generates depletion zones in the water environment, offer better chances for the I− anions to diffuse with lower hindrance. This finding is able to account for the different efficiencies exhibited by the investigated electrolytes.
For those reasons, our results strongly suggest, on the one hand, that aqueous DSSCs should employ, as an electrolyte, NaI water solutions rather than LiI or KI aqueous mixtures and, on the other, that DSSCs should be designed in such a way to exploit electrolytes containing cations holding a relatively high electric charge and being structure maker species.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Calogero, A. Bartolotta, G. Di Marco, A. Di Carlo and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3244 RSC .
L. Goncalves, V. Bermudez, H. Ribeiroa and A. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 655 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 20801 Search PubMed .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894 RSC .
F. Bella, S. Galliano, M. Falco, G. Viscardi, C. Barolo, M. Grätzel and C. Gerbaldi, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1043 RSC .
F. Bella, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3431 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X. R. Xiao and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Weidmann, T. Dittrich, E. Konstantinova, I. Lauermann, I. Uhlendorf and F. Koch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 56, 153 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and R. Gebauer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 813 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sumita, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19849 CAS .
B. Macht, M. Turrion, A. Barkschat, P. Salvador, K. Ellmer and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitamura, K. Okada, H. Matsui and N. Tanabe, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2010, 132, 021105 CrossRef .
P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 3686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tekkanone, A. R. Kumarasiringhe, G. R. R. A. Kumara, K. G. U. Wijayantha and P. M. Sirimanne, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 193 CrossRef .
Q. Dai and J. Rabani, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2142 RSC .
Q. Dai and J. Rabani, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 17 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai and J. Rabani, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 421 RSC .
G. Calogero, J. H. Yum, A. Sinopoli, G. Dimarco, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1563 CrossRef CAS .
V. Leandri, H. Ellis, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19964 RSC .
S. Galliano, F. Bella, G. Piana, G. Giacona, G. Viscardi, C. Gerbaldi, M. Grätzel and C. Barolo, Sol. Energy, 2018, 163, 251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Galliano, F. Bella, C. Gerbaldi, M. Falco, G. Viscardi, M. Grätzel and C. Barolo, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 300 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y.-Y. Lin, F.-L. Wu, C.-T. Li, P.-Y. Chen, K.-C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Law, S. C. Pathirana, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barns, A. Listorti, T. H. Ghaddar and B. C. O'Regan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dong, W. Xiang, F. Huang, D. Fu, W. Huang, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng, X. Li and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kakiage, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bella, S. Galliano, M. Falco, G. Viscardi, C. Barolo, M. Grätzel and C. Gerbaldi, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4880 RSC .
L. Stryer and R. P. Haugland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1967, 68, 719 CrossRef .
J. E. Enderby, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1995, 24, 159 RSC .
K. D. Collins, G. W. Neilson and J. E. Enderby, Biophys. Chem., 2007, 128, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Gaiduk and G. Galli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Saitta, F. Saija and P. V. Giaquinta, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 207801 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cassone, F. Creazzo, P. V. Giaquinta, F. Saija and A. M. Saitta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23164 RSC .
G. Cassone, F. Creazzo, P. V. Giaquinta, J. Sponer and F. Saija, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20420 RSC .
G. Cassone, P. V. Giaquinta, F. Saija and A. M. Saitta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cassone, P. V. Giaquinta, F. Saija and A. M. Saitta, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 054502 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sinopoli, I. Citro, G. Calogero and A. Bartolotta, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 143, 291 CrossRef CAS .
P. Giannozzi, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. English and C. J. Waldron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12407 RSC .

          M. R. Wright, An Introduction to Aqueous Electrolyte Solutions, Wiley, Chichester, England,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Ding, A. Hassanali and M. Parrinello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 3310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Goldsack and R. Franchetto, Can. J. Chem., 1977, 55, 1062 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mähler and I. Persson, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 425 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bankura, V. Carnevale and M. L. Klein, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 014501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. Rowley and B. Roux, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 3526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O’Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Huang and H. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6864 RSC .
A. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Benedetti, M. de Paoli and A. Nogueira, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1121 RSC .

          R. W. Gurney, Ionic Processes in Solution, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1953 Search PubMed .
H. S. Frank and W. Y. Wen, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1957, 24, 133 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp01155aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:
I3− + 2e−(TiO2) → 3I−,	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Cross-section view of an illuminated natural dye (cyanidin) based solar cell operating in the absence (blue lines) and in the presence (red lines) of a bias voltage. Under forward bias (red arrows), electron recombination mainly occurs from the TiO2 conduction band or surface states with the electrolyte (i.e., I3− → I−). Under illumination (blue arrows), electron injection from the LUMO level of the dye to the TiO2 conduction band occurs and I− ions close to the photoelectrode provide the electrons to the oxidized dye.	 

 	Fig. 2  Iodide–oxygen (a) and iodide–hydrogen (b) radial distribution functions of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at 300 K.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mean square displacement (MSD) along a given axis (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions present in KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at 0.5 M (a) and at 2.1 M (b) under ambient conditions and at zero-field.	 

 	Fig. 4  Mean square displacement (MSD) along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions present in the 2.1 M KI (a), NaI (b), and LiI (c) water solutions at different field strengths. Black curves: 0.05 V Å−1; red curves: 0.075 V Å−1; blue curves: 0.15 V Å−1. At this latter field intensity, a diffusive regime of I− is established in all these three samples.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Mean square displacement (MSD) along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the iodide anions of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions at a field strength equal to 0.15 V Å−1. I− species solvated in the NaI aqueous solution are so far the most mobile. (b) Drift along the field direction (i.e., z-axis) of the cations (continuous lines) and the iodide anions (dashed lines) of the 2.1 M KI (black), NaI (red), and LiI (blue) water solutions at a field strength equal to 0.15 V Å−1. The zero-drift dotted line is a guide for the eye in order to better follow the divergent directions taken by ions of opposite charge when exposed to the field action.	 

KI (2.1)	0.213	0.073	209	0.246	0.011
NaI (2.1)	0.258	0.198	209	0.447	0.029
LiI (2.1)	0.314	0.160	209	0.366	0.024

 	Fig. 6  Potassium–oxygen (KO), sodium–oxygen (NaO), and lithium–oxygen (LiO) radial distribution functions (a) and the respective running coordination numbers (b) of the 2.1 M KI (black curves), NaI (red curves), and LiI (blue curves) water solutions under zero-field (continuous lines) and under a field strength of 0.15 V Å−1 (dashed lines).	 

 	Fig. 7  Solvation shell structures taken from randomly chosen frames of the first-principles molecular dynamics trajectories. Distances (in Å) between the three closest water molecules and K+ (a), Na+ (b), Li+ (c), and I− (d) are displayed. Whereas K+ (a) and I− (d) are moderate and strong “structure breakers”, respectively, inducing – at short distances – more expanded arrangements of the nearby water molecules, Na+ (b) and Li+ (c) are moderate and strong “structure makers”, respectively, introducing more compacted water regions in their proximity with respect to the bulk water case.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp01155a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
