Combined solid-state NMR, FT-IR and computational studies on layered and porous materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00358G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00358G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5684-5739Combined solid-state NMR, FT-IR and computational studies on layered and porous materials†

        
          
            Geo 
            Paul
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chiara 
            Bisio
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ilaria 
            Braschi
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Maurizio 
            Cossi
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Giorgio 
            Gatti
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Enrica 
            Gianotti
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Leonardo 
            Marchese
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Science and Technological Innovation, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Viale T. Michel 11, 15121 Alessandria, Italy. E-mail: leonardo.marchese@uniupo.it
bCentro Interdisciplinare Nano-SiSTeMI, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Viale T. Michel 11, 15121 Alessandria, Italy
cDepartment of Agricultural and Food Sciences, University of Bologna, Viale G. Fanin 44, 40127 Bologna, Italy
Received 
      20th April 2018
    First published on 17th July 2018AbstractUnderstanding the structure–property relationship of solids is of utmost relevance for efficient chemical processes and technological applications in industries. This contribution reviews the concept of coupling three well-known characterization techniques (solid-state NMR, FT-IR and computational methods) for the study of solid state materials which possess 2D and 3D architectures and discusses the way it will benefit the scientific communities. It highlights the most fundamental and applied aspects of the proactive combined approach strategies to gather information at a molecular level. The integrated approach involving multiple spectroscopic and computational methods allows achieving an in-depth understanding of the surface, interfacial and confined space processes that are beneficial for the establishment of structure–property relationships. The role of ssNMR/FT-IR spectroscopic properties of probe molecules in monitoring the strength and distribution of catalytic active sites and their accessibility at the porous/layered surface is discussed. Both experimental and theoretical aspects will be considered by reporting relevant examples. This review also identifies and discusses the progress, challenges and future prospects in the field of synthesis and applications of layered and porous solids.
Geo Paul
Geo Paul graduated in Chemistry from the University of Calicut, India. Geo was introduced to framework solids in the laboratory of Prof. C. N. R. Rao at JNCASR, Bangalore, India. Later, he moved to the University of Münster, Germany, to pursue his PhD in the group of PD Dr Hubert Koller. After a brief postdoctoral research stint in Münster, he moved to the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy) for post-doctoral research with Prof. L. Marchese. Geo's research interests are in the field of solid state chemistry, framework solids, porous materials, and hydraulic binders. He has co-authored 38 peer-reviewed research papers (ca. 1000 citations, h-index 17).
Chiara Bisio
Chiara Bisio graduated in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Piemonte Orientale and obtained her PhD in Chemistry at the University of Turin (Italy) and the University “Pierre et Marie Curie” (France) in 2005. She is an Associate Professor at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). Her research interests are in the field of the synthesis and physico-chemical characterisation of solids with applications as heterogeneous catalysts, sorbents for the removal of environmental pollutants and use in devices for the production of renewable energy. She has co-authored 67 research papers (ca. 1000 citations, h-index 19), 2 book chapters and 2 patents.
Ilaria Braschi
Ilaria Braschi graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 1991 from the University of Bologna (Italy), received a PhD in Soil Chemistry in 1997 from the University of Turin (Italy) and a second PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2013 from the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). She is an Associate Professor in Agricultural Chemistry at the University of Bologna. Her scientific activities focus on the host–guest & guest–guest interactions driving the adsorption and transformation of chemicals of both natural and anthropic origin involved in remediation processes. She has co-authored 41 research papers (h-index 16, ca. 700 citations), 5 book chapters and 1 patent.
Maurizio Cossi
Maurizio Cossi graduated and received his PhD from the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa (Italy). He is a Full Professor in Theoretical Chemistry at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). He contributed to the development and implementation of some of the most used algorithms and codes for the inclusion of solvent effects in ab initio calculations (PCM). Presently his main interests include the ab initio simulation of hybrid systems, often in connection with experimental studies: functionalized surfaces, gas adsorbed in porous materials, heterogeneous catalysts, hybrid photovoltaic materials. He has published more than 100 papers (ca. 23000 citations, h-index 36).
Giorgio Gatti
Giorgio Gatti graduated in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Piemonte Orientale and obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Technology at the University of Turin (Italy) in 2004. He is a Researcher at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). His research interests are in the field of advanced porous and layered materials exploitable for gas storage and decontamination of water. He focused his attention on the synthesis and physico-chemical characterisation of porous aromatics polymers with high surface area. He has co-authored 54 research papers (ca. 800 citations, h-index 17), 3 book chapters and 5 patents.
Enrica Gianotti
Enrica Gianotti received a degree in Chemistry in 1995 and PhD in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Turin (Italy). She has been an Associate Professor in Physical Chemistry at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy) since 2015. Her scientific activities are devoted to the synthesis and physico-chemical characterization of nanoporous materials with large surface area for catalytic and bio-medical applications. A multi-technique approach using FT-IR, DR UV-Vis-NIR, photoluminescence and ssNMR is performed to understand structure–property relationship. She is the co-author of 72 research papers, 2 book chapters and 1 patent. She has received around 1850 citations with h-index 22.
Leonardo Marchese
Leonardo Marchese graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 1985 and obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1990 from the University of Turin (Italy). He has been a Full Professor of Physical Chemistry since 2005 at the Università del Piemonte Orientale, where he is the Director of the Department of Science and Technological Innovation. He leads a research group of around 15 professors and researchers focusing on the development of materials for application in catalysis, gas storage and separation, photovoltaic cells and biomedicine, studied by a combined experimental and computational approach. He has co-authored 240 articles and 8 patents (ca. 7200 citations, h-index 48).
1. Introduction
The rational design of 3D porous and 2D layered materials as well as the understanding of their structure–property relationship is of utmost relevance for efficient chemical process and technological applications. There has been a significant increase in their synthesis as well as applications and as a result there has been an increase in the scientific publications being published across chemistry, physics and materials science. In the past few years, we have witnessed an increase in the multi-technique approaches, which stimulate the collection of information on solids with growing structural and compositional complexity. Each approach offers distinct advantages and can provide different information about bulk and surface properties. Though the principles of combined approaches for characterisation have long since been in use, the application of solid-state NMR (ssNMR), FT-IR spectroscopy and modelling to investigate weak interactions in porous matter has merely emerged recently. In this review, we provide an overview of the combined approach of using ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy together with computational methods to gather information at a molecular level for materials with 2D as well as 3D porous architectures. Finally, special attention will be paid to the use of molecular probes to determine the strength, type, concentration, nature and the accessibility of active sites.1–5
The scope of this review is to cover comprehensively the 2D and 3D porous materials that have been reported in the past 5 years where a combined approach has been employed for their characterization. The physico-chemical characterization of porous or layered solids, for technological applications, is an integral aspect of the research and development process. A number of considerations need to be made when one selects the spectroscopic technique of choice for solid state characterization of porous/layered solids. Theoretically, each technique is based upon a unique phenomenon: FT-IR is based on infrared energy absorption; ssNMR is based on radiofrequency absorption while the sample is located in a magnetic field, etc. Because of the unique nature of each technique and the various objectives of solid state characterization, one technique may be better suited than another. It is also very important to understand the limitations of each technique. However, a complete and detailed theoretical discussion of each technique is beyond the scope of this review. Instead, the reader is referred to a number of publications, outlining the theory6–10 and general usage11,12 as well as references cited therein.
First of all, the review will give a brief background to the advantages of coupling techniques and special emphasis will be given to show how the information obtained from one technique would complement that obtained from other techniques. After that, a section addressing the need to use probe molecules with different chemical nature to monitor the surface of porous/layered solids (i.e. polarity, catalytic active sites, pore size, etc.) will be discussed. Finally, two sections will give an overview of 2D layered materials and 3D porous materials. Properties of such materials depend on the nature of layered or porous architectures and the presence of active sites, which are finely characterized by the multi-technique approach reviewed in this work. It is unattractive and almost impossible to cite every article related to these topics, therefore, the authors have adopted a balanced approach in identifying and including only the most relevant scientific papers in this review. The acronyms used in this review are briefly described in a glossary found in the ESI.†
2. Advantages of coupling techniques
The multi-technique approach can allow collecting both structural and surface information of solids. Among the characterisation techniques, the huge advantage of ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy over other traditional solid-state techniques, such as diffraction, is that they can be applied not only to crystalline samples but also to amorphous, disordered or inhomogeneous systems. Therefore, NMR spectroscopy can be used, for instance, to measure atomic coordinates, lattice parameters, interatomic distances, and occupancy of atomic positions, whereas FT-IR can be exploited to collect fundamental information on structural and surface features of solids. On the other hand, utmost information related to the interactions between organic and inorganic components as well as hybrid materials can also be easily acquired by ssNMR and FT-IR methods. Moreover, ssNMR can also give important information on the molecular dynamics or transport properties of such types of solids.
Very often, a single experimental dataset is not sufficient to solve the complexity related to solid-state systems. Several experimental tools are used to study porous solids, but they all are limited in their spatial and temporal resolution. Different philosophies exist behind the choice of an experimental approach that usually is associated with the time scale of spectroscopic processes (Fig. 1). Solid-state NMR is able to provide different spectral insights through the observation of multiple nuclei in the same sample. However, one is limited to the observation of events that are significantly slower than the resonance frequencies of nuclei in question. Nevertheless, using FT-IR spectroscopy one can observe processes that occur at frequencies of the order of 1013 and 1015 Hz at room temperature. Experimental ssNMR spectroscopy measures the time and ensemble averaged values of chemical shifts in such cases. However, FT-IR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are capable of yielding data on a single molecule.
 Fig. 1  Time scale of some fundamental molecular motions and different experimental approaches to probe them. Figure in part inspired and adapted from M. Levitt's webpage (http://www.southampton.ac.uk/~mhl/publications/books/SpinDynamics/SD1/index.html). 
Solid-state NMR spectroscopy is largely used to obtain important information on the structural properties of solids. For instance, naturally abundant aluminium is important in the study of porous solids and is a favourable nucleus for ssNMR study. The Al–O environments and coordination sphere in porous and layered solids can easily be determined from the 27Al chemical shifts; 4, 5 and 6-coordinated aluminium resonances are well separated and are in the range 80–50, 40–30 and 15–10 ppm, respectively. 27Al MAS NMR chemical shift scales of porous aluminosilicates, aluminophosphates (AlPO) and silicoaluminophosphates (SAPO) are given in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  
27Al MAS NMR chemical shift scale of aluminium environments in selected porous solids. 27AlBAS, aluminium at the Brønsted acid site; 27AlLAS, aluminium at the Lewis acid site. 
Another common example is the investigation of the isotropic chemical shifts of 29Si sites that can give direct information about the structure, coordination and neighbour environments in porous and layered solids. In silicates and aluminosilicates, 29Si chemical shift ranges associated with coordination and environments are well established (Fig. 3). Most information on silicates, aluminosilicates and silicoaluminophosphates can be obtained from 29Si isotropic chemical shifts of tetrahedrally coordinated silicon atoms. Systematic changes in the chemical shift values are observed when the second coordination sphere (first being oxygens) is changed from Si to other atoms.13 As can be derived from Fig. 3, information concerning structural species and surface OH groups of solid samples can be obtained from the analysis of 29Si MAS NMR.
 Fig. 3  
29Si MAS NMR chemical shift scale of selected silicon environments. 
In addition, 1H MAS NMR chemical shifts can distinguish resonances due to acidic and non-acidic protons present in a porous solid. A chart showing the chemical shift scale of various protons that can be found in porous and layered solids is given in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  
1H MAS NMR chemical shift scale of various protons in porous solids. AlOHiso, isolated aluminol; SiOHiso, isolated silanol; AlOHH-bond, hydrogen bonded aluminol; BAS1, Brønsted acid site in large cavities; BAS2, Brønsted acid site in confined environments; SiOHH-bond, hydrogen bonded silanols. 
FT-IR spectroscopy is also widely used to have information on solid samples: in the literature, there are an exceedingly high number of papers dealing with the use of this technique (and related methods such as Attenuated Total Reflections, ATR, and Diffuse Reflectance IR, DRIFT) to obtain information on hydroxyl groups and other surface species as well as to draw some conclusions on the framework properties of materials. Nevertheless, FT-IR spectroscopy suffers from some limitations: for instance, the IR spectrum of the sample is “blind” with respect to the presence of ions with unsaturated coordination, which have a pivotal role in determining the catalytic properties of a solid and it cannot give complete information about the acidity of surface species (both hydroxyl groups, Brønsted or Lewis sites). Furthermore, no discrimination between bulk and surface species can be made. For this reason, most of the applications of FT-IR spectroscopy to study the surface properties of materials are linked to the use of probe molecules (see Section 3). Although other vibrational spectroscopies such as Raman and inelastic neutron scattering (INS) have been used for various applications in porous solids, this review will focus only on FT-IR spectroscopy. Dedicated reviews and articles are available for other vibrational spectroscopies.12,14–16
In Fig. 5, a schematic representation of the frequency range scale of the most common IR signals that are used to study both the structure (typically the bands below 1000 cm−1) and the surface species of solids is given.
 Fig. 5  FT-IR correlation chart reporting the most common IR signals typically used for the analysis of solid systems. 
As a matter of fact, the combination of 1H MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy is essential in order to have a deeper insight in the evaluation of the nature of the surface protons in porous and layered materials. In this sense, a direct investigation of surface hydroxyls with different acidic strengths in solids can be achieved by coupling FT-IR (also of adsorbed probe molecules, see Section 3) and 1H ssNMR spectroscopy.
The concentration of protons (nH) of a sample can be indeed estimated from NMR data by using the following equation:  where m and mref denote the mass of the sample and a standard reference (a solid with known concentration of acid sites (nrefH)), respectively; whereas I and Iref are the intensity (integral area) of the sample and reference signals, respectively.
There is an empirical and linear correlation between the proton chemical shift δH (ppm) and stretching vibration of hydroxyl groups in solids:17δH (ppm) = 57.1 − 0.0147νOH (cm−1)However, for estimating hydrogen bonded protons, the following correlation should be adopted:δH (ppm) = 37.9 − 0.0092νOH (cm−1)
It has to be noted that cationic hydroxyls will significantly deviate from these equations.
Similarly, the stretching vibration of bridging Si(OH)Al groups in aluminosilicates can be estimated from the δH measured at 298 K by using an empirically derived relationship, as expressed by18νOH (cm−1) = 3906 − 74.5δH (ppm)
In Scheme 1, 1H MAS NMR and FT-IR spectra related to the OH groups of a silicoaluminophosphate material are reported.
 Scheme 1  An effective mirror image assembly between 1H MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy associated with the linear relationship of 1H chemical shift and the frequency of OH stretching vibration as seen in a dehydrated zeo-type (SAPO) material. The assignments of the most common isolated OH surface sites are highlighted: Si–OHiso, isolated silanols; Si–OHH-bond, hydrogen bonded silanols; BAS, Brønsted acid sites. 
Owing to the wide accessibility of general utility quantum chemistry programs, theoretical calculations of spectral parameters have provided an alternative, flexible, relatively easy, and sometimes more detailed approach, also aiding in the assignment of complex spectra. Molecular vibrations are computed in the harmonic approximation by numerous programs, either at the ab initio or at the semi-empirical level: almost all the codes providing geometry optimizations (Turbomole,19 Gaussian,20 Dalton,21 ADF,22 MOLPRO,23 to cite some of the most used) also provide Hessian matrices and simulated vibrational spectra. In some cases anharmonic corrections are available as well,24,25 though their high computational cost limits such applications severely; some codes provide vibrational frequencies at the DFT level also for periodic solids.26
There are many examples of studies combining IR or Raman (either absorbance or diffuse reflectance) spectra and theoretical simulations, often to support the assignment of peaks in difficult cases, or to model the intra- and inter-molecular interactions underlying the vibrational patterns. Some of these applications27 are described in the following: an example of DFT and experimental vibrational spectra, compared to deduce the structure of different sulfonamide antibiotics embedded in a zeolite framework, is shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Right side: Simulated (red) and experimental (blue) vibrational frequencies of some sulphonamide antibiotic molecules embedded in zeolite Y (examples shown on the left). Note the different scale due to harmonic approximation in the theoretical spectra. Left side: The optimized structure of sulfachloropyridazine (top) and sulfadiazine dimer embedded in the supercages of zeolite Y (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society & Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Solid-state NMR calculation methods and modelling have kept pace with the rapid extension of experiments.28,29 Calculation of NMR parameters, such as quadrupolar coupling constants, by WIEN codes has been in use for decades.30 Similarly, SIMPSON, another authoritative program for fast and accurate numerical simulation of ssNMR experiments, was described by Nielsen and coworkers.31 Application of first-principles calculations using the gauge including projector augmented wave method (utilizing the framework of density functional theory) has revolutionized the ability to compute NMR tensors in periodic solid systems with all-electron accuracy.32 The applications of this highly innovative approach in chemistry and materials science were recently reviewed by Bonhomme et al.33
3. Probe molecules
The adsorption of probe molecules allows fine characterization of the surface nature of 2D and 3D porous solids: molecules with particular properties (i.e. acidic or basic) can interact with the surface active sites present inside the pores or between the layers.34,35 By considering the electronic or geometrical distortion of the molecules induced by the adsorption, or eventually their chemical modification, it is possible to achieve information on the nature, location, accessibility and reactivity of the active sites. An ideal probe molecule should not cause any chemical modification of the surface and should occupy the same kind of sites during adsorption on different materials forming complexes stable enough to be characterised.35 However, a proton transfer may occur between a solid acid and a basic probe molecule, and this process is also studied to get insights into the nature and concentration of catalytic acid sites as described below. Probe molecules may be classified according to their abilities to interact with acidic, basic or redox centres or, more generally, with surface defects (i.e. uncoordinated surface centres).35
FT-IR spectroscopy in the mid-IR region (4200–400 cm−1) allows monitoring the solid surface through the perturbation of the probe molecules, that means changes in vibrational frequency and intensity of their IR modes. To be active in the IR range, a molecule has to change its dipole moment: molecules such as CO, NO, NH3, and CH3CN are IR active.36–38 Nevertheless, IR inactive molecules, such as H2 and N2, can become IR active as a result of the interaction with the surface active sites. Some research groups have revised the use of probe molecules by FT-IR spectroscopy for 3D porous materials describing the most accurate methodologies to obtain information on physico-chemical properties of the active sites, as well as on their concentration and strength.12,39–41
The adsorption of probe molecules can also be followed by MAS NMR spectroscopy. Probe molecules with different basicity have been used, for instance, to study the acidity of solid catalysts with industrial relevance for the production of fine chemicals.1 Three types of acid sites are in general recognized in porous silica-based heterogeneous catalysts, namely Brønsted, Lewis and silanols, which dictate the fate of a chemical reaction. In porous solid acids, bridging OH groups (Al–OH–Si) are considered the locus of Brønsted acid sites, which are able to donate the proton when interacting with a strong basic molecule, while Lewis acid is only able to coordinate the probe.
The adsorption of weak bases is normally adopted to characterize Lewis and Brønsted acidity: upon interaction with an acidic OH group, these molecules form an H-bond adduct resulting in a downward shift of the O–H stretching modes. The magnitude of the shift is a measure of the acid strength of the hydroxyl group and is proportional to the proton affinity of the surface groups. The most frequently used probe molecules of this class are CO, N2, O2, and H2 (normally adsorbed at temperature ≤100 K) along with acetonitrile, benzene, substituted benzenes, olefins (normally adsorbed at room temperature).35 Strong bases such as ammonia and pyridine but also piperidine, trimethylamine and n-butylamine are also useful.42,43 When these molecules are adsorbed on Brønsted acid sites they become protonated and display different spectroscopic features with respect to the un-protonated probes. A list of the most common basic probe molecules suitable to study solid acids is reported in Table 1.
Table 1 List of selected probe molecules employed in FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopic studies of the acidity and basicity of porous solids




Probe molecules44 basic
FT-IR type of interaction
MAS NMR: methods and comments
Ref.


Brønsted acidity
Lewis acidity




CO
H-Bond with Brønsted acid sites

1H NMR acid concentration and strength

1H NMR acid concentration and strength

12, 35, 39, 40 and 45–49



CD3CN
H-Bond with Brønsted acid sites

1H NMR acid strength

1H NMR acid strength

50–54



NH3
Proton transfer with Brønsted acid sites

1H NMR acid concentration and strength

1H NMR acid concentration and strength

51 and 55–61



Pyridine & alkylpyridines
Proton transfer with Brønsted acid sites

1H and 15N NMR acid concentration and strength

15N NMR acid concentration and strength

49 and 62–69



Trimethyl phosphine



31P NMR acid concentration

31P NMR acid concentration and strength

70–72



Trialkyl phosphine oxide



31P NMR acid location, concentration and strength

31P NMR acid location and concentration

60 and 73–76



Diphosphines



31P NMR acid location, concentration and strength

31P NMR acid location and concentration

77 and 78




13C-2-Acetone



13C NMR acid strength

13C NMR acid strength

60 and 79–85



Perfluorotributyl amine



1H NMR distinguishes between internal and external Brønsted acid sites



86 and 87







Probe molecules88 acidic
Methods and comments
Ref.




CO2
FT-IR: interaction with basic sites

12, 89 and 90



Pyrrole
FT-IR: intrinsic basicity; 1H NMR: intrinsic basicity

91–93



Chlorodifluoromethane
FT-IR: intrinsic basicity; 1H and 13C NMR: intrinsic basicity

94 and 95



Fluoroform
FT-IR: intrinsic basicity and strength

95 and 96



Methylacetylene &







tert-Butylacetylene
FT-IR: Lewis basic sites and basicity strength

97



Methyl iodide

13C NMR: base strength

98–100



Trichloromethane
FT-IR: base strength; 1H and 23Na NMR: intrinsic basicity

101



SO2, SO3, HCN, CS2
FT-IR: basic sites; 1H, 13C and 23Na NMR: intrinsic basicity

95 and 102–105






Fig. 7 shows a schematic representation of the different positions of 1H chemical shift (A) and the stretching and bending modes in FT-IR spectra (B) of d-acetonitrile, a weak basic molecule as well as ammonia and pyridine, strong bases (the classification is based on a massive number of results reported in the literature). The position of protonated species is also reported.
 Fig. 7  Correlation chart related to selected probe molecules: (A) 1H MAS NMR chemical shift scale and (B) FT-IR active frequencies. LAS, Lewis acid site; BAS, Brønsted acid site; H-bond, hydrogen bond. 
FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed probe molecules also allowed the quantification of the total number of accessible Brønsted acid sites (N). It can be estimated using the Lambert–Beer law in the form A = εNρ, where A is the intensity of the specific IR band obtained after interaction with the probe molecule (i.e. pyridinium or ammonium ions), ε is the molar extinction coefficient (cm μmol−1), N is the concentration of the vibrating species (mmol g−1) and ρ is the density of the pellet (mass/area ratio expressed as mg cm−2).
Besides solid acids, there is a strong interest in basic materials because of their interest in industrial catalysis.92,96 The origin of material basicity is very often associated with the negative charge density of the framework oxygen atoms, which further depends on the framework topology and chemical composition.94 In the case of ion-exchanged zeolites, the framework negative charge can be for instance modulated by introducing different alkali-metal cations thus leading to solids with variable basicity.106 Spectroscopic studies of porous solids allow the determination of abundance and type of basic sites, which is mostly due to Lewis basicity, with the help of acidic probe molecules. A more comprehensive assessment of the basicity in zeolites could be given by ssNMR spectroscopy. Indeed, through identifying characteristic difference in the chemical shifts before and after probe adsorption it is possible to follow the base strength of solid bases.93 There are a variety of acidic probe molecules employed for these studies and a few of them are listed in Table 1.88 Busca has recently reviewed the basicity and acidity of protonic and cationic zeolites and discussed the topic based on FT-IR spectroscopic measurements and chemical approaches.107
ssNMR spectroscopy can be used to study concentration, distribution, nature and strength of acid sites (Brønsted and Lewis) because of the possibility to exploit several magnetically active nuclei (1H, 27Al, 29Si, 23Na, 119Sn etc.) that may be present in a porous solid as well as in a probe molecule (1H, 13C, 15N, and 31P). Alternatively, Lewis acidic sites can be directly detected by multinuclear (27Al, 119Sn and 47,49Ti) NMR spectroscopy, which can distinguish between framework and extra-framework species.108–110 Additional information on these specific applications is given in the ESI.†
To monitor the adsorption of probe molecules on a surface, specific cells are needed; moreover, solid samples have to be outgassed under high vacuum conditions (and very often at high temperatures) in order to clean up the surface before the adsorption of molecules. Specific cells (very often home-made designed and fabricated) are needed to study the adsorption of probe molecules by using both IR and ssNMR spectroscopy. An example is given in Fig. 8: a vacuum line is used to both clean up the sample surface and take up gases or vapours (in controlled doses) simultaneously on both the pellet used for IR measurement and the powder for ssNMR analysis. This allows the studies by FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy under strictly similar conditions, thus giving complementary insights into the surface sites and their interactions, which are otherwise not achievable.
 Fig. 8  Schematic view of the apparatus (vacuum line and cells) used for the simultaneous uptake of a probe molecule on samples that can be then studied (under similar conditions) by FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopic techniques. 
Deng et al. recently reviewed the application of combined approaches, in acquiring both qualitative and quantitative information on acidic sites using probe molecules, by employing ssNMR and DFT calculations.111 DFT calculations can yield valuable information on the adsorption structure, deprotonation energy, and NMR parameters that can be correlated with the acid strength of solid acids. A recent review of Trujillo et al. describes the most applied spectroscopic and sorption based techniques in the investigation of acidic properties of porous solids.47 The use of FT-IR spectroscopy for the characterization of layered and porous hierarchical materials has been reviewed by Roth et al.,112 and some applications of ab initio calculations to support the experimental results have been mentioned.
Van Santen and co-workers have been using quantum chemical calculations in combination with spectroscopy to study various aspects of zeolites.113,114 Hardness and softness, both at the global and local levels in the framework of zeolite basicity can be calculated using DFT.115 Similarly, DFT calculations can be employed to investigate the interaction of acidic sites in zeolites with common basic molecular probes and alkenes to explore scaling relations between zeolite acidity and catalytic reactivity.116,117
Mass transfer and diffusion in porous materials can be studied using pulsed field gradient (PFG) NMR and molecular dynamics (MD).118,119 Kärger and co-workers have recently reviewed the fundamentals and applications of PFG NMR in the study of the internal dynamics in mesoporous and hierarchical micromesoporous materials.120,121
4. 2D layered materials
Among the vast class of advanced oxide materials, 2D layered solids have an important place because of their remarkable structure–property relationship, which has been the subject of an increasing number of research papers and patents for different technological applications.122
Layered materials are formed by the packing of inorganic planar structures called layers or lamellae, interacting with each other through essentially weak bonds, typically of van der Waals (vdW) type, even if ionic interactions can also be found.123 The strong chemical bonding in two rather than three crystallographic directions results in some of the interesting anisotropic properties of these compounds, like their mechanical strength, optical absorption, reflectivity, and the transport of electrons, holes and intercalated ions.
All along the years layered materials have attracted ever increasing attention as attested by the large number of published scientific papers, reviews and books. Many layered solids are of natural origin (for instance clay minerals) and have been good companions of the humanity through the ages having known the most widespread applications. Nevertheless, over the past few decades much attention has been paid to synthetic layered materials especially due to the possibility of tuning their properties through a rational modification of the composition of the layers and/or interlayer space.124–126 In relation to their controllable properties, this review is especially dedicated to synthetic solids.
The reversible inclusion of guest species (with variable chemical composition, from simple ions to complex organic moieties) in the layered host matrix (having either a crystalline or amorphous structure) leads to the so-called intercalation compounds: this is an interesting way to obtain new functional materials (not otherwise obtainable) in which the intercalated guests are accommodated, and in many cases protected from oxidation or photo-degradation. Since these materials very often do not fulfil the fixed stoichiometry required for a compound, the term hybrid is frequently used, especially when the guest species is an organic moiety.127
Intercalation compounds are a class of extremely flexible materials because the appropriate choice of host and guest species results in the possibility of tuning their final properties, thus extending their potential applications to various technological fields such as heterogeneous catalysis, biomedicine, polymer science and environmental protection.128–132
The study of intercalation compounds started some ten years ago, and represents now an established specific domain of solid-state research and materials sciences. The knowledge of these solids has become largely widespread through the publication of several books, reviews and even through the organisation of specific meeting and conferences.133–135 For instance, since 1977 the International Symposium on Intercalation Compounds (ISIC) has been organised on a biannual basis, and the most recent advances were also collected in a themed issue of Dalton Transactions titled “Recent developments in Intercalation Compounds: Chemistry and Applications”.136
In the frame of this review, recent and significant examples attesting the importance of combining FT-IR, ssNMR and/or computational modelling techniques for the study of layered materials will be highlighted, with particular emphasis to solids that can be intercalated with different guest species. Our choice is based on the fact that the coupling of experimental and theoretical techniques is very often fundamental to giving additional hints on intercalation phenomena and to the comprehension of structure/property relationship of the derived materials.
Then, a survey on the combined use of techniques for the investigation of synthetic materials such as synthetic cationic clays, alkali layered silicates, phosphates/phosphonates and layered double hydroxides (Fig. 9) will be reported. Examples of perovskite-based solids will also be provided in relation to the increasing relevance that these materials have recently acquired in various fields such as optoelectronic or photocatalysis. It is relevant to note that hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites have recently acquired enormous interest due to their outstanding performances in a new generation of photovoltaic devices.137–140 Nevertheless, the solids used for this application have essentially 3D structures and they will not be treated in this section.
 Fig. 9  Schematic view of the classes of synthetic layered materials treated in the review. 
4.1. Synthetic clay-like materials
Clays of natural origin are largely available and very often inexpensive. Nevertheless, their chemical composition and physico-chemical properties are largely variable depending on their site origin and this could limit their technological applications. In addition, the use of natural clays requires several extensive purification steps due to the presence of organic and/or inorganic impurities. For this reason, in this review the main attention is focused on the recent literature concerning synthetic clays with controlled and tuned properties.
Besides the classical uses as sorbents or ion exchangers, clays have also been employed as heterogeneous catalysts for the production of fine chemicals141 or for the oxidative degradation of toxic molecules142 and as additives for the preparation of polymer nanocomposites.129,143 More recently, clays have also been used for optical and optoelectronic applications144,145 or as additives for the stabilization of liquid electrolytes needed for the preparation of organic-based photovoltaic devices such as dye-sensitized solar cells.146,147 An example of combined experimental study enlightening the influence of the adopted synthetic approaches, especially the effects of the dilution of the synthesis gel, on the physico-chemical properties of lamellar solids is reported by our research group and is related to saponite clay of the smectite family.148 This type of solid can be obtained by exploiting hydrothermal and microwave-assisted methods or a sol–gel procedure (the latter method in general leads to poorly crystalline solids).149
The combination of FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed probe molecules (i.e. NH3 at r.t. and CO at 100 K) and ssNMR provided new insights into the coordination/distribution of aluminium in tetrahedral and octahedral sheets of saponite in relation to the H2O/Si ratio of the synthesis gel. Besides an evident effect on the platelet dimension (Fig. 10, top), FT-IR data of NH3 adsorption confirmed the presence of higher concentration of Brønsted acid sites in samples prepared with less diluted synthesis gel (as can be seen from the intensity of the band at 1445 cm−1 due to ammonium ions, Fig. 10, bottom left), whereas the use of CO as a probe molecule allowed making a scale of acidity of surface acid sites. Solid-state 27Al NMR data involving 1D MAS (Fig. 10, bottom right) and 2D MQMAS clearly demonstrated that the increase of synthesis gel dilution leads to a reduction of the AlIV/AlVI ratio, in agreement with the reduced cationic exchange capacity of these synthetic clays. It was thus inferred that a simple modification of the synthesis gel dilution resulted in the possibility of tuning the acidity and ion exchange capacity of synthetic saponite samples.
 Fig. 10  (top) TEM images of synthetic saponite samples prepared by using different H2O/Si ratios (A: H2O/Si = 20, B = 50, C = 110, D = 150); (frame E) FT-IR spectra, in the 1800–1300 cm−1 region of NH3 (100 mbar) adsorbed and subsequently evacuated at r.t. on saponites prepared using H2O/Si ratios of (a) 20, (b) 50, (c) 110 and (d) 150; materials outgassed at 573 K; (frame F) 27Al MAS NMR data recoded using a MAS rate of 15 kHz, each spectrum includes experimental and deconvoluted spectra with individual contributions from each 27Al site. Adapted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd. 
Besides fully inorganic clays, in the last few years much effort has been devoted to the preparation of organic–inorganic hybrid materials, aiming to combine the advantages of organic functionalities and inorganic frameworks in solids for catalysis, drug delivery etc.150,151 Organo-clays are generally prepared by post-synthesis ion-exchange intercalation of surfactant molecules.152 However, other strategies have been recently explored to modify the surface of clay materials. Different hybrid organic–inorganic solids have been obtained, in fact, through one-pot synthesis by introducing organic alkoxides into the synthesis gel of phyllosilicates such as montmorillonite, saponite or laponite.153,154
Bisio et al. provided an example of the combination of ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy to give additional hints on the arrangement of cetyltrimethylammonium (CTA+) cations intercalated in saponite clay.128 An organo-saponite intercalated with CTA+ (CTA-SAP_OP) was synthesized by a one-step hydrothermal method and compared with an organo-saponite prepared by a classical post-synthesis exchange method (CTA-SAP_PS). FT-IR and ssNMR experiments demonstrated a different trans/gauche conformation ratio of the CTA+ ions in the two hybrid clays. 27Al and 29Si MAS NMR experiments showed that the CTA-SAP_PS sample has a higher concentration of tetrahedral aluminium than CTA-SAP_OP. This means that the one-pot synthesis material has a lower charge density in the lamellae, which influences the surfactant organization in the saponite interlayer space.
As can be seen in Fig. 11A, 13C resonance peaks were considerably broadened and shifted in CTA-SAP_PS and CTA-SAP_OP compared to CTABr molecules and this suggests conformational changes and distribution of environments for intercalated ions, together with a modification of the mobility of the surfactant chains. The surfactant molecules in CTA-SAP_OP (Fig. 11A, curve c) predominantly adopted all-trans conformation, whereas CTA-SAP_PS (Fig. 11A, curve b) contained CTABr in both conformations in a similar ratio. FT-IR data supported ssNMR ones, as can be seen from the changes of the IR band intensity in the hybrid systems (Fig. 11B) and this is a clear indication of the different organization of surfactant ions in the interlayer space of the two hybrids in relation to their preparation method.
 Fig. 11  (A) 13C CPMAS NMR spectra of pure CTABr (a), CTA-SAP_PS (b) and CTA-SAP_OP (c); (B) IR spectra of CTABr (a), CTA-SAP_PS (b) and CTA-SAP_OP (c) samples diluted in KBr. CN denotes methyl carbons directly bound to nitrogen. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
In 2011, Alba et al. reported a FT-IR and MAS NMR (both 29Si and 13C) spectroscopic study on the conformational (gauche to trans) changes of the interlayer structure of mica intercalated with various n-alkylammonium cations (R-NH3+) with different alkyl chain lengths (R = C12, C14, C16, and C18).155 The amount of intercalated surfactant and the d-spacing of the resulting solids increased with alkyl chain length, with the mica interlayer spaces expanding as needed to accommodate intercalated surfactants. The results indicated that the alkylammonium molecules packed tail-to-tail in a bimolecular arrangement, with the chain ends of two opposing molecules lying next to each other.
In 2016, Tao et al. proposed the sylilation of saponite clays to prepare organic–inorganic hybrid materials in which covalent links are present between the organic components and the surface. This enabled a durable immobilization of the organic species on the clay surface, thus widening the possible uses of the derived materials.156 In this study, saponite samples with a fixed Si/Mg ratio were prepared by a hydrothermal method and then grafted with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTS). The sylilation mechanism of the clay mineral surfaces was described thanks to the coupling of FT-IR and 29Si-NMR spectroscopy. In particular, FT-IR monitored the surface sylilation and the 29Si MAS NMR clarified the occurrence of T3 structures that increased with the silane content. T1 structures were absent (these signals/sites are described in Section 2).
Expandable 2:1 clays are currently considered quite versatile materials for biomedical applications such as controlled drug release, gene delivery, and cancer therapy. In this context, dendrimeric-like assemblies based on organoclays were developed as multi-host systems for sustained drug delivery.157 β-Cyclodextrin was modified by tosylation of its C6-hydroxyl groups whereas a synthetic Na-montmorillonite was grafted with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane to display amino groups. The two building blocks could covalently bind through a nucleophilic substitution reaction between the mono-6-(p-toluenesulfonyl)-6-deoxy-β-cyclodextrin and an amino group of the 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane-functionalized montmorillonite. A combined IR and 1H and 29Si MAS NMR evaluation confirmed the occurrence of a nucleophilic substitution. From nano- to micro-scale dendrimeric supramolecular architecture structural features were observed owing to intermolecular H-bonding between the hydroxyl groups in β-cyclodextrin units and oxygens of the SiO4 tetrahedra of the montmorillonite surface. Several interesting biomedical features could be related to the dendrimeric structure of the organo-clay material (i.e. high drug loadings, prolonged low aggregation in cell-like media and low cytotoxicity), thus offering a promising approach toward the synthesis and the assembly of novel multifunctional materials with a dendrimeric-like architecture.
The interlayer cations are of utmost importance to govern the sequence and route of reactions on the surface of the 2D expandable nanosheets during their assembly. The local state of sodium cations inside the interlayer spaces of synthetic saponite, hectorite and stevensite was systematically investigated by an experimental and simulated 23Na MAS (MQMAS) NMR approach158 and the tunability of the different interlayer cation states along with the local structure of the 2D nanosheets was defined. Experimental and simulated NMR show two and three cation states in stevensite and hectorite as a consequence of the different local electrostatic fields induced by the different charges of the corresponding octahedral layers.
An interesting example is related to the interaction of water with natural and organically modified montmorillonites.159 Although natural clays are not included in the review, this study is described because of its relevance in showing the potential of combined IR and NMR spectroscopy. The combination of the near-IR (9000–4000 cm−1) together with 1H and 13C MAS NMR spectroscopy was adopted for a systematic study of water species adsorbed in a natural Na-montmorillonite exchanged with Li+ and two organic cations of different size (namely, tetramethylammonium – TMA – and hexadecyltrimethylammonium – HDTMA) exposed to different conditions of relative humidity at room temperature. According to the adsorption isotherms the amount of water decreased in the order Li+ > TMA > HDTMA due to the increased hydrophobicity of the montmorillonite exchanged with organic cations. The intensities of the overtone (2ν) and combination (ν + δ) bands of H2O vibrations, gradually increased in hydrated samples. The 13C MAS NMR and near-IR of the hydrated organoclays confirmed the presence of water close to the head-group of the organic cations. Interestingly, NMR signals of inner –CH2– groups in HDTMA were also affected by hydration and the contribution of disordered gauche conformers increased after water adsorption.
Few examples of combined theoretical/experimental studies appeared for the class of synthetic clays: ab initio (DFT) calculations with hybrid functionals, however, were used to help the interpretation of multinuclear ssNMR spectra in the characterization of montmorillonite;160 electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy was applied to investigate polymer–clay nanocomposites,161 and in this case DFT results provided insights into the weak coupling with various nuclei, notably 23Na. On the other hand, a number of recent publications reported on the use of classical and ab initio molecular dynamics to support the structural determination of several clays with inelastic and quasi-elastic neutron scattering.162–166
The combination of DFT and IR spectroscopy has also been used to study a novel dielectric relaxation behavior under an applied alternating current electrical field originated from the dynamic orientation motion of ethanolamine or ethylene glycol intercalated into a montmorillonite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4·0.83 ethanolamine and Al2Si2O5(OH)4·0.71 ethylene glycol, respectively).167 IR analysis of the intercalated materials revealed that the characteristic and very sensitive IR active inner and inner-surface O–H stretching modes of the host were not significantly affected by the guests in full agreement with the DFT analysis of the single-crystal structures of the same materials. As a result, the intercalation expanded the kaolinite crystal along the c-axis, and did not significantly affect the atom arrangement within the aluminosilicate layer. These host–guest interactions were supposed to lead to the existence of a small energy barrier for the motion of ethanolamine or ethylene glycol from one orientation to another. The potential barrier associated with the thermal-assisted orientation alternation of the intercalated molecules could be overcome under an applied alternating current electrical field.
4.2. Alkali layered silicates
Aluminium-free layered hydrated silicates can be considered an extension of the groups of silicates and provide interesting alternatives to the different forms of silica. They are mainly prepared from common raw materials through hydrothermal processes. These materials have peculiar properties, including the possibility to be exchanged and intercalated, and applied in technological fields.168

4.2.1. Magadiite. 
Magadiite is a member of the hydrous-layered alkali silicates that have attracted interest in relation to the possibility of easily modifying their structure, texture and composition. In order to extend its use to thin film technologies and to the preparation of polymer nanocomposites many studies have focused on the modification of the orientation and organization of the lamellae or by controlling the particle morphology (also through the disaggregation of the magadiite particles).
In 2013, Pastore et al. reported an example of the preparation and characterization of magadiite exchanged with cetyltrimethylammonium cations (CTA-magadiite), and its disaggregation in separated plaques through ion-exchange in acidic media.169 In this case, the combination of variable temperature IR and ssNMR spectroscopy provided additional hints to the comprehension of the disaggregation process and enlightened the physico-chemical properties of the produced materials. A comparison of the IR spectra of disaggregated magadiite and of the parent CTA-magadiite after evacuation at different temperatures (i.e. 373 K and 573 K; Fig. 12A) enlightens the different nature of both intercalated and surface species of the two materials.
 Fig. 12  (A) IR spectra of CTA-magadiite (solid line) and disaggregated magadiite (dashed line) sample after outgassing at 373 and 573 K. (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of Na-magadiite, CTA-magadiite and disaggregated magadiite. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Indeed, the IR spectra at 373 K clearly show that the disaggregation process leads to an almost complete removal of organic species (testified by the negligible presence of the bands in the 3000–2800 and 1500–1450 cm−1 ranges), and to the formation of surface Si–OH species (broad and intense band at 3220 cm−1). Moreover, the concentration of silanols is much lower in the CTA-magadiite sample. After heating at higher temperature, the concentration of silanols becomes similar to that of the disaggregated magadiite, though the distribution of species is different in the two materials as testified by the different shape and wavenumber of the band in the 3700–3000 cm−1 range. At this temperature a high concentration of silanols is present inside the magadiite interlayer space and likely on the external surface of the silica particles. The coupling with 1H ssNMR spectroscopy helped in clarifying the nature of the surface species (schemes in Fig. 12).
In addition, the combination of 2D 1H–29Si HETCOR NMR with FT-IR spectroscopy provided a deeper insight into the nature of the surface/interface of inorganic–organic hybrid CTA-exchanged samples, along with that of the derived disaggregated material. 2D HETCOR NMR experiments, with different contact times, indicated that the samples have distinct structural conformations and dynamics at the interface. These results, combined with those derived by variable temperature XRD and FT-IR, led to clarify that by thermal heating the CTA degradation influences the disaggregation of the structure with an increase of surface area. A condensation of silanol groups occurred during the disaggregation, with the formation of specific siloxane interlayer linkages. Moreover, disaggregated magadiite shows a much higher concentration of H-bonded silanol nest typical of amorphous silica samples or highly defective silicalite170 (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Representation of the evolution of interlayer species after heating of CTA-magadiite based on the results arising from the coupling of variable temperature IR and XRD analyses and ssNMR spectroscopy. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.2. Na-RUB-18. 
The hydration-dependent structural changes of the layered silicate Na-RUB-18 (Na8Si32O64(OH)8·32H2O)171 were also studied by a combination of experimental (TG, XRPD, IR) and theoretical (semi-empirical and ab initio periodic calculations) techniques.172 Such a combined approach was particularly useful to describe the evolution of the Na-RUB-18 local structure as a function of the temperature and hydration degree.
A theoretical model of the hydrated, as-synthesized Na-RUB-18, optimized by DFT with periodic boundary conditions showed that two water molecules in each solvation shell (in apical position) are less strongly bound, and they are likely to be lost in the first de-hydration. The coupling of modelling with variable temperature IR analysis gave more insights about the changes induced by the de-hydration (Fig. 13). The spectrum of the hydrated form reveals water molecules engaged in H-bonds of different strengths as testified by the complex band in the 3700–3000 cm−1 band (Fig. 13a), thus confirming the difference between apical and equatorial positions, while in the partially de-hydrated form the H-bonds appear stronger, in agreement with the structure optimized theoretically.
 Fig. 13  (A) Variable temperature FT-IR spectra of Na-RUB-18 samples; (B) Na2Si8O16H7(OH)·8H2O cluster used to model the silanol bridge in the hydrated structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2009 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
An important point concerns the nature of the H-bond between silanol and silanolate groups on the layer surface, which has been debated in the literature and is more evident upon heating at 100 °C (Fig. 13, curve d). The IR spectra analysis shows that the stretching of this H-bond is associated with a large feature in the 3200–1300 cm−1 range, showing Fermi resonance phenomena with the overtones (and/or combinations) of the bending modes of the same group. These frequencies are reproduced by ab initio calculations to reproduce the chemical environments of the silanol–silanolate bridge in the hydrated and de-hydrated forms. Experimental and theoretical findings agree in indicating a strong H-bond in the silanol–silanolate bridge, rather than shared hydrogen in a single-wall potential.


4.2.3. Kanemite. 
Kanemite, a framework of only tetrahedral Si(Al)O4 units with both Si/Al–OH groups and hydrated alkali metals at the interlayer, deserves special attention because of its ability to form ordered mesoporous silicas. Inorganic–organic nanostructures, used as mesostructured material precursors, can be constructed by the interlayer modification of inorganic layered materials with surfactants. In this context, the adsorption conditions of octadecyltrimethylammonium (ODTMA) in Kanemite were found to contribute to the design of novel layered materials with potential environmental and technological use.173 In this study, the long and short range structural orders of Kanemite intercalated with ODTMA ions at the interlayer under different conditions (i.e., different temperatures and clay: HDMA ratio, pH adjustment with HCl or HF) were investigated by a combined IR and multinuclear ssNMR investigation. An ordered lamellar structure was always obtained for all the hybrid mesophases whereas different all-trans and trans–gauche conformations were revealed for the adsorbed ODTMA under the specific loading conditions. The ODTMA adsorption decreased the water content in the interlayer space in Kanemite and induced changes in the silicate framework. When the adsorption was carried out in HCl or HF medium, it provoked a disruption of the intralayer H–O–H bridges accompanied by the formation of SiO4 Q4 environments and five-membered rings as revealed by FT-IR and 29Si MAS NMR observations.

4.3. Layered phosphates and phosphonates
Smectite-type layered phosphates, phosphonates and phosphites have received considerable attention in the past few decades due to their potential applications in various domains such as catalysis, biological applications, biosensors etc.168
In particular, the structure of α-zirconium phosphate, Zr(O3POH)2·H2O, consists of planes of Zr(IV) atoms linked by phosphate groups above and below the plane, in a two-dimensional network.174
The three-dimensional structure results from the two-dimensional layers stacking upon one another formed by hydrogen bonds between the phosphate hydroxyl groups and the intercalated water molecules. Alberti et al.175 and Dines and Di Giacomo176 discovered a related family of compounds known as zirconium phosphonates, Zr(O3PR)2, which also possess a layered structure similar to that of zirconium phosphate, and can be synthesized using phosphonic acids instead of phosphoric acid. In these materials, it is now the attractive interactions of the organic (R) groups that project into the interlayer region that are responsible for stacking the zirconium planes. Zirconium phosph(on)ates are considered promising materials with applications that span from catalysis177 to ion exchange178,179 and photophysics.180 Several reviews and books dealing with zirconium phosph(on)ates appeared in the literature.181,182 However, few examples of the combination of experimental techniques and/or modelling aiming to determine the structure of these particular compounds have been given in the literature.
For instance, Casciola et al. used a combination of FT-IR and photoacoustic spectroscopy (FTIR-PAS) and 31P ssNMR to study zirconium sulfophenylenephosphonates (SPP), with a layered structure of the a-type and variable concentration of sulfonic groups, obtained by direct precipitation in the presence of HF. From the characterization they indicated that the solids have a layered structure built up by the packing of symmetric a-layers where SPP and HPO4 groups are uniformly distributed on both layer faces.183
Clearfield et al. obtained α-zirconium phosphate organically surface-modified through the reaction of surface P–O–H groups of α-zirconium phosphate nanoparticles (α-ZrP) with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) using a one-step synthesis. The formation of P–O–Si bonds arising from the nucleophilic attack of POH on the silane was confirmed by ssNMR experiments whereas the surface coverage of the organic modifier was characterized by TGA, AFM, and FT-IR methods.184
Zhang recently reported a combined study of both experimental and modelling techniques.185 Novel ZrPP-anchored heterogeneous methyltrioxorhenium (MTO) catalysts were prepared by a conventional impregnation method and several characterization techniques such as XRD, FT-IR, ICP-ES, HRTEM, XPS, and 1H MAS NMR, and DFT calculations were employed to understand the structural features of the obtained MTO/ZrPP catalyst. It was indicated that MTO is anchored on the support surface by the favoured hydrogen-bonding between two oxo ligands of MTO and two H atoms from the adjacent phenyls of ZrPP.
A general recipe to decompose the NMR Fermi contact shifts of a number of oxides and phosphates, based on DFT calculations with hybrid density functionals, was proposed and the potential applications were described for several layered electrodes in Li batteries.186 Electric field gradient (EFG) tensors computed at the ab initio level have been used to support the interpretation of Na, Mg and Zr NMR spectra;187–190 Marfa et al. described the structural characterization of titanium phosphate with organic templating agents with a wealth of experimental techniques,191 including X-ray diffraction, multinuclear MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy, and showed how DFT calculations could be used for the assignment of NMR resonances (especially of 1H spectra); in the same work the theoretical calculations provided information about the strength of H-bonding in phosphate moieties.
Theoretical IR spectra, obtained with 3D and 2D boundary conditions, were compared to experimental FT-IR results on layered aluminophosphate (ALPO) intercalated with n-butylammonium ions, to support the assignment and the interpretation of the experimental peaks, also revealing the presence of Fermi resonances: also in this case, the comparison was used to estimate the interactions between the phosphate and the organic layers (Fig. 14).192
 Fig. 14  Top: Comparison of experimental (black) and DFT (red, 80 cm−1 shifted for anharmonicity) vibrational spectra of AlPO-butylammonium. Bottom: Theoretical assignment of the main peaks in the simulated spectrum. 
4.4. Layered double hydroxides
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs), also known as hydrotalcite-like materials, are anionic exchanging clays consisting of a metal hydroxide layer and anions intercalated into a hydrated interlayer for supplying the balancing negative charge.168,193,194 The nanostructured character of LDHs, their temperature-induced transformations into metastable oxide materials and their ability to reconstruct the LDH state through the action of humidity or water lead to their widespread applications in many technological areas ranging from catalysis to polymer science or drug delivery.195–198 They can be represented by the ideal formula [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2x]x+Ax/nn−·mH2O, where M2+ and M3+ are divalent and trivalent metal cations (i.e. Mg2+, Al3+) respectively, and An− is an exchangeable anion, such as CO32−, SO42−, and NO3−.199
Unlike most cationic clay materials, an important feature of LDH is that the layered charge density and the chemical composition can be tuned over a wide range during synthesis with an associated fine control of the properties of LDH-based materials. The synthesis and chemical modification of LDHs offer attractive research opportunities, mostly due to their good environmental stability and simple intercalation/deintercalation chemistry. In this context, the combination of spectroscopic and computational techniques is fundamental to evaluate the host–guest interactions and to calculate the geometric and electronic structures of the LDH intercalated with guest species.200–202
The structure of LDHs, although simpler than that of other layered materials such as natural cationic clays, has been largely studied in relation to (i) charge distribution within the brucitic layer and their local order/disorder at short or long range; (ii) influence of the cation size for maintaining a hydrotalcite-like structure; (iii) order/disorder degree of the anions into the interlayer region and interactions with the brucitic layer; (iv) influence of the interlayer water content on the reactivity; (v) layer stacking and (vi) microstructural defects due to stacking faults and turbostratic disorder. A large number of experimental methods with computational techniques have been very often used to clarify the above-mentioned points. Several examples of these case studies have been recently reviewed by Nocchetti et al.123

4.4.1. Structural information on LDHs. 
A recent review collected many convenient synthetic routes for hydrotalcites and presented some examples of joint theoretical and experimental characterization techniques, based on X-ray and electron diffraction for the structural determination.203
In 2016, Nielsen et al. studied the insertion of Zn into a bayerite layer and fully characterised the obtained series of Zn–Al4 LDHs with a multidisciplinary approach.204 In particular, 1H and 27Al ssNMR, IR, and Raman spectroscopy were applied to have a detailed insight into the structure and composition. Four different structural models were assessed using the experimental techniques in combination with first-principles calculations of the ssNMR parameters. The obtained data indicated that the combined experimental and theoretical approach is beneficial to optimise the synthesis conditions of materials thus helping in determining the best procedure for pure phase preparation.
An example of the use of the Raman and IR spectroscopy together with modelling methods was given on nitrate-based layered double hydroxides, Mg1–xAlx(OH)2(NO3)x·mH2O.205 Stability towards humidity, dehydration, nitrate group orientation, Al migration and crystal structure were studied. The coupling of vibrational spectroscopy (both IR and Raman) together with modelling methods was employed in this case to have additional insights into the properties of interlayer space, surface species and layer structure. The atomic positions of all the structure models, also in the presence of NO3− and H2O (Fig. 15), were optimized by using DFT-based methods. Starting from these models, the IR spectra were simulated for samples with different chemical compositions and compared with the experimental ones (Fig. 15). The study provided information on the orientation of anions and water molecules in the interlayer space, thus confirming that the combination of experimental and theoretical tools is relevant to understand the interlayer chemistry, and can easily be extended to fully dehydrated systems, more complex anions, and magnetic LDHs among other systems.
 Fig. 15  (A) Crystal structure of LDH without any interlayer anions within the A–B–C–A stacking (frame a). Intercalated NO3− and H2O molecules in Mg1–xAlx(OH)2(NO3)x·mH2O for x = 0.125 (frame b) and 0.33 (frame c). For ease of visualization, the NO3− and H2O species within the interlayers are displayed only between the A–B stacking layers. (B) Theoretically simulated IR spectra for Mg1–xAlx(OH)2(NO3)x·mH2O (experimental: x = 0.20, 0.25, 0.33; theory: x = 0.20, 0.25, 0.33) as well as for gas-phase NO3− under ambient conditions (from theory). The origin of each mode is graphically represented in an inset. (C) Experimental IR spectra of the same compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 


4.4.2. Intercalated LDHs. 
The intercalation processes enlarge the possible applications of LDHs to ionic conductors, catalysts, electrodes, biomaterials and materials for optics, and to the removal of organic pollutants. The hosted molecules (that can have different molecular structure, dimension and charge density) can be oriented in a different fashion in the interlayer and this depends on the experienced interactions with the host structure (host–guest interactions), on the anionic concentration and the experimental reaction conditions.206,207
The synthesis of a LDH with Mg2+ and Al3+ in the ratio of 2:1 co-precipitated with cubane-1,4-dicarboxylate anion was reported, characterized by PXRD and FT-IR methods and investigated by molecular modelling.200 IR investigations reported H-bonding between the carboxylate and the LDH interlayer oxides owing to the electrostatic attraction between the electropositive cations in the layer and the organic anions in the interlayer. The dynamical properties, such as mean-square displacements and self-diffusion coefficients, were also analyzed for the intercalated organic anions and water molecules. Cubane-dicarboxylate anions were tilted approximately 54° from the perpendicular orientation to the LDH layer with water molecules dispersed in the interlayer as two main shells at about 0.97 and 1.57 Å from the cubane dicarboxylate end-groups in agreement with the XRD results.
In 2013, Wang et al. intercalated a model drug (glutathione, GSH) into LDHs by ion exchange, and a systematic study combining experimental and theoretical investigation was used to have information on the microstructure of LDHs and the reaction mechanism of the GSH intercalation into LDHs.208 These results provide detailed structural information on the drug–LDH system, insights into the arrangement of the interlayer anions, and the interactions between the hydroxide layers and the intercalated drug molecules. The simulated hydroxide layers were constructed by using the mineral hydrotalcite ((Mg4Al2(OH)12CO3(H2O)3)0.5) and the atomic position was obtained from the crystal structure of the X-ray diffraction data. DFT calculations were employed to model the inorganic framework. The geometry of GSH in the ground state (S0) was firstly optimized and then the vibrational spectra (IR and Raman) and 13C NMR chemical shifts were calculated.
The calculated and experimental IR spectra of GSH were compared with those of the intercalated material and a reasonable agreement was observed, and this confirmed that the intercalation was successful. Solid-state NMR spectroscopy was applied to complement the information. The experimental data, in good agreement with the DFT calculations, indicated that, when intercalated, the chemical environment of the GSH changes: the 13C NMR spectrum showed that the integrity of the GSH is well preserved in the interlayer of LDHs. Thus, the combination of FT-IR, ssNMR and computational techniques allowed depicting the structure of the drug–LDH compounds and drawing a clear picture of the intercalation path of the organic molecule into LDHs.
In 2012, Costantino et al. proposed the preparation of LDH nanocontainers, suitable as carriers for Pravastatin, an anionic cholesterol-lowering drug.209 The comparison of experimental and theoretical vibrational spectra showed that the main difference between sodium and intercalated forms of Pravastatin is due to the electrostatic interactions between the COO− group of the organic drug and the positive LDH layers. 13C ssNMR data and their DFT simulations also supported this finding. The development of reliable models for the intercalation compounds allowed the authors to assign the experimental 13C ssNMR chemical shifts of both pure and intercalated Pravastatin as well as the vibrational FT-IR and Raman frequencies of the same compounds.
The incorporation of antioxidant molecules as phenolic compounds into LDH galleries is considered a feasible approach to improve their longevity and stability for various applications. The antioxidant 3-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxy-phenyl)-propionate anion (BHPPA) was successfully inserted at the interlayer of the LDH with a Mg:Al ratio = 3 by utilizing the structural memory effect and its retained antioxidant activity was confirmed by the 2,2-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazil radical-based colorimetric method.202 The structure of the intercalated species was characterized by FT-IR spectroscopy that confirmed the presence of the BHPPA anion as revealed by the position of the carboxylate asymmetric and symmetric stretching bands H-bonded to the LDH hydroxyls. The interlayer space revealed by XRPD combined to structural modelling accounted for a bilayer BHPPA arrangement at the interlayer and the co-existence of water molecules. The most stable bilayer arranged to minimize the steric hindrance between close bulky tert-butyl groups thus resulting in a tilted orientation of the corresponding rings with respect to the layer hydroxyl groups.
Other examples report on the combination of FT-IR, 13C ssNMR and DFT methods for the study of LDHs intercalated with different drugs such as Sulindac,210 Mefenamate211 and benzoxaboroles.132 All the reported examples illustrate well the potential of combined spectroscopic, structural and theoretical analyses: here, the role of DFT calculations is mainly to assist the interpretation of spectra and the assignment of difficult adsorption peaks or resonances. In many cases, this is accomplished by simulating the spectra of isolated molecules, and transferring the results to intercalated compounds, but in some cases a model of the interlayer space is proposed as well.132
The combination of FT-IR and ssNMR techniques has often been used to confirm the intercalation of different molecules inside LDHs and to provide structural/molecular information on the intercalated solids. The following examples underline this aspect.
Costa et al. prepared Zn–Al layered double hydroxides (LDHs) containing solely 1-pyrenesulfonate (PS) or 1-heptanesulfonate (HS) anions, or a mixture of the two molecules with HS/PS molar ratios ranging between 7.5 and 8.2, by a direct synthesis method.212 The obtained solids were characterized by different experimental techniques including FT-IR, FT-Raman, and 13C{1H} CPMAS NMR spectroscopy.
The derivatives of fluorenone are chromophore molecules with intriguing photophysical performance to study, develop and apply as solid-state fluorescent materials. The organic anion 9-fluorenone-2,7-dicarboxylate (FDC) was assembled into highly-ordered LDH materials with Mg/Al and Zn/Al ratio = 2 because of its rigid planarity and vertical orientation relative to the LDH layer.201 Polarization and delocalization of the electronic density of the anionic dye induced by the positively-charged LDH layers was revealed by comparing the 13C MAS NMR features of pure dye with those of the assembled FD-LDH materials. In parallel, blue shifts of 20 and 7 cm−1 of the carbonyl band were observed for Mg/Al and Zn/Al LDHs thus indicating that the interaction between the FD carboxylate group and LDH layers was influenced by the elemental compositions of the latter. The periodic DFT calculation adopted to further study the geometric and electronic structures of the idealized model of the structures of the two systems revealed that the hybrid systems exhibit an energy transfer behavior from the interlayer chromophores to the LDH layer owing to the close energy levels between the π-conjugated fluorenone dicarboxylate and the LDH layer, favorable to produce a highly ordered orientation of the transition dipole moment for polarized photoemission (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Frontier orbital profiles (HOMO−1, HOMO, LUMO, LUMO+1) for (a) the pristine FDC, (b) FDC/Mg2Al-LDH, and (c) FDC/Zn2Al-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Here is a list of other examples where the combination of FT-IR and ssNMR techniques has been relevant to provide structural/molecular information on intercalated solids:
(i) A novel MgAl-based LDH nanofiller intercalated with silsesquioxane-based aminoundecanoic acid (SAD) and grafted with the semiadduct of IPDI and 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (IPDI–HEA) suitable for polymeric materials prepared by Shi et al.213
(ii) Terephthalate-intercalated NiAl LDH materials proposed by Faro Jr.214
(iii) The preparation of a composite material based on MCM-22 zeolite and HTLC.215
(iv) Finally, Song et al. reported on the preparation of LDH anchored ionic liquids as amphiphilic heterogeneous catalysts for the Knoevenagel condensation reaction.216


4.4.3. LDH for catalytic applications. 
LDHs are also largely used for catalytic applications. In this respect a recent work described the synthesis and the characterization of solid state catalysts for aldol condensation reactions, based on activated M-Al-LDH (where M = Ca, Mg).217 The active sites, formed by distorted M(OH)6 octahedra, provide Brønsted acid moieties: a morphological and chemical difference between Ca and Mg compounds was found and characterized with a wealth of experimental (XPS, EXAFS, FT-IR, 27Al MAS NMR) and computational (DFT) models. In this case, the computational contribution was to describe the structure of the metal hydroxide centres and estimate the strength of the Brønsted acidity; some calculations on model clusters supported the evaluation of the catalytic activity, and the structure–property correlation as well. Similarly, the catalytic activity of Ni218 and Pd219 supported by LDH was described by a combination of FT-IR and DFT calculations, along with EXAFS structural measures: in the former article, CO molecular probes were used for in situ IR spectroscopy and the spectra were interpreted with the aid of theoretical simulations.
The effect of cation arrangement on the electrocatalytic activity of Ni/Fe LDH in the oxygen evolution reaction was evaluated by comparing FT-IR spectroscopy and periodic DFT calculations, based on plane waves supplemented by the effective Hubbard-U potential:220 in this case, a 2D single layer was built to model the LDH with variable Fe/Ni substituents and the atomic arrangement was optimized at the DFT level; then, the reaction of oxygen evolution was simulated at the same level in this model system. Periodic DFT calculations were used in combination with XRPD and EXAFS on the same systems to evaluate the effect of different substituents on the reaction.221–224
FT-IR, along with UV-Vis and XPRD techniques, was used to characterize different Ni/Cr and Mg/Al LDHs used for the removal of methylene blue, methyl orange and formaldehyde from aqueous solutions: in this study, preliminary DFT calculations described the geometrical arrangement and the electronic band structure of the various LDH samples, supporting the description of the catalytic activity.225

4.5. Layered perovskites
Layered perovskites have attracted enormous interest in recent years because of their unique electronic226,227 and photocatalytic properties.228 They consist of perovskite-like slabs and interlayer cations or bismuth-oxide sheets, such as Dion–Jacobson, Ruddlesden–Popper and Aurivillius phases.229 Moreover, different inorganic ions and organic compounds have been intercalated into the interlayer space of layered perovskites, thus giving rise to the preparation of compounds with novel properties.
In the following list the intercalation process and the structure of the intercalated systems have been studied by a combination of FT-IR and ssNMR:
(i) Wang et al. reported a new method to intercalate carbon into the interlayer space of a layered HLaNb2O7 perovskite for modifying the band gap.230D-Glucopyranose was firstly grafted onto the interlayer surface of the layered perovskite via the reaction between the n-decoxyl derivative of HLaNb2O7 and D-glucopyranose.
(ii) D-Glucopyranose rings were successfully coordinated onto the interlayer surface of a Ruddlesden–Popper-type layered perovskite, H2CaTa2O7, by a reaction with the precursor of n-decoxyl derivative of H2CaTa2O7.231
(iii) n-Alkyl chains were successfully grafted into the interlayer space of a Ruddlesden–Popper-type double-layered perovskite (with chemical formula H2CaTa2O7) via a hydrolysis–esterification process.232
(iv) Sugahara et al. intercalated triethylphosphine oxide [(C2H5)3PO; TEPO] into protonated Dion–Jacobson-type ion exchangeable layered perovskites, HLaNb2O7·xH2O (HLaNb) and HCa2Nb3O10·xH2O (HCaNb).233 The spectroscopic results suggested that TEPO is in interaction with Brønsted acid sites present on the surface of the solids and that this molecule exhibited different orientations with respect to the inorganic layers.
In a few cases, ab initio calculations have been used to support the interpretation of NMR and FT-IR characterization of inorganic or hybrid layered perovskites, whose main interest is in catalysis, though some systems were suggested for photovoltaic applications too.
Kessentini et al. diffusely used DFT calculations, with hybrid functionals and basis sets including effective core potentials to reduce the computational cost, to assign the vibrational bands in IR and Raman characterization of CdI4 and CuCl4 perovskites intercalated with organic cations.234,235 Similarly, the vibrational modes of copper chlorides with organic intercalates were discussed and assigned by Dammak et al. through the comparison with existing databases for isolated molecules supplemented by DFT calculations at the same level as above.236
The crystal structure of some layered ceramics based on mixed oxides, La2Sn2–xTixO7 and RbSr2Nb3O10, was determined by a combination of XRD and 119Sn and 87Rb NMR. In both cases, the resonance spectra were interpreted with the aid of DFT calculations of chemical shifts and EFG tensors: in one example237 the theoretical analysis also allowed predicting the relative stability of two layered phases indistinguishable from the NMR results, while in another case238 the geometrical deformation of the layers in a Dion–Jacobson phase was described by comparing the theoretical and the recorded resonance spectra.
A similar approach, based on XRD and 87Rb NMR supported by DFT calculations, was used to determine the crystal structure of Rb3Bi2I9: the theoretical approach was also used to describe the optical (absorption and photoluminescence) properties.239
It is worth noting that in the above examples the DFT methods were based on localized basis functions and hybrid functionals, as is common in the calculations of spectroscopic parameters to be compared to the experiments. It has been shown repeatedly, on the other hand, that the theoretical optimization of crystal structures and the calculation of electronic properties, e.g. band structures, for 2D and 3D perovskites require a careful consideration of spin–orbit coupling (SOC),240 and possibly also of long-range coulombic interactions.241 These contributions are usually computed within plane-wave approaches with non-local density functionals, but a discussion of their possible weight on the simulation of FT-IR or NMR spectra is outside the scope of this work.

4.5.1. Colloidal perovskite nanocrystals. 
Colloidal nanocrystals of alkaline earth perovskite oxides having the formula ABO3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba; B = Ti, Zr), and their corresponding quaternary A1−xAx′BO3 solid solutions, exhibit a wide range of technologically relevant properties. The versatility of this family of complex oxide nanocrystals stems from the compositional dependence of their physical properties. An interesting example of the coupling of computational and experimental techniques was given by Copéret et al.242 They investigated CO2 chemisorption on colloidal Ba1−xSrxTiO3 nanocrystal surfaces using different techniques, including in situ FT-IR, 13C ssNMR spectroscopy, and DFT calculations. CO2 was used as a probe molecule for the study of basic sites. Prior to CO2 exposure, the FT-IR spectra of the calcined nanocrystals showed the presence of amorphous alkaline earth carbonates. After CO2 addition to the perovskite nanocrystals, the bands in the same C–O spectral region become more complex and increased in intensity. In order to examine specifically the adsorption and binding modes of CO2 at the surface of the perovskite nanocrystal, labelled 13CO2 was brought into contact with the samples and 13C ssNMR spectra were collected. Periodic DFT simulations were performed in order to propose assignments for the observed species.

5. 3D porous solids
The pursuit for new efficient 3D porous materials has materialized in a significant increase in their publications in the last few years.1,243 Porous 3D solids with high surface area and active sites are important in both science and technology fields for applications in catalysis, adsorption, separation, gas storage and molecular confinement for technological/biomedical applications. On the other hand, for the rational design and synthesis of porous 3D solids, knowledge about the structure–property relationship is essential. Different types of 3D porous materials will be considered (Fig. 17), highlighting how the combination of techniques is a powerful tool to elucidate the structure–property relationship. The combination of ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy together with computational methods is already leading to new insights and addresses key issues related to studies of confined spaces.69,244–246
 Fig. 17  Classification of selected 3D silica based porous solids according to the pore size. 
The area of inorganic–organic/organic/polymer based framework porous materials (MOFs, COFs, POPs, PAFs, MOPs, PIMs, CMPs, HCPs, CTFs, PMMs) has witnessed extensive attention and rapid growth over the past two decades due to their applications in drug delivery, imaging, catalysis, sorption, separation and storage of gases etc.247–274 Given that the field is incredibly diverse, we will omit their coverage and readers are invited to read the excellent reviews that have appeared recently in these areas.14,265,268,275–287
5.1. Microporous materials

5.1.1. Classical zeolites. 
Zeolites are molecular sieves of a robust crystalline silica alumina framework structure formed by a continuous network of oxygen-sharing SiO4 and AlO4 tetrahedra. The unit negative charge in the framework created by the presence of one Al3+ ion in the tetrahedral position is complemented by loosely held inorganic cations (alkali or alkaline earth cations) or organic cations that reside in the cavities preserving the electroneutrality of the zeolite. Based on IUPAC recommendations, they are classified as microcrystalline porous materials as their average pore diameter falls below 2 nm. The great interest in these microporous materials are due to their tuneable physico-chemical properties such as high surface area and pore volume, surface acidity and basicity with ion exchange capacity, high thermal, hydrothermal and mechanical strength. They have found applications in a wide range of fields including catalysis, gas storage, molecular sieve, ion-exchange etc.
In order to achieve a wider range of applications, the development of zeolites with extra-large pores and chiral centres is desirable. Over the past few years, there have been considerable efforts to synthesise newer zeolite materials and interesting candidates will be reviewed in this segment.


5.1.2. Formation of materials and their structural characterization. 
Layered zeolites are unique microporous materials composed of rigid zeolitic lamellae. In contrast to traditional 3D zeolites, layered zeolites originate from zeolitic precursors consisting of lamellar sheets of unit cell thickness.288 Wu et al. have reported a silylation strategy for converting 2D precursors into novel 3D zeolites with high crystallinity by inserting monomeric silanes into the interlayer spaces, producing a series of interlayer expanded zeolitic (IEZ) materials.289 In a recent report, they have adopted a versatile and convenient one-pot post synthesis strategy in the preparation of novel titanosilicate catalysts by simultaneous isomorphous substitution and interlayer expansion of zeolitic layered silicates.290 The structural transformation and the incorporation of Ti in the preparation of IEZ were monitored using a multi-technique approach. High level DFT calculations along with Rietveld refinement of the XRD data and 29Si and 13C solid-state MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy helped them to perform the structural analysis and catalytic activity studies.
Bottom-up approaches using 2D layered silicates are promising for precise design of 3D crystalline microporous materials and have been known for a while. The layers of 2D silicates possess Si–O− negative charges as well as abundant Si–OH groups with ordered arrangements on the surfaces. Silylation of these layered silicates leads to the formation of new Si–O–Si linkages and larger interlayer pores than those of zeolites obtained by direct interlayer condensation through simple calcination. Asakura et al. prepared a novel crystalline microporous material by silylation of layered silicate RUB-51 with tetrachlorosilane and heat treatment for interlayer condensation.291 They have employed 29Si MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy to follow the bottom-up approach from the layered parent material to the final 3D microporous zeolite. The evolution of layered silicate RUB-51 to a 3D porous solid was followed by a comparison of ratios of the relative intensities of Q2:Q3:Q4 units as shown in Fig. 18(A). The large amounts of Q3 units in heated-tetra-RUB-51 indicate that surface silanols are abundant in the pores of the final 3D material. FT-IR spectroscopy was also used to determine the presence of OH groups on the surfaces of the obtained pores (Fig. 18(B)). They have observed signals owing to the stretching vibration of free or slightly hydrogen (3724 and 3691 cm−1) bonded OH groups, which proves the presence of isolated silanol groups inside the micropores of the final material.
 Fig. 18  (A) 29Si MAS NMR spectra of (a) RUB-51, (b) tetra-RUB-51, and (c) heated-tetra-RUB-51 and (B) IR spectra of (a) heated-tetra-RUB-51 and (b) heated-tetra-RUB-51 after heating at 200 °C for 4 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In another study, the transformation mechanism of layered silicate RUB-36 into ZSM-35 zeolites, revealed to be a topotactic conversion process, was investigated in detail by a multi-technique approach.292 Local interactions between the inorganic building blocks and organic moieties are of key importance to drive the topotactic conversion and to form a zeolite phase. Multi-dimensional ssNMR spectroscopy along with theoretical simulations provided a powerful combination to explore the local environments and interactions in porous materials. In this study, they employed 1H–29Si as well as 1H–27Al HETCOR NMR experiments to probe the spatial connectivity through heteronuclear dipolar interactions. The structure-directing role of the organic moieties was also illustrated by theoretical Monte Carlo simulations. Čejka et al. have reported the synthesis of a multifunctional porous hybrid material based on covalently bonded organic–inorganic nanosystems using a top-down approach from zeolite UTL.293 The porous hybrid material obtained by intercalation with silsesquioxane possessed layered morphology and exhibited hierarchical micro-/mesoporous systems, stable up to 350 °C. Katz et al. have used single-step delamination of MWW borosilicate using aqueous Al(NO3)3 to prepare aluminosilicate zeolite.294 A multi-technique approach involving FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy established the formation of Brønsted acid sites upon delamination.
The ADOR (assembly–disassembly–organisation–reassembly) mechanism for the synthesis of new zeolites has been recently reviewed by Čejka et al.295 According to this strategy, a previously assembled zeolite is selectively and controllably disassembled into layered building units, which are then organised into a suitable orientation before being reassembled into a new zeolite structure. They claim that the limitation of the traditional synthetic methodologies can be overcome by the ADOR process and can fully exploit the potential of zeolite synthesis of all types. There have been a few reports in the recent past that adopted the ADOR process for the preparation of new zeolites.296–298 Ashbrook et al.5 have applied multinuclear ssNMR spectroscopy to shed light on the role played by water in the ADOR process and to gather insight into the detailed mechanism of the structural changes involved. From 17O and 29Si NMR experiments they were able to demonstrate that the hydrolysis and rearrangement process occurs over a much longer time scale than seen by diffraction.
In a recent report, the local structures of framework 27Al Lewis sites in dehydrated zeolites and their precursors in hydrated zeolites were studied by a combined approach of high-resolution MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy as well as DFT/MM calculations.110 They have identified tri-coordinated framework aluminium in a mildly dehydroxylated zeolite, which can act as a Lewis acid site in catalytic reactions, and exhibits a very broad 27Al resonance (δiso ≈ 67 ppm, CQ ≈ 20 MHz, and η ≈ 0.1). The origin of this site was identified to be “perturbed” framework Al atoms in the hydrated precursor zeolite of the form (SiO)3AlOH. The assignment was supported by the presence of the IR vibration at 3655 cm−1 due to the O–H stretching mode of terminal (SiO)3AlOH. Furthermore, calculation of NMR parameters (δiso = 59–62 ppm, CQ = 5 MHz, and η = 0.3–0.4) was in good agreement with the experimental results (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Structure of a terminal (SiO)3AlOH group and the corresponding dehydroxylated (SiO)3Al in the CHA zeolite with the atoms corresponding to O3AlOH displayed as balls. Silicon atoms are grey, the aluminium atom is yellow, oxygen atoms are red, and the hydrogen atom is white. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Mapping of various Sn sites in Sn-β zeolites according to chemical shifts was carried out by Wolf et al. employing a multi-technique route involving ssNMR and first principles calculations.299 Their study indicated that the materials showing the highest activity prepared by the traditional hydrothermal method possessed a highly hydrophobic, defect-free zeolite framework, whereas post-synthetically synthesized Sn-β samples prepared in two steps via dealumination and subsequent solid-state ion exchange from Al-β showed significantly lower activity, which was associated with a hydrophilic framework and/or a lower accessibility. They have concluded that the activity of Sn-β in the aqueous-phase isomerization of glucose was highly dependent on the hydrophobicity of the material. In addition, accessibility and T site positioning of the Sn site, both defect-open and closed sites, were found to be important.
Nakazawa et al. have employed a multi-technique approach to solve the structure of a novel aluminosilicate zeolite (YNU-5), a zeolite containing interconnected 12 membered ring (MR), 12MR, and 8MR pores, as well as independent straight 8MR channels.300 The chemical composition and local structures of constituent elements of the new zeolite were analysed by ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy. The Si/Al ratio was estimated to be 9.4–10.2 from the 29Si MAS NMR spectrum, while the stability of cationic molecules (Me2Pr2N+) in the as-synthesized sample was determined by 13C CPMAS NMR spectrum. In addition, the presence of a Na+ ion with a single local structure was confirmed by 23Na MAS NMR and a four-coordinated Al site was detected by 27Al MAS NMR of the as-synthesized YNU-5. Furthermore, the FT-IR spectrum of pyridine adsorbed on YNU-5 (Si/Al = 8.4, H+ form) established the Brønsted acid sites and Lewis acid sites. Such detailed characterization studies supported the structural elucidation of YNU-5 by ab initio analysis from powder diffraction data.
Structure-directing behaviours of TEA cations toward zeolite Beta were studied by Okubo et al.301 Unlike the role of most OSDAs in zeolite synthesis, the case for zeolite Beta synthesized by using TEA cations is different, where a cluster/aggregate of ca. six TEA cations are occluded in the channel intersection of zeolite Beta. Using a multi-technique approach, it was revealed that the formation of amorphous TEA+–aluminosilicate composites and their structural, chemical, and textural evolution toward the amorphous zeolite Beta-like structure during the induction period were vital for the formation of zeolite Beta. The conformational rearrangement of TEA cations has a strong influence with the formation of micropores and the incorporation of Al into the aluminosilicate Beta framework.
Interactions of zeolites with water strongly depend on the presence of hydrophilic moieties including BAS, extra-framework cations, and silanol defects. Resasco et al. have systematically studied the crystallinity changes of a series of zeolites (HY, H-ZSM-5, and H-β) with varying Si/Al ratio, density of BAS, zeolite structure, and density of silanol defects upon exposure to liquid water at 200 °C.302 The most crucial role in zeolite stability in hot liquid water was played by the density of silanol defects. They have proposed that the tolerance of defective zeolites to hot liquid water can be greatly enhanced by functionalization with organosilanes. Similarly, in a combined approach of employing FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy,303 Prodinger et al. have demonstrated the significant improvement in the material stability in hot liquid water for microporous zeolite Beta upon post-synthetic silylation treatment. The defects in the siloxy bonds were capped by a reaction with trimethylchlorosilane and Si–O–Si bonds were eventually formed. Silylation led to the reduction of the concentration of internal structural defects significantly and enhanced the zeolite stability in hot liquid water.
Solid-state NMR spectroscopy and DFT calculations were combined to study the impact of aqueous medium (heated for 48 h at 160 and 300 °C in an autoclave while being stirred at 600 rpm) on the framework integrity of zeolite Beta by Lercher et al.304 They explored the effects of various properties, including Al concentration, Al distribution, particle size, and structural defects on zeolite stability in aqueous medium. The combined data suggested that the crystallinity decreased via selective hydrolysis of the T1- and T2-sites that form the 4MR pores of the zeolite framework resulting in amorphization of the sample. The combination of techniques allowed establishing the location and concentration of Al in the HBEA lattice.
Park et al. proposed a reliable formation pathway for UZM-5 zeolite crystals based on MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy.305 UZM-5 zeolite synthesized via the charge density mismatch approach resulted in a novel framework topology (UFI) crystallized with four different building units. Solid-state 29Si, 27Al and 13C MAS NMR as well as FT-IR spectroscopy were used to characterize the solids isolated in a time series that helped in determining the evolution in the structure building process and crystallization. 29Si MAS NMR spectra of solid products separated at early stages of crystallization showed the formation of X-ray amorphous solids and were characterized by one very broad line around −101 ppm (Fig. 20A). When the crystallization time was longer than 24 h, this line disappeared and four narrower lines began to be resolved and were due to the simultaneous dissolution of the initially formed amorphous solids and the growth of Na-UZM-5 crystals. Similarly, FT-IR spectra in the structural region of solid products showed a weak band around 545 cm−1, assigned to the single 5MR (s5r) unit, a part of both wbc- and rth-cages, originated after 30 h or longer and a band around 570 cm−1 due to the d4r-cage unit was observed only after 48 h (Fig. 20B). From these data, they have reasoned that d4r-cages were formed after wbc-cages, assuming the connecting mode of building units in the UFI structure.306
 Fig. 20  
29Si MAS NMR spectra (A) and FT-IR spectra (B) of solid products separated after Na-UZM-5 crystallization under rotation (60 rpm) at 150 °C for different times. UFI structure building unit with different cages (C). Adapted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Xia et al.,307 for the first time, applied a dry-gel conversion technique to prepare organic–inorganic hybrid aluminosilicate zeolites. They followed the synthesis, structure formation and framework modifications through the combined application of ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy. Methylene-bridged hybrid zeolite with MOR topology was sulfonated with fuming sulphuric acid to form an acidic MOR-SO3H catalyst, which exhibited high catalytic activity.
Dzwigaj et al. applied a post-synthesis procedure to prepare molybdenum incorporated Beta zeolite with isolated mononuclear Mo(VI) species, which were characterized using a multi-technique strategy.308 The incorporation of Mo into the vacant T atom sites was confirmed by FT-IR and MAS NMR spectroscopy. A decrease of the intensity of the IR bands due to isolated internal, terminal internal and hydrogen bonded silanol groups suggested their reaction with the Mo precursor. The same mechanism of incorporation was monitored by the disappearance of peaks in the range 1–4 ppm of the 1H NMR spectrum of Beta.
The same group has further applied a multi-technique approach to identify the state of silver ions in the framework of Beta zeolite.309 To obtain well-dispersed silver species, they have employed a two-step post-synthesis method that allowed the incorporation of silver ions into the framework of zeolite mainly as isolated mononuclear silver species without the formation of metal oligomers or metal oxides. The consumption of OH groups as a result of their reaction with the silver precursor as well as the acidity of the thus formed AgSiBEA has been investigated by FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed CO and pyridine was used as probe molecules. The changes in the silver state as a function of Ag content have been identified by 109Ag MAS NMR spectroscopy along with other techniques. While the low silver content zeolite showed a signal at 21.5 ppm associated with framework mononuclear Ag(I), high content zeolite exhibited a signal with the chemical shift at −33.2 ppm linked to Agnδ+ clusters.
The acidity of hierarchical USY, Beta and ZSM-5 zeolites obtained by alkaline treatment was investigated by Rac et al.310 using a multi-technique approach. A comparison, before and after treatment, led to the conclusion that mesopore formation via alkaline treatment in zeolites resulted in acidity alterations. The concentration of acidic sites was almost completely preserved after the modification in all three zeolitic structures, but their distributions in strength were affected. While FT-IR investigations revealed that the Brønsted site strength was more affected by the alkaline treatment than the Lewis site strength, 27Al NMR results showed the redistribution of Lewis sites. Catalytic performance, tested in a fructose dehydration reaction, was shown to be significantly improved in terms of HMF selectivity, when compared to the parent samples.
Van Aelst et al. studied the influence of aqueous ammonia treatment on USY zeolite which they wanted to use as a catalyst support with a hierarchical pore system containing micro- and mesopores.311 The effect of the contact time with the ammonia solution was investigated as well as the effect of subsequent thermal treatments. They applied a suite of 1D and 2D NMR protocols, including 1H DQ-SQ (Fig. 21), 27Al MQMAS, 29Si MAS and CPMAS, and 1H–29Si HETCOR. These authors have observed an increasing loss of crystallinity upon increasing duration of ammonia treatment. However, shorter duration treatment resulted in a complex hierarchical material with mesopores and zeolitic micropores next to a dense amorphous aluminosilicate, containing NH4+ ions, highly structured water, and silanol nests.
 Fig. 21  2D DQ–SQ 1H–1H POST-C7 spectrum (A) of the dehydrated USY zeolite treated with NH4OH solution for 16 h. Some selected slices along the t1 axis are shown. Proposed local structure of the amorphous hydrated ammonium silicate phase (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 311. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Fernandez et al. reported very recently the role of a structure-directing agent in localizing the silanol defects within the framework of silicalite with MFI topology.312 These authors applied 2D double-quantum 1H MAS NMR experiments with spinning sideband pattern (ssb) simulations to clarify the location and distribution of these defects with respect to tetrapropylammonium (TPA+) in the as-synthesized silicalite-1 (Fig. 22). The silanol defects (in SiO−⋯HOSi structures) are preferentially placed near the methyl groups of the TPA+ cation at mid distance between the channel intersections with the inter-nuclear distance between silanol and methyl protons at approximately 3.3 Å, whereas between silanol protons at approximately 3.0 Å. According to this study, two silanols participate in the compensation of the siloxy negative charge. Their approach can also be applied to other zeolites in order to locate the defects or active sites for better understanding of material properties.
 Fig. 22  Conventional MAS (top, in blue) and 2D double quantum (bottom) 1H NMR spectrum recorded using back-to-back (BaBa) sequence on the as-synthesized TPA-silicalite-1 at 500 MHz (A). Schematic representation of the SiO−⋯HOSi defects in the vicinity of TPA methyl groups (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Brunklaus et al. have applied 1H double and triple quantum NMR spectroscopy to investigate the clustering of defect groups (SiOH and SiO− groups) and their location within the pore walls of four as-synthesized zeolites.313 The interaction between organic SDA and defect sites as well as among defect sites in zeolites ZSM-12, ZSM-5, SSZ-74 and SSZ-24 was revealed by DQ and TQ coherences. As shown in Fig. 23a and b, they have observed a DQ signal at 20.6 and a TQ signal at 30.9 for the as-synthesized ZSM-12. Similarly, the DQ and TQ signals were at 20 and 30 ppm for ZSM-5 (Fig. 23c and d). Double quantum and triple quantum signals mandatorily require at least a pair of protons and a cluster of three protons in close proximity, respectively. The interaction between the structure directing agent and silanol was found by a DQ signal at 13.5 ppm in ZSM-12 as well as at 10.8 ppm in ZSM-5. They found that connectivity defects were dominant in ZSM-5, ZSM-12, and SSZ-24, but ordered vacancy defects existed in SSZ-74 instead. They concluded that there is a preferential interaction between framework defects and SDA charge centres, provided that this is sterically possible. From their structural models, the organic structure directing agent appears to have an important role in the location and orientation of silanol defects in the zeolite framework.
 Fig. 23  (a) 1H DQ and (b) 1H TQ MAS NMR data of ZSM-12; (c) 1H DQ and (d) 1H TQ MAS NMR data of ZSM-5; part of structure directing agents (arrows) that interact with the defect protons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Dib et al. showed that the local disorder in as-synthesized ZSM-5 could be studied and quantified using 14N MAS NMR as the SDA is usually tetrapropylammonium (TPA) in this zeolite.314 Insights into the atomic local disordering, which are difficult to acquire using diffraction methods, could be established by ssNMR crystallography approaches (see the special issue of Acta Crystallographica C http://journals.iucr.org/c/issues/2017/03/00/). The analysis of 14N (a quadrupolar nucleus) spinning side-band patterns of a series of as-synthesized ZSM-5 zeolites containing various amounts of Al were shown to evolve with the Si/Al ratio. The structural information was generated from the quadrupolar coupling parameters (coupling constant, CQ and asymmetry parameter, ηQ), which defined the width and the shape of the 14N resonances. The influence of the zeolite framework modifications due to Al/Si substitution on 14N NMR parameters was obtained from the DFT calculations. They have identified two types of interrelated disorder due to the insertion of Al into the silica framework. Firstly, the Al substitution leads to a distribution of charges that affects directly the electric field gradient (EFG) at 14N sites. Secondly, the geometrical modification of the zeolite at short-range scales is due to heteroatom substitution, as this produces local variations in electron densities that again affect EFG at 14N sites. These two factors lead to possible rearrangements of the TPA molecules (displacements, conformational changes, etc.) to minimize the intra- and intermolecular electrostatic interactions. As the sitting position of Al atom (one of the 24 possible tetrahedral crystallographic sites) changes, and is responsible for changes in the C–N–C angles in TPA and a deviation from Td symmetry, very different sets of 14N quadrupolar parameters were obtained.
For the crystallographic structure determination, diffraction techniques (X-ray, neutron, synchrotron etc.) have been in use for decades. However, NMR crystallography has recently emerged as a complementary tool for structure determination.315 Martineau et al. have reviewed the strategy and application of this innovative approach involving solid-state NMR spectroscopy and powder diffraction along with computer modelling.316
Tang et al. successfully employed a micro-explosion method by microwave assisted decomposition of H2O2 to create mesopores from the interior zeolite crystal toward the exterior.317 The effects of the micro-explosion process on the properties of the zeolites were investigated by ssNMR and IR spectroscopy. The 1H spin-echo MAS NMR spectrum showed peaks due to Brønsted acid sites and isolated silanols, in parent Beta zeolite. After microwave treatment, a broad signal owing to H-bonded hydroxyls centred at 4.9 ppm as well as hydroxyls related to extra-framework aluminium can be drawn by the small peaks at 3.6 and 0.2 ppm. Moreover, 27Al MAS NMR spectra of microwave treated samples showed two additional tetrahedral framework 27Al at two distinct lattice positions of zeolite Beta (Fig. 24). On the other hand, FT-IR spectra showed good preservation of the BEA framework during micro-explosion. Pyridine adsorption FT-IR data revealed no notable decrease in the total density of acidic sites but the presence of slight dealumination.
 Fig. 24  Illustration of the microwave-assisted H2O2-decomposition micro-explosion process and creation of an interwoven mesopore network in the zeolite BEA (A). 27Al MAS NMR spectra (B) of BEA zeolite before (a) and after (b) microwave treatment, showing the formation of two additional tetrahedral framework 27Al. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The local structure of layered silicates is often challenging to establish due to disorder of the sheet assemblies. Cadars et al.318 reported a new protocol that combines complementary information from ssNMR on the local compositions and structures of the silicate sheets with information on medium and long-range atomic ordering provided by electron and synchrotron XRD along with support from DFT calculations. These authors were successful in determining the framework structure of a new layered silicate material, CLS-1, despite the high degrees of molecular disorder in its sheet assemblies. The diffraction based approach probed the long-range atomic order, which led to the identification of a set of possible space groups. Solid-state NMR provided local information on the framework structure, through a suite of 1D and 2D 29Si, 13C and 1H NMR experiments from which structural models were established. All of these structures were then relaxed with quantum chemical calculations using the plane-wave-based DFT. Furthermore, the quality of DFT predictions of NMR parameters for the final structure found by the structure-solution algorithm and refined by DFT was established as the right one. This protocol can be further extended to the determination of the structure of other layered silicates with low degree of crystallinity and high degree of stacking disorder.
Harris et al. have reported a direct hydrothermal synthesis route to prepare isomorphously substituted framework Sn heteroatoms in pure-silica chabazite molecular sieves (Sn-CHA).319 They have adopted an integrated experimental and theoretical approach to precisely describe the primary coordination and secondary confining environments of Sn active sites in Sn-CHA. FT-IR of Sn-CHA samples saturated with Lewis bases (NH3, CD3CN, and pyridine) demonstrated that framework Sn atoms behave as Lewis acid sites, which were then quantified. DNP MAS NMR characterization of Sn-CHA zeolites showed that Sn sites were incorporated into framework lattice positions, both defect-open ((HO)-Sn-(OSi)3) and closed sites (Sn-(OSi)4), in the dehydrated state, which formed hydrated defect and hydrated hydrolysed-open sites upon exposure to ambient conditions or aqueous solution. DFT calculations on cluster models supported the experimentally measured 119Sn NMR CSA parameters for Sn sites. Catalysis studies showed that Sn-CHA zeolite was active in intermolecular propionaldehyde reduction, ethanol oxidation as well as glucose–fructose isomerization.
Ivanova et al. have applied time-resolved in situ13C, 23Na, 27Al, and 29Si MAS NMR spectroscopy to monitor the nucleation and growth of a zeolite BEA catalyst under hydrothermal conditions.320 While the 29Si MAS and 29Si CPMAS NMR permitted the detection of various mobile and rigid silicate and aluminosilicate species in solution as well as in the solid-state and monitoring of their transformation into zeolite, 27Al MAS NMR was very sensitive to the interaction with inorganic and organic cations and provided information on the involvement of different cations in aluminosilicate species at different steps of synthesis. Information on the structure directing behaviour of TEA+ was provided by 13C MAS and 13C CPMAS NMR spectroscopy. Solution-mediated and solid–solid hydrogel rearrangement has been distinguished for two different synthesis procedures and insights into the mechanisms of structure-directing behaviour of TEA+ cations in two reaction pathways have been elucidated from the NMR spectral data.
In a recent study, Oleksiak et al. demonstrated the organic-free synthesis of a highly siliceous faujasite zeolite (HOU-3) with spatially biased Si speciation.321 Modelling revealed that more siliceous FAU was thermodynamically feasible and that kinetic factors govern HOU-3 formation. Solid-state NMR data suggested that the Si speciation in HOU-3 was more discriminated than random. They have confirmed the improved hydrothermal stability and enhanced catalytic performance, for HOU-3 with a Si/Al ratio of 3, relative to the commercial zeolite Y.
Grand et al. have reported the synthesis of silanol-free nanosized MFI-type zeolites which opened novel perspectives for catalytic and separation applications.322 Atomically dispersed tungsten in the one-pot synthesis medium of zeolite prevented the formation of silanol groups by forming flexible W–O–Si bridges. They have applied a combination of experimental and theoretical techniques to characterize the silanol-free nature of the zeolite. The absence of silanols in the zeolite was confirmed by FT-IR and 29Si MAS NMR spectroscopic techniques. Further insights into the zeolitic material were provided by DFT modelling.


5.1.3. Surfaces, acid sites and pore confinement. 
Román-Leshkov et al. investigated the Lewis acidity of metal sites in Beta zeolites with 15N pyridine adsorption coupled with MAS NMR spectroscopy and DFT.323 The 15N chemical shift of adsorbed pyridine was found to scale with the acid character of both Lewis (Ti, Hf, Zr, Nb, Ta, and Sn) and Brønsted (B, Ga, and Al) acidic heteroatoms that are difficult to analyse with traditional methods (Fig. 25A). Theoretical DFT calculations showed a strong correlation between experimental 15N chemical shift and the calculated metal–nitrogen bond dissociation energy. Electron affinity and Mulliken electronegativity showed a linear correlation with the experimentally determined 15N isotropic chemical shift values of strong and weak acidic sites (Fig. 25B). They have concluded that pyridine adsorption and direct detection by 15N CPMAS NMR spectroscopy can distinguish between Brønsted and Lewis acidity, their strength, as well as the number of framework and extra-framework metal sites in metal-substituted zeolites. More importantly, it can distinguish inactive metal oxides from metal-substituted zeolites as well as it is able to record spectra under dehydrated and hydrated conditions, emphasizing the water tolerance of these solid acids.
 Fig. 25  (A) 15N ssNMR chemical shift scale of various pyridine binding environments for Lewis (LAS) and Brønsted acid sites (BAS) and (B) Mulliken electronegativity vs. pyridine 15N ssNMR chemical shift plot. Adapted with permission from ref. 323. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Deng et al. comprehensively reviewed the ssNMR methods for acidity characterization of solid acid catalysts with the help of DFT calculations to justify the correlations between experimental chemical shift values and the Brønsted/Lewis strength of acid sites in solid acid catalysts.111 When pyridine-d5 is adsorbed on isolated silanol groups, H-bonding normally leads to δH values in the range of 2–10 ppm while its adsorption on Brønsted acid sites results in the formation of pyridinium ion complexes which results in δH values in the range of 12–20 ppm. Similarly, they have employed DFT calculations to obtain quantitative correlations between 1H NMR chemical shift data and acid strength. They have reported an explicit correlation curve between the predicted δH and deprotonation energy values (intrinsic acid strength) for the solid acid systems (Fig. 26). Those theoretical results were in good agreement with experimental data. Deng et al. also combined ssNMR spectroscopy and DFT calculations for measuring the base strength of solid catalysts with pyrrole as a probe.92 These authors systematically investigated the adsorption structures, adsorption energies, and corresponding 1H chemical shifts of pyrrole adsorbed on various basic zeolites with varied base strengths by using a combined NMR experiment and theoretical calculation approach. Furthermore, the study demonstrated that the zeolite confinement effect would decrease the 1H chemical shift of adsorbed pyrrole by ca. 0.4 ppm.
 Fig. 26  Correlations between 1H NMR chemical shifts and the deprotonation energy (DPE) for Brønsted acid sites in solid acids in the presence of adsorbed pyridine-d5. Adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd. 
DFT calculations in combination with ssNMR spectroscopy were implemented to investigate the specific aluminium location and the origin of Brønsted acid strength in Al-rich as well as Si-rich Beta zeolite catalysts.56 The Brønsted acid strength was correlated with the Al location at the specific T-site on the zeolitic framework. DFT calculations of proton affinities, NH3 adsorption energies and 1H chemical shifts of pyridine-d5 adsorption on Al-rich H-Beta revealed that its average Brønsted acid strength was weaker than that of its Si-rich counterpart.
Lercher et al. has proposed a general methodology that allows direct probing of Al distributions by NMR spectroscopic methods in zeolites with high confidence.32427Al single pulse MAS NMR spectra of HBEA zeolites with high Si/Al ratios were obtained at high magnetic field strengths. By combining the various field 27Al MAS (Fig. 27) and high magnetic field MQMAS NMR, four different peaks were deconvoluted using the same set of quadrupole coupling constants, asymmetric parameters and relative integrated peak intensities for the tetrahedral Al peaks. They have concluded from the study that the effect of second order quadrupole interaction can be ignored and quantitative results can be derived by directly fitting the high field (∼19.97 T or higher) spectra using a mixed Gaussian/Lorentzian line shape with the support of DFT NMR calculations.
 Fig. 27  
27Al MAS NMR data on zeolite HBEA at various field strengths demonstrating the significant decrease in the quadrupole interactions at high field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The 31P MAS NMR can be used as a tool to study solid acids using trimethylphosphine oxide (TMPO), which shows chemical shifts highly sensitive to the acid strength and can be introduced to porous systems in the gas phase or liquid phase using solvents. In a recent report, Hayashi et al. studied the acid properties of ZSM-5 type zeolite by ssNMR using TMPO as a probe molecule.75 They introduced TMPO from the gas phase at 373 K in order to increase the loading level as well as to probe almost all the acid centres. The 31P chemical shifts in the range between 90 and 60 ppm are attributed to TMPO adsorbed on Brønsted acid sites, whereas the signals between 60 and 40 ppm are ascribed to other sites.
A great deal of attention has been paid to synthesise highly siliceous zeolites owing to their higher hydrothermal stability and better catalytic properties in comparison with Al-rich zeolites. Tarach et al. studied the hydrothermal stability and catalytic performance of desilicated highly siliceous zeolite ZSM-5.325 The concentration of Brønsted and Lewis acid sites was measured in quantitative IR studies of pyridine adsorption, while their strength was determined in pyridine thermo-desorption experiments and low temperature carbon monoxide adsorption. The 27Al MAS NMR measurements delivered information on the status of Al atoms in both native and desilicated zeolites as well as on the changes of this status upon the steaming process.
The 2H NMR spectroscopy has become a method of choice for the investigation of molecular dynamics in molecular and solid-state systems. Lalowicz et al.326–330 have applied 2H NMR and IR spectroscopy along with spectral simulations to derive the confinement effect and molecular dynamics of methanol-d4 and D2O inside zeolite faujasite cages. Water confined in the NaX and NaY zeolites indicated that the presence of sodium cations in the zeolite framework is important for the observed mobility of water molecules and stability of water clusters. On the other hand, by measuring the temperature-dependent relaxation of deuterium in the range between 20 and 170 K, it was possible to distinguish gas phase, liquid-like, and immobilized methanol-d4 in zeolite cages.
Otomo et al. prepared variable Al loaded MCM-68 zeolites by post-synthetic acid treatment that were investigated by 27Al MQMAS NMR spectroscopy.62 The location of Brønsted acid sites and their tolerance against the acid treatment were determined by FT-IR spectroscopy using two probe molecules, pyridine and di-tert-butylpyridine. Brønsted acid sites were located in the 12MR channel as well as in 10MR windows and inside the supercages for Si/Al ratio of 10. High-silica MCM-68 had Brønsted acid sites predominantly in the 10MR windows and inside the supercages confirming their high resistance against the acid treatment. MCM-68 catalysts with a Si/Al ratio of 33 showed better catalytic performance in the dehydration of sorbitol than Beta, ZSM-5, and mordenite.


5.1.4. Applications. 
Wang et al. combined experimental NMR and theoretical investigations to gain new insights into the hydrocarbon-pool chemistry of the methanol-to-olefin (MTO) reaction over zeolite H-ZSM-5.331 They have co-fed methanol and benzene over the zeolite and detected active intermediates such as various cyclopentenyl cations and the pentamethylbenzenium ion. They have demonstrated the operation of an aromatics-based pairing mechanism for the formation of propene, which was also theoretically supported by DFT calculations.
By combining FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy along with other techniques, Raja et al.332 have outlined the crucial differences in diffusion modes and molecular interactions of active sites within solid-acid catalysts based on MFI and FAU topologies. Such an understanding can be utilized in the industrial production of ε-caprolactam (precursor to Nylon-6) under low-temperature, liquid-phase conditions.
The transformation of biomass into fuels is of great industrial relevance for green chemistry reasons. Sels et al. have demonstrated cooperative catalysis for multistep biomass conversion with bifunctional Sn/Al Beta zeolite using a combined spectroscopic approach.333 Lewis acid Snβ-type zeolites with varying amounts of Brønsted acid Al in the framework were synthesized by partial dealumination of β zeolite, followed by grafting of Sn centres (Fig. 28A). FT-IR and 27Al MAS NMR demonstrated the presence of Brønsted acid framework AlIV as well as tetrahedral Lewis acidic SnIV sites (Fig. 28B). Zeolites containing moderate amounts of framework Al showed the highest catalytic activity, validating the cooperative effect of Lewis SnIV and Brønsted AlIV acid sites.
 Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Sn/Al zeolitic material (A) and a plot of Brønsted and Lewis acidity per weight of material, obtained with quantitative FT-IR probed pyridine sorption, as a function of the AlIV (bottom axes) and Sn content (top axes) of the materials (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 333. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Hunger et al. also investigated Sn-Beta zeolites as Lewis acid catalysts for the ring-opening hydration of epoxides prepared by a two-step post-synthesis strategy.334 Solid-state 119Sn MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy revealed that most Sn species have been successfully incorporated into the framework of Beta zeolite and exist as isolated tetrahedral SnIV in open arrangement creating strong Lewis acidity (Fig. 29A). The signal at −420 ppm observed for Sn-Beta was due to framework SnIV in open arrangement, while no SnIV in closed arrangement was detected at −443 ppm (Fig. 29B). More importantly, hydration of tetrahedrally coordinated open arrangement Sn species resulted in an octahedral SnVI species and was seen at −685 ppm. The catalytic activity study in the ring-opening hydration of epoxides to the corresponding 1,2-diols showed remarkably high selectivity under near ambient and solvent-free conditions. They have also reported recently a novel approach for the characterization of Lewis acidic solid catalysts by ssNMR spectroscopy. Acetone-2–13C, trimethylphosphine oxide (TMPO) and ammonia were applied as probe molecules for ssNMR investigations of Lewis acid sites on γ-Al2O3, TiO2/anatase and lithium-exchanged zeolite Na-Y.335
 Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the incorporation of tetrahedrally coordinated Sn(IV) species into beta zeolite (A) and 119Sn MAS NMR spectra of dehydrated and hydrated Sn-Beta and SnO2/Si-Beta samples (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Dai et al. demonstrated for the first time the formation of the tert-butyl cation during isobutene conversion on zeolite H-ZSM-5 by ssNMR spectroscopy supported by DFT calculations.3361H and 13C MAS NMR studies as well as the theoretical calculations indicated that the tert-butyl cation formed on zeolite H-ZSM-5 by conversion of isobutene could be captured with ammonia. Furthermore, they did not observe any signals due to tert-butylammonium ions in the reaction between ammonia and isobutene in the absence of Brønsted acidic sites.
The reaction mechanism of solid-acid catalysed phenol alkylation with cyclohexanol and cyclohexene in decalin has been studied using in situ13C MAS NMR spectroscopy and the Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF-2014) package.337In situ13C ssNMR spectroscopy can probe, at a molecular level, the reaction pathways for this type of solid-acid catalysed reaction, under high temperature and high pressure conditions. They have established that intramolecular rearrangement of cyclohexyl phenyl ether is a minor pathway to cyclohexylphenols and alkylation occurs via a stepwise route initiated by olefin protonation.
Radhakrishnan et al. investigated pore mouth catalysis in etherification of β-citronellene with ethanol on zeolite Beta using FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy.338In situ FT-IR investigations using pyridine revealed that access to the interior of zeolite Beta crystallites was not blocked by pre-adsorption of 2,4,6-collidine. In situ13C Hahn-echo and 1H–13C CPMAS NMR characteristics were used to discriminate between molecules freely moving in the liquid phase outside the zeolite and molecules adsorbed inside zeolite pores and in pore mouths. Preferential adsorption of ethanol in zeolite pores dictates the etherification reaction of the β-citronellene molecule from the external liquid phase in a pore mouth and prevents side reactions.
Moreno-Gonzalez et al. have tested two copper zeolites with different framework topologies for the selective catalytic reduction of exhaust gas from diesel vehicles.339 They have studied the interaction of ammonia with zeolite Cu-SSZ-13 (CHA topology) with a uniform distribution of Cu2+ sites prepared in one pot and a conventional Cu-ZSM-5 (MFI topology) for comparison. In situ EPR and ssNMR spectroscopy combined with DFT calculations have provided experimental evidence for the formation of various ammonia containing copper species under different conditions. DFT calculations along with 1D and 2D 15N and 1H MAS NMR spectroscopy of 15N enriched ammonia adsorbed on the Cu zeolites provided direct information on the reduced Cu+ sites formed, as well as on the 15NH4+ cations formed on the Brønsted acid sites which shed light on the selective catalytic reduction (SCR) reaction mechanism. Cu-SSZ-13 zeolite has also been used in the SCR reaction.340
Solid-state NMR spectroscopic studies of quadrupolar nuclei have recently undergone remarkable development of capabilities for obtaining structural and dynamic information at the molecular level, thanks to the development of new techniques such as multiple-quantum magic angle spinning (MQMAS), double rotation (DOR), dynamic angle spinning (DAS), and satellite transition magic angle spinning (STMAS).341 Since acidity in microporous solids is a direct consequence of the presence of Al in an adequate framework position, a study of its environment is vital. Several studies and reviews dedicated to recent advances and their applications have been published.29,342–345
In a recent report, a crystallographic approach combining ssNMR spectroscopy, diffraction and calculations was employed to investigate the charge-balancing mechanisms operating in MgAPO STA-2.346 High-resolution 27Al MQMAS NMR data and first-principles calculations were able to show that Mg was preferentially substituted on the Al1 site in the AlPO framework.
Cadars et al. have studied the structure of rubidium-exchanged gallosilicate natrolite zeolite using a combined approach involving 29Si and 17O ssNMR experiments and DFT modelling.347 The T–O–T linkages in rubidium-exchanged zeolite were determined using 17O MQMAS NMR measurements. They have concluded from the study that 17O NMR parameters were more influenced by local structural factors than by the number of Ga atoms to which they were connected. Therefore, the resolved peak detected in the 17O NMR spectrum at around 15 ppm in the hydrated sample could be attributed to Ga–O–Ga and/or to Ga–O–Si species in the rubidium-exchanged zeolite.

Ab initio calculations (mainly at the DFT level, though some examples of correlated post-Hartree–Fock methods exist too) are often used to supplement the vibrational spectroscopic characterization, supporting the peak assignments. Many examples published prior 2015 are reviewed and the role of probe molecules is also described, with particular attention to CO, CO2 and NO used to investigate the surface acid sites in different zeolites.12,348
Very recently, Knott et al. have reviewed the experimental and computational progress in the modelling of MFI zeolites, concentrating on the catalytic applications, and underlying again the role of DFT calculations in the interpretation of vibrational spectra, as well as in the definition of small size (cluster) models of the reacting systems for the investigation of reaction mechanisms.349
The theoretical shift of the stretching frequency of NO and CO molecular probes was used in conjunction with FT-IR experiments to characterize the adsorption sites in some copper-exchanged zeolites and zeotypes (SAPO).350 Similarly, the comparison of theoretical and experimental CO frequencies was used to describe the cationic sites in high silica USY zeolites decorated with alkali metals351 and in FER systems including Ca2+ cations.352 In both cases, the modification of the probe stretching frequency could be correlated with the structure of the surrounding material, in particular the number and position of silanol groups, through the modelling of suitable clusters.
Of particular interest is the use of DFT calculations to identify some representative vibrations in the low-frequency pseudolattice region, involving ring oscillations, and which are quite difficult to interpret in the experiments: modelling of suitable clusters and of periodic frameworks allowed describing in detail the ring vibrations in FER, MOR and HEU zeolites, with a great improvement in the spectra interpretation.353 A similar approach had been used to identify the 5–1 ring vibrations in spectra recorded for MOR zeolites after heavy metal cation immobilization.354
Because of the extensive use of zeolites in catalysis, in many papers a combination of theoretical and experimental techniques is applied to describe reaction mechanisms: most of such studies lie outside the scope of this work, but in some recent applications FT-IR spectra have been interpreted with the aid of DFT simulations, leading to suitable chemical models of interacting systems, for instance propene in potassium-FER zeolite,355 or acetic acid and methanol in H-Beta zeolite.356
The photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue catalysed by a Ni(II) hexa–aza complex embedded in Y zeolite was followed by a series of spectroscopic measurements, supported by DFT calculations on model systems, describing both the neat and the encapsulated complex.357
In an outstanding work recently published,358 different spectroscopic and diffraction techniques were used in conjunction with DFT calculations to describe the self-organization of perylene-diimide dyes inside a zeolite L: in this theoretical-experimental approach, the supramolecular organization in the confining matrix was described by modelling the atomistic structure and comparing the simulated structure and spectra with the measurements (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Centre: FT-IR spectra of perylene dye embedded in zeolite L in solid state (grey), degassed (red) and re-hydrated (green). Left and right panels: sketch of two normal modes computed at the DFT level for an isolated dye molecule, used for the assignment of the IR bands. Adapted with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
When coupled to NMR experiments, ab initio calculations are usually employed to reproduce chemical shifts and chemical shift anisotropies, to be compared to the experimental values under different conditions, often with the support of suitable probes. Many nuclei have been considered by this approach: 119Sn chemical shift anisotropies were computed at the DFT level on model clusters to elucidate the interaction sites of tin in CHA zeolites;31913C CPMAS NMR experiments were interpreted with the aid of multiscale theoretical simulations to investigate the solvent effect on the activity of an acetone probe in ZSM-5;82 analogously, pyrrole was used as the 1H NMR probe to test basic sites on catalytic materials, by comparing a number of experimental data on different zeolites with DFT computed chemical shifts for pyrrole on a generic 8T zeolite model.92
A combination of DFT and MAS NMR spectroscopy on 29Si nuclei was used to study the structural and chemical modifications induced by Ge/Si substitution in zeolite Beta: in this work, it was possible to discriminate between the different substitution sites thanks to the accurate calculation of chemical shifts in different suitable model clusters;359 the structure of a newly synthesized AST zeolite was determined by 14N NMR spectroscopy, by reproducing the NMR parameters at the DFT level, after the theoretical optimization of the material, and demonstrating the presence of weak CH⋯O hydrogen bonds inside the structure.360
Zheng et al. have reviewed the use of 31P NMR spectroscopy for the study of acid sites in various liquid and solid catalysts, including several zeolites, with the support of DFT calculations: in this case, instead of reproducing the NMR tensors, the calculations were mainly used to estimate the acid strength to be correlated with the measured magnetic spectra.76
A comprehensive review was recently published about the studies employing DFT calculation of chemical shift tensors to support the assignment and the analysis of 27Al NMR spectra: a variety of Al containing solids were mentioned in this work, among which were different zeolites, underlying the potential utility of this combined approach.361

5.2. Zeo-type materials
In the early 1980s, a new class of microporous crystalline materials, aluminophosphates (AlPOs), different in nature with respect to zeolites that are silicates or aluminosilicates, but with similar textural and shape-selectivity properties, were synthesized.362 ALPOs cover a wide range of different crystalline structures: some analogous to traditional zeolites such as SAPO-34 (CHA structure) or SAPO-37 (FAU structure) and others with unique structures. The AlPO framework allows introducing isolated active centres via isomorphous substitution of metal ions into the alternating AlO4 and PO4 framework tetrahedra during synthesis generating a diverse range of active sites (solid-acid and/or redox centres).363 Al(III) and/or P(V) can be replaced with Si(IV) to form SAPO-n materials and with other metals to form MeAPO-n or MeAPSO-n materials. Owing to the availability of a large-range of metal ions that could be effectively incorporated into a diverse-range of AlPO architectures creating Brønsted acids or redox sites and containing a wide range of pore apertures, these microcrystalline materials have been widely used as acid or redox heterogeneous catalysts. Among silicoaluminophosphates (SAPOs), SAPO-34 has been investigated extensively due to its well-established industrial relevance in the methanol-to-olefin (MTO) acid catalysed process (100% methanol conversion and >90% selectivity to C2–C4 light olefins).364 The catalytic activity of microporous crystalline materials in MTO reactions is due to the presence of Brønsted acid sites, SiO(H)Al, within their channels and cavities. The Brønsted acidity in SAPOs is produced by the insertion of Si(IV) at the P(V) site, which leads to the formation of negatively charged frameworks that are balanced by protons attached to Si–O–Al bridges; this mechanism is denoted SM2. The substitution of Si(IV) for Al(III), SM1, is another possible mechanism of Si insertion; however, this would lead to the formation of Si–O–P bridges, which are energetically unfavourable as suggested by a computational study on SAPO-5 and have never been observed experimentally. The double substitution of neighbouring Al(III) and P(V) by two Si atoms has often been proposed for the Si insertion; this third mechanism, SM3, is responsible for the formation of Si islands, e.g., silicate-type patches with variable extension, within the AlPO frameworks. The silicon content can address the substitution mechanism generating different SAPO structures. The three mechanisms are represented in Scheme 3, where it is clear that the local structure of Brønsted acid sites in SAPOs is formally similar to that of classical zeolites.365
 Scheme 3  Adapted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2005 Annual Reviews. 
The nature and the strength of the acid sites in the SAPOs can be assessed coupling FT-IR spectroscopy with (1H, 29Si, 31P and 27Al) ssNMR. In particular, the acid strength of Brønsted sites can be studied by FT-IR spectroscopy using adsorption of probe molecules with basic character, such as ammonia or pyridine, or by measuring the temperature at which these molecules are desorbed (temperature programmed desorption (TPD) measurements).366 However, these techniques and the use of strong basic probe molecules do not allow discerning among families of Brønsted sites with small differences in acid strength; in this case the use of probe molecules with weaker basicity such as CO is compulsory. In particular, the CO adsorption at 100–110 K on acid materials produces a downward shift of the stretching mode of O–H (νOH) due to the interaction of the acid site by H-bond with the CO molecules. The measure of the νOH shift upon formation of the OH⋯B adducts represents a classical method to estimate the acidity of Brønsted sites.12,367–369 To achieve information on the coordination of the framework constituent of AlPO or SAPO architectures, ssNMR is widely used; in fact different chemical shifts are observed by changing the coordination of Al or P from tetrahedral to octahedral.
SAPO-34 catalysts have been characterized in depth by FT-IR and ssNMR. In the O–H stretching region of FT-IR spectra (Fig. 31A), calcined SAPO-34 displays two intense bands with maxima at 3630 and 3600 cm−1 assigned to the stretching mode of Al(OH)Si Brønsted acid sites in the O4 (3630 cm−1, OHA) and O2 (3600 cm−1, OHC) structural configurations of the CHA framework.370,371 The two acid sites have also been evidenced by 1H MAS NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 31B): a signal at around 4 ppm, associated with Brønsted Si(OH)Al groups, is present and after deconvolution, two components at 3.6 and 3.9 ppm can be identified, corresponding to the two protons in the CHA framework.
 Fig. 31  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region of calcined microporous SAPO-34; (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of a SAPO-34 sample similar to (A); (C) SAPO-34 samples (a–c) of different origin and CAL-1 (d), a silicoaluminophosphate with a CHA structure, as described in ref. 370; (D) sample (b) under different CO pressures; (E) a representation of a silicon island in a SAPO-34 structure, after substitution of 4 couples of Al/P atoms with 8 silicon atoms as described in ref. 365; (F) 29Si CP MAS NMR of selected samples of frame (C). Adapted with permission form ref. 365 and 370. Copyright 2005 Annual Reviews and Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Clear-cut proof for the presence of a third type of Brønsted acid site (called OHB) was found by a FT-IR study of weak probe molecules: these sites, absorbing at 3625 cm−1, have been described in the literature by a multi-peak curve-fitting (Fig. 31C and D).370 The validity of this curve-fitting procedure was checked using the empirical correlation proposed by Makarova et al. based on the increase of the extinction coefficients of OH groups involved in H-bonding.367 Brønsted OHB sites were found to be more acidic with respect to OHA and OHC by studying the shift of the stretching O–H mode due to the CO adsorption at 110 K (Fig. 31D): the downshift observed for OHB Brønsted sites was ca. 331 cm−1, higher than those found at 277 and 145 cm−1 for OHA and OHC, respectively. The OHB were found to be even more acidic than the protons of the H-SSZ-13, the zeolitic homologues (ΔνOH = 316 cm−1).372 The nature of these particular acid sites was explained in terms of Si sites present at the borders of silica islands (Fig. 31E), having a local environment similar to that of Brønsted sites in zeolites; this hypothesis was confirmed by a detailed comparison of the data obtained on samples with different Si loadings and by 29Si CP MAS NMR analysis (Fig. 31F). It should be noted that 1H MAS NMR could not directly detect the OHB sites because of the strong overlapping with the other two proton signals, whereas 29Si CP MAS NMR proved their possible location. Again, this enlightens the relevance of adopting a combined FT-IR/ssNMR and theoretical study for an in-depth characterization of solid systems with high structural complexity.
The position and the chemical environment of copper ions embedded in SAPO catalysts were characterized with a combination of IR spectroscopy and DFT calculations, employing different probe molecules: NO was used to describe the structure of Cu-SAPO-34, compared to Cu-SSZ-13, and the comparison of experimental and theoretical frequencies indicated the presence of dimeric copper oxo ions;350 CO was also used in a combined FT-IR and theoretical investigation of Cu-SAPO-34 to locate the copper sites, depending on the preparation methods.373 In both these studies, the calculations were used to assign the vibrational frequencies of the probe/copper complexes, using models of the different conformations.
On the other hand, DFT calculations were used in conjunction with FT-IR measurements to elucidate the mechanism of NO oxidation in a Cu-SAPO-18 catalyst: in this case, the role of the theoretical study was related to the modelling of the process, rather than to the spectroscopic characterization.374
5.3. Mesoporous materials
Mesoporous silica has received much attention due to its well-defined structural order, high surface area, and tuneable pore diameter. Although the first successful report patented on the synthesis of mesoporous silica happened in the 1970s, the effective introduction to scientific community appeared in 1992 from Mobil research and Development Corporation. Those ordered mesoporous silica materials (MCM type) had a pore diameter of up to 10 nm. However, mesoporous silica systems with a larger pore diameter of up to 30 nm started to appear in 1998 and were called Santa Barbara Amorphous (SBA) type.
Unlike microporous materials, mesoporous materials have the advantage that their larger ordered pore systems can be utilized for a variety of applications such as gas storage, separation, heterogeneous catalysis and drug delivery. Moreover, their inner walls could be functionalized to yield single-site, chiral and catalytically active centres, which could be determined using FT-IR and multi-nuclear MAS NMR spectroscopy. These techniques opened up the prospect of understanding how the catalytic effects are achieved in these porous systems or how a molecule is confined inside the pores. Alonso and Marichal have recently reviewed the application of ssNMR spectroscopy on the study of formation mechanisms, the characterisation of structures, textures, surfaces and interfaces, functionalisation, dynamic properties and structure–reactivity correlations.375

5.3.1. Surfaces, acid sites and pore confinement. 
A study of the formation of mesoporous materials is of great importance in order to tailor the pore size to specific uses and to maximize the stability. When a non-ionic triblock co-polymer surfactant of the type EO106PO70EO106 (Pluronic F127) was used in a self-assembled micellar approach, a 3D cubic Im3m space group arranged mesoporous silica material was formed (SBA-16).376,377 By careful variation of the amount and ratios between reactants such as surfactant F127, water, HCl, butanol and TEOS, it was possible to control the texture of SBA-16. The synthesis is driven by a self-assembly of the co-polymer in micelles, which minimizes the contact of its hydrophobic parts with the water solution and leads to the formation of the silica inorganic structure by hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) at the water/polymer interface. Bisio et al. reported a combined application of FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy, to assess the interactions occurring between the triblock copolymer and the SBA-16 siliceous framework at different hydration levels.378
They have employed multi-nuclear multi-dimensional MAS NMR experiments to probe the organic–inorganic interfaces formed by the copolymer and silica framework in as-synthesized SBA-16. Heteronuclear correlation (HETCOR)379 experiments, based on proton to silicon or proton to carbon dipolar couplings, are sensitive concurrently to the atomic distances of interest and to the co-polymer segmental mobilities. The presence of strong surface interactions between the block-copolymer and various framework silicon sites was hinted by the overlapping cross peak pairs (in 2D 1H–29Si HETCOR data) generated between protons of the alkoxy units and silicon nuclei of the as-synthesized SBA-16. Interpenetration of the F127 polymer blocks into the inner silica walls was confirmed by the correlation peaks appeared between Q3 and Q2 silicon sites and methyl protons of co-polymer at around 1 ppm. Such cross peaks were absent in a dehydrated SBA-16 sample hinting reorganization of the PEO and PPO blocks of the copolymer. In addition, 2D 1H–13C HETCOR data also revealed the location and role of water in the formation and stabilization of polymer–silica interfaces (Fig. 32). Moreover, the organization of PEO and PPO blocks at the interface and their dynamics controlled by the interfacial water were also revealed. Strong hydrogen bonding interactions between the copolymer and silica framework were confirmed by the appearance of a cross-peak between the PEO units (13C at 70.7 ppm) and the 1H signal of hydrogen bonded silanols at 5.7 ppm. Variable temperature FT-IR studies confirmed the H-bonding between SiOH and etheric oxygen atoms of the co-polymer. Such an integrated approach using multiple characterization tools helps one in understanding the formation of mesoporous materials and forecasting their properties.
 Fig. 32  2D 13C–1H HETCOR NMR spectra of as synthesized (right) and dehydrated (left) SBA-16. 1H MAS NMR spectra are on the 1H axis while the 13C projections on the 13C axis (top). Adapted with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yasmin and Muller have applied a supercritical fluid approach to prepare alkyl bonded mesoporous MCM-41 silica materials with higher surface coverages.380 The degree of bonding and cross-linking of the alkylsilanes was determined by 29Si NMR spectroscopy, and the application of FT-IR and 13C NMR spectroscopy revealed the conformational behaviour and mobility of the bonded alkyl chains.
Cattaneo et al. prepared organosulfonic modified SBA-15 silicas for catalytic applications in organic reactions.381 Catalytic activity of the propylsulfonic pendants in the ordered mesostructures of SBA-15 was restricted to 20 mol%. The extent of the propylsulfonic functionalization into the silica materials was monitored through 29Si ssNMR spectroscopy. Above 50 mol% of organic functionalization, a progressive modification of the SBA-15 hexagonal mesoporous structure was observed which suggested an inhomogeneous distribution of the organic pendants. From 1H and 13C MAS NMR, it was shown that a full conversion of the –SH groups to –SO3H was possible only at low functionalization degrees while at higher degrees the formation of S–S bridges was the predominant mechanism.
Reid and Crudden were successful in producing stable molecular chirality within the walls of periodic mesoporous organosilicas via self-assembly.382,383 Their chiral PMOs showed strong circular dichroism signals that were completely preserved after post-treatment of the solid-state material favouring the conformationally locked chiral PMO. Solid state 13C CPMAS NMR confirmed the presence of the chiral dopant embedded within the PMO materials while the 29Si MAS NMR signals in the T-site region indicated a high degree of condensation in the final material.
Azhati et al. recently demonstrated that ordered highly zeolitized mesoporous materials can be obtained via a gradient acidic assembly growth strategy with a mixed template synthesis approach.384 The resultant highly zeolitized mesoporous aluminosilicate SBA-16, composed of the intergrown zeolite subcrystal particles, exhibited high surface area and pore volume, a typical channel of MFI framework and uniform mesopores (∼5.7 nm). They have used a multi-technique approach to characterize the material including solid-state 29Si and 27Al MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy. FT-IR spectra of adsorbed pyridine were used to calculate the relative concentration of the Brønsted and Lewis acid sites from the intensity of the PyH+ and PyL bands.
Recent investigations by Peemoller et al. utilized proton NMR to model the chemical shift averaging, due to the making and breaking of hydrogen bonds as water molecules move on the mesoporous MCM-41 surface, both as a function of hydration and temperature.385,386 Various hydrogen bonding configurations of water on MCM-41 are shown in Fig. 33. They identified two water groups of which one makes up 37–42% of the total water hydrating MCM-41 and was assigned to H-bonded surface OH group adsorption sites, while the water group making up 58–63% of the water on the surface was assigned to Si–OH groups. It was found that the water groups maintain these fractions at all temperatures (over a temperature range of 200–325 K) and hydrations, with minor deviations.
 Fig. 33  The various hydrogen bonding configurations of water, (a–g), to the surface silanols considered in the chemical shift averaging model. Dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds. All protons involved in hydrogen bonding are assumed to take the same isotropic chemical shift value of 5.5 ppm. Protons of water molecules and OH groups not involved in hydrogen bonding were assigned a value of 1.5 ppm and 1.75 ppm, respectively, at 293 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd. 
In the work of Grünberg et al. melting of naphthalene confined in mesoporous silica MCM-41 with a pore width of 3.3 nm was studied using 2H solid-echo NMR in the temperature regime from 180 to 250 K.387 The melting point of the naphthalene molecules confined in mesoporous silica MCM-41 showed a reduction of 152 K. The line shape changes in the melting region were simulated with models and found out that a relatively narrow distribution of melting points of the naphthalene molecules inside the pores is indicative of a well-defined organization of the naphthalene molecules within the pore structure.
Kamarudin et al. utilized FT-IR and ssNMR for probing the influence of Al loading in mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) for the evaluation of ibuprofen adsorption and release.388 Acidity in Al-MSN samples was monitored using pyridine pre-adsorbed FT-IR spectroscopy (Fig. 34A). The bands at 1545 cm−1 and 1639 cm−1 were due to pyridinium ions bound to Brønsted acid sites, while the bands at 1446 cm−1 and 1619 cm−1 were due to pyridine bound to Lewis acid sites. H-bonded pyridine showed a band at 1596 cm−1 while the band at 1488 cm−1 was assigned to pyridine associated with both Brønsted and Lewis acids. The trend in the relationship between Brønsted and Lewis acid sites according to Al grafting on MSN is illustrated in Fig. 34B. Brønsted and Lewis acid sites related to the Al coordination sphere were determined by 27Al MAS NMR spectroscopy. The spectra of higher Al loaded samples showed two peaks at around 0 and 55 ppm, corresponding to extra-framework (octahedral) and framework (tetrahedral) Al coordination, respectively. An increase in Al loading in mesoporous silica amplified the acid sites that embraced the molecules, and raised the retention in ibuprofen release.
 Fig. 34  (A) FT-IR spectra of adsorbed pyridine of (a) MSN; (b) 1Al-MSN; (c) 5Al-MSN; (d) 10Al-MSN outgassed at 423 K. (B) Relationship of Lewis acid sites and Brønsted acid sites with Al loading. Adapted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bhaumik et al. have reported a new heterogeneous catalyst, mesoporous bifunctionalized organosilica containing Brønsted acidic and basic sites, with exceptionally high surface area and tuneable porosity.389 They have employed various techniques along with FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy to determine the acid strength and demonstrated the excellent catalytic activity of the mesoporous material for the synthesis of HMF from various carbohydrates.
Washton et al. unveiled the confinement effects on the behaviour of supercritical methane in nonporous and mesoporous silica in variable temperature and pressure regimes using high pressure MAS NMR and MD simulations.39013C MAS NMR experiments on bulk methane showed that the chemical shift of methane in the pure state was between −10.45 and −9.71 ppm from 28.2 to 112.7 bar of pressure, respectively. The 13C isotropic chemical shift of methane mixed with nonporous silica changed only slightly (−9.76 ppm at 112.7 bar). Meanwhile, methane loaded into mesoporous silica exhibited two distinct resonances at −9.62 and −9.17 ppm due to unconfined and mesopore confined molecules, respectively (Fig. 35A). The effects of confinement were studied by variable temperature 13C MAS NMR measurements. A lack of thermal response was observed for 13C chemical shifts associated with unconfined methane either in nonporous or mesoporous silica (as well as for bulky methane). In addition, confinement effects are evident in the line broadening exhibited for methane in mesoporous silica relative to pure methane. A decrease in pore size leads to hindered translational and rotational motion for the methane molecules, leading to restricted motion that will shorten the T2 relaxation time and contribute to line broadening. Pressure induced changes to the 13C NMR chemical shift values of methane were attributed to methane densification on the pore surface, and molecular dynamics disclosed the fluid densification enhanced by pore confinement and increased CH4–CH4 interactions (Fig. 35B).
 Fig. 35  Proton decoupled 13C MAS NMR spectra of methane in the pure state and in mixtures with nonporous silica and mesoporous silica, acquired at 112.7 bar and 307 K (A). Snapshots of the 4 nm silica pore model (B) with methane adsorbed at 307 K, 28.2 bar (top), 56.4 bar (middle), 112.7 bar (bottom). Red balls are oxygen atoms, gold balls are silicon atoms, white balls are hydrogen atoms, and grey balls represent methane molecules. Adapted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


5.3.2. Mesoporous solids for drug delivery. 
Confining pharmaceutically active ingredients into mesoporous materials has been a hot topic in the recent past. Bioavailability of the drug molecules can be enhanced by their slow release from meso-pores. About 25% of all marketed drugs are fluorinated molecules and developing novel nano-confined pharmaceutical formulations as drug delivery systems can have day-to-day applications. Nartowski et al.391 have applied variable temperature 19F magic angle spinning NMR spectroscopy along with computational methods, to derive detailed mechanistic insights into the crystallization of flufenamic acid in a confined environment of mesoporous silica materials with different pore diameters (3.2–29 nm). They found out that the encapsulation of flufenamic acid molecules within silica scaffolds led to either the formation of confined crystals or the stabilization of the confined amorphous phase, as well as a highly mobile species in the form of a molecular liquid-like layer at the silica surface depending on the pore size of the host and the properties of guest molecules (size, flexibility, and thermal behaviour). A combined approach enabled them to gain a better understanding of the fundamental processes of molecular aggregation in different porous environments, motional regimes and at different length scales.
Azaïs et al. have applied DFT calculations and ssNMR spectroscopy to determine the origin and the strength of the interactions at the molecular level for ibuprofen and benzoic acid, encapsulated in hydrated MCM-41 modified with organic moieties.392 They have observed both by calculations and experimental methods that the micro-solvated silica surface was found to adsorb better ibuprofen and benzoic acid than the bare silica surface at 300 K. The water layer acted as an adhesive between the organic molecules and the silica surface, where rapid reorientation of the molecules inside the mesoporous silica occurred due to adsorption/desorption induced by the interactions. On the other hand, silica surface functionalization by aminopropyl groups confirmed that the adsorption of organic molecules on that surface was very unfavourable in the absence of micro-solvation. The water molecules at the surface prevent the aminopropyl moiety from interacting preferably with the surface silanols and a competition between water adsorption and interaction with the amino groups makes the aminopropyls available for interaction with ibuprofen or benzoic acid molecules which lead to their slow desorption from the silica surface. They have stated that, by the careful choice of organic functionalization in mesoporous silica, one could control the release rate of the molecule of interest. A combination of ab initio calculations and 1H and 13C ssNMR experiments was used to investigate the adsorption of ibuprofen onto hydrated and functionalized mesoporous silica: the theoretical models helped in describing the position and the adsorption energies, highlighting the central role of water monolayers on the silica surface.392 In a related study, they have applied variable temperature 1H MAS NMR experiments to demonstrate the fast chemical exchange between protons of the COOH group of the organic molecule and protons from water molecules at the silica surface.393 A different approach was adopted by Vega et al.394 to describe the adsorption/desorption dynamics of a drug model, namely a glycine-alanine dipeptide, onto SBA-15 at different degrees of hydration: the interaction with the hydrated surface was followed by deuterium MAS NMR, evaluating the size of the water clusters surrounding the adsorbed molecules. In this case, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were used to support the measurements and model the adsorbate dynamics: a standard force field was used.
Many applications of mesoporous silica involve drug delivery and controlled release: recently, some papers have applied theoretical methods along with FT-IR and ssNMR techniques to describe the interaction of drug molecules, or their molecular models, with such environments. Barczak et al. described a number of SBA-15 samples decorated with different organic groups, including amines, pyridine, thiols and others, and evaluated the adsorption capacities of diclofenac, a widely used anti-inflammatory drug. The results were rationalized by describing the interaction of giclofenac with the organo-modified surface by means of FT-IR measurements and DFT calculations, to detail the atomistic interactions.395 Other drug release experiments were performed on mesoporous silica microspheres functionalized with metal (Pt and Ti) complexes, studying the interaction and the release dynamics of guanosine and bovine serum albumin by means of FT-IR and 13C MAS-NMR: DFT calculations supported the experiments by modelling the interaction energies and the adsorption/desorption mechanisms.396 MCM-41 and SBA-15 were tested as potential carriers for a poorly soluble drug (nimodipine), which was shown to be incorporated either in crystalline or in amorphous form, the latter being markedly more resistant to washing: the properties of the loaded samples were characterized by several techniques, including FT-IR and DFT calculations, which were used to interpret the vibrational spectra (modelling the bulk nimodipine molecule).397


5.3.3. Mesoporous solids for CO2 adsorption. 
In a recent report, the structure of chemisorbed CO2 species in amine-functionalized mesoporous silica was studied by ssNMR and computer modelling.398 To shed light on the nature of chemisorbed CO2 species formed and their intermolecular interactions with neighbouring amine groups, they have applied a ssNMR and computational approach on various amine-grafted SBA-15 materials loaded with 13C-labeled CO2 at variable pressures under a tightly controlled atmosphere. Three distinct chemisorbed CO2 species were identified in this study and all of them were involved in hydrogen bonds with either surface silanols or neighbouring alkylamines. Different combinations of hydrogen bonding networks (weak to very strong) essentially stabilize the carbamic acid and alkylammonium carbamate-like ion pairs in amine-grafted SBA-15 materials loaded with 13CO2.
Gatti et al. reported a study on the adsorption of CO2 on different organo-modified silicas (SBA-15 and MCM-41) with varying degrees of amine concentrations. They have employed three different amino-silane species, namely, 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTS), 3-(2-aminoethyl)aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (EAPTS) and 3-[2-(2-aminoethyl)aminoethyl]aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (PAPTS) which were incorporated into mesoporous silica by either a grafting procedure or a one-pot preparation method.399 In another strategy, they have varied the particle size of the mesoporous silicas which had grafted amino groups and studied the CO2 adsorption behaviour.400 By using an integrated approach of various spectroscopic (FT-IR and ssNMR) and calorimetric techniques as well as computational techniques, they have found out that the reactivity of amino-modified silica samples towards CO2 was deeply influenced by both the preparation route and the type of organo-silane used for the functionalization of the materials. Post-synthesis grafting of organo-silane was more efficient than the one-pot method, as the CO2 adsorption data showed. Amine protonation owing to the acidic preparation condition was responsible for the ineffective nature of the one-pot preparation method. On the other hand, a higher amount of CO2 physisorption was observed in the nanometer sized mesoporous sample, due to its higher pore volume, whereas chemisorbed (carbamate and carbamic acid) species were predominant in the micrometer sized sample (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  
13C MAS NMR spectra of 13CO2 adsorbed on amino-silane grafted mesoporous MCM-41 with micro-size particles (a) and nano-size particles (b) recorded using a MAS rate of 10 kHz. Each spectrum includes experimental and deconvoluted spectra401 with individual contributions from each 13C site. Schematic diagram representing two possible models of the hydrogen bonding network formed by carbamate and carbamic acid species with surface silanols and neighbouring amino-units. Adapted with permission from ref. 400. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Combined theoretical and experimental techniques have often been used to characterize organo-modified mesoporous silica: for instance, a surface functionalized by aminopropyltriethoxysilane was studied by 29Si NMR, as well as TGA and ESI-MS, and modelled by DFT calculations, which helped describe the hydration states of the tethered functional groups.402 The stability of organo-modified silica, with amines of variable length grafted on the surface, was investigated under a number of different conditions, to evaluate the relation between stability and chain length. Several experimental techniques were employed, among which 13C ssNMR, and the results were supported by ab initio calculations describing the degradation pathways by optimizing reactants, products and possible transition states.403
Some older results about the structure and the stability of surface modified silica for the immobilization of enzymes are reviewed.404 Here, some examples of molecular dynamics simulations supporting the structure analysis are reported, highlighting the importance of a theoretical atomistic description when non-crystalline samples are found.
Other surface modifications of silica have been recently described by combined methods: for instance, zinc oxide grafted on mesostructured silica foam has been described by vibrational spectroscopy supported by theoretical calculations performed on realistic amorphous silica surface models, using the harmonic simulated spectra to assign the experimental vibrational modes.405 CO2 adsorption in SBA-15 was shown to increase upon incorporation of potassium chloride particles: the formation of gas-trapping sites around the KCl clusters, caused by the intense electrostatic field generated, was described by molecular dynamics simulations with a specifically derived force field, and by DFT calculations of the adsorption energies. In this work 29Si MAS-NMR spectra were recorded to confirm the results of the simulations, showing the actual formation of regions with a high concentration of gas around the KCl clusters.406 A series of crown-ethers were immobilized on the SBA-15 surface, previously derivatized with alkyl halide chains, to test the separation of lithium isotopes from liquid samples: the structure of the functionalized surfaces was confirmed by 1H and 13C NMR spectra, and the complexation reaction between lithium and the macrocycle ligands was reproduced by ab initio calculations. In this work, the structure of the Li complexes inside the silica pores could be described in good detail, thanks to the comparison of the optimized structures with the results of the NMR analysis.407
Paul et al. have applied a multi-technique approach for the investigation of the interaction of water vapour with aminopropyl groups on the surface of mesoporous silica nanoparticles.408 The application of the rotor-synchronised spin-echo magic angle spinning 1H NMR methodology provided substantial suppression of broad probe background signals as well as the signals from strongly dipolar coupled terms (other broad signals) in partly hydrated samples delivering an opportunity to obtain the signal of surface groups. They have judiciously chosen the delay time (τ) as an optimised compromise between the signal decay owing to relaxation and the resolution gain owing to longer delay times. The essential advantage of this approach was that, it could provide a spectrum, without undergoing drastic surface changes and masking of delicate interface interactions when the sample was dehydrated under vacuum. The interaction of water with the surface of mesoporous silica functionalized with aminopropylsilanes was carefully studied by 29Si, 1H and 13C ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy, evaluating the strength of hydrogen bonds between the organic chains and the surface silanols, as well as with the water molecules, and evidencing the presence of protonated ammonium groups. This point was discussed in detail with the help of ab initio simulations, showing the conditions for the protonation of amino groups on the silica surface in the presence of water.408
Andreev et al. further developed the spin-echo sequence with the insertion of a dipolar filter prior to the sequence.409 The usability of the 1H dipolar filtering spin-echo MAS NMR technique has been demonstrated, in that work, for the semi-quantitative analysis of dried and partly hydrated commercially available zeolites. They acknowledged that the technique can reveal the framework stacking fault species that can be crucial for understanding the relationships of structure and performance.


5.3.4. Other applications. 
Harrach et al. demonstrated the unique applicability of ssNMR methods combined with MD simulations for the characterization of binary fluid mixtures inside porous silica materials.410 The phase behaviour of an isobutyric acid–water mixture inside a mesoporous SBA-15 material showed microphase separation: the isobutyric acid-rich phase was close to the pore wall while the water-rich phase was in the centre of the pores. However, upon increasing the temperature, the relative water concentration increases at the pore surface and leads to a more thorough miscibility.
Another interesting illustration of the relevance of the multi-technique approach in characterizing mesoporous silica nanoparticles was reported by Martins Estevão et al.411 These authors covalently coupled the photosensitizer Rose Bengal (RB) to mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) and demonstrated the advantage in photodynamic therapy applications given that the photosensitizing molecules are stably incorporated into the nanoparticles and are protected from the outer environment. The covalent coupling and the stability of RB on MSN were confirmed by FT-IR (Fig. 37) and ssNMR spectroscopic techniques. The structure of RB in water solution and immobilized into the channel of MSNs was also optimized theoretically, with DFT methods, to understand the structural modifications induced by the adsorption on the silica particles.412
 Fig. 37  Schematic representation of the synthetic procedure used to obtain the Rose Bengal photosensitizer bound to mesoporous silica nanoparticles (A). FT-IR spectra of RB-MSNs and NH2-MSNs (B) and 13C CPMAS NMR spectra (C) of RB-MSN and pure Rose Bengal. Adapted with permission from ref. 411. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The design and development of molecular machines including molecular rotors, motors, and brakes have attracted attention over the last decade.413 To control the rates of rotation and rotational barriers of molecular devices, one may judiciously use non-covalent forces (e.g. hydrogen bonding). Molecular dynamics in such systems can easily be followed by ssNMR spectroscopy in combination with other techniques. Comotti et al. have reported, in 2008, the study of molecular rotor motions in periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs), which consist of fully covalent architectures using phenyl-silica.414 Recently, they have studied periodic mesoporous hybrid materials composed of divinyl-p-fluorophenylene units bridging two adjacent siloxane layers, exhibiting a periodic architecture.415 For structural characterization, they have employed ssNMR to investigate the motional behaviour of p-phenylene moieties in the mesoporous fluoro-organosilicas using 13C spin–lattice relaxation measurements. The 180° flip of the benzene ring was demonstrated by 2H NMR (ca. 108 Hz at 325 K). They have achieved the molecular rotational modulation by substituting the organic units (e.g. with I2) or by filling the pores with guest molecules (e.g. with N2 or CO2) as shown in Fig. 38. Such solids can be used in gas capturing, detection and sensing.
 Fig. 38  Schematic representation of a macroscopic gyroscope, molecular rotors and the host–guest molecular dynamics in porous solids detected by ssNMR. Adapted with permission from ref. 413. Copyright 2016 American Society of Chemistry. 
In the past thirty years, 129Xe NMR has been applied to various porous systems, as an efficient technique to investigate the structure of porous solids. The timeline of 129Xe NMR development is reported in Fig. 39. The main advantage of 129Xe NMR is the high sensitivity of the xenon atom to its local environment. Any distortion of the large highly-polarizable electron cloud of the xenon atom is directly transmitted to the nucleus, affecting the chemical shift. During the past 30 years, 129Xe NMR spectroscopy has been applied on various systems, such as microporous zeolites, mesoporous silica, pillared clays, hierarchical solids, and hybrid porous materials.416,417 Valtchev and co-workers have applied 129Xe NMR to determine the increase in micropore volume resulting from the opening of sodalite cages in faujasite-type zeolite.418 They have reported a 10% increase in micropore volume as well as a high number of accessible active sites which substantially improved the catalytic performance of the zeolite. The opening of sodalite cages in zeolite was achieved by controlled etching using ammonium fluoride.
 Fig. 39  Historical timeline of 129Xe NMR with important years and events. Adapted with permission from ref. 416. Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. 
Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is one of the most promising methods to enhance the intrinsic sensitivity of ssNMR experiments by several orders of magnitude.419 Recently, a few reviews have appeared which provided an in-depth overview about the theoretical and practical aspects of DNP under MAS conditions at high magnetic fields.420–423 They have also covered the applicability of DNP MAS NMR spectroscopy towards the problems in materials science and the readers are encouraged to go through these excellent sources for more in-depth information. The application of DNP NMR on microporous and mesoporous materials has been reported recently.342,424–430 Lafon et al. have recently demonstrated the propagation of DNP-enhanced 1H polarization via1H–1H spin diffusion over distances up to several hundreds of nm in mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) loaded with surfactant molecules.425 The approach was established using MSN, functionalized with 3-(N-phenylureido)propyl (PUP) groups, filled with the surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and an enhancement of 13C and 29Si signals εon/off of around 8 was observed. In CTAB-free MSN, the DNP enhancement was around 30 validating the ability of radical TOTAPOL to penetrate into the mesopores of MSN. This research work has revealed the new opportunities created by DNP NMR for the study of organic–inorganic hybrid porous materials.

5.4. Hierarchical porous materials
Microporous materials (porous diameter <2.0 nm) such as zeolites have been extensively used as heterogeneous catalysts in refinery and petrochemical industrial processes where their shape-selective properties are exploited. Nevertheless, zeolites do not work at their full potential due to the fact that the sole presence of micropores imposes diffusion limitations on the reaction rate, and the mass transport to and from the active sites located within the micropores is slow and limits the performance of industrial catalysts. Different synthetic strategies have been adopted to avoid this limitation, such as minimizing the size of the zeolite crystals (<50 nm) or increasing the pore size of the zeolites losing in this way the shape-selectivity. Some other limitations are introduced following these procedures; in fact large pore zeolites or mesoporous materials suffer from low shape-selectivity, while small zeolite crystals are difficult to recover. For these reasons, hierarchical zeolites, which combine two levels of porosity (micro and meso) in the same material, represent a viable alternative to traditional microporous systems.431,432 Two levels of porosity interconnected into porous materials can be achieved following a “top-down” or a “bottom up” approach. The top-down approach involves post-synthetic modifications, such as demetallation under acidic or basic conditions, to extract framework constituents whilst preserving crystallinity. On the other hand, the bottom-up approach uses surfactants and templates, whereby sophisticated and sacrificial surfactant molecules self-assemble into a supramolecular micelle that guides the formation of the mesoporous network, and a structure-directing agent facilitates the formation of the microporous architecture. The bottom-up approach is a relatively facile route, being compatible with a “one-pot” synthesis, and benefits from a high degree of structural control through the modification of the micellar structure (see the special themed issue of Chem. Soc. Rev., titled “Hierarchically-structured porous materials: from basic understanding to applications” appeared in 2016).433
The catalytic evaluation of hierarchical zeolites has shown enhanced performances in traditional and emerging applications.434,435 In addition, the peculiar features of hierarchically porous materials, such as high surface area, large accessible space, low density, variable chemical compositions and interconnected hierarchical porosity at different length scales, can be exploited not only in catalysis but also for light harvesting, electron and ion transport, and mass loading and diffusion, endowing them with technological importance in energy storage and conversion, photocatalysis, adsorption, separation, gas sensing, and biomedicine applications.436
A multi-technique approach is needed to elucidate the structure, texture and localization of the active sites in the multilevel pore network of hierarchical zeolites.437 As for the Brønsted acidity it is necessary to compare the spectroscopic features using FT-IR and ssNMR of the hierarchical zeolites with the ones of the analogues microporous zeolites; in fact in hierarchical zeolites the distribution of the acid active sites in the internal or external surfaces requires particular attention and the adsorption of substituted bases of different size that can selectively probe acid sites in different positions is highly recommended. The structural modification responsible for changes in the acidity of hierarchical zeolites can be clarified by 27Al MAS NMR studies that enable checking the coordination of aluminium revealing the presence of penta- or octahedrally coordinated sites. The number of framework Si atoms that can be removed without producing structural damage is governed by the Si/Al ratio and framework topology as well as by alkaline treatments (concentration and type of desilicating agents). Goŕa-Marek et al. used a dealumination/desilication approach combined by the presence of tetraalkylammonium, a pore directing agent (PDA), to produce hierarchical mordenite starting from commercial MOR zeolite, and reported its detailed ssNMR and FT-IR characterization.438 The 29Si and 27Al (Fig. 40) MAS NMR analyses clarified the local environment of Si and Al atoms upon the consecutive demetallation processes and addition of tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) as PDA. The 29Si MAS NMR spectrum of commercial MOR showed a strong signal at 111 ppm attributed to Si(4Si,0Al) units and a less intense one at 105 ppm evidencing the presence of one Al in the direct neighbourhood of Si atoms, Si(3Si,1Al). Upon dealumination (DeAl/MOR), the Si(3Si,1Al) signal decreased significantly in intensity and an increase in the Si(4Si,0Al) signal was observed evidencing the high efficiency of the dealumination procedure. For alkaline (NaOH)-treated (DeSi_NaOH/DeAl/MOR) and TBAOH added (DeSi_NaOH & TBAOH/DeAl/MOR) samples, a drop of the Si(4Si,0Al) signal was detected due to a decrease in the Si/Al ratio of the sample upon desilication. Nevertheless, in NaOH & TBAOH medium the privileged extraction of silicon atoms from Si(4Si,0Al) units was observed, since for DeSi_NaOH&TBAOH/DeAl/MOR a 2-fold increase of the Si(3Si,1Al)/Si(4Si,0Al) intensity ratio was evidenced, when compared to DeAl/MOR. In contrast, for DeSi_NaOH/DeAl/MOR the increase of the Si(3Si,1Al)/Si(4Si,0Al) ratio was considerably less pronounced. Consequently, in NaOH medium, Si atoms in the neighbourhood of four Si in Si(4Si,0Al) units are extracted before those Si atoms that are placed in the Si(3Si,1Al) units. Thus, the presence of AlO4− stabilizes the neighbouring Si atom (in the Si(OH)Al groups) by the repulsion of OH− ions.439 This effect was predominant when the zeolite was treated in the presence of TBAOH. The 27Al MAS NMR spectrum of the commercial MOR consists of one intense signal at 50 ppm assigned to tetrahedral Al(IV) at the zeolite framework. Dealumination results in the 3-fold drop of the Al(IV) signal and the appearance of a small signal typical of Al(IV) extra-framework species. Further treatment, i.e., desilication, reversed an earlier trend, and the expected growth of the Al(IV) signal was observed. The typical signal of Al(IV) species was not detected in the 27Al MAS NMR spectra of desilicated zeolites (DeSi_NaOH/DeAl/MOR and DeSi_NaOH&TBAOH/DeAl/MOR).
 Fig. 40  
29Si MAS NMR (A) and 27Al MAS NMR (B) spectra of mordenite samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The acidity of the hierarchical mordenite was evaluated by FT-IR spectroscopy by the comparison of the OH groups in the O–H stretching mode range present in the differently treated samples. Brønsted acid sites (Si–OH–Al) typical of MOR catalysts are detected in the FT-IR spectra at 3603 cm−1. Dealumination of commercial mordenite (DeAl/MOR) produced a significant reduction in the intensity of the Si(OH)Al band accompanied by the development of a low intensity broad band associated with the formation of H-bonded Si–OH groups in silanol nests (3500 cm−1). Desilication resulting in the selective Si atom extraction for alkaline (NaOH)-treated MOR is manifested as growth of the 3740 cm−1 Si–OH band intensity related to the enhanced population of silanol groups on a new fabricated mesopore system, i.e., mesopore surface improvement. Moreover, the band at 3610 cm−1 due to Brønsted acid sites is restored. CO adsorption at low temperature (Fig. 41B) evidenced that Lewis acid sites originated from dehydroxylation, and this predominantly suggested that the Al species introduced into the desilicating mixture were partially integrated into the zeolite framework giving rise to both Brønsted and Lewis acidity. This reinsertion of the Al atoms, extracted from zeolite together with the Si atoms, onto the mesopore walls led to the formation of new acid sites, mainly the Lewis acid sites. One of the hypotheses assumes that the Brønsted sites formed by reinserted Al atoms are disposed toward dehydroxylation; thus the Lewis acid sites formed in this process are situated on the mesopores walls. In consequence, the amount of Lewis acid sites can be taken as the measure of the resistance of the desilicated zeolite to the thermal treatment and, in the case of desilicated mordenite, this clearly confirms their high thermal stability.
 Fig. 41  FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region (A) and in the C–O stretching region after CO adsorption at 77 K (B) on mordenite samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Erigoni et al.69 explored a post-synthetic desilication strategy in alkali (NaOH) media to produce hierarchical H-ZSM-5, starting from parent MFI zeolites with different Si/Al ratios. In H-ZSM-5 microporous zeolite, different types of silanol groups are present, external and internal Si–OH, and nest Si–OH, together with stronger Si–OH–Al Brønsted sites: the alkali treatment can modify these OH sites, in terms of their localization, concentration, and acid strength. FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed probe molecules coupled with 1H MAS NMR was performed to assess the impact of the post-synthetic desilication on the acidic properties of the produced hierarchical ZSM-5. The effect of the NaOH treatment on hierarchical H-ZSM-5 is visible in the O-H stretching region of the FT-IR spectra (Fig. 42A). The alkaline-treated ZSM-5 (labelled 30H and 80H) show an increase of the signal of the isolated Si–OH groups (3745 cm−1) with respect to parent zeolites (labelled 30P and 80P) in agreement with their increased external surface area. In contrast, a fraction of the Brønsted acid sites (Si–OH–Al groups, BAS), which shows a typical band at 3615 cm−1, was lost in the hierarchical catalysts; this effect is particularly evident in the low Si/Al catalyst. Together with FT-IR spectra, 1H MAS NMR spectroscopy provided direct information on the different proton sites present in the hierarchical zeolites (Fig. 42B). The proton spectra of parent and hierarchical zeolites (recorded on catalysts treated at 250 °C) consist of contributions from isolated Si–OHext (1.6–1.8 ppm), Si–OHint (2.0 ppm), hydroxyl units bound to Lewis acid sites (LAS) and extra-framework Al species (EFAl) through hydrogen bonding (2.4–2.8 ppm), Brønsted acid sites (3.8 ppm) and H-bonded hydroxyls (Si–OHnest) (4.3 ppm). In addition, a peak at 0.8 ppm due to isolated Al–OH is visible in the 30P sample. Quantitative representations of various protonic species are shown in Table 2 correlated with the FT-IR frequencies. The desilication treatment produces an increase in the signal intensity of isolated Si–OH groups with respect to the parent zeolites and a loss of a fraction of BAS, particularly evident for the low Si/Al ratio zeolite. Moreover, the presence of H-bonded species is confirmed in all samples and the presence of isolated Al–OH species is evidenced only in the low Si/Al samples.
 Fig. 42  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region of parent and hierarchical H-ZSM-5 thermally treated at 250 °C (black lines) and at 500 °C (red lines). (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra recorded after outgassing the catalysts at 250 °C. Experimental and deconvoluted spectra with individual contribution from each 1H site are reported for each sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Table 2 FT-IR frequencies and distribution of protonic species obtained from 1H MAS NMR in parent and hierarchical H-ZSM-5 zeolites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH




Assignments

ν
OH [cm−1]

1H chemical shift (δ) [ppm]

1H species (%)


30H
30P
80H
80P




Si–OHext
3745
1.6–1.8
12
4
17
6


Si–OHint
3720–3710
1.8–2.0
17
11
10
11


LAS
3665
2.4–2.8
18
16
22
18


BAS
3615
3.8
9
19
13
18


Si–OHnest

ca. 3500
4.3–6.6
44
46
38
47




To assess the accessibility and strength of acid sites in hierarchical H-ZSM-5, FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed probe molecules with different basicity and steric hindrance was used. Substituted pyridines have been widely used to study and quantify the enhanced accessibility of acid sites in hierarchical zeolites, given their impediment to diffuse through small micropores. In particular, 2,4,6-trimethylpyridine (2,4,6-TMP) with a kinetic diameter (KD) of approximately 0.74 nm is too bulky to enter the H-ZSM-5 micropores and interacts only with the acid sites located in either mesopores or micropore mouths of the hierarchical zeolites. These interactions can be readily identified in the aromatic ring vibration region of the FT-IR spectrum. In particular, the ν8a mode, which in the liquid phase appears at 1611 cm−1, is very sensitive to the acidity of the OH sites present on the catalysts, and its position changes with respect to the strength of the acid centres. When the ν8a mode appears at wavenumbers higher than 1630 cm−1, the formation of a protonated species can be inferred, whereas lower wavenumbers correspond to H-bonded adducts.440 The FT-IR spectra in Fig. 43 show the stretching region of C–C ring vibrations of the 2,4,6-TMP irreversibly adsorbed. In all samples, bands typical of 2,4,6-TMP H-bonded to Si–OH groups (1618 and 1572 cm−1) are present. These bands almost completely disappear after outgassing the samples at 423 K. A strong band at 1638 cm−1, negligible for the parent zeolites and more resistant to the thermal treatment at higher temperatures is evident in the hierarchical zeolites and is assigned to the protonated 2,4,6-TMP molecules (2,4,6-TMPH+) formed upon interaction with strong Brønsted acid sites. The presence of this band in the hierarchical catalysts evidenced that desilication enhances the accessibility to the internal Brønsted acid sites.
 Fig. 43  FT-IR difference spectra of (A) 80P and 80H and (B) 30P and 30H upon 2,4,6-TMP outgassing at room temperature (90 min) and at higher temperatures (423, 573, and 723 K). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
The data in Table 3 clearly show that in the hierarchical materials (80H and 30H) the number of Brønsted sites accessible by molecules as bulky as 2,4,6-TMP is greatly increased with respect to the parent zeolites.
Table 3 Integrated area (A) of the ν8a (1638 cm−1) band and concentration of accessible Brønsted acid sites (N). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH




Catalysts

A [cm−1]

N [mmol g−1]




80H
1.35
2.18


30H
1.04
1.69


80P
0.20
0.32


30P
0.07
0.11




Another example of the combination of FT-IR and ssNMR techniques to study the acidity of hierarchical ZSM-5 obtained by a dealumination–realumination process (Scheme 4) is reported by Li et al.44127Al MAS NMR evidenced in the ZSM-5 sample treated with a NH4F solution and subsequently under alkaline conditions a broadening of the signal at 54 ppm due to tetrahedral Al sites suggesting the existence of various types of four-coordinate Al species. The acidity of the differently treated ZSM-5 samples was assessed by FT-IR (Fig. 44A). Fluorination significantly decreases the intensities of the signals due to Si–OH defects (3720 and 3520 cm−1) and of the band due to Brønsted acid sites (3600 cm−1) for hierarchical H-ZSM-5 (HZ-F6: sample treated with 0.06 M NH4F solution) suggesting fewer Al frameworks compared to microporous H-ZSM-5 (HZ), which is in agreement with the distortion of tetrahedral Al in 27Al MAS NMR. The bands due to the Si–OH also disappear for HZ-AT (sample treated with 0.2 M NaOH solution), which confirms selective leaching of defective Si-sites by alkaline-treatment. In contrast, the band at 3600 cm−1 has a larger intensity, which is in agreement with a larger amount of Brønsted acid sites. A more intense band at 3732 cm−1 is detected for HZ-F6-AT (sample treated with NH4F followed by treatment with NaOH solutions), which demonstrates a larger amount of terminal Si–OH groups, while the intensity of the 3600 cm−1 band decreases compared to that of HZ, and this suggests special tetrahedral Al species for HZ-F6-AT. 1H MAS NMR experiments (Fig. 44B), in agreement with the FT-IR data, show three main resonances at 1.6 (Si–OH), 2.3 (OH bound to extra-framework Al species), and 3.8 (BAS) ppm with different intensities in the treated samples. In particular, the 3.8 ppm signal of the HZ-F6-AT is weaker than that of the HZ, and this feature is ascribed to special Al sites that contribute less to acidity, as suggested by NH3-TPD, 27Al MAS NMR and FT-IR results.
 Scheme 4  Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 44  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region and (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of ZSM-5 (HZ) and hierarchical H-ZSM-5 (HZ-F6: sample treated with a 0.06 M NH4F solution; HZ-AT: sample treated in 0.2 M NaOH solution and HZ-F6-AT: sample treated in NH4F followed by treatment in NaOH solutions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The “top-down” procedures used to convert microporous zeolites to hierarchical ones was also applied to produce hierarchical SAPO catalysts;442 again in this case coupled FT-IR spectroscopy and ssNMR was a powerful tool to explore the structural and physico-chemical modifications induced by the post-synthesis treatment.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, hierarchical zeolites or SAPOs can be also synthesized by using a bottom-up approach using surfactants as mesoporogens in the synthesis gel.68,443 Trimodal porous hierarchical SSZ-13 zeolites (CHA topology) have been obtained using [C22H45–N+(CH3)2–C4H8–N+(CH3)2–C4H9]Br2 (denoted C22-4-4 Br2) as the mesoporogen.444 The nature of the OH groups of the SSZ-13 zeolites was investigated by means of 1H MAS NMR (Fig. 45) and FT-IR spectroscopy of adsorbed CO. The deconvolution of the signal at lower ppm, evidenced two contributions, one at 1.8 ppm, due to isolated external Si–OH at lattice defect sites and one at 2.0 ppm that refers to the interaction of Si–OH with neighbouring oxygen atoms, indicating that they are located in the zeolite micropores. The band at ∼4 ppm belongs to the Brønsted acid sites (i.e. protons bound to oxygen atoms bridging Si and Al) and signals in the region 2.5–3.0 ppm correspond to protons of Al–OH moieties at extra-framework positions. These assignments are supported by data from 1H–{27Al} TRAPDOR NMR experiments that help to identify the protons located in the vicinity of Al atoms.
 Fig. 45  (A) 1H MAS NMR spectra of (a) SSZ-13-R, (b) SSZ-13-F, and (c) SSZ-13-F-M25. (B) Deconvolution of the spectra for SSZ-13-R. SSZ-13-R is the reference sample, SSZ-13-F is the sample obtained by adding NaF to the synthesis gel and SSZ-13-F-M25 is the sample where a fraction of TMAdaOH (N,N,N-trimethyl-1-adamantammonium hydroxide) is replaced with C22-4-4 Br2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 444. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The acidity strength was elucidated by FT-IR spectra of adsorbed CO and pyridine. Pyridine, a molecule too large to enter the pores of CHA zeolite, was used to detect Brønsted acid sites located outside the micropore space of the zeolites (Fig. 46, band at 1545 cm−1 due to the protonated form of pyridine upon interaction of strong BAS). The concentration of Brønsted sites at the external crystal surface of SSZ-13-R is negligible. In contrast, such sites could be clearly observed for SSZ-13-F-M25 because of its higher surface area. It was estimated that approximately 5% of all of the Brønsted sites were located at the external crystal surface in hierarchical SSZ-13-F-M25.
 Fig. 46  FT-IR spectra of pyridine adsorbed on the proton forms of (A) SSZ-13-R and (B) SSZ-13-F-M25 after evacuation at 150, 300, and 500 °C (arrow indicates increasing evacuation temperature). Reproduced with permission from ref. 444, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
5.5. Evaluating host–guest and guest–guest interactions

5.5.1. Environmentally driven studies. 
Inorganic host materials are used for a wide variety of environmentally beneficial applications.445 Industrial wastewater, sewage, or rainfall/irrigation runoff may contain detrimental additives in concentrations that make them unsuitable for human and animal consumption. Affected water may require decontamination before it can be returned safely into the aquatic ecosystem. Among the multitude of physical, chemical, and biological methods suitable for the removal of contaminants from water, adsorption seems to be the most efficient and cost-effective method.
In this context, even if the combination of spectroscopic investigations and computational modelling is still not routinely adopted in defining the properties of porous solid matrices for environmental applications, its combined application to elucidate the interactions between 2D/3D systems and guest molecules (host–guest interactions) or between guest species (guest–guest interactions) confined in the voids of porous and layered systems is even less common to find in the literature. The reasons for this infrequent approach are based on several factors as follows: (i) the experimental conditions allowing the observation of the host–guest and guest–guest adducts cannot be easy to reproduce switching from one spectroscopic technique to another as is the case of gaseous substances loaded on solid supports (an example of possible experimental setup is described in the first part of this review, Section 3, Fig. 8); (ii) the stabilization energy involved in possible host–guest as well as guest–guest arrangements can be small as is in the case of van der Waals (vdW) forces, thus making the observed/calculated signal/value unsuitable to predict the real and more stable conformation; (iii) the formation of clusters may depend on several interacting portions that spread the overall stabilizing effect on the molecular scale and make it difficult for the observation of circumscribed and well defined effects.
As far as the study of the host–guest and guest–guest interactions in 3D systems is concerned, their involvement has been recently observed in high silica zeolite-based systems for impacted water and gas purification.
The occurrence of sulfonamide antibiotics in water bodies is an emerging environmental topic that is related to the diffusion of antibiotic resistance into the environment. In this context, high silica zeolite Y was successfully used to remove the high amount of environmentally persistent sulfonamides (fully occupied faujasite supercages at the maximum loading capacity) from water with favourable adsorption kinetics (equilibrium time ≤1 min). The sulfonamide antibiotics irreversibly adsorbed in the pore of zeolite Y were investigated in depth by IR and ssNMR analysis augmented by calculations at the DFT level.27,446,447 The comparison among the computed and experimental IR signals of sulfamethoxazole sulfonamide in CH2Cl2 and adsorbed in the zeolite Y allowed defining medium-weak and cooperative H-bonds and multiple vdW forces involved in the host–guest interactions.446 In addition, the amide and imide tautomeric form of other sulfonamide antibiotics (namely, sulfathiazole, sulfamerazine, sulfadimethoxine, and sulfadoxine) adsorbed by the same zeolite Y was clearly defined for the first time by a combined FT-IR, 15N{1H}CPMAS NMR and DFT calculation approach, and H-bonds were described for those embedded in dimeric form.27 The adsorption of sulfamethoxazole from water was also studied in the presence of model molecules of natural phenolic compounds (namely, vanillin and caffeic acid) always occurring in natural waters.447 The coadsorption of the antibiotic and vanillin by the zeolite Y occurred in the range of pH typical of natural water (5–8) through H-bonding between the carbonyl oxygen of vanillin and the heterocycle NH of sulfamethoxazole in amide form as defined by FT-IR analysis in agreement with the adduct stabilization energies computed under vacuum at the DFT level (56.2 kcal mol−1) with respect to the isolated molecules (Fig. 47). These findings indicate that the presence of phenolic compounds in aqueous media does not limit the adsorption performance of the high silica zeolite Y toward sulfonamide antibiotics and confirm its suitability for separation processes in natural waters.
 Fig. 47  DFT optimized structures of sulfamethoxazole antibiotic + vanillin complex with antibiotic in amide (a) and imide form (b) in vacuo and in the zeolite cage (c) framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 447. Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. 
Recently, high silica zeolites have also gained special attention for environmental applications finalized to waste gas purification and hydrocarbon traps. Control of volatile pollutants is of major concern to the oil and chemical industries where air pollutants originate from breathing and loading losses from storage tanks, venting of process vessels, leaks from piping and equipment, wastewater streams, and heat exchange systems. An application of the combined spectroscopic and computational approach to quantify the co-adsorption of n-hexane and toluene as molecules representative of fuel-based aliphatic and aromatic components via the gas phase in the confined space of high silica zeolite Y and ZSM-5 is available.448–450
In the study of Sacchetto et al. FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy were used to elucidate the type and strength of the host–guest and guest–guest interactions between the model molecules singly adsorbed on the zeolite surfaces at different loadings/pressures.448 At low loading, toluene displayed π–H-bonding with zeolite silanols (more numerous in Y than in ZSM-5) while at higher dosages vdW interactions became more pronounced. In n-hexane adsorption, dispersion forces were those mainly driving the adsorption by both zeolites. The interactions between the silica surfaces and each pollutant computed at the DFT level, and supplemented by empirical formulation of dispersion energies, led to the estimation of the relevance of dispersion forces to stabilize the pollutant molecules (especially n-hexane) inside the zeolite cavities and/or cages.
To quantify each single constituent of a mixture adsorbed onto solid sorbents, the definition of specific molar absorption coefficients in adsorbed form can be suitable. In this context, the quantification of gaseous n-hexane and toluene coadsorbed into zeolites Y and ZSM-5 porosities has been addressed by a combination of FT-IR and microgravimetric analysis of each single molecule adsorbed on the two supports.449,450
Different molar absorption coefficients of n-hexane at 1380 cm−1 (methyl bending mode) were derived (0.278 ± 0.018 and 0.491 ± 0.032 cm μmol−1 for Y and ZSM-5, respectively) owing to a significant change in the dipole moment of the methyl group adsorbed on the two solids.449 Similarly, the estimation of the molar absorption coefficients at 1605 cm−1 (CC stretching mode) of toluene adsorbed on the same supports resulted to be quite different for Y and ZSM-5 (0.224 ± 0.019 and 0.378 ± 0.030 cm μmol−1, respectively).450 The different environment experienced by n-hexane or toluene molecules adsorbed inside the porosities of the two zeolites was confirmed by computational modelling.449,450 These findings reveal that the use of probe molecules for quantitative measurements of surface sites has to be judiciously adopted, especially if adsorption occurs in the restricted spaces of microporous materials.
This approach allowed determining for the first time the optical adsorption isotherms of both toluene and n-hexane coadsorbed on the zeolite Y and ZSM-5 from an equimolar gas mixture.450 Different toluene and n-hexane adsorption regimes were shown by each zeolite: Y revealed more affinity for toluene whereas ZSM-5 for n-hexane. Complementary solid state 1H and 13C NMR experiments at variable temperatures provided more insights into the local environment that the pollutants experience inside the zeolites pores. The topology of MFI zeolite influences the diffusion of n-hexane: the aliphatic molecules are able to occupy both linear and zigzag channel types so that they do not allow toluene to arrange at the intersection channel where molecules are generally favorably adsorbed.
The confinement effect of the zeolite framework was also observed to play crucial roles in governing the 1H NMR chemical shifts of adsorbed pyrrole as a probe molecule over basic catalysts.92 Here, the adsorption structures and the corresponding 1H chemical shifts of pyrrole H-bonded over various zeolites (namely, LiY, NaZSM-5, NaY, and KY) with varied intrinsic base strengths were systematically investigated by using a combined NMR experiment and theoretical calculation approach. Since both oxygen and nitrogen atoms could act as framework basic sites, the so-called intrinsic basicity is dependent on the complex framework structure and chemical composition. DFT calculations were employed to explore the adsorption structures and 1H chemical shifts of pyrrole adsorbed over the zeolites. Based on a generic 8T zeolite ((SiH3)3–Si–X–Si–O–(SiH3)3, X = O or NH), various calculated models with different Si–H bond lengths were constructed to represent the basic sites with varied strengths and used to predict the pyrrole adsorption structures as well as the 1H chemical shifts. The correspondence of the larger 1H chemical shift of adsorbed pyrrole to the stronger basic site on solid catalysts was demonstrated by experimental results. A linear correlation between the 1H chemical shift of adsorbed pyrrole and the proton affinity value of solid bases was theoretically found to be independent of the basic central atoms (e.g., O or N). The influence of the confinement effect on the adsorption structures and 1H chemical shifts of pyrrole over basic zeolite catalysts with respect to mesoporous Si-MCM-41 decreased the 1H chemical shift by ca. 0.4 ppm.


5.5.2. Supramolecular organization. 
Supramolecular organizations inside zeolite nanochannels represent a challenging research field for electronic properties and potential technological applications. A regime not investigated in applications yet and that might have great potential for future development in this field is the confinement of close-packed dye molecules. In this context, K+ zeolite L (LTL-framework type, Si/Al ratio 2.9) was maximally loaded with fluorenone molecules via the gas phase and the composite (1.5 fluorenone molecules per L unit cell) was investigated by an integrated experimental and computational approach.451 As revealed by comparing ATR-IR spectra of fluorenone (both solid and in cyclohexane solution) to the molecules maximally loaded in the zeolite, the composite arranged to concomitantly maximize the π-stacking of fluorenone (intermolecular guest–guest interactions) and to allow the carbonyl group to interact with a K+ (host–guest interactions). DFT calculations were performed on a series of models for the composite. The PBE approximation with periodic boundary conditions and Grimme corrections for the guest–guest interactions was applied throughout. The calculated stabilization energy of the resulting minimum energy structure with respect to the isolated components equaled to −266.5 kJ mol−1. The water molecules inside the packed channel were found to arrange to maximize hydrogen bond interactions, thus providing further stabilization to the system without altering the guest distribution, which is governed by the stronger guest–guest and host–guest interactions. The quasi 1-D noncovalent supramolecular nanoladders running along the zeolite channels, formed by pairs of π-stacked fluorenone molecules, hold some resemblance to the structure of solid fluorenone pairs. However, the confinement inside the zeolite channels and the different dimensions of the guest molecule and the zeolite unit cell prevent the connectivity of consecutive pairs of molecules like in crystalline fluorenone. The identification of the continuous and quasi 1-D dye nanostructure self-assembled into a zeolite, accompanied by the understanding of the interplay of host–guest/guest–guest interactions governing supramolecular organization under the high packing conditions gathered in this study, strongly suggests that high-loading regimes deserve to be deeply investigated to design dye–zeolite composites for innovative optical devices.


5.5.3. The reactivity in confined space. 
The potential use of specific drugs is often hindered by oxidative processes that might be limited by their confinement into inorganic matrixes as covered by the research field on drug encapsulation. This is also the case of the amino acid L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) in the treatment of Parkinson's disease that is hindered by an oxidative polymerization that passes through the cyclized leucodopachrome and dopachrome forms up to melanin.452 In this study, the complex oxidation mechanism of L-DOPA adsorbed by water solution at pH 3.1 and 5.9 on a synthesized zeolite Beta has been addressed by a multidisciplinary IR, Raman, ssNMR and periodic DFT investigation. The zeolite Beta in Na+ form and with a Si/Al ratio = 12 was synthesized and loaded with L-DOPA at about 9 wt%. The determination of the neutral, zwitterionic, cationic, or anionic state of L-DOPA in the zeolite was elucidated by Raman-IR and NMR findings that highlighted the presence of –NH3+ and –COOH groups in L-DOPA. The molecular modelling revealed that an ion exchange occurs between the protonated form of DOPA and its derivatives and the Na+ cations in zeolite micropores. The results can be used to limit the L-DOPA polymerization by combining the steric effect of the zeolite matrix and the condition of amino acid immobilization.
As far as the catalytic processes in 3D microporous systems are concerned, generally, the transformations of reactants start with polarization and protonation by the acid sites in zeolites. Thus, the charge distribution and its subtle change in zeolite channels are considered to drive and influence adsorption and reaction energetics. In this context, several studies adopting a multidisciplinary approach to evaluate the activation state of reagents within the solids' porosities can be found in the literature.
Esterification of carboxylic acids, as promising candidates to replace petroleum fuels, by solid acid catalysts is a very important process in organic synthesis as well as in the fuel industry as it is considered an alternative “green” route for the use of free fatty acids and bio-oils in esterification reactions. In the literature, four models for the first steps of adsorption mechanism for acetic acid and alcohols by Brønsted acid sites (BAS) of H-zeolites have been postulated (i.e. alcohol adsorption, acetic acid adsorption either by carboxylic OH or CO and a co-adsorbed methanol and acetic acid complex). The mechanism of the first step of esterification has been clarified in H-Beta zeolite (SiO2/Al2O3 = 38) with IR investigations coupled with DFT calculations at the M06e2X/6-31G(D) level.356 In the study, though it was not possible to discriminate between stepwise or co-adsorption, it was revealed that acetic acid is molecularly adsorbed by the carbonyl group on the catalyst BAS and with the OH group oriented to the Al–O–Si bridge. The complexes where the acetic acid is adsorbed by the carbonyl group are clearly the most stable ones as indicated by DFT calculations.
Another research field where the definition of microporous catalysts BAS is of utmost importance is the cracking of alkanes. A combined NMR and computational study to elucidate the BAS in ZSM-5 zeolite with different Si/Al ratios (namely, 16, 25, 40 and 140) has been recently adopted.453 The concentrations of BAS and Lewis acid site (LAS) of the catalysts were quantified by IR spectroscopic measurements using pyridine. 1H MAS NMR spectra provided quantitative information about different proton species, while 1H DQ MAS NMR spectra elucidated the inter-nuclear proximity between the same or different 1H species. 13C MAS NMR spectra revealed a more pronounced polarization of adsorbed acetone and alkanes (i.e. C3–C5) in zeolites proximal to BAS with subsequent cracking at higher turnover rates than isolated BAS. Apparent activation energies were found to be similar on the catalysts with different concentrations of isolated and adjacent BAS, while apparent activation entropies became less negative at higher BAS concentrations. Kinetic experiments in conjunction with adsorption measurement and DFT calculations proved that cracking rates at these Al-site pairs are mainly due to more positive intrinsic activation entropies, thus suggesting that the protonation transition state occurs later along the reaction coordinate on adjacent BAS. In addition, adjacent BAS were found to favor cracking over dehydrogenation and central cracking over terminal cracking.
Recently, a new alternative route to produce propene from renewable feedstock is considered to be the direct conversion of ethene to propene (ETP), particularly when it is combined with the dehydration of ethanol/bio-ethanol to ethene. In this context, a combination of IR and ssNMR has been applied to study the reaction and deactivation mechanisms of microporous catalysts.454 Among several materials tested, dealuminated H-SSZ-13 zeolite, consisting of chabazite cages connected via 8MR windows, possessed the highest adsorption capacity for ethene and exhibited the best activity in the ETP conversion. The reaction mechanism of H-SSZ-13 during the ETP process was clarified by following the BAS evolution during the catalyst lifetime by in situ IR and 1H SS NMR. While the number of accessible BAS decreased as revealed by IR and NMR, the number of naphthalene-based carbenium ions increased (ammonia was used as a trap to confirm the ion formation) during the highly active reaction period of the catalyst, thus indicating that these ions play a key role as catalytically active intermediates in the ETP conversion.
While conjugated carbocations like cyclic alkenyl and aromatic carbenium ions readily stabilized by BAS of solid acids can be observed by ssNMR and IR spectroscopy, the observation of short chain carbocations on solid acids due to their extremely short lifetime and high reactivity is challenging. In this context, tert-butyl carbocation was unambiguously identified by a combined experimental and computational approach.455 In this work, the 13C-labeled tert-butyl carbocation was captured by co-fed ammonia to stabilize the highly reactive species formed by tert-butanol dehydration at the BAS of H-ZSM-5 zeolite and its structure and host/guest interactions with the zeolite framework were determined by 13C–13C homonuclear and 13C–27Al heteronuclear correlation ssNMR and DFT theoretical calculations. The tert-butyl carbocation could be stabilized in the zeolite channel and the strong confinement effect of the framework significantly stabilized the cation as indicated by the calculated large vdW interaction region combined to the small repulsive region (Fig. 48). The occurrence of strong vdW interactions between the cations and the zeolite BAS was confirmed by 13C–27Al Symmetry based Resonance-Echo Saturation Pulse Double-Resonance (S-RESPDOR) experiments.
 Fig. 48  (A) The local structure of the tert-butylamine cation confined in a 72T cluster model of H-ZSM-5 zeolite, in which H-bonds between the oxygen atom of the zeolite framework and the hydrogen atoms of ammonia are given. (B) Host–guest interactions between the tert-butylamine cation and the ZSM-5 zeolite framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 455. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of chemistry. 
Recently the effect of zeolitic restricted space on occluded structure directing agents exposed to oxidation has been addressed by a combined IR-Raman and 13C MAS NMR study.456,457 The combination of these techniques allowed observing that hexamethyleneimine restricted in MOR and AlPO4-5 channels in its protonated form underwent different oxidation pathways when exposed to H2O2.456 The AFI topology structure allowed the oxidation of the structure directing agent to hydrocarbons and some other amines whereas the MOR one preserved hexamethyleneimine from oxidation. Both hybrid materials, as well as oxidized hybrid AlPO4-5, showed interesting applications for water purification against Ni(II).
A similar investigation was extended to ferrierite (SiO2/Al2O3 = 30) and sodalite (both pure silica and SiO2/Al2O3 = 20) crystalized by ethylene glycol.457 Although 13C MAS NMR revealed ethylene glycol in FER and SOD to be in the same state, sodalitic β cage prevented the organic compound against oxidation when exposed to H2O2 or HIO4. A combined Raman and 13C MAS NMR analysis of the oxidized hybrid FER indicated the formation of alkanes and alcohols in the presence of H2O2 whereas alkynes, acetals and ketals were revealed after HIO4 treatment. The fact that the oxidation of ethylene glycol occluded in ferrierite gives oxidation products that are different from the bulk reaction and different depending on the used oxidant opens new opportunities for further research of molecular reactions on inorganic hybrids.

6. Future perspective and outlook
The examples in this review demonstrate that complete information about the structure–property relationships in layered or porous materials is hardly provided by experimental or computational approaches alone, whereas a suite of complementary multi-technique approaches is very useful for the study of pore morphology, nature, strength and concentration of active sites. Integrated multi-technique approaches involving ssNMR and FT-IR spectroscopy along with various computational techniques will become a norm for the full characterization in most of the fundamental and applied areas of 2D layered and 3D porous solids.
The advances in both the experimental (especially FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopy) and computational techniques paved the way to describe in detail all the aspects of such solids from structure prediction to synthesis, mechanistic as well as kinetic investigation of nucleation, formation, growth and crystallization, along with structure–property relationship studies and applications. Among the experimental approaches, ssNMR spectroscopy has demonstrated high versatility, though FT-IR study of probe molecules (especially those with weak acid/base character that does not alter the chemical nature of the probed surface sites) is still the technique of choice for monitoring strength and distribution of catalytic active sites. However, there is little doubt that many new experimental ssNMR spectroscopic approaches utilizing dipole–dipole interactions, quadrupole interactions, and indirect spin–spin (j) coupling will be emerging in the near future. Improving the NMR sensitivity to probe surface structures in porous solids needs particular emphasis. In this respect, DNP surface enhanced NMR spectroscopy is a promising tool for the future. As hinted by the studies selected to exemplify the advantages of employing computational techniques, future research will be shaped by the development of novel computational strategies that are capable of taking into account the time averaging of chemical shifts for faster events and will improve the accuracy of computation based predictions.
On the other hand, the combination of ever increasing computing power and development of more efficient models and algorithms has completely changed the range of applicability of the theoretical modelling in the last decade and this trend is expected to continue in the future too. It is now common to simulate hundreds of atoms (even including dynamical averages) at the ab initio level, and up to tens of thousands of atoms with classical force fields (and these levels can be largely overpassed with the aid of dedicated supercomputing facilities). As for the models, several new density functionals are becoming popular for applications in different fields, reaching chemical accuracy; a great improvement in the description of weak interactions has been achieved by semi-empirical corrections accounting for van der Waals interactions specifically parameterized for DFT. Finally, polarizable and chemically accurate force fields for molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations are being developed also with dispersion-corrected ab initio calculations.
Although the synthesis of a variety of layered and porous solids has been reported in the recent years, a number of challenges remain. For example, layered and porous solids for single-site catalysis or chiral zeolites for asymmetric heterogeneous catalysis or thermally stable extra-large pore solids for natural product as well as heavy oil catalysis are highly desirable. Transport limitations for molecular traffic can be overcome by employment of materials with tailored hierarchical porosity. In this regard, large mesoporous solids with conventional intrinsic catalytic properties and (hydro)thermal stability would be outstanding candidates for novel applications in heterogeneous catalysis. Again, owing to the complexity of specifically designed catalysts, only a suite of combined experimental and theoretical approaches, as those described in this review, may guarantee an in-depth characterization of active surface sites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the students, postdoctoral co-workers and collaborators who have contributed to the development and understanding of layered and porous solids all along the last twenty years of work. Their achievements have been reached with the aid of funding from several sources: the European Union (EU) Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program (MULTI2HYCAT – Grant No. 720783); EU under 7thFP (GLOBASOL – Grant No. 309194; INNOVASOL – Grant No. NMP3-SL-2009-227057); the Italian Ministry for Education, University and Research through PRIN2008 Program (ZeoNAq – Grant No. 2008BL2NWK), PRIN2015 Program (MethaPore – Grant No. 2015CTEBBA; Green4Water – Grant No PRIN2015AKR4HX); Compagnia di San Paolo (HEPYCHEM and MASTERLIGHT projects); University of Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro (Italy); Research Centre for Non-Conventional Energy, Istituto ENI Donegani – Environmental Technologies (Novara, Italy).
References
J. Li, A. Corma and J. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7112–7127 RSC .
W. J. Roth, P. Nachtigall, R. E. Morris and J. Čejka, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4807–4837 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Wu, W. J. Wolf, Y. Levartovsky, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin, F. D. Toste and E. Gross, Nature, 2017, 541, 511–515 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Orazov and M. E. Davis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 11777–11782 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. M. Bignami, D. M. Dawson, V. R. Seymour, P. S. Wheatley, R. E. Morris and S. E. Ashbrook, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5140–5148 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. H. Levitt, Spin dynamics: basics of nuclear magnetic resonance, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, England, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Duer, Introduction to solid-state NMR spectroscopy, Blackwell, Oxford, UK, Malden, MA,  2004 Search PubMed .

          N. B. Colthup, L. H. Daly and S. E. Wiberley, Introduction to infrared and Raman spectroscopy, Academic Press, Boston, 3rd edn,  1990 Search PubMed .

          G. Socrates, Infrared and Raman characteristic group frequencies: tables and charts, Wiley, Chichester, 3rd edn, repr. as paperback.,  2010 Search PubMed .

          C. J. Cramer, Essentials of computational chemistry: theories and models, Wiley, Chichester, West Sussex, England, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
T. Blasco, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4685–4702 RSC .
S. Bordiga, C. Lamberti, F. Bonino, A. Travert and F. Thibault-Starzyk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7262–7341 RSC .

          H. Koller and M. Weiß, in Solid State NMR, ed. J. C. C. Chan, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2011, vol. 306, pp. 189–227 Search PubMed .
T. L. Easun, F. Moreau, Y. Yan, S. Yang and M. Schröder, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 239–274 RSC .
T. Lemishko, S. Valencia, F. Rey, M. Jiménez-Ruiz and G. Sastre, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 24904–24909 CrossRef .
B. S. F. Parker and P. Collier, Johnson Matthey Technol. Rev., 2016, 60, 132–144 CrossRef .
E. Brunner, H. G. Karge and H. Pfeifer, Z. Phys. Chem., 1992, 176, 173–183 CrossRef .
Y. Hayashi, A. Miyaji, K. Motokura, N. Asakawa and T. Baba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9207–9217 CrossRef .
R. Ahlrichs, M. Bär, M. Häser, H. Horn and C. Kölmel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989, 162, 165–169 CrossRef .

          M. J. Frisch, et al., Gaussian, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT,  2016 Search PubMed .
K. Aidas, C. Angeli, K. L. Bak, V. Bakken, R. Bast, L. Boman, O. Christiansen, R. Cimiraglia, S. Coriani, P. Dahle, E. K. Dalskov, U. Ekström, T. Enevoldsen, J. J. Eriksen, P. Ettenhuber, B. Fernández, L. Ferrighi, H. Fliegl, L. Frediani, K. Hald, A. Halkier, C. Hättig, H. Heiberg, T. Helgaker, A. C. Hennum, H. Hettema, E. Hjertenaes, S. Høst, I.-M. Høyvik, M. F. Iozzi, B. Jansík, H. J. A. Jensen, D. Jonsson, P. Jørgensen, J. Kauczor, S. Kirpekar, T. Kjaergaard, W. Klopper, S. Knecht, R. Kobayashi, H. Koch, J. Kongsted, A. Krapp, K. Kristensen, A. Ligabue, O. B. Lutnaes, J. I. Melo, K. V. Mikkelsen, R. H. Myhre, C. Neiss, C. B. Nielsen, P. Norman, J. Olsen, J. M. H. Olsen, A. Osted, M. J. Packer, F. Pawlowski, T. B. Pedersen, P. F. Provasi, S. Reine, Z. Rinkevicius, T. A. Ruden, K. Ruud, V. V. Rybkin, P. Sałek, C. C. M. Samson, A. S. de Merás, T. Saue, S. P. A. Sauer, B. Schimmelpfennig, K. Sneskov, A. H. Steindal, K. O. Sylvester-Hvid, P. R. Taylor, A. M. Teale, E. I. Tellgren, D. P. Tew, A. J. Thorvaldsen, L. Thøgersen, O. Vahtras, M. A. Watson, D. J. D. Wilson, M. Ziolkowski and H. Ågren, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2014, 4, 269–284 Search PubMed .

          E. J. Baerends, ADF2017, SCM, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,  2017 Search PubMed .
H.-J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, G. Knizia, F. R. Manby and M. Schütz, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2012, 2, 242–253 Search PubMed .
V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 014108 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bloino, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 5269–5287 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Dovesi, A. Erba, R. Orlando, C. M. Zicovich-Wilson, B. Civalleri, L. Maschio, M. Rérat, S. Casassa, J. Baima, S. Salustro and B. Kirtman, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 1–36, e1360 Search PubMed .

  (a) I. Braschi, G. Gatti, G. Paul, C. E. Gessa, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9524–9532 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) I. Braschi, G. Paul, G. Gatti, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7427–7437 RSC .
T. Charpentier, M. C. Menziani and A. Pedone, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 10550–10578 RSC .
S. E. Ashbrook and S. Sneddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15440–15456 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, P. Sorantin and S. B. Trickey, Comput. Phys. Commun., 1990, 59, 399–415 CrossRef .
M. Bak, J. T. Rasmussen and N. C. Nielsen, J. Magn. Reson., 2000, 147, 296–330 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Pickard and F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 245101 CrossRef .
C. Bonhomme, C. Gervais, F. Babonneau, C. Coelho, F. Pourpoint, T. Azaïs, S. E. Ashbrook, J. M. Griffin, J. R. Yates, F. Mauri and C. J. Pickard, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5733–5779 CrossRef PubMed .

          W. Suëtaka and J. T. Yates, Surface infrared and Raman spectroscopy: methods and applications, Plenum Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
K. I. Hadjiivanov and G. N. Vayssilov, Adv. Catal., 2002, 47, 307–511 Search PubMed .
K. Hadjiivanov, K. Chakarova, N. Drenchev and M. Mihaylov, Curr. Phys. Chem., 2012, 2, 151–161 CrossRef .
K. Hadjiivanov, Adv. Catal., 2014, 57, 99–318 Search PubMed .
K. Chakarova and K. Hadjiivanov, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1878–1880 RSC .
A. Vimont, F. Thibault-Starzyk and M. Daturi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4928–4950 RSC .
C. Lamberti, A. Zecchina, E. Groppo and S. Bordiga, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4951–5001 RSC .
G. Busca, Curr. Phys. Chem., 2012, 2, 136–150 CrossRef .
G. Busca, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 723–736 RSC .
M. Primet, J. Bandiera, C. Naccache and M. V. Mathieu, J. Chim. Phys., 1973, 67, 535–541 CrossRef .
M. Hunger, Catal. Rev., 1997, 39, 345–393 CrossRef .
A. A. Gabrienko, I. G. Danilova, S. S. Arzumanov, A. V. Toktarev, D. Freude and A. G. Stepanov, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 131, 210–216 CrossRef .
E. Brunner, K. Beck, M. Koch, L. Heeribout and H. G. Karge, Microporous Mater., 1995, 3, 395–399 CrossRef .
L.-E. Sandoval-Díaz, J.-A. González-Amaya and C.-A. Trujillo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 215, 229–243 CrossRef .
N. S. Nesterenko, F. Thibault-Starzyk, V. Montouillout, V. V. Yuschenko, C. Fernandez, J.-P. Gilson, F. Fajula and I. I. Ivanova, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 71, 157–166 CrossRef .
I. Miletto, C. Ivaldi, G. Paul, S. Chapman, L. Marchese, R. Raja and E. Gianotti, ChemistryOpen, 2018, 7, 297–301 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pazé, A. Zecchina, S. Spera, G. Spano and F. Rivetti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 5756–5760 RSC .
Y. Jiang, J. Huang, W. Dai and M. Hunger, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2011, 39, 116–141 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, H. Li, C. Stampfl, C. Liang and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15248–15255 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. Hunger and J. Huang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1144–1147 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. Jiang, V. R. R. Marthala, B. Thomas, E. Romanova and M. Hunger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3811–3818 CrossRef .
J. Huang, N. van Vegten, Y. Jiang, M. Hunger and A. Baiker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7776–7781 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Zhao, R. Zhao, D. Zhou and W. Zhang, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1494–1502 CrossRef .
G. P. Holland, B. R. Cherry and T. M. Alam, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16420–16426 CrossRef .
F. Yin, A. L. Blumenfeld, V. Gruver and J. J. Fripiat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 1824–1830 CrossRef .
D. Coster, A. L. Blumenfeld and J. J. Fripiat, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 6201–6211 CrossRef .
S. Lang, M. Benz, U. Obenaus, R. Himmelmann, M. Scheibe, E. Klemm, J. Weitkamp and M. Hunger, Top. Catal., 2017, 60, 1537–1553 CrossRef .
A. Zecchina, L. Marchese, S. Bordiga, C. Pazè and E. Gianotti, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10128–10135 CrossRef .
R. Otomo, T. Nishitoba, R. Osuga, Y. Kunitake, Y. Kamiya, T. Tatsumi and T. Yokoi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1180–1191 CrossRef .
S. M. Maier, A. Jentys and J. A. Lercher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8005–8013 CrossRef .
D. Mauder, D. Akcakayiran, S. B. Lesnichin, G. H. Findenegg and I. G. Shenderovich, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19185–19192 CrossRef .
G. Crépeau, V. Montouillout, A. Vimont, L. Mariey, T. Cseri and F. Maugé, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15172–15185 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Farcaşiu, R. Leu and A. Corma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 928–932 CrossRef .
M. Diab, K. Shreteh, N. Afik, M. Volokh, S. Abramovich, U. Abdu and T. Mokari, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 1800001 CrossRef .
I. Miletto, G. Paul, S. Chapman, G. Gatti, L. Marchese, R. Raja and E. Gianotti, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 9952–9961 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Erigoni, S. H. Newland, G. Paul, L. Marchese, R. Raja and E. Gianotti, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3161–3169 CrossRef .
Y. Chu, Z. Yu, A. Zheng, H. Fang, H. Zhang, S.-J. Huang, S.-B. Liu and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7660–7667 CrossRef .
J. H. Lunsford, W. P. Rothwell and W. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 1540–1547 CrossRef .
H.-M. Kao, C.-Y. Yu and M.-C. Yeh, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2002, 53, 1–12 CrossRef .
J. P. Osegovic and R. S. Drago, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 147–154 CrossRef .
M. D. Karra, K. J. Sutovich and K. T. Mueller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 902–903 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hayashi, K. Jimura and N. Kojima, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 186, 101–105 CrossRef .
A. Zheng, S.-B. Liu and F. Deng, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12475–12531 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Peng, P. J. Chupas and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12254–12255 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Peng and C. P. Grey, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 116, 277–283 CrossRef .

Handbook of heterogeneous catalysis, ed. G. Ertl, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2., completely rev. and enl. ed.,  2008, vol. 8 Search PubMed .
A. Zheng, S. Li, S.-B. Liu and F. Deng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 655–663 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, A. Zheng, Y. Chu and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12711–12718 CrossRef .
G. Li, X. Yi, L. Huang, J. Jiang, Z. Yu, Z. Liu and A. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16921–16931 CrossRef .
S. Li, S.-J. Huang, W. Shen, H. Zhang, H. Fang, A. Zheng, S.-B. Liu and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14486–14494 CrossRef .

Surface characterization methods: principles, techniques, and applications, ed. A. J. Milling, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
V. R. Reddy Marthala, W. Wang, J. Jiao, Y. Jiang, J. Huang and M. Hunger, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 99, 91–97 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, D. Ma, X. Liu, X. Liu and X. Bao, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1091–1092 RSC .
W. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Han and X. Bao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 192–210 RSC .

Zeolites and catalysis: synthesis, reactions and applications, ed. J. Čejka, A. Corma and S. Zones, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. Bisio, G. Martra, S. Coluccia and P. Massiani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10520–10530 CrossRef .
G. Martra, S. Coluccia, P. Davit, E. Gianotti, L. Marchese, H. Tsuji and H. Hattori, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1999, 25, 77–93 CrossRef .
M. Huang and S. Kaliaguine, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1992, 88, 751–758 RSC .
X. Yi, G. Li, L. Huang, Y. Chu, Z. Liu, H. Xia, A. Zheng and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3887–3895 CrossRef .
M. Sánchez-Sánchez and T. Blasco, Chem. Commun., 2000, 491–492 RSC .
M. Sánchez-Sánchez, T. Blasco and A. Corma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16961–16967 CrossRef .
M. Sánchez-Sánchez and T. Blasco, Catal. Today, 2009, 143, 293–301 CrossRef .
A. A. Tsyganenko, N. V. Zakharov and P. D. Murzin, Catal. Today, 2014, 226, 73–80 CrossRef .
D. Mordenti, P. Grotz and H. Knözinger, Catal. Today, 2001, 70, 83–90 CrossRef .
V. Bosacek, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 10732–10737 CrossRef .
V. Bosáek, H. Ernst, D. Freude and T. Mildner, Zeolites, 1997, 18, 196–199 CrossRef .
M. Hunger, U. Schenk, B. Burger and J. Weitkamp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 2504–2506 CrossRef .
E. Bosch, S. Huber, J. Weitkamp and H. Knözinger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 579–584 RSC .
J. C. Lavalley, Catal. Today, 1996, 27, 377–401 CrossRef .
M. Sánchez-Sánchez, T. Blasco and F. Rey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 4529–4535 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Y. Jin, M. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Xie, J. Gu, H. Wen, J. Wang and L. Peng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15412–15420 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sahibed-Dine, A. Aboulayt, M. Bensitel, A. B. Mohammed Saad, M. Daturi and J. C. Lavalley, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 162, 125–134 CrossRef .
D. Barthomeuf, Catal. Rev., 1996, 38, 521–612 CrossRef .
G. Busca, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 254, 3–16 CrossRef .
R. Bermejo-Deval, M. Orazov, R. Gounder, S.-J. Hwang and M. E. Davis, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2288–2297 CrossRef .
S. Ganapathy, K. U. Gore, R. Kumar and J.-P. Amoureux, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2003, 24, 184–195 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Brus, L. Kobera, W. Schoefberger, M. Urbanová, P. Klein, P. Sazama, E. Tabor, S. Sklenak, A. V. Fishchuk and J. Dědeček, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 541–545 Search PubMed .
A. Zheng, S.-B. Liu and F. Deng, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2013, 55–56, 12–27 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Roth, B. Gil, W. Makowski, B. Marszalek and P. Eliášová, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3400–3438 RSC .
H. Koller, G. Engelhardt and R. A. van Santen, Top. Catal., 1999, 9, 163–180 CrossRef .
H. Koller, E. L. Meijer and R. A. van Santen, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 1997, 9, 165–175 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Schoonheydt, P. Geerlings, E. A. Pidko and R. A. van Santen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18705–18707 RSC .
C. Liu, I. Tranca, R. A. van Santen, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23520–23530 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, G. Li, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, J. Catal., 2016, 344, 570–577 CrossRef .
C. Rajappa, C. Krause, B. J. Borah, Z. Adem, P. Galvosas, J. Kärger and Y. Subramanian, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 171, 58–64 CrossRef .
R. Krishna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3099–3118 RSC .
D. Schneider, D. Mehlhorn, P. Zeigermann, J. Kärger and R. Valiullin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3439–3467 RSC .
J. Kärger and R. Valiullin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4172–4197 RSC .
H. Yin and Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4873–4891 RSC .
U. Costantino, F. Costantino, F. Elisei, L. Latterini and M. Nocchetti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13254–13269 RSC .
S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, B. Lukose, S. M. Kunjir, M. Chaudhary, R. Babarao, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853–17861 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tsapatsis, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 2374–2381 CrossRef .

Solid-state supramolecular chemistry: two- and three-dimensional inorganic networks, ed. G. Alberti, J.-M. Lehn and J. L. Atwood, Pergamon, Oxford, 1st edn,  1996 Search PubMed .
C. Bisio, F. Carniato, G. Paul, G. Gatti, E. Boccaleri and L. Marchese, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7250–7257 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Carniato, C. Bisio, G. Gatti, E. Boccaleri, L. Bertinetti, S. Coluccia, O. Monticelli and L. Marchese, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6059–6061 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ostinelli, S. Recchia, C. Bisio, F. Carniato, M. Guidotti, L. Marchese and R. Psaro, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 2394–2402 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Olivero, F. Carniato, C. Bisio and L. Marchese, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 158–165 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sene, S. Bégu, C. Gervais, G. Renaudin, A. Mesbah, M. E. Smith, P. H. Mutin, A. van der Lee, J.-M. Nedelec, C. Bonhomme and D. Laurencin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1242–1254 CrossRef .

          L. Pietronero and E. Tosatti, Physics of Intercalation Compounds: Proceedings of an International Conference Trieste, Italy, July 6–10, 1981, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1981 Search PubMed .
M. Ogawa and K. Kuroda, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 399–438 CrossRef .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 136–143 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bisio, M. Nocchetti and F. Leroux, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 2838–2840 RSC .
S. Yang, W. Fu, Z. Zhang, H. Chen and C.-Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11462–11482 RSC .

Organic-Inorganic halide perovskite photovoltaics: from fundamentals to device architectures configurations and applications, ed. N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel and T. Miyasaka, Springer, Cham,  2016 Search PubMed .

Perovskite solar cells: principle, materials, devices, ed. E. Diau and P. Chen, World Scientific, New Jersey,  2017 Search PubMed .

          A. Thankappan and S. Thomas, Perovskite Photovoltaics – Basic to Advances, Elsevier Academic Press, S.l.,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Guidotti, R. Psaro, N. Ravasio, M. Sgobba, F. Carniato, C. Bisio, G. Gatti and L. Marchese, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1173–1178 RSC .
F. Carniato, C. Bisio, R. Psaro, L. Marchese and M. Guidotti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10095–10098 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Utracki, M. Sepehr and E. Boccaleri, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2007, 18, 1–37 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lee, T.-H. Lee, H.-K. Han, W. J. Go, J.-W. Yang and H.-J. Shin, Photochem. Photobiol., 2010, 86, 520–527 CrossRef PubMed .
K. V. Rao, K. K. R. Datta, M. Eswaramoorthy and S. J. George, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1179–1184 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Park, B.-W. Kim and J. H. Moon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B171–B173 CrossRef .
M.-C. Tsui, Y.-L. Tung, S.-Y. Tsai and C.-W. Lan, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2010, 133, 011002 CrossRef .
D. Costenaro, G. Gatti, F. Carniato, G. Paul, C. Bisio and L. Marchese, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 162, 159–167 CrossRef .
J. T. Kloprogge, Clays Clay Miner., 1999, 47, 529–554 CrossRef .
F. Carniato, C. Bisio, G. Gatti, M. Guidotti, L. Sordelli and L. Marchese, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 914–921 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Patil, M. Li, E. Dujardin and S. Mann, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2660–2665 CrossRef PubMed .
H. He, R. L. Frost, T. Bostrom, P. Yuan, L. Duong, D. Yang, Y. Xi and J. T. Kloprogge, Appl. Clay Sci., 2006, 31, 262–271 CrossRef .
M. Richard-Plouet, S. Vilminot and M. Guillot, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 1073–1082 RSC .
M. Jaber and J. Miehé-Brendlé, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 107, 121–127 CrossRef .
M. D. Alba, M. A. Castro, M. M. Orta, E. Pavón, M. C. Pazos and J. S. Valencia Rios, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9711–9718 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tao, Y. Fang, T. Li, D. Zhang, M. Chen, S. Ji, H. He, S. Komarneni, H. Zhang, Y. Dong and Y. D. Noh, Appl. Clay Sci., 2016, 132–133, 133–139 CrossRef .
W. Li, L. Sun, L. Pan, Z. Lan, T. Jiang, X. Yang, J. Luo, R. Li, L. Tan, S. Zhang and M. Yu, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2014, 88, 706–717 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sato, K. Numata, W. Dai and M. Hunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 131901 CrossRef .
H. Pálková, V. Hronský, V. Bizovská and J. Madejová, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 149, 751–761 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cadars, R. Guégan, M. N. Garaga, X. Bourrat, L. Le Forestier, F. Fayon, T. V. Huynh, T. Allier, Z. Nour and D. Massiot, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4376–4389 CrossRef .
U. Kielmann, G. Jeschke and I. García-Rubio, Materials, 2014, 7, 1384–1408 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jiménez-Ruiz, E. Ferrage, M. Blanchard, J. Fernandez-Castanon, A. Delville, M. R. Johnson and L. J. Michot, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5029–5040 CrossRef .
V. Marry, E. Dubois, N. Malikova, J. Breu and W. Haussler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15106–15115 CrossRef .
L. J. Michot, E. Ferrage, M. Jiménez-Ruiz, M. Boehm and A. Delville, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16619–16633 CrossRef .
M. Jiménez-Ruiz, E. Ferrage, A. Delville and L. J. Michot, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 2379–2387 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Marry, E. Dubois, N. Malikova, S. Durand-Vidal, S. Longeville and J. Breu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2850–2855 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Qiao, H. Yang, J.-L. Liu, S.-P. Zhao and X.-M. Ren, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 5427–5434 RSC .

          S. M. Auerbach, K. A. Carrado and P. K. Dutta, Handbook of layered materials, ed. M. Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. Martins de Souza e Silva, G. Paul, J. Bendall, C. Bisio, L. Marchese and H. O. Pastore, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13434–13445 RSC .

          S. Bordiga, P. Ugliengo, A. A. Damin, C. Lamberti, G. Spoto, A. Zecchina, G. Spano, R. Buzzoni, L. Dalloro and F. Rivetti, Topics in Catalysis, Springer/Plenum Publishers, 233 Spring ST, New York, NY 10013 USA,  2001, vol. 15(1), pp. 43–52 Search PubMed .
S. Vortmann, J. Rius, S. Siegmann and H. Gies, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 1292–1297 CrossRef .
M. F. Iozzi, C. Bisio, T. Regi-Macedo, C. Airoldi, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2610–2617 RSC .
J. I. Corredor, A. Cota, E. Pavón, F. J. Osuna and M. D. Alba, Appl. Clay Sci., 2014, 95, 9–17 CrossRef .
A. Clearfield and G. D. Smith, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 431–436 CrossRef .
G. Alberti, U. Costantino, S. Allulli and N. Tomassini, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1978, 40, 1113–1117 CrossRef .
M. B. Dines and P. M. DiGiacomo, Inorg. Chem., 1981, 20, 92–97 CrossRef .
A. Clearfield, J. Mol. Catal., 1984, 27, 251–262 CrossRef .
G. Alberti, Acc. Chem. Res., 1978, 11, 163–170 CrossRef .

Inorganic ion exchange materials, ed. A. Clearfield, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla,  1982 Search PubMed .
L. A. Vermeulen and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 77–81 CrossRef .
A. Clearfield, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1996, 1, 268–278 CrossRef .

Metal phosphonate chemistry: from synthesis to applications, ed. A. Clearfield and K. Demadis, RSC Publishing, Cambridge,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. Alberti, M. Casciola, A. Donnadio, P. Piaggio, M. Pica and M. Sisani, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2893–2898 CrossRef .
A. Díaz, B. M. Mosby, V. I. Bakhmutov, A. A. Martí, J. D. Batteas and A. Clearfield, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 723–728 CrossRef .
S. He, X. Liu, H. Zhao, Y. Zhu and F. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 437, 58–64 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Middlemiss, A. J. Ilott, R. J. Clément, F. C. Strobridge and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1723–1734 CrossRef .
J. Zhu and Y. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10186–10192 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu and Y. Huang, Can. J. Chem., 2011, 89, 803–813 CrossRef .
J. Cuny, J. R. Yates, R. Gautier, E. Furet, E. Le Fur and L. Le Pollès, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2010, 48, S171–S175 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, C. W. Kirby and Y. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8575–8586 CrossRef .
L. Mafra, J. Rocha, C. Fernandez, G. R. Castro, S. García-Granda, A. Espina, S. A. Khainakov and J. R. García, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3944–3953 CrossRef .
M. D’Amore, C. Bisio, G. Talarico, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4980–4985 CrossRef .
A. I. Khan and D. O’Hare, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3191–3198 RSC .
S. Ishihara, P. Sahoo, K. Deguchi, S. Ohki, M. Tansho, T. Shimizu, J. Labuta, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, K. Watanabe, Y. Yamauchi, S. Suehara and N. Iyi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18040–18043 CrossRef PubMed .
B. F. Sels, D. E. De Vos and P. A. Jacobs, Catal. Rev., 2001, 43, 443–488 CrossRef .
F. Leroux and J.-P. Besse, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3507–3515 CrossRef .
V. Srivastava, J. Chem. Sci., 2013, 125, 1207–1212 CrossRef .
U. Riaz and S. M. Ashraf, Mini-Rev. Med. Chem., 2013, 13, 522–529 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Fu, S. Zhang and W. Hou, Appl. Clay Sci., 2011, 51, 460–466 CrossRef .
Z. Rezvani, F. Arjomandi Rad and F. Khodam, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 988–996 RSC .
D. Yan, Y. Zhao, M. Wei, R. Liang, J. Lu, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4303–4310 RSC .
S. P. Lonkar, B. Kutlu, A. Leuteritz and G. Heinrich, Appl. Clay Sci., 2013, 71, 8–14 CrossRef .
E. Conterosito, V. Gianotti, L. Palin, E. Boccaleri, D. Viterbo and M. Milanesio, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2018, 470, 36–50 CrossRef .
S. S. C. Pushparaj, N. D. Jensen, C. Forano, G. J. Rees, V. Prevot, J. V. Hanna, D. B. Ravnsbæk, M. Bjerring and U. G. Nielsen, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9306–9315 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Sjåstad, N. H. Andersen, P. Vajeeston, J. Karthikeyan, B. Arstad, A. Karlsson and H. Fjellvåg, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 1775–1788 CrossRef .
C. Vaysse, L. Guerlou-Demourgues and C. Delmas, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 6905–6913 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Su, W. Li and J. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 3890–3895 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Li, N. Zhu and Z. Dang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 394, 564–572 CrossRef PubMed .
V. R. R. Cunha, P. A. D. Petersen, M. B. Gonçalves, H. M. Petrilli, C. Taviot-Gueho, F. Leroux, M. L. A. Temperini and V. R. L. Constantino, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1415–1425 CrossRef .
M. A. Rocha, P. A. D. Petersen, E. Teixeira-Neto, H. M. Petrilli, F. Leroux, C. Taviot-Gueho and V. R. L. Constantino, RSC
Adv., 2016, 6, 16419–16436 RSC .
V. R. R. Cunha, V. A. Guilherme, E. de Paula, D. R. de Araujo, R. O. Silva, J. V. R. Medeiros, J. R. S. A. Leite, P. A. D. Petersen, M. Foldvari, H. M. Petrilli and V. R. L. Constantino, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 58, 629–638 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Costa, A. C. Gomes, M. Pillinger, I. S. Gonçalves and J. S. Seixas de Melo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4769–4778 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan and W. Shi, Appl. Clay Sci., 2012, 67–68, 83–90 CrossRef .
S. Arias, J. G. Eon, R. A. S. San Gil, Y. E. Licea, L. A. Palacio and A. C. Faro, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 2084–2093 RSC .
T. Baskaran, J. Christopher, M. Mariyaselvakumar and A. Sakthivel, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2396–2405 CrossRef .
T. Li, W. Zhang, W. Chen, H. N. Miras and Y.-F. Song, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3059–3067 RSC .
W. Bing, L. Zheng, S. He, D. Rao, M. Xu, L. Zheng, B. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Wei, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 656–664 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, C. Li, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, D. Rao, S. He, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5756–5765 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, M. Shao, D. Yan, S. Zhang, Z. Lu, Z. Li, X. Cao, B. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5840–5846 RSC .
A. Guzmán-Vargas, J. Vazquez-Samperio, M. A. Oliver-Tolentino, G. Ramos-Sánchez, J. L. Flores-Moreno and E. Reguera, Electrocatalysis, 2017, 8, 383–391 CrossRef .
A. C. Thenuwara, N. H. Attanayake, J. Yu, J. P. Perdew, E. J. Elzinga, Q. Yan and D. R. Strongin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 847–854 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, L. Lv, X. Ji, K. Xu, L. Miao and J. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15364–15372 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604765 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-M. Xu, T. Pan, Y.-B. Dou, H. Yan, S.-T. Zhang, F.-Y. Ning, W.-Y. Shi and M. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18823–18834 CrossRef .
X. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. Zhu and F. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 241–248 CrossRef .
K.-I. Kobayashi, T. Kimura, H. Sawada, K. Terakura and Y. Tokura, Nature, 1998, 395, 677–680 CrossRef .
A. Sakai, T. Kanno, K. Takahashi, Y. Yamada and H. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 103706 CrossRef .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1455–1471 CrossRef .
C. Wang, K. Tang, D. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11086–11092 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Zhu, X. Li, L. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Hao and K. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15590–15597 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Hao, X. zhu, X. Chen and K. Tang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4047–4054 RSC .
N. Toihara, Y. Yoneyama, A. Shimada, S. Tahara and Y. Sugahara, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 3002–3008 RSC .
A. Kessentini, M. Belhouchet, J. J. Suñol, Y. Abid and T. Mhiri, J. Mol. Struct., 2013, 1039, 207–213 CrossRef .
A. Kessentini, M. Belhouchet, J. J. Suñol, Y. Abid and T. Mhiri, J. Lumin., 2014, 149, 341–347 CrossRef .
T. Dammak, H. Boughzala, A. Mlayah and Y. Abid, J. Lumin., 2016, 173, 213–217 CrossRef .
A. Fernandes, D. McKay, S. Sneddon, D. M. Dawson, S. Lawson, R. Veazey, K. R. Whittle and S. E. Ashbrook, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20288–20296 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Adhikari and L. J. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17548–17559 CrossRef .
A. J. Lehner, D. H. Fabini, H. A. Evans, C.-A. Hébert, S. R. Smock, J. Hu, H. Wang, J. W. Zwanziger, M. L. Chabinyc and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7137–7148 CrossRef .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef .
A. Fraccarollo, V. Cantatore, G. Boschetto, L. Marchese and M. Cossi, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 164701 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Margossian, S. P. Culver, K. Larmier, F. Zhu, R. L. Brutchey and C. Copéret, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13791–13794 RSC .
Y. Li and J. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7268–7316 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Xu, S. Asahina, K. A. Cychosz, K. V. Agrawal, Y. A. Wahedi, A. Bhan, S. A. Hashimi, O. Terasaki, M. Thommes and M. Tsapatsis, Science, 2012, 336, 1684–1687 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Sheng, Y. Chu, S. Xin, Q. Wang, X. Yi, Z. Feng, X. Meng, X. Liu, F. Deng and F.-S. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6171–6176 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sacchetto, C. Bisio, D. F. Olivas Olivera, G. Paul, G. Gatti, I. Braschi, G. Berlier, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24875–24886 CrossRef .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Heurtaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J.-S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P.-N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Férey, P. Couvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172–178 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nugent, Y. Belmabkhout, S. D. Burd, A. J. Cairns, R. Luebke, K. Forrest, T. Pham, S. Ma, B. Space, L. Wojtas, M. Eddaoudi and M. J. Zaworotko, Nature, 2013, 495, 80–84 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, S. Yang, A. J. Blake and M. Schröder, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 296–307 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Furukawa, J. Reboul, S. Diring, K. Sumida and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5700–5734 RSC .
A. Cadiau, K. Adil, P. M. Bhatt, Y. Belmabkhout and M. Eddaoudi, Science, 2016, 353, 137–140 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, W. Zhou, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5657–5678 RSC .
B. E. G. Lucier, S. Chen and Y. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 319–330 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Errahali, G. Gatti, L. Tei, G. Paul, G. A. Rolla, L. Canti, A. Fraccarollo, M. Cossi, A. Comotti, P. Sozzani and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28699–28710 CrossRef .
J. Jiang and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6966–6997 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Howarth, A. W. Peters, N. A. Vermeulen, T. C. Wang, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 26–39 CrossRef .
O. M. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef .
M. Kondo, T. Yoshitomi, H. Matsuzaka, S. Kitagawa and K. Seki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1725–1727 CrossRef .
G. Ferey, Science, 2005, 309, 2040–2042 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi, A. O. Yazaydin, R. Q. Snurr, M. O’Keeffe, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. McDonald, J. A. Mason, X. Kong, E. D. Bloch, D. Gygi, A. Dani, V. Crocellà, F. Giordanino, S. O. Odoh, W. S. Drisdell, B. Vlaisavljevich, A. L. Dzubak, R. Poloni, S. K. Schnell, N. Planas, K. Lee, T. Pascal, L. F. Wan, D. Prendergast, J. B. Neaton, B. Smit, J. B. Kortright, L. Gagliardi, S. Bordiga, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, Nature, 2015, 519, 303–308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Bachman, Z. P. Smith, T. Li, T. Xu and J. R. Long, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 845–849 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, K. Chen, H. Xing, Q. Yang, R. Krishna, Z. Bao, H. Wu, W. Zhou, X. Dong, Y. Han, B. Li, Q. Ren, M. J. Zaworotko and B. Chen, Science, 2016, 353, 141–144 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
X. Zhao, X. Bu, T. Wu, S.-T. Zheng, L. Wang and P. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2344 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Errahali, G. Gatti, L. Tei, L. Canti, A. Fraccarollo, M. Cossi and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10053–10060 CrossRef .
J. B. DeCoste and G. W. Peterson, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5695–5727 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Guillerm, D. Kim, J. F. Eubank, R. Luebke, X. Liu, K. Adil, M. S. Lah and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6141–6172 RSC .
P. J. Waller, F. Gándara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cossi, G. Gatti, L. Canti, L. Tei, M. Errahali and L. Marchese, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 14405–14414 CrossRef PubMed .
T. K. Todorova, X. Rozanska, C. Gervais, A. Legrand, L. N. Ho, P. Berruyer, A. Lesage, L. Emsley, D. Farrusseng, J. Canivet and C. Mellot-Draznieks, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16531–16538 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Evans, K. E. Jelfs, G. M. Day and C. J. Doonan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3286–3301 RSC .
J. W. Yoon, H. Chang, S.-J. Lee, Y. K. Hwang, D.-Y. Hong, S.-K. Lee, J. S. Lee, S. Jang, T.-U. Yoon, K. Kwac, Y. Jung, R. S. Pillai, F. Faucher, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, G. Férey, C. Serre, G. Maurin, Y.-S. Bae and J.-S. Chang, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 526–531 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Silva, S. M. F. Vilela, J. P. C. Tomé and F. A. Almeida Paz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6774–6803 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Gascon, J. Li and B. Van der Bruggen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7124–7144 RSC .
E. Barea, C. Montoro and J. A. R. Navarro, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5419–5430 RSC .
W. Lu, Z. Wei, Z.-Y. Gu, T.-F. Liu, J. Park, J. Park, J. Tian, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang, T. Gentle III, M. Bosch and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5561–5593 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Chen, H. Cui, J. Zhang, L. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6011–6061 RSC .
A. Schneemann, V. Bon, I. Schwedler, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6062–6096 RSC .
A. Schoedel, M. Li, D. Li, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12466–12535 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, B. Li, H. He, W. Zhou, B. Chen and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 483–493 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. J. Rogge, A. Bavykina, J. Hajek, H. Garcia, A. I. Olivos-Suarez, A. Sepúlveda-Escribano, A. Vimont, G. Clet, P. Bazin, F. Kapteijn, M. Daturi, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, V. Van Speybroeck and J. Gascon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3134–3184 RSC .
K. Sakaushi and M. Antonietti, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1591–1600 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-K. Sun, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6627–6656 RSC .
P. Falcaro, R. Ricco, C. M. Doherty, K. Liang, A. J. Hill and M. J. Styles, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5513–5560 RSC .
F. Solânea O. Ramos, M. K. de Pietre and H. O. Pastore, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2084–2111 RSC .

  (a) P. Wu, J. Ruan, L. Wang, L. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Fan, M. He, O. Terasaki and T. Tatsumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8178–8187 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Jiang, L. Jia, B. Yang, H. Xu and P. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4710–4718 CrossRef .
B. Yang, J.-G. Jiang, K. Zhang and P. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5295–5303 CrossRef .
Y. Asakura, Y. Sakamoto and K. Kuroda, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3796–3803 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, W. Zhang, P. Ren, X. Han, U. Müller, B. Yilmaz, M. Feyen, H. Gies, F.-S. Xiao, D. De Vos, T. Tatsumi and X. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 840–847 CrossRef .
M. Opanasenko, W. O. Parker, M. Shamzhy, E. Montanari, M. Bellettato, M. Mazur, R. Millini and J. Čejka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2511–2519 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ouyang, S.-J. Hwang, R. C. Runnebaum, D. Xie, Y.-J. Wanglee, T. Rea, S. I. Zones and A. Katz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1449–1461 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Eliášová, M. Opanasenko, P. S. Wheatley, M. Shamzhy, M. Mazur, P. Nachtigall, W. J. Roth, R. E. Morris and J. Čejka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7177–7206 RSC .
S. A. Morris, G. P. M. Bignami, Y. Tian, M. Navarro, D. S. Firth, J. Čejka, P. S. Wheatley, D. M. Dawson, W. A. Slawinski, D. S. Wragg, R. E. Morris and S. E. Ashbrook, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1012–1018 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Firth, S. A. Morris, P. S. Wheatley, S. E. Russell, A. M. Z. Slawin, D. M. Dawson, A. Mayoral, M. Opanasenko, M. Položij, J. Čejka, P. Nachtigall and R. E. Morris, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5605–5611 CrossRef .
V. Kasneryk, M. Shamzhy, M. Opanasenko, P. S. Wheatley, S. A. Morris, S. E. Russell, A. Mayoral, M. Trachta, J. Čejka and R. E. Morris, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4324–4327 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wolf, M. Valla, F. Núñez-Zarur, A. Comas-Vives, A. J. Rossini, C. Firth, H. Kallas, A. Lesage, L. Emsley, C. Copéret and I. Hermans, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4047–4063 CrossRef .
N. Nakazawa, T. Ikeda, N. Hiyoshi, Y. Yoshida, Q. Han, S. Inagaki and Y. Kubota, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7989–7997 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ikuno, W. Chaikittisilp, Z. Liu, T. Iida, Y. Yanaba, T. Yoshikawa, S. Kohara, T. Wakihara and T. Okubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14533–14544 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Chen, B. Chen, J. L. White and D. E. Resasco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11810–11819 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Prodinger, M. A. Derewinski, A. Vjunov, S. D. Burton, I. Arslan and J. A. Lercher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4408–4415 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vjunov, J. L. Fulton, D. M. Camaioni, J. Z. Hu, S. D. Burton, I. Arslan and J. A. Lercher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3533–3545 CrossRef .
M. B. Park, N. H. Ahn, R. W. Broach, C. P. Nicholas, G. J. Lewis and S. B. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1574–1582 CrossRef .
M. B. Park, D. Jo, H. C. Jeon, C. P. Nicholas, G. J. Lewis and S. B. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6684–6694 CrossRef .
D. Zhou, X. Lu, J. Xu, A. Yu, J. Li, F. Deng and Q. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4160–4165 CrossRef .
R. Baran, F. Averseng, Y. Millot, T. Onfroy, S. Casale and S. Dzwigaj, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4143–4150 CrossRef .
N. Popovych, P. Kyriienko, S. Soloviev, R. Baran, Y. Millot and S. Dzwigaj, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 29458–29465 RSC .
V. Rac, V. Rakić, D. Stošić, O. Otman and A. Auroux, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 194, 126–134 CrossRef .
J. Van Aelst, M. Haouas, E. Gobechiya, K. Houthoofd, A. Philippaerts, S. P. Sree, C. E. A. Kirschhock, P. Jacobs, J. A. Martens, B. F. Sels and F. Taulelle, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22573–22582 CrossRef .
E. Dib, J. Grand, S. Mintova and C. Fernandez, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7577–7579 CrossRef .
G. Brunklaus, H. Koller and S. I. Zones, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14459–14463 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Dib, T. Mineva, P. Gaveau, E. Véron, V. Sarou-Kanian, F. Fayon and B. Alonso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15831–15841 CrossRef .
B. Bouchevreau, C. Martineau, C. Mellot-Draznieks, A. Tuel, M. R. Suchomel, J. Trébosc, O. Lafon, J.-P. Amoureux and F. Taulelle, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2227–2242 CrossRef .

          C. Martineau, J. Senker and F. Taulelle, Annual Reports on NMR Spectroscopy, Elsevier,  2014, vol. 82, pp. 1–57 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, Z. Shi, A. Azhati, S. Xie, H. He and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2757–2767 CrossRef .
S. Cadars, M. Allix, D. H. Brouwer, R. Shayib, M. Suchomel, M. N. Garaga, A. Rakhmatullin, A. W. Burton, S. I. Zones, D. Massiot and B. F. Chmelka, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6994–7008 CrossRef .
J. W. Harris, W.-C. Liao, J. R. Di Iorio, A. M. Henry, T.-C. Ong, A. Comas-Vives, C. Copéret and R. Gounder, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8824–8837 CrossRef .
I. I. Ivanova, Y. G. Kolyagin, I. A. Kasyanov, A. V. Yakimov, T. O. Bok and D. N. Zarubin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15344–15347 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Oleksiak, K. Muraoka, M.-F. Hsieh, M. T. Conato, A. Shimojima, T. Okubo, W. Chaikittisilp and J. D. Rimer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13366–13371 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Grand, S. N. Talapaneni, A. Vicente, C. Fernandez, E. Dib, H. A. Aleksandrov, G. N. Vayssilov, R. Retoux, P. Boullay, J.-P. Gilson, V. Valtchev and S. Mintova, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 1010–1015 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Gunther, V. K. Michaelis, R. G. Griffin and Y. Román-Leshkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28533–28544 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Hu, C. Wan, A. Vjunov, M. Wang, Z. Zhao, M. Y. Hu, D. M. Camaioni and J. A. Lercher, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2017, 121, 12849–12854 CrossRef .
K. A. Tarach, J. Martinez-Triguero, F. Rey and K. Góra-Marek, J. Catal., 2016, 339, 256–269 CrossRef .
Z. T. Lalowicz, G. Stoch, A. Birczyński, M. Punkkinen, E. E. Ylinen, M. Krzystyniak, K. Góra-Marek and J. Datka, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2012, 45–46, 66–74 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Stoch, E. E. Ylinen, A. Birczynski, Z. T. Lalowicz, K. Góra-Marek and M. Punkkinen, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2013, 49–50, 33–41 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Szymocha, A. Birczyński, Z. T. Lalowicz, G. Stoch, M. Krzystyniak and K. Góra-Marek, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 5359–5370 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Szymocha, Z. T. Lalowicz, A. Birczyński, M. Krzystyniak, G. Stoch and K. Góra-Marek, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 5371–5380 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. T. Lalowicz, A. Birczyński and A. Krzyżak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26472–26482 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Chu, A. Zheng, J. Xu, Q. Wang, P. Gao, G. Qi, Y. Gong and F. Deng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12432–12443 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Potter, A. J. O’Malley, S. Chapman, J. Kezina, S. H. Newland, I. P. Silverwood, S. Mukhopadhyay, M. Carravetta, T. M. Mezza, S. F. Parker, C. R. A. Catlow and R. Raja, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2926–2934 CrossRef .
J. Dijkmans, M. Dusselier, D. Gabriëls, K. Houthoofd, P. C. M. M. Magusin, S. Huang, Y. Pontikes, M. Trekels, A. Vantomme, L. Giebeler, S. Oswald and B. F. Sels, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 928–940 CrossRef .
B. Tang, W. Dai, G. Wu, N. Guan, L. Li and M. Hunger, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2801–2810 CrossRef .
S. Lang, M. Benz, U. Obenaus, R. Himmelmann and M. Hunger, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2031–2036 CrossRef .
W. Dai, C. Wang, X. Yi, A. Zheng, L. Li, G. Wu, N. Guan, Z. Xie, M. Dyballa and M. Hunger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8783–8786 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, H. Shi, C. Wan, M. Y. Hu, Y. Liu, D. Mei, D. M. Camaioni, J. Z. Hu and J. A. Lercher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9178–9185 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Radhakrishnan, P.-J. Goossens, P. C. M. M. Magusin, S. P. Sree, C. Detavernier, E. Breynaert, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle and J. A. Martens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2802–2808 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Moreno-González, B. Hueso, M. Boronat, T. Blasco and A. Corma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1011–1017 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Paolucci, A. A. Parekh, I. Khurana, J. R. Di Iorio, H. Li, J. D. Albarracin Caballero, A. J. Shih, T. Anggara, W. N. Delgass, J. T. Miller, F. H. Ribeiro, R. Gounder and W. F. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6028–6048 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. Fernandez and M. Pruski, in Solid State NMR, ed. J. C. C. Chan, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2011, vol. 306, pp. 119–188 Search PubMed .
C. Copéret, W.-C. Liao, C. P. Gordon and T.-C. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10588–10596 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Grekov, T. Vancompernolle, M. Taoufik, L. Delevoye and R. M. Gauvin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2572–2590 RSC .
R. W. Schurko, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1985–1995 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. T. Almutairi, B. Mezari, G. A. Filonenko, P. C. M. M. Magusin, M. S. Rigutto, E. A. Pidko and E. J. M. Hensen, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 452–466 CrossRef .
V. R. Seymour, E. C. V. Eschenroeder, P. A. Wright and S. E. Ashbrook, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2015, 65, 64–74 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cadars, N. H. Ahn, K. Okhotnikov, J. Shin, A. Vicente, S. B. Hong and C. Fernandez, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2017, 84, 182–195 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Meunier, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 134–141 RSC .
B. C. Knott, C. T. Nimlos, D. J. Robichaud, M. R. Nimlos, S. Kim and R. Gounder, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 770–784 CrossRef .
P. Concepción, M. Boronat, R. Millán, M. Moliner and A. Corma, Top. Catal., 2017, 60, 1653–1663 CrossRef .
T. C. Keller, M. Položij, B. Puértolas, H. V. Thang, P. Nachtigall and J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4954–4960 CrossRef .
I. Voleská, P. Nachtigall, E. Ivanova, K. Hadjiivanov and R. Bulánek, Catal. Today, 2015, 243, 53–61 CrossRef .
A. Mikuła, M. Król, W. Mozgawa and A. Koleżyński, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2018, 195, 62–67 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Król, W. Mozgawa and W. Jastrzębski, J. Porous Mater., 2016, 23, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. Rubeš, E. Koudelková, F. S. de Oliveira Ramos, M. Trachta, O. Bludský and R. Bulánek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6128–6136 CrossRef .
G. J. Gomes, M. F. Zalazar, C. A. Lindino, F. R. Scremin, P. R. S. Bittencourt, M. B. Costa and N. M. Peruchena, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 252, 17–28 CrossRef .
S. C. Mohan, R. Vijay Solomon, P. Venuvanalingam and K. Jothivenkatachalam, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 9505–9512 RSC .
L. Gigli, R. Arletti, G. Tabacchi, M. Fabbiani, J. G. Vitillo, G. Martra, A. Devaux, I. Miletto, S. Quartieri, G. Calzaferri and E. Fois, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3401–3418 CrossRef .
S. R. Whittleton, A. Vicente, C. Fernandez, S. F. Rastegar, A. V. Fishchuk and S. Sklenak, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 267, 124–133 CrossRef .
E. Dib, M. Freire, V. Pralong, T. Mineva and B. Alonso, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Struct. Chem., 2017, 73, 202–207 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Haouas, F. Taulelle and C. Martineau, Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc., 2016, 94–95, 11–36 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Wilson, B. M. Lok, C. A. Messina, T. R. Cannan and E. M. Flanigen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 1146–1147 CrossRef .
M. Hartmann and L. Kevan, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 635–664 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tian, Y. Wei, M. Ye and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1922–1938 CrossRef .
H. O. Pastore, S. Coluccia and L. Marchese, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2005, 35, 351–395 CrossRef .
J. Chen, P. A. Wright, J. M. Thomas, S. Natarajan, L. Marchese, S. M. Bradley, G. Sankar, C. R. A. Catlow and P. L. Gai-Boyes, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 10216–10224 CrossRef .
M. A. Makarova, A. F. Ojo, K. Karim, M. Hunger and J. Dwyer, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3619–3623 CrossRef .
H. Knözinger and S. Huber, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 2047–2059 RSC .
S. Coluccia, L. Marchese and G. Martra, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 30, 43–56 CrossRef .
G. A. V. Martins, G. Berlier, S. Coluccia, H. O. Pastore, G. B. Superti, G. Gatti and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 330–339 CrossRef .
G. V. A. Martins, G. Berlier, C. Bisio, S. Coluccia, H. O. Pastore and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7193–7200 CrossRef .
S. Bordiga, L. Regli, D. Cocina, C. Lamberti, M. Bjørgen and K. P. Lillerud, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2779–2784 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qu, Y. Li, S. Huang, P. Chen and X. Ma, Sci. China Chem., 2017, 60, 912–919 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Deng, W. Song, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, M. Gao, Y. Wei and L. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14669–14680 CrossRef .
B. Alonso and C. Marichal, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3808–3820 RSC .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, Q. Huo, J. Feng, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 6024–6036 CrossRef .
F. Carniato, G. Paul, C. Bisio, S. Caldarelli and L. Marchese, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1153–1160 RSC .
G. Paul, S. Steuernagel and H. Koller, Chem. Commun., 2007, 5194–5196 RSC .
T. Yasmin and K. Müller, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 208, 83–92 CrossRef .
A. S. Cattaneo, C. Ferrara, D. C. Villa, S. Angioni, C. Milanese, D. Capsoni, S. Grandi, P. Mustarelli, V. Allodi, G. Mariotto, S. Brutti and E. Quartarone, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 219, 219–229 CrossRef .
L. M. Reid and C. M. Crudden, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7605–7612 CrossRef .
M. W. A. MacLean, T. K. Wood, G. Wu, R. P. Lemieux and C. M. Crudden, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5852–5859 CrossRef .
A. Azhati, S. Xie, W. Wang, A. A. Elzatahry, Y. Yan, J. Zhou, D. Al-Dhayan, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4859–4866 CrossRef .
J. Walia, J. Crone, J. Liang, M. Niknam, C. Lemaire, R. Terry Thompson and H. Peemoeller, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2013, 49–50, 26–32 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Niknam, J. Liang, J. Walia and H. Peemoeller, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 162, 136–142 CrossRef .
B. Grünberg, A. Grünberg, H.-H. Limbach and G. Buntkowsky, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2013, 44, 189–201 CrossRef .
N. H. N. Kamarudin, A. A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono, M. R. Sazegar, S. Hamdan, S. Baba and A. Ahmad, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30023–30031 RSC .
P. Bhanja, A. Modak, S. Chatterjee and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2763–2773 CrossRef .
S. Ok, D. W. Hoyt, A. Andersen, J. Sheets, S. A. Welch, D. R. Cole, K. T. Mueller and N. M. Washton, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 1359–1367 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Nartowski, D. Malhotra, L. E. Hawarden, J. Sibik, D. Iuga, J. A. Zeitler, L. Fábián and Y. Z. Khimyak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8904–8908 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tielens, N. Folliet, L. Bondaz, S. Etemovic, F. Babonneau, C. Gervais and T. Azaïs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17339–17347 CrossRef .
T. Azaïs, G. Laurent, K. Panesar, A. Nossov, F. Guenneau, C. Sanfeliu Cano, C. Tourné-Péteilh, J.-M. Devoisselle and F. Babonneau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26833–26839 CrossRef .
S. Jayanthi, S. Kababya, A. Schmidt and S. Vega, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2797–2806 CrossRef .
M. Barczak, M. Wierzbicka and P. Borowski, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 264, 254–264 CrossRef .
I. del Hierro, Y. Pérez, P. Cruz and R. Juárez, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 3030–3039 CrossRef .
A. Kiwilsza, B. Milanowski, K. Drużbicki, L. E. Coy, M. Grzeszkowiak, M. Jarek, J. Mielcarek, J. Lulek, A. Pajzderska and J. Wąsicki, J. Porous Mater., 2015, 22, 817–829 CrossRef .
L. Mafra, T. Čendak, S. Schneider, P. V. Wiper, J. Pires, J. R. B. Gomes and M. L. Pinto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 389–408 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gatti, D. Costenaro, C. Vittoni, G. Paul, V. Crocellà, E. Mangano, S. Brandani, S. Bordiga, M. Cossi, L. Marchese and C. Bisio, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 14114–14128 RSC .
G. Gatti, C. Vittoni, D. Costenaro, G. Paul, E. Mangano, S. Brandani, L. Marchese and C. Bisio, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29449–29460 RSC .
D. Massiot, F. Fayon, M. Capron, I. King, S. Le Calvé, B. Alonso, J.-O. Durand, B. Bujoli, Z. Gan and G. Hoatson, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2002, 40, 70–76 CrossRef .
F. Bauer, S. Czihal, M. Bertmer, U. Decker, S. Naumov, S. Wassersleben and D. Enke, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 250, 221–231 CrossRef .
S. A. Didas, R. Zhu, N. A. Brunelli, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12302–12311 CrossRef .
N. Carlsson, H. Gustafsson, C. Thörn, L. Olsson, K. Holmberg and B. Åkerman, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 205, 339–360 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Siodla, I. Sobczak, M. Ziolek and F. Tielens, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 256, 199–205 CrossRef .
S. Kwon, H. J. Kwon, J. I. Choi, K. C. Kim, J. G. Seo, J. E. Park, S. J. You, E. D. Park, S. S. Jang and H. C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31683–31690 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, F. Liu, G. Ye, N. Pu, F. Wu, Z. Wang, X. Huo, J. Xu and J. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 16492–16504 RSC .
G. Paul, G. E. Musso, E. Bottinelli, M. Cossi, L. Marchese and G. Berlier, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 839–849 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Andreev and V. Livadaris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14108–14119 CrossRef .
M. F. Harrach, B. Drossel, W. Winschel, T. Gutmann and G. Buntkowsky, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28961–28969 CrossRef .
B. Martins Estevão, F. Cucinotta, N. Hioka, M. Cossi, M. Argeri, G. Paul, L. Marchese and E. Gianotti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26804–26812 RSC .
E. Gianotti, B. Martins Estevão, F. Cucinotta, N. Hioka, M. Rizzi, F. Renò and L. Marchese, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10921–10925 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Comotti, S. Bracco and P. Sozzani, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1701–1710 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bracco, A. Comotti, P. Valsesia, B. F. Chmelka and P. Sozzani, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4798–4800 RSC .
S. Bracco, M. Beretta, A. Cattaneo, A. Comotti, A. Falqui, K. Zhao, C. Rogers and P. Sozzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4773–4777 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Weiland, M.-A. Springuel-Huet, A. Nossov and A. Gédéon, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 41–65 CrossRef .
K. Bärwinkel, M. M. Herling, M. Rieß, H. Sato, L. Li, Y. S. Avadhut, T. W. Kemnitzer, H. Kalo, J. Senker, R. Matsuda, S. Kitagawa and J. Breu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 904–909 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qin, K. A. Cychosz, G. Melinte, H. El Siblani, J.-P. Gilson, M. Thommes, C. Fernandez, S. Mintova, O. Ersen and V. Valtchev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17273–17276 CrossRef PubMed .
L. R. Becerra, G. J. Gerfen, R. J. Temkin, D. J. Singel and R. G. Griffin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 3561–3564 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Rossini, A. Zagdoun, M. Lelli, A. Lesage, C. Copéret and L. Emsley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1942–1951 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Lilly Thankamony, J. J. Wittmann, M. Kaushik and B. Corzilius, Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc., 2017, 102–103, 120–195 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee, S. Hediger and G. De Paëpe, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2015, 66–67, 6–20 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rosay, M. Blank and F. Engelke, J. Magn. Reson., 2016, 264, 88–98 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Grüning, A. J. Rossini, A. Zagdoun, D. Gajan, A. Lesage, L. Emsley and C. Copéret, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13270–13274 RSC .
O. Lafon, A. S. L. Thankamony, T. Kobayashi, D. Carnevale, V. Vitzthum, I. I. Slowing, K. Kandel, H. Vezin, J.-P. Amoureux, G. Bodenhausen and M. Pruski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1375–1382 CrossRef .
O. Lafon, M. Rosay, F. Aussenac, X. Lu, J. Trébosc, O. Cristini, C. Kinowski, N. Touati, H. Vezin and J.-P. Amoureux, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8367–8370 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, O. Lafon, A. S. Lilly Thankamony, I. I. Slowing, K. Kandel, D. Carnevale, V. Vitzthum, H. Vezin, J.-P. Amoureux, G. Bodenhausen and M. Pruski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5553–5562 RSC .
T. Kobayashi, D. Singappuli-Arachchige, Z. Wang, I. I. Slowing and M. Pruski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1781–1789 RSC .
P. Wolf, M. Valla, A. J. Rossini, A. Comas-Vives, F. Núñez-Zarur, B. Malaman, A. Lesage, L. Emsley, C. Copéret and I. Hermans, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10179–10183 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Gunther, V. K. Michaelis, M. A. Caporini, R. G. Griffin and Y. Román-Leshkov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6219–6222 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Serrano, J. M. Escola and P. Pizarro, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4004–4035 RSC .
J. Shi, Y. Wang, W. Yang, Y. Tang and Z. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8877–8903 RSC .
M. Hartmann and W. Schwieger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3311–3312 RSC .
J. Pérez-Ramírez, C. H. Christensen, K. Egeblad, C. H. Christensen and J. C. Groen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2530–2542 RSC .
M. S. Holm, E. Taarning, K. Egeblad and C. H. Christensen, Catal. Today, 2011, 168, 3–16 CrossRef .
M.-H. Sun, S.-Z. Huang, L.-H. Chen, Y. Li, X.-Y. Yang, Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
S. Mitchell, A. B. Pinar, J. Kenvin, P. Crivelli, J. Kärger and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8633 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Góra-Marek, K. Tarach, J. Tekla, Z. Olejniczak, P. Kuśtrowski, L. Liu, J. Martinez-Triguero and F. Rey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28043–28054 CrossRef .
J. C. Groen, L. A. A. Peffer, J. A. Moulijn and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 4983–4994 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Gianotti, M. Manzoli, M. E. Potter, V. N. Shetti, D. Sun, J. Paterson, T. M. Mezza, A. Levy and R. Raja, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1810–1819 RSC .
J. Li, M. Liu, X. Guo, S. Xu, Y. Wei, Z. Liu and C. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26096–26106 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Verboekend, M. Milina and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4552–4562 CrossRef .
A. Sachse and J. García-Martínez, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3827–3853 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, J. P. Hofmann, B. Mezari, N. Kosinov, L. Wu, Q. Qian, B. M. Weckhuysen, S. Asahina, J. Ruiz-Martínez and E. J. M. Hensen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2163–2177 CrossRef .
A. J. Cramer and J. M. Cole, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10746–10771 RSC .
S. Blasioli, A. Martucci, G. Paul, L. Gigli, M. Cossi, C. T. Johnston, L. Marchese and I. Braschi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 419, 148–159 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Braschi, A. Martucci, S. Blasioli, L. L. Mzini, C. Ciavatta and M. Cossi, Chemosphere, 2016, 155, 444–452 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sacchetto, G. Gatti, G. Paul, I. Braschi, G. Berlier, M. Cossi, L. Marchese, R. Bagatin and C. Bisio, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13275–13287 RSC .
G. Gatti, D. F. Olivas Olivera, V. Sacchetto, M. Cossi, I. Braschi, L. Marchese and C. Bisio, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 2374–2380 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sacchetto, D. F. Olivas Olivera, G. Paul, G. Gatti, I. Braschi, L. Marchese and C. Bisio, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6081–6089 CrossRef .
L. Gigli, R. Arletti, G. Tabacchi, E. Fois, J. G. Vitillo, G. Martra, G. Agostini, S. Quartieri and G. Vezzalini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15732–15743 CrossRef .
M. Bouchoucha, F. Tielens, F. Gaslain, F. CostaTorro, S. Casale, A. Palcic, V. Valtchev, J.-F. Lambert and M. Jaber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8736–8747 CrossRef .
C. Song, Y. Chu, M. Wang, H. Shi, L. Zhao, X. Guo, W. Yang, J. Shen, N. Xue, L. Peng and W. Ding, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 163–174 CrossRef .
W. Dai, X. Sun, B. Tang, G. Wu, L. Li, N. Guan and M. Hunger, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 10–20 CrossRef .
M. Huang, Q. Wang, X. Yi, Y. Chu, W. Dai, L. Li, A. Zheng and F. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10606–10608 RSC .
S. Zhang, M. Cui, Y. Zhang, Y. Mu, T. Lv, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, X. Liu and C. Meng, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 244, 158–163 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, M. Cui, Y. Zhang, J. Zheng, T. Lv, W. Gao, X. Liu and C. Meng, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 788–794 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00358gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Geo Paul
	Geo Paul graduated in Chemistry from the University of Calicut, India. Geo was introduced to framework solids in the laboratory of Prof. C. N. R. Rao at JNCASR, Bangalore, India. Later, he moved to the University of Münster, Germany, to pursue his PhD in the group of PD Dr Hubert Koller. After a brief postdoctoral research stint in Münster, he moved to the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy) for post-doctoral research with Prof. L. Marchese. Geo's research interests are in the field of solid state chemistry, framework solids, porous materials, and hydraulic binders. He has co-authored 38 peer-reviewed research papers (ca. 1000 citations, h-index 17).

Chiara Bisio
	Chiara Bisio graduated in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Piemonte Orientale and obtained her PhD in Chemistry at the University of Turin (Italy) and the University “Pierre et Marie Curie” (France) in 2005. She is an Associate Professor at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). Her research interests are in the field of the synthesis and physico-chemical characterisation of solids with applications as heterogeneous catalysts, sorbents for the removal of environmental pollutants and use in devices for the production of renewable energy. She has co-authored 67 research papers (ca. 1000 citations, h-index 19), 2 book chapters and 2 patents.

Ilaria Braschi
	Ilaria Braschi graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 1991 from the University of Bologna (Italy), received a PhD in Soil Chemistry in 1997 from the University of Turin (Italy) and a second PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2013 from the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). She is an Associate Professor in Agricultural Chemistry at the University of Bologna. Her scientific activities focus on the host–guest & guest–guest interactions driving the adsorption and transformation of chemicals of both natural and anthropic origin involved in remediation processes. She has co-authored 41 research papers (h-index 16, ca. 700 citations), 5 book chapters and 1 patent.

Maurizio Cossi
	Maurizio Cossi graduated and received his PhD from the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa (Italy). He is a Full Professor in Theoretical Chemistry at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). He contributed to the development and implementation of some of the most used algorithms and codes for the inclusion of solvent effects in ab initio calculations (PCM). Presently his main interests include the ab initio simulation of hybrid systems, often in connection with experimental studies: functionalized surfaces, gas adsorbed in porous materials, heterogeneous catalysts, hybrid photovoltaic materials. He has published more than 100 papers (ca. 23000 citations, h-index 36).

Giorgio Gatti
	Giorgio Gatti graduated in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Piemonte Orientale and obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Technology at the University of Turin (Italy) in 2004. He is a Researcher at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy). His research interests are in the field of advanced porous and layered materials exploitable for gas storage and decontamination of water. He focused his attention on the synthesis and physico-chemical characterisation of porous aromatics polymers with high surface area. He has co-authored 54 research papers (ca. 800 citations, h-index 17), 3 book chapters and 5 patents.

Enrica Gianotti
	Enrica Gianotti received a degree in Chemistry in 1995 and PhD in Chemistry in 2001 from the University of Turin (Italy). She has been an Associate Professor in Physical Chemistry at the University of Piemonte Orientale (Italy) since 2015. Her scientific activities are devoted to the synthesis and physico-chemical characterization of nanoporous materials with large surface area for catalytic and bio-medical applications. A multi-technique approach using FT-IR, DR UV-Vis-NIR, photoluminescence and ssNMR is performed to understand structure–property relationship. She is the co-author of 72 research papers, 2 book chapters and 1 patent. She has received around 1850 citations with h-index 22.

Leonardo Marchese
	Leonardo Marchese graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 1985 and obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1990 from the University of Turin (Italy). He has been a Full Professor of Physical Chemistry since 2005 at the Università del Piemonte Orientale, where he is the Director of the Department of Science and Technological Innovation. He leads a research group of around 15 professors and researchers focusing on the development of materials for application in catalysis, gas storage and separation, photovoltaic cells and biomedicine, studied by a combined experimental and computational approach. He has co-authored 240 articles and 8 patents (ca. 7200 citations, h-index 48).

 	Fig. 1  Time scale of some fundamental molecular motions and different experimental approaches to probe them. Figure in part inspired and adapted from M. Levitt's webpage (http://www.southampton.ac.uk/~mhl/publications/books/SpinDynamics/SD1/index.html).	 

 	Fig. 2  
27Al MAS NMR chemical shift scale of aluminium environments in selected porous solids. 27AlBAS, aluminium at the Brønsted acid site; 27AlLAS, aluminium at the Lewis acid site.	 

 	Fig. 3  
29Si MAS NMR chemical shift scale of selected silicon environments.	 

 	Fig. 4  
1H MAS NMR chemical shift scale of various protons in porous solids. AlOHiso, isolated aluminol; SiOHiso, isolated silanol; AlOHH-bond, hydrogen bonded aluminol; BAS1, Brønsted acid site in large cavities; BAS2, Brønsted acid site in confined environments; SiOHH-bond, hydrogen bonded silanols.	 

 	Fig. 5  FT-IR correlation chart reporting the most common IR signals typically used for the analysis of solid systems.	 

 		 
δH (ppm) = 57.1 − 0.0147νOH (cm−1)
δH (ppm) = 37.9 − 0.0092νOH (cm−1)
νOH (cm−1) = 3906 − 74.5δH (ppm)

 	Scheme 1  An effective mirror image assembly between 1H MAS NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy associated with the linear relationship of 1H chemical shift and the frequency of OH stretching vibration as seen in a dehydrated zeo-type (SAPO) material. The assignments of the most common isolated OH surface sites are highlighted: Si–OHiso, isolated silanols; Si–OHH-bond, hydrogen bonded silanols; BAS, Brønsted acid sites.	 

 	Fig. 6  Right side: Simulated (red) and experimental (blue) vibrational frequencies of some sulphonamide antibiotic molecules embedded in zeolite Y (examples shown on the left). Note the different scale due to harmonic approximation in the theoretical spectra. Left side: The optimized structure of sulfachloropyridazine (top) and sulfadiazine dimer embedded in the supercages of zeolite Y (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society & Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


CO	H-Bond with Brønsted acid sites	
1H NMR acid concentration and strength	
1H NMR acid concentration and strength	
12, 35, 39, 40 and 45–49

CD3CN	H-Bond with Brønsted acid sites	
1H NMR acid strength	
1H NMR acid strength	
50–54

NH3	Proton transfer with Brønsted acid sites	
1H NMR acid concentration and strength	
1H NMR acid concentration and strength	
51 and 55–61

Pyridine & alkylpyridines	Proton transfer with Brønsted acid sites	
1H and 15N NMR acid concentration and strength	
15N NMR acid concentration and strength	
49 and 62–69

Trimethyl phosphine	
	
31P NMR acid concentration	
31P NMR acid concentration and strength	
70–72

Trialkyl phosphine oxide	
	
31P NMR acid location, concentration and strength	
31P NMR acid location and concentration	
60 and 73–76

Diphosphines	
	
31P NMR acid location, concentration and strength	
31P NMR acid location and concentration	
77 and 78


13C-2-Acetone	
	
13C NMR acid strength	
13C NMR acid strength	
60 and 79–85

Perfluorotributyl amine	
	
1H NMR distinguishes between internal and external Brønsted acid sites	
	
86 and 87


CO2	FT-IR: interaction with basic sites	
12, 89 and 90

Pyrrole	FT-IR: intrinsic basicity; 1H NMR: intrinsic basicity	
91–93

Chlorodifluoromethane	FT-IR: intrinsic basicity; 1H and 13C NMR: intrinsic basicity	
94 and 95

Fluoroform	FT-IR: intrinsic basicity and strength	
95 and 96

Methylacetylene &	
	


tert-Butylacetylene	FT-IR: Lewis basic sites and basicity strength	
97

Methyl iodide	
13C NMR: base strength	
98–100

Trichloromethane	FT-IR: base strength; 1H and 23Na NMR: intrinsic basicity	
101

SO2, SO3, HCN, CS2	FT-IR: basic sites; 1H, 13C and 23Na NMR: intrinsic basicity	
95 and 102–105


 	Fig. 7  Correlation chart related to selected probe molecules: (A) 1H MAS NMR chemical shift scale and (B) FT-IR active frequencies. LAS, Lewis acid site; BAS, Brønsted acid site; H-bond, hydrogen bond.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic view of the apparatus (vacuum line and cells) used for the simultaneous uptake of a probe molecule on samples that can be then studied (under similar conditions) by FT-IR and ssNMR spectroscopic techniques.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic view of the classes of synthetic layered materials treated in the review.	 

 	Fig. 10  (top) TEM images of synthetic saponite samples prepared by using different H2O/Si ratios (A: H2O/Si = 20, B = 50, C = 110, D = 150); (frame E) FT-IR spectra, in the 1800–1300 cm−1 region of NH3 (100 mbar) adsorbed and subsequently evacuated at r.t. on saponites prepared using H2O/Si ratios of (a) 20, (b) 50, (c) 110 and (d) 150; materials outgassed at 573 K; (frame F) 27Al MAS NMR data recoded using a MAS rate of 15 kHz, each spectrum includes experimental and deconvoluted spectra with individual contributions from each 27Al site. Adapted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) 13C CPMAS NMR spectra of pure CTABr (a), CTA-SAP_PS (b) and CTA-SAP_OP (c); (B) IR spectra of CTABr (a), CTA-SAP_PS (b) and CTA-SAP_OP (c) samples diluted in KBr. CN denotes methyl carbons directly bound to nitrogen. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) IR spectra of CTA-magadiite (solid line) and disaggregated magadiite (dashed line) sample after outgassing at 373 and 573 K. (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of Na-magadiite, CTA-magadiite and disaggregated magadiite. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 2  Representation of the evolution of interlayer species after heating of CTA-magadiite based on the results arising from the coupling of variable temperature IR and XRD analyses and ssNMR spectroscopy. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Variable temperature FT-IR spectra of Na-RUB-18 samples; (B) Na2Si8O16H7(OH)·8H2O cluster used to model the silanol bridge in the hydrated structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2009 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Top: Comparison of experimental (black) and DFT (red, 80 cm−1 shifted for anharmonicity) vibrational spectra of AlPO-butylammonium. Bottom: Theoretical assignment of the main peaks in the simulated spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Crystal structure of LDH without any interlayer anions within the A–B–C–A stacking (frame a). Intercalated NO3− and H2O molecules in Mg1–xAlx(OH)2(NO3)x·mH2O for x = 0.125 (frame b) and 0.33 (frame c). For ease of visualization, the NO3− and H2O species within the interlayers are displayed only between the A–B stacking layers. (B) Theoretically simulated IR spectra for Mg1–xAlx(OH)2(NO3)x·mH2O (experimental: x = 0.20, 0.25, 0.33; theory: x = 0.20, 0.25, 0.33) as well as for gas-phase NO3− under ambient conditions (from theory). The origin of each mode is graphically represented in an inset. (C) Experimental IR spectra of the same compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Frontier orbital profiles (HOMO−1, HOMO, LUMO, LUMO+1) for (a) the pristine FDC, (b) FDC/Mg2Al-LDH, and (c) FDC/Zn2Al-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Classification of selected 3D silica based porous solids according to the pore size.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) 29Si MAS NMR spectra of (a) RUB-51, (b) tetra-RUB-51, and (c) heated-tetra-RUB-51 and (B) IR spectra of (a) heated-tetra-RUB-51 and (b) heated-tetra-RUB-51 after heating at 200 °C for 4 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of a terminal (SiO)3AlOH group and the corresponding dehydroxylated (SiO)3Al in the CHA zeolite with the atoms corresponding to O3AlOH displayed as balls. Silicon atoms are grey, the aluminium atom is yellow, oxygen atoms are red, and the hydrogen atom is white. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  
29Si MAS NMR spectra (A) and FT-IR spectra (B) of solid products separated after Na-UZM-5 crystallization under rotation (60 rpm) at 150 °C for different times. UFI structure building unit with different cages (C). Adapted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  2D DQ–SQ 1H–1H POST-C7 spectrum (A) of the dehydrated USY zeolite treated with NH4OH solution for 16 h. Some selected slices along the t1 axis are shown. Proposed local structure of the amorphous hydrated ammonium silicate phase (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 311. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Conventional MAS (top, in blue) and 2D double quantum (bottom) 1H NMR spectrum recorded using back-to-back (BaBa) sequence on the as-synthesized TPA-silicalite-1 at 500 MHz (A). Schematic representation of the SiO−⋯HOSi defects in the vicinity of TPA methyl groups (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) 1H DQ and (b) 1H TQ MAS NMR data of ZSM-12; (c) 1H DQ and (d) 1H TQ MAS NMR data of ZSM-5; part of structure directing agents (arrows) that interact with the defect protons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  Illustration of the microwave-assisted H2O2-decomposition micro-explosion process and creation of an interwoven mesopore network in the zeolite BEA (A). 27Al MAS NMR spectra (B) of BEA zeolite before (a) and after (b) microwave treatment, showing the formation of two additional tetrahedral framework 27Al. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) 15N ssNMR chemical shift scale of various pyridine binding environments for Lewis (LAS) and Brønsted acid sites (BAS) and (B) Mulliken electronegativity vs. pyridine 15N ssNMR chemical shift plot. Adapted with permission from ref. 323. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Correlations between 1H NMR chemical shifts and the deprotonation energy (DPE) for Brønsted acid sites in solid acids in the presence of adsorbed pyridine-d5. Adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 27  
27Al MAS NMR data on zeolite HBEA at various field strengths demonstrating the significant decrease in the quadrupole interactions at high field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Sn/Al zeolitic material (A) and a plot of Brønsted and Lewis acidity per weight of material, obtained with quantitative FT-IR probed pyridine sorption, as a function of the AlIV (bottom axes) and Sn content (top axes) of the materials (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 333. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the incorporation of tetrahedrally coordinated Sn(IV) species into beta zeolite (A) and 119Sn MAS NMR spectra of dehydrated and hydrated Sn-Beta and SnO2/Si-Beta samples (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Centre: FT-IR spectra of perylene dye embedded in zeolite L in solid state (grey), degassed (red) and re-hydrated (green). Left and right panels: sketch of two normal modes computed at the DFT level for an isolated dye molecule, used for the assignment of the IR bands. Adapted with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Adapted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2005 Annual Reviews.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region of calcined microporous SAPO-34; (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of a SAPO-34 sample similar to (A); (C) SAPO-34 samples (a–c) of different origin and CAL-1 (d), a silicoaluminophosphate with a CHA structure, as described in ref. 370; (D) sample (b) under different CO pressures; (E) a representation of a silicon island in a SAPO-34 structure, after substitution of 4 couples of Al/P atoms with 8 silicon atoms as described in ref. 365; (F) 29Si CP MAS NMR of selected samples of frame (C). Adapted with permission form ref. 365 and 370. Copyright 2005 Annual Reviews and Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  2D 13C–1H HETCOR NMR spectra of as synthesized (right) and dehydrated (left) SBA-16. 1H MAS NMR spectra are on the 1H axis while the 13C projections on the 13C axis (top). Adapted with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  The various hydrogen bonding configurations of water, (a–g), to the surface silanols considered in the chemical shift averaging model. Dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds. All protons involved in hydrogen bonding are assumed to take the same isotropic chemical shift value of 5.5 ppm. Protons of water molecules and OH groups not involved in hydrogen bonding were assigned a value of 1.5 ppm and 1.75 ppm, respectively, at 293 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 34  (A) FT-IR spectra of adsorbed pyridine of (a) MSN; (b) 1Al-MSN; (c) 5Al-MSN; (d) 10Al-MSN outgassed at 423 K. (B) Relationship of Lewis acid sites and Brønsted acid sites with Al loading. Adapted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  Proton decoupled 13C MAS NMR spectra of methane in the pure state and in mixtures with nonporous silica and mesoporous silica, acquired at 112.7 bar and 307 K (A). Snapshots of the 4 nm silica pore model (B) with methane adsorbed at 307 K, 28.2 bar (top), 56.4 bar (middle), 112.7 bar (bottom). Red balls are oxygen atoms, gold balls are silicon atoms, white balls are hydrogen atoms, and grey balls represent methane molecules. Adapted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  
13C MAS NMR spectra of 13CO2 adsorbed on amino-silane grafted mesoporous MCM-41 with micro-size particles (a) and nano-size particles (b) recorded using a MAS rate of 10 kHz. Each spectrum includes experimental and deconvoluted spectra401 with individual contributions from each 13C site. Schematic diagram representing two possible models of the hydrogen bonding network formed by carbamate and carbamic acid species with surface silanols and neighbouring amino-units. Adapted with permission from ref. 400. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic representation of the synthetic procedure used to obtain the Rose Bengal photosensitizer bound to mesoporous silica nanoparticles (A). FT-IR spectra of RB-MSNs and NH2-MSNs (B) and 13C CPMAS NMR spectra (C) of RB-MSN and pure Rose Bengal. Adapted with permission from ref. 411. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 38  Schematic representation of a macroscopic gyroscope, molecular rotors and the host–guest molecular dynamics in porous solids detected by ssNMR. Adapted with permission from ref. 413. Copyright 2016 American Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 39  Historical timeline of 129Xe NMR with important years and events. Adapted with permission from ref. 416. Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 40  
29Si MAS NMR (A) and 27Al MAS NMR (B) spectra of mordenite samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region (A) and in the C–O stretching region after CO adsorption at 77 K (B) on mordenite samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 42  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region of parent and hierarchical H-ZSM-5 thermally treated at 250 °C (black lines) and at 500 °C (red lines). (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra recorded after outgassing the catalysts at 250 °C. Experimental and deconvoluted spectra with individual contribution from each 1H site are reported for each sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 


Si–OHext	3745	1.6–1.8	12	4	17	6
Si–OHint	3720–3710	1.8–2.0	17	11	10	11
LAS	3665	2.4–2.8	18	16	22	18
BAS	3615	3.8	9	19	13	18
Si–OHnest	
ca. 3500	4.3–6.6	44	46	38	47

 	Fig. 43  FT-IR difference spectra of (A) 80P and 80H and (B) 30P and 30H upon 2,4,6-TMP outgassing at room temperature (90 min) and at higher temperatures (423, 573, and 723 K). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

80H	1.35	2.18
30H	1.04	1.69
80P	0.20	0.32
30P	0.07	0.11

 	Scheme 4  Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 44  (A) FT-IR spectra in the O–H stretching region and (B) 1H MAS NMR spectra of ZSM-5 (HZ) and hierarchical H-ZSM-5 (HZ-F6: sample treated with a 0.06 M NH4F solution; HZ-AT: sample treated in 0.2 M NaOH solution and HZ-F6-AT: sample treated in NH4F followed by treatment in NaOH solutions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 45  (A) 1H MAS NMR spectra of (a) SSZ-13-R, (b) SSZ-13-F, and (c) SSZ-13-F-M25. (B) Deconvolution of the spectra for SSZ-13-R. SSZ-13-R is the reference sample, SSZ-13-F is the sample obtained by adding NaF to the synthesis gel and SSZ-13-F-M25 is the sample where a fraction of TMAdaOH (N,N,N-trimethyl-1-adamantammonium hydroxide) is replaced with C22-4-4 Br2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 444. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 46  FT-IR spectra of pyridine adsorbed on the proton forms of (A) SSZ-13-R and (B) SSZ-13-F-M25 after evacuation at 150, 300, and 500 °C (arrow indicates increasing evacuation temperature). Reproduced with permission from ref. 444, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 47  DFT optimized structures of sulfamethoxazole antibiotic + vanillin complex with antibiotic in amide (a) and imide form (b) in vacuo and in the zeolite cage (c) framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 447. Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 48  (A) The local structure of the tert-butylamine cation confined in a 72T cluster model of H-ZSM-5 zeolite, in which H-bonds between the oxygen atom of the zeolite framework and the hydrogen atoms of ammonia are given. (B) Host–guest interactions between the tert-butylamine cation and the ZSM-5 zeolite framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 455. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00358g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
