Wetting-regulated gas-involving (photo)electrocatalysis: biomimetics in energy conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00258A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00258A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10674-10699Wetting-regulated gas-involving (photo)electrocatalysis: biomimetics in energy conversion

        
          
            Guanyu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            William S. Y. 
            Wong
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Markus 
            Kraft
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Joel W. 
            Ager
          
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Doris 
            Vollmer
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Rong 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 62 Nanyang Drive, 637459 Singapore. E-mail: rxu@ntu.edu.sg
bCambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore (CARES), CREATE Tower, 1 Create Way, 138602 Singapore
cMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, D-55128, Mainz, Germany
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, West Cambridge Site, Philippa Fawcett Drive, Cambridge CB3 0AS, UK
eDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
fBerkeley Educational Alliance for Research in Singapore (BEARS), CREATE Tower, 1 Create Way, 138602 Singapore
Received 
      9th April 2021
    First published on 9th August 2021Abstract(Photo)electrolysis of water or gases with water to species serving as industrial feedstocks and energy carriers, such as hydrogen, ammonia, ethylene, propanol, etc., has drawn tremendous attention. Moreover, these processes can often be driven by renewable energy under ambient conditions as a sustainable alternative to traditional high-temperature and high-pressure synthesis methods. In addition to the extensive studies on catalyst development, increasing attention has been paid to the regulation of gas transport/diffusion behaviors during gas-involving (photo)electrocatalytic reactions towards the goal of creating industrially viable catalytic systems with high reaction rates, excellent long-term stabilities and near-unity selectivities. Biomimetic surfaces and systems with special wetting capabilities and structural advantages can shed light on the future design of (photo)electrodes and address long-standing challenges. This article is dedicated to bridging the fields of wetting and catalysis by reviewing the cutting-edge design methodologies of both gas-evolving and gas-consuming (photo)electrocatalytic systems. We first introduce the fundamentals of various in-air/underwater wetting states and their corresponding bioinspired structural properties. The relationship amongst the bubble transport behavior, wettability, and porosity/tortuosity is also discussed. Next, the latest implementations of wetting-related design principles for gas-evolving reactions (i.e. the hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction) and gas-consuming reactions (i.e. the oxygen reduction reaction and CO2 reduction reaction) are summarized. For photoelectrode designs, additional factors are taken into account, such as light absorption and the separation, transport and recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes. The influences of wettability and 3D structuring of (photo)electrodes on the catalytic activity, stability and selectivity are analyzed to reveal the underlying mechanisms. Finally, remaining questions and related future perspectives are outlined.
Guanyu Liu
Guanyu Liu is a research fellow at the School of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University and Cambridge Center for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore (CARES). He received his PhD degree from the Australian National University in 2017. His research is focused on the nanostructured catalysts for (photo)electrochemical water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction.
William S. Y. Wong
William S. Y. Wong is an MSCA-funded research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (since 2018). He received his PhD degree in Materials Engineering from the Australian National University in 2018. His current research interests are in surface chemistry, dynamic wetting, nano-enhanced interfacial phenomena, and the application of (super)wettability for liquid manipulation and smart coatings (self-cleaning, wetting-responsive, adaptive, and anti-frosting).
Joel W. Ager
Joel W. Ager III is a staff scientist in the Materials Sciences Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and an adjunct full professor in the Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Berkeley. His research interests include the fundamental electronic and transport properties of semiconducting materials, discovery of new photoelectrochemical and electrochemical catalysts for solar to chemical energy conversion, and the development of new types of transparent conductors.
Doris Vollmer
Doris Vollmer is currently a group leader at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research and a professor at the Johannes Gutenberg University. She studied physics at the University of Bielefeld, the ETH Zurich (Switzerland) and the University of Utrecht (The Netherlands). She completed her PhD in physical chemistry at the University of Basel. Her research group is actively involved in wetting, capillary flow, lubrication, imbibition, superhydrophobicity, anti-icing, anti-(bio)fouling and flow through granular media.
Rong Xu
Rong Xu is a professor at the School of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. She received her PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2004. Her research group has been actively involved in areas related to energy and environmental applications including solar fuel generation and water treatment, using nanoengineered particulate semiconductor photocatalysts, molecular complexes, and hybrid systems.
1. Introduction
Maximizing energy harvest and storage from sunlight striking our planet's surface can sustainably meet the increasing energy demand while reducing the carbon footprint. Photovoltaic cells are commercially available to convert solar energy into electrical energy.1 However, there remain a number of issues including the intermittent availability of solar energy and waste of excessive amounts of electrical energy, which could be addressed via large-scale energy storage in the form of chemical bonds, such as H2 with a high energy density of 122 kJ g−1.2 Later on, the electrical energy can be efficiently regenerated using fuel cells. High-value-added chemicals such as ammonia, ethylene and propanol as industrial feedstocks can also be produced by utilizing solar/electrical energy, water and atmospheric gases.
(Photo)electrocatalysis plays a crucial role in the aforementioned energy conversion and storage processes towards a sustainable future. Based on the roles of gases as products or reactants, gas-involving (photo)electrochemical reactions can be categorized into gas-evolving reactions (GERs) and gas-consuming reactions (GCRs).3 GERs include the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which can occur concurrently at cathodes and anodes for overall water splitting. GCRs consist of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) to H2O/H2O2 and the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) to NH3 (Fig. 1). Notably, regarding NRR, due to the high solubility of ammonia gas in water (32 g per 100 mL at 25 °C), NH3 formed during the reaction will quickly dissolve in the aqueous electrolyte. However, in addition to the consumed CO2 and CO gases during the carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) and carbon monoxide reduction reaction (CORR), there could be gases and/or liquids produced using different catalysts during the CO2RR/CORR. Therefore, CO2RR and CORR usually involve both GERs and GCRs (Fig. 1). To date, extensive research efforts have been devoted to understanding the catalytic mechanisms and in particular, the influences of the morphology and composition of an electrode on the reaction efficiency.4–11
 Fig. 1  Categories for (photo)electrocatalytic gas-involving reactions. 
During (photo)electrocatalytic GERs in aqueous electrolytes, gas bubbles are formed on the surface of (photo)electrodes. The aggregation of these bubbles between catalysts and electrolytes will not only reduce the availability of exposed active sites, but also severely hinder the mass transport in the liquid phase, thus slowing the charge transfer and resulting in inferior (photo)electrocatalytic activity and stability. Therefore, efforts towards industrial-scale GERs have focused on achieving a rapid release of the formed gas bubbles in order to retain the activity of (photo)electrodes.12 In contrast, during GCRs, the (photo)electrode design should enable unobstructed gas-diffusion pathways to continuously supply sufficient gas reactants to the catalytic sites. This will preferably create abundant gas/electrolyte/catalyst three-phase contact lines with water usually serving as the proton source.
Taking into account the influence of gas–liquid–solid interfaces on (photo)electrocatalytic processes, understanding and exploiting the wetting properties of materials may provide solutions to outstanding problems (i.e. boundary layer limitations, limiting currents, etc.) in the (photo)electrode design. Just as the catalytic systems for water splitting and NRR are inspired from photosystem II and enzyme nitrogenase, respectively,13,14 nature-inspired design principles of superwettable materials may also shed light on furthering the development of novel (photo)electrodes.15 Preliminary studies have already shown that the adhesion and transport behaviors of gas layer/bubbles near/on/inside (photo)electrodes are controllable by tailoring their compositions, morphologies and 3D structures.16–20
In this review, we focus on the recent progress in wetting-regulated gas-involving (photo)electrocatalysis. The fundamentals of bioinspired (super)wettability and the potential for (photo)electrode designs are first introduced. Afterward, bubble adhesion and transport behaviors in smooth and porous media are discussed. In the subsequent sections, the design strategies towards improved catalytic performance for (photo)electrodes with related experimental evidence in GERs and GCRs are summarized. In the last section, we discuss the open challenges and propose potential directions for future research.
2. (Photo)electrode designs taking inspiration from superwettability in nature
The presence of bubbles on electrodes influences the efficiency of (photo)electrocatalytic gas-involving reactions. In GERs, release of bubbles is preferential as they block active sites.21,22 To minimize the loss of catalytic activity, understanding and controlling the shape and adhesion of bubbles on electrodes are required.23–25 In GCRs, bubble entrapment is preferential as gases serve as the reactant.26–28 Therefore, enabling and optimizing plastron (air layer) durability and bubble-uptake are desired.29 The interaction of electrodes and bubbles depends on many parameters, such as surface roughness, material and liquid properties, bulk mixing, and even applied voltage.30,31 Depending on the operating conditions, the bubble/drop shape may change. Our ability to grasp and control the fundamentals of bubble mobility will guide the design of future electrode materials and morphology in order to enhance the process yields and efficiency.
Wetting is conventionally quantified by the contact angle, θ (Fig. 2). It represents the angle at which a wetting fluid (liquid or gas) contacts a surface.32 This angle is always defined as the angle between the chord and the circular arc. In the following, surface refers to the electrode surface. The contact line is where the so-termed three-phase meets, i.e., the air–water–surface contact. At the macroscopic scale, this is represented by the drop/bubble velocity. Using water as a probe liquid, surfaces with a θair < 90° are considered hydrophilic (Fig. 2a), while those with a θair > 90° are considered hydrophobic (Fig. 2c).32 When submerged, these are also aerophobic (θbubble > 90°) and aerophilic (θbubble < 90°), respectively (Fig. 2b and d).27,33–35 Contact angles, however, are not uniquely defined. Stationary drops and bubbles can exhibit a range of contact angles. This occurs because the three-phase contact line (the line where bubble, liquid, and surface meet) may not actually move even when its volume or shape is slightly perturbed (Fig. 2e). The three-phase contact line remains pinned to the surface36–39 until a maximum (θadv) or minimum (θrec) contact angle is reached (Fig. 2e, the shift in second-to-third dotted lines and moving drop, right side).38–42 Thereafter, the contact line moves (advances or recedes). This dynamic contact angle is thus bracketed by the advancing contact angle (θadv) and the receding contact angle (θrec).37,40
 Fig. 2  Wettability and contact angles (apparent and dynamic). (a and b) In-air hydrophilicity and underwater aerophobicity. (c and d) In-air hydrophobicity and underwater aerophilicity. (e) Drop motion, contact line depinning and advancing/receding contact angles. (f and g) In-air superhydrophilicity and underwater superaerophobicity. (h and i) In-air superhydrophobicity and underwater superaerophilicity. 
However, θadv of θrec sensitively depends on the degree of pinning, surface roughness, chemical inhomogeneities, and even optical resolution.36,43,44 Moreover, measurements are also influenced by the contact line velocity, i.e., the drop velocity.45–47 High-resolution optical microscopy39,45,48 is known to improve the accuracy of these measurements.
For rough surfaces, one can distinguish between different regimes. Here, it is important to note that roughness amplifies wetting. A hydrophobic surface becomes more hydrophobic, whereas a hydrophilic surface becomes more hydrophilic. Moreover, roughness may result in fractional wetting behaviour. With wetting on a rough surface, apparent contact angles (θapp) are observed. Superhydrophilicity represents a superwetting state where θappair is lower than 5–10° (Fig. 2f). The surface (and its asperities) is completely wetted by the liquid.49 There is some debate within the community with regard to the importance of timescales (milliseconds vs. seconds) in achieving such low contact angles (superspreading vs. hemiwicking).50–55 The speed and degree of imbibition depend on the surface energy and morphology.53,56 However, such specificity is irrelevant for the field of catalysis due to the timescales involved (minutes to hours). In all cases, when submerged, these surfaces are superaerophobic (Fig. 2g).35
Superhydrophobicity (or superoleophobicity/superamphiphobicity for low surface tension liquids) represents a super(de)wetting state where θappair is higher than 150° and the roll-off angle (5–10 μL drops) is lower than 10° (Fig. 2h).57,58 Air pockets between the surface and liquid are preserved, culminating in the fractional wetting state. The solid–water contact areas are defined as a fraction (f) while the air–water contact areas are defined as a complementary (f − 1).59,60 In this state, the actual advancing water contact angle (θactualadv,air) is always close to 180°,61 because the contact lines move over fragmented water–solid–air interfaces. When submerged, these surfaces are superaerophilic (Fig. 2i).
In the following, we discuss these concepts on natural surfaces. In Nature, the roughness and chemistry of surfaces greatly vary. Consequently, different wetting behaviors exist over a wide spectrum. Such observations have inspired many researchers to investigate natural surfaces in greater detail. The aim is to transfer such concepts to the design of next-generation electrodes (Fig. 3). For photoelectrodes, natural organisms’ anatomical features (e.g. moth eyes, butterfly wings, fern leaves, sunflowers) have inspired smart sophisticated architectures and strategies. These features have proven to reduce the loss of absorbed light through reflection while enabling enhanced light harvesting capabilities.62
In the context of wetting, variations in surface energy and surface morphologies are commonly found in both land and water plants, potentially providing guidance towards the development of gas-evolving and gas-consuming (photo)electrodes for (photo)electrocatalysis. When electrodes (solid) are submerged, the understanding, control and minimizing of pinning of bubbles on solids will contribute to the design of advanced wetting-regulated electrodes.
Superhydrophilic (θappair ≈ 0°) plants such as the water-absorbing moss (Sphagnum squarrosum) employ the presence of micropores (0.2–1 μm) within a sponge-like epidermis (Fig. 3a and e). These hydrophilic micropores draw in moisture from fog, dew or rain via capillary action in order to prevent drying out.63 When immersed, in-air superhydrophilicity becomes underwater superaerophobicity. When employing superhydrophilicity in electrocatalysis, gas bubbles (hydrophobic entity) tend not to form or stay on electrodes, thus preserving the high density of catalytically active sites (Fig. 3i and m).30,35 Superhydrophilic electrodes (i.e. Ni2P nanoarrays in Fig. 3i) are well-suited for gas-evolving reactions (GERs) due to the high gas–liquid contact. However, they are not favorable for gas-consuming reactions (GCRs) due to the inhibition of direct wetting.
 Fig. 3  Superwettability in plants adapted to in-air, near-water and underwater environments and how they may inspire future electrode designs. These include the (a and e) superhydrophilic water-adsorbing moss (Sphagnum squarrosum),64 (b and f) hydrophilic underwater plant (Anubias barteri),64 (c and g) hydrophobic succulents (Aloe barbadensis miller),65 and (d and h) superhydrophobic lotus plant (Nelumbo nucifera),64 (g: scale-bar 5 μm, e, f and h: scale-bars 20 μm, inset 2 μm). Their unstructured or structurally enhanced wettability inspires the development of immersion applications in electrode designs for (photo)electrocatalytic gas-involving systems. (i) Superaerophobic Ni2P nanoarrays for the HER (scale-bar 50 μm),66 (j) Pt nanosphere films for the HER (scale-bar 1 μm),67 (k) hydrophobic Au/C gas diffusion electrodes for CO2RR (scale-bar 1 μm),68 and (l) superaerophilic carbon-nanotube-array electrodes for the ORR (scale-bar 20 μm).69 (m) Superhydrophilic/superaerophobic electrodes result in the formation of tiny bubbles. (n) Hydrophilic/aerophobic electrodes result in the formation of small bubbles having higher bubble contact angles. (o) Hydrophobic/aerophilic electrodes result in the formation of large bubbles having lower bubble contact angles. (p) Superhydro(oleo)phobic/superaerophilic electrodes result in the formation of a continuous plastron until very large bubbles detach by tearing away from the bulk plastron layer. Top vs. bottom panels: bubble detachment depends on the orientation gravity and the central axis of the bubble; top (orthogonal), bottom (parallel). 
Hydrophilic (θappair = 10–90°) underwater plants such as the common aquarium Anubias barteri have comparatively smooth epidermal surfaces (Fig. 3b and f). The smooth surface allows for reduced shear with underwater currents, while aiding in the removal of any solid (hydrophobic) contaminants.70 Hydrophobic (θappair > 90°) succulent green desert plants such as the Aloe barbadensis miller65 likewise possess smooth hydrophobic epidermal surfaces (Fig. 3c and g). Like many other desert plants, the thick wax cuticles prevent water loss.71 The use of hydrophilic (Pt nanosphere films, Fig. 3j and n) and hydrophobic (Au/C gas diffusion electrodes, Fig. 3k and o) electrodes under immersion results in the corresponding aerophobic and aerophilic states when in contact with bubbles. The electrode surfaces are wetted. However, the degree of wetting/aerophobicity will result in the adsorption/formation of micro- to milli-metric bubbles. When pinned, bubbles re-orientate on electrode surfaces depending on the electrode's orientation and the action of gravity. These electrode variants are commonly used for both gas-evolving and gas-reacting systems.27
The superhydrophobicity (θappair > 150°) of water-plants such as the lotus (Nelumbo nucifera)72 exploits the presence of both micro- and nano-scale protrusions. Water partially rests on air pockets and only partially wets the surface (Fig. 3d and h).60 Due to the reduced contact, liquid adhesion remains remarkably low, thus enabling high mobility of water drops from rain or splashes to clean away solid (hydrophobic) contaminants.73 For superhydro(oleo)phobic/superaerophilic electrodes (i.e. carbon-nanotube-arrays, Fig. 3l and p), a plastron layer is typically formed immediately upon immersion.27 The plastron could be important in GCRs due to the large gas-to-solid contact area provided. However, they are clearly not the choice for gas-evolving systems due to the poor liquid wetting (hence liquid-contact) properties.
Most laboratory-scale electrode configurations typically involve its longitudinal axis aligned parallel with gravity (Fig. 3m–p, top panel). However, it may also be aligned perpendicular to gravity (Fig. 3m–p, bottom panel). Therefore, depending on the wettability and actual surface configuration, buoyancy may influence the shape of the bubbles on the electrode. In superhydrophilic/superaerophobic electrodes, the ability of the bubbles to escape may scale with buoyant forces moving them off the electrode (Fig. 3m). For hydrophilic/hydrophobic electrodes, bubbles may adopt asymmetrically deformed or symmetric profiles (Fig. 3n and o).74–76 In superhydrophobic/superaerophilic electrodes, plastron orientation may result in gas-deficient locations (Fig. 3p, top panel vs. bottom panel).27,35 Evidently, the states of extreme superwettability – superaerophobicity and superaerophilicity – present the most intriguing wetting properties for further investigation in GER and GCR electrode design.
3. Design of bubble transport in smooth and porous media
For the sake of brevity, the influence of liquid saturation, nucleation delay, critical bubble nuclei, and liquid-phase boundary layer effects will not be discussed as this has been covered extensively by a recent review.77 We begin the discussion with bubbles that have already heterogeneously nucleated and are currently growing.25,28 The timescale between nucleation and detachment depends on the (1) bubble growth rate, (2) diffusive fluxes, and (1) detachment size. Therefore, growth-detachment kinetics, akin to reaction kinetics, rely on operating parameters. For instance, in the HER, the growth-detachment process takes place in the order of 1–100 s while H2 bubbles are growing.78,79 Notwithstanding quantifiable contributions by the decrease of active sites79 or concentration potential,32 the presence of bubbles unanimously results in a decrease in electrocatalytic current density (hence by proxy, reaction kinetics). In general, bubble growth and adhesion processes are commonly known today to directly interfere with electrocatalytic processes.80
3.1 Bubble shapes
Bubble shapes depend on the orientation of the electrode with respect to the gravitational force. This is reflected by the Bond (Bo) number,  where Δρ is the difference in density between the gas and liquid phases, g is the gravitational constant, L is the characteristic length (radii of curvature), and γ is the surface tension. The Bond number is a dimensionless number that measures the ratio of gravitational forces vs. surface tension forces. With a Bo of >1, gravity influences the shape of the bubble (Fig. 4a and b).81 As a bubble grows, the contact line moves.
 Fig. 4  Mechanism of bubble transport on flat and structured surfaces. (a and b) Influence of bubble size on the Bond number and the gravitational influence on the bubble shape. (c and d) Force balance represented on a bubble (buoyancy) adhered to a (c) vertical plate (lateral adhesion, Fl,adh) and (d) horizontal plate (lateral adhesion, Fv,adh). Computation of effective buoyancy and adhesion (contact line) corrected by (e) the spherical cap approximation (vs. sphere approximation). (f) The case for symmetric bubble detachment (vertical adhesion, bubble-on-plate) is computed based on bubble radii/Bond number (x-axis) and θbubblerec (lines) vs. net force (y-axis), Fnet = Fb,SC − Fv,adh. The spherical cap approximation was applied. 
3.2 Buoyant forces
Buoyant forces, Fb, is one of the primary forces (Fig. 4c and d) involved in bubble mobility. In a spherical bubble, buoyancy is defined by the displaced liquid, Fb = ΔρgV, where V is the bubble volume. Therefore, with a spherical unadhered bubble, the buoyancy is (1)where r is the radius of the bubble (non-adhered).3 With this spherical approximation, force balance such as the Fritz equation82,83 allows for the estimation of critical bubble dimensions (see Section 3.5). However, if the bubble is spherical but adhered as a spherical cap (SC, Fig. 4e),84 the volume and buoyant force must be re-defined (assuming low Bond numbers), (2)where rSC is the radius of the spherical cap. r and rSC can be significantly different depending on the local contact angle. Under this approximation, (3)
The volume is defined based on the polar angle (α), which is equal to the bubble contact angle, θbubble = 180° − θ. This spherical cap approximation is analytical and can be easily applied to improve the accuracy of estimates (Fig. 4e). For a rough surface, the θappbubble must be determined. θappbubble is found between the bubble's advancing (θadvbubble) and receding (θrecbubble) contact angles (Fig. 4c and d). However, if bubbles are distorted (laterally or vertically) due to high Bond numbers (Bo ≫ 1), the actual volume should be defined numerically in 3D due to the biaxial asymmetry involved.85
3.3 Vertical adhesion
When gravity acts parallel to the central axis of the bubble-on-surface, it adopts the shape of a spherical cap. To detach the bubble from the surface, the adhesion force needs to be overcome. A bubble detaches from a surface in an analogous manner to vertical drop-from-surface detachment. Here, the upper limit for vertical adhesion force (bubble-to-plate)86,87 is defined by Fv,adh = πDγsin(θbubblerec).(4)where D is the diameter of the circular area where the bubble is in contact with the electrode.
Note that no advancing bubble contact angle, θadvbubble, exists as all contact lines are receding. The case for vertical adhesion of a bubble in water: Fv,adhvs. Fb is presented in Fig. 4fvia a range of θrecbubble. The threshold bubble size (r) for contact line motion occurs when Fb > Fv,adh, or a positive Fnet = Fb,SC − Fv,adh. As the contact line begins to move, the contact line shrinks in size (i.e. D decreases), therefore Fv,adh decreases further and the contact line motion accelerates. This eventually results in detachment. A negative Fnet implies that the bubble remains pinned to the surface while buoyant forces influence the bubble shape and apparent contact angle. This behavior is commonly observed when physically manipulating soft materials such as drops or bubbles.23 Readers should note that the computation of Fv,adh in Fig. 4f is an upper bound because pinning, necking and rupturing contributions may result in easier detachment of the primary bubble. In these cases, a small satellite bubble may remain on the surface (see Section 3.5). While bubbles on aerophobic surfaces likely detach with a moving contact line (spontaneously decreasing D), bubbles on aerophilic surfaces may not have an actively moving contact line. The latter eventually results in pinch-off (see Section 3.5). Realistically, most real-world surfaces (flat) are comparatively hydrophilic (30–90°)88,89 which results in an aerophobic behavior (θappbubble = 90–150°) when under water.
3.4 Lateral adhesion
When gravity acts orthogonally to the central axis of the bubble, the contact angles at the top and bottom differ, i.e., asymmetrical bubbles (Fig. 4c and 5a, b). During bubble motion, the resulting dynamic bubble contact angles (θbubbleadv/θbubblerec) are given by the relative local aerophobicity of the electrodes involved. The lateral movement of a bubble on a surface is analogous to lateral drop-on-surface motion. The adhesion force (bubble-to-plate) involved is defined by the lateral adhesion force,42,90,91 Fl,adh = kwγ[cos(θbubblerec) − cos(θbubbleadv)](5)
The k-factor depends on the shape of the three-phase contact line (i.e. k ≈ 1 for a circular contact line)90,92,93 and w is the width of the drop. With this revised force balance, a similar computation of effective forces per Fig. 4f can also be performed. The bubble starts moving when Fb,SC > Fl,adh.
3.5 Pinch-off and necking
During both vertical and lateral bubble detachment, the potential for necking and partial bubble/drop pinch-off exists.77,94 Lateral detachment mechanisms will require numerical solutions due to the non-radially-symmetric bubble profile.85,95 However, the vertical detachment mechanism may be solved analytically after corrections. Pinch-off occurs when part of the bubble contact line is pinned while the gradually growing bubble increases sufficiently in size. This results in a vertical neck, where the region between the primary bubble and the pinning site thins, forming a dumbbell-shaped geometry. The bubble eventually splits, giving rise to a large primary bubble and a smaller satellite bubble.94 Forces involved during this process are dominated by the formation and the critical diameter of the neck, Dneck (before spontaneous breakage). Without necking, the critical radius, rcrit, for bubble detachment may be computed via a force balance between spherical-approximated buoyancy, Fb and Fv,adh, giving the Fritz equation.82,83 (6)With necking, there is a simple correction from the contact diameter, D, to the necking diameter, (7)
While the Fritz equation may be used, the spherical cap approximation (see above) may be applied.
3.6 Porous surfaces
In efforts to increase the net effective surface area (hence active sites) per volume of electrode material, porous electrodes are often favored in both GERs and GCRs. This increases the net yield per gram of electrode material (which can be costly), thus providing an economical edge. On nano- and micro-structured electrodes, the configuration of wetting becomes superhydrophilic/superaerophobic (Fig. 5c) and superhydrophobic/superaerophilic (Fig. 5d) respectively. In the latter, bubbles are more likely to be absorbed into the plastron96 for reaction while bubble production is severely hindered due to the non-wetting condition. Bubble-to-plastron coalescence takes place over very small timescales (∼10–1000 ms) and is likely not the limiting step.97,98 Bubbles contacting superaerophobic electrodes do not merge and thus exhibit no coalescence dynamics. Therefore, superaerophilic are preferred for GCRs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Hydrophilic/aerophobic surfaces exhibit lower adhesion compared to (b) hydrophobic/aerophilic surfaces, thus requiring smaller bubble sizes for detachment. Structured surfaces exist as (c) superhydrophilic/superaerophobic and (d) superhydro(oleo)phobic/superaerophilic variants. In the latter, a (d) thick plastron forms, and any bubble detachment relies on tearing from the primary plastron, which is often unfavorable for GERs. However, they are particularly proficient (albeit durability considerations) for GCRs. Alternatively, (c) superhydrophilic/superaerophobic surfaces may (e) release or (f) entrap bubbles depending on surface structuring (tortuosity, τ). 2D models are depicted for simplicity: low surface tortuosity would allow for smoother bubble escape compared to higher surface tortuosity. 
Electrode materials optimized for wetting-enhanced GERs (low Fadh/Fb ratio) often result in the formation of tiny bubbles (Fig. 5e and f). However, the ability of a tiny bubble in navigating out of the porous/nano-micro-structured surfaces30 often relies on the tortuosity factor, τ, of the porous electrode and the surface-to-gravity orientation. Tortuosity is defined by  or the arc–chord ratio (≥1): the ratio of the length of the curve (C) to the distance between its ends (S). This parameter constrains how the random walk of a bubble will escape the porous network (or not) (Fig. 5e and f). Therefore, the time of escape, t, scales to the n-step-dependent probability, p(n), towards which the preferential direction is taken, i.e., a small τ, a small n, and p(n) ≈ 1 guarantee the fastest escape. In reality, p(n) includes contributions from the gravitational constant (and direction), collision with other bubbles,97 and wall adhesion,28 which are factors that will heavily influence the process beyond simple Brownian forces.
We believe that the future design of superaerophobic porous electrodes will entail theoretical and experimental mapping (i.e. tomography) of surface tortuosity. Model geometries can also be pre-defined using additive manufacturing methods such as 3D-printing99 to further improve our understanding of gas-evolving electrodes.
4. Gas-involving (photo)electrocatalysis
4.1 Electrochemical HER
Hydrogen gas bubble nucleation behaviors are affected by the electrode materials, which results from their different wettability. Moreover, the electrode morphology and gas diffusion layer thickness are also related to the bubble nucleation on electrodes.100 Liu et al. investigated the individual hydrogen bubble nucleation on flat electrodes, namely, polycrystalline Pt, Au and MoS2, using scanning electrochemical cell microscopy with a single-channel pipet.101 Based on stochastic bubble nucleation measurement and finite element simulation, it was suggested that the threshold of surface H2 concentration for bubble nucleation is ∼218, ∼137 and ∼157 mM on Pt, Au and MoS2 electrodes, respectively. Moreover, it was also discovered that the surface faceting of polycrystalline Pt is not correlated with the bubble nucleation behavior. Therefore, one of the strategies is to modify the electrode materials thus adjusting their wettability for facile bubble detachment. For instance, iron ions were irradiated on the surface of Bi2Te3 nanosheets to tune the Bi2Te3 surface from hydrophobic to hydrophilic, which facilitated the release of hydrogen bubbles from the electrode surface and rapidly exposed the active sites.102 In addition, varying the conditions during the phosphidation process of Ni(OH)2 also led to a range of wettability for the HER catalyst Ni2P, showing water contact angles ranging from 21° to 79°.103 The most hydrophilic electrode demonstrated the highest electrochemically active surface area (ECSA)-normalized current density, indicative of its superior intrinsic activity of the catalytic sites.
Another strategy is to optimize the morphology of the electrode to improve its hydrophilicity/aerophobicity. It is worth noting that this strategy is feasible only if the catalyst material is intrinsically hydrophilic/aerophobic. Further increasing the surface roughness of the hydrophilic/aerophobic electrode can give rise to superhydrophilicity/superaerophobicity. Compared to CoS2 films, CoS2 microwire (MW) and nanowire (NW) arrays were superior in facilitating H2 bubble convection away from the electrode surface (Fig. 6a).22 Consequently, the increased surface texture not only decreased the overpotential required to achieve a target current density (Fig. 6b), but also improved the long-term stability for the HER (Fig. 6c). This was ascribed to the rapid bubble detachment, which prevented the H2 bubbles from accumulating and damaging the catalyst, as commonly occurred for the CoS2 films. Later on, superaerophobic Ni2P nanoarrays (Fig. 6d) and N-doped tungsten carbide (Fig. 6e) nanoarrays have also been developed with excellent HER activity.66,104 The bubbles on the N-doped tungsten carbide (N–WC) nanoarray electrode were much smaller and detached much faster than those on the other electrodes (Fig. 6f), which was in line with its largest bubble contact angle (Fig. 6g) and lowest bubble adhesion force of <1.2 μN. In addition, other hydrophilic/aerophobic electrocatalysts with various morphologies have been developed for efficient HER, such as superaerophobic pine-shaped Pt nanoarrays (−0.04 V vs. RHE at ∼10 mA cm−2),67 MoS2 nanoflakes (−0.23 V vs. RHE at ∼10 mA cm−2),105 Ni nanoparticle-decorated NiMoN NW arrays (−0.037 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2),106 WS2 nanoparticle-modified graphene nanohills (−0.18 V vs. RHE at ∼10 mA cm−2),107 Ni–Mo alloy nanosheets (−0.035 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2),108 Ni–Zn nanosheet arrays (−0.068 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2),109 aerophobic dendritic Ni5P4 nanostructures on copper foam (−0.09 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2),110 superhydrophilic amorphous Co–B–P nanosheets (−0.042 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2),111 and MoS2 hierarchical wrinkles (−0.225 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2).112
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic depictions of CoS2 MWs and NWs bursting the larger H2 bubbles that commonly pin on the surface of CoS2 films. (b) Polarization curves for CoS2 film, NW, and MW electrodes. (c) Long-term stability tests for CoS2 film, NW, and MW electrodes. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for Ni2P nanoarrays and digital images of H2 bubbles on the nanoarray electrode. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for N-doped WC nanoarrays on carbon fiber papers. (f) Snapshots of bubbles detaching from different electrodes at −0.2 V vs. RHE. Scale bar is 100 μm. (g) Bubble contact angles on various electrodes of WC, WC nanoarrays, N-WC, and N-WC nanoarrays. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
The third strategy towards the rapid release of H2 bubbles is to take advantage of specially designed electrode structures for efficient bubble transport. This strategy is independent of the wettability of the electrode materials. For example, an aerophilic cone-shaped Cu electrode was fabricated with the adhesive force of 167 ± 14 μN to gas bubbles and the bubble contact angle of 117 ± 4° (Fig. 7a).113 However, the generated H2 bubbles during the HER can be timely removed via efficient and directional transportation from the tip to the base (Fig. 7b). Further integrating the base of the electrode with a superaerophilic sponge, which exhibited excellent properties of efficiently absorbing and releasing gas bubbles, can help in realizing the collection of the generated H2. The bubble movement is driven by a Laplace pressure gradient (ΔP) on the aerophilic conical electrode due to the larger Laplace pressure on the tip-side than that on the base-side. Moreover, deposition of a specially designed overlayer on the electrode surface can also facilitate the elimination of H2 bubbles, which in principle can be applied to virtually any electrode surface (Fig. 7c). A series of highly porous superaerophobic hydrogels have been prepared by cross-linking M13 bacteriophages through a condensation reaction with glutaraldehyde (Fig. 7d).35 This virus was chosen as the building block due to its inherent nanofibrillar structure, hydrophilicity, and high stability under various conditions. Amongst these hydrogels, the optimum one demonstrated an air-contact angle of 159° and a corresponding air-sliding angle of 1° (Fig. 7e). This hydrogel was subsequently used to modify the Pt electrode for the HER, which resulted in more efficient elimination of adhered H2 bubbles than bare Pt (Fig. 7f). The current densities were significantly improved especially at higher potentials where more H2 bubbles were formed and attached on the electrode surface (Fig. 7g).
 Fig. 7  (a) Wetting state/contact model of aerophilic copper surface to gas bubbles. (b) In situ observation of the HER on an aerophilic cone electrode. Scale bar is 2 mm. (c) Schematic demonstration of H2 bubbles’ behavior on the aerophilic copper surface. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM images showing the morphologies of cross-linked viral hydrogels. (e) Comparison of aerophobicity for various hydrogels. (f) Schematic illustrations for the electrochemical HER performance of Pt electrodes with and without the superaerophobic hydrogel. (g) Chronoamperograms Pt electrodes with and without the modification with the superaerophobic hydrogels. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
4.2 Electrochemical OER
Catalysts for the electrochemical OER can be generally categorized into molecular catalysts and heterogeneous catalysts. Regarding molecular OER catalysts, a considerable fraction of them undergo changes during the electrochemical processes.114 To address this issue, stabilization strategies have been applied to immobilize molecular catalysts on solid surfaces.115–117 There are three different immobilization strategies, namely, covalent bonding,118,119 physical interactions,120,121 and direct encapsulation.122,123 Amongst them, hydrophobic interaction is one of the physical adsorption-based immobilization methods. Specifically, hydrophobicity of the coordinating ligands can significantly influence the surface-immobilization process and consequently the activity and stability of the molecular OER catalysts. By investigating a library of molecular OER catalysts based on the Co-complexes of tris(2-benzimidazolymethyl)amine with tailored hydrophobicity (Fig. 8a and b), it was found that more hydrophobic coordinating ligands with longer alkyl chains or fluorinated groups led to decreased overpotentials, enhanced turnover frequencies and long-term stability due to improved immobilization on the substrate surfaces through physisorption (Fig. 8c and d).124 Besides physical properties, the OER mechanism of molecular catalysts can also be affected by their wettabilities. From the study of supramolecular dimers of [RuVO(pda)]+ (pda = 1,10-phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid) and [RuVO(bda)]+ (bda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate) complexes, it was found that the directionality of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic units of the catalyst is a key factor for creating efficient O–O bond-forming catalysts.125 Specifically, regarding the bda complex, the hydrophobic oxo tended to point at another oxo with the bda directed toward water, which favored the I2M mechanism. On the contrary, the hydrophobic oxo of the pda complex was directed toward a more hydrophobic phenanthroline moiety of the pda of another species bearing more stable binding free energy than that of the prereactive dimer, which made the water nucleophilic attack mechanism competitive.
 Fig. 8  (a) Various tris-benzimidazole Co complexes as OER electrocatalysts. (b) Water contact angles for Co-(BimH)3, Co-(BimC10H)3 and Co-(BimC3F8)3 films deposited on a Si wafer. (c) OER overpotentials for various Co complex electrocatalysts. (d) Controlled potential electrolysis traces at 1.91 V vs. RHE for selected cobalt complexes. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In comparison, with respect to heterogeneous OER electrocatalysts, most research efforts have been directed toward enhanced hydrophilicity/aerophobicity of their surfaces, which facilitates O2 bubble desorption.126–128 The resulting improved OER catalytic activity is usually attributed to the increased ECSA129,130 and decreased interfacial resistance at the catalyst–electrolyte interface during the OER.131 In addition to the surface property, engineering of OER catalyst electrodes into certain structures can also promote the efficient transport of the evolved gas while maintaining high electrical conductivity, thus resulting in enhanced ECSA-specific activity. Recently, Kim et al. reported a woodpile-structured Ir catalyst containing well-defined macropores (>200 nm) at the inter-wire space with a linkage to the inter-layer mesopores (<50 nm) (Fig. 9a and b).132 This structure enabled facile transport of the evolved O2 gas bubbles by suppressing the coalescence of the bubbles from forming larger ones (Fig. 9c), which was confirmed by scanning electrochemical microscopy (Fig. 9d) and dynamic light scattering (Fig. 9e) analyses. Therefore, with both improved ECSA and ECSA-specific activity enabled by 3D nanostructuring, it demonstrated a 30-fold higher mass activity for the OER than conventional nanoparticle-based catalysts in a polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolyzer. Inspired by the breathing process of mammals, a pouch-type alveolus-like nanoporous polyethylene (alv-PE) membrane loaded with the Au/NiFeOx catalyst was fabricated as an electrode for the OER, whereby the outer membrane touched the electrolyte and the inside pouch was left dry (Fig. 9f).133 To assess the impact of the electrode structure on the electrochemical performance, the alv-PE structure was compared with that of the alveolus-like carbon-based gas-diffusion layers (alv-carbon GDL) and flat-PE, exhibiting the highest current density (Fig. 9g). Its superior performance was ascribed to the following phenomenon. During the OER, the newly formed O2 molecules at the catalyst/electrolyte interface efficiently diffused toward the gas phase inside the pouch, without the additional energy cost of bubble formation, which in turn increased the OER efficiency. This assumption was confirmed by the rarely observed bubbles from the catalyst surface of the alv-PE structure until the applied voltage was increased to 1.65 V (Fig. 9g [red arrow]).
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a woodpile-structured Ir as the OER catalyst containing mesopores and macropores. (b) Ir catalyst with 10-layer perpendicular stacking of building blocks. (c) Schematic illustration of bubble formation and removal mechanism within the 3D-nanostructured electrocatalyst. (d) Fast Fourier transformation amplitude spectra of currents recorded at the tip during scanning electrochemical microscopy analysis. The higher frequency of the peak indicates the faster cycling of formation and detachment of O2 bubbles. (e) Dynamic light scattering analysis spectra, showing the size distribution of the generated O2 bubbles. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of an alv-PE structure for the OER. (g) Linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) curves of Au/NiFeOx-coated membranes with different structures: alv-PE, alv-carbon GDL, and flat-PE. Arrows indicate the photographs of their corresponding surfaces with the onset potential of O2 bubbles. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
4.3 Overall water splitting
Similar to the HER and OER (vide supra), efforts towards rapid bubble release have been focused on enhancing the hydrophilicity/aerophobicity of electrodes or developing novel electrode structures that can suppress gas bubble coalescence, jamming, and trapping. A straightforward method is to simply couple an aforementioned HER catalyst with an OER catalyst as the cathode and anode, respectively, for overall water splitting.134 In addition, certain electrode materials can be catalytically active for both the HER and OER. Shan et al. synthesized a hierarchical CoMoSx catalyst on a nickel foam (NF), which showed superhydrophilicity/superaerophobicity with a water-droplet contact angle of 0° and an underwater gas-bubble contact angle of 165° (Fig. 10a and b).135 Therefore, due to the negligible bubble adhesive force (Fig. 10c), which resulted from the discontinuous state of the three-phase contact line between the bubbles and the hierarchical surface of the electrode, the generated bubbles adhered on the electrode surface were tiny in the range of tens of micrometers in size (Fig. 10d). Following this concept, superaerophobic Fe, Co, Ni, Mo, and S-based hybrid nanotube arrays,136 Cu3P microsheets,137 Ni–Co–S–P nanoparticles,138 urchin-like Al,P-codoped Co3O4 microspheres on NF139 and Ni3Se2 nanoforest on NF140 have been developed as bifunctional catalysts for both the OER and HER.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of CoMoSx/NF. (b) Air-bubble contact angle under water (top) and water-droplet contact angle (bottom) for CoMoSx/NF. (c) Gas-bubble adhesive force measurement of CoMoSx/NF. (d) Digital photograph of bubbles released at the surface of CoMoSx/NF. Scale bar is 0.5 mm. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic diagram of 3DPNi functionalized with C–Ni1−xO catalyst and its SEM images. Scale bars are 500 and 4 μm, respectively. Simulation frames showing bubble shape during transport in (f) 3DPNi and (g) NF. (h) Relative bubble migration time through 3DPNi and NF as a function of bubble diameter. High-speed camera images collected from the (i) C–Ni1−xO/NF and (j) C–Ni1−xO/3DPNi electrodes during water electrolysis. Scale bars are 2 mm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Highly controlled periodic structures, i.e., 3D printed Ni (3DPNi) electrodes decorated with carbon-doped nickel oxide (C–Ni1−xO), have also been reported to catalyse both the OER and HER at commercially relevant current densities.30 The printed lattice structure consisted of a linear array of filaments within each layer with a centre-to-centre spacing of 800 μm. There are five stacked layers in total with an individual layer's orientation orthogonal to its underlying layer (Fig. 10e). Compared to the stochastic porous Ni foam, this periodic structure presented a larger critical bubble size, indicating that the generated gas bubbles are less likely to be trapped in its regular porous medium (Fig. 10f and g). Simulations showed that a bubble with different diameters in the nickel foam exhibited a longer transport time than that in the 3DPNi electrode (Fig. 10h). The varying pore sizes and tortuous paths of the random porous media the Ni foam increased the bubble travel distance. Moreover, these structural features also caused the leading portion of the bubble to regularly encounter the solid network ahead of it. The resulting forces exerted on the bubble by the solid beams counteracted the effect of buoyancy, thus slowing the migration. High-speed camera images confirmed that there were more and considerably larger gas bubbles on the C–Ni1−xO/nickel foam electrodes than those on the C–Ni1−xO/3DPNi electrodes (Fig. 10i and j). Additionally, nonwoven stainless-steel fabrics as the conductive substrate decorated with a bifunctional iron nickel-layered double hydroxide catalyst also led to a much faster escape rate of gas bubbles and less dragging force for bubble releasing than the nickel foam and stainless-steel foam substrates.141
4.4 Electrochemical ORR
Electrochemical ORR is a gas-consuming process occurring at liquid/gas/solid interfaces for energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries.9,142,143 In addition to extensive research focusing on catalyst development, underwater wettability plays a crucial role in determining the nature of liquid/gas/solid interfaces, thus affecting the performance of the ORR. To provide a three-phase contact point (TPCP) amongst the oxygen, electrolyte and catalyst, the catalytic layer needs to be aerophilic for trapping a thin oxygen plastron layer near the catalyst surface. Based on this catalyst design principle, porous cobalt-incorporated nitrogen-doped carbon-nanotube (CoNCNT) arrays were directly grown on carbon-fiber paper (CFP) followed by subsequent polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) modification (Fig. 11a).69 This electrode was denoted as T-CoNCNT-CFP and demonstrated superaerophilic properties with oxygen bubble bursting upon contacting the electrode surface within 42 ms (Fig. 11b), indicative of a strong interaction between the bubble and the electrode. Compared to Pt/C loaded on the Teflon-treated carbon fiber paper (Pt/C-TCFP) as the electrode, the approaching oxygen bubbles would merge with a plastron layer on the T-CoNCNT-CFP electrode and maintain a robust gas film during the ORR (the picture on the right in Fig. 11b and c). Due to the abundant nanoscale TPCP on the T-CoNCNT-CFP electrode as well as an accelerated gas-diffusion process, it showed better ORR performance in both acid and alkaline electrolytes than the Pt/C-TCFP electrode at high current densities, even though the intrinsic activity of the CoNCNTs is low compared to that of the Pt/C.144
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the superaerophilic electrode by directly growing CoNCNT arrays on CFP associated with subsequent modification with PTFE. (b) Oxygen-bubble adhesion behavior and optical picture of T-CoNCNT-CFP electrodes in a basic electrolyte. (c) Schematic illustration for comparison of the oxygen-bubble adhesion behaviors on aerophilic Pt/C-TCFP and superaerophilic T-CoNCNT-CFP. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) The typical three types of wetting state for a hydrophobic surface in the underwater system, as schematically shown in the underwater Wenzel state, Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state, and Cassie state. (e) LSV curves for the ORR reaction on three platinum-coated samples. The inset includes SEM images of the morphologies of three kinds of conductive pillar-structured silicon substrates and the corresponding water contact angles. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of a Janus electrode under ORR conditions. Schematic illustration of the gas bubble behaviour on the (g) aerophilic and (h) aerophobic sides of the Janus electrode. Gas bubble behaviour on the (i) aerophilic and (j) aerophobic sides of the Janus electrode. (k) ORR polarization curves of the superaerophobic, Janus, superaerophilic, and commercial Pt/C electrodes in the oxygen-bubbled 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
However, more aerophobic states do not necessarily lead to superior ORR performance. There are generally three underwater wetting states for hydrophobic surfaces categorized based on the behaviors at the interface between the liquid and the solid with increasing hydrophobicity: (1) the liquid completely wetted the solid without trapped air at the liquid/solid interface, namely, underwater Wenzel state; (2) the liquid partially intruded into the textured solid surface with a certain amount of trapped air at the interface, namely, underwater Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state; (3) the liquid hardly touched the textured surface, giving rise to a quasi-continuous gas layer over the textured solid surface, namely, underwater Cassie state (Fig. 11d).29 By investigating three Pt nanoparticle-coated square-pillar-structured silicon wafer electrodes with subsequent modification of fluorosilane, it was suggested that the superhydrophobic electrode with the underwater Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state exhibited the highest ORR catalytic activity (Fig. 11e), which was attributed to its maximal and stable liquid/gas/solid three-phase interface that was favorable for gas-diffusion.29
In addition, the combination of both aerophilic and aerophobic surfaces in one electrode can also result in excellent catalytic performance for ORR. Li et al. reported a Janus electrode with an aerophilic side and aerophobicity for the other side by partial modification of aerophobic nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube arrays with PTFE (Fig. 11f).145 The aerophilic side showed a gas bubble contact angle of 23 ± 2° (Fig. 11g and i). In contrast, the aerophobic side allowed quick bubble penetration behavior from the aerophobic to aerophilic side (Fig. 11h and j). Therefore, the Janus electrode with opposite wettability on adjacent sides maintained a stable O2 gas reservoir at the aerophilic side while shortening the O2 diffusion pathway to reach the catalyst at the aerophobic side, thus resulting in comparable ORR performance with the Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 11k) and outperforming the merely aerophilic or aerophilic electrode.
Interestingly, superhydrophilic honeycomb carbon nanofibers were also reported as superb catalysts for two-electron ORR performance with a high H2O2 selectivity of 97.3% and a mass activity of up to 220 A g−1.146 By comparing to a less hydrophilic solid carbon nanofiber catalyst with a water contact angle of 38° as control, it was proposed that the superhydrophilicity of the honeycomb carbon nanofiber catalyst contributed to better wetting of the catalyst by the electrolyte, and that the interconnected cavities of its porous carbon skeleton allowed for more effective entrapping of oxygen gas bubbles. Therefore, the three-phase interface was also created with the entrapped O2 and aqueous electrolyte around the defective catalytic sites.
4.5 Electrochemical CO2RR
Electrochemical CO2RR consists of both gas-consuming and gas-evolving processes, during which CO2 is reduced with H2O as the proton source to form mainly C1–3 products such as CO (g), HCOOH (l), CH4 (g), CH3OH (l), C2H4 (g), C2H5OH (l) and C3H7OH (l), as well as H2 (g) produced by the competing HER.11 Regarding selective liquid-producing (i.e. HCOOH) catalysts, such as Sn- and Bi-based electrodes, it is suggested that their design principles should be similar to those for ORR catalysts. However, taking Au as an example to catalyze CO2 (g) electroreduction to CO (g) in aqueous electrolytes, it is necessary to take into account the effects of both gas-consuming and gas-releasing behaviors on the key reaction parameters. The morphological influence of Au electrodes on gas-releasing behavior during CO2RR was investigated by comparing three electrode morphologies, namely, nanoneedles, nanorods and nanoparticles (Fig. 12a).31 The nanoneedles had a smaller bubble departure diameter with a mean value of 23 μm compared to the diameters of 31 and 97 μm for the nanorod and nanoparticle surfaces, respectively (Fig. 12b). The effervescent generation of small bubbles on the nanoneedle surface corresponded to small diffusion thickness, resulting in improved mass transport and intensified CO2 reduction (Fig. 12c). Additionally, by comparing a range of Au/C catalysts with the same nanoparticle morphology, the effects of wettability on reactant gas behavior near the electrode surface were demonstrated (Fig. 12d).68 The Cassie–Wenzel coexistence wetting state with a water contact angle of 107 ± 3° is most favorable for the three-phase-contact CO2RR system showing the fastest reaction rate, the highest selectivity towards CO and an optimum long-term stability (Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of nanoneedles, nanorods, and nanoparticles. Scale bars are 5 μm. (b) Cumulative distribution curve of bubble release diameters for Au electrodes with various morphologies. (c) Schematic depicting the influence of electrode morphology on bubble release diameter and the resulting thickness of the diffusion boundary layer. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the Au/C electrode and its gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces for CO2RR. (e) Geometric jCO, CO faradaic efficiency of various Au/C electrodes and photographs of water droplets on each Au/C electrode with different water contact angles. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the fabrication process of Au/PE catalyst for CO2RR and its detailed structure with three-phase interface between the Au/H2O/CO2. (g) Normalized current densities of CO production for a bilayer pouch-type Au/PE, flat Au/C and flat Au/Si. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Moreover, another effective strategy to improve CO2RR performance is to design an electrode structure that enables appropriate gas transport both inwards and outwards. Inspired by the alveolus structure in mammalian lungs, a Au nanoparticle-coated nanoporous polyethylene (nanoPE) membrane was rolled to form a bilayer pouch-type structure (Fig. 12f).147 In this structure, the water-impenetrable nanoPE membrane separated the central sealed compartment from the external electrolyte. CO2 can diffuse into the pores of the nanoPE membrane in the central compartment via the connected inlet. Pinholes on the outer layer enabled ion exchange between the interlayer electrolyte and the external bulk electrolyte. Compared to the Au-coated PTFE-treated carbon paper and silicon wafer (designated as Au/C and Au/Si, respectively) (Fig. 12g), as well as the hydrophilic bilayer Au/PE pouch-type membrane, it was suggested that both the alveolus-mimicking structure and hydrophobicity contributed to the excellent current density and high faradaic efficiency for CO production due to the efficient CO2 access and high local alkalinity.
Among the electrocatalysts studied to date, Cu is the only known metal that can catalyze the electrochemical CO2RR/CORR toward hydrocarbons and oxygenates with significantly high faradaic yields.10,148 However, as its products upon reaction includes a range of gases and liquids, the design of Cu-based catalytic systems with a high production rate and selectivity towards one specific product remains challenging. Regulating the wettability on/near the surface of Cu catalysts has been demonstrated as effective strategies to improve the CO2RR/CORR performance. Taking the ‘plastron effect’ used by aquatic arachnids (e.g. diving bell spider) as inspiration, direct functionalization of Cu using 1-octadecanethiol to form a hydrophobic alkanethiol overlayer on the Cu surface (Fig. 13a) resulted in suppressed HER and dramatically enhanced the faradaic efficiency for CH4, C2H4 and C2H5OH compared to a pristine hydrophilic Cu electrode (Fig. 13b).149 However, this method also presented a drawback, i.e., decreased current density (Fig. 13c), which was ascribed to the blocked electrochemically active surface area by the hydrophobic overlayer.150–152 By comparing the underwater wetting behavior near the hydrophobic Cu surface with that near the hydrophilic surface, it was proposed that the electrolyte–solid–gas three-phase boundary for the hydrophobic Cu electrode facilitated omnidirectional CO2 mass transport with improved local CO2 availability, which greatly increased the surface concentration of Cu–CO* as a key intermediate for subsequent CH4 formation and C–C coupling (Fig. 13d). A fairly stable formation of C1–3 products was achieved for at least 5 h.
 Fig. 13  (a) A hydrophobic dendritic Cu electrode for CO2RR and its water contact angle measurement. (b) Product formation faradaic efficiencies for the hydrophobic versus wettable electrode. (c) Polarization curves for the wettable and hydrophobic electrodes. (d) The proposed role of hydrophobicity in promoting CO2RR over proton reduction. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Faradaic efficiency and geometric current density for CORR over Cu particles loaded on four types of carbon papers. The bottom pictures show water contact angles on the corresponding carbon papers. (f) SEM images of Cu particles/carbon paper-microporous layer electrodes. (g) Schematic illustration for CORR on Cu catalysts assisted by the hydrophobic microporous layer to improve the CO diffusion. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (h) Hydrophobic microenvironment with solid–liquid–gas interfaces constructed in a gas-diffusion electrode cell by dispersing PTFE nanoparticles inside the catalyst layer. (i) Partial current densities for CO2RR on the Cu/C and Cu/C/PTFE electrodes. (j) Photographs of contact angle measurements on the Cu/C/PTFE electrode before and after CO2 electrolysis. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
To circumvent the catalytic site-blocking issue, hydrophobicity can also be induced into the underlayer/substrate or the adjacent catalytically inert solid additive. For instance, a PTFE-treated carbon black microporous underlayer loaded with Cu catalysts gave rise to a 52.7% faradaic efficiency for C2H4 production, which corresponded to ∼20 times increment compared to a less hydrophobic 5%-PTFE treated carbon paper substrate (Fig. 13e and f).153 Notably, its geometric current density for C2H4 was also higher than those of other substrates with 5–25% PTFE treatment (Fig. 13e). This configuration favored the formation of the three-phase interface without blocking the catalytic sites on the Cu surface (Fig. 13g).153,154 Another configuration was demonstrated by mixing Cu catalysts with PTFE particles (Cu/C/PTFE) to create a hydrophobic microenvironment with solid–liquid–gas interfaces (Fig. 13h). This Cu/C/PTFE electrode showed higher current densities across all the examined potentials (Fig. 13i) and higher total faradaic efficiency for CO2RR as well as higher C2+ faradaic efficiency than that for the Cu/C electrode without PTFE. The blended PTFE particles effectively sustain the hydrophobicity of the electrode (i.e. the three-phase interface) during electrochemical CO2RR (Fig. 13j). The issue about electrolyte flooding under high-rate operations was also addressed using a bioinspired copper catalyst on a gas-diffusion layer that mimicked the unique hierarchical structuring of Setaria's hydrophobic leaves.155 Specifically, an outstanding stability at 300 mA cm−2 over 45 h was achieved in a flow reactor, largely outperforming its wettable copper counterparts. Lastly, a very straightforward strategy was demonstrated by simply placing Cu catalysts in close proximity to a CO2 plastron layer trapped by superhydrophobic silicon in the electrolyte.156 This configuration turned out to be effective for reducing the faradaic efficiency for the HER and enhancing the formation of C2+ products.
Last but not the least, due to the produced alcohols with low surface tension upon CO2RR/CORR, i.e., 22.5 mN m−1 for methanol,158,159 21.8 mN m−1 for ethanol,160,161 and 23.3 mN m−1 for propanol at 25 °C,162–164 the surface tension of the initial aqueous electrolyte (72.0 mN m−1 at 25 °C) with gradually accumulated products will keep decreasing over time. For example, aqueous solutions of 10 wt% methanol, ethanol and 1-propanol have a surface tension of 56.2, 47.5 and 34.3 mN m−1 at 25 °C, respectively.165 Consequently, the electrode will eventually be wetted so that the pores in the catalyst layer will be flooded by the electrolyte and the three-phase interface will disappear. This problem can be potentially addressed by fabricating oleophobic/omniphobic electrodes that repel low surface tension liquids (<25 mN m−1) and/or by designing novel systems that efficiently remove alcohols and other CO2RR/CORR products from the electrolyte.
4.6 Photoelectrochemical gas-involving reactions
Photoelectrochemical gas-involving reactions include both GERs and GCRs. Therefore, some of the wettability-related design principles for photoelectrodes are similar to their counterparts for electrolysis. Taking advantage of its high transparency, the aforementioned superaerophobic hydrogel (Fig. 7d in Section 4.1) was added as an overlayer on the Pt nanoparticle-loaded p-type Si photocathode for the HER.35 Under front-side (electrode–electrolyte side) light illumination, there was a substantial increase in the photocurrent density across all the examined potentials after the deposition of the porous hydrogel. The chronoamperograms measured at −0.9 V vs. RHE also confirmed that the hydrogel overlayer led to improved stability of the Si photocathode. In addition to the deposition of a catalytically inert overlayer on photoelectrodes, the integration of superaerophobic/superhydrophilic co-catalysts onto photoelectrodes can potentially contribute to not only rapid bubble release but also suppressed electron–hole recombination and improved water oxidation kinetics. Modification of the BiVO4 photoanode using both the superhydrophilic graphdiyne and CoAl layered double hydroxide catalyst facilitated charge separation and electrode/electrolyte interface charge transfer during photoelectrochemical OER, resulting in enhanced incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency and half-cell solar energy conversion efficiency.166 However, it is worth noting that a hydrophobic overlayer can also improve the performance of a photoelectrode for gas-evolving reactions. By investigating the TiO2 nanotube photoanodes modified with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl trichlorosilane (PFTS), n-octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTS), and polymerized 2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyltrimethylammonium chloride (PMETAC) (denoted as PTFS–TiO2, OTS–TiO2, APTS–TiO2 and PMETAC-g-TiO2, respectively) ranging from hydrophilic to hydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 14a), it was discovered that hydrophobic OTS–TiO2 and PTFS–TiO2 photoanodes demonstrated higher photocurrent densities and lower onset potentials than hydrophilic ones (Fig. 14b).167 The authors proposed that the modification with monolayers was beneficial to the separation and transport of photoinduced electrons and holes. Additionally, based on the theory of electric double layer, due to the coated hydrophobic monolayers with low surface energy on the surface, there are more particles with a negative charge (–OH, OH−) on the inner dense layer. Consequently, the photogenerated holes migrated faster to the interface, which was beneficial to the OER.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of molecular monolayer modification of TiO2 with different chemicals and corresponding contact angle measurements. (b) Photocurrent densities of TiO2 photoelectrodes before and after chemical modification with different modifiers under illumination. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the capillary force-induced restructuring of Fe2O3 photoanodes. (d) SEM images showing corresponding changes in the Fe2O3 photoanodes. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (e) The droplet shape of the electrolyte and the shape of the underwater N2 bubble on the surface of the Au-PTFE/TS photocathode. (f) Scheme of NRR enhancement by introducing the aerophilic hierarchical structure on the Au-PTFE/TS photocathode. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
Capillary effects have also been utilized to improve the photoelectrochemical performance. First, regarding the bubble release behavior, theoretical models and experimental results using TiO2 nanorod arrays confirmed that morphology-dependent capillarity led to the formation of a liquid layer between the photoelectrode surface and the adhere bubble, thus significantly alleviating the blockage of active sites at the bubble base.168 Second, with respect to the morphological and structural tuning effect, by applying low surface tension ethanol (∼22 mN m−1) to high surface energy (1.36 J m−2) metal oxide FeOx nanoparticulate networks, capillary forces acted between the nanoparticles at the liquid–air interface in the subsequent drying process (Fig. 14c). When the capillary forces are larger than the inter-particle cohesion forces, it will result in the restructuring of the nanoparticle network (Fig. 14d). Characterization studies showed that the capillary-force-induced self-assembly improved the crystallinity, promoted the preferential orientation of the hematite along the [110] direction upon calcination, and thereby enhanced the electrical conductivity of the material, which led to a 12-fold enhancement of photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the OER.169
For a photoelectrochemical GCR, a hydrophobic or an aerophilic photoelectrode is preferential. Regarding a photoelectrochemical NRR, a hydrophobic photoelectrode with an underwater Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state was fabricated by coating Au nanoparticles and a hydrophobic PTFE porous framework on a Ti-passivated Si photocathode, denoted as Au-PTFE/TS.170 It had a liquid contact angle of ∼125° and a gas-bubble contact angle of ∼88° (Fig. 14e). The hydrophobicity-induced electrolyte/N2/Au interface resulted in the close proximity of active protons and N2 molecules to the Au catalyst on the surface of the PTFE framework, which facilitated the intermolecular interactions for hydrogenating N2 and overcame the rate-determining step of N2-to-NH3 fixation (Fig. 14f). Therefore, after the incorporation of the hydrophobic PTFE porous framework, both the yield rate and the faradaic efficiency for NH3 were remarkably increased on Au-PTFE/TS by ∼1.5 and ∼4 times, respectively.
Light harvesting is an additional key parameter for photoelectrocatalysis to enhance the solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency, which has also been inspired by nature. One strategy towards improved light trapping is to develop antireflective surfaces. Intricate surface architectures with tapered shapes (e.g. cones, pillars and columns) can minimize the light reflection based on a subwavelength diffraction grating mechanism, which have been found in moth eyes and butterfly wings (Fig. 15a).171 For example, patterning mesoporous TiO2 layers with conical-shaped moth-eye structures (Fig. 15b) led to significantly enhanced optical absorption compared to a flat TiO2 surface (Fig. 15c).172 Moreover, leaves as the light harvester for green plants have evolved to maximize their photon harvesting capabilities. Accordingly, ZnO-based fern-like microleaves exhibited superior light absorption independent of the incident light angle to ZnO nanorods and nanowires (Fig. 15d).173 Artificial N-doped ZnO leaves demonstrated increased light absorbance within the visible light range by up to 131% and a redshift of bandgap absorption edge compared to the bulk counterpart (Fig. 15e and f).174 Another feasible biomimetic strategy to enhance light harvesting is based on phototropism. This phenomenon occurs when plants such as sunflowers self-orient to face the sun throughout the day (Fig. 15g). Phototropism enabled the tips of the sunflower-like omnidirectional tracker fibrils that always received the maximum photonic power density at oblique illumination angles, which achieved up to a 400% solar energy-harvesting enhancement over non-tropistic materials.175 Similarly, a ‘bionic sunflower’ based on a light-responsive hydrogel was reported.176 When it was used for a photo-driven ORR, a ∼3 times higher H2O2 yield rate was achieved than the same system without phototropism.
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM images of corneal nipple arrays in the peacock (Inachis io), a nymphalid butterfly. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2005, The Royal Society. (b) SEM image of a moth-eye patterned TiO2 layer. (c) Optical images of glass substrates with flat TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic representation of a microfern leaf and SEM image of ZnO-based fern-like microleaves. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (e) Optical and TEM images of the original Cinnamomum camphora leaf. (f) SEM and TEM images of the artificial N-doped ZnO leaf. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Phototropism of sunflowers. (h) Side-view photographs of a biomimetic omnidirectional tracker tracking various angles of incidence light (0–90°). Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
Wettability regulation during the design of (photo)electrodes is an effective strategy towards improving the (photo)electrocatalytic performance. In this review, we have summarized the fundamentals of a range of wetting states and the corresponding strategies towards practical applications in various (photo)electrochemical reactions. In addition to (photo)electrocatalysis, wettability regulation can also contribute to the improved Fischer–Tropsch process177 and biologically relevant catalysis.178 However, great challenges remain as this is an emerging field lacking in comprehensive mechanistic studies and systematic design principles. Applying the principles of surface wettability to catalytic systems is rather complicated owing to diverse surface physicochemical properties and specific operational conditions. Future efforts can be made on the basis of the following aspects.
First, with respect to GERs, superhydrophilic/superaerophobic (photo)electrode surfaces are preferable for bubble detachment. Besides the intrinsic properties of catalytic materials, the design of (photo)electrodes with minimal bubble-to-surface contact area, such as nanoneedle arrays, can significantly decrease the adhesion force of bubbles, thus enabling rapid bubble release.
Second, superhydrophobic/superaerophilic (photo)electrodes with an underwater Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state are favorable for GCRs. However, the durability of underwater superaerophilicity as a common issue is much less investigated.179 More specifically, these (photo)electrodes should demonstrate immersion-stable superaerophilicity, maintaining a durable plastron layer of gas reactants, thus enabling a long-term three-phase for reactions. Regarding some CO2RR systems, accumulated alcohol products are produced in the electrolyte upon CO2RR. This leads to the effect of decreased electrolyte surface tension. As a result, the development of robust superoleophobic/superomniphobic electrode surfaces is necessary.
Third, a novel structural design of 3D electrodes and functional overlayers/underlayers for electrodes can be tailored to the requirements of GERs and GCRs, respectively. Effective tools for the modelling of bubble transport and gas-diffusion behaviors inside/near electrodes are necessary to achieve optimal design parameters. The use of gas-permeable membranes could also be adapted to fabricate novel electrode architectures for gas-involving reactions.180,181
Fourth, industrially viable fabrication techniques are highly desirable for the scaling up of superwetting electrodes and photoelectrodes. A roll-to-roll technique is promising for addressing this issue.5 Amongst the various deposition methods, spray coating (Fig. 16a) and screen printing (Fig. 16b) are compatible with this technique. Both traditional wet spray coating and screen-printing methods have been used for electrode and photoelectrode fabrication.182–187 While introducing superwetting properties into (photo)electrodes, an additional functionalization step or physically adding superwetting materials is generally indispensable (vide supra). However, one-step fabrication of superhydrophobic catalytic layers was also feasible using flame spray pyrolysis based on on-the-fly hydrophobization (Fig. 16c).188 Notably, flame spray pyrolysis as an aerosol deposition method is highly scalable for facile and fast fabrication of various nanostructured (photo)electrodes.169,189–191 A production rate of a few kilograms per hour has been achieved using lab-scale burners with tunable specific surface area and catalytic activity for the produced nanomaterials.192,193 Furthermore, a post-synthetic gas-phase fluorosilanization method was applicable for modification of large-size (photo)electrodes towards superoleophobicity (Fig. 16d).194
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustrations of (a) spray roll-to-roll coating technique and (b) rotary screen-printing technique. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic diagram of the one-step synthesis of superhydrophobic nano-layers via flame spray pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic description of fluorosilanization process by an atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) method to achieve superoleophobicity. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In recent years, emerging macroscopic-scale model fabrication techniques such as 3D printing (i.e. additive manufacturing) have been extended towards materials such as metals and thus metal oxides.195 The maturation of additive manufacturing will likely lead to developments in printable materials, including (photo)electrodes. The integration of 3D-printing with micro-metrically accurate CNC milling and nano-metrically accurate laser ablation can potentially impart hierarchically structured model designs.196,197 The use of precise laser ablation may also enable surface chemistry patterning and therefore direct wettability and plastron control. With rapid advancements and widespread availability of these manufacturing methods (3D-printing, CNC milling, and laser ablation), we envision that they will eventually be implemented towards developing highly precise and model architectures to manipulate bubble transport, gas diffusion and light harvesting behaviors.198
The advancement of the field will likely be guided by both model and stochastic fabrication methods, with effective usage determined by cost-energy storage parity ratios ($/W). Regardless of the precision and scalability involved, the efficient control and use of (super)wettability for the enhancement of electrocatalytic efficiency (selectivity, limiting current density, etc.) would likely spur future electrode developments.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the eCO2EP programme funded by the Singapore National Research Foundation under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme through the Cambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore (CARES) and the Berkeley Educational Alliance for Research in Singapore (BEARS). W. S. Y. W and D. V. acknowledge the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program LubISS No. 722497 and the ERC Advanced Grant (883631 DynaMo).
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Sun, L. Jiang and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1590–1598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Wei, Z.-F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Sheng, J. W. Ager, M. Kraft and R. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100014 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, T. Tran-Phu, H. Chen and A. Tricoli, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1800028 CrossRef .
H. Vogt, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 495–499 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz, M. Chrysina and N. Cox, Photosynth. Res., 2019, 142, 105–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Burgess and D. J. Lowe, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2983–3012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Darband, M. Aliofkhazraei and S. Shanmugam, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Ren and L. Luo, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 5392–5408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Yu, Z. Wang, X. Gong, Z. Guo and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9488–9513 RSC .
Z. Lu, Y. Li, X. Lei, J. Liu and X. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 294–298 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zou, L. Tao, Y. Wang, G. Huang, S. Du and S. Wang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2055–2066 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mazloomi and N. Sulaiman, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4257–4263 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Faber, R. Dziedzic, M. A. Lukowski, N. S. Kaiser, Q. Ding and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10053–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gao, F. Geyer, D. W. Pilat, S. Wooh, D. Vollmer, H.-J. Butt and R. Berger, Nat. Phys., 2017, 14, 191 Search PubMed .
H. J. Butt and M. Kappl, Surface and Interfacial Forces, 2010, 219–250,  DOI:10.1002/9783527629411.ch8 .
E. Dussan V., J. Fluid Mech., 1985, 151, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Sheng, X. Cheng, L. Chen, J. Jin and X. Feng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 87–90 RSC .
C. Yu, P. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703053 CrossRef .
K. D. Danov, R. D. Stanimirova, P. A. Kralchevsky, K. G. Marinova, S. D. Stoyanov, T. B. J. Blijdenstein, A. R. Cox and E. G. Pelan, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 233, 223–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Hayashi, Q. A. Meng, Q. Wang, H. Liu, K. Hashimoto and L. Jiang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601250 CrossRef .
T. Kou, S. Wang, R. Shi, T. Zhang, S. Chiovoloni, J. Q. Lu, W. Chen, M. A. Worsley, B. C. Wood, S. E. Baker, E. B. Duoss, R. Wu, C. Zhu and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002955 CrossRef CAS .
T. Burdyny, P. J. Graham, Y. Pang, C.-T. Dinh, M. Liu, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4031–4040 CrossRef CAS .
T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1805, 95, 65–87 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, B. Su and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6872–6897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Su, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1727–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jeon, J. Park, C. Shin, H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, D. W. Lee and J. Ryu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz3944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Korhonen, T. Huhtamäki, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3858–3863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Eral, D. J. C. M.’t Mannetje and J. M. Oh, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 247–260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6234–6237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Y. Wong, L. Hauer, A. Naga, A. Kaltbeitzel, P. Baumli, R. Berger, M. D‘Acunzi, D. Vollmer and H.-J. Butt, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 7236–7245 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Yuan and T. R. Lee, in Surface Science Techniques, ed. G. Bracco and B. Holst, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2013,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-34243-1_1, pp. 3–34 .
C. W. Extrand, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3793–3796 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Y. Wong and A. Tricoli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13999–14007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pomeau and J. Vannimenus, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1985, 104, 477–488 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Joanny and P. G. de Gennes, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 552–562 CrossRef CAS .
B. Andreotti and J. H. Snoeijer, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2020, 52, 285–308 CrossRef .
M. van Gorcum, B. Andreotti, J. H. Snoeijer and S. Karpitschka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 121, 208003 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Snoeijer and B. Andreotti, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2013, 45, 269–292 CrossRef .
F. Schellenberger, N. Encinas, D. Vollmer and H.-J. Butt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 096101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ç. Cebeci, Z. Wu, L. Zhai, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2856–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tricoli, M. Righettoni and S. E. Pratsinis, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12578–12584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8230–8293 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ishino, M. Reyssat, E. Reyssat, K. Okumura and D. Quéré, EPL, 2007, 79, 56005 CrossRef .
E. Martines, K. Seunarine, H. Morgan, N. Gadegaard, C. D. W. Wilkinson and M. O. Riehle, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2097–2103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Vorobyev and C. Guo, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 6455–6460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bico, U. Thiele and D. Quéré, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 206, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
H. Teisala, M. Tuominen, M. Aromaa, M. Stepien, J. M. Makela, J. J. Saarinen, M. Toivakka and J. Kuusipalo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3138–3145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Lotus Versus Rose: Biomimetic Surface Effects, Springer, Berlin, Germany,  2012 Search PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Zhao and J. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4338–4341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cassie and S. Baxter, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .

          F. Schellenberger, N. Encinas, V. Doris and H.-J. Butt, How Water Advances on Superhydrophobic Surfaces,  2016 Search PubMed .
E. Brillas, A. Serrà and S. Garcia-Segura, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 26, 100660 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Edelmann, C. Neinhuis, M. Jarvis, B. Evans, E. Fischer and W. Barthlott, Planta, 1998, 206, 315–321 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koch and W. Barthlott, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1487–1509 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Wang and Z. D. Dai, Biosurf. Biotribol., 2016, 2, 70–74 CrossRef .
X. Yu, Z. Y. Yu, X. L. Zhang, Y. R. Zheng, Y. Duan, Q. Gao, R. Wu, B. Sun, M. R. Gao, G. Wang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7537–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, T. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Wu, P. Wan, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1737–1744 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shi, J. Guo, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z. Han, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, C. Zhou, L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Li, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7155–7161 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, W. Zhang, C. Dong, T. S. Sreeprasad and Z. Xia, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2016, 13, 20160300 CrossRef .
W. Barthlott, M. Mail, B. Bhushan and K. Koch, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 23 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
F. Geyer, M. D’Acunzi, A. Sharifi-Aghili, A. Saal, N. Gao, A. Kaltbeitzel, T.-F. Sloot, R. Berger, H.-J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaw9727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Le Grand, A. Daerr and L. Limat, J. Fluid Mech., 2005, 541, 293–315 CrossRef .

          P. G. de Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart and D. Quere, Capillarity and Wetting Phenomena: Drops, Bubbles, Pearls, Waves,  2003 Search PubMed .
H. Princen, Colloids Surf., 1969, 2, 1–84 CAS .
A. Angulo, P. van der Linde, H. Gardeniers, M. Modestino and D. Fernández Rivas, Joule, 2020, 4, 555–579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and L. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 231604 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, T. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Wu, P. Wan, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1737–1744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Burdyny, P. J. Graham, Y. Pang, C.-T. Dinh, M. Liu, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4031–4040 CrossRef CAS .
N. Le Grand, A. Daerr and L. Limat, J. Fluid Mech., 2005, 541, 293–315 CrossRef .
G. Duhar and C. Colin, Phys. Fluids, 2006, 18, 077101 CrossRef .

          R. Kumar and N. K. Kuloor, in Advances in Chemical Engineering, ed. T. B. Drew, G. R. Cokelet, J. W. Hoopes and T. Vermeulen, Academic Press,  1970, vol. 8, pp. 255–368 Search PubMed .

          A. D. Polyanin and A. V. Manzhirov, Handbook of Mathematics for Engineers and Scientists, CRC Press,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. B. G. M. O'Brien and B. H. A. A. van den Brule, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 1579–1583 RSC .
H.-J. Butt, I. V. Roisman, M. Brinkmann, P. Papadopoulos, D. Vollmer and C. Semprebon, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 343–354 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Butt, N. Gao, P. Papadopoulos, W. Steffen, M. Kappl and R. Berger, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 107–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Papra, N. Gadegaard and N. B. Larsen, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1457–1460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Q. Pham, K. P. Johnston and P. F. Green, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9785–9793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Extrand and Y. Kumagai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1995, 170, 515–521 CrossRef CAS .
C. Antonini, F. J. Carmona, E. Pierce, M. Marengo and A. Amirfazli, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6143–6154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. ElSherbini and A. M. Jacobi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 299, 841–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gao, F. Geyer, D. W. Pilat, S. Wooh, D. Vollmer, H.-J. Butt and R. Berger, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 191–196 Search PubMed .
W. S. Y. Wong, T. P. Corrales, A. Naga, P. Baumli, A. Kaltbeitzel, M. Kappl, P. Papadopoulos, D. Vollmer and H.-J. Butt, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3836–3846 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, B. Zhang, X. Gao, Z. Liu and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 2472–2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, X. Cui, X. Zhang, P. Tchoukov, Q. Liu, N. Encinas, M. Paven, F. Geyer, D. Vollmer, Z. Xu, H.-J. Butt and H. Zeng, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7317–7327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, R. Manica, Q. Liu, E. Klaseboer, Z. Xu and G. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 122, 194501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. C. Chan, E. Klaseboer and R. Manica, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 2235–2264 RSC .
J. Lv, Z. Gong, Z. He, J. Yang, Y. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Liu, M. Fan and W.-M. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12435–12444 RSC .
Z. Lu, L. Zhang, R. Iwata, E. N. Wang and J. C. Grossman, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 15112–15118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Jin, Y. Liu, K. H. Ruiz, H. Ren, Y. Fan, H. S. White and Q. Chen, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 355–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, K. Cui, J. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, G. Ma, Z. Yang, Z. Lei and S. Ren, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16208–16214 RSC .
B. Liu, C. Wu, G. Chen, W. Chen, L. Peng, Y. Yao, Z. Wei, H. Zhu, T. Han, D. Tang and M. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2019, 429, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Zhu, X. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Sun, X. Wang, H. Wang, J. Wang, J. Luo, X. Lei and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2683–2687 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shang, Y. Zhao, X.-Y. Kong, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Wen and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105375 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akbar, S. Hussain, L. Truong, S. B. Roy, J. H. Jeon, S.-K. Jerng, M. Kim, Y. Yi, J. Jung and S.-H. Chun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43674–43680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Z. Feng, L. Wang, D. Li and P. Xing, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 365701 CrossRef CAS .
M. Das, N. Jena, T. Purkait, N. Kamboj, A. De Sarkar and R. S. Dey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23989–23999 RSC .
H. Sun, X. Xu, Z. Yan, X. Chen, L. Jiao, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22062–22069 RSC .
W.-B. Jung, G.-T. Yun, Y. Kim, M. Kim and H.-T. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7546–7552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yu, M. Cao, Z. Dong, K. Li, C. Yu, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6830–6835 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Guttinger, R. More, F. Song, W. Wan and G. R. Patzke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6124–6147 RSC .
A. Nayak, S. Roy, B. D. Sherman, L. Alibabaei, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, K.-R. Wee and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3853–3860 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S. Inagaki and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14924–14950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Brennaman, R. J. Dillon, L. Alibabaei, M. K. Gish, C. J. Dares, D. L. Ashford, R. L. House, G. J. Meyer, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13085–13102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. deKrafft, C. Wang, Z. Xie, X. Su, B. J. Hinds and W. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 608–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, M. Göthelid and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10025–10027 RSC .
J. D. Blakemore, A. Gupta, J. J. Warren, B. S. Brunschwig and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18288–18291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Morlanés, K. Takanabe and V. Rodionov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3092–3095 CrossRef .
E. L. Demeter, S. L. Hilburg, N. R. Washburn, T. J. Collins and J. R. Kitchin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5603–5606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masud, P.-C. Ioannou, N. Levesanos, P. Kyritsis and M. Nath, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3128–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-T. Chen, N. Morlanés, E. Adogla, K. Takanabe and V. O. Rodionov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4647–4652 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhan, B. Zhang, L. Sun and M. S. G. Ahlquist, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13364–13370 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dastafkan, Y. Li, Y. Zeng, L. Han and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15252–15261 RSC .
Y. Li and C. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2535–2541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Li, L. Ding, X. Xu, Z. Chen, C. Li and J. Ding, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4503–4506 RSC .
J. He, B. Hu and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5998–6004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Yuan, Z. Wang, J. Li, M. Yang, L. Cao, G. Liu, D. Qian and Z. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10860–10863 RSC .
K. Dastafkan, Q. Meyer, X. Chen and C. Zhao, Small, 2020, 16, 2002412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, A. Lim, J. M. Kim, D. Lim, K. H. Chae, E. N. Cho, H. J. Han, K. U. Jeon, M. Kim, G. H. Lee, G. R. Lee, H. S. Ahn, H. S. Park, H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and Y. S. Jung, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Chen, Z. Lu, J. Xu, A. Pei, Y. Peng, X. Zheng, Z. Zhang, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Joule, 2019, 3, 557–569 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, P. Wan, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 2492–2498 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shan, J. Liu, H. Mu, Y. Xiao, B. Mei, W. Liu, G. Lin, Z. Jiang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1659–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Sun, L. Song and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2452 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600236 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, Z. Lin, J. Yu, S. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Liu, R. Chen, Y. Qi, H. Zhang, R. Li, J. Li and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14639–14646 CrossRef CAS .
X.-W. Lv, Y. Liu, W. Tian, L. Gao and Z.-Y. Yuan, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 324–331 CrossRef .
R. Xu, R. Wu, Y. Shi, J. Zhang and B. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Huang, S. Jiang, M. Li, K. Zhang, Y. Yan, H. Zhang and J. M. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40281–40289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
W. Tian, H. Li, B. Qin, Y. Xu, Y. Hao, Y. Li, G. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Sun and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7103–7110 RSC .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Y. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 358–365 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, N. Han, Y. Kuang, J. Liu, W. Liu, H. Duan and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, J. Liang, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, T. Li, L. Li, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, Q. Li, D. Ma and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, G. Chen, Y. Zhu, Z. Liang, A. Pei, C.-L. Wu, H. Wang, H. R. Lee, K. Liu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 592–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wakerley, S. Lamaison, F. Ozanam, N. Menguy, D. Mercier, P. Marcus, M. Fontecave and V. Mougel, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1222–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, W. Xu, X. Wen, Y. Zhong, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, Y. Zhao, X. Wen, W. Xu, Y. Zhong, L. Bai, W. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 490–494 RSC .
M. Wang, L. Wan and J. Luo, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 3588–3593 RSC .
R. Chen, H.-Y. Su, D. Liu, R. Huang, X. Meng, X. Cui, Z.-Q. Tian, D. H. Zhang and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Chang, H. Zhang, M. He, W. A. Goddard, J. G. Chen, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4709–4718 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Z. Niu, F.-Y. Gao, X.-L. Zhang, P.-P. Yang, R. Liu, L.-P. Chi, Z.-Z. Wu, S. Qin, X. Yu and M.-R. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8011–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khan, J. Hwang, Y.-S. Horn and K. K. Varanasi, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100318 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, L. Hu, D. S. Ripatti, X. Hu and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Lin, Q. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao, P. Yang, J. Greeley, R. Mu, G. Zhang, Z. Gong, Z. Luo, J. Chen, Y. Cui, G. A. Ozin and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15415–15419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, D. Rebollar, H. He, L. Chong, Y. Liu, C. Liu, C.-J. Sun, T. Li, J. V. Muntean, R. E. Winans, D.-J. Liu and T. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 623–632 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, F. P. García de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. C. Li, D.-H. Nam, J. Li, Y.-S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. Chen, M. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorović, F. Li, T.-T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S.-F. Hung, Y. Lum, M. Luo, Y. Min, A. Xu, C. P. O’Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Zhuang, Y. Pang, Z.-Q. Liang, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C.-S. Tan, J. Li, C. T. Dinh, P. De Luna, P.-L. Hsieh, T. Burdyny, H.-H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Li, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, D.-H. Nam, Z.-Y. Wu, Y.-R. Zheng, A. H. Ip, H. Tan, L.-J. Chen, S.-H. Yu, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 946–951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, T. T. Zhuang, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, D. H. Nam, F. Li, C. W. Huang, C. S. Tan, Z. Chen, M. Chi, C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, P. Todorovic, A. Proppe, Y. Pang, A. R. Kirmani, Y. Wang, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, B. Scheffel, A. Xu, S. C. Lo, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5186 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, R. B. Sandberg, A. J. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vazquez, E. Alvarez and J. M. Navaza, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1995, 40, 611–614 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Gao, Z. Li, J.-H. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Yin, Y. Wang, X.-B. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808079 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, P. Lin, N. Wei and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20110–20118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and L. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 231604 CrossRef .
G. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, H. Chen, L. Spiccia, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, D. Wang, A. N. Simonov and A. Tricoli, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, M. Qiao, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Li, C. Chen, Y. Li, H. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Chem, 2019, 5, 617–633 CAS .
D. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2006, 273, 661–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kang, S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, J. Yoon, D.-E. Yoo, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Small, 2016, 12, 2443–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Serrà, Y. Zhang, B. Sepúlveda, E. Gómez, J. Nogués, J. Michler and L. Philippe, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 129–146 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, T. Fan, X. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2695–2703 RSC .
X. Qian, Y. Zhao, Y. Alsaid, X. Wang, M. Hua, T. Galy, H. Gopalakrishna, Y. Yang, J. Cui, N. Liu, M. Marszewski, L. Pilon, H. Jiang and X. He, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, K.-B. Chu, Y. Huang, X. Zhu, J. Hofkens, G. He, I. P. Parkin, F. Lai and T. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3931–3937 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. Li, J. Gao, J. Wang, G. Ma, X. Wen, Y. Yang, Y. Li and M. Ding, Science, 2021, 371, 610–613 CrossRef CAS .
B. Feng, R. P. Sosa, A. K. F. Mårtensson, K. Jiang, A. Tong, K. D. Dorfman, M. Takahashi, P. Lincoln, C. J. Bustamante, F. Westerlund and B. Nordén, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 17169–17174 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Song and X. Deng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4031–4061 RSC .
F. Geyer, C. Schönecker, H.-J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603524 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, R. Vaillant and D. Attinger, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 765–772 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dias, A. Vilanova, T. Lopes, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. R. Samsudin, S. Sufian, N. M. Mohamed, R. Bashiri, F. Wolfe and R. M. Ramli, Mater. Lett., 2018, 211, 13–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fekete, R. K. Hocking, S. L. Y. Chang, C. Italiano, A. F. Patti, F. Arena and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2222–2232 RSC .
Y. Guo, N. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Qian, S. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7571–7577 RSC .
M. Fekete, W. Riedel, A. F. Patti and L. Spiccia, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7585–7593 RSC .
W. J. Lee, P. S. Shinde, G. H. Go and E. Ramasamy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5262–5270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, W. S. Y. Wong, N. Nasiri and A. Tricoli, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6085–6093 RSC .
H. J. Chen, R. H. Bo, T. P. Thanh, G. Y. Liu and A. Tricoli, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 569–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Kho, W. Y. Teoh, A. Iwase, L. Madler, A. Kudo and R. Amarl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, A. N. Simonov, M. Fekete, H. Chen, N. Nasiri, N. H. Le, P. Reddy Narangari, M. Lysevych, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Lowe, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, L. Spiccia and A. Tricoli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600697 CrossRef .
R. Mueller, L. Madler and S. E. Pratsinis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2003, 58, 1969–1976 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Liu, J. Hall, N. Nasiri, T. Gengenbach, L. Spiccia, M. H. Cheah and A. Tricoli, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 4162–4171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Y. Wong, G. Liu, N. Nasiri, C. Hao, Z. Wang and A. Tricoli, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 587–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Tran, A. Chinnappan, J. K. Y. Lee, N. H. Loc, L. T. Tran, G. Wang, V. V. Kumar, W. A. D. M. Jayathilaka, D. Ji, M. Doddamani and S. Ramakrishna, Metals, 2019, 9, 756 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lasemi, D. Xue and P. Gu, Comput. Aided Des., 2010, 42, 641–654 CrossRef .
L. Jonušauskas, S. Juodkazis and M. Malinauskas, J. Opt., 2018, 20, 053001 CrossRef .
J. Wicks, M. L. Jue, V. A. Beck, J. S. Oakdale, N. A. Dudukovic, A. L. Clemens, S. Liang, M. E. Ellis, G. Lee, S. E. Baker, E. B. Duoss and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003855 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Guanyu Liu
	Guanyu Liu is a research fellow at the School of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University and Cambridge Center for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore (CARES). He received his PhD degree from the Australian National University in 2017. His research is focused on the nanostructured catalysts for (photo)electrochemical water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction.

William S. Y. Wong
	William S. Y. Wong is an MSCA-funded research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (since 2018). He received his PhD degree in Materials Engineering from the Australian National University in 2018. His current research interests are in surface chemistry, dynamic wetting, nano-enhanced interfacial phenomena, and the application of (super)wettability for liquid manipulation and smart coatings (self-cleaning, wetting-responsive, adaptive, and anti-frosting).

Joel W. Ager
	Joel W. Ager III is a staff scientist in the Materials Sciences Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and an adjunct full professor in the Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Berkeley. His research interests include the fundamental electronic and transport properties of semiconducting materials, discovery of new photoelectrochemical and electrochemical catalysts for solar to chemical energy conversion, and the development of new types of transparent conductors.

Doris Vollmer
	Doris Vollmer is currently a group leader at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research and a professor at the Johannes Gutenberg University. She studied physics at the University of Bielefeld, the ETH Zurich (Switzerland) and the University of Utrecht (The Netherlands). She completed her PhD in physical chemistry at the University of Basel. Her research group is actively involved in wetting, capillary flow, lubrication, imbibition, superhydrophobicity, anti-icing, anti-(bio)fouling and flow through granular media.

Rong Xu
	Rong Xu is a professor at the School of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. She received her PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2004. Her research group has been actively involved in areas related to energy and environmental applications including solar fuel generation and water treatment, using nanoengineered particulate semiconductor photocatalysts, molecular complexes, and hybrid systems.

 	Fig. 1  Categories for (photo)electrocatalytic gas-involving reactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Wettability and contact angles (apparent and dynamic). (a and b) In-air hydrophilicity and underwater aerophobicity. (c and d) In-air hydrophobicity and underwater aerophilicity. (e) Drop motion, contact line depinning and advancing/receding contact angles. (f and g) In-air superhydrophilicity and underwater superaerophobicity. (h and i) In-air superhydrophobicity and underwater superaerophilicity.	 

 	Fig. 3  Superwettability in plants adapted to in-air, near-water and underwater environments and how they may inspire future electrode designs. These include the (a and e) superhydrophilic water-adsorbing moss (Sphagnum squarrosum),64 (b and f) hydrophilic underwater plant (Anubias barteri),64 (c and g) hydrophobic succulents (Aloe barbadensis miller),65 and (d and h) superhydrophobic lotus plant (Nelumbo nucifera),64 (g: scale-bar 5 μm, e, f and h: scale-bars 20 μm, inset 2 μm). Their unstructured or structurally enhanced wettability inspires the development of immersion applications in electrode designs for (photo)electrocatalytic gas-involving systems. (i) Superaerophobic Ni2P nanoarrays for the HER (scale-bar 50 μm),66 (j) Pt nanosphere films for the HER (scale-bar 1 μm),67 (k) hydrophobic Au/C gas diffusion electrodes for CO2RR (scale-bar 1 μm),68 and (l) superaerophilic carbon-nanotube-array electrodes for the ORR (scale-bar 20 μm).69 (m) Superhydrophilic/superaerophobic electrodes result in the formation of tiny bubbles. (n) Hydrophilic/aerophobic electrodes result in the formation of small bubbles having higher bubble contact angles. (o) Hydrophobic/aerophilic electrodes result in the formation of large bubbles having lower bubble contact angles. (p) Superhydro(oleo)phobic/superaerophilic electrodes result in the formation of a continuous plastron until very large bubbles detach by tearing away from the bulk plastron layer. Top vs. bottom panels: bubble detachment depends on the orientation gravity and the central axis of the bubble; top (orthogonal), bottom (parallel).	 

 	Fig. 4  Mechanism of bubble transport on flat and structured surfaces. (a and b) Influence of bubble size on the Bond number and the gravitational influence on the bubble shape. (c and d) Force balance represented on a bubble (buoyancy) adhered to a (c) vertical plate (lateral adhesion, Fl,adh) and (d) horizontal plate (lateral adhesion, Fv,adh). Computation of effective buoyancy and adhesion (contact line) corrected by (e) the spherical cap approximation (vs. sphere approximation). (f) The case for symmetric bubble detachment (vertical adhesion, bubble-on-plate) is computed based on bubble radii/Bond number (x-axis) and θbubblerec (lines) vs. net force (y-axis), Fnet = Fb,SC − Fv,adh. The spherical cap approximation was applied.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Fv,adh = πDγsin(θbubblerec).	(4)
Fl,adh = kwγ[cos(θbubblerec) − cos(θbubbleadv)]	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Hydrophilic/aerophobic surfaces exhibit lower adhesion compared to (b) hydrophobic/aerophilic surfaces, thus requiring smaller bubble sizes for detachment. Structured surfaces exist as (c) superhydrophilic/superaerophobic and (d) superhydro(oleo)phobic/superaerophilic variants. In the latter, a (d) thick plastron forms, and any bubble detachment relies on tearing from the primary plastron, which is often unfavorable for GERs. However, they are particularly proficient (albeit durability considerations) for GCRs. Alternatively, (c) superhydrophilic/superaerophobic surfaces may (e) release or (f) entrap bubbles depending on surface structuring (tortuosity, τ). 2D models are depicted for simplicity: low surface tortuosity would allow for smoother bubble escape compared to higher surface tortuosity.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic depictions of CoS2 MWs and NWs bursting the larger H2 bubbles that commonly pin on the surface of CoS2 films. (b) Polarization curves for CoS2 film, NW, and MW electrodes. (c) Long-term stability tests for CoS2 film, NW, and MW electrodes. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for Ni2P nanoarrays and digital images of H2 bubbles on the nanoarray electrode. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for N-doped WC nanoarrays on carbon fiber papers. (f) Snapshots of bubbles detaching from different electrodes at −0.2 V vs. RHE. Scale bar is 100 μm. (g) Bubble contact angles on various electrodes of WC, WC nanoarrays, N-WC, and N-WC nanoarrays. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Wetting state/contact model of aerophilic copper surface to gas bubbles. (b) In situ observation of the HER on an aerophilic cone electrode. Scale bar is 2 mm. (c) Schematic demonstration of H2 bubbles’ behavior on the aerophilic copper surface. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM images showing the morphologies of cross-linked viral hydrogels. (e) Comparison of aerophobicity for various hydrogels. (f) Schematic illustrations for the electrochemical HER performance of Pt electrodes with and without the superaerophobic hydrogel. (g) Chronoamperograms Pt electrodes with and without the modification with the superaerophobic hydrogels. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Various tris-benzimidazole Co complexes as OER electrocatalysts. (b) Water contact angles for Co-(BimH)3, Co-(BimC10H)3 and Co-(BimC3F8)3 films deposited on a Si wafer. (c) OER overpotentials for various Co complex electrocatalysts. (d) Controlled potential electrolysis traces at 1.91 V vs. RHE for selected cobalt complexes. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a woodpile-structured Ir as the OER catalyst containing mesopores and macropores. (b) Ir catalyst with 10-layer perpendicular stacking of building blocks. (c) Schematic illustration of bubble formation and removal mechanism within the 3D-nanostructured electrocatalyst. (d) Fast Fourier transformation amplitude spectra of currents recorded at the tip during scanning electrochemical microscopy analysis. The higher frequency of the peak indicates the faster cycling of formation and detachment of O2 bubbles. (e) Dynamic light scattering analysis spectra, showing the size distribution of the generated O2 bubbles. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of an alv-PE structure for the OER. (g) Linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) curves of Au/NiFeOx-coated membranes with different structures: alv-PE, alv-carbon GDL, and flat-PE. Arrows indicate the photographs of their corresponding surfaces with the onset potential of O2 bubbles. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of CoMoSx/NF. (b) Air-bubble contact angle under water (top) and water-droplet contact angle (bottom) for CoMoSx/NF. (c) Gas-bubble adhesive force measurement of CoMoSx/NF. (d) Digital photograph of bubbles released at the surface of CoMoSx/NF. Scale bar is 0.5 mm. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic diagram of 3DPNi functionalized with C–Ni1−xO catalyst and its SEM images. Scale bars are 500 and 4 μm, respectively. Simulation frames showing bubble shape during transport in (f) 3DPNi and (g) NF. (h) Relative bubble migration time through 3DPNi and NF as a function of bubble diameter. High-speed camera images collected from the (i) C–Ni1−xO/NF and (j) C–Ni1−xO/3DPNi electrodes during water electrolysis. Scale bars are 2 mm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the superaerophilic electrode by directly growing CoNCNT arrays on CFP associated with subsequent modification with PTFE. (b) Oxygen-bubble adhesion behavior and optical picture of T-CoNCNT-CFP electrodes in a basic electrolyte. (c) Schematic illustration for comparison of the oxygen-bubble adhesion behaviors on aerophilic Pt/C-TCFP and superaerophilic T-CoNCNT-CFP. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) The typical three types of wetting state for a hydrophobic surface in the underwater system, as schematically shown in the underwater Wenzel state, Wenzel–Cassie coexistent state, and Cassie state. (e) LSV curves for the ORR reaction on three platinum-coated samples. The inset includes SEM images of the morphologies of three kinds of conductive pillar-structured silicon substrates and the corresponding water contact angles. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of a Janus electrode under ORR conditions. Schematic illustration of the gas bubble behaviour on the (g) aerophilic and (h) aerophobic sides of the Janus electrode. Gas bubble behaviour on the (i) aerophilic and (j) aerophobic sides of the Janus electrode. (k) ORR polarization curves of the superaerophobic, Janus, superaerophilic, and commercial Pt/C electrodes in the oxygen-bubbled 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of nanoneedles, nanorods, and nanoparticles. Scale bars are 5 μm. (b) Cumulative distribution curve of bubble release diameters for Au electrodes with various morphologies. (c) Schematic depicting the influence of electrode morphology on bubble release diameter and the resulting thickness of the diffusion boundary layer. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the Au/C electrode and its gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces for CO2RR. (e) Geometric jCO, CO faradaic efficiency of various Au/C electrodes and photographs of water droplets on each Au/C electrode with different water contact angles. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the fabrication process of Au/PE catalyst for CO2RR and its detailed structure with three-phase interface between the Au/H2O/CO2. (g) Normalized current densities of CO production for a bilayer pouch-type Au/PE, flat Au/C and flat Au/Si. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A hydrophobic dendritic Cu electrode for CO2RR and its water contact angle measurement. (b) Product formation faradaic efficiencies for the hydrophobic versus wettable electrode. (c) Polarization curves for the wettable and hydrophobic electrodes. (d) The proposed role of hydrophobicity in promoting CO2RR over proton reduction. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Faradaic efficiency and geometric current density for CORR over Cu particles loaded on four types of carbon papers. The bottom pictures show water contact angles on the corresponding carbon papers. (f) SEM images of Cu particles/carbon paper-microporous layer electrodes. (g) Schematic illustration for CORR on Cu catalysts assisted by the hydrophobic microporous layer to improve the CO diffusion. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (h) Hydrophobic microenvironment with solid–liquid–gas interfaces constructed in a gas-diffusion electrode cell by dispersing PTFE nanoparticles inside the catalyst layer. (i) Partial current densities for CO2RR on the Cu/C and Cu/C/PTFE electrodes. (j) Photographs of contact angle measurements on the Cu/C/PTFE electrode before and after CO2 electrolysis. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of molecular monolayer modification of TiO2 with different chemicals and corresponding contact angle measurements. (b) Photocurrent densities of TiO2 photoelectrodes before and after chemical modification with different modifiers under illumination. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the capillary force-induced restructuring of Fe2O3 photoanodes. (d) SEM images showing corresponding changes in the Fe2O3 photoanodes. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (e) The droplet shape of the electrolyte and the shape of the underwater N2 bubble on the surface of the Au-PTFE/TS photocathode. (f) Scheme of NRR enhancement by introducing the aerophilic hierarchical structure on the Au-PTFE/TS photocathode. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM images of corneal nipple arrays in the peacock (Inachis io), a nymphalid butterfly. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2005, The Royal Society. (b) SEM image of a moth-eye patterned TiO2 layer. (c) Optical images of glass substrates with flat TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic representation of a microfern leaf and SEM image of ZnO-based fern-like microleaves. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (e) Optical and TEM images of the original Cinnamomum camphora leaf. (f) SEM and TEM images of the artificial N-doped ZnO leaf. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Phototropism of sunflowers. (h) Side-view photographs of a biomimetic omnidirectional tracker tracking various angles of incidence light (0–90°). Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustrations of (a) spray roll-to-roll coating technique and (b) rotary screen-printing technique. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic diagram of the one-step synthesis of superhydrophobic nano-layers via flame spray pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic description of fluorosilanization process by an atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) method to achieve superoleophobicity. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
