Hybrid thin films of graphene nanowhiskers and amorphous carbon as transparent conductors   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C002092C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C002092C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3502-3504Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsHybrid thin films of graphene nanowhiskers and amorphous carbon as transparent conductors†

        
          
            Xiao 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xinming 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eryang 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shu 
            Luo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Lei
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Advanced Manufacturing by Material Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: hongweizhu@tsinghua.edu.cn; wdh-dme@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 6277 0190;   Tel: +86 10 62781065
Received 
      1st February 2010
    , Accepted 12th March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      7th April 2010
    AbstractA new form of hybrid carbon-based thin film was prepared via a pyridine chemical vapour deposition method. The as-obtained films consist of agglomerated flowerlike graphene nanowhiskers embedded in a uniform matrix of amorphous carbon. Schottky solar cells made from the hybrid films and n-type silicon show conversion efficiencies of ∼1% under AM 1.5 illumination.
Carbon is fascinating as it can be found in various forms including fullerenes, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphite (graphene), diamond and amorphous phase. They essentially correspond to two different ways of forming a bond between carbon atoms, namely the sp2 and sp3 bond. Carbon materials can also form fibers (1D), films (2D), arrays/bulk porous materials (3D), showing the diversity of carbon macrostructures. Graphene, the basis of most graphitic materials, is a two-dimensional (2D) form of carbon with atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice, which can be stacked into graphite or rolled up into a cylindrical nanotube. Graphene has received great interest since its discovery in 2004.1 Recently, large-area uniform graphene films have been produced consisting of one or a few atomic layers by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) using nickel or copper as substrates.2 Besides, several synthesis techniques have been developed to directly grow various graphene-based bulk forms from a carbon source (typically a liquid or gas, like ethanol, methane or ethylene).3
Hybrid structures of graphene with other carbon materials such as CNTs,4 diamond5 further extended the diversity of carbon-based macrostructures with combined properties inherited from the constituent structures. For example, the composite films made from graphene and CNTs possessed high transparencies and electrical conductivities,4 showing excellent potential as a conducting and transparent material. Using graphene sheets as fillers, conductive composite silica thin films were made via a simple sol–gel route.6 Here, we report the first example of a new form of carbon-based hybrid thin films which consist of flowerlike graphene nanowhiskers (FGW) embedded in a matrix of amorphous carbon. Our hybrid FGW films are uniform, continuous, and transparent, with a macrosize of centimetres which is only limited by the furnace size. The two-dimensionality, inherent transparency and excellent conductivity make the hybrid films ideal candidates for thin film electrodes.
The hybrid FGW films were synthesized by a conventional floating CVD approach in which pyridine was served as the sole carbon source and copper as the substrate. A schematic representation of the formation of the graphene flowers is shown in Fig. 1a. Cu foil was first annealed in Ar to form dense micro-bumps on the surface. After pyridine CVD growth, there are essentially two layers formed on the Cu foil during the CVD and quenching process. The top layer is thick and opaque, composed of crisp amorphous carbon (AC) flakes with a shining surface, named “AC layer”, which can be peeled off easily. The bottom layer shows the distinct features compared to the AC layer. It is highly transparent, continuous and tightly and conformally coated on the Cu foil, having a strong bonding with Cu.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for FGW film preparation. (b) 3D surface profile of the FWG film. (c) Etching the Cu foil away yields a transparent thin film. (d) Transmission spectrum of the FGW film. 
3D surface profile of the bottom film was obtained based on a white-light interference technology. Fig. 1b shows the 3D projection of the surface morphology of a 170 μm × 170 μm area. Except the traces of grain boundaries of the polycrystalline Cu, identified as the big cracks in the profile, the film possesses a rather smooth surface with dense packed particles embedded in a continuous matrix. The associated profile extraction from the marked single-pixel line gives an average surface roughness of ∼70 nm. Later measurements confirmed that the film consists of largely agglomerated flowerlike graphene nanowhiskers embedded in a uniform AC thin film matrix (see Fig. 1 and Fig. S1†).
To separate and transfer the bottom film to other substrates, Fe(NO3)3 was used as an oxidizing etchant to etch the Cu foil away. After 1–2 h etching, the bottom film was left floating on the surface of the solution (Fig. 1c). The film was collected with a stainless steel screen mesh (with pore size of about 100 μm). The mesh was then covered onto the receiving substrate with the film fully contacted to the target substrate. Several drops of ethanol were applied to the mesh from the back side. Ethanol infiltrated through the mesh and the densified film tightly adhered to the target substrate. The mesh was then lifted off, leaving the films fully transferred to the substrate. Interestingly, the hybrid films obtained under different growth conditions show nearly identical transmittances. A typical optical transmission spectrum is shown in Fig. 1d. The sheet resistance (Rs) was measured from 70–120 Ω/sq which shows no obvious correlation with the transmittance of the films.
Optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterizations further revealed that the hybrid film has good uniformity and continuity over a large area (Fig. 2a,b). High resolution SEM image (Fig. 2c) shows a flower (or petal)-like morphology in which graphene nanowhiskers are agglomerated into urchin structures. A typical corresponding transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image is shown in Fig. 2d, demonstrating a well organized homogeneous pattern of embedded graphene flowers in a continuous matrix phase. Electron diffraction (inset of Fig. 2d) taken from the FGW pattern clearly shows a typical polycrystalline or amorphous nature of carbon, which arises from the randomly oriented graphene nanowhiskers and the AC matrix. An enlarged view of the pattern area (Fig. 2e) highlights the microstructure of the FGWs. FGWs are joined together by the AC matrix, further confirming a mixed amorphous and nanocrystalline feature of the hybrid film. Each FGW agglomeration separates from each other and the boundaries between them are clearly observed. Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) measurement confirms the absence of other elements except carbon, silicon (from the underlying silicon wafer) and a small amount of nitrogen, copper, iron and oxygen (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the FGW films. (a) Optical image. (b) Low and (c) high magnification SEM images. (d) Low and (e) high magnification TEM images. (f) AES depth scanning profiles. 
To find out the formation mechanism of the hybrid FGW films, a Cu substrate (as a control sample) was annealed following the same procedure for FGW growth but without the addition of pyridine. As shown in Fig. 3a, the annealing process produced dense packed micro-bumps which were generated on the Cu surface. The size distribution is strictly correlated to that for FGWs (Fig. 3b). This implies that these bumps have been served as the nucleation sites of FGWs. Our experiments indicated that growth of over 10 min yielded similar FGW structures without obvious thickness and transparency differences. For times much less than 10 min, the Cu surface is usually not fully covered with FGW film. Therefore, similar to the growth of graphene, the deposition of FGW films on Cu is also self-limited.2 FGWs grew directly on the Cu foil by the catalyzed process of the surface bumps.
 Fig. 3  (a) Bumps formed on Cu surface. (b) Size distributions of bumps and FGWs. 
It has found that nitrogen played an important role for the hybrid FGW film formation. Ethanol has been used as a carbon source instead of pyridine and no FGW structures were formed. To clarify the influence of nitrogen on the formation of the FGWs, an XPS measurement was carried out and the result confirms that a small amount of nitrogen (1.06%) is present in the as-prepared sample. As shown in the N1s core level spectrum (Fig. S2a†), the binding energy peaks around 399 eV and 400 eV correspond to pyridinic and pyrrolic type nitrogen doping, respectively,7 which are related to the existence of defective graphite sheets. The pyrrolic type is dominant based on the area ratio of these two nitrogen types. However, the graphitic type (∼401 eV) is not detected from the spectrum, suggesting the absence of the sp2-substitutional nitrogen. The Cu2p spectrum exhibit more resolved peak components (Fig. S2b†) besides 932.5 eV (the binding energy of metallic copper). This can be attributed to the presence of different Cu–N bonds and explains the strong bonding between the as-grown hybrid film and the Cu foil.
Raman spectrum (Fig. S3†) further reveals the presence of disorders/defects in FGWs. The spectrum exhibit two major peaks: the G-band at approximately 1585 cm−1 originates from the in-plane stretching vibration mode E2g of single crystalline graphite and the D-band at ∼1340 cm−1 corresponds to the disorder-induced feature due to the finite particle size effect or lattice distortion. The broad multi-band peaks around 2650 cm−1 (2D) are consistent with the presence of amorphous phase and multi-layer graphene sheets. The pyridinic and pyrrolic forms of nitrogen were suggested to be the main contributors in the disorder induced in as-grown materials,8 resulting in the formation of FGWs and amorphous phase. The process is similar to the formation of carbon nitride compounds during successive nitrogen implantations in copper,9 in which two different C–N regions exist and that they are embedded in a dominant AC matrix.
Considering its two-dimensionality, high transparency and conductivity, the hybrid FGW film can be used as a transparent and conductive electrode. To evaluate this, solar cells based on Schottky junctions formed with the FGW films and n-Si were designed. Fig. 4a shows the Schottky solar cell consisting of a hybrid FGW upper layer supported by an n-type (100) silicon wafer. Fig. 4b shows the representative equilibrium energy band diagram of the FGW/n-Si junction in the dark. The two-dimensional FGW film makes a conformal coating on Si to make carrier separation take place more easily. Hence, photogenerated carriers can reach the Schottky junction with high efficiency without substantial bulk recombination. The dark current density–voltage (J–V) curve obtained from the FGW/n-Si cell (Fig. 4c) exhibits a typical rectifying behavior, and demonstrates that the FGW/n-Si heterostructure behaves as a well-defined diode. The fit to the ln(I)–V curve recorded in forward bias from the FGW/n-Si junction (inset of Fig. 4c) is nearly linear, and yields a diode ideality factor n of 2.05. The photovoltaic properties of the FGW/n-Si solar cells were characterized under air mass 1.5 (AM 1.5) illumination. The photogenerated carriers are separated by the built-in field and holes are diffused to the junction where they are swept to the FGW side. The light I–V curve (Fig. 4c) recorded from a typical cell yields a down-shift curve with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.47 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 18%. The conversion efficiency (η) of the unoptimized cell is 1.0%. The fabrication of Schottky junctions has the merits of low cost and simplicity and provides a new trend to develop carbon-based solar cells.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for a FGW/n-Si Schottky solar cell. (b) Equilibrium energy band diagram of the FGW/n-Si junction. (c) J–V curves. The inset shows the ln(I)–V curve. 
Hybrid FGW thin films have been synthesized by the CVD with a nitrogen element added. Such two dimensional structures are of interest for the study of their optical and electrical properties. Our results show that graphene can form Schottky junction solar cells with n-Si with power conversion efficiencies up to 1.0% at AM 1.5. The transparent and conductive films make this material attractive for use in nanoelectronics.
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (#50972067), and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University of State Education Ministry of China (#NCET-08-0322).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS ; A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS ; K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ando, X. Zhao and M. Ohkohchi, Carbon, 1997, 35, 153 CrossRef CAS ; C. H. Lin, H. L. Chang and M. H. Tsai, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2002, 11, 922 CrossRef CAS ; J. Robertson, A. T. H. Chuang and B. O. Boskovic, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 1103 CrossRef ; J. Y. Wang and T. Ito, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 364 CrossRef CAS ; A. N. Obraztsov, A. V. Tyurnina, E. A. Obraztsova, A. A. Zolotukhin, B. Liuc, K. Chinc and A. T. S. Wee, Carbon, 2008, 46, 963 CrossRef CAS ; A. Malesevic, R. Vitchev, K. Schouteden, A. Volodin, L. Zhang, G. V. Tendeloo, A. Vanhulsel and C. V. Haesendonck, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 305604 CrossRef ; X. B. Wang, H. J. You, F. M. Liu, M. J. Li, L. Wan, S. Q. Li, Q. Li, Y. Xu, R. Tian, Z. Y. Yu, D. Xiang and J. Cheng, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2009, 15, 53 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, L. M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949 CrossRef CAS ; Y. K. Kim and D. H. Min, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11302 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Vlasov, O. I. Lebedev, V. G. Ralchenko, E. Goovaerts, G. Bertoni, G. Van Tendeloo and V. I. Konov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4058 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. L. Zhang, L. P. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Gammon, O. Kraft, A. C. Reilly and B. C. Holloway, Carbon, 2003, 41, 1917 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thome, J. L. Colaux, P. Louette and G. Terwagne, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2006, 151, 19 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods, TEM, XPS and Raman spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c002092cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for FGW film preparation. (b) 3D surface profile of the FWG film. (c) Etching the Cu foil away yields a transparent thin film. (d) Transmission spectrum of the FGW film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the FGW films. (a) Optical image. (b) Low and (c) high magnification SEM images. (d) Low and (e) high magnification TEM images. (f) AES depth scanning profiles.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Bumps formed on Cu surface. (b) Size distributions of bumps and FGWs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for a FGW/n-Si Schottky solar cell. (b) Equilibrium energy band diagram of the FGW/n-Si junction. (c) J–V curves. The inset shows the ln(I)–V curve.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods, TEM, XPS and Raman spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c002092c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
