Gateway towards recent developments in quantum dot-based light-emitting diodes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR05288H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR05288H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 4042-4064Gateway towards recent developments in quantum dot-based light-emitting diodes

        
          
            Yu-Ming 
            Huang
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Konthoujam 
            James Singh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tsou-Hwa 
            Hsieh
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Catherine 
            Langpoklakpam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tzu-Yi 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chien-Chung 
            Lin
          
        
      *bf, 
      
        
          
            Yiming 
            Li
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Fang-Chung 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shih-Chen 
            Chen
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Hao-Chung 
            Kuo
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Jr-Hau 
            He
          
        
      g
aDepartment of Photonics, Institute of Electro-Optical Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan. E-mail: hckuo@faculty.nctu.edu.tw
bInstitute of Photonic System, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Tainan 71150, Taiwan
cSemiconductor Research Center, Hon Hai Research Institute, Taipei 11492, Taiwan. E-mail: gary.sc.chen@foxconn.com
dTechnology Development Center, InnoLux Corporation, Hsinchu 35053, Taiwan
eInstitute of Communications Engineering, College of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan
fGraduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: chienchunglin@ntu.edu.tw
gDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Received 
      12th August 2021
    , Accepted 5th December 2021First published on 15th December 2021AbstractQuantum dots (QDs), with their excellent photoluminescence, narrow emission linewidth, and wide color coverage, provide unrivaled advantages for advanced display technologies, enabling full-color micro-LED displays. It is indeed critical to have a fundamental understanding of how QD properties affect micro-LED display performance in order to develop the most energy-efficient display device in the near future. However, to take a more detailed look at the stability issues and passivation ways of QDs is essential for accelerating the commercialization of QD-based LED technologies. Knowing about the most recent breakthroughs in QD-based LEDs can give a good indication of how they might be used in shaping the future of displays. In this review, we discuss the characteristics of QD-based LEDs for the applications of display and lighting technologies. Various approaches for synthesis and the stability improvement of QDs are addressed in detail, along with recent advancements towards QD-based LED breakthroughs. Moreover, we summarize our latest research findings in QD-based LEDs, providing valuable information about the potential of QD-based LEDs for future display technologies.
Introduction
Quantum dots (QDs) are artificial nanoscale semiconducting crystals that can transport electrons with sizes ranging from 2 to 10 nanometers whose electrical and optical properties can be tuned by changing their sizes.1–3 As the size of the QDs shrinks, the energy difference between the highest valence band and the lowest valence band increases, thereby enlarging the band gap. As a result, adjusting the dot size of QDs allows them to emit various colors of light. Smaller QDs typically emit shorter wavelengths, resulting in colors like violet, blue, or green, whereas larger QDs emit longer wavelengths, resulting in colors like yellow, orange, or red. QDs are referred to as artificial atoms as their discrete electronic states and electronic wave function relate them more closely to atoms than bulk materials.4,5 The electrons in these nanoparticles are confined in a quantum well because of their small size, and when the nanocrystal radius is lower than the exciton Bohr radius, the energy levels are quantized according to Pauli's exclusion principle.6,7 Controllable PL intensity, stable and narrow emission linewidths, and emission of pure and saturated colors are just a few of the fascinating properties of QDs, which make them promising candidates for applications in LEDs,8–10 solar cells,11–13 photodetectors,14,15 field-effect transistors,16 and biological systems.17–19 Because of their excellent efficiency and color purity, QD-based LEDs are ideal for applications like large-panel displays and solar cells. Colloidal QDs are typically made up of semiconductors of groups II–VI, III–V, or IV, and their incredibly small size enables them to have distinct optical and electrical properties that differ from their bulk counterparts. They have been applied to optoelectronic devices20,21 due to their solution processability and easy fabrication process. Colloidal QDs can be classified as core-type, core–shell, and alloyed QDs, depending on their structure and composition.
Core-type QDs are composed of single components such as selenides, sulfides, or tellurides of metals like cadmium, lead, or zinc as shown in Fig. 1(a). Cd- and Pb-based QDs such as CdSe, CdS, CdTe, or PbS are the most investigated QDs so far because of their remarkable optical and electrical characteristics. The most common II–VI semiconductor QDs are cadmium selenide (CdSe) and cadmium telluride (CdTe) which are preferably used in lighting and display applications based on QD-based LEDs.23–26 In 1993, Murray et al. for the first time prepared CdSe QDs by using trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and trioctylphosphine (TOP) as the solvent.27 With these precursors, many researchers were able to achieve a high fluorescence quantum yield up to 80%.28,29 However, the high toxicity, and inflammable and explosive nature of TOPO lead to the development of phosphine-free synthesis of CdSe QDs using Cd precursor and Se powder with a quantum yield reduced to 50%. Later on, the quantum yield of Cd-based QDs was enhanced by structural modification and the introduction of core–shell QDs.30,31 Most of the commercially available QDs are Cd-based QDs; however, their potential toxicity in the biological environment has been debated over the past decade, as the Cd2+ ions released from the QD surface are highly toxic to cells and tissues,32,33 which hampers their further practical application. As a result, researchers have focused their efforts on developing Cd-free QDs for eco-friendly process. The heavy-metal-free QDs, such as carbon-based QDs and silicon or germanium QDs, were introduced in response to the need for more biocompatible QDs. Lower toxicity, better solubility in various solvents, inert qualities, high specific surface areas, functionalization sites, and adaptability make carbon and graphene QDs some of the most promising carbon-based nanomaterials. Furthermore, because of their biocompatibility compared to conventional QDs, silicon QDs have attracted the interest of many researchers as a potential candidate for optoelectronic devices.34 In core–shell type QDs (Fig. 1(b)), the quantum dot core is surrounded by a larger bandgap QD responsible for the improvement of stability as well as photoluminescence efficiency over simple QDs. For example, CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs with CdSe core and ZnS shell exhibit a quantum yield of over 50%. The fundamental reason for this improvement is that QDs shells are employed to passivate nonradiative recombination sites, leading to a robust PL efficiency. Some of the typical examples of core–shell type QDs include (CdS)ZnS, (CdSe)ZnS, (CdSe)CdS, and (InAs)CdSe.35 The toxicity of Cd-based QDs can be reduced through structural engineering such as doping transition metal ions in order to reduce the ratio of toxic Cd in undoped QDs.36 Furthermore, manufacturing high-quality core–shell QDs can reduce the toxicity of heavy-metal-based QDs. Core–shell QDs are very desirable for many biological applications, as they have improved fluorescence properties and prevent leaching; however, their toxicity is still a major concern for in vivo studies in particular. Hence, many researchers started to fabricate more safe and efficient Cd-free QDs such as Ag–In–S/ZnS, Zn–Ag–In–S/ZnS, Cu–Ag–In–S/ZnS, etc. for high-contrast fluorescence bioimaging.37 In-based QDs exhibited a great potential for light absorption and emission with long PL lifetime which is significant for LEDs. Alloyed QDs are a new group of QDs that are created with various semiconductor nanocrystals with varying bandgaps, resulting in characteristics that are different from their constituents (Fig. 1(c)). Fabrication of Cd/Pb-free QDs has sparked a lot of attention in recent years as a solution to avoid using toxic elements in the development of QD-based devices. CuInS2 QDs have been created with high QYs; however, their color gamut and color purity are minimal, making them unsuitable for display applications.38 Due to their structurally stable features, QDs manufactured from the III–V group, such as InP, could be a viable replacement for Cd/Pb-based QDs.39 Their structural robustness leads to high optical stability and lower toxicity because of non-erosion of constituent ions. However, InP QDs exhibit inferior optical characteristics compared to Cd-based QDs owing to the presence of surface defects and traps resulting in nonradiative recombination.40,41 This could be prevented by growing ZnS shell over the InP QDs core forming InP/ZnS QDs to passivate the dangling bonds on the surface thereby improving the photoluminescence. However, because of the insufficiency of active precursors and alternatives for an efficient passivating shell, improving the growth technique of InP QDs in comparison to II–VI QDs remains a challenge.42
 Fig. 1  (a) Different types of QDs under UV excitation22, (b) core–shell QDs, and (c) alloyed QDs. 
The metal halide perovskites QDs (PQDs) are considered as the next generation thin-film LED light emitters because of their superior characteristics compared to colloidal QDs. PQDs are direct-bandgap semiconductor materials, which have high PLQY,43 and also have tunable narrow and symmetric PL peaks over the visible range spectrum by adjusting halide composition.44 The resultant wide color gamut is broader than the CIE chromaticity diagram of the National Television System Committee (NTSC) standard. PQDs are effective models of colloidal NCs because of their attractive chemical processability and superior optical properties.45–49 In 1839, Gustav Rose discovered the perovskite crystal structure in CaTiO3. In the 1990s, Mitzi and his teams used perovskites for thin-film LEDs.50 Perovskites are thin films or colloidal nanocrystals materials with high carrier mobility and large exciton diffusion length for balanced electrons and hole transportation51,78 which can easily be synthesized and processed using inexpensive precursors at room temperature or lower temperature, i.e., <180 °C.52,53 Perovskites are a 3D structural framework compound with AMX3 as a chemical formula where the A-site can either be an organic cation (MA+ or FA+) or monovalent inorganic metal cations (Cs+ or Rb+), the M-site can be divalent metal cations (Pb2+, Sb2+, Eu2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, etc.), and the X-site is a halide anion (Cl−, Br−, I−, etc.).54 The perovskite crystal structure is shown in Fig. 2, where A cations are at the vertexes, the M cation at the center, and X anions at the face centers of the cube. Fig. 2(b) shows an ideal 3D cubic phase perovskite structure formed by a continuous array of corner-sharing PbX6 octahedra, and the less symmetric orthorhombic phase formed when the octahedra of PbX6 are distorted from the ideal cubic structure is shown in Fig. 2(c). Perovskites are classified into hybrid (or organic/inorganic) materials and all-inorganic perovskites. MAPbX3 and FAPbX3 belong to hybrid material types and CsPbX3 belongs to all-inorganic perovskites. Perovskites synthesized colloidally are known as perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) and are usually classified into quantum dots (QDs) for zero-dimensional (0D) nanomaterials, nanorods (NRs), and nanowires (NWs) for one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials. Until recent decades, the use of perovskite structure materials in the field of optoelectronics was infrequent, although they have satisfactory physical properties.55 The ability to readily process colloidal PQDs in solution makes it possible to produce cost-effective emitting layers of large areas which are also compatible with flexible electronics.56–59 The diversity in structural and chemical properties of PQDs makes it possible to have a wide range of optoelectronics application scopes.60–62 Various effective methods of synthesizing high-quality colloidal PQDs have been developed.46–48,63–65 An efficient red emissive perovskite QD-based LED was fabricated with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of about 21.3% using a halide-anion containing alkyl ammonium and aryl ammonium salt.66
 Fig. 2  (a) Perovskite crystal structure, (b) cubic phase, and (c) orthorhombic phase.54 
So far, the majority of the display manufacturers, such as Samsung, LG, and Sony, have adopted CdSe or InP-based QD technology for commercial displays and lighting sources.67,68 Comparing traditional QDs and PQDs, the superior properties of the latter, such as symmetric and narrow emission bands, brighter light emission, and the ability to engineer optical properties, make PQDs the next favorable candidates for QD-based LEDs.62,69 In 2014, the first PQD-based LEDs were demonstrated by Galian and Pérez-Prieto with 1 cd m−2 as a maximum luminance.46 Successively, green LEDs were introduced by Pei and Zhong with a maximum brightness of about 2503 cd m−2, a current efficiency (CE) of around 4.5 cd A−1, and an EQE of 1.1% which have a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3Ds/TPBi/CsF/Al.70 QD-based LEDs based on MAPbX3 exhibiting luminances of 2673, 2398, and 986 cd m−2, CEs of about 4.01, 3.72, and 1.52 cd A−1, and EQEs of 1.38%, 1.06%, and 0.53% respectively were proposed by Zhang and Jie.71 A QD-based LED with improved CE of about 11.49 cd A−1, PE of 7.84 lm W−1, and an EQE of 3.8%7.84 lm W−1, were demonstrated by using a MAPbX3 QD suspension prepared by exploiting ligand-assisted re-precipitation (LARP) by Xiong and his teams with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/TPBi/Cs2CO3/Al.72
However, the use of PQD-based LEDs in lighting source applications remains vague due to their limitation efficiency. A high-efficient colloidal MAPbBr3 QD-based LED with a maximum luminance of 43440 cd m−2 was reported by Sargent et al. with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/B3PYMPM:Cs2Co3/Al realized balancing and suppressing the Auger recombination.73 The high stability of FAPbBr3 in LED applications led to the development of a high-efficiency FAPbBr3 QD-based LED with a CE of 9.16 cd A−1, PE of 6.4 lm W−1, and an EQE of 2.05%, synthesized by Lee et al. at room temperature.74 In 2015, Kovalenko et al.63 proposed all-inorganic CsPbX3 QDs. The first all-inorganic CsPbX3 QD-based LEDs with luminances of 742 cd m−2, 946 cd m−2, and 528 cd m−2, and EQEs of 0.07%, 0.12%, and 0.09%, were demonstrated by Zeng and his team with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CsPbX3 QDs/TPBi/LiF/Al device structure.75 A stable perovskite QD-based LED under ambient and harsh conditions was demonstrated by using the technique developed by Li and Shan with a maximum luminance of 6093.2 cd m−2, a CE of 7.96 cd A−1, and an EQE of 3.79%.76 Deep-red emitting PQDs can be synthesized using an anion exchange technique from pristine CsPbBr3 through aryl ammonium salts, and Chiba and his team66 proposed using halide-anion-containing alkyl ammonium. The PQD-based LEDs demonstrate high luminance of 500 cd m−2 and an EQE of 21.3% from the LEDs developed based on alkyl ammonium iodine salt, and 749 cd m−2 and an EQE of 14.1% from the LED based on aryl ammonium salt. Moreover, the perovskite based on aryl ammonium salt has more operational stability owing to lower ligand density. Blue, green, orange and red emission high-efficiency perovskite QD-based LEDs having a structure ITO/ZnO/CsPbX3 QDs/TFB/MoO3/Ag were developed by Greenham and Tan through introduction of facile trimethylaluminum (TMA) with maximum luminances of 8.7, 2335, 1559, and 206 cd m−2, and EQEs of 0.0074%, 0.19%, 1.4%, and 5.7%, respectively. An optimum performance perovskite QD-based LED based on FA0.8Cs0.2PbBr3 having an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/TPBi/LiF/Al structure was developed by using organic–inorganic hybrid QDs synthesized by Zhang, Chen, and Sun, and they were able to achieve a brightness of 55005 cd m−2, a CE of 10.09 cd A−1, and an EQE of 2.80%.77 A MA0.7Cs0.3PbBr3 QD-based LED with a maximum luminance of 24510 cd m−2, a CE of 4.1 cd A−1, and an EQE of 1.3% was developed using the organic–inorganic QDs synthesized by Chen and Sun.77
Synthesis of QDs
Colloidal halide perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) have been known to have excellent optoelectronic properties, such as high PLQY, tunable bandgap, low manufacturing cost, and so on. Currently, high temperature hot-injection (HI) and room temperature (RT) synthesis are the most common QD synthesis techniques. The hot injection synthesis of QDs entails injecting a pre-prepared precursor solution into another at a specific temperature while operating under a protective gas. This synthesis method takes only a few seconds by fast nucleation and growth dynamics, leading to the formation of QDs with good monodispersity, tunable composition and luminous characteristics, high fluorescence efficiency, and fluorescence emission peaks encompassing the entire visible region. Fig. 3(a) shows the hot injection method for the preparation of CdSe QDs.79 The materials used for the synthesis of CdSe QDs comprise trioctylphosphine (TOP), metal base selenium powder (Se), octadecene (OTD), cadmium oxide (CdO), and oleic acid (OA). TOP was employed to dissolve the Se powder in order to achieve a superior cadmium–selenium stoichiometric ratio. The Cd-precursor consists of a mixture of CdO, OA, and OTD, and the mixture is heated using a heating mantle. TOP:Se solution is injected into the Cd solution at around 170 °C, and CdSe QDs are collected with a glass syringe at 10 min intervals. The emission colors of the different CdSe QDs under UV light will vary from blue to yellow depending on the duration of the growth time, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 3(a). The same HI approach can be used to produce perovskite QDs, and Kovalenko et al. synthesized the first entirely organic CsPbX3 QDs (X = Cl−, Br−, and I− or halide mixture) in 2015.45Fig. 3(b) shows the schematic diagram of the HI strategy for the synthesis of PQDs.80 The Cs-OA precursor solution was obtained by mixing CsCO3, OA, and ODE, and heating it under a protective gas (nitrogen). Following that, a mixture of PbBr2, ODE, OAm, and OA was prepared and placed in a flask to be heated to a specific temperature before injecting the Cs precursor solution. However, the hot-injection method is not feasible for large-scale production of QDs owing to the extremely toxic, expensive, and explosive reactants. In addition, PQD synthesis by the hot injection method results in poor colloidal stability and rapid precipitation from the solution.
 Fig. 3  Hot injection method for the synthesis of (a) CdSe QDs79 and (b) CsPbBr3 QDs.80 
In addition, the high-temperature synthesis method is relatively complex and necessarily involves a relatively high reaction temperature, a specified injection temperature, and inert gas protection. As a result, for the synthesis of PQDs, a simple and easy-to-use approach is essential, and several researchers have developed RT synthesis strategies such as supersaturated recrystallization (SR) and ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP). Based on the polarity of the reaction solvent system, the RT synthesis method can be categorized into two perspectives: polar solvent and non-polar solvent. The reprecipitation method is a simple process that uses solvent mixing to prepare organic nanoparticles or polymer dots at the same time. The use of capping ligands on the surface of nanoparticles has been extensively studied and is becoming a more established technique for controlling their size and morphology.81,82 Zhang et al. developed a LARP strategy to fabricate brightly luminescent and color-tunable colloidal CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I, Cl) QDs at room temperature and low excitation fluencies.49Fig. 4(a) shows a schematic diagram for the LARP synthesis of PQDs in a good solvent, such as N-dimethylformamide (DMF), mixed with a vigorously stirred poor solvent, such as toluene or hexane with long-chain organic ligands, resulting in the controlled crystallization of precursors into colloidal nanoparticles. For the precursor solution, PbBr2, CH3NH3Br, n-octylamine, and oleic acid are mixed together and dissolved into DMF, which is an excellent solvent for dissolving inorganic salts and small molecules. The precursor solution is added drop by drop into toluene under intense stirring, and subsequently forms a yellow-green colloidal solution facilitated by the crystallization of precursors into nanoparticles. Centrifugation at 7000 rpm removes large particles from the resultant colloidal solution in toluene, resulting in a high-quality colloidal solution with small-sized nanoparticles. Other alkylamines with longer chains, such as dodecylamine, hexadecylamine, and hexylamine, can also be used to control crystallization and produce colloidal QD solutions. It has been revealed that n-octylamine regulates the kinetics of crystallization, which controls the size of QDs, while oleic acid suppresses the QD aggregation effects, which ensures the colloidal solution stability. Zeng et al. described a facile SR approach for the synthesis of highly emissive inorganic PQDs that can be done in a matter of seconds at room temperature, and the detailed operational mechanism is shown in Fig. 4(b).83 DMF or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is employed as a solvent for a mixture of ion sources including CsX and PbX2 (X = Cl, Br, I), with OAm and OA as surface ligands. For the synthesis of CsPbBr3, the precursor solution is formed by dissolving a mixture of PbBr2 and CsBr in DMF or DMSO followed by addition of OAm to stabilize the precursor solution. Then, the precursor solution is added to toluene under vigorous stirring, resulting in an instantaneous highly supersaturated state due to rapid recrystallization under the activation of stirring. A stable toluene dispersion of PQDs with the protection of ligands is obtained after the centrifugation of the resulting solution, and the detailed reaction is given in the inset of Fig. 4(b). The surface functionalization of OAm and OA facilitates in controlling crystal size and dispersing them in a variety of nonpolar solvents.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) the reaction system and process for LARP technique49 and (b) the detailed operation and mechanism of RT-SR synthesis.83 
In another study, Song et al. reported a simple and straightforward RT approach for the synthesis of inorganic PQDs employing synergistic short ligands in toluene without the use of an inert gas.84 Synergistic ligands such as tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB), didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB), and octanoic acid (OTAc) provide QDs with excellent ink stability and ideal emissive characteristics. The employment of short ligands allows for the development of thin films with superior charge injection and transport properties. The synthesis process of PQDs is illustrated in Fig. 5(a) where toluene is used to dissolve PbBr2 with TOAB. Another solution containing Cs+ complex formed by dissolving Cs2CO3 in OTAc is added to the first solution. After introducing the Cs+, the QDs nucleated instantly, and after 5 minutes, DDAB was added, resulting in a stable QD ink. Finally, PQDs are obtained after centrifugation and purification using toluene or octane. In this proposed strategy, three kinds of synergistic ligands are being used, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Because of the high steric effect, TOAB only improves the dissolving capacity of PbBr2, but it does not act as a ligand on the QD surface. By bonding to the QD surface through DDA+ with the Br−, DDAB as a ligand can improve the PL characteristics and ink stability of QDs. The OTAc ligands will facilitate the effective electrical transportation features in the QD films. However, the LARP technique for PQD synthesis still has several drawbacks, because of the low yield issue of PQDs and the difficulties of cleaning and purifying the QD solution, restricting their use in EL-based devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and treatment process of PQDs and (b) room-temperature triple-ligand surface engineering.84 
In most cases, lead halide PQDs are synthesized by injecting lead halides dissolved in good solvents into poor solvents where they nanocrystallize. However, the QDs generated using this approach usually have irregular spherical forms in contrast to their inorganic cesium (Cs)–lead halide counterparts, which normally have a precise cubic structure.85–87 Furthermore, because of severe quenching, these PQDs have a PLQY of less than 40% when cast into films, but their solution has a PLQY of up to 80%.86 Lin et al. proposed a new PQD spray synthesis technique to address this issue by combining traditional PQD synthesis with spray pyrolysis.88 In both solution form as well as films, the resulting organometallic lead halide PQDs had a well crystalline cubic structure with a 100% absolute PLQY due to negligible quenching. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the spray-synthesis technique where the perovskite precursor solution is sprayed into a poor solvent like toluene. The perovskite precursor is made up of a mixture of organic halide, methylammonium bromide (CH3NH3Br, MABr), and lead bromide (PbBr2) with organic ligands (oleic acid and n-octylamine) dissolved in DMF, which is a good solvent. The high-quality crystallization of PQDs is due to the microsized droplets of the sprayed solution ensuring a substantially greater contact surface area and increased mixing between the precursor solutions with the poor solvent. The precipitate of the sprayed solution is removed by centrifugation of the resulting solution, which is later resuspended in hexane solution for film casting using spin coating. Lin et al. compared the PL spectra as well as PLQY for two QD solutions made using traditional drop-synthesized (D) and novel spray-synthesized methods. Fig. 6(b) illustrates the PL spectra for the S and D solutions, showing the same peak wavelength at 511 nm. However, the D solution shows an additional emission peak at ≈470 nm owing to the presence of smaller QDs in the solution. The PLQY stability test for both QD solutions is shown in Fig. 6(c), revealing that the S QD solution is substantially more stable than the D solution, with negligible QY degradation over a month. The S QD solution exhibited a high PLQY of ≈100%; however it is difficult to cast into uniform films because of the presence of excess oleic acid. As a result of excessive oleic acid contamination, the cast film encounters severe quenching, resulting in an extremely low PLQY of roughly 1–2%. The film spin coated with the precipitate of S solution in hexane, on the other hand, had an extremely high PLQY of up to 100% and just 9% PLQY decay in 2 months. The spray-synthesized halide PQDs are highly stable and highly emissive when cast into thin films making them ideal for color conversion LED as well as OLED. However, it is still challenging to obtain high quality QD film by the spray coating method due to the poor adhesion between the QDs and the substrate. Since the QDs are dispersed in the solution, the adhesion depends on the absorption of the QDs and the substrate.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the spray-synthesis technique, (b) PL spectra, and (c) long-term stability of PLQY for the drop-synthesized (D) and spray-synthesized (S) toluene solutions.88 
Despite the fact that lead halide PQDs have a high PLQY, the toxicity issue related to the presence of Pb has hampered their commercialization.89,90 Researchers have tried a variety of methods in order to synthesize lead-free PQDs, including the use of substitutes (Sn2+),91 Mn doping at the Pb site in PQDs,92 partial doping,93 and so on. However, they continue to experience PL quenching, instability issues due to humidity and temperature, and PLQY degradation. Researchers have also explored replacing Pb in MAPbI3 with Co to tackle the stability issues, resulting in a stabilized device efficiency of over 16% after optimization.94 In lead halide PQDs, simultaneous co-substitution of anions and cations could be a viable technique to adjust their optical and electrical characteristics, resulting in highly stable perovskite. In this regard, Lin et al. recently demonstrated simultaneous cation and anion exchange with cobalt and chloride ions into the host CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xCl2x PQDs followed by matrix encapsulation via poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) to be a promising method for stabilizing PQDs with superior PLQY.95 Integrating both Co and Cl into the perovskite crystal lattice is expected to improve the phase stability and optical properties of MAPbBr3 PQDs. For the synthesis of MAPbBr3 PQDs, a homogeneous solution of MABr and PbBr2 dissolved in DMF is first prepared, followed by stirring. The perovskite precursor is prepared by mixing oleic acid and oleylamine with the DMF solution, then adding it to toluene and heating with vigorous stirring. The resulting solution is yellowish in color under ambient conditions and emits green light when exposed to UV (365 nm) light. The precipitate is separated from the solution by centrifugation, after which it is dispersed in toluene and sonicated for homogenous mixing before centrifugation. The colloidal solution is separated and appears transparent green-yellowish, whereas the uncentrifuged solution appears yellow. The synthesis of MAPb1−xCoxBr3−2xCl2x (x = 0 to 0.50) PQDs follows a similar approach as in MAPbBr3 with changes in PbBr2 and CoCl2 concentrations. Fig. 7(a) shows the images of the CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xClx perovskite quantum dot thin films prepared through a centrifuge tube containing a glass substrate, and colloidal PQDs with different concentrations under ambient and UV light irradiation. Moreover, the perovskite colloidal and PMMA solutions are mixed and stirred to obtain a homogeneous green PQD/PMMA composite solution, which is then used to make a highly stable thin film using spin coating. There will be partial substitution of Pb2+ and Br− by Co2+ and Cl− respectively. It has been found that replacing Co2+ and Cl− with Pb2+ and Br−, respectively, has no significant effect on the crystal structure. As shown in Fig. 7(c), the increase in CoCl2 concentration results in a significant blue shift in the PL emission, which is attributed to lattice contraction as well as a local anion clustering mechanism. Because of the difference in electronegativity between Pb2+ and Co2+, as well as Br− and Cl− anions, the band gaps of the PQDs shift from 2.29 to 2.41 eV after the substitution. The PLQY of MAPb1−xCoxBr3−2xCl2x PQDs is shown in Fig. 7(b) with different concentrations of x. It is clear that the undoped MAPbBr3 PQDs had the maximum PLQY of 98%, which was later reduced to 64% after 30 mol% CoCl2 was introduced to MAPbBr3. Even after the incorporation of cobalt and chloride ions into host PQDs, a high PLQY of 95% was obtained. Auger recombination of trions and biexcitons associated with the introduction of additional cations and anions causes this degradation in PLQY.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photograph of CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xClx PQD thin films with different concentrations under ambient and UV light irradiation, (b) PLQY for PQDs with different concentrations of x, (c) Trend of CoCl2 concentration for CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xClx PQDs, (d) the reaction between CNCs and anions in perovskite, € PL emission spectra of PQDP with various amounts of MAPbBr3 precursor, and (f)–(h) the time-dependent PL environmental stability.98,100 
During the synthesis stage, surface ligands such as OA and OLA should still be employed to control the size of the PQDs and passivate the PQD structure before encapsulation. Although encapsulation methods have been used during the synthesis of PQDs to increase their moisture resistance, their stability under continuous irradiation has yet to be proven.96 Instead of combining carboxylic acid (such as OA) and alkyl amines (such as OLA) in the perovskite precursor, Li et al. synthesized perovskite quantum dot paper using cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) a few hundred nanometers in length and a large quantity of –HSO3 and –O groups (PQDP). These –HSO3 and –O cellulose anions interact as capping ligands, limiting the development of perovskite crystals and resulting in PQDs that are widely distributed in PQDP. Moreover, in the preparation of perovskite precursor (N,N-dimethyl formide (DMF) + MAX + PbX2 + CNCs, MA = CH3NH3+), the CNCs’ –O and –HSO3− are coordinated to the PbX2 empty orbital, and the PQDs are entangled between long chains of CNCs to avoid the dangling capping behavior of OA and OLA and they become more stable.97 The process reaction between CNCs and anions in perovskite is shown in Fig. 7(d). Fig. 7(e) demonstrates a concentration-dependent behavior. By using a solution with lower precursor concentrations, fewer precursor residues are retained within the CNCs, resulting in crystalized PQDs with smaller size. Additionally, after 8 months of exposure in a 60% RH and 20 °C environment, the relative PL intensity of PQDP was maintained at 80%, but the relative PL intensity of pristine PQDs decreased dramatically to 30% after 2 months, as shown in Fig. 7(f). Although several effective strategies for improving humidity stability have been proposed, PQDP exhibits outstanding stability, with a 10% decay in PL intensity after 60 days of continuous UV irradiation and a 40% decay in PL intensity after 20 days at high temperature (100 °C), respectively, as shown in Fig. 7(g) and (h). These are the strongest stability values for PQD materials ever evaluated under continuous UV irradiation and high-temperature environments. It is beneficial for the development of related industries. However, even at ambient temperature, ion exchange synthesis of QDs might result in a non-equilibrium state of the QD solution owing to rapid ion replacement by solid-state diffusion.
A benchmark of comparisons between PQDs and CdSe-based QDs is made in Table 1 showing the improvement of PLQY by adopting PQDs.
Table 1 Benchmark of PLQY for different PQDs and CdSe based-QDs




QD materials
Synthesis method
Properties
Ref.




CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs
Spray synthesis method
PLQY ≈ 100%

97



CsPbBr3
Hot injection method
PLQY ≈ 90%

83



CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs
Ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP) technique
PLQY ≈ 70%

97



CsPbBr3 QDs
Room-temperature triple-ligand surface engineering method
PLQY = 93%

97



CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xCl2x PQDs
Cation and anion exchange method
PLQY = 95%

97



MAPbBr3/PQDP
Oleic acid/oleylamine (traditional surface ligands)-free method
PLQY ≈ 80%

97



CdSe–ZnS QDs
Microwave synthesis
PLQY ≈ 50%

98



CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs
Hydrothermal method
PLQY ≈ 47%

99



Ligand capped CdS QDs
Solutions based method
PLQY = 69%

100





QD-based LEDs
Quantum dots (QDs) that generate light with high color purity have drawn significant interest as a light-emitting element for creating a wide color gamut display. Since their development, QD-LED performance has been similar to that of existing organic LEDs, meeting commercial display demands. QDs can be either photoluminescent or electroluminescent depending on the way they are being used in LEDs. QDs have been able to achieve a wide color gamut of nearly 100% of Rec. 2020 by emitting monochromatic and saturated light.101 QDs can be employed in a variety of ways for QD-LEDs, including as color-conversion films on top of blue LEDs or as a self-emissive layer. In self-emissive QD-LEDs, a QD layer as an emission layer is sandwiched between an electron transport layer and a hole transport layer. When an electric field is applied, electrons and holes will be injected into the QD layer where they recombine and emit photons.
Electroluminescence device
QD-LEDs exhibit a wider color gamut and superior performance compared to LCD and OLED display technologies. However, most of the electroluminescence QD-LEDs with high EQE still operate at low brightness due to band energy alignment problems between the constituent structures.102–104 Moreover, the performance of QD-LEDs depends on the QD shell structure and the composition of QDs as the emission layer. In this regard, Ba et al. demonstrated a high-efficiency CdSe-based QD-LED with a ZnSe interlayer and a ZnSeS outermost layer as emitting layers through shell engineering.105 Core–shell QDs have been synthesized by regulating the shell structure and composition such as CdSe/ZnS, CdSe/ZnSe, CdSe/ZnSe/ZnS, and CdSe/ZnSe/ZnSeS. Fig. 8(a) shows the device structure with multilayers including ITO, PEDOT:PSS, TFB, QDs, ZnO, and Al. Four types of QD-LEDs have been fabricated based on various QD shell structures and their efficiencies have been compared. Fig. 8(b) and (c) illustrate the EQE dependence on luminance as well as current density for the four different types of QD-LEDs. It is shown that with ZnSe as the outermost shell, the peak EQE of the device is improved with enhanced luminance. Furthermore, the efficiency still maintained more than 90% of its peak value even at high brightness, which is very promising for future display and lighting applications. The presence of ZnSe as the intermediate layer and ZnSeS as the outermost layer enhances the hole injection efficiency, thereby balancing the charge injection efficiency at high brightness and high current density, resulting in better performance of these devices. Hence, it is very important to control the hole injection in order to balance the charge injection for a better performance of QD-LEDs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of multi-layered QD-LEDs, (b) the EQE-luminance, and (c) the EQE-current density of different QD-LED types.105 
Even though Cd-based QD-LEDs exhibit high efficiency, they are still not preferable because of their severe toxicity and environmental issues. In recent findings, many researchers have developed InP-based QD-LEDs with quantum yields of 93% and an EQE of 12.2%.106 The poor performance of InP-based QD-LEDs is mainly due to the presence of surface and oxidation defects of InP QDs.107 In order to minimize these defects, Won et al. used a ZnSe interlayer as the passivation layer for InP QDs and a ZnS outermost shell resulting in highly efficient and stable QD-LEDs. It has been found that the thickness of the ZnSe interlayer greatly influences the EQE and luminescence of the LEDs, as increasing the thickness results in decreasing PLQY. Hence, it is crucial to make a thinner ZnSe interlayer so that the shapes become more regular as more spherical QDs will lead to an improved device performance. The InP/ZnSe/ZnS QD-LEDs exhibit a quantum yield of 100% and an excellent EQE of 21.4% with a brightness of 100000 cd m−2 and a lifetime of 1000000 hours at 100 cd m−2. The thickness of the shell has been optimized in order to maintain high luminescence efficiency and a better charge injection balance.
However, the EQE for the QD-LEDs is still lower than that of state-of-the-art OLEDs. The main reason for this low performance is due to the low mobility of the organic semiconductor which is being used for light emission. Because of their intrinsically low stability against moisture, oxygen, and heat, organic materials decay more quickly than inorganic materials. Organic molecules are degraded by photo-oxidation reactions when exposed to high energy irradiation, resulting in a degradation of their electrical characteristics. In addition to this, the inefficient charge injection into the QD layer still becomes a critical issue limiting their applications at high brightness for QD-LEDs. The uneven injection and transport rates of electrons and holes cause charge imbalance in several QLEDs. In some cases, electron leakage from the active layer can cause the hole transport layer to degrade, reducing the device lifetime. Hence, when developing QD-LEDs, a number of aspects must be considered, including charge injection, carrier transport, material stability, and control of physical and chemical phenomena at the interface. A benchmark for electroluminescence characteristics of various QD-LEDs is given in Table 2.
Table 2 Benchmark of electroluminescence characteristics for different QD-LEDs




Emission layer materials
Current efficiency (cd A−1)
External quantum efficiency (%)
Ref.




ZnO/PEI
18.8
16.5%

108



PVK/QD/PEIE
89.8
22.4%

109



CdSe/CdS nanorod-based
19.8
15.7%

110



traditional CdSe/ZnS QDs
69.2
22.9%

111



InP/ZnSe/ZnS core/shell/shell


12.2%

112





Photoluminescence device
In order to overcome these technical problems, QD color-converter films have been adopted by many researchers. In addition to this, halide perovskite QDs are preferable to the conventional colloidal QDs such as Cd- and InP-based QDs, due to their toxicity and low QY issues. In contrast, there has been recent development in CdSe-based QDs exhibiting high QY of greater than 90%, while the InP-based QDs fail to achieve such high performance.113,114 Because of their superior optical and transport characteristics, PQDs are becoming a popular choice for color conversion in next-generation displays, replacing the conventional QDs. PQDs exhibit a PLQY of about 90% even without a shell layer, narrow emission linewidth, and tunable emission wavelength.65,115 However, the stability of PQDs remains a challenge in order to apply for future device applications. PQDs for color conversion can be used in the form of enhancement film, color filter, and on-chip QDs. QD-LEDs with QD enhancement film can lead to optical loss resulting in low device efficiency.116 QD color filters can exhibit a higher efficiency compared to enhancement film; however, it can lead to a cross-talk effect when it comes to a full-color system.116 In order to overcome these issues, QD films can just be coated on LED chips to fabricate QD-LED system, which is simple and can have high device efficiency.
Yoon et al. developed a highly efficient and stable QD-LED based on PQDs passivated and encapsulated with mixed silicon nitride and silicon oxide exhibiting a high luminous efficacy of 138.6 lm W−1 and an EQE of 51.4%.117 Polysilazane (PSZ) has been used to passivate the surface defects of green PQDs resulting in the formation of a PQD/PSZ composite, thereby maintaining high PLQY. Fig. 9(a) represents the PL spectra of the PQD/PSZ composite with an emission wavelength of 522 nm and an FWHM of 23 nm. In addition to this, the green PQDs exhibit a high PLQY of 81.7%. The PQD/PSZ composite also maintains the efficiency levels at 90.2%, 52.1%, and 33.7% at various temperatures of 60, 100, and 140 °C, respectively, showing high thermal stability. The QD-LEDs exhibit a luminous efficacy of 113.6 lm W−1 and a CCT of 6140 K at 120 mA, which increase to 153.9 lm W−1 and 6667 K at an injection current of 20 mA as shown in Fig. 9(b). These results are sufficient for the highly stable green PQD/PSZ composite to be used as a color converter in high-performance lighting devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra for PQD/PSZ composite and (b) luminous efficacy and CCT (K) for the QD-LEDs.117 
The lifetime of the PQD-related device is one of the important characteristics that needs to be checked before its commercial deployment. Through different engineering designs, it is possible for the lifetime of the PQDs to be extended to more than 6000 hours in a remote film type package. Several improvements can be realized in the devices. First, the PQDs were coated with silica (SiO2) during the synthesis procedure. Then, hexagonal boron nitride nanoparticles (with average size of 1 μm) were introduced into the PQD and PDMS mixture to increase the heat conduction capacity and thus to reduce possible accumulation of thermal energy within the PQD film. A further drop in the temperature of the PQD film can be achieved by lifting the film above the pumping LED, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The composite film can sustain the environmental wear-out for 250 days on the shelf. A continuous aging test demonstrated excellent performance of illumination capability after 2500 hours of LED excitation, when compared to traditional packaged devices (93.0% vs. 9.6%), as shown in Fig. 10(a).118
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the remote film types and traditional packaged types of device. The upper-left corner shows a comparison of normalized peak intensities between a traditional device and a remote-film type PQD device. A serious degradation (>90%) of the traditional device was detected after a continuous 2500-hour aging test. (b) The finished remote-film type PQD hybrid LED.118 
However, one of the most common commercialization challenges for QD color conversion films is instability, which leads to PL quenching owing to thermal degradation at high radiation. As a result, understanding the QD degradation mechanism and enhancing their stability have become important concerns in the QD materials field. The degradation of QDs can be described in terms of structural, environmental, and thermal stability. Many efforts have been made to improve the stability of these QD color conversion films and some of the strategies will be described in a later section.
QD-based white light system
Electroluminescence device
Over the last few years, there has been an ever-increasing demand for high-efficiency and long-lasting devices for lighting and display applications. Owing to their unique characteristics, such as high PLQY, narrow emission spectra, size tunable emission wavelength, and solution-processed synthesis, QDs are extremely promising for next-generation display and lighting applications.114,119,120 Numerous QD-based white LEDs have been reported so far, with QDs serving as either light-emitting materials or color converters in various structural designs.121–124 However, the color converter type LEDs have shown a much longer lifetime than devices based on the active layer emission process, due to unstable electrical excitation.124 Although QD-based LEDs have been a major area of research in the QD community and have been actively explored in recent decades, full-scale display commercialization is still some way off. It has been previously reported that blue, red, and green CdSe QD-based LEDs exhibit EQE values of 19.8%, 20.5%, and 21% respectively.125–127 The color conversion of QDs is still lower than that of conventional phosphor, as the emitted QD light will be reabsorbed by the QD itself, converting it to thermal energy resulting in significant optical loss. The luminous efficiency of CdSe QD-based white LEDs is still poor (40–100 lm W−1), making them unsuitable for high-power applications and causing thermal issues.128–130 In this regard, Li et al. used QD/silica (SBA-15) nanocomposite particles (NPs) to produce highly efficient white LEDs through photon management of reabsorption processes.131 The QD/SBA-15 NPs are produced by blending red and green (RG) CdSe QDs with SBA-15 particles in hexane solution at a particular mass ratio, then mixing uniformly using ultrasound. The white LEDs have been made by injecting RG-QD/SBA-15 NPs or QD slurry into blue LED devices and curing them at 60 °C for 2 hours to avoid QD degradation. In general, the absorption spectra of red QDs overlap with the emission spectra of green QDs resulting in an inter-reabsorption mechanism that increases red emission, as shown in Fig. 11(a). More inter-reabsorption events result from higher concentrations of green light and red QDs, resulting in a larger redshift. However, the pore structure of the NPs will suppress this inter-reabsorption mechanism between red and green QDs in NPs, as illustrated in Fig. 11(b). As a result, the white LEDs will have a reduced red shift in color coordinates and a higher maximum luminous efficacy. The red and green QDs with and without SBA-15 have relative refractive indices (RRIs) of more than 1 and equal to 1, respectively. As the RRI increases, the light extraction efficiency increases and will tend to be saturated. When the RRI is greater than one, QD light is confined in the bodies of the SBA-15 particles, a phenomenon that becomes more evident as the RRI increases. A stronger waveguide effect can be noticed when the difference in refractive index is larger, constraining a lot more QD light in the bodies of SBA-15 particles. Because of the waveguide effect originating from the bodies of SBA-15 particles, some of the QD light can bypass the QDs situated in the pore array, minimizing self-reabsorption loss. Fig. 11(c) shows the luminous efficacy and luminous flux of the white LEDs with and without SBA-15 as a function of injection current. The QD/SBA-15 white LEDs have a luminous efficacy of 206.8 lm W−1 and a radiant efficacy of 50.5%, respectively, which are 39.7% and 59.8% higher than commercial QD-phosphor-based hybrid white LEDs. One explanation for this variation is because red QDs have a lower self-reabsorption loss than green QDs because their Stokes shift from absorption of blue light to emission of red light is larger. Fig. 11(d) shows the luminous efficacy and luminous flux as a function of injection current for the white LEDs with dichromatic QD/SBA-15 NPs integrated with red and green QD/SBA-15 NPs, showing an increment of 28% in luminous efficacy as compared with the white LED without SBA-15 NPs. It is worth noting that the enhancement with dichromatic NPs is not quite as high as it is with monochromatic NPs in this instance. This is because the green-to-red proportion in these devices is relatively low, implying that blue light absorption is insufficient and reabsorption loss is not as severe as when monochromatic NPs at high QD concentrations are used. As a result, a more precise tuning of the emission spectra can be predicted to yield a larger improvement in the future. The results show that the NPs minimize the inter-reabsorption loss of red QDs to green light even more, indicating that they are an excellent solution for decreasing energy loss caused by overlapping spectra.
 Fig. 11  (a) Reabsorption mechanism of red and green QDs without SBA-15, (b) light extraction mechanism of QD light in QD/SBA-15 NPs, (c) luminous efficacy and luminous flux for white LEDs, and (d) luminous efficacy and luminous flux of red and green QD/SBA-15 integrated into dichromatic QD/SBA-15 NP white LEDs.131 
On-chip QD-LEDs
However, CdSe QD-based LEDs suffer strongly from the lack of surface engineering throughout the manufacturing process and low-cost preparation techniques.132 In addition, developing high-performance CdSe QD-based LEDs necessitates precise core/shell design, as well as band engineering and surface ligands. In this regard, researchers have begun to pave the way for the development of LEDs based on colloidal lead halide perovskite QDs with excellent performance and PLQY. The development of highly efficient QD-based LEDs enables the generation of white light by LEDs, which is of crucial importance for solid-state lighting to replace the conventional lighting systems. Kang et al. used PQD paper to develop highly efficient and stable white-light-emitting diodes with ultrahigh luminous efficiency, a wide color gamut, and a long operation lifetime.119 The CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 PQD paper is produced by mixing cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) in DMF solution with a perovskite precursor solution prepared by mixing CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 in DMF. After filtering the mixed solution using a vacuum filter setup, the CNC/perovskite materials are collected and dried to obtain PQD paper. Blue LED chips for blue emission, PQD paper for red emission, and K2SiF6:Mn4+ (KSF) phosphor for red emission have been employed in the fabrication of white LEDs. The fabrication process of the white LEDs is shown in Fig. 12(a), where the PQD paper is the color converter. KSF phosphor was mixed with silicone resin and dispensed into the blue LED package, which is then cured for one hour. To achieve the white LEDs, the PQD paper is then bonded to the top of the package. A white LED has three emission peaks at 452, 518, and 630 nm, corresponding to the blue LED, green PQD paper, and red phosphor, respectively. The PQD-based white LEDs exhibited a wide color gamut of 123% of the NTSC standard and 92% of Rec. 2020 as shown in Fig. 12(b). The color coordinates of the blue LED and red phosphor are nearly identical to those of the Rec. 2020 standard; however, the color coordinate of the PQD paper is not even close to the ideal green point of the Rec. 2020 standard. Fig. 12(c) illustrates the luminous efficiency and luminous flux of the PQD-based LEDs exhibiting a maximum efficiency of 124 lm W−1 at 6 mA. When the drive current is increased to 50 mA, the device still has a luminous efficiency of over 100 lm W−1, suggesting that the device performs well at various drive currents. Furthermore, the luminous flux of the PQD-based white LEDs shows only a 12.4% degradation after 240 hours of continuous operation, as shown in Fig. 12(d). The PQD-based LED lighting performance meets industrial standards, and device stability is substantially better than PQD-based LEDs previously reported in the literature. However, the device's stability is insufficient for commercialization, and additional improvements are required. The PQD paper is still in its early stages of development, but it has already demonstrated the ability to produce efficient and stable LEDs without the use of any additives or additional engineering, which bodes well for future lighting applications.
 Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication process of PQD-based white light LEDs, (b) CIE diagram, (c) luminous efficiency and luminous flux as a function of current, and (d) luminous flux under continuous operation.108 
Many different features of a white light LED may be applied to quantify performance. In our past results, a 60 lm W−1 efficiency in a pure green PQD hybrid device was reported.118 Meanwhile, a white light LED is crucial, because it takes green and red quantum dots to provide a white light source with a suitable color temperature. A list of white LEDs that incorporate QDs and perovskite QDs may be found in Table 3. To produce white light, all of the devices on the list use InGaN blue LEDs to excite QDs and other luminophores, and three metrics properties are compared: luminous efficiency (LE, lm W−1), correlated color temperature (CCT), and color rendering index (CRI).
Table 3 Comparison of NYCU and other group's white light properties




Emission layer materials
Luminous efficiency (lm W−1)
CRI
CCT
Ref.




K2SiF6:Mn4+ phosphor (red), CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs (green)
124
64
6706

108



CsPbBr1.2I1.8 QDs (red), CsPbBr3-SiO2 QDs (green)
35.4


5623

110



K2SiF6:Mn4+ phosphor (red), CsPbBr3/TDPA QDs (green)
63
83
7072

111



CsPbBr3 PQDs integrated with the S-AIM (AeroPQDs)
59.8


6500

112



CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell QD (RGB)
64





129



CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell QD (green, blue)
105





129



CdSe/ZnS QDs (red), YAG phosphor (yellow)
90
90.3
4382

133



RGB PiG phosphor
27.19
87.2
3326

134



CdTe@NaCl (red, green, yellow)
45 (green only)
92.5
2650

135





Printed QD-based QD-LEDs
Because of its compelling potential advantages in terms of efficiency, power usage, contrast ratio, longevity, and reaction time, QD-based display technology is the ideal choice for next generation displays. LEDs with a diameter of less than 100 μm must be utilized for better resolution—displays realized utilizing QDs and LEDs are often referred as QD-based LED displays. In order to achieve a high-resolution display, it is a trend to shrink the devices to less than 5 × 5 μm2 LEDs. Some research has improved electrical characteristics as well as enhanced top emission136 and used a redistribution layer technique to achieve active matrix (AM) micro-LED displays with Si-based CMOS addressing circuits.137 In our previous research, a full-color display was realized with the help of an ultra-violet (UV) LED and colloidal QDs (CQDs).136,138 CQDs of all three primary wavelengths—red, green, and blue—were integrated with a GaN-based UV LED with a narrow pitch of 40 μm. To provide fine printing that is more accurate and maskless, using the deposition of liquids containing functional materials, RGB QDs were deposited on the array of UV LEDs using an aerosol jet (AJ) printer. The luminous efficacy of radiation was reported to be 165 lm W−1 under various currents. A QD-based LED array of 35 × 35 μm2 area comprised small emissive sections with a pitch size of 40 μm. Each emissive section operated as a pixel with three sub-pixels emitting blue, green, and red colors. Lin et al. show that utilizing a photoresist (PR)-defined mold with a blocking wall to confine QDs during the AJ printing process reduces cross-talk significantly compared to previous work, as shown in Fig. 13(c) and (f).138,139 Furthermore, by including a DBR, UV light may be used more effectively, since reflected UV light can be reabsorbed by QDs. The emission efficiencies of blue, red, and green QDs were reported to be increased by 5%, 23%, and 32%, respectively. The PR mold was also found to be effective in minimizing the coffee-ring effect,140 which causes non-uniform QD dispersion on the LED surface, as shown in Fig. 13(a), (b), and (d).
 Fig. 13  (a) and (d) Mechanism of the coffee-ring effect due to the QDs’ outward flow during evaporation, (b) and (c) the OM image and EL illumination without PR square, and (e) and (f) the OM image and EL illumination with PR square.139 
In order to avoid the mass-transfer process, combining shorter wavelength LED arrays and the RGB QD method is demonstrated in the previous paragraph. Chen et al., in 2019, used strain-induced engineering to construct nanoring (NR) structures on a green LED epitaxial wafer with the goal of tuning the peak wavelength from green to blue through strain relaxation. Metal organic chemical vapor deposition was used to produce epitaxial layers of GaN LEDs with 525 nm emission on c-plane pattern sapphire substrates.141 The emission wavelength was tuned from green to blue using the releasing strain method, and red QDs were deposited on the blue emission area for color down-conversion.142 Strain-induced engineering includes etching LEDs to reduce their volume, resulting in the release of strain and a reduction in the quantum-confined Stark effect.143 This effect causes the tilted energy band to flatten, the overlap between quantum state distributions to increase, and the wavelengths to blue-shift. As shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 14(a)–(c), the final device consists of an array of RGB pixels, each of which has a green subpixel, a blue subpixel with nanorings, and a red subpixel with nanorings and red QDs. The sidewalls of the InGaN/GaN MQWs were densely surrounded by QDs, which are crucial for the nonradiative resonant energy transfer (NRET) processes. Alternatively, the TEM picture shows a 1 nm thick Al2O3 layer deposited on the NR-LED sidewall. To maintain a high enough resolution, each subpixel's area was reduced to 3 × 10 μm2. The super inkjet (SIJ) printer was used to deposit QDs in a small region, resulting in a linewidth of 1.65 μm for the QDs layer. A layer of Al2O3 was deposited on the sidewalls of the NR-LED, which increased the PL intensity by 143.7% when compared to the reference structure, as shown in Fig. 14(d). Moreover, Fig. 14(e) exhibits the color gamut of the final QD-based LED device which was reported to be 104.8% and 78.2% according to NTSC and Rec. 2020 standards, respectively.
 Fig. 14  (a)–(c) SEM image of the RGB pixel array and NR-LED with 30° tilt angle; TEM image of the contact area between MQWs and QDs, (d) PL emission spectra of NR-LEDs with and without ALD passivation, and (e) color gamut of RGB hybrid QD-based LED, NTSC, and Rec. 2020.141 
Another method to achieve high resolution is electrohydrodynamic (EHD) printing for perovskite patterning, which provides an electrical force to pull the nozzle. The pixel can achieve a nanoscale resolution (∼50 nm). Fig. 15(a) shows a schematic of the EHD printing setup, and the relation between diameter and voltage pulse peak is shown in Fig. 15(b). Therefore, the solution on the nozzle tip is polarized during the EHD printing process by supplying a high voltage potential, which causes a strong electric field around the pendent drop, deforming it into a cone-like shape from whose apex a fine jet is ejected. Furthermore, Fig. 15(c) and (d) show the RGB QD ink pattern line and dot diameter. Under 365 nm UV excitation, the fluorescent images of the CsPbX3 full-color pattern are homogeneous and bright. Different inks can be given to different regions in the RGB arrays with accurate registration. Moreover, Fig. 15(e) shows the surface height profile of a typical dot to evaluate the surface shape and thickness of the patterned CsPbBr3 microarray.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup for the EHD printing system, (b) the relationship between CsPbX3 crystal dot diameter and voltage pulse peak, EHD printed microscale (c) line arrays of RGB and (d) dot arrays of RGB, (e) height profile of CsPbBr3 dot.144 
On the other hand, low-cost selective electrophoretic deposition (SEPD) can be used to achieve large-area full-color display. The SEPD technique combines photolithography with mild and low-cost selective electrophoretic deposition (SEPD). This innovative EPD approach uses photolithography to swiftly (in a few seconds) manufacture QD designs only on selective polarity electrodes using a high-accuracy microelectrode. The deposited QD films can be patterned into pixel arrays with arbitrary yet specified forms beyond 1000 pixels per inch (PPI), with controlled, uniform feature sizes down to 2 μm and finely adjusted thickness. The technique of patterning QDs on in-plane interdigitated electrodes by SEPD is shown schematically in Fig. 16(a). The in-plane three-electrode substrate was successively put into the PGMEA solution containing red, green, and blue QDs. These QDs were then successively placed on the positive (negative) electrodes. After that, the RGB pattern array was produced. Moreover, the QD patterns are in a uniform geometric shape with precise positioning, and cross-sectional SEM and 3D OM images of the deposited QD stripe pattern with different thicknesses are shown in Fig. 16(b).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration and corresponding fluorescence images of red, green, and blue QDs, full-color patterns of QDs and (b) cross-sectional SEM images of QD stripes with different thicknesses and fluorescence image of a QD stripe array with a linewidth of 2 μm.145 
As a result of the quantum confinement effect, colloidal QDs exhibit excellent PL properties and are appropriate for use as a color-conversion layer for LEDs,137,146,147 as stated in previous paragraphs. A high contrast ratio may be achieved by combining a printing method and a color filter on top of QDs in a LED display.138,148 Moreover, the printing method also overcomes the mass-transfer process. However, large area production and throughput are the major difficulties for the current QD printing method. Therefore, after surface modification,149 the disadvantages of QD printing can be overcome by combining QDs with photoresist (PR) to produce QDPR. QDPR is a method for patterning multicolor QD arrays that allows for thickness and size control while preserving the benefits of photolithography. This method addresses the bottlenecks in producing high-resolution, large-area devices, particularly full-color LEDs for display applications, in a cost-effective and realistic way. In addition, leaking of blue incident light and cross-talk are still problems in the LED application. Chen et al. combined thick-shell CdSe/CdZnS QDs and black PR with TiO2, which may return incident light to the QDPR and effect re-absorption in QDs. A schematic diagram of a full-color LED array is shown as Fig. 17(a).150 Black PR can absorb redundant incident blue light as shown in Fig. 17(c). Cross-talk between RGB pixels is eliminated by utilizing the bottom side black PR and the top side gray PR, which created a height wall. Fig. 17(b) shows the RGB EL microscope images. Another important aspect is the use of semi-polar LEDs. Compared to the c-plane LED's shift of 13.0 nm, the semipolar LED has a stabilizing wavelength shift of 3.2 nm. As a result of these issues, it is a promising candidate light source for display applications. In the CIE 1976 color space, Fig. 17(d) and (e) show the performance under a 1 A cm−2 to 200 A cm−2 driving current density, and the coordinates varied from (0.1572, 0.1067) to (0.1483, 0.0379) and (0.1433, 0.0388) to (0.1490, 0.0317) for the c-plane and semi-polar blue LED, respectively. Semipolar devices demonstrate a wide color gamut of 114.4% NTSC and 85.4% Rec. 2020, which is attributed to the almost unchanged wavelength peak.
 Fig. 17  (a) The red, green, and blue (transparent) pixel lithography process, (b) EL image of RGB pixels, (c) EL spectra of red and green pixels; color gamut of RGB pixel assembly from (d) c-plane LED and (e) QDPR at various current densities in the CIE 1976 color space.150 
Combining the QDs and photoresist is useful to reduce the leakage of blue light. After drying, the QY of QDs is considerably decreased, making them difficult to pattern and structurally unstable, particularly in thick dry QD films. Adding additional passivation layers and integrating QDs with polymer might assist in avoiding QY degradation. The light absorption property is decreased because the volume density of an active region is reduced in these approaches. As a result, a novel structure that can greatly enhance light absorption while also stably holding QDs is critical and in high demand for a QD-based LED display. Kang et al. explore the optical characteristics of a nanoporous(NP) GaN structure that enables it to scatter light and host QDs, as well as the novel generation of LED arrays made of NP GaN and QDs.151 The schematic structure and cross-sectional NP structure are shown in Fig. 18(a) and (b). In contrast to conventional QD films, this structure has a high structural stability and considerably increased light absorption owing to repeated light scattering. Electrical conductivity-dependent electrochemical (EC) etching and selective area QD-loading with a spin coater are all required for this fabrication, which allows for high-throughput manufacturing of a LED display. The strong light at the center of the target disappears with a 75% NP GaN, resulting in equal light dispersion, as shown in Fig. 18(c). Fig. 18(d) shows the PL intensity of both red and green NPQDs, with LCEs of 100% and 96%, respectively. In the blue-violet region, the total transmittance spectra of NP GaN and NPQDs are shown in Fig. 18(e). Because of a combination of wavelength-dependent light scattering and QD absorption coefficients, the transmittance of NPQDs decreases as the wavelength decreases. Fig. 18(f) shows the CIE 1931 color spectrum of green and red NPQDs, as well as a blue-violet pumping LED. The large color gamut of the NPQD structure is due to the high LCEs and narrow emission bandwidths of the QDs, which cover 88% of the Rec. 2020 color space. This study demonstrated better light absorption characterictics for the 4-inch wafer scale color converter, as well as using RGB-LED arrays by conventional semiconductor manufacturing.
 Fig. 18  (a) The schematic structure and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of NP structure, (c) light scattering by pristine GaN and NP GaN, (d) PL intensity and (e) total transmittance spectra of green and red NPQDs, and (f) color gamut of green and red NPQDs in the CIE 1931 color space.151 
Another major obstacle for commercial use is the low stability of perovskite. Halide perovskites are highly moisture sensitive and rapidly deteriorate in air because of their ionic characteristics. As a result, a variety of techniques for improving the stability of perovskite devices have been proposed. Lin et al. demonstrate the use of aluminium oxide (AAO) to confine the perovskite nanowires (NWs) by the printing method and vacuum pumping, as shown in Fig. 19(a).152 Moreover, by controlling the different compositions of the halide anions, the printed CH3NH3Pb(Cl1−xBrx)3 NWs showed blue-shifted PL when the concentration of Cl− was increased, and when I− ions were added they showed red-shifted PL, as shown in Fig. 19(b). Fig. 19(c) and (d) demonstrate powder samples of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite NWs under UV illumination, as well as PL images of printed perovskite in a template under UV illumination. For the reliability test, a comparison was made between the perovskite NWs printed onto a AAO structure and with flat Al2O3 substrate with a PMMA sealing process. Fig. 19(e) shows the flat Al2O3 substrate and the AAO structure under UV illumination. Also, the perovskite NWs in the AAO substrate deteriorate significantly less than perovskite on the flat Al2O3 substrate. Fig. 19(f) reveals that the PL peak intensity decreased by 50% after 25 days for perovskite with flat Al2O3 substrate; however, the perovskite NWs in AAO deteriorated by 50% after 60 days when stored under room lighting. The AAO-confined structure with perovskite NWs printed enables modern lighting applications.
 Fig. 19  (a) Process flow of nanoporous AAO with perovskite NWs, (b) the optical image from 439 nm to 736 nm under UV light, (c) the perovskite NW powders and (d) different patterns under UV illumination, (e) time-dependent PL intensity under continuous 30 mW cm−2 UV excitation in air, and (f) time-dependent PL intensity of the perovskite samples under room lighting and 50% humidity in air.152 
In 2020, Lin et al. realized anisotropic growth of perovskite and successfully fabricated high-quality and orientationally aligned perovskite NW array films for highly polarized emission using an inkjet printing technique and a nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) confinement method, as shown in Fig. 20(a).153 This process is fabricated similarly to that described in the previous paragraph. As seen from the TEM image in Fig. 20(a), it is obvious that the sample CH3NH3PbBr3 quantum rod (QR) structure further aids in the polarized emission. Fig. 20(b) shows the photoluminescence signals generated from the QR sample, which shows a sinusoidal fluctuation pattern, indicating a significant polarization effect. The effective stability of light holes (LHs) with respect to heavy holes is attributable to the polarized emission from QRs (HHs), and the increased recombination rate of LH excitons relative to HH excitons. The degree of linear polarization (DOLP) is calculated as 0.84, which is attributed to their anisotropic shape and the difference between NWs and the surrounding environment is shown in Fig. 20(b). Fig. 20(c) demonstrates the perovskite NW array lit up by the blue LED. Fig. 20(d) shows that the current-dependent PL EQE has a maximum EQE of 21.6% at 30 mA, which is higher than that of current-generation electroluminescence (EL) perovskite devices. Perovskite NWs array with printing method is helpful for development of highly polarized light application.
 Fig. 20  (a) Process flow of fabricating inkjet-printed perovskite NW arrays, (b) the polarized emission of perovskite NW arrays, (c) a NW/AAO device pumped by a GaN blue LED, and (d) the EQE property of a perovskite NW/AAO device.153 
Challenges of QD-based LEDs
QDs offer a lot of potential as a color converter in full-color LEDs for solid-state lighting and display applications, as was demonstrated recently by the development of a QD-based LED with efficiency comparable to commercialized organic LED technologies. However, most QD-based LEDs, especially those that generate blue or green light, have a much lower EQE due to non-radiative recombination originating from electronic trap states and free-charge carriers. The EQE of the device is proportional to the quantum yield which depends on the exciton nonradiative and radiative recombination rates. If the QDs have surface state defects, trap-assisted recombination will usually happen, resulting in nonradiative recombination and a reduction in quantum yield. Furthermore, inappropriate electron and hole injection into QDs causes Auger nonradiative recombination, resulting in energy dissipation to a charge carrier rather than a photon. In hybrid organic/colloidal QD-based LEDs, there is Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) phenomenon originating from electromagnetic fields generated by the dipoles of resonant transitions in the excited donor and the ground state acceptor, resulting in PL quenching. The spectrum overlap between the donor's emission and the acceptor's absorption triggers FRET, although the underlying mechanism of FRET's contribution to the reduced quantum efficiency is yet unknown. In most QD-based LEDs, the QD active layer is also exposed to an electric field, which causes a spatial separation of the electron and hole wave functions, lowering the exciton's radiative rate dramatically. With increasing current density, the EQE of several types of QD-based LEDs often drops. The lowering of the PL efficiency of QD-based LEDs can be attributed to a fall in radiative recombination rate caused by a high-voltage bias.
Significant progress has been achieved in the development of QD chemistries to improve the QY of QD emitters over the last 20 years. A narrow red emitter with the desired centered wavelength greatly enhances efficiency because the spectrum of current phosphors is too broad, re-emitting red light with wavelengths outside of the eye's sensitivity limitations. Finding stable QDs that can tolerate heat and light, replace existing phosphor technology, and have no toxin content, for display and lighting applications, has been one of the major problems. To obtain extremely efficient full-color LEDs, the existing on-chip integration of QDs into LED chips also needs to be highly optimized. Despite the fact that the deployed QDs may go through ligand exchange followed by a reaction to build a protective silica shell surrounding the conventional core–shell structure, the early products are limited to low-power LEDs. On-chip QD technology can allow the QDs to be directly integrated into the LEDs used in LCD backlighting, bypassing the need for additional QD films, depending on the display size. It is indeed a frontrunner for LED technology, as it can meet the size requirements better than ordinary phosphors.
Heavy-metal cations, such as cadmium, lead, and mercury, have been employed to create QDs because of their fascinating optical properties and the tunability of their fluorescence emission. However, there are rising concerns about the toxicity and other long-term health risks of employing these heavy-metal products, as well as the disposal risks. Non-cadmium alternatives with sufficient stability will be sought, indicating an urgent need for research and development. As a result, significant work has gone into developing heavy-metal-free (HMF) QDs as well as a wide spectrum of compounds and elemental semiconductors that are more environmentally friendly and less harmful. Another issue with commercializing QD-based LEDs is the device's long-term stability, as QD-based LEDs still need to have a sufficiently long lifetime. However, the toxicity and short lifetime of the CdSe-based QDs has been solved in recent years by developing Cd-free QDs such as InP- or ZnS-based QDs for display technologies. InP QDs are very interesting in terms of visible emission wavelengths with a narrow emission linewidth and high PLQY. Lian et al. developed highly stable InP/ZnS core–shell QDs with a high PLQY up to 78.5% which show a suppressed thermal quenching retaining >90% PL intensity at 150 °C.154 The surface passivation of InP QDs by the ZnS shell leads to the stability of the InP QDs. It is necessary to maintain the optimum stoichiometry between In and P within the core QDs and avoid In incorporation during epitaxial development of ZnS shells in order to establish these outstanding luminescence characteristics.106 However, InP QD synthesis requires highly flammable and expensive phosphor sources and use of phosphine, resulting in high production costs.155,156 In order to reduce the cost of QD manufacturing and device fabrication, easy-to-scale methodologies with reasonably priced, non-hazardous precursors, low-energy synthetic approaches, inexpensive and environmentally friendly solvents, and cost-effective processing technologies and facilities are required. Recently, Gao et al. reported bulk like ZnSe/ZnS core–shell QDs exhibiting high quantum yields up to 95% with an ultra-narrow emission linewidth of 9.6 nm.157 The QD-LEDs based on these ZnSe/ZnS QDs show a maximum EQE of 12.2% and a long operation lifetime, which is made possible by the growth of the ZnS shell. In spite of having a high efficiency and long lifetime, care must be taken while growing the core–shell QDs in order to lower the lattice mismatch between the core and the shell. Large lattice mismatch might lead to interfacial defects while growing the passivating shell around the QD cores. The issue of considerable performance loss in a variety of QD devices induced by developing devices in an ambient atmosphere must be handled in terms of device fabrication. More emphasis should be directed to the preparation of uniform and large-area QD films in order to facilitate their use in LED backlight liquid crystal displays and full-color QD-based LED displays.
Strategies of stability improvement for QDs
In comparison with Cd-based QDs, PQD-based LEDs still show lower performance.158–160 Moreover, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials, as well as their devices, are hindered by their limited stability.161–163 All-inorganic PQDs, such as CsPbX3 where X can be Cl, Br, or I, show superior thermal stability compared to that of their hybrid analogs.48 Although there is great potential for all-organic CsPbX3 QDs in LEDs, their emission properties have been impacted by long insulating organic ligands on the surface of QDs which affects the efficient hopping of charge carriers in the QD solids and leads to a compromise on the device performance.62,164 For the traditional QD systems, ligand exchange, namely film-based post-treatment or solution-phased pretreatment, has been developed properly.165 The ligand exchange process cannot be transferred directly to PQDs, and also the polar solvents which limit the direct transfer of the ligand excess process of post ligand treatment challenge the PQD stability.166 The ligand exchange schematic of the CsPbBr3 QD surface is shown in Fig. 21(a). The protonated OAm ligands form an acid–base complex with deprotonated OA groups, which promotes Br− anion coordination with surface metal centers (Cs+ and Pb2+) and their solubility in toluene was maintained by the presence of DDA+ on the QD surface.48 A perovskite-compatible purification process that uses a hexane/acetate solvent pair as a reagent for purification to control the density of the insulating ligand was proposed by Zeng and his team167 and was able to achieve 50-fold improvement in EQE of CsPbBr3 QD-based LEDs when the treating cycle is executed twice. However, the increase in the treatment time degrades the CsPbBr3 QDs and the performance of the corresponding QD-based LEDs due to the reduction in oleylamine (OAm) and oleic acid (OA) ligands.167 Along with the advances in improving the purification process, surface ligand engineering incorporating new-style ligands provides a simplistic and diverse route to improve the carrier transport properties and QD-based LED performance. The incorporation can be divided into two categories: (1) direct introduction as synthetic ligands and (2) post-ligand exchange treatment.166 A relatively short halide pair ligand (di-dodecyl dimethylammonium bromide (DDAB)) has been used in place of long-chain OA and OAm ligands to synthesize the CsPbBr3 QDs.48,168 DDAB ligand introduction led to enhancement of carrier injection as well as transportation and also the corresponding QD-based LED performance.169 A high-performance CsPbX3 QD-based LED was fabricated using high PLQY QDs prepared from multidentate ligands (3-(N,N-dimethyloctadecylammonio) propane sulfonate or 2,2′-iminodibenzoic acid).170,171 On comparing with other strategies with surface ligand engineering for optimization of colloidal CsPbX3 QDs for X = Cl, Br, or I, surface ligand engineering is the most effective strategy due to the highly dynamic binding between QDs and ligands.166 To improve the optical properties of CsPbBr3 QDs for X = Br and I, a type of effective surface ligand engineering has been invented which uses a π-conjugation ligand, phenethylamine (PEA) with a benzene ring and short branch chain, to synthesize QDs and treats the QD film with phenethylammonium bromide (PEABr) or phenethylammoniumiodide (PEAI).172–179 The enhanced performance of CsPbBr3 QD-based LEDs through the solid-state ligand exchange method by substituting the long chain ligands of OA and OAm by PEABr is shown in Fig. 21(b).166 The performance was enhanced by increasing the CsPbBr3 QD layer PEA content. It was possible to achieve improved green emission CsPbBr3 QD-based LEDs with a maximum EQE of 4.59% and maximum CE of 14.54 cd A−1, and it was possible to achieve the best performance red emission CsPbI3 QD-based LEDs based on pure I perovskite materials, which have maximum luminance of 1444 cd m−2 and a maximum EQE of 14.08%.180–183
 Fig. 21  (a). The ligand-exchange mechanism on CsPbBr3 QD surfaces184 and (b) schematic of the ligand exchange on the QD surface.166 
The high PLQY, high color purity, and tunable emission color over the entire visible spectral region have made CsPbX3 QDs the next-generation light emitter for LEDs.44,45,185,186 However, the presence of excessive non-radiative recombination centers, i.e., Pb atoms, leads to quenching of the exciton, which reduces the PL intensity, as well as the performance of perovskite QD-based LEDs.170,187,188 Another method to improve the optical and electrical properties of perovskite QDs is by doping.189 Doping heterovalent Bi3+ ions into the perovskite QDs shifts the Fermi level near the conduction band and promotes interfacial charge transfer.190 Perovskite QDs doped with Mn2+, Sn2+, Zn2+, Rb+, and Ag+ ions show improved PLQY and stability.191–195 Doping with lanthanides improves PLQY and results in tunable multicolor emissions.196 Red-emitting CsPbI3 QD-based LEDs were reported to exhibit an EQE of 11.2% through silver doping and surface passivation.193 A green CsPbBr3 QD-based LED doped with Mn2+, Sn4+, and Ce3+ was able to achieve a maximum EQE equal to 4.4%.197–199Fig. 22(a) illustrates the contraction in the lattice in a perovskite CsPbX3 crystal after substituting Pb2+ with smaller Mn2+ ions which enhances the perovskite CsPbBr3 formation energies and thus overcomes their weak thermal stability. Fig. 22(b) and (c) demonstrate the EQE as a function of luminance and CE as a function of current density for CsPbX3 and CsPbBr3:Mn (2.6 mol%) and CsPbBr3:Mn (3.8 mol%). It is observed that the maximum EQE and CE of the device are increased from 0.81% and 3.71 cd A−1 for CsPbBr3 to 1.49% and 6.40 cd A−1 for Mn (3.8 mol%) doped sCsPbBr3. The doping of luminescent impurity dopants (Mn2+or lanthanide ions) introduces new emission centers into perovskite QDs, which leads to the transfer of energy and influences the LED color purity.191,200,201 It was possible to achieve an improved photo/electroluminescence efficiency and stability of CsPbI3 perovskite QDs by simultaneous Sr2+ ion doping and surface Cl− ion passivation, and the resultant QD-based LED produces a high external quantum yield of 13.5%.189 An efficient QD-based LED with enhanced PLQY was demonstrated by doping heterovalent Ce3+ ions through the hot-injection method into the colloidal CsPbBr3 QDs.202
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration showing the lattice contraction in a perovskite CsPbX3 crystal after the substitution of Pb2+ with smaller Mn2+ ions, (b) EQE of these devices as a function of luminance, and (c) current efficiency of these devices as a function of current density.197 
QD-based LEDs have a multilayer device structure consisting of an electron transport layer (ETL), a QD emitting layer (EML), and a hole transport layer (HTL). To achieve highly stable perovskite QD-based LEDs, the charge transport layers protect the perovskite emissive layer. Hence, the material of the charge transport layer has become crucial in protecting the emission layer along with energy level matching and charge transport. The metal oxides, namely ZnO161,203,204 and TiO2,205,206 are widely employed as ETL materials that have high carrier mobility and superior stability. Colloidal ZnO QDs can be synthesized at room temperature and can be used to make the best-performing QD-based LEDs.158 However, they can lead to unstable properties due to the absorbed oxygen at the ZnO ETL and perovskite QD EML interface, especially for smaller size ZnO.207,208 Hence, it is important to improve the performance and stability of surrounding by controlling the ZnO/perovskite QD interface properties for fabricating LEDs. A stable and highly efficient QD-based LED, applying solution-processed Mg-doped ZnO QDs as an interface layer, was demonstrated where the air stability of the perovskite QD film was enhanced due to the reduction in oxygen vacancy surface sites at Mg-doped ZnO QDs.209 The schematic device structure of the Mg-doped ZnO-based LED is shown in Fig. 23(a). The device has a multilayer device structure with indium tin oxide (ITO, cathode), ZnO/MZO NCs (electron transport layer, 50 nm), CsPbBr3 NCs (emitting layer, 20 nm), 4,4′-bis(carbazole-9-yl) biphenyl and 4,4′,4′′-tris(carbazol-9-yl) triphenylamine organic molecules (hole transport layer, 50 nm), and MoOx/Au (anode). Fig. 23(b) presents a record of the normalized PLQY of the device with and without Mg-doping. It shows that Mg-doped ZnO-based LEDs can maintain 80% of the original PLQY whereas only 38% can be retained by the device without Mg-doping suggesting that there is a slower decline of the efficiency of the QDs doped with Mg. The LEDs with Mg-doped ZnO also exhibit a luminance of 3059 cd m−2, and have CEs 1.9 times higher and EQE 2 times higher when compared to that of the LEDs without Mg-doped ZnO.
 Fig. 23  (a) The device structure of the ZnO/MZO-based LEDs and (b) normalized PLQY evolution of CsPbBr3 films when deposited on different substrates.209 
Conclusions
In summary, QDs with a narrow bandwidth emission and a high PLQY enable wide color gamut light generation technologies for display applications. For future commercialization, the device performance of QD-based LEDs has been greatly enhanced through device optimization via QD engineering and device architecture, which serve as factors reducing non-radiative recombination and PL quenching. In this review, we have taken a detailed look at the synthesis of QDs and their stability enhancement strategies for further use in device applications. The recent breakthroughs in QD-based LEDs, as well as their performance enhancement, have also been elaborately discussed. This review will serve as a connecting point between the past, present, and future developments of QD-based LEDs. A combination of improvement in synthesis techniques of QDs and device fabrication of LEDs can yield the most promising technologies for next-generation displays. To achieve the stringent stability requirements of commercial displays, more research into the stability and protection strategies of QD coatings on LEDs is required. Although researchers have made significant progress in terms of QD conversion efficiency and stability when coupled with LEDs for full-color displays, they still need to meet the standard stability requirements of commercial displays. The recent breakthroughs in QDs and LEDs will provide a hopeful outlook for the future demand for next-generation displays.
Author contributions
Data curation, Tzu-Yi Lee; project administration, Chein-Chung Lin, Yiming Li, Fang-Chung Chen, Tsou-Hwa Hsieh, and Hao-Chung Kuo; supervision, Jr-Hau He, Chein-Chung Lin, Shih-Chen Chen, and Hao-Chung Kuo; writing – original draft, Yu-Ming Huang, Konthoujam James Singh, and Catherine Langpoklakpam; writing – review & editing, Chein-Chung Lin and Shih-Chen Chen.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (110-2124-M-A49-003-, 108-2221-E-009-113-MY3). The authors would like to thank Prof. Lung-Chien Chen of National Taipei University of Technology, Prof. Hao-Wu Lin of National Tsing Hua University, Prof. Tingzhu Wu of Xiamen University, and Prof. Shu-Ru Chung of National Formosa University for helpful discussions.
Notes and references
W. M. Girma, M. Z. Fahmi, A. Permadi, M. A. Abate and J.-Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 6193–6216 RSC .
K. E. Sapsford, T. Pons, I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, Sensors, 2006, 6, 925–953 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Srivastava, W. Zhang, J. Schneider, J. E. Halpert and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Ashoori, Nature, 1996, 379, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kastner, Ann. Phys., 2000, 9, 885–894 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 477–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Reimann and M. Manninen, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 1283–1342 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Huang, K. J. Singh, A.-C. Liu, C.- . Lin, Z. Chen, K. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, T. Wu and H.-C. Kuo, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 2696 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, C.-H. Lin, B.-R. Hyun, C.-W. Sher, Z. Lv, B. Luo, F. Jiang, T. Wu, C.-H. Ho, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. He, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. A. Wang, L. S. Li, D. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 717–722 CrossRef CAS .
H.-V. Han, C.-C. Lin, Y.-L. Tsai, H.-C. Chen, K.-J. Chen, Y.-L. Yeh, W.-Y. Lin, H.-C. Kuo and P. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Nikolenko and V. F. Razumov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2013, 82, 429–448 CrossRef .
G. S. Selopal, H. Zhao, X. Tong, D. Benetti, F. Navarro-Pardo, Y. Zhou, D. Barba, F. Vidal, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701468 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, K. S. Jeong and P. Guyot-Sionnest, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11707–11714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Y. Yin, M. U. Ali, W. Peng, S. Zhang, D. Li, T. Zou, Y. Li, S. Jiao, S.-j. Chen, C.-Y. Lee, H. Meng and H. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2103–2110 RSC .
F. Hetsch, N. Zhao, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 312–325 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Klostranec and W. C. W. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1953–1964 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Rosenthal, J. C. Chang, O. Kovtun, J. R. McBride and I. D. Tomlinson, Chem. Biol., 2011, 18, 10–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Sutherland, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jung, N. Ahn and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 643–655 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Farzin and H. Abdoos, Talanta, 2021, 224, 121828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Araki, K. Ohkuno, T. Furukawa and J. Saraie, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 301–302, 809–811 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, C. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Wang, S. Xu and Y. Cui, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 419–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, B. Song, H. Wang, F. Zhang, F. Chen, L. Wang, L. S. Li, F. Guo and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7223–7229 RSC .
S. Yu-Sheng, H. Chih-Chun and C. Shu-Ru, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2016, 9954, 99540B Search PubMed .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. D. Donakowski, K. E. Knowles and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 897–906 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Stan, M. S. Secula and D. Sibiescu, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2012, 8, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, H. Liu, J. Miao, R. Lu, Z. Zhou, B. Zhao, B. Xie, J. Cheng, K. Wang and M.-H. Delville, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 12048 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-j. Hao, J. Zhou and C.-y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6346–6348 RSC .
E. Oh, R. Liu, A. Nel, K. B. Gemill, M. Bilal, Y. Cohen and I. L. Medintz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 479–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P. Zimmer, B. I. Ipe, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2007, 25, 1165–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Morozova, M. Alikina, A. Vinogradov and M. Pagliaro, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vasudevan, R. R. Gaddam, A. Trinchi and I. Cole, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 636, 395–404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safari, S. Najafi, E. Arkan, S. Amani and M. Shahlaei, Microchem. J., 2019, 146, 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
E. Soheyli, B. Ghaemi, R. Sahraei, Z. Sabzevari, S. Kharrazi and A. Amani, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 111, 110807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Reifsnyder, X. Ye, T. R. Gordon, C. Song and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4307–4315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xi, D.-Y. Cho, M. Duchamp, C. B. Boothroyd, J. Y. Lek, A. Besmehn, R. Waser, Y. M. Lam and B. Kardynal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18233–18242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Zhao, K. S. Leck, S. T. Tan, Y. X. Tang, J. Zhao, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4180–4185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jang, Y. Kim, Y.-H. Won, H. Jang and S.-M. Choi, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1316–1327 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Milstein, D. M. Kroupa and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3792–3799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, L. Polavarapu, J. A. Sichert, A. S. Susha, A. S. Urban and A. L. Rogach, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e328–e328 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. M. Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gonzalez-Carrero, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9187–9193 RSC .
J. Pan, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, W. Peng, B. Murali, S. P. Sarmah, M. Yuan, L. Sinatra, N. M. Alyami, J. Liu, E. Yassitepe, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. N. Hedhili, O. F. Mohammed, Z. H. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8718–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chondroudis and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3028–3030 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Yettapu, D. Talukdar, S. Sarkar, A. Swarnkar, A. Nag, P. Ghosh and P. Mandal, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4838–4848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Cao, D. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Wu and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603996 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .

          M. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Guo, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2019, 29, 1902008 Search PubMed.

          Y.-M. Huang, K.-L. Liang, Y.-Y. Cho, S.-C. Hsu, W.-H. Kuo, C.-P. Huang, H.-C. Kuo, Y.-H. Fan and C.-C. Lin, CLEO: Science and Innovations, Optical Society of America,  2019, SF2O.2 Search PubMed .
A. S. Bhalla, R. Guo and R. Roy, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2000, 4, 3–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wang, Z. Bao, H. Y. Tsai, A. C. Tang and R. S. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702433 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-X. Zhang, H.-Y. Wang, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Sun, Y.-Y. Yue, L. Wang, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1920–1926 RSC .
F. Zhao, D. Chen, S. Chang, H. Huang, K. Tong, C. Xiao, S. Chou, H. Zhong and Q. Pei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 531–538 RSC .

          Y.-F. Li, S.- . Chou, P. Huang, C. Xiao, X. Liu, Y. Xie, F. Zhao, Y. Huang, J. Feng, H. Zhong, H.-B. Sun and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater.,  2019, 31, 1807516 Search PubMed.
Z. Wei and J. Xing, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3035–3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. N. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater.,  2018, 30, 1801996 Search PubMed.
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, D. Trummer, I. V. Kochetygov, S. Yakunin, F. Krumeich, N. P. Stadie and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5866–5874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, S. Kobayashi, T. Izuishi, N. Nakazawa, T. Toyoda, T. Ohta, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai and Q. Shen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10373–10383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Chiba, Y. Hayashi, H. Ebe, K. Hoshi, J. Sato, S. Sato, Y.-J. Pu, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, Nat. Photonics,  201812, 681–687 Search PubMed.
T. Senden, R. J. A. van Dijk-Moes and A. Meijerink, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 8 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. E. Panfil, M. Oded and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,  2018, 57, 4274–4295 Search PubMed.

          M. Liu, H. Zhang, D. Gedamu, P. Fourmont, H. Rekola, A. Hiltunen, S. G. Cloutier, R. Nechache, A. Priimagi and P. Vivo, Small,  2019, 15, 1900801 Search PubMed.
H. Huang, F. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Zhang, X. G. Wu, L. Shi, B. Zou, Q. Pei and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28128–28133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Deng, X. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, L. Wang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2016, 26, 4797–4802 Search PubMed.
J. Xing, F. Yan, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, R. Zeng, H. V. Demir, X. Sun, A. Huan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, J. Xing, G. Xing, L. Quan, S.
T. Tan, J. Zhao, R. Su, L. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Zhao, A. Huan, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and H. V. Demir, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3157–3164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, G.-H. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, C. Wolf, H. J. Yun, W. Kwon, C. G. Park and T. W. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater.,  2015, 27, 7162–7167 Search PubMed.
Z. Shi, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Ji, X. Li, D. Wu, T. Xu, Y. Chen, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, C. Shan and G. Du, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1462–1472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 Search PubMed.
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, P. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Zhou and B. Li, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 335401 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, F. Cao, D. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Wu and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603996 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Pradhan, D. Reifsnyder, R. Xie, J. Aldana and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9500–9509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800764 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, E. Yassitepe, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, G. Walters, X. Gong, P. Kanjanaboos, A. F. Nogueira and E. H. Sargent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25007–25013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Huang, P. Wang, X. Chen, S. Zhao, Y. Dong and H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3793–3799 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Dai, B.-W. Hsu, C.-Y. Chen, C.-A. Lee, H.-Y. Liu, H.-F. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, T.-L. Wu, A. Manikandan, R.-M. Ho, C.-S. Tsao, C.-H. Cheng, Y.-L. Chueh and H.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705532 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605005 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Singh, R. Kumar, N. Jain, M.-T. Kuo, C. P. Upadhyaya and J. Singh, Appl. Nanosci., 2019, 9, 1953–1962 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Singh, R. Kumar, N. Jain, S. R. Dash, J. Singh and A. Srivastava, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 96, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Singh, S. Som, S. Dutta, N. Jain, M.-T. Kuo, J. Singh, R. Kumar and T.-M. Chen, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 2999–3008 RSC .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. W. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T. W. Wang, X. Dang, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 236–246 RSC .
R. K. Singh, P. Sharma, R. Kumar, S. Som, S. Dutta, N. Jain, R. Chaurasiya, M. L. Meena, J.-S. Ho, S.-W. Dai, J. Singh, C.-H. Lu and H.-W. Lin, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 717–728 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Wang, J. He, H. Chen, J. Chen, R. Zhu, P. Ma, A. Towers, Y. Lin, A. J. Gesquiere, S.-T. Wu and Y. Dong, Adv. Mater.,  2016, 28, 10710–10717 Search PubMed.

          T.-Y. Li, X. Xu, C.-H. Lin, X. Guan, W.-H. Hsu, M.-L. Tsai, X. Fang, T. Wu and J.-H. He, Adv. Sci.,  2020, 7, 1902439 Search PubMed.
M. Grabolle, J. Ziegler, A. Merkulov, T. Nann and U. Resch-Genger, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 2008, 1130, 235–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lee, K. Noguchi, H. Nishimura and D. Kim, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2019, 1220, 012028 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Bansal, F. Antolini, S. Zhang, L. Stroea, L. Ortolani, M. Lanzi, E. Serra, S. Allard, U. Scherf and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1871–1880 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, Z. Luo, H. Chen, Y. Dong and S.-T. Wu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 23680–23693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, H. Chen, L. Fan, B. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Zhuang, B. Hu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20231–20238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, W. Jiang, D. Kim, W. Lee and H. Chae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17295–17300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Lin, H. Shen and L. S. Li, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 7935–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ba, Q. Xu, X. Li, Q. Lin, H. Shen and Z. Du, Opt. Express, 2021, 29, 12169–12178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Hou, X. Dai, Z. Yao, L. Lv, Y. Jin and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6448–6452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Carrière, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Kang, C.-H. Lin, C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Li, S.-W. Huang Chen, C.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Sher, T.-Z. Wu, P.-T. Lee, X. Xu, M. Zhang, C.-H. Ho, J.-H. He and H.-C. Kuo, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1902230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Sher, C.-H. Lin, H.-Y. Lin, C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Huang, K.-J. Chen, J.-R. Li, K.-Y. Wang, H.-H. Tu, C.-C. Fu and H.-C. Kuo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1117–1122 RSC .
D. H. Park, J. S. Han, W. Kim and H. S. Jang, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 149, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xuan, X. Yang, S. Lou, J. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Yu, H. Li, K.-L. Wong, C. Wang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15286–15290 RSC .

          Z. Li, S. Cunjiang, L. Jiasheng, G. Liang, R. Longshi, Y. Shudong, X. Ding, Y. Tang, B. Yu, J. Ou, U. Lemmer and G. Gomard, Adv. Mater. Technol.,  2020, 5, 1900941 Search PubMed.
C. Ippen, W. Guo, D. Zehnder, D. Kim, J. Manders, D. Barrera, B. Newmeyer, D. Hamilton, C. Wang, C. Hotz, R. Ma, J.-K. Bin, B. Kim, K. Kim, K. Jang, J. Park, T. Lee, W.-Y. Kim and J. Lee, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2019, 27, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Swarnkar, R. Chulliyil, V. K. Ravi, M. Irfanullah, A. Chowdhury and A. Nag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15424–15428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Ko, M. Jalalah, S.-J. Lee and J.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 12881 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Yoon, S. Lee, J. K. Song, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11756–11767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Hsu, Y.-M. Huang, C.-P. Huang, T.-Y. Lee, Y.-Y. Cho, Y.-H. Liu, A. Manikandan, Y.-L. Chueh, T.-M. Chen, H.-C. Kuo and C.-C. Lin, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 2836–2845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Kang, C.-H. Lin, C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Li, S.-W. Huang Chen, C.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Sher, T.-Z. Wu, P.-T. Lee, X. Xu, M. Zhang, C.-H. Ho, J.-H. He and H.-C. Kuo, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1902230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, K.-H. Kim, S. Kim, S.-M. Choi, H. Jang, H.-K. Seo, H. Lee, D.-Y. Chung and E. Jang, Nature, 2020, 586, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lin, A. Verma, C.-Y. Kang, Y.-M. Pai, T.-Y. Chen, J.-J. Yang, C.-W. Sher, Y.-Z. Yang, P.-T. Lee, C.-C. Lin, Y.-C. Wu, S. K. Sharma, T. Wu, S.-R. Chung and H.-C. Kuo, Photonics Res., 2019, 7, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, W. Peng, B. Murali, S. P. Sarmah, M. Yuan, L. Sinatra, N. M. Alyami, J. Liu, E. Yassitepe, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. N. Hedhili, O. F. Mohammed, Z. H. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8718–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Wang, S.-Y. Lin, A.-C. Tang, B. P. Singh, H.-C. Tong, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Lee, T.-L. Tsai and R.-S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7924–7929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. D. A. Ng, R. H. Friend and Z.-K. Tan, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 3866–3875 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Manders, L. Qian, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. Tokarz-Scott, K. P. Acharya, Y. Yang, W. Cao, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2015, 23, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Hu, X. Guo, Y. Lv, Z. Tang, J. Zhao, Y. Fan, N. Zhang, Y. Wang and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38755–38760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Tang, Z. Li, X. Ding, L. Rao and B. Yu, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2018, 65, 2877–2884 CAS .
S. Sadeghi, B. G. Kumar, R. Melikov, M. M. Aria, H. Bahmani Jalali and S. Nizamoglu, Optica, 2018, 5, 793–802 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, H. Liu, R. Hu, C. Wang, J. Hao, K. Wang and X. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801407 CrossRef .
J.-S. Li, Y. Tang, Z.-T. Li, J.-X. Li, X.-R. Ding, B.-H. Yu, S.-D. Yu, J.-Z. Ou and H.-C. Kuo, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 550–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2448–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Song, Z. Qiu, J. Li, K. Cao, X. Ding and Y. Tang, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 3020–3027 CAS .
Y. Peng, S. Wang, R. Li, H. Li, H. Cheng, M. Chen and S. Liu, Appl. Opt., 2016, 55, 4933–4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hsu, L. Ke, H. Lin, T. Chen, H. Lin, Y. Chen, Y. Chueh, H. Kuo and C. Lin, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Tsai, S. K. Huang, H. H. Huang, S. M. Yang, K. L. Liang, W. H. Kuo, Y. H. Fang, C. I. Wu, S. W. Wang, H. Y. Shih, Z. Xu, M. Cho, S. C. Shen and C. C. Lin, IEEE Photonics J., 2020, 12, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K.-L. Liang, W.-H. Kuo, H.-T. Shen, P.-W. Yu, Y.-H. Fang and C.-C. Lin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 60, SA0802 CrossRef .
H.-V. Han, H.-Y. Lin, C.-C. Lin, W.-C. Chong, J.-R. Li, K.-J. Chen, P. Yu, T.-M. Chen, H.-M. Chen, K.-M. Lau and H.-C. Kuo, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 32504–32515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Sher, D.-H. Hsieh, X.-Y. Chen, H.-M. P. Chen, T.-M. Chen, K.-M. Lau, C.-H. Chen, C.-C. Lin and H.-C. Kuo, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 411–416 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, Z. Zhong, B. Liu, Z. He, J. Zou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26162–26168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Huang Chen, C.-C. Shen, T. Wu, Z.-Y. Liao, L.-F. Chen, J.-R. Zhou, C.-F. Lee, C.-H. Lin, C.-C. Lin, C.-W. Sher, P.-T. Lee, A.-J. Tzou, Z. Chen and H.-C. Kuo, Photonics Res., 2019, 7, 416–422 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J. Bai, Y. P. Gong and T. Wang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 395102 CrossRef .

          J.-H. Ryou, W. Lee, J. Limb, D. Yoo, J. P. Liu, R. D. Dupuis, Z. H. Wu, A. M. Fischer and F. A. Ponce, Appl. Phys. Lett.,  2008, 92, 101113 Search PubMed.

          M. Zhu, Y. Duan, N. Liu, H. Li, J. Li, P. Du, Z. Tan, G. Niu, L. Gao, Y. Huang, Z. Yin and J. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2019, 29, 1903294 Search PubMed.
J. Zhao, L. Chen, D. Li, Z. Shi, P. Liu, Z. Yao, H. Yang, T. Zou, B. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Yang, W. Cao, X. Yan, S. Zhang and X. W. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Achermann, M. A. Petruska, D. D. Koleske, M. H. Crawford and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1396–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Erdem and H. V. Demir, Nanophotonics,  2013, 2, 57–81 Search PubMed.
H. Chen, J. He and S. Wu, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Park, J. Kyhm, H. H. Kim, S. Jeong, J. Kang, S.-e. Lee, K.-T. Lee, K. Park, N. Barange, J. Han, J. D. Song, W. K. Choi and I. K. Han, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6946–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. H. Chen, Y.-M. Huang, K. J. Singh, Y.-C. Hsu, F.-J. Liou, J. Song, J. Choi, P.-T. Lee, C.-C. Lin, Z. Chen, J. Han, T. Wu and H.-C. Kuo, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, 630–636 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kang, B. Li, T. Zhao, M. A. Johar, C.-C. Lin, Y.-H. Fang, W.-H. Kuo, K.-L. Liang, S. Hu, S.-W. Ryu and J. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30890–30895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Li, J. Zhang, Z.-Y. Chiao, P.-C. Wei, H.-C. Fu, L. Hu, M.-J. Yu, G. H. Ahmed, X. Guan, C.-H. Ho, T. Wu, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, Y.-J. Lu, X. Fang and J.-H. He, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104801 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Kang, T.-Z. Wu, C.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Sher, X. Guan, P.-T. Lee, T. Wu, C.-H. Ho, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. He, Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2020, 30, 1909275 Search PubMed.
L. Lian, Y. Li, D. Zhang and J. Zhang, Coatings, 2021, 11, 581 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li and P. Reiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11588–11589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Won, O. Cho, T. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T. Kim, H. Chung, H. Jang, J. Lee, D. Kim and E. Jang, Nature, 2019, 575, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, H. Yang, H. Shen, Z. Zeng, F. Fan, B. Tang, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Q. Hua, L. S. Li, B. Ji and Z. Du, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 7252–7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics,  2015, 9, 259–266 Search PubMed.
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, P. Gao, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6160–6164 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
O. Voznyy, B. R. Sutherland, A. H. Ip, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17026 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Adv. Mater.,  2017, 29, 1607022 Search PubMed.
G. Li, J. Huang, H. Zhu, Y. Li, J.-X. Tang and Y. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6099–6107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Xu, T. Wang, J. Song, J. Chen, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Cai, Q. Shan, B. Han and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 603885 Search PubMed .
T. Chiba, K. Hoshi, Y.-J. Pu, Y. Takeda, Y. Hayashi, S. Ohisa, S. Kawata and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18054–18060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, M. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, T. Zhang, V. L. Colvin and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4173–4178 RSC .
J. Pan, Y. Shang, J. Yin, M. De Bastiani, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, A. M. El-Zohry, M. N. Hedhili, A.-H. Emwas, O. F. Mohammed, Z. Ning and O. M. Bakr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 562–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Krieg, S. T. Ochsenbein, S. Yakunin, S. ten Brinck, P. Aellen, A. Süess, B. Clerc, D. Guggisberg, O. Nazarenko, Y. Shynkarenko, S. Kumar, C.-J. Shih, I. Infante and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Sabatini, G. Walters, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, Y. Li, J. Z. Fan, H. Tan, J. Pan, M. Yuan, O. M. Bakr, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3701–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Ng, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Parida, N. F. Jamaludin, N. Yantara, A. Bruno, C. Soci, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12004–12007 RSC .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. Meng, P. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 570 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, M. T. Rea, J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Zhao, D. Pan, L. H. Manger, J. C. Wright, R. H. Goldsmith and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8385–8394 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Pei, F. Xiao, T. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. Xu, J. Sun, B. Peng and M. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318–6322 RSC .
L. Zhang and W. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1517–1523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Li, Z. Zhu, Q. Dong, J. Li, Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, A. K.-Y. Jen and L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces,  2017, 4, 1700598 Search PubMed.
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zou, R. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Miao, M. Xu, Q. Guo, D. Di, L. Zhang, C. Yi, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 608 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Si, Y. Liu, Z. He, H. Du, K. Du, D. Chen, J. Li, M. Xu, H. Tian, H. He, D. Di, C. Lin, Y. Cheng, J. Wang and Y. Jin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11100–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Pan, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, W. Peng, B. Murali, S. P. Sarmah, M. Yuan, L. Sinatra, N. M. Alyami, J. Liu, E. Yassitepe, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. N. Hedhili, O. F. Mohammed, Z. H. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater.,  2016, 28, 8718–8725 Search PubMed.
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, L. Chen, N. Song, Y. Lv, F. Hu, C. Sun, W. W. Yu, C. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 026401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, W. Chen, W. Wang, B. Xu, D. Wu, J. Hao, W. Cao, F. Fang, Y. Li, Y. Zeng, R. Pan, S. Chen, W. Cao, X. W. Sun and K. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5168–5173 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Shen, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater.,  2018, 30, 1804691 Search PubMed.
R. Begum, M. R. Parida, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, N. M. Alyami, G. H. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Q. Lin, H. Li, K. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954–14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Baek, S. Kim, J. Y. Noh, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, K.-H. Hong and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Opt. Mater.,  2018, 6, 1800295 Search PubMed.
M. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Bai, H. Wu, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Song, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, V. K. Ravi and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1089–1098 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pan, X. Bai, D. Yang, X. Chen, P. Jing, S. Qu, L. Zhang, D. Zhou, J. Zhu, W. Xu, B. Dong and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zou, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. Liu, R. Feng, F. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng, M. Hong and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443–11450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Wang, W. Wang, A. C. Tang, H. Y. Tsai, Z. Bao, T. Ihara, N. Yarita, H. Tahara, Y. Kanemitsu, S. Chen and R. S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13650–13654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yao, J. Ge, B. N. Han, K. H. Wang, H. B. Yao, H. L. Yu, J. H. Li, B. S. Zhu, J. Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, S. Ji, M. C. De Siena, L. Fei, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhao and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8003–8011 CrossRef CAS .
D. Parobek, B. J. Roman, Y. Dong, H. Jin, E. Lee, M. Sheldon and D. H. Son, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7376–7380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Yao, J. Ge, B.-N. Han, K.-H. Wang, H.-B. Yao, H.-L. Yu, J.-H. Li, B.-S. Zhu, J.-Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H.-B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bai, W. Ji, D. Han, L. Chen, B. Chen, H. Shen, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1085–1091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2362–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, G. Baek, B. R. Lee, E. D. Jung, S. Lee, J. H. Chu, D. K. Lee, K. J. Choi, S. Cho and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3492–3500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manor, E. A. Katz, T. Tromholt and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 836–843 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pachoumi, C. Li, Y. Vaynzof, K. K. Banger and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1428–1436 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Lu, C. Sun, T. Zhang and W. W. Yu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700377 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Different types of QDs under UV excitation22, (b) core–shell QDs, and (c) alloyed QDs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Perovskite crystal structure, (b) cubic phase, and (c) orthorhombic phase.54	 

 	Fig. 3  Hot injection method for the synthesis of (a) CdSe QDs79 and (b) CsPbBr3 QDs.80	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) the reaction system and process for LARP technique49 and (b) the detailed operation and mechanism of RT-SR synthesis.83	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and treatment process of PQDs and (b) room-temperature triple-ligand surface engineering.84	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the spray-synthesis technique, (b) PL spectra, and (c) long-term stability of PLQY for the drop-synthesized (D) and spray-synthesized (S) toluene solutions.88	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photograph of CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xClx PQD thin films with different concentrations under ambient and UV light irradiation, (b) PLQY for PQDs with different concentrations of x, (c) Trend of CoCl2 concentration for CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xClx PQDs, (d) the reaction between CNCs and anions in perovskite, € PL emission spectra of PQDP with various amounts of MAPbBr3 precursor, and (f)–(h) the time-dependent PL environmental stability.98,100	 

CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs	Spray synthesis method	PLQY ≈ 100%	
97

CsPbBr3	Hot injection method	PLQY ≈ 90%	
83

CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs	Ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP) technique	PLQY ≈ 70%	
97

CsPbBr3 QDs	Room-temperature triple-ligand surface engineering method	PLQY = 93%	
97

CH3NH3Pb1−xCoxBr3−2xCl2x PQDs	Cation and anion exchange method	PLQY = 95%	
97

MAPbBr3/PQDP	Oleic acid/oleylamine (traditional surface ligands)-free method	PLQY ≈ 80%	
97

CdSe–ZnS QDs	Microwave synthesis	PLQY ≈ 50%	
98

CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs	Hydrothermal method	PLQY ≈ 47%	
99

Ligand capped CdS QDs	Solutions based method	PLQY = 69%	
100


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of multi-layered QD-LEDs, (b) the EQE-luminance, and (c) the EQE-current density of different QD-LED types.105	 

ZnO/PEI	18.8	16.5%	
108

PVK/QD/PEIE	89.8	22.4%	
109

CdSe/CdS nanorod-based	19.8	15.7%	
110

traditional CdSe/ZnS QDs	69.2	22.9%	
111

InP/ZnSe/ZnS core/shell/shell	
	12.2%	
112


 	Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra for PQD/PSZ composite and (b) luminous efficacy and CCT (K) for the QD-LEDs.117	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the remote film types and traditional packaged types of device. The upper-left corner shows a comparison of normalized peak intensities between a traditional device and a remote-film type PQD device. A serious degradation (>90%) of the traditional device was detected after a continuous 2500-hour aging test. (b) The finished remote-film type PQD hybrid LED.118	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Reabsorption mechanism of red and green QDs without SBA-15, (b) light extraction mechanism of QD light in QD/SBA-15 NPs, (c) luminous efficacy and luminous flux for white LEDs, and (d) luminous efficacy and luminous flux of red and green QD/SBA-15 integrated into dichromatic QD/SBA-15 NP white LEDs.131	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication process of PQD-based white light LEDs, (b) CIE diagram, (c) luminous efficiency and luminous flux as a function of current, and (d) luminous flux under continuous operation.108	 

K2SiF6:Mn4+ phosphor (red), CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs (green)	124	64	6706	
108

CsPbBr1.2I1.8 QDs (red), CsPbBr3-SiO2 QDs (green)	35.4	
	5623	
110

K2SiF6:Mn4+ phosphor (red), CsPbBr3/TDPA QDs (green)	63	83	7072	
111

CsPbBr3 PQDs integrated with the S-AIM (AeroPQDs)	59.8	
	6500	
112

CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell QD (RGB)	64	
	
	
129

CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell QD (green, blue)	105	
	
	
129

CdSe/ZnS QDs (red), YAG phosphor (yellow)	90	90.3	4382	
133

RGB PiG phosphor	27.19	87.2	3326	
134

CdTe@NaCl (red, green, yellow)	45 (green only)	92.5	2650	
135


 	Fig. 13  (a) and (d) Mechanism of the coffee-ring effect due to the QDs’ outward flow during evaporation, (b) and (c) the OM image and EL illumination without PR square, and (e) and (f) the OM image and EL illumination with PR square.139	 

 	Fig. 14  (a)–(c) SEM image of the RGB pixel array and NR-LED with 30° tilt angle; TEM image of the contact area between MQWs and QDs, (d) PL emission spectra of NR-LEDs with and without ALD passivation, and (e) color gamut of RGB hybrid QD-based LED, NTSC, and Rec. 2020.141	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup for the EHD printing system, (b) the relationship between CsPbX3 crystal dot diameter and voltage pulse peak, EHD printed microscale (c) line arrays of RGB and (d) dot arrays of RGB, (e) height profile of CsPbBr3 dot.144	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration and corresponding fluorescence images of red, green, and blue QDs, full-color patterns of QDs and (b) cross-sectional SEM images of QD stripes with different thicknesses and fluorescence image of a QD stripe array with a linewidth of 2 μm.145	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The red, green, and blue (transparent) pixel lithography process, (b) EL image of RGB pixels, (c) EL spectra of red and green pixels; color gamut of RGB pixel assembly from (d) c-plane LED and (e) QDPR at various current densities in the CIE 1976 color space.150	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The schematic structure and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of NP structure, (c) light scattering by pristine GaN and NP GaN, (d) PL intensity and (e) total transmittance spectra of green and red NPQDs, and (f) color gamut of green and red NPQDs in the CIE 1931 color space.151	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Process flow of nanoporous AAO with perovskite NWs, (b) the optical image from 439 nm to 736 nm under UV light, (c) the perovskite NW powders and (d) different patterns under UV illumination, (e) time-dependent PL intensity under continuous 30 mW cm−2 UV excitation in air, and (f) time-dependent PL intensity of the perovskite samples under room lighting and 50% humidity in air.152	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Process flow of fabricating inkjet-printed perovskite NW arrays, (b) the polarized emission of perovskite NW arrays, (c) a NW/AAO device pumped by a GaN blue LED, and (d) the EQE property of a perovskite NW/AAO device.153	 

 	Fig. 21  (a). The ligand-exchange mechanism on CsPbBr3 QD surfaces184 and (b) schematic of the ligand exchange on the QD surface.166	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration showing the lattice contraction in a perovskite CsPbX3 crystal after the substitution of Pb2+ with smaller Mn2+ ions, (b) EQE of these devices as a function of luminance, and (c) current efficiency of these devices as a function of current density.197	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) The device structure of the ZnO/MZO-based LEDs and (b) normalized PLQY evolution of CsPbBr3 films when deposited on different substrates.209	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
