Organic nanophotonics: from controllable assembly of functional molecules to low-dimensional materials with desired photonic properties  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00098F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00098F
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4325-4340Organic nanophotonics: from controllable assembly of functional molecules to low-dimensional materials with desired photonic properties

        
          
            Yongli 
            Yan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong Sheng 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. E-mail: yszhao@iccas.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-10-62652029;   Tel: +86-10-62652029
Received 
      3rd March 2014
    First published on 3rd April 2014AbstractNanophotonics, which is mainly the study of the behavior of light–matter interaction at the wavelength scale, has developed into one of the most important branches in optics-related disciplines. Utilizing organic functional molecules as the building blocks of nanophotonic materials and devices has great potential due to the multiple advantages, including the molecular designability, good processability, tailorable properties, and so on. Small molecules exhibit a strong tendency to aggregate into low-dimensional structures through an assembly process. The morphologies of the formed products, which are tightly related to the stacking modes of the molecules, can be precisely controlled through the modulation of various intermolecular interactions. The optical properties of organic complex structures, assembled from one or more types of small molecules, show heavy dependence on the composition, distribution, as well as the topological structures, manifesting a strategy to acquire desired photonic properties via rational structural design and/or componential modulation. This tutorial review focuses on the relationship among various molecules, diverse structures and photonic properties, with emphasis on the controllable assembly processes to fabricate low-dimensional structures and assembly strategies to achieve requisite optofunctional properties.
Yongli Yan
Yongli Yan received her PhD degree in 2008 from Fudan University. Then she joined the National University of Singapore as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2010, she joined Prof. Yong Sheng Zhao's research group as an assistant professor and was promoted to an associate professor in 2012. Her research interests are focused on the linear and nonlinear optical properties of organic composite materials, including the controllable synthesis of hybrid materials, comprehensive investigation of the involved energy/charge/exciton processes, and their applications in the optoelectronics field.
Yong Sheng Zhao
Yong Sheng Zhao received his PhD degree in 2006 from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). After that, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and Northwestern University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2009, he returned to ICCAS as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on organic nanophotonic materials and devices, including the controllable synthesis of low dimensional organic materials, comprehensive investigation of the photophysical and photochemical processes involved in the materials, and the design, fabrication and performance optimization of photonic/optoelectronic nanodevices.

Key learning points
(1) Assembly characteristics of small organic molecules
(2) The dependence of organic nanostructures on the molecular assembly
(3) Photonic properties of organic nanomaterials with specific structures and compositions
(4) Function-guided material design and synthesis through molecular tailoring

1. Introduction
Nanophotonics, which is the generation, transfer, modulation and detection of photons in a confined system, was first used in the field of near-field optics/spectroscopy, and subsequently generalized in other fields such as photonic crystals and surface plasmon optics.1 Since photons exhibit great superiority over electrons as information carriers, including speed, bandwidth, capacity, etc., nanophotonics provides a promising solution to the current bottlenecks that limit the further improvement of modern electronics. Therefore, the photonic applications of inorganic–organic nanostructures have become a relatively new branch of nanophotonics. There is no existing guidance on the design of photonic materials and devices due to the vast differences between photons and electrons in fundamental physical properties at the moment. Chemists and material scientists, in this respect, have made an outstanding contribution to achieving novel optical properties with inorganic materials, such as ZnO, CdSe as well as noble metal nanostructures.2 During the flourishing of their inorganic counterparts, organic materials have gradually become a better choice as nanophotonic materials due to their numerous advantages. Organic molecules possess high photoluminescence quantum yields, tunable optical properties, and rapid photoresponses. Their excellent flexibility and processability are also big pluses in the fabrication of functional photonic devices. Taken together, there is no doubt that organic molecular materials are good candidates for the design and fabrication of functional elements for photonic integrated circuits.3
Organic compounds, especially small molecules, tend to form crystalline structures through an assembly process driven by the weak interactions among the molecules, such as hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, π–π interactions, etc.4 These weak intermolecular interactions allow for more facile and mild conditions in the fabrication of high quality low-dimensional structures. There have been numerous efforts to synthesize organic nanostructures through a variety of methods, including assembly in the liquid phase, epitaxial growth in the vapor phase and template-involved methods.5 It is indicated that molecular interactions play an important role in dominating the assembly characteristics.6 In general, participation of a single force will cause molecular packing along a preferential direction and result in one-dimensional (1D) structures. The participation of two or more kinds of interactions will complicate the assembly process and nanostructures with various morphologies are expectable. It is necessary to summarize the relationship between the intermolecular interactions and the final structural features to further guide the molecular design and construction strategy optimization.
One of the most important reasons why organic nanomaterials have become very attractive is their unique optical properties, which are fundamentally different from their inorganic counterparts.7 The optical properties of assembled nanostructures depend not only on those of molecules constituting them, but also on the morphologies of their aggregates.8 Aggregation induced enhanced photoluminescence,9 mainly because of the reduced vibration-rotation in the solid state, has been reported in plenty of molecules. In addition, those as-prepared crystalline structures with regular shapes are often accompanied by remarkable photon confinements, including but not limited to the cavity effect and waveguide behavior. Moreover, the formation of exciton polaritons (EPs), by the strong coupling between photons and Frenkel type excitons, can change the original properties a lot and cause plenty of new phenomena.10 The fruitful excited state processes among different molecules, i.e. energy/charge transfer, exciton diffusion, separation and recombination,11 could bring much flexibility in the realization of complex photonic functions. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the relationship between optical properties and structures is essential to direct the material design and synthesis.
In this tutorial review, we mainly focus on the relationship among molecules, assembly characteristics, structures and photonic properties, which is divided into three parts (Fig. 1). We start by looking at how opto-functional molecules begin to assemble under various intermolecular forces (Part 2). Then, we put emphasis on the relationship between assembly behavior and morphologies of the final low-dimensional structures, providing a way to fabricate diverse nanostructures through rational control of intermolecular interactions (Part 3). In the following part, we will concentrate on the structural design and the corresponding cooperative assembly method of multiple molecules towards achieving complex photonic functions and high performance (Part 4). Finally, we summarize the recent contributions as well as challenges in this field and put forward the prospects and directions for future development.
 Fig. 1  Organization of this review. Part 2: molecular assembly characteristics, which are determined by intermolecular interactions. Part 3: low-dimensional structures with diverse morphologies fabricated through the controllable assembly processes. Part 4: optical properties and photonic applications of the assembled complex structures. 
2. From molecules to assembly
The development of a facile construction strategy to fabricate organic low-dimension structures is a crucial prerequisite for further investigation of optofunctions. Present methods applicable to inorganic materials are not suitable for organic categories because of the vicious reaction conditions, such as high pressure, high temperature, and various solvents. Fortunately, some meaningful attempts to synthesize organic materials have been made in the past couple of years. Assembly has been demonstrated to be a facile and universal route to synthesize organic solid materials.12 This bottom-up method starts from the aggregation of individual molecules, and ends up with a dynamic balance in the liquid phase or depletion of raw materials in the vapor phase.
Molecules could assemble into crystals on some occasions if the nucleation and crystal growth processes coexist in a system. The tiny aggregates assembled at the initial stage can serve as stable nuclei once they reach a critical size. Then the crystals grow larger and larger until the whole system reaches equilibrium. The fundamental difference between assembly and crystallization processes is the driving forces. The crystallization process, which consists of nucleation and crystal growth stages, was driven by supersaturation, while the driving forces behind the assembly process may come from the inherent weak intermolecular interactions or the influence of the environment. Here we elaborate on how these interactions impact upon the molecular behavior in the assembly process.
2.1 Inherent intermolecular interactions
Among numerous construction strategies for organic micro-nanostructured materials, the most widely used strategy is assembly in the liquid phase, because of its simplicity and flexibility. By carefully controlling the assembly behavior, we can obtain regular-shaped aggregates. For small molecules, the weak interactions among molecules, which are usually one or more kinds of π–π interactions, van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonding, etc., play a key role in promoting the aggregation behavior. Continuous efforts have been made to explore the relationship between the interactions and the pattern modes of molecules in crystalline structures with smooth surfaces and flat end facets.

Fig. 2 summarizes several typical molecular structures (fibers, tubes, sheets and rings) fabricated through the assembly behavior of organic molecules. Shown in Fig. 2A is the representative formation mechanism of the nanowires, which are assembled from a π-conjugated compound, 2-(N,N-diethylanilin-4-yl)-4,6-bis(3,5-dimethylpyrazol-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazine (DBPT).13 It is known from Fig. 2A (middle) that the molecule has a preferential stacking direction along the c crystal axis because of the strong π–π interaction stemming from the middle core. Therefore DBPT molecules stack up one by one along the [001] direction, leading to the formation of 1D nanostructures. The SEM image displayed in Fig. 2A (right) further confirms that the 1D wire-like structures grown along a single direction are smooth-surfaced. The flat end facets can serve as reflectors to form high quality Fabry–Pérot cavities.
 Fig. 2  Formation mechanisms of four representative structures. (A) Nanowire: (left) molecular structure of DBPT; (middle) predicted growth morphology of DBPT crystalline structure; (right) SEM image of the DBPT nanowires. Scale bar is 2 μm. (B) Schematic elucidation of the possible formation mechanism of tubular structures via supramolecular assembly of 2,6-di-pyrazol-1-ylpyridine. (C) Nanosheet: (left) molecular structure of BP2T-OMe; (middle) crystal structures of BP2T-OMe with projections of the bc-plane, ac-plane, and herringbone packing mode along the c axis, respectively; (right) crystal lattice in the ab-plane. (D) Microring: (up) molecular structure of DPPDO and illustration of the assembling mechanism of microrings; (bottom) optical microscope images of nanowires, small/large rings and tiles formed by using DPPDO solutions with different concentrations. Scale bars are 25 μm. Insets show the corresponding SEM images. Scale bars are 2 μm. Fig. 2A, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; Fig. 2B, Copyright 2011, Wiley; Fig. 2C, Copyright 2012, Wiley; Fig. 2D, Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
Things change if there is more than one kind of interaction during assembly. Fig. 2B schematically illustrates the formation mechanism of a tubular structure from a novel back-to-back coupled 2,6-di-pyrazol-1-ylpyridine compound,14 whose structure is shown in Fig. 2B. The molecule is nearly planar (demonstrated by the optimized top view and side view images). The hydrogen bond formed between the pyrazole-ring nitrogen and the pyrazole-ring proton facilitates a head-to-tail packing pattern and thus forms a 1D chain like structure, which is then closely packed and forms a pseudo sheet-like structure. This sheet-like structure could aggregate into a 3D multilayered supramolecular structure via intermolecular π–π interactions of the pyridine rings. The supramolecular aggregates are not thermodynamically stable, and an upfolding of 90 degrees along the sheet axis was found to minimize the surface energy. After a subsequent seaming process, these triple folded nanosheets formed a rectangular tube-like structure. Further growth of the tube along the axis was steered by the rapid growth of the tube walls.

Fig. 2C shows the molecular pattern in the low-dimensional crystals with a consequent rhombus shape.15 The model compound, 5,5′-bis(4′-methoxybiphenyl-4-yl)-2,2′-bithiophene (BP2T-OMe), has a long chain core of a thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer (Fig. 2C left), which has been widely used as gain medium for lasing. It can be observed from the middle part of Fig. 2C that the molecules are tilted against the ab-plane, which is governed by the interactions between methoxy groups. The molecular axes are alternately declined in the opposite direction to the c-axis in the stacked molecular layers because of the zigzag molecular shape. A classic herringbone packing is clearly observed when projected along the molecular axis in one molecular layer parallel to the ab-plane. It is the combination of π stacking and interactions between peripheral methoxy groups that is responsible for the formation of the two-dimensional shape, because hydrogen atoms on the molecular terminals do not contribute to the stabilization of an orthorhombic form.16 The angle between the (110) and (10) faces of the crystal is determined to be 77.6°, which is close to the edge angle of the rhombus shape of the sheet.
Recently, our group succeeded in the controllable construction of microrings using an organic compound named 1,5-diphenyl-1,4-pentadien-3-one (DPPDO).17 The molecular structure of DPPDO is displayed in Fig. 2D. This molecule enables a rearrangement in the loose crystal lattice due to good tolerance for structural distortion. The molecular planes are perpendicular to the c axis and the distance between neighboring molecules along the c axis is a bit large, revealing a buffer space for the movement of DPPDO molecules. As a result, the assembled DPPDO 1D structures have remarkable flexibility, which implies a bendable characteristic in the preferential growth directions. Therefore, assembled microrings can be achieved by the aggregation of DPPDO molecules, as long as an appropriate driving force could be applied for the circular growth during the assembly process.
In this work, the crystalline microrings were fabricated by introducing the liquid tension of solution droplets during the assembly process. The DPPDO molecules concentrate preferentially first at the contact line between the microsized droplet and the substrate, where the solvent evaporated faster than in the central area. The solution droplet was therefore confined within the inner surface, and offered a circular template for the assembly around the droplet. As DPPDO segments grow large, molecular packing bends gradually induced by the force of liquid tension at the contact line. With further evaporation of solvent, the segments grow into a curved belt. The formation of the rings greatly depends on the amount of DPPDO units in the microdroplets (Fig. 2D bottom). If there were no sufficient molecules, only short rods would emerge. With the increase of the DPPDO amount, the products gradually develop into incomplete and perfect microrings. However, only large tiles would appear if there were excess DPPDO in a droplet, because of the huge mechanical resistance needed to be overcome for the wide tiles. From this result, we can infer that though intermolecular forces dominate the assembly behavior and thus the final morphology, other factors, such as the amount of DPPDO,18 should not be ignored.
2.2 Influences of external factors
Besides inherent intermolecular forces, some other external conditions of the environment, solvent, humidity,19 surface tension, temperature,20 aging time,21 ultrasonic action,22etc. also play a role in determining the packing behavior of molecules. For example, a highly humid condition would be crucial to the formation of assembled structures with ring shape for thiacyanine derivatives.19 Zhang and colleagues reported that by changing the process temperature, three kinds of single crystal nanostructures, nanoribbons, nanotubes, and nanowires, can be controllably prepared using a single intramolecular charge-transfer organic compound.20

2.2.1 Solvent effect on assembly. 

Fig. 3 illustrates an example of the solvent effect on the products with distinct morphologies, i.e. solid rods and hollow tubes, respectively. Both the structures were formed by assembly in the liquid phase.21 Briefly, 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA) solution was injected into boiling water under vigorous agitation and then cooled to room temperature. Fig. 3A shows the SEM image of the obtained microrods and the magnified image of a single rod tip. If the boiling system were kept refluxed for a given time period before cooling, the final products would be perfect hollow tubes (Fig. 3B), which were further confirmed by the TEM image (Fig. 3C). Two structures have the same preferential growth direction of [001] (Fig. 3C inset). The reason why reflux enables the formation of hollow structures was explored through variation of reflux time. It is the etching of BPEA molecules by a small amount of ethanol (good solvent) during the reflux period that resulted in the formation of the hollow tubular structures.23
 Fig. 3  Solvent etching effect on the assembled structures. (A) SEM image of the BPEA microrods prepared by regular liquid phase assembly. Scale bar is 5 μm. Inset: SEM image of a single rod tip. (B) SEM image of BPEA microtubes prepared through an assembly process under reflux. Scale bar is 10 μm. (C) TEM image of the typical BPEA microtubes. Scale bar is 2 μm. Inset: SAED pattern. Copyright 2008, Wiley. 


2.2.2 Site-selected assembly on specific substrates. 
For assembly in the liquid phase, the solvent is of great significance because some other external factors come into play through it, such as temperature, solubility, aging time and surface tension. By contrast, the most important factor for assembly in the vapor phase is the parameters of vaporized organic molecules. It is well known that the supersaturation degree of the vaporized molecules is the key factor in deciding the morphology and monodispersity.24 Maintaining the vapor saturation at a low level will facilitate the processing of most organic materials into uniform low-dimensional structures. Thus, it is increasingly important to be able to control such a parameter.
It was found that the introduction of an adsorbent in vapor phase deposition improves the quality remarkably.25 The adsorbents, which can be neutral aluminum oxide or silica gel, are extremely helpful to control the degree of supersaturation. The mechanism is considered to be associated with the existence of an adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the adsorbents and the organic sources. A series of crystalline organic nanostructures have been prepared using this improved method. Fig. 4A illustrates a typical assembly process of the tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3) compound. Here a mixture of Alq3–adsorbent was used as a material source and heated to the deposition temperature. The sublimed Alq3 vapor with an appropriate degree of supersaturation translates into small Alq3 crystal nuclei with high uniformity on the substrates. Subsequently Alq3 molecules are adsorbed onto the nuclei through intermolecular interactions and assembled into uniform 1D nanowires.
 Fig. 4  Substrate effect on the assembly of organic molecules in the vapor phase. (A) Growth mechanism of Alq3 nanowires with the assistance of adsorbents to improve the uniformity and crystallinity. (B) Patterned growth of DAAQ nanowire arrays on silicon wafers with periodic ridge–groove patterns. Scale bar is 25 μm. (C) Optical microscope image of the DAAQ nanowires grown at an AFM tip. Scale bar is 10 μm. (D) SEM image of the DAAQ nanowires grown on silica spheres. Inset shows the magnified image. Scale bars are 2 μm. (A) Copyright 2006, Wiley; (B–D) Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Assembling 1D structures into vertically aligned arrays has been actively pursued because of its advantages in a wide range of applications, such as solar cells, batteries, light emitting diodes, and so forth. Previous reports on array materials mostly concentrated on inorganic semiconductors26 or materials fabricated using various templates.27,28 Since organic materials have been widely used in the photoelectric field, it is necessary to acquire organic nanowire arrays. Huang et al. reported the direct growth of vertically aligned organic nanowire arrays using 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ).29 It was found that DAAQ tends to preferably nucleate and grow faster on high surface energy sites. This site-selected growth enables a patterned growth on substrates upon specific treatment. Fig. 4B shows the tilted view of the SEM image of DAAQ arrays grown on a silicon substrate modified with alternating ridge edges and grooves. Here, DAAQ molecules selectively nucleate and grow on ridge edges with high surface energy. Similarly, DAAQ molecules could also grow on AFM tips (Fig. 4C) with a much longer nanowire near the very end tip, where it possesses the highest surface energy. This reminds us that introducing extra sites with high surface energy should be an effective way to control the distributions of the obtained nanostructures. It has been proved that the size of the growth site affects the number and orientation of DAAQ nanowires. As demonstrated in Fig. 4D, only one nanowire grew on each silica sphere with an appropriate diameter of 520 nm. The ease of the oriented vertical growth and modulation provides convenience for the fabrication of complex structures as well as direct integration of nanowires into devices.

3. From assembly to structures
One of the most important reasons why organic nanostructures have become very attractive is the fact that their optical and electronic properties are quite different from their inorganic counterparts. As we know, the optical performances of organic nanostructures are determined by both the intrinsic properties of molecules constituting them and the optical confinement effect derived from the various structural features. Organic aggregates assembled from small molecules are usually crystals with regular shape, where the ordered molecular arrangements could offer good photon confinement. It can be seen from the last section that the molecular assembly behaviors directly determine the final structures of tiny crystals. That is to say, the acquisition of distinct structures can be reasonably expected through a finely controlled assembly process. In this part, we will discuss the fabrication of nanomaterials with specific structures either through rational molecular design or construction strategy selection.
3.1 Structural control through intermolecular interactions
We have known that molecules would assemble into various structures if appropriate forces were introduced during the aggregation process. Since the optical performances are strongly morphology-dependent, a controllable synthesis is of particular significance. In most cases, aromatic molecules tend to assemble into one-dimensional structures through strong π–π interactions if there are no other intermolecular interactions. Modifying the molecular structure by tailoring the constituent groups may introduce additional forces and disturb the balance of π stacking, causing different preferential growth patterns, such as the direction, planarity and steric hindrance effect. Thus, the rational design of molecular components with different intermolecular recognition patterns would be promising for the acquisition of nanostructures with desired morphologies, which can manipulate photons in specific modes.

3.1.1 Controlling the structures through molecular design. 
Very recently, we constructed 1D and 2D nanoarchitectures with distinct photonic confinements through assembly by altering the structures of the components, affording guidelines for the molecular design and morphology control (Fig. 5).30 The only difference between 2-acetyl-6-dimethylaminonaphthalene (ADN, Fig. 5A) and 2-acetyl-6-methylaminonaphthalene (AMN, Fig. 5E) is the substituents on the naphthalene core. The secondary amine in AMN could provide less steric repulsion with neighboring molecules and an extra hydrogen-bonding site, preventing packing along a single direction. It is known from the predicted pattern modes (Fig. 5B and F, respectively) that the thermodynamically stable morphology of ADN is wire-like, while AMN molecules would be arranged in a slip–stack mode and a sheet-like structure induced by the hydrogen bonding between adjacent molecules should be obtained.
 Fig. 5  Assembled materials with 1D and 2D structures obtained through molecular design. (A, E) Molecular structures of ADN and AMN, respectively. (B, F) Predicted growth morphologies based on the attachment energies of ADN and AMN molecules. (C, G) SEM images of 1D nanowires aggregated from ADN and 2D rhombic plates from AMN molecules. (D, H) Distinct waveguide behaviors of 1D and 2D structures. Scale bars in D and H are 5 μm and 10 μm, respectively. Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
The 1D growth of ADN (Fig. 5C) was determined to be along the [010] direction, which can be attributed to the π interactions. These nanowires can serve as active waveguides where the emitted light is confined in the nanowire and propagates along the axis in two predominant directions (Fig. 5D). No obvious light loss was observed from the light intensities for positions 1–6 (labeled in Fig. 5D) with the increase of the propagation length, indicating a low-loss transmission. Similarly, the growth directions of the 2D rhombic sheets (Fig. 5G) are [100] and [010], which are related to the π–π interactions and hydrogen bonding interactions, respectively. When a laser beam was focused on the center of the rhombus plate, the neighboring two outcoupled edges (marked as 1 and 2, Fig. 5H) have large, bright emissions, which show a significant contrast with the small, obscure outcouplings at the opposite edges (3 and 4). The intensity difference between edges of an acute angle implies an asymmetric light propagation, which may play a fundamental role in creating new types of devices.
For organic compounds, not only the kind and steric hindrance of substituent groups,19,31 but also their positions may significantly influence the dominant driving forces in the assembly process, and thus the appearance of final products.32 It has been demonstrated that three isometric molecules of bis(iminopyrrole)benzene could assemble into well-defined spheres, wires and cubes, respectively, though the intermolecular forces are the same. It is the different interactions for aggregate stacking at the supramolecular level caused by the isomeric molecular structures that are most likely responsible for the different morphological evolution.


3.1.2 Structures obtained from the synergistic assembly of different compounds. 
Intermolecular interactions between different compounds can be utilized to get multicomponent structures through their cooperative assembly.33 The selected compounds usually constitute a donor–acceptor pair with high energy transfer efficiency, where a small amount of energy acceptor would quench the donor emission heavily. In organic binary aggregates, the energy transfer process through either dipole–dipole interaction or an electron-exchange mechanism would be very effective due to the reduced intermolecular distance, affording an alternative way to obtain tunable color emission. Benefitting from the fruitful excited state dynamics, the doped structures could not only retain the advantages of each component, but also provide novel optical performances, for example, white light emission.34 Therefore, exploitation of the construction strategy for complex systems has a far-reaching consequence on the overall manipulation of photon parameters.

Fig. 6 shows two typical 1D binary structures assembled through the recognition of different molecules. The well-defined nanowires shown in Fig. 6A were prepared by the above-mentioned adsorbent-assisted epitaxial growth method using a blue light emitter (1,3,5-triphenyl-2-pyrazoline, TPP) and an orange dye (rubrene) as the deposition sources. The distribution of the dopant was determined to be uniform in the TPP host. These two dyes constitute a good host–guest pair of Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET). The emission color varies a lot along with the rubrene doping content, which was tuned by changing the molar ratio of the source materials. When an appropriate TPP/rubrene molar ratio (100:1) was adopted, white light emission can be achieved from these 1D nanostructures. The emission color evolution from blue to orange is shown in Fig. 6B. At first, there was only one characteristic fluorescence band for pure TPP nanowires. With the increase of rubrene content, the emission of TPP was quenched gradually, while the emission corresponding to the rubrene increased rapidly. At an appropriate doping ratio, stable white light was observed.
 Fig. 6  Composite structures fabricated by the synergistic assembly of different molecules. (A) PL microscopy image of TPP/rubrene nanorods with controllable doping ratios. Scale bar is 5 μm. (B) Emission spectra of the TPP/rubrene nanostructures with different doping contents. (C) Molecular structures of DP and DCM as well as the illustration of the formation mechanism of the gradiently doped microrods. (D) PL microscopy image of the microrods under UV illumination. (A–B) Copyright 2008, Wiley; (C–D) Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Yao and co-workers demonstrated a supramolecular synthesis of triblock microrods constituting 1,3-diphenyl-2-pyroline (DP) and 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethyl-aminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM),35 as illustrated in Fig. 6C. With the assistance of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) micelles, the DCM molecules were selectively doped at both ends of DP rods. During the assembly process, DP molecules first dissolved in the hydrophobic core of the spherical CTAB micelles due to the solubilization effect (stage I). The dissolution of DP molecules helps in the formation of rod-like micelles which then act as templates directing the primary growth of DP molecules. Finally, DCM molecules co-deposited on DP molecules, generating the triblock microrods (Fig. 6D). Though these microrods exhibit microarea heterogeneity, they show macroscopic high quality white light emission properties.

3.2 Structure modulation through external factors
We have come to know that an assembly process can be influenced by environmental factors from the above discussions. Utilizing this, we could intervene in the molecular behavior by adjusting the assembly conditions on the basis of a clear aggregation picture. For the fac-tris(2-phenylpyridine) iridium (Ir(ppy)3) compound, the rod and wire structures assembled using solvent exchange and solvent-evaporation methods, respectively, exist in different crystalline forms.36 Reversible nanostructure conversion from nanospheres to nanorods and nanoslices has also been realized with the destruction of the axial coordination interaction by the competition of solvent.37

3.2.1 Structures versus aging time. 
Recently, reversible shape-shifting of 1,4-bis(1,2′:6′,1′′-bis(3-butyl-1H-3,4,5-triazolyl)pyridin-4′-yl)benzene nanostructures was reported by the Chandrasekar group, as shown in Fig. 7A.38 The rod-shaped arrangement of three aromatic rings in the molecule center (Fig. 7A) ensures a nice molecular planarity. Furthermore, the triazole ring nitrogen atom (N2) participates in two hydrogen bonding interactions with phenyl ring protons, which play a vital role in the supramolecular ordering and assembly into rectangular sheets (Fig. 7B). Those plates, with a typical size of micrometers, could switch into tubes (Fig. 7C) via a rolling mechanism in the presence of water, while sonication could induce the transformation of the tubes back into plates. The rings were obtained from the tube solution after a week and the transformation process is irreversible.
 Fig. 7  Various assembled nanostructures and the corresponding optical properties obtained under different assembly conditions. (A) Sketch map of formation of 2D rectangular plates, 1D nanotubes and 0D nanorings of the compound under different conditions. (B) TEM image of a single rectangular plate. Scale bar is 0.5 μm. (C) TEM image of a single nanotube. Scale bar is 400 nm. (D) SEM image of the nanorings. Scale bar is 2 μm. (E, F) Optical bright-field and photoluminescence microscope images of an identical microtube. (G) Photoluminescence microscopy image of a single nanosheet with laser excitation at the corner. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
The absence of any external interference during the whole morphology evolution suggests that the critical activation energy needed to overcome the intermolecular binding forces is very low. For this case, the driving force behind the structural deformation was ascribed to the hydrophobic surface effect, which propels these structures to curve to avoid the exposure to water. An anisotropic optical waveguide was observed with the excitation of a focused laser beam, demonstrating the possibility of switching the waveguiding behavior in the light propagating direction in both 1D (Fig. 7E and F) and 2D (Fig. 7G) structures. This work shows again that various optical performances for different applications can be achieved even from the same compound as long as an appropriate fabrication method is predesigned. Before that, a careful analysis of the relationship between intermolecular/environmental interactions and structures is indispensable for choosing appropriate assembly strategies.


3.2.2 Heterostructures obtained through site-specific epitaxial growth. 
As mentioned above, the site-specific nucleation characteristics of organic molecules could be used to fabricate some useful complex structures, for example organic–metal nanowire heterojunctions, which were realized by our group recently via the vapor deposition of organic compounds on silicon substrates dispersed with pre-fabricated silver nanowires (Fig. 8).39Fig. 8A shows the SEM images of silver nanowires with convex vertices, which ensure an overwhelming superiority in attracting vaporized BPEA molecules. During the deposition process, the sharp wire tips play the role of nuclei centers for the condensation of BPEA vapor. Finally, BPEA molecules nucleated and grew specifically adjacent to the tips of the silver wires to form heterojunctions (Fig. 8B), which is testified by the TEM image of a single BPEA–silver nanowire junction area (Fig. 8C).
 Fig. 8  Preparation of organic–metal nanowire heterojunctions through substrate modification. (A) SEM image of the silver nanowires with convex tips. Scale bar is 2 μm. (B) Optical microscopy image of the BPEA–silver heterojunctions. Scale bar is 20 μm. (C) TEM image of the junction area. Scale bar is 200 nm. (D, E) Optical bright-field and PL microscopy images of an identical junction. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
Shown in Fig. 8D and E are the bright-field and photoluminescence microscopy images of an identical organic–silver nanowire heterojunction. Under the excitation of a focused laser beam, both tips of the BPEA nanowire and the joint point emit bright yellow light due to the active waveguide behavior. The red emission, observed from the end of silver nanowires, can be modulated through the polarization of excitation beam, which is attributed to the direct exciton polariton–plasmon coupling. The distinct characteristic of EPs in organic nanowires affords a new way to realize logic operations with an individual heterojunction. This facile step-by-step growth strategy provides a great convenience for incorporating plasmonic modules as practical components into high-capacity photonic circuits.

4. From structures to photonic properties
Low-dimensional structures built from a single kind of compound offer an ideal model to investigate the assembly characteristics as well as structure-related light confinement and electronic properties.40 Now we have achieved a preliminary comprehension of the relationship among molecules, assembly and structures from the last two sections. The rich interactions among different materials, such as energy/charge transfer, exciton migration and conversion, and so forth, might generate a series of novel properties in complex structures. A fine utilization of these new mechanisms would be helpful for the realization of photonic devices with manifold functions.11 Thus, in this part, we will focus on the optical properties and corresponding photonic applications of three representative complex structures assembled from organic molecules.
4.1 Nanowire heterojunctions
In comparison with uniformly doped structures, heterostructures would afford a greater flexibility in the manipulation of photons at the micro-/nanoscale. The existence of clear interfaces may give rise to some innovative ways to modulate the light–matter interactions and thus achieve meaningful optical properties. For example, multiple segmented nanostructures exhibit broad multifunctionality in photonic applications, including nanobarcodes,35 p–n junctions,41 and multiluminescent light sources. However, these phase-separated low-dimensional structures were mainly prepared via hard template or electrochemical deposition techniques, with a great weakness of photonic properties due to the amorphous structures. With our knowledge of the controllable assembly, heterostructures could also be prepared via modulated assembly.42

4.1.1 Dendritic heterostructures as optical routers. 
Organic dendritic structures have been extensively investigated due to their potential applications in one-to-many, many-to-one and many-to-many photonic devices. Inspired by the fact that vaporized organic molecules tend to nucleate preferentially and grow more rapidly on sites with smaller curvature radii or higher surface energies,29 we further developed a two-step wire-on-wire deposition method to create organic dendritic structures (Fig. 9A).43 Assembled crystalline Alq3 microwires (step 1) with smooth surfaces and hexagonal cross sections (Fig. 9B) were used as nucleation centers for the vertical epitaxial growth of DAAQ molecules (step 2). DAAQ molecules nucleate selectively on the Alq3 microwire to form isolated clusters, seeding subsequent molecular deposition to form the final vertical nanowire branches, which has been proved by the SEM images of different growth stages (Fig. 9C–E). Both the branch density and length can be precisely controlled by deposition time and temperature, respectively, illustrating the versatility and generality of the method. The green emission from the Alq3 trunk and red emission from DAAQ are clearly seen in corresponding positions (Fig. 9F), verifying the phase-separated component distribution and existence of clear interfaces.
 Fig. 9  Growth processes and photonic properties of the dendritic organic nanowire heterojunctions. (A) Schematic illustration of the growth processes. Step 1: Alq3 microwires prepared through assembly in the liquid phase. Step 2: site-specific nucleation and epitaxial growth of DAAQ molecules on the Alq3 microwires. (B–E) SEM images of different growth stages of DAAQ in step 2. (F) PL microscopy image of a single nanowire heterojunction under the illumination of unfocused UV light. (G) PL microscopy image of the heterostructure under the excitation of a focused laser beam. (H) Spatially resolved photoluminescence spectra of the excited spot (I) and output signals from the DAAQ branches (II–IV) and the Alq3 tip (V) labeled in G. (I) Photoluminescence decay profiles of Alq3 emissions at different propagation lengths. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Those obtained heterostructures can act as optical routers with many output channels so that the guided light could be output simultaneously from the trunk tips and each branch under excitation (Fig. 9G). The spatially resolved PL spectra (Fig. 9H) of different branches demonstrate propagation-length-dependent outputs as well as color changes (inset). The spectra recorded locally from the trunk (curves I and V) show a red-shift due to the variation in the energy transfer efficiency. The other three curves are all superpositions of the green and red emissions from the two compositions, indicating the simultaneous occurrence of efficient FRET processes and the direct guidance of Alq3 emission in DAAQ branches at the interfaces. The decreased fluorescence lifetime of Alq3 emission at different positions (Fig. 9H) further proved the energy transfer process.


4.1.2 Nanowire p–n junctions as photoelectric transducers. 
If both the nucleation spots and the growth direction can be simultaneously controlled with high accuracy, where only one wire grows vertically on the predispersed wire, crystalline heterojunctions would be achieved.44 The preparation method could be a two-step way as previously discussed or just a one-step way, for example, epitaxial growth via vapor phase co-deposition, as illustrated in Fig. 10A.41 Here, the p-type material (copper phthalocyanine, CuPc) and the n-type material (5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)-porphyrin, H2TPyP) were selected for synthesizing coaxial p–n junction nanowire arrays due to their similar molecular structure. Both compounds were placed at different positions in a tube furnace to be co-evaporated at a varied evaporation rate. During the deposition process, H2TPyP forms vertically aligned hollow structures first, which provide nucleation centers for subsequent CuPc vapor phase deposition. Then, the two molecules co-deposited onto the substrates to form the heterojunction nanowire arrays (Fig. 10B).
 Fig. 10  Formation and photoelectric properties of the coaxial organic p–n heterojunctions. (A) Schematic illustration of the assembly processes of the CuPc-H2TPyP p–n junction nanowire arrays. (B) SEM image of the as-prepared nanowire junctions. Scale bar is 1 μm. Inset shows a single heterojunction. (C) SEM image of a photoelectric device based on a single junction. Inset shows the energy level diagram of the device. (D) Current–voltage (I–V) curves of the device shown in (C). (E) Photoswitching characteristics of the p–n junction device. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
The strong π–π interactions between the two planar compounds assure good connections at the junction part which endows each coaxial heterojunction nanowire with great potential in high-quality optoelectronic devices. Fig. 10C shows a single device with the prepared p–n junction. Such a device acts as a good photoelectronic transducer, as depicted in Fig. 10D and E. The repeatable photocurrent under the light illumination indicates a reversible and stable response to external radiation. The large energy difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of H2TPyP and the highest occupied molecular orbital of CuPc at the heterointerface offers a great opportunity for the improvement of device efficiency. Commonly, the larger the wire diameters are, the higher the device efficiency is. Owing to the unique cable-type structure and the large interfacial gap, the single junction device shows better optoelectronic conversion performance than those of single component nanowires and thin film sandwiched devices, which is ready to be applied as a highly sensitive photoelectric transducer in nanoscale photonic circuits.

4.2 Doped nanostructures
In a photonic circuit, the light sources might be nanolaser with a narrow line width or broadband emissions, and even white light, since they provide more possibilities in novel optical signal processing. Doping is a widely used technique in organic materials to obtain color-tunable emissions due to the efficient FRET process. However, the emission colors of the doped materials are usually not stable because of acceptor content variation caused by external stimuli. Therefore, developing a self-modulating mechanism that can adjust the output intelligently, regardless of the doping ratio and environmental variation, is necessary and challenging.

4.2.1 Uniformly doped structures as tunable light sources. 
The combination of FRET down-conversion and triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) upconversion in an organic system is supposed to fulfill the requirement. We fabricated uniform 1D nanostructures with 9,10-di-phenylanthracene (DPA) and iridium(III) bis(2-phenylbenzothiozolato-N,C2′) acetylacetonate ((BT)2Ir(acac)) through assembly.45 In these composite nanowires, the bi-directional energy transfer, that is, the FRET from DPA to (BT)2Ir(acac) and the reverse TTET from (BT)2Ir(acac) to DPA co-exist, causing the fluctuations of the singlet and triplet excitons during the light propagation. The excitons can fluctuate between the blue emission of DPA and the orange emission of (BT)2Ir(acac) in the nanowire. The color ratios of two outcoupling colors from either low or high doped nanowires can reach the same value after the light transmission over a certain distance (Fig. 11A), resulting in a self-modulated white light outcoupling at wire tips. Such an optical waveguide behaves like a regulator which converts different input colors into a standard output, in spite of the doping ratio, as displayed in Fig. 11B. These results provide a comprehensive understanding of exciton polariton conversion in active waveguiding and effective strategies for developing novel multi-component waveguide building blocks.
 Fig. 11  Fabrication of uniformly doped structures for light sources with tunable emission colors. (A) The exponential relationship between the contribution ratio of donor to acceptor emission, n, and the propagation length in the low and highly doped nanowires. (B) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for the self-modulated white light outcoupled emission. (C) Molecular structures of APO and TPI. (D) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the 1D doped tubular structures. (E) The principle of the microtubes as an optical waveguide switch. The circled areas represent the photo-isomerization regions induced by UV irradiation. The squares indicate the excited spots for waveguide measurement. (A–B) Copyright 2011, Wiley; (C–E) Copyright 2011, Wiley. 
An optical switcher is an indispensable element for performing some ordinary functions. The achievement of the ON/OFF state for photons is not an easy thing because external activities can hardly intervene in the movement of photons. Fortunately, light–matter interactions as well as optical confinement in different structures could be used to solve this problem. Organic molecules, which were endowed with various photo-responses, could be finely utilized to realize specific functions. Here, photochromism,46 a reversible change in the absorption band modulated by the light irradiation, was chosen to construct a kind of waveguide switcher.47Fig. 11C presents the molecular structures of a photochromic molecule 3-(anthracen-10-yl)-1-phenylpro-2-en-1-one (APO) and 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (TPI). Homogeneous tubular structures (Fig. 11D) were obtained through the cooperative assembly of the two model compounds mediated by hydrogen bonding.
Under the excitation with a focused laser on the squared area (Fig. 11E), the 1D tube would emit intense fluorescence and self-guide to both tips. After the illumination with UV400, the intensity decreased dramatically while the emission with a peak at 540 nm disappeared completely. Meanwhile, no change was observed in the outcouplings from the right tip before and after the UV irradiation. That is to say, selective switching of the waveguide had been successfully achieved in such a binary tube. The out-coupled light can be turned on again by keeping the sample in the dark. This switching behavior can be reversibly switched over several cycles without any fatigue, demonstrating its good repeatability as a reliable photonic device. This work also shows a way to remotely control waveguide behavior through the particular properties of molecules.


4.2.2 Gradiently doped structures as photonic transistors. 
Precise designing and fabrication of chemical heterogeneous structures is another good alternative route to achieve specific photonic functions. Benefitting from the flexible fabrication through cooperative assembly, the spatial excitonic emission along the path of light propagation could be finely engineered through the donor–acceptor energy transfer in organic heterogeneous composites. A template-free method for obtaining heterostructures with axially tunable compositions was developed by Zhao and co-workers.48 The intermolecular interactions along the growth direction were properly designed between the host and the guest to acquire axial segments. In this work, TPI was selected as the host molecule and two other molecules, a sphere-like organometallic complex (BT)2Ir(acac) and a planar molecule BPEA, were chosen as two typical guest molecules. In the assembly process (Fig. 12A), TPI molecules quickly concentrate and nucleate into short rod-like hollow structures and then the guest molecules start to insert into the TPI host matrix subsequently. The sharp contrast between the two molecules lies in the host–guest interaction strength, i.e. the π–π interaction force in the BPEA–TPI pair is much stronger than the van der Waals force in (BT)2Ir(acac)-TPI. Such a divergence results in the uneven doping of the guest component in the axial direction.
 Fig. 12  Formation and optical properties of the gradiently doped 1D nanostructures. (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of doped TPI tubes with different guest molecules. (B, C) PL microscopy images of the triblock and multiblock doped TPI microtubes. (D) Fluorescence spectra of Coumarin 6 aggregates with different contents in the ethanol–water mixture. (E) PL microscopy image of Coumarin 6 doped TPI microtubes. (F) Schematic illustration of the design concept (top) and realization (down) of a photonic transistor in rainbow colored microtubes. (G) Outcoupled emission spectra from the drain port at various gate powers. The inset shows the relationship between blue to red light output ratio and the power of the gate laser. (A–C) Copyright 2012, Wiley; (D–G) Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
For (BT)2Ir(acac), the complete mismatch with TPI in molecular structures leads to a large steric hindrance, which terminates the further growth of TPI. Therefore, the final products were characterized as three blocks, with two doped orange blocks as the ends (Fig. 12B). Comparatively, the parallel packing of BPEA and TPI molecules with a strong π–π interaction ensures better molecular compatibility, which allows for the packing of TPI molecules. The consumption of BPEA ends up its aggregation, and then the growth of TPI will be predominating. With the continuous evaporation of solvent, BPEA aggregates again along the 1D growth direction. These processes took place repeatedly until the depletion of molecules. This alternate growth of TPI and BPEA resulted in the multiblock structures with tunable colors (Fig. 12C).
This cooperative assembly strategy can be generalized and expanded to achieve some practical functions, such as full-color emission in a single tube14 or triode for signal processing.41,49 Soon afterwards, 3-(2-benzothiazolyl)-7-diethylaminocoumarin (Coumarin 6) was adopted as the guest compound to acquire nanostructures with distensible color range on the basis of the above results. Besides the intrinsic green emission from a monomer, Coumarin 6 also emits red fluorescence from the charge-transfer state in aggregates, as proved in Fig. 12D. Therefore, RGB colors in an individual luminescent structure were accomplished in the TPI–Coumarin 6 pair via controllable doping during the assembly.
The formation mechanism of the TPI–Coumarin 6 system is similar to that of the TPI–(BT)2Ir(acac) pair, and 1D wire-like hollow structures were obtained. The axial doping gradient of Coumarin 6 induced the full-colored visible luminescence along these microtubes (Fig. 12E). Upon UV light excitation, both TPI and Coumarin 6 could be excited and emit fluorescence with different colors. A part of the emitted fluorescence is confined and guided in the tube in both directions. During light propagation, the energy transfer occurs irreversibly from the donor to the acceptor, ensuring a unidirectional light transfer in the optical materials. Such a characteristic is of great importance to the development of essential photonic devices, especially all-optical diodes and triodes.
The design concept and experimental verification of a photonic triode are demonstrated in Fig. 12F. Similar to an electronic triode, the optical analogy also constitutes source, drain and gate components. The excitation with fixed laser intensity at the left end acts as the source, while the outcoupled light from the right tip is regarded as the drain. The gate beam with different attenuations irradiates at the middle part of the individual tube to control the conducting signal from the source to the drain. The outcouplings from the drain (Fig. 12G) are gradually altered from red (blue/red <1, OFF) to blue (blue/red >1, ON) with the increased gate intensity. The continuous blue/red ratio suggests a precise gate-modulated output of the transistor.


4.2.3 Core–sheath structures as photonic sensors. 
Assembled crystalline 1D nanostructures are all active waveguides in which the fluorescence can be confined and propagated along the axis due to the difference in the refractive index between the organic material and the surrounding medium, which is mostly air. Ambient environmental changes could be recorded by the transmitted light in the form of the light parameters. Since light transmission is very sensitive to the external conditions, such a mechanism could be applied in the fabrication of ingenious sensors. Fig. 13 shows an analogous photonic gas transducer with core–sheath structure, which was fabricated through decorating the single crystalline BPEA nanowire with chemo-reactive bis(2,4,5-trichloro-6-carbopentoxy-phenyl) oxalate (CPPO).50 This core–sheath nanostructure was also fabricated by a cooperative assembly process (Fig. 13A). The cable-like structures appeared with the appropriate ratio of BPEA to CPPO such that the BPEA nanowires can be totally wrapped up by the dye-doped CPPO shell, as testified by the TEM image in Fig. 13B. The peripheral CPPO layer is highly sensitive and selective to the chemical gas of H2O2 as a typical chemiluminogenic compound. Such a core–sheath structure could not only retain the high chemical activity of CPPO, but also improve its mechanical and optical properties through the introduction of BPEA molecules in the outer layer.
 Fig. 13  Formation and photonic sensing performance of the core–sheath nanostructure. (A) Scheme of the growth mechanism. (B) TEM image of a single core–sheath nanowire, scale bar is 1 μm. (C) Schematic illustration of the evanescent field sensing of the core–sheath optical waveguide. Light is coupled into the cavity and travels through the sensing region coated with a chemo-reactive shell. (D, E) Time dependent PL intensities of the input and output light upon exposure to 6 ppm H2O2 vapor. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
A single core–sheath nanowire was employed for gas sensing based on gas concentration-dependent evanescent power leakage of a waveguiding nanowire (Fig. 13C). The fluorescence under an excitation of UV laser beam serves as the input signal while the outcoupled light is regarded as the output signal. Once the surrounding media contained a trace amount (several ppm) of H2O2, the output of the waveguide was drastically attenuated (ca. 50%) with the input intensity remaining unchanged (Fig. 13D and E). The optical waveguide response of the nanowires exposed to the gas vapors is remarkably fast (tens of seconds). This cable-like optical waveguide sensing platform complements the present nanowire field-effect sensors with the ability to rapidly and specifically monitor the amplified optical variation across the nanowire waveguide, showing that a single nanocable is very promising for developing optical probes to detect individual responses on a chip. The use of a facile assembly method to fabricate cable-like composites not only bestows the transducer with a defect-free structure and high sensitivity, but also enables the large-scale preparation, which is a key factor for commercial products.

5. Conclusions
The ever-growing demand for multifunctional photonic devices at the micro-/nanoscale greatly promotes the development of chemistry and materials. Organic materials have attracted much attention due to their great advantages of flexible design, tailored properties, easy processibility as well as low-cost. Small molecules tend to aggregate into low-dimensional crystals by weak intermolecular interactions, resulting in unique photophysical and photochemical characteristics that are largely different from their inorganic counterparts. Obvious structure-dependent photonic properties have been observed for these organic nanocrystals, suggesting a way to get desired functionalities. Up to now, plenty of construction strategies starting from organic small molecules have been proposed for the acquisition of functional materials with various photonic behaviors.
However, systematic studies on the relationship among molecular design, synthesis method selection, morphological modulation and optical performance manipulation of final products are rather scattered and suffer from a high-impact advance. Based on these aspects, we began with a comprehensive introduction of the assembly process of several representative molecules, highlighting the influence of molecular interactions and environmental conditions on the molecular pattern mode. Either aggregation in the liquid phase or epitaxial growth in the vapor phase has been proved to be a universal and facile preparation method to achieve diverse nanostructures. The careful design and control of the assembly process have direct impacts on the structural features and the corresponding properties of final obtained products.
Rational molecular design and targeted assembly method selection are further steps to achieve function-orientated material synthesis. On the basis of a deep understanding of basic assembly rules, we could tailor the intermolecular interactions by modifying the molecular structure or changing the environmental conditions, which may affect both the structures and properties of organic aggregates. A good method for obtaining multifunctional materials is the construction of crystalline nanocomposites through cooperative assembly, due to the ease of preparation and flexibility. Multicomponent materials, either uniformly or gradiently doped, have been demonstrated to be beneficial for high quality and performance in the integration of the devices. Before that, it is necessary to precisely design and control the structures according to the desired properties. Besides photonic devices, the resultant composite nanomaterials could also be used in biomedicine, sensors, automation, opto-electronics, etc.
The development of organic nanomaterials still falls far behind that of their inorganic counterparts, although considerable attention has been paid in the past few decades. The preparation of micro-/nanocrystals is still in its early stage. For this reason, a continuous investigation of molecular synergistic assembly would be necessary to make improvements in reproducibility, uniformity, special substrate/organic material requirements, controllable morphology and dimensions, and/or crystalline quality. In this sense, we hope to promote a deep understanding of the relationship among molecules, assembly, structures and properties through this tutorial review to speed up the spiraling development of organic nanophotonics (Fig. 14). Benefitting from the present development status, we have known that distinct optical properties can be achieved through rational molecular design and fabrication strategy selection. New efforts based on current cognition would help us to achieve a better comprehension of the function-oriented assembly process as well as structure construction, which would further stimulate progress in this area. A reasonable theoretical model, which is not limited to several molecules, will be beneficial for obtaining in-depth knowledge of the aggregation process and the structure confinement effect.
 Fig. 14  A spiraling cognition of the relationship among molecules, assembly, structures and properties to power the following development of organic nanophotonic materials and devices. 
The present photonic devices primarily take advantage of the linear optical properties only, especially light emission. It is difficult to realize some sophisticated applications solely with the linear response, such as an ultrafast switcher or a signal amplifier. Organic nanostructures with large nonlinear optical coefficients would be appreciative alternatives in such areas. The response time to external inputs is usually on the order of femtoseconds to picoseconds. Such a rapid response ensures a good signal processing speed. Moreover, the nonlinear properties of organic materials might be magnified at a micro-/nanoscale due to the size-dependent optical confinement effect, facilitating the design and realization of nonlinear photonic devices.
Considering the vast number of organic species and great possibilities of their structure-related optical performances, we believe that there will be a brighter future for the organic assemblies as photonic materials. To achieve this goal, we need to devote ourselves to further exploring this promising field, especially the relationship among molecules, morphology and function. There are still many challenges, e.g. synthesis of hierarchical structures, acquisition of complex functions, synergistic effects among different compositions, and so on. We expect the bottom-up assembly method to open up new prospects for the creation of novel photonic materials.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21125315 and 21373241), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2012YQ120060), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Notes and references
R. Kirchain and L. Kimerling, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 303 CrossRef CAS .
B. Piccione, C.-H. Cho, L. K. van Vugt and R. Agarwal, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Clark and G. Lanzani, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Ma, Q. Liao and J. Yao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 43, 409 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Ma, D. Xiao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-J. Avestro, M. E. Belowich and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5881 RSC .
J.-M. Lehn, Science, 2002, 295, 2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cordovilla and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361 RSC .
Y. Yan and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, C. Zhang, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C.-L. Zou, Y. Yan, R. Hao, F.-W. Sun, Z.-F. Han, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Basak and R. Chandrasekar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mizuno, U. Haku, Y. Marutani, A. Ishizumi, H. Yanagi, F. Sasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bernstein, J. A. R. P. Sarma and A. Gavezzotti, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 174, 361 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, C.-L. Zou, Y. Yan, C. Wei, J.-M. Cui, F.-W. Sun, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 357 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. Fu, J. Ma and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 159 RSC .
K. Takazawa, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, K. Zou, C.-S. Lee and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, J. Xu, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, W. Yang and J. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3300 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Shi, X. Meng, C. Lee and S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, D. Xiao, W. Yang, A. Peng and J. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2302 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O'Carroll, I. Lieberwirth and G. Redmond, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, P. Zhan, J. Kim, C. Sun and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, Y. Yan, L. Xue, C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao, H. Jiang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cantekin, D. W. R. Balkenende, M. M. J. Smulders, A. R. A. Palmans and E. W. Meijer, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1623 RSC .
S. K. Park, S. Varghese, J. H. Kim, S.-J. Yoon, O. K. Kwon, B.-K. An, J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, F. Q. Hu, A. D. Peng, W. S. Yang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, Q. Liao, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Liao, H. Fu, Y. Zeng, Z. Jiang, J. Ma and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 89 RSC .
T. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Yan, Y. Li, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Chen, C. Liu, Y. Zhao and H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14134 CAS .
N. Chandrasekhar and R. Chandrasekar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palermo, E. Schwartz, C. E. Finlayson, A. Liscio, M. B. J. Otten, S. Trapani, K. Müllen, D. Beljonne, R. H. Friend, R. J. M. Nolte, A. E. Rowan and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Cui, L. Jiang, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao, W. Hu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, E. Pentzer, F. A. Bokel, T. Emrick and R. C. Hayward, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10924 CAS .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yan, X. Wang, Y. S. Zhao, J. Huang and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Dong, Q. Tang, S. Ferdous, F. Liu, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, W. Hu and A. L. Briseno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Zou and H. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, H. Fu, C. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Yan, Y.-Y. Jing, Q. Shi, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yan, X. Wang, W. Shi, H. Ma, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP194 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Yongli Yan
	Yongli Yan received her PhD degree in 2008 from Fudan University. Then she joined the National University of Singapore as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2010, she joined Prof. Yong Sheng Zhao's research group as an assistant professor and was promoted to an associate professor in 2012. Her research interests are focused on the linear and nonlinear optical properties of organic composite materials, including the controllable synthesis of hybrid materials, comprehensive investigation of the involved energy/charge/exciton processes, and their applications in the optoelectronics field.

Yong Sheng Zhao
	Yong Sheng Zhao received his PhD degree in 2006 from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). After that, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and Northwestern University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2009, he returned to ICCAS as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on organic nanophotonic materials and devices, including the controllable synthesis of low dimensional organic materials, comprehensive investigation of the photophysical and photochemical processes involved in the materials, and the design, fabrication and performance optimization of photonic/optoelectronic nanodevices.

Key learning points
(1) Assembly characteristics of small organic molecules
(2) The dependence of organic nanostructures on the molecular assembly
(3) Photonic properties of organic nanomaterials with specific structures and compositions
(4) Function-guided material design and synthesis through molecular tailoring


 	Fig. 1  Organization of this review. Part 2: molecular assembly characteristics, which are determined by intermolecular interactions. Part 3: low-dimensional structures with diverse morphologies fabricated through the controllable assembly processes. Part 4: optical properties and photonic applications of the assembled complex structures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Formation mechanisms of four representative structures. (A) Nanowire: (left) molecular structure of DBPT; (middle) predicted growth morphology of DBPT crystalline structure; (right) SEM image of the DBPT nanowires. Scale bar is 2 μm. (B) Schematic elucidation of the possible formation mechanism of tubular structures via supramolecular assembly of 2,6-di-pyrazol-1-ylpyridine. (C) Nanosheet: (left) molecular structure of BP2T-OMe; (middle) crystal structures of BP2T-OMe with projections of the bc-plane, ac-plane, and herringbone packing mode along the c axis, respectively; (right) crystal lattice in the ab-plane. (D) Microring: (up) molecular structure of DPPDO and illustration of the assembling mechanism of microrings; (bottom) optical microscope images of nanowires, small/large rings and tiles formed by using DPPDO solutions with different concentrations. Scale bars are 25 μm. Insets show the corresponding SEM images. Scale bars are 2 μm. Fig. 2A, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; Fig. 2B, Copyright 2011, Wiley; Fig. 2C, Copyright 2012, Wiley; Fig. 2D, Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  Solvent etching effect on the assembled structures. (A) SEM image of the BPEA microrods prepared by regular liquid phase assembly. Scale bar is 5 μm. Inset: SEM image of a single rod tip. (B) SEM image of BPEA microtubes prepared through an assembly process under reflux. Scale bar is 10 μm. (C) TEM image of the typical BPEA microtubes. Scale bar is 2 μm. Inset: SAED pattern. Copyright 2008, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  Substrate effect on the assembly of organic molecules in the vapor phase. (A) Growth mechanism of Alq3 nanowires with the assistance of adsorbents to improve the uniformity and crystallinity. (B) Patterned growth of DAAQ nanowire arrays on silicon wafers with periodic ridge–groove patterns. Scale bar is 25 μm. (C) Optical microscope image of the DAAQ nanowires grown at an AFM tip. Scale bar is 10 μm. (D) SEM image of the DAAQ nanowires grown on silica spheres. Inset shows the magnified image. Scale bars are 2 μm. (A) Copyright 2006, Wiley; (B–D) Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Assembled materials with 1D and 2D structures obtained through molecular design. (A, E) Molecular structures of ADN and AMN, respectively. (B, F) Predicted growth morphologies based on the attachment energies of ADN and AMN molecules. (C, G) SEM images of 1D nanowires aggregated from ADN and 2D rhombic plates from AMN molecules. (D, H) Distinct waveguide behaviors of 1D and 2D structures. Scale bars in D and H are 5 μm and 10 μm, respectively. Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Composite structures fabricated by the synergistic assembly of different molecules. (A) PL microscopy image of TPP/rubrene nanorods with controllable doping ratios. Scale bar is 5 μm. (B) Emission spectra of the TPP/rubrene nanostructures with different doping contents. (C) Molecular structures of DP and DCM as well as the illustration of the formation mechanism of the gradiently doped microrods. (D) PL microscopy image of the microrods under UV illumination. (A–B) Copyright 2008, Wiley; (C–D) Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Various assembled nanostructures and the corresponding optical properties obtained under different assembly conditions. (A) Sketch map of formation of 2D rectangular plates, 1D nanotubes and 0D nanorings of the compound under different conditions. (B) TEM image of a single rectangular plate. Scale bar is 0.5 μm. (C) TEM image of a single nanotube. Scale bar is 400 nm. (D) SEM image of the nanorings. Scale bar is 2 μm. (E, F) Optical bright-field and photoluminescence microscope images of an identical microtube. (G) Photoluminescence microscopy image of a single nanosheet with laser excitation at the corner. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  Preparation of organic–metal nanowire heterojunctions through substrate modification. (A) SEM image of the silver nanowires with convex tips. Scale bar is 2 μm. (B) Optical microscopy image of the BPEA–silver heterojunctions. Scale bar is 20 μm. (C) TEM image of the junction area. Scale bar is 200 nm. (D, E) Optical bright-field and PL microscopy images of an identical junction. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  Growth processes and photonic properties of the dendritic organic nanowire heterojunctions. (A) Schematic illustration of the growth processes. Step 1: Alq3 microwires prepared through assembly in the liquid phase. Step 2: site-specific nucleation and epitaxial growth of DAAQ molecules on the Alq3 microwires. (B–E) SEM images of different growth stages of DAAQ in step 2. (F) PL microscopy image of a single nanowire heterojunction under the illumination of unfocused UV light. (G) PL microscopy image of the heterostructure under the excitation of a focused laser beam. (H) Spatially resolved photoluminescence spectra of the excited spot (I) and output signals from the DAAQ branches (II–IV) and the Alq3 tip (V) labeled in G. (I) Photoluminescence decay profiles of Alq3 emissions at different propagation lengths. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Formation and photoelectric properties of the coaxial organic p–n heterojunctions. (A) Schematic illustration of the assembly processes of the CuPc-H2TPyP p–n junction nanowire arrays. (B) SEM image of the as-prepared nanowire junctions. Scale bar is 1 μm. Inset shows a single heterojunction. (C) SEM image of a photoelectric device based on a single junction. Inset shows the energy level diagram of the device. (D) Current–voltage (I–V) curves of the device shown in (C). (E) Photoswitching characteristics of the p–n junction device. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  Fabrication of uniformly doped structures for light sources with tunable emission colors. (A) The exponential relationship between the contribution ratio of donor to acceptor emission, n, and the propagation length in the low and highly doped nanowires. (B) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for the self-modulated white light outcoupled emission. (C) Molecular structures of APO and TPI. (D) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the 1D doped tubular structures. (E) The principle of the microtubes as an optical waveguide switch. The circled areas represent the photo-isomerization regions induced by UV irradiation. The squares indicate the excited spots for waveguide measurement. (A–B) Copyright 2011, Wiley; (C–E) Copyright 2011, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  Formation and optical properties of the gradiently doped 1D nanostructures. (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of doped TPI tubes with different guest molecules. (B, C) PL microscopy images of the triblock and multiblock doped TPI microtubes. (D) Fluorescence spectra of Coumarin 6 aggregates with different contents in the ethanol–water mixture. (E) PL microscopy image of Coumarin 6 doped TPI microtubes. (F) Schematic illustration of the design concept (top) and realization (down) of a photonic transistor in rainbow colored microtubes. (G) Outcoupled emission spectra from the drain port at various gate powers. The inset shows the relationship between blue to red light output ratio and the power of the gate laser. (A–C) Copyright 2012, Wiley; (D–G) Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  Formation and photonic sensing performance of the core–sheath nanostructure. (A) Scheme of the growth mechanism. (B) TEM image of a single core–sheath nanowire, scale bar is 1 μm. (C) Schematic illustration of the evanescent field sensing of the core–sheath optical waveguide. Light is coupled into the cavity and travels through the sensing region coated with a chemo-reactive shell. (D, E) Time dependent PL intensities of the input and output light upon exposure to 6 ppm H2O2 vapor. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  A spiraling cognition of the relationship among molecules, assembly, structures and properties to power the following development of organic nanophotonic materials and devices.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
