Extremely black carbon nanotube materials with three-dimensional networks for highly efficient solar-driven vapor generation  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR04857D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR04857D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 17438-17446Extremely black carbon nanotube materials with three-dimensional networks for highly efficient solar-driven vapor generation

        
          
            Shenglin 
            Zhou
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Jiapeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangcheng 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhaohui 
            Yang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Xiaohua 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab
aCenter for Soft Condensed Matter Physics and Interdisciplinary Research & School of Physical Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China. E-mail: zhxh@iccas.ac.cn
bJiangsu Key Laboratory of Thin Films, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China
cState Key Lab of Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
dSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Thin Film and Microfabrication Technology (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
Received 
      5th September 2022
    , Accepted 26th October 2022First published on 27th October 2022AbstractPorous CNT sponge (CNTS) and aligned CNT array (CNTA) were used as light absorbers to generate water vapor by harvesting solar energy. To improve the wettability of water on superhydrophobic CNTs and enhance water transport in porous CNT materials, CNTs were decorated with a hydrophilic silk fibroin (SF) protein coating. Water rapidly infiltrates the porous SF-modified CNT materials. Importantly, strong water–SF interactions via the hydrogen bonding between SF protein molecules and CNT sidewalls resulted in a reduction in the vaporization enthalpy of water in the SF-modified CNT materials, which facilitated vapor generation. Additionally, the SF-modified CNT light absorbers exhibit excellent vapor generation performance over a wide pH range of 2 to 12 and good stability. The SF-modified CNT materials thus have the advantage of being potentially applicable to the purification of wastewater and desalination of brackish water with high or low pH values. SF-CNTA light absorbers with vertically aligned CNTs, which are of great benefit in water transport and vapor escape, achieved a water evaporation rate of 3.2 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation with an energy transfer efficiency of 94%. After a desalination treatment, the concentrations of primary ions in seawater are greatly decreased and meet the requirements for drinking water.
Introduction
Solar thermal technologies involving the conversion of sunlight to thermal energy are attracting increasing attention because of the abundant source of renewable and sustainable solar energy.1,2 Solar-to-thermal energy conversion has been considered a potential and sustainable solution to low-cost water heating,3,4 power generation,5–7 steam sterilization,8,9 wastewater purification10,11 and desalination.12–14 There has been great interest in vapor generation by harvesting solar energy. Vapor and clean water generation using solar energy from polluted water or brackish water is being intensively studied.15–17 Continuing challenges with the solar-driven vapor generation technology were the needs to significantly reduce heat losses from light absorbers and enhance light absorption in order to improve the energy transfer efficiency and achieve a high water evaporation rate.
Various strategies such as the structural design of a solar evaporation system, energy management, and material choice of light absorbers are capable of achieving good vapor generation performance.18–26 Interfacial solar evaporation enabled vapor generation to occur at the water–air interface. For the interfacial solar evaporation system where the light absorbers were located at the water–air interface, the heat loss was significantly reduced by only heating the surface water instead of heating bulk water.27–30 Energy management such as harvesting extra energy from the surrounding environment,18,19 extracting energy from bulk water using a supporting material between bulk water and the solar evaporation surface,20,21 and recycling the latent heat from water vapor condensation22,23 has emerged as a route to improve the vapor generation performance. Enhancing light absorption has proven to be another viable means of improving the energy transfer efficiency and achieving a high water evaporation rate. Recently, CNTs received significant attention due to their excellent light absorption in the full region of the solar spectrum and good stability. Despite these advantages, the separation or collection of CNT loose power from water after vapor generation was a primary limitation of CNT light absorbers. The cost of separating CNTs from water became overwhelming for many applications. CNTs in porous CNT materials such as CNT sponges and CNT arrays are connected and form three-dimensional (3D) networks. The interconnected CNT networks have the advantage of facile separation from water. Channels or open pores in 3D CNT networks provide the pathways for the influx of water molecules and vapor escape. The use of porous CNT arrays to generate vapor using solar energy has been explored.31,32 The evaporation rate of water using a porous CNT array as a light absorber floating on the surface of water significantly increased as compared to bare water.31,33 A 2D porous SWNT–MoS2 film exhibited an absorption of more than 82% over the full solar spectrum range and an impressively high evaporation efficiency.34
A continuing challenge in the use of CNT-based light absorbers is the superhydrophobicity of CNT sidewalls, preventing the rapid infiltration of water into porous CNT materials and suppressing water transfer. Research on the improvement of the wettability of water on CNT sidewalls would seem pertinent. The chemical modification of CNT sidewalls was emerging as an effective route to improve the hydrophilicity of CNT sidewalls. This most widely used method often required the homogeneous and stable dispersion of CNTs in solution in order to achieve good wettability of water on the CNT sidewalls. However, the 3D networks of highly porous CNT materials are often destructed during the dispersion of CNTs. For CNT-based porous light absorbers, an effective and non-destructive technique of chemical modification is highly demanded. Here, we focused primarily on the improvement of the vapor generation performance of CNT-based porous materials from solar absorption, thermal management and water transport. We used a non-destructive approach to improve the hydrophilicity of the CNT sidewalls. We incorporated a hydrophilic silk fibroin (SF) protein coating on the CNT sidewalls to enhance the wettability of water on the CNT sidewalls. This effective and non-destructive approach significantly enhanced the water transport in porous CNT sponges and CNT arrays. The interconnected porous structures of CNT sponges and CNT arrays still remain after this chemical modification. Our group studied the effects of SF coating on the state of water, the vaporization enthalpy of water and the vapor generation performance. The role of CNT orientation in CNT porous materials in vapor generation has also been investigated.
Results and discussion
The morphologies of porous CNT materials are shown in Fig. 1. CNTs in CNTAs were vertically aligned. The diameter of CNTs in CNTAs is 16 ± 2 nm and the average tube-to-tube (intertube) distance is 55 ± 10 nm. The height of CNTA is 0.8 mm. For the CNT sponge, CNTs formed a percolating 3D network. The average pore size of the 3D nanotube network is 95 ± 10 nm and the diameter of the CNT in CNTS is 35 ± 3 nm. The thickness of CNTS is ca. 1 mm. The sidewalls of CNTs are superhydrophobic. It is extremely challenging for high surface tension liquids such as water to wet the superhydrophobic CNT sidewalls.35 Wetting the CNT sidewalls plays a crucial role in water transport and efficient water evaporation. Thus, improving the wettability of the CNT sidewalls towards water is a viable means of enhancing water transport. In this study, CNTs were modified by incorporating a silk fibroin protein coating on the CNT sidewalls by soaking CNTs in a protein solution. The silk fibroin proteins have hydrophobic regions exposed to solvent.36,37 These hydrophobic regions in the silk fibroin proteins interacted with the CNT through hydrophobic interactions.36,37 The hydrophobic interactions between CNTs and silk fibroin proteins facilitated the formation of the silk fibroin protein layer on the surface of CNTs. The SEM images of SF-modified CNTA and SF-modified CNTS showed that CNT orientation in CNTA and 3D nanotube networks remained after this chemical modification. It indicated that incorporating SF coating on the CNT sidewalls did not destruct the structures of CNTA and CNTS, which are of great benefit in efficient water evaporation. The SF coating on the CNT sidewalls could be clearly discerned in the TEM images of SF-modified CNTs (see Fig. 2). The thickness of the SF coating in SF-modified CNTA is 7 ± 2 nm and the corresponding value in SF-modified CNTS is 12 ± 4 nm. Additionally, we performed measurements of SF protein on the CNT sidewalls by FTIR spectroscopy, TGA and EDS mapping techniques. Fig. 3a shows the FTIR data from pristine CNTs and SF-modified CNTs. SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS showed peaks at 1637 cm−1, 1523 cm−1 and 1234 cm−1, which were attributed to the amide I (CO stretching vibrations), amide II (C–N stretching vibrations) and amide III (N–H deformation vibrations) of the SF protein, respectively.38
 Fig. 1  SEM images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (c) and SF-CNTS (d). 
 Fig. 2  TEM images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (c) and SF-CNTS (d). 
 Fig. 3  FTIR spectra (a) and TGA data (b) of pure SF, SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS; XPS of pristine CNTA, SF-CNTA, pristine CNTS and SF-CNTS (c and d); EDS elemental maps of SF-CNTA (e) and SF-CNTS (f). 
TGA showed that the decomposition of pure SF protein occurred in the temperature range of 220 °C to 520 °C (Fig. 3b). For SF-modified CNTs, a significant weight loss in the temperature range of 220 °C to 520 °C is observed, indicating the presence of SF protein in SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS. Fig. 3c and d show the XPS spectra of pristine CNTs and SF-modified CNTs. In the XPS spectra of pristine CNTA, only the C 1s peak appears, while the C 1s and O 1s peaks are observed in the XPS spectra of pristine CNTS. The O 1s peak for pristine CNTS probably arises from the residual catalyst. For SF-modified CNTs, the N 1s, C 1s, and O 1s peaks are observed in the XPS spectra. The N 1s and O 1s peaks arise from the SF protein in SF-modified CNTs. EDS elemental maps showed that the nitrogen element associated with the SF protein is uniformly distributed in SF-modified CNTs (Fig. 3e and f). It indicates that the distributions of the SF protein in CNTA and CNTS were relatively uniform. A combination of FTIR, TGA, EDS, XPS and morphological observations using SEM and TEM provided a reliable measure of SF protein in SF-modified CNTs. After this chemical modification, the hydrophilicity was dramatically improved as shown in Fig. 4. The water contact angle of SF-modified CNTs is ca. 0°. Water can rapidly infiltrate porous SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS. While the values of water contact angle for pristine CNTA and CNTS are 140° and 144°, respectively, it is extremely difficult for water to infiltrate pristine CNTA and CNTS. Fig. 4c and g show that the pristine CNTA and CNTS were floating on the surface of water in a vial due to their high hydrophobicity and porous SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS sank to the bottom of a water-filled vial. The photographs of the whole SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS light-absorbers are shown in Fig. 4d and h, respectively. These observations indicate that the formation of SF coating on CNTs has great benefit for water transport in porous CNT composites.
 Fig. 4  Water contact angle images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (e) and SF-CNTS (f); pictures of pristine CNTA, SF-CNTA, pristine CNTS and SF-CNTS (c and g) in water; photographs of the whole SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS evaporators (d and h). 
Generally, thermal harvesting applications require solar-thermal conversion systems that exhibit high solar absorption over the full solar spectrum range, minimized heat losses and highly efficient water transport. In this study, we use porous CNT composites as light absorbers to investigate solar-driven vapor generation because of the strong light absorption of CNTs in the full region of the solar spectrum. To gain insight into the influence of the SF coating on the CNT sidewalls on the solar absorbance of CNTs, we performed light absorbance spectrum measurements on pristine CNTs and SF-modified CNTs (Fig. 5). The light absorbance of pristine CNTs over a wavelength range from 300 to 2500 nm is above 98%, indicating efficient full solar spectrum absorbance. SF-modified CNTs also achieve a high light absorbance of above 97% over a wavelength range of 300 to 2500 nm and the optical loss is insignificant. It suggests that the formation of SF coating on the CNT sidewalls did not have a significant influence on the solar absorbance and the high full solar spectrum absorbance of CNTs still remained.
 Fig. 5  Absorbance spectra of pristine CNTS, SF-CNTS, pristine CNTA and SF-CNTA. 
The schematic of a solar vapor generation system is shown in Fig. 6a. Interconnected porous structures in CNTS and CNTA facilitate the efficient transport of water in light absorbers, which is one of the crucial factors controlling the vapor generation performance (Fig. 6b). Conductive heat loss to underlying bulk water is one of the main heat losses in the solar vapor generation system. To minimize the heat loss to bulk water, we used a piece of closed-cell polymer foam as a thermal insulating layer between the CNT-based light absorber and bulk water. The underlying water was wicked into the top light absorber layer by using hydrophilic glass fibres via capillary forces.
 Fig. 6  The schematics of the solar vapor generation system (a) and water channels in the SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS (b). 
This double-layer system that consists of the CNT-based light absorber on the top of a thermal insulating layer floats on the surface of water. Only a small amount of water located at the water–CNT interface is heated and the vapor generation occurs at the water–CNT interface. We roughly evaluated the costs of light absorbers. The materials for synthesizing CNTA and CNTS include ethylene, hydrogen, argon, and 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The silkworm cocoons used to extract SF protein, closed-cell polymer foam, and glass fibres are commercial products. The costs for SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS light absorbers are approximately 0.35 USD per m2 and 0.1 USD per m2, respectively.
Next, we focus on the solar-driven vapor generation of CNT-based light absorbers. It is worthy to note that environmental conditions such as temperature and relative humidity influence the solar-driven vapor generation. High environmental temperatures facilitate the vapor generation. The variations in ambient humidity resulted in the fluctuations in evaporation rate.39 In our studies, the temperature was controlled at 25 °C and the relative humidity was 45–50% during the solar-driven vapor generation tests. We compare the overall mass changes of a water-filled container with floating SF-modified CNTs to the corresponding values for pristine CNTs. Fig. 7a shows the overall mass changes of the water-filled container under 1 sun radiation (1 kW m−2). For SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS, the overall mass changes are dramatic compared to saline water without light absorber. The water evaporation rate without light absorbers is 0.20 kg m−2 h−1. The corresponding values for SF-CNTS and SF-CNTA are 2.4 kg m−2 h−1 and 3.2 kg m−2 h−1. Clearly, SF-modified CNTs make solar-driven vapor generation under 1 sun radiation more efficient. The formation of a hydrophilic SF coating on the CNT sidewalls significantly improved the wettability of water on the CNT sidewalls and thus enhanced water transport in porous CNT-based light absorbers, which played a critical role in the vapor generation.
 Fig. 7  The mass changes of water-filled containers with and without light absorbers (a); the surface temperatures of 3.5% saline water, SF-CNTS and SF-CNTA under one sun irradiation at different irradiation times (b); the infrared images of 3.5% saline water (c), SF-CNTS (d) and SF-CNTA (e) during the vapor generation process under one sun irradiation. 
SF-CNTA achieved a higher evaporation rate than SF-CNTS. For SF-CNTA, CNTs and intertube channels are vertically aligned as shown in Fig. 6b. As compared to CNT sponges where CNTs are randomly distributed, the diffusion path of water and escape path of the generated vapor in SF-CNTA are relatively short. Water molecules can rapidly diffuse into SF-CNTA and vapor molecules escape light absorbers more efficiently.40,41 Additionally, the vertically aligned CNT arrays with relatively small diameters of CNTs (16 ± 2 nm) and small intertube distances (55 ± 10 nm) have large surface areas as compared to CNT sponges with large diameters of CNTs (35 ± 3 nm) and large pore sizes (95 ± 10 nm). Thus, SF-CNTA light-absorbers have a relatively large evaporation surface area compared to SF-CNTS light-absorbers. They might explain the high evaporation rate for SF-CNTA. The performance of solar-driven vapor generation based on SF-CNTA light absorbers is superior to carbon-based light absorbers reported in the literature, e.g. graphene-based light absorbers (1.62 kg m−2 h−1 in 1 sun illumination),41 GO/MWCNT-based light absorbers (1.22 kg m−2 h−1 in 1 sun illumination),42 CNT/paper-based light absorbers (1.15 kg m−2 h−1 in 1 sun illumination),43 carbon/chitosan-based light absorbers (2.19 kg m−2 h−1 in 1 sun illumination),44 and carbon sponge-based light absorbers (1.31 kg m−2 h−1 in 1 sun illumination).45
Under solar illumination, the course of the water evaporation also accompanies heating light absorbers. Fig. 7b–e show the temperatures of CNT-based light absorbers and saline water without light absorbers under 1 sun radiation. The surface temperature of saline water without light absorbers plateaued after 30 min of solar radiation and the temperature at the plateau is 22 °C. For SF-modified CNTs, the temperatures of SF-CNTS and SF-CNTA reached plateau regions after 10 min of solar radiation. The values of temperatures at plateau for SF-CNTS and SF-CNTA are 35 °C and 36.5 °C, respectively. Evidently, SF-modified CNTs can be rapidly heated to plateau temperatures compared to saline water. In the temperature rise region, a significant amount of converted solar energy was used to heat light absorbers instead of generating water vapor. In the plateau region, the energy harvested from sunlight was mainly used to generate water vapor. Additionally, the temperatures at plateau for SF-modified CNTs are relatively low. There is a positive consequence of low plateau temperatures. Low plateau temperatures generally lead to relatively low thermal radiative and convective losses to the ambient. We also check the influence of the power density of solar illumination on the vapor generation performance of CNT-based light absorbers.
The overall mass changes of the water-filled containers and water evaporation rate under different power densities are shown in Fig. 8a and b. Both the overall mass change and evaporation rate increase with increasing the power density. Under 5 sun illumination, SF-CNTA achieved an evaporation rate of 12.1 kg m−2 h−1. The temperatures of light absorbers also increase with an increase in the power density as shown in Fig. 8c and d. After 60 min of solar radiation under 5 sun illumination, the temperature of SF-CNTA is 60.6 °C and the corresponding value for 1 sun illumination is 36.5 °C.
 Fig. 8  Mass change vs. time plot (a), evaporation rate (b), temperatures (c) and infrared images (d) for SF-CNTA under different sun irradiations. 
Energy transfer efficiency is a key parameter for the evaluation of the vapor generation performance of light absorbers. The energy transfer efficiency is calculated from the relationship η = vEwater/CoptP0, where v is the mass flux, Ewater is the vaporization enthalpy of the water in the light absorbers, Copt refers to the optical concentration on the light-absorber surface and P0 is the solar irradiation power of one sun (1 kW m−2). The value of the vaporization enthalpy of bulk water is 2450 kJ kg−1. It is worth noting that the water state near a highly hydrophilic surface is different from bulk water.46,47 In the presence of a highly hydrophilic surface, there are three types of water state: bound water near the hydrophilic surface, bulk water in the region far away from the surface and intermediate water between bound water and bulk water.46–48 In our studies, due to the formation of hydrogen bonding between SF protein molecules on the CNT sidewalls and water molecules, the water–surface interactions are strong. We performed Raman spectrum measurements on the water trapped in SF-CNTA to reveal the water states (Fig. 9a). The peaks at 3201 cm−1 and 3305 cm−1 are associated with the hydrogen bonding of bulk water (free water, FW) and the peaks at 3459 cm−1 and 3533 cm−1 arise from intermediate water (IW) with weak hydrogen bonding. The water state plays a crucial role in the phase transition of water.46,47 We measured the vaporization enthalpy of water in SF-CNTA by evaporating water under dark conditions. The calculated vaporization enthalpy of water in SF-CNTA is 1070 ± 21 kJ kg−1, a reduction of 1380 kJ kg−1 from the value of bulk water. This reduced equivalent vaporization enthalpy was used to evaluate the energy transfer efficiency. SF-CNTA achieved an energy transfer efficiency of 94% under 1 sun illumination. The energy transfer efficiency of SF-CNTA gradually decreases with increasing the power density (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  Raman spectra and the fits to the Raman spectrum data (a) and the energy transfer efficiency of SF-CNTA under different power densities (b). 
Under 5 sun illumination, the value of energy transfer efficiency decreases to 72%. The relatively low energy transfer efficiency under high input power densities might be caused by the significant heat loss under the high-energy irradiation. Heat loss can occur by the conduction of heat from the light absorber to underlying bulk water, the convection of heat from the light absorber to the ambient air, and radiation from the light absorber. In this study, we used a piece of closed-cell polymer foam as a thermal insulating layer between the light absorber and underlying bulk water to minimize the heat loss to bulk water. There is no direct contact between the light absorber and bulk water and thus the heat loss caused by the conduction of heat is negligible. The heat losses caused by convection and radiation are closely related to the temperature of light absorbers. Under high-energy irradiation, the temperature rise of SF-CNTA was quick as compared to low-energy irradiation. Fig. 8c and d show that with the increase of power density of solar illumination from 1-sun irradiation to 5-sun irradiation, the temperature of the SF-CNTA increased from 36.5 °C to 60.6 °C. The high temperature of light absorbers leads to an increase in the radiation heat loss and convection heat loss, which is responsible for the decrease in the energy transfer efficiency under high-energy irradiation.
Wastewater contaminated by various human activities or seawater from different regions may have a wide pH range. Many applications require the good vapor generation performance of light absorbers over a wide pH range. We thus investigated the influence of pH value on the vapor generation performance of SF-CNTA. Fig. 10a shows the evaporation rate of water over a pH range from 2 to 12 under 1 sun radiation. SF-CNTA light absorbers did not show a significant variation in the evaporation rate of water in the pH range of 2 to 12. It indicates that CNT-based light absorbers have the advantage of being potentially applicable to the purification of polluted water or brackish water with high or low pH values.
 Fig. 10  Evaporation rate of water with different pH values under one sun irradiation (a) and the water evaporation rate for SF-CNTA in different cycles (b). The mass change of a seawater-filled container under one sun irradiation at different irradiation times (c) and ion concentrations in seawater and in desalinated seawater (d). 
The stability of light absorbers is a crucial factor relevant to their widespread applications. The good stability of CNT-based light absorbers is of practical importance since many applications require a long-term clean water supply. Vapor generation via harvesting solar energy occurs in the daytime. At night without sunlight, water evaporates relatively slowly. To test the stability of the SF-CNTA light absorbers, we periodically turned on and turned off the solar simulator and measured the overall mass changes of the water-filled container using the same samples. Under 1 sun radiation, the water evaporation rate for SF-CNTA in the first cycle is 3.2 kg m−2 h−1 (Fig. 10b). After 10 cycles, the value of the water evaporation rate is still 3.2 kg m−2 h−1. The SF-CNTA light absorbers show no decline in vapor generation, indicating the good stability of CNT-based light absorbers.
To validate the solar desalination ability of CNT-based light absorbers, we carried out a vapor generation experiment using seawater obtained from the East China Sea. Fig. 10c shows the overall mass changes of the seawater-filled container under 1 sun radiation. The evaporation rate of the seawater for SF-CNTA light absorbers is 3.2 kg m−2 h−1, which is equivalent to the corresponding value for freshwater (3.2 kg m−2 h−1). It suggests that the influence of salinity on the solar-driven vapor generation is not significant. Salt accumulation during the solar-driven evaporation of seawater generally needs careful consideration for practical applications.49 In our studies, we did not observe the salt precipitation or salt crystal on the surface of SF-CNTA even after a long-term test (>48 h). Efficient water-wicking in the hydrophilic layer might suppress the salt precipitation due to rapid salt dissolution in running water. As pointed out before by Quan et al.,50 continuous quick water pumping through hydrophilic channels in porous light-absorbers led to rapid salt dissolution in continuously running water and effective inhibition of salt crystallization. We also performed the measurement of salinities on desalinated water. The concentrations of primary ions (Na+, Mg2+, K+ and Ca2+) in seawater after a desalination treatment were greatly decreased (Fig. 10d). The ion concentrations in desalinated water meet the requirements for drinking water (0.1% by the World Health Organization51 and 0.05% by the US Environmental Protection Agency52). The ion concentrations are also well below the corresponding values for desalinated water obtained using well-established desalination techniques such as membrane filtration (reverse osmosis) and thermal distillation.
Experimental
Materials
Silkworm cocoons were purchased from Northwest Silkworm Base. Na2CO3 was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. LiBr was obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Cellulose dialysis membranes (Spectra/Por1, Biotech Cellulose Ester films, MWCO: 3500, Spectrum Laboratories Inc.) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether (EGDE) was purchased from TCI Chemicals.
Sample preparation
First, the CNTA and CNTS were synthesized using a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method.53,54 SF solutions were prepared by first removing the sericin of silkworm cocoons in a 0.5% Na2CO3 solution and then dissolving dry silk fibroin in a lithium bromide solution at a concentration of 9.3 mol L−1. The silk fibroin solution was dialyzed against deionized water for 5 days in a cellulose dialysis membrane. After that, 10 mL of ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether (EGDE) was added to the silk fibroin solution for cross-linking SF. CNTA and CNTS were soaked in the silk fibroin solution for 0.5 h and then freeze-dried for 3 h.
Measurements and characterization
A Hitachi SU8100 (Hitachi Inc.) scanning electron microscope was used to obtain the SEM images of the CNTS and CNTA before and after chemical modification and elemental distribution map. The TEM images were captured using a Tecnai G220 (FEI) transmission electron microscope. The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the samples were obtained using a Nicolet 6700 FTIR infrared spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in ATR mode. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) data of the samples were obtained using a SDT-2960 (TA instrument) thermogravimetric analyzer under a nitrogen flow. The water contact angles of CNTA and CNTS before and after chemical modification were measured using a contact angle goniometer (USA Kino Industry Co., Inc.) equipped with a camera. The XPS data of the CNTA, CNTS, SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS were achieved using an ESCALAB 250-XI X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An atomic emission spectrometer using inductively coupled plasma as the excitation source (ICP-AES) was used to measure the ion content. The Raman spectroscopy data were obtained using a RENISHAW SERIAL NO133A80 Raman spectrometer. The light absorbance spectrum measurements on CNTA and CNTS before and after the chemical modification were carried out using a Cary5000UV-Vis-NIR UV spectrometer (Agilent Company, United States). The solar light for water evaporation experiments was supplied by a solar simulator (CEL-HXF300-T3) equipped with AM 1.5G spectrum filter. The temperatures of light absorbers were measured using an infrared radiation (IR) camera (Testo 872). An electronic mass balance (OHAUS AX124ZH/E) was used to monitor the change in water mass during the water evaporation.
Conclusions
We have investigated the solar-driven vapor generation using SF-modified CNT porous materials as light absorbers. The vapor generation performance of CNT-based light absorbers was greatly improved after incorporating a hydrophilic SF coating on the superhydrophobic CNT sidewalls, which enhanced water transport in porous CNT materials. We also found that incorporating the SF protein coating on the CNT sidewalls resulted in a reduction of the vaporization enthalpy of water due to strong interactions between the SF protein molecules and water, which is of great benefit in vapor generation. The orientation of CNTs in porous materials played an important role in vapor generation. CNTs with vertical orientation have good vapor generation performance due to the relatively short water transport path and vapor escape path, as compared to randomly oriented CNTs. Importantly, SF-modified CNT light absorbers exhibited a good vapor generation performance over a wide pH range. This advantage makes the purification of wastewater or desalination of brackish water with high or low pH values possible.
Author contributions
Shenglin Zhou: investigation, validation, and writing – original draft. Jiapeng Zhang, Chuang Wang, Chen Wu and Xiangcheng Zhang: investigation. Zhaohui Yang: conceptualization and funding acquisition. Xiaohua Zhang: conceptualization, methodology, writing – original draft, supervision, and funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Specially Appointed Professor Plan in Jiangsu Province (No. SR10800312 and SR10800215) and the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
References
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151–3160 RSC .
C. Chang, X. Nie, X. X. Li, P. Tao, B. W. Fu, Z. Y. Wang, J. L. Xu, Q. X. Ye, J. Y. Zhang, C. Y. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20970–20978 RSC .
Z. G. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. F. Luo, W. Wang and X. D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 702–726 RSC .
X. Q. Lan, P. L. Wan, Y. Guo, X. Y. Xu, L. W. Fan, W. P. Liu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 11784–11792 RSC .
G. H. Liu, T. Chen, J. L. Xu, G. Li and K. Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 513–531 RSC .
Q. Ji, N. Li, S. X. Wang, S. Li, F. B. Li, L. M. Yu, P. Murto and X. F. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21197–21208 RSC .
K. R. Li, T. H. Chang, Z. P. Li, H. T. Yang, F. F. Fu, T. T. Li, J. S. Ho and P. Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901687 CrossRef .
C. Chang, P. Tao, J. L. Xu, B. W. Fu, C. Y. Song, J. B. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18466–18474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, L. N. Zhang, E. Strobach, A. Leroy, M. K. Yadav, S. Yang, T. A. Cooper, L. A. Weinstein, A. Modi, S. B. Kedare, G. Chen and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2733–2745 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Liu, Z. B. Wang, L. P. Heng and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3436–3442 RSC .
W. G. Li, M. C. Tekell, Y. Huang, K. Bertelsmann, M. Lau and D. L. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802108 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. H. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Y. J. Zheng, R. A. C. Gonzalez, K. B. Hatzell and M. C. Hatzell, Joule, 2021, 5, 1971–1986 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Shang, G. Z. Wang, J. Jin, Z. Y. Leong, S. Z. Huang, C. D. Gu, M. Ding, M. E. Pam, S. Vafakhah, X. L. Li, S. Y. A. Yang and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7216–7226 RSC .
L. F. Su, Y. Y. Ning, Z. Q. Ma, Y. H. Zhang, C. L. Liu, Y. L. Zhang, L. Miao, J. H. Zhou, B. Wu and J. S. Qian, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, X. H. Tian, X. F. Li, S. Han, C. J. Li, X. Z. Zhai, Y. Kang and Z. Z. Yu, J. Mater.
Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14859–14867 RSC .
T. T. Li, Q. L. Fang, X. F. Xi, Y. S. Chen and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 586–593 RSC .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Q. Li and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, P. Wu, J. Zhao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 2479–2488 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Sun, Y. Z. Li, J. Y. Li, Z. Q. Zhu, W. T. Zhang, W. D. Liang, C. H. Ma and A. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 33427–33436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Xiong, Y. J. Zhu, D. D. Qin, F. F. Chen and R. L. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803387 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. L. Tan, J. Y. Wang, W. C. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. S. Cai, S. N. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–399 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Y. Song, W. Shang, J. B. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepallifit, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Gong, H. C. Yang, S. H. Wu, G. P. Xiong, J. H. Yan, K. F. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 51 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. X. Li, W. L. Yang, T. J. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, H. M. Wang, M. Q. Jian, Y. S. Li, K. L. Xia, M. C. Zhang, C. Y. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Ma, Q. S. Zheng and Y. Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28596–28603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Li, Q. L. Fang, J. Q. Wang, H. B. Lin, Q. Han, P. Wang and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 390–399 RSC .
Y. Q. Hou, M. Wang, X. Y. Chen and X. Hou, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 2171–2178 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Yang, Y. B. Yang, L. N. Fu, M. C. Zou, Z. H. Li, A. Y. Cao and Q. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
S. Zhou, J. Sheng, Z. Yang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8763–8771 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Yoon, S.-M. Kwon and H.-J. Jin, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 82–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsuura, T. Saito, T. Okazaki, S. Ohshima, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 429, 497–502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Xu, C. Gao, H. Kong, D. Y. Yan, Y. Z. Jin and P. C. P. Watts, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8846–8853 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11665–11673 RSC .
Z. C. Yu and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000065 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Zhang, J. Li, L. X. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Wang, C. Z. Wang, X. J. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
P. Xiao, J. He, F. Ni, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, W. Zhou, J. C. Gu, J. Y. Xia, S. W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, Z. H. Chen, Z. Z. Guo, M. S. Irshad, L. Yu, J. W. Qian, T. Mei and X. B. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 7139–7149 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhu, M. M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Q. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. H. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. H. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, C. X. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. X. Yu, M. H. Yu, V. G. Sakai, M. S. Tyagi, T. Yamada, L. H. He, X. H. Zhang and L. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11064–11074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Xu, X. Xiao, X. F. Fan, Y. Yang, C. W. Song, Y. F. Fan and Y. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24108–24116 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, P. Wu, H. Yu, J. Zhao, X. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, D. Zhang, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14470–14478 RSC .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Hong, D. Sycks, H. F. Chan, S. T. Lin, G. P. Lopez, F. Guilak, K. W. Leong and X. H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4035–4040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Y. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. P. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. G. Yang, L. T. Qu and G. H. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Liu, G. M. Liao, S. Y. Li, Y. Y. Pan, X. Y. Wang, Y. Y. Weng, X. H. Zhang and Z. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13321–13327 RSC .
X. C. Gui, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, H. W. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. K. Shu and D. H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (c) and SF-CNTS (d).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (c) and SF-CNTS (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  FTIR spectra (a) and TGA data (b) of pure SF, SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS; XPS of pristine CNTA, SF-CNTA, pristine CNTS and SF-CNTS (c and d); EDS elemental maps of SF-CNTA (e) and SF-CNTS (f).	 

 	Fig. 4  Water contact angle images of pristine CNTA (a), SF-CNTA (b), pristine CNTS (e) and SF-CNTS (f); pictures of pristine CNTA, SF-CNTA, pristine CNTS and SF-CNTS (c and g) in water; photographs of the whole SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS evaporators (d and h).	 

 	Fig. 5  Absorbance spectra of pristine CNTS, SF-CNTS, pristine CNTA and SF-CNTA.	 

 	Fig. 6  The schematics of the solar vapor generation system (a) and water channels in the SF-CNTA and SF-CNTS (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  The mass changes of water-filled containers with and without light absorbers (a); the surface temperatures of 3.5% saline water, SF-CNTS and SF-CNTA under one sun irradiation at different irradiation times (b); the infrared images of 3.5% saline water (c), SF-CNTS (d) and SF-CNTA (e) during the vapor generation process under one sun irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 8  Mass change vs. time plot (a), evaporation rate (b), temperatures (c) and infrared images (d) for SF-CNTA under different sun irradiations.	 

 	Fig. 9  Raman spectra and the fits to the Raman spectrum data (a) and the energy transfer efficiency of SF-CNTA under different power densities (b).	 

 	Fig. 10  Evaporation rate of water with different pH values under one sun irradiation (a) and the water evaporation rate for SF-CNTA in different cycles (b). The mass change of a seawater-filled container under one sun irradiation at different irradiation times (c) and ion concentrations in seawater and in desalinated seawater (d).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
