Atomic heterointerface engineering overcomes the activity limitation of electrocatalysts and promises highly-efficient alkaline water splitting  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE02105B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02105B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5228-5259Atomic heterointerface engineering overcomes the activity limitation of electrocatalysts and promises highly-efficient alkaline water splitting

        
          
            Qiucheng 
            Xu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jiahao 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Haoxuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liyue 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yanjie 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Chunzhong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of Ministry of Education, Frontiers Science Center for Materiobiology and Dynamic Chemistry, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: jianghao@ecust.edu.cn; czli@ecust.edu.cn
bShanghai Engineering Research Center of Hierarchical Nanomaterials, School of Chemical Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China
Received 
      8th July 2021
    , Accepted 23rd August 2021First published on 2nd September 2021AbstractAlkaline water splitting, especially anion-exchange-membrane based water electrolysis, is an attractive way for low-cost and scalable H2 production. Green electricity-driven alkaline water electrolysis requires that highly-efficient electrocatalysts be developed to further decrease the barriers of two half reactions – the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Various strategies have been exploited to date, among which atomic heterointerface engineering is the most promising strategy to overcome the intrinsic activity limitation of electrocatalysts. In this review, we thoroughly summarize the recent progress of atomic heterointerface engineering to improve the activity of electrocatalysts. The origin and rationale of the sluggish kinetics of the alkaline HER and OER are first introduced. Subsequently, the synergistic effects (ensemble effect and electron effect) of atomic heterointerface engineering to overcome the activity limitation are elaborated, in which the ensemble effect is helpful in optimizing the reaction pathways with enhanced reaction kinetics by creating a favorable heterointerface and the electron effect can balance the adsorption energies of reaction intermediates by coupling their electronic configurations. And then the rational design of the targeted electrocatalysts is concluded based on the heterointerface constituents and characteristics. At the end, some outlooks about the future development direction for optimizing and maximizing the interfacial active sites in the electrocatalysts are proposed.
Qiucheng Xu
Qiucheng Xu acquired his PhD in materials science and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in June 2021 (supervised by Prof. Jiang and Prof. Li), and had a 1-year joint PhD experience in the University of Oregon. He will join the Technical University of Denmark as a postdoctoral fellow very soon. His research interests include the synthesis of novel nanomaterials and the development of membrane-based electrochemical devices.
Jiahao Zhang
Jiahao Zhang received his BS in composite materials and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST) in 2018. He is currently a PhD candidate in materials science and engineering under the supervision of Prof. Chunzhong Li and Prof. Hao Jiang at ECUST. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of novel electrocatalytic nanomaterials and the understanding of structure–performance relationships.
Hao Jiang
Hao Jiang is a full professor of the Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of the Ministry of Education at East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). Prof. Jiang received his PhD in materials science and engineering from ECUST in 2009, and was also a postdoctoral fellow at Temasek Laboratories, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), until 2011. His research interests mainly focus on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials in the application of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Chunzhong Li
Chunzhong Li is a Cheung Kong Chair Professor at East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). He is also the Dean of the School of Chemical Engineering at ECUST. Prof. Li received his BS (1989), MS (1992), and PhD (1997) in chemical engineering from ECUST. His research interests are highly interdisciplinary, including the accurate construction and application of nanoenergy materials, synthesis and processing of polymer-based nanohybrids, and the chemical basis and scale-up of nanomaterial production.

Broader context
Green hydrogen energy is the key to realizing the global energy transformation and social sustainability. Alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) driven by green-electricity has been considered to be one of the most hopeful ways to replace the traditional industrial technology for low-cost and scalable H2 production. In general, the development of AWE requires that highly-efficient electrocatalysts be designed for two half reactions, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Currently, the alkaline HER and OER are, respectively, limited by the water dissociation step and the scaling relationship of oxygen reaction intermediates. Among various strategies developed so far, atomic heterointerface engineering is the most promising strategy to overcome the intrinsic activity limitation of electrocatalysts. Its unique multi-component synergistic effect enables effectively balancing the optimization conditions for intermediate adsorptions and thus improves the reaction kinetics. However, the progress of interface engineering, especially the detailed protocols to design heterointerfaces based on the reaction mechanism, is still lacking in the recently reported reviews. In this review, we systematically summarize the fundamental features (e.g., interfacial types, synergistic effects), synthesis strategies and experimental progress in atomic heterointerface engineering, mainly discussing how interface engineering helps in overcoming the performance limitation of catalysts for water splitting in alkaline electrolyte. By highlighting the ensemble effect and electron effect, the enhancement mechanism of heterointerface engineering is discussed. Furthermore, rational design guidelines for fabricating the targeted electrocatalysts based on the heterointerface constituents and characteristics are elaborated for the HER, OER and overall water-splitting separately. Finally, we clarify the fact that the key to atomic heterointerface engineering is to optimize the interfacial structure and maximize the interfacial sites in the electrocatalysts. Some perspectives on the real activity evaluation and surface reconstruction effect of heterointerface catalysts are also critically discussed.

1. Introduction
Sustainable hydrogen production is crucial to solving the energy and environmental crisis.1–3 Hydrogen not only has a far higher energy density (∼120 MJ kg−1) than traditional fossil fuels, but is also a clean energy source with zero greenhouse gas emissions.4 These features render it huge application potential in the fields of vehicle power systems, residential heating and smart grids (Fig. 1a). Currently, 96% of the world's annual hydrogen production comes from steam reforming and coal gasification, which involve high energy-consumption processes and inevitably emit greenhouse gases.5,6 To further implement sustainable development, it is charming to replace the traditional hydrogen production methods with the new technology – ion exchange membrane water electrolysis.7,8 For example, proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers, which can well be integrated with renewable energy resources (solar energy, wind, etc.), are promising devices to directly generate high-pressure hydrogen from water with high efficiency and cleanness.9 Despite their advantages, the manufacture of these devices is impeded by their high cost of stack components and catalysts.7 Normally, noble metal (Pt/IrOx) catalysts and titanium alloy hardware are required to maintain the durability of PEM electrolyzers in strongly acidic environments. In contrast, anion exchange membrane (AEM) electrolyzers reacting in alkaline media can use low-cost metals (Cu/Ni/Co/Fe) as hardware materials or catalysts, and thus have greater cost and application advantages than PEM electrolyzers.10 However, the sluggish reaction kinetics of low-cost metal catalysts generally leads to high overpotentials and low energy efficiencies.11 Therefore, developing efficient, stable and low-cost catalysts has been a current hot-spot for the scale-up application of alkaline water splitting technology.
 Fig. 1  The importance of alkaline water splitting and volcano-shape curves for HER and OER electrocatalysts.15,16 (Parts b and c are reproduced from ref. 15 and 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Copyright 2019, Elsevier.) 
In general, water splitting consists of two half reactions – the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Under alkaline conditions, the HER goes through a two-step process, where water dissociation occurs to first supply protons and then convert them into H2; the OER is a complex four-electron transfer process, which involves multiple steps to first form oxygen-containing intermediates and then convert them into O2.12 These reaction steps require extra overpotentials (beyond the thermodynamic requirement) to be driven, consuming large additional energy. Thus, the development of electrocatalysts is essential to reduce the overpotential as well as quicken the reaction kinetics. Recently, single-component metal catalysts have seen a rapid development and have made great progress in alkaline water-splitting.11,13 Their single and clear structures are beneficial to combining the experimental results and theoretical calculations; hence some influential structure–activity relationships (descriptors) and the corresponding volcano plots have been proposed.14–16 These volcano plots confirm the Sabatier principle that the interactions between the catalyst and the intermediates should be neither too strong nor too weak, and have provided great guidance on discovering many potential single-component catalysts.17
On the other hand, the peak of volcano plots reflects the upper limit of activity for single-component catalysts. Fig. 1b exhibits the volcano plot for the alkaline HER, where its peak at around −0.4 eV is far from the ideal zero position of hydrogen binding energy (ΔEH).15 This is due to the dilemma of single-component catalysts that they cannot simultaneously satisfy the water dissociation process and the H* adsorption process in alkaline electrolyte during the HER catalysis. The volcano plot for the alkaline OER is shown in Fig. 1c. The best OER catalyst (SrIrO3) still requires an overpotential of 0.22 V to generate oxygen in alkaline media, which is on account of the inherent scaling-relationship between different oxygen-containing intermediates.16 From the above discussion, we consider that the activity limitation of single-component catalysts is caused by the fact that it is difficult for their single adsorption site to simultaneously meet the adsorption equilibrium of various reaction intermediates during the catalysis.
Recently, increasing the complexity of material systems has been recognized as the key strategy to overcome the activity limitation of single-component catalysts, such as metal alloying, heteroatom doping and heterointerface engineering.18–20 Among them, heterointerface engineering displays considerable potential owing to its unique multi-component synergistic effect, which enables effectively balancing the optimization conditions for intermediate adsorptions. For instance, Subbaraman et al. discovered that the rational arrangement of Ni(OH)2 clusters on Pt electrode surfaces manifested 8 times HER activity enhancement relative to pristine Pt in alkaline medium.21 The synergism of Ni(OH)2–Pt heterointerfaces is that Ni(OH)2 clusters promote the water dissociation with the formation of rich H* intermediates, while the nearby Pt sites take charge of the highly-efficient H* adsorption and then the H2 evolution. This work shows that reasonable heterointerface engineering can greatly break through the activity limitation of catalysts. Recently, the progress of heterointerface engineering in the field of electrocatalysis has been reported by a few reviews. Kwon et al. summarized the electron density and binding energy control of metal/metal compound heterointerfaces on the catalytic performance.22 Yang and co-workers discussed the progress of metal surface-interface engineering and emphasized the geometric structure effect for promoting electrocatalysis.23 These reviews focus on the effect of heterointerface engineering, whereas they still lack detailed protocols to design heterointerfaces, especially based on the electrochemical reaction mechanism. Moreover, the key point of heterointerface engineering is to precisely regulate the atomic configuration at the interface. A reasonable atomic configuration design can not only maximize the synergistic effects of heterointerfaces, but also simultaneously optimize the thermodynamics and kinetics of catalysis. Herein, the synergistic effects, synthesis strategies and design protocols of atomic heterointerface engineering are discussed for developing efficient water splitting electrocatalysts. We first summarized the origin and rationale of the sluggish kinetics of the HER and OER in alkaline medium. Afterwards, the advantages of the ensemble effect and electron effect of atomic heterointerface engineering to overcome the activity limitation of the HER, OER and overall water-splitting (OWS) are discussed. Finally, some perspectives on the challenges and future development of atomic heterointerface engineering for electrocatalysis are proposed.
2. Synergistic effects and synthesis strategies of atomic heterointerfaces in electrocatalysts
The concept of heterointerfaces originates from the heterojunction in the semiconductor field, which describes the contact region (interface) between two different semiconductors.24 In the electrocatalysis field, heterointerface catalysts, defined as the catalysts containing interfaces between hetero- or multi-components, have recently attracted great attention. Some special physico-chemical features would be generated towards the heterointerfaces due to the electronic structure or bandgap difference of the unequal components, for example the Schottky barrier of a metal–semiconductor contact.25 The atomic interface engineering proceeding with precise control of interfacial atom configurations and uniform interface distribution is the current development tendency. The favorable atomic-combination of multi-components can optimize the catalytic reaction pathways with enhanced reaction kinetics. In this review, we divide heterointerfaces into three typical types: planar interface, lateral interface and hierarchical interface, as shown in Fig. 2. Planar and hierarchical interfaces are commonly designed for electrocatalytic reactions due to their relatively small contact area between different components. In this case, heterointerfaces as key catalytic centers are required to be formed as many as possible to maximize the targeted adsorption sites. On the other hand, a lateral interface with larger interfacial contact area shows much stronger electron and energy band structure interaction, which is widely operated in the photocatalysis field. On the atomic scale, interfacial structures can be further divided into two combining forms based on the atomic arrangement – whether their lattices are matched. A perfectly lattice-matched interface should show a coherently crystalline matrix with no dangling bonds. Ideally, this kind of interface can be considered as a dividing line to separate different components with a continuous bandgap grading. The chemical bonding in the lattice-matched interface would be strong and stable. In contrast, a lattice-mismatched interface may contain many dangling bonds and show a more defective structure coupled with the lattice strain. A transition and interdiffusion region, like the depletion layer in the semiconductor, would serve as the interface region to realize the combination and stabilization of multi-components. Highly lattice-mismatched interfaces with abundant bond distortions would provide diverse prospects for optimizing the bandgap structure and these interface regions are usually active and efficient for catalysis.
 Fig. 2  Three heterointerface types and the characteristic effects of atomic heterointerface engineering. 
Although the electron transfer or interfacial resistances are different for interfaces with variable atomic arrangements, their general interfacial effects are almost similar. Two main effects (ensemble effect and electron effect) are attributed to the significant role of heterointerface engineering in catalysis. The ensemble effect is based on the multi-component characteristics of heterostructures, where bridge- or interconnected adsorption sites with different coordination environments optimize and accelerate the adsorption process of different reaction intermediates.26 For example, a tandem reaction consists of the following elementary steps: (a) the adsorption of reactants; (b) the formation and transformation of intermediates (b1 and b2); and (c) the desorption of products. The heterointerface contains two components (A and B), where A and B are beneficial to the a and b1 steps and b2 and c steps, respectively. In this case, the heterointerface can provide a favorable reaction pathway for the tandem catalysis process when each elementary step occurs in its desired component and thus significantly improves the overall reaction kinetics. In fact, the term ‘ensemble effect’ originates from alloy chemistry, which refers to the randomly alloyed geometries about the ensemble of a certain number of atoms. In this review, we further introduce the ensemble effect in the heterointerface field. Ideally, if different components in a hetero-catalyst are treated as one-single metal atom, then heterointerface engineering and metal alloying are very similar. We consider that heterointerface engineering is the development of metal alloying since it is suitable for a wider range of material systems. Moreover, the electron effect reflects the electronic interaction between multi-components across the heterointerface, which is caused by their energy band difference.27 Such a difference induces oriented electron transportation and creates a charge distribution gradient at the interface. Both electron-rich and electron-deficient states exist in one catalyst system, so the band structures of the constituents around the interface are altered and the adsorption energies of reaction intermediates are regulated. As a result, the electron effect balances the adsorption energies of reaction intermediates by coupling their electronic configurations. It is worth highlighting that both the ensemble effect and electron effect are synergistically conduced on the interface, and the reasonable design of atomic interface engineering can maximize these effects.
To realize the atomic arrangement of heterointerfaces, many advanced synthesis strategies have been developed in recent years. Here, we highlight several methods based on their synthetic chemical-environments (Fig. 3), such as wet-chemical methods, physico-chemical methods, and electro-chemical methods. The general and essential characteristics of these methods are that their growth or conversion rates are relatively slow, which enables precisely controlling the atomic arrangement of the targeted interface by regulating the preparation parameters. For the wet-chemical synthesis, two of the most common strategies to construct a heterointerface are (1) the epitaxial growth of a second component on the existing component and (2) the ion-exchange of specific template materials.28 Normally, the epitaxial growth of the second component along a specific crystal plane can be finely controlled by regulating the chemical state of the existing component. Xu et al. demonstrated a heterointerface model in which CdS nanoparticles can be selectively loaded onto either the lateral- or basal sites of Bi2Se3 nanoplates.29 They found that the surface atomic composition of Bi2Se3 (i.e., the coordination-saturation state of Se) largely affects the thermodynamic and kinetic barriers of nucleation. A planar heterointerface between the (104) of Bi2Se3 and the (101) of CdS tends to be fabricated when the Bi2Se3 exposes the Se-enriched edge. Furthermore, physico-chemical methods such as magnetron sputtering (MS) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques are efficient in constructing atomic heterointerfaces.30 In particular, the ALD technique enables growing an ultrathin film on target materials via the reaction between the exposed surface and gaseous reactant. By tailoring the ALD cycles and precursors, the components and size of atomic heterointerfaces can be rationally designed. Different ALD strategies, such as ALD overcoating, template-assisted ALD and area-selective ALD, further provide promising prospects for performing atomic heterointerface engineering in a precise manner.31 Sun and co-authors constructed atomically coupled Pt–Ru dimers on N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) due to the strong metal–support interaction by the two-step ALD process.32 Pt and Ru atoms are controllably bonded near the N-sites of the NCNTs to form the as-designed Pt–Ru bimetallic structure. Similarly, magnetron sputtering is another charming physical vapour deposition technology.30 The magnetic field controls ionized Ar atoms to bombard the target, which releases reactive molecules/atoms, which are then deposited on the nearby substrate materials. Meng et al. sputtered Pt nanoparticles with the perfect exposure of active (111) facets on CoO nanorods by direct current magnetron sputtering.33 The sputtering current and time were used to finely regulate the interfacial atom arrangement.
 Fig. 3  Advanced synthesis strategies to realize the atomic heterointerface engineering of catalysts.29,33,39,41 Reproduced with permission from Copyright 2015&2020, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2016&2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, electrochemical synthesis methods have become attractive strategies to construct atomic heterointerfaces. The electrochemical potential difference can drive the deposition or conversion reactions of electrode materials in different electrolyte systems.34 Accordingly, many novel heterostructures with adjustable chemical compositions, which are commonly hard to construct by conventional methods, can be easily fabricated by electrochemical methods. For instance, electrodeposition can realize the facile preparation of metal-based heterointerfaces by controlling the electrolyte components and the targeted electrode materials.35 On the other hand, electrochemical conversion has attracted more and more attention in the last decade. Researchers first noticed that the constitution or structure of many materials would inevitably be converted during the electrocatalysis process (e.g. OER, CO2RR).36 This conversion is mainly due to the applied potential bias during the catalysis, which electrically drives the oxidation or reduction of catalysts. Moreover, the reconstruction of catalysts is also decided by the reaction environments and the intrinsic structure of the catalysts. A few recent studies were reported that utilized the electrochemical conversion phenomenon innovatively to synthesize heterointerface engineered efficient catalysts. Liao et al. constructed a class of core/shell Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x catalysts with tunable metal-(oxy)hydroxide heterointerfaces by controlling the electrochemical cycling.37 To realize the formation of Pd/Fe (oxy)hydroxide interfaces, the applied potential was restricted to −0.4 to 0 V (vs. RHE) and the electrolyte was chosen as 0.5 M H2SO4. This strategy takes advantage of the electrochemical dealloying and reconstruction processes to implement atomic heterointerface engineering. Moreover, the electrochemical oxidation process is another useful strategy that can selectively convert template materials into the desired catalysts. For example, Xu et al. developed a fluorine triggered surface conversion strategy to realize the fabrication of atomic Ni(Fe)OxHy/NiFe alloy heterointerfaces during the electrochemical oxidation process.38 Similarly, Jiang and co-authors applied high oxidation potentials to successfully convert Ir/Co(OH)2 into IrOx/CoOOH as effective OER catalysts.39 This strategy is suitable for constructing heterointerfaces between abundant precursors (sulfides, phosphides, nitrides, etc.) and their metal (oxy)hydroxides. Besides, other-chemical methods, such as photo-deposition and ultrasonication-assisted deposition, can also be used to construct atomic heterointerfaces by finely controlling the reaction parameters.40 Veziroglu et al. reported the preparation of Au–TiO2 heterostructures by the photo-deposition method.41 The deposited state of Au on TiO2 was altered according to the solvent type. Different heterogeneous TiO2–solvent interfaces with discrepant electron transfer rates leads to the variant Au arrangements on TiO2. In conclusion, although many advanced synthesis methods have been reported, further developments of atomic heterointerface engineering with the fine control and feasible synthesis are urgently required.
3. Overcoming water dissociation for the alkaline HER
3.1 Mechanisms and challenges for the alkaline HER

3.1.1 Reaction paths and challenges of the alkaline HER. 
The cathodic HER is a multi-step reaction with two-electron transfer.42,43 Its reaction pathway is generally described as follows: Volmer step: H2O + e− → H* + OH−(1) Heyrovsky step: H2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH−(2) or Tafel step: H* + H* → H2(3)where * represents the active adsorption site of the electrocatalyst used and H* indicates the hydrogen intermediate adsorbed onto the active site. It has been reported that the pH of electrolytes can largely affect the HER kinetics of catalysts. The experimental results show that the HER activity of most electrocatalysts in alkaline media (pH = 13) is 2–3 orders of magnitude lower than that in acidic media (pH = 1).44 This large performance difference is principally caused by the H+ concentration in the electrolyte. In acidic media, abundant H+ ions in the electrolyte are supplied to directly adsorb onto the active site for the following steps. However, an additional water dissociation process is required to produce protons for the following steps in alkaline media, and it is currently considered as the rate-determining step for the alkaline HER.45Fig. 4a shows the free energy diagram of reaction pathways for the alkaline HER, in which the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps are both required to overcome the higher energy barriers of the sluggish water dissociation process. Therefore, the intrinsic activities of alkaline HER electrocatalysts are not only determined by the hydrogen adsorption ability (the mostly accepted descriptor for acidic HER electrocatalysts), but also controlled by the delicate balance of the other three major factors derived by water dissociation: H2O adsorption ability, H2O dissociation ability and OH− desorption ability (Fig. 4b).46–48
 Fig. 4  (a) Free energy diagram of reaction pathways for the alkaline HER. (b) Schematic illustration of an ideal multi-site model. The contents in the gray dashed box are the major factors for the alkaline HER. 


3.1.2 Role of heterointerface engineering in the alkaline HER. 
As mentioned above, an outstanding alkaline HER electrocatalyst should meet several key parameters: appropriate H-binding energy, effective H2O-adsorption, low H2O-dissociation barrier and suitable OH− adsorption energy. Heterointerface engineering with the strong synergistic interaction between different interfacial components is one effective strategy to simultaneously meet these requirements. A rationally designed heterointerface normally presents both the ensemble effect and electron effect. On the one hand, the ensemble effect can potentially integrate the active centers of different components to form the multi-site reaction pathway for accelerating the alkaline HER kinetics. For example, as shown in Fig. 4b, the water dissociation process to produce H* and the recombination process to generate H2 separately occur on their favorable sites of different components in a hybrid catalyst, and the heterointerface helps in transferring the reaction intermediates.49–51 On the other hand, the energy band structure at the heterointerface could be precisely regulated via the electron effect, thereby changing the surface electronic environment of active components.52 Schottky electrocatalysts take advantage of this mechanism, in which the Schottky barrier leads to band bending near the heterointerface and allows electrons to spontaneously transfer across the interface until the work function reaches equilibrium on both sides.25 The resulting electron-rich side of interfaces is normally observed with better HER activity and a faster reaction rate. In Table 1, we summarise the recently reported heterointerface catalysts whose HER performances were measured in both alkaline and acidic media. After forming the heterointerface, their performance improvement (Δη10) in alkaline media is much larger than that in acidic media for both the noble metal-based and transition metal-based catalysts. This result strongly supports the fact that atomic heterointerface engineering is significant in optimizing the atomic configuration and electronic structure of catalysts for outstanding alkaline HER performance. In this section, we will discuss the synergistic effects of atomic heterointerface engineering, mainly the ensemble effect and electron effect, and the design principles as well as applications of heterointerface electrocatalysts in the alkaline HER.
Table 1 Comparison of the acidic and alkaline HER performance of representative heterointerface electrocatalysts




Type
Catalyst
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Δη10 (mV)
Ref.




Noble metal based heterointerfaces
PtNi/NiOx
1 M KOH
50
17

53



PtNi NWs
67


PtNi/NiOx
0.5 M H2SO4
35
−3


PtNi NWs
32


Rh–Rh2O3-NPs/C
0.5 M KOH
63
164

54



RhNPs/C
227


Rh–Rh2O3-NPs/C
0.5 M H2SO4
13
7


RhNPs/C
20


Ru@WNO-C
1 M KOH
24
518

55



WNO-C
542


Ru@WNO-C
0.5 M H2SO4
172
57


WNO-C
229






Transition metal based heterointerfaces
Co9S8–MoS2
1 M KOH
167
182

56



MoS2
349


Co9S8–MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
229
42


MoS2
271


MoS2/Ni2+δOδ(OH)2−δ
1 M KOH
73
185

57



1T-MoS2
258


MoS2/Ni2+δOδ(OH)2−δ
0.5 M H2SO4
212
−4


1T-MoS2
208


MoP@NC
1 M KOH
149
283

58



MoP
432


MoP@NC
0.5 M H2SO4
96
74


MoP
170





3.2 Ensemble effect dominated heterointerface electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER
Constructing atomic heterointerfaces by combining highly-efficient water dissociation components with representative HER active components has been verified as the most valid strategy to implement the ensemble effect for improving alkaline HER kinetics. For example, a designed heterointerface is constructed between a traditional acidic HER catalyst and an oxyphilic component. In this mode, the oxyphilic component is beneficial to promoting the adsorption and decomposition of H2O with the generation of many H* species; subsequently, the H* species are adsorbed onto nearby acidic HER active sites and recombine into H2. In this context, many materials with a strong water adsorption–dissociation ability, typically metal oxides and metal hydroxides, are summarized and investigated to break down the energy barrier of the rate-determining step for promoting the alkaline HER.

3.2.1 Oxide-based heterointerface electrocatalysts. 
Metal oxides have been reported to exhibit excellent oxyphilic properties, which have the potential to quicken the water dissociation process.59–62 Many researchers have reported their use as co-catalysts in heterointerface catalysts. For instance, Dai et al. synthesized nanoscale NiO/Ni heterostructures attached onto CNT sidewalls that exhibited superior HER activity in alkaline media.63 They found that the sluggish OH− desorption of pure Ni drastically limits the HER catalytic activity. On the designed NiO/Ni heterointerfaces, the NiO with strong electrostatic affinity preferentially attracts and dissociates H2O. The positively charged Ni2+ species in the NiO with abundant unfilled d-orbitals is the key to triggering such water dissociation. Therefore, owing to the ensemble effect, the NiO/Ni heterointerface promotes the generation of protons which then adsorb onto the adjacent Ni0 sites for facilitating the H2 evolution. Interestingly, Cheng et al. recently prepared an unconventional heterointerface between Ni nanocrystals and Ni-deficient LixNiO nanoclusters, in which the lattice oxygen species inside the LixNiO nanoclusters with strong Brønsted basicity could spontaneously break H–OH in the alkaline HER.64 The ensemble effect of LixNiO/Ni remarkably accelerates the rate-determining Volmer step, leading to significantly improved activity with only 36 mV for producing H2 at 10 mA cm−2.
Many attempts have also been applied to combine oxides with noble metal. Huang et al. developed an interface-engineered NiOx/PtNi nanowire electrocatalyst by a simple annealing treatment under different oxidation atmospheres.53 The as-obtained NiOx/PtNi hierarchical heterointerface with an appropriate coverage of NiOx exhibits unprecedented HER activity in 1 M KOH. On the NiOx/PtNi interface, NiOx can accelerate the water dissociation to produce protons and nearby vacant Pt sites would evolve H2 readily. Besides nickel oxides, many other metal oxides (e.g., MnOx, CeO2) have also been studied to serve as metal-containing heterointerface electrocatalysts because of their strong H2O adsorption and dissociation abilities.65–67
Transition metal nitrides have demonstrated tremendous potential to replace noble metal for the HER. Fortunately, the combination of metal oxides and nitrides through heterointerface engineering shows accelerated alkaline HER kinetics. Qian et al. successfully constructed Ni3N–MoO2 heterointerface nanosheets by an in situ component manipulation strategy.68 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal that MoO2 with a lower unoccupied orbital center (0.64 eV) could substantially facilitate the water dissociation process, while Ni3N is more inclined to provide sites for increasing H2 desorption. In detail, MoO2 delivers a much larger water adsorption energy (−0.58 eV) and an obviously lower energy barrier for water dissociation (0.09 eV) than Ni3N, suggesting strong charge interaction between MoO2 and H2O. Consequently, an ultrasmall overpotential of 21 mV is required for the Ni3N–MoO2 catalyst to attain 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline electrolyte, which is superior to those of commercial Pt/C catalysts.


3.2.2 Hydroxide-based heterointerface electrocatalysts. 
Some studies have reported that hydroxides are the most potential water dissociation active components to construct atomic heterointerfaces for improving the alkaline HER.69 For example, Markovic et al. found that the arrangement of only a small amount of Ni(OH)2 clusters on Pt catalyst would improve the HER activity owing to the outstanding water dissociation properties of Ni(OH)2.21 As shown in Fig. 5a, a water dissociation process requires concerted interaction of O species at the edges of Ni(OH)2 clusters and H intermediates on the neighboring Pt sites. The as-obtained catalyst manifests an 8 times activity increase in the HER via the mentioned mechanism. Moreover, introducing intercalated Li+ can further enhance the water splitting performance due to the destabilization effect of Li+ on the HO–H bond. To confirm the significance of the water dissociation step and investigate the universality of this principle, the alkaline HER performances were systematically studied on a series of Ni(OH)2-modified metal surfaces.70 The results summarized in Fig. 5b show that Ni(OH)2 can successfully enhance the HER activity on different kinds of metal surfaces, such as group IB metals (Cu, Ag and Au), Pt-group metals (Ru, Ir and Pt) and 3D transition metals (V, Ti and Ni). This work provides a viable strategy for alkaline HER electrocatalysts to obtain satisfactory catalytic activity based on the ensemble effect.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the alkaline HER on a Ni(OH)2/Pt heterointerface.21 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Comparison of HER activities expressed as overpotentials to achieve 50 A m−2 in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M KOH for pure metal surfaces and Ni(OH)2-modified surfaces.70 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Adsorption free energy diagram for the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps of α- or β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrodes. In situ Raman tests at low (d) and high (e) wavenumbers of the β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrode in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.71 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) High-resolution TEM image of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest structure. (g) Schematic illustration of the HER activity enhancing mechanism of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest structure in alkaline media.72 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Based on the above-mentioned Ni(OH)2 modified heterointerface model, a range of catalysts were further developed for a high-performance alkaline HER. For instance, Yu et al. constructed atomic heterointerfaces by loading α- and β-Ni(OH)2 nanostructures onto the surfaces of Pt electrodes to research the phase effect on alkaline HER activity.71 The results show that β-Ni(OH)2/Pt is the better choice for boosting the alkaline HER since β-Ni(OH)2 has a stronger hydrogen bonding interaction with molecular H2O than α-Ni(OH)2, as shown in Fig. 5c. Besides, the hydrogen adsorption energy of Pt sites is optimized by efficient electron transfer from β-Ni(OH)2 through the heterointerface. In particular, the superficial valence bond structure of β-Ni(OH)2 during the cathodic polarization process was monitored via in situ Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 5d and e). The intensities of the γNi–OH, νNi–O and νOH bands weaken gradually during the HER process, indicating the strong adsorption of H2O onto the β-Ni(OH)2 lattice. Moreover, the increasing ratio (Iγ/ν) is owing to the strong hydrogen bonding interaction, which restricts the stretching of the Ni–O bonds. Thus, β-Ni(OH)2 can strongly interact with H2O molecules for improving the alkaline HER.
Besides noble material Pt, Ni3S2 is a very promising HER electrocatalyst in acidic media owing to its rich Ni–S and Ni–Ni bonds. Unfortunately, its weak OH− adsorption ability as well as the sluggish water dissociation kinetics slows down the formation of H*, severely limiting the HER performance of Ni3S2 under alkaline conditions. For this reason, Xu et al. demonstrated the preparation of a Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 heterostructure by a rapid electrodeposition technique.72 The planar heterointerface between Ni(OH)2 and Ni3S2 can be obviously observed in the high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 5f. The as-prepared Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 exhibits a Tafel slope of 49 mV dec−1, close to that of commercial Pt/C (43 mV dec−1) but much lower than those of Ni(OH)2 (60 mV dec−1) and Ni3S2 (99 mV dec−1). The excellent properties and boosting kinetics of Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 for the alkaline HER can be ascribed to the advanced hierarchical nanoforest structure and the ensemble effect at the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 heterointerface, as shown in Fig. 5g. The surface atomic configuration analysis reveals that Ni(OH)2 could efficiently reduce the work function at the heterointerface and cleave HO–H bonds due to its powerful OH− adsorption ability, leading to remarkably accelerated alkaline HER kinetics. Moreover, MoS2 with rich S-edge sites can have a near-optimal hydrogen adsorption free energy, and has been regarded as a promising acid HER electrocatalyst.73 In order to implement its application in the alkaline HER, Jiang et al. synthesized a novel 3D Ni(OH)2/MoS2 hybrid catalyst.74 DFT calculations demonstrate that the interfacial cooperation of Ni(OH)2/MoS2 brings favorable hydrogen and hydroxyl species energetics, leading to a low-grade energy barrier of the rate-limiting water dissociation step in alkaline media. Besides Ni3S2 and MoS2, metal hydroxides have also been widely used to establish atomic heterointerfaces with transition metal-based compounds (such as Ni(OH)2–CoS2, Ni(OH)2–Fe2P and MoS2/NiCo-LDH),75–77 in which the hydroxide plays a key role in speeding up the Volmer step by providing additional water dissociation sites.


3.2.3 Other heterointerface electrocatalysts with ensemble effects. 
Apart from the most common oxides/hydroxides, numerous materials with fast water dissociation kinetics have also been largely employed in the alkaline HER, such as FeOx(OH)2−2x, NiS, Ni(HCO3)2, Ni–Nx species, and 2D Co-BDC.37,78–84 Interestingly, Xu et al. reported a top-down electrochemical synthesis strategy to fabricate a core–shell structured Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x composite, which formed abundant lateral interfaces.37 As shown in Fig. 6a, Fe species serve as targeted sites for water dissociation and provide abundant active protons, while the Pd nanoparticles act as the sites for hydrogen adsorption/desorption. By precisely controlling the electrochemical cycling process, the coverage areal ratio of iron (oxy)hydroxide on the Pd surface could be well-modulated. The operando XANES spectra of Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x during the electrochemical cycling process were measured (Fig. 6b). By comparing the ratio of Fe2+ on the outermost surface to the metallic Fe beneath the surface, a “V”-shaped relationship of the Fe valence state with the increase of the number of cycles is shown. Furthermore, the intrinsic activity of Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x for the alkaline HER also exhibits a volcano-shaped correlation depending on the surface Fe species coverage (Fig. 6c). Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x with a coverage of about 40% display optimized activity, which is 19 times better than that of pure Pd, indicating an effective balance between the water dissociation step and hydrogen formation step. Using this electrochemical synthesis strategy it is feasible to design in situ formed heterointerface electrocatalysts in alkaline media and this strategy could be extended to other metal compounds. Similarly, Zheng et al. designed a Pt decorated Ni3N electrocatalyst for the alkaline HER.85 They found that an atomically-thin Ni(OH)2 layer was in situ formed on the surfaces of the Ni3N nanosheets under HER conditions. Such a newly formed heterointerface provides abundant active sites for accelerating the water dissociation and the H* formation, which are further transported to the nearby Pt surface. Consequently, the Ni(OH)2/Ni3N/Pt catalyst exhibits a brilliant performance for the alkaline HER, including an ultralow onset potential (5 mV), an exceptional Tafel slope (36.5 mV dec−1) and an excellent stability of 82.5% current retention after operating for 24 h.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the ensemble effect on the surfaces of Pd/FeOX(OH)2−2x NPs for the alkaline HER. (b) In situ XANES of the Fe K-edge of the Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x NPs after various electrochemical cycles. Inset (b) shows the Fe valency (in 0.1 M KOH) as a function of the cycle number. (c) The overpotential versus FeOX(OH)2−2x coverage.37 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of a nitrogen-doped carbon/VO-WON heterostructure. (e) Free energy diagram for the HER on NC, WO3, VO-WON, and NC/VO-WON models.87 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
It has also been reported that defects can improve the water dissociation kinetics for the alkaline HER.86 For instance, Hou et al. designed a hydrogenation/nitridation-induced strategy to construct a mesoporous heterostructure array (NC/VO-WON), in which porous tungsten oxynitride nanorod arrays with rich oxygen vacancies are skillfully encapsulated into nitrogen-doped carbon nanolayers.87 DFT calculations reveal that the abundant VO in the core/shell heterostructure can not only regulate the surface electronic structure but also offer substantial potential sites to promote the adsorption and dissociation of H2O (Fig. 6d). As a result, NC/VO-WON shows an outstanding HER activity with an ultrasmall overpotential of 16 mV to realize 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 33 mV dec−1 in alkaline electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 6e, VO-WON demonstrates much lower free energy for water dissociation (−1.17 eV), reflecting that abundant VO and N species are favorable for splitting HO–H bonds.

3.3 Electron effect dominated heterointerface electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER
Heterointerfaces are normally assembled from multiple active components with different work functions and surface electronic environments, which inevitably causes the readjustment of the electronic structure around the surface/interface of the heterostructure. This phenomenon is famously known as the “electron effect”. Based on the reasonable engineering of heterointerfaces, moderate adsorption free energies for reactant and/or intermediate species could be achieved; they have a considerable influence on alkaline HER performance and kinetics. In this section, we summarize a wide range of metal/metalloid–semiconductor heterointerface electrocatalysts for alkaline HER catalysis.

3.3.1 Metal-based Schottky electrocatalysts. 
Schottky electrocatalysts, which are obtained by the combination of metallic and semi-conductive phases, are the most typical materials dominated by the electron effect. Recently, Wang et al. constructed a CoMn/CoMn2O4 Schottky electrocatalyst (Fig. 7a) for the alkaline HER.88 Benefiting from the modulation of local electron density at the heterointerface, CoMn/CoMn2O4 exhibits superior catalytic activity, especially a low overpotential of 69 mV to output 10 mA cm−2. The electron effect between CoMn and CoMn2O4 was analysed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS); see Fig. 7b, where an obvious gap between their work function values confirms the successful establishment of a Schottky heterointerface in the CoMn/CoMn2O4 hybrid, leading to a self-driven charge transfer process. As shown in Fig. 7c, the Schottky barrier will result in band bending at the heterointerface, causing continuous transfer of electrons from CoMn to CoMn2O4 until the work functions become equilibrated. This work achieves a novel strategy to construct Mott–Schottky heterojunctions for efficient electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of a CoMn/CoMn2O4 heterostructure. (b) UPS analysis of CoMn and CoMn2O4. (c) Energy band diagram of metallic CoMn and CoMn2O4 with Schottky contact.88 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) High-resolution TEM image of a S-MoS2@C electrocatalyst. (e) The side view of the optimized molecular orbital models for the S-MoS2@C electrocatalyst. (f) Polarization curves of commercial MoS2, MoS2@C, and S-MoS2@C electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Electron density difference plot at the MoO2–FeP heterointerface. (h) Calculated H2O adsorption energy and (i) H* adsorption energy of MoO2–FeP, FeP, and MoO2 systems.95 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Inspired by the same viewpoint, Wang et al. decorated nanosized TiO2 nanoparticles on microscale Co dendrites to obtain a Co/TiO2 hierarchical heterointerface.89 The strong electron interaction enhances the local electronic state of Co centers to optimize ΔGH*, as proved by XPS results and DFT calculations. In detail, an obvious shift of Co 2p3/2 toward low binding energy for Co/TiO2 in contrast to the pristine Co embodies the electron collector properties of Co, demonstrating spontaneous charge distribution via the metal–semiconductor heterointerface. As a result, the d-band center shows a negative shift from −1.16 eV (Co) to −1.38 eV (Co/TiO2) after Schottky contact, suggesting the better chemical desorption capability of Co/TiO2 for H*. Theoretical calculations confirm the vital role of the Schottky heterojunction for optimizing ΔGH* by regulating the local electronic structure, which further improves the alkaline HER performance of the hierarchical Co/TiO2 electrocatalyst. Transition metal carbides have also been applied in fabricating Schottky heterointerfaces because of their efficient electron transfer ability.90 Li et al. prepared multi-interfacial Ni/WC hybrid nanoparticles anchored onto N-doped carbon sheets (Ni/WC@NC), which exhibited superior activities for a robust HER over a wide pH range.91 In 1 M KOH, Ni/WC@NC displays a low overpotential of only 77 mV to realize 10 mA cm−2 with a small Tafel slope (68.6 mV dec−1) and excellent stability. The abundant hierarchal heterointerfaces between Ni and WC species synergistically optimized the local electronic configurations of both components; thus, they are regarded as the primary factor in the remarkable HER performance. The above studies provide a powerful heterointerface engineering strategy for designing high-performance alkaline HER electrocatalysts.


3.3.2 Carbon-based Schottky electrocatalysts. 
In recent years, carbon-based materials have been widely developed in energy storage systems owing to their numerous advantages, such as excellent conductivity, tunable 3D porous structure, enormous specific surface area and ideal supporting stability.92 Accordingly, carbon-based materials could also trigger spontaneous electron rearrangement by constructing heterointerfaces with semiconductors. For instance, Xu et al. constructed a strongly coupled MoS2 nanocrystal–carbon embedded-structure hybrid catalyst (S-MoS2@C) with abundant lateral interfaces and unsaturated S-edges (Fig. 7d).93 They used the optimized molecular orbital models to show the strong interaction between S-MoS2 and carbon in Fig. 7e, where the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are concentrated on carbon and S-MoS2, respectively, indicating rapid electron transfer from carbon to S-MoS2. Furthermore, first-principles calculations demonstrate that the unsaturated S-edge has an optimized ΔGH* of 0.52 eV than the Mo-edge (−0.94 eV), S-edge (0.97 eV) and inert S-basal plane (7.17 eV), verifying the desirable valence-electron state and hydrogen adsorption behavior of S-MoS2@C. Thus, this S-MoS2@C electrocatalyst exhibits state-of-the-art catalytic activity toward the HER with a small η10 of 136 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 155 mV in 1 M KOH (Fig. 7f), respectively. Besides, doping and co-doping heteroatoms (N, B, P, S, O) into carbon-based materials have been widely demonstrated as efficient strategies to improve the physicochemical properties of carbon-based materials.94 2D graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) could be well-tuned to an appropriate level for H* adsorption by constructing heterostructures. Benefiting from the enormous specific surface area and the electron effect of g-C3N4, the hybrids would exhibit excellent HER activity for the alkaline HER. Guo et al. reported a MoB/g-C3N4 Schottky catalyst by introducing n-type semi-conductive g-C3N4 into metallic MoB.95 The difference in Fermi level between the metal and semiconductor sides drives the charge redistribution across the Schottky heterointerface, leading to the accumulation of local electron density on the MoB side. According to the first-principles calculations, the kinetic barriers of both proton adsorption and reduction coordinates are dramatically reduced owing to the subtle Schottky contact, thus facilitating surface H2 desorption. As expected, the MoB/g-C3N4 Schottky catalyst exhibits an outstanding HER performance with a low Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1 and a high exchange current density of 17 μA cm−2, much superior to those of the pristine MoB. Similarly, Qiao et al. prepared a Mo-based Schottky heterointerface by combining g-C3N4 with 2D MoN.96 After hybridization, a metallic g-C3N4 surface with enriched electron density is formed due to the charge redistribution occurring at the interlayer, leading to the stabilization of Had and the enhancement of catalytic activity for the HER. Besides, Shao et al. investigated a series of noble-metal phosphide-based core–shell heterostructures (MPX) for the HER by integrating with ultrathin N,P co-doped graphitic carbon (NPGC), in which the MPX includes RhP2, RuP2, PtP2, IrP2 and Pd5P2.97 Among them, the RuP2@NPGC hybrid shows the best activity in 1 M KOH with a low overpotential of 108 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and an ultrasmall Tafel slope of 30 mV dec−1.


3.3.3 Other heterointerface electrocatalysts with electron effects. 
In fact, a Schottky-based junction can be formed as long as there is a difference in Fermi level between materials on both sides of the heterointerface, which would drive the charge flow propagated by electrons or holes until the system reaches equilibrium. Hence, constructing heterointerfaces between different semiconductors was also studied to operate the “electron effect” for accelerating the alkaline HER.98,99 For instance, Fu et al. designed a carbon-encapsulating MoO2–FeP heterostructure (MoO2–FeP@C) electrocatalyst, with enriched lateral interfaces.100 XPS results and DFT calculations reveal the electron redistribution at the heterointerface, where electron transfer from MoO2 to FeP leads to an electron accumulation area on the FeP side and a hole accumulation area on the MoO2 side (Fig. 7g). Furthermore, MoO2–FeP has a more negative ΔGH2O value (−0.42 eV) and a moderate ΔGH* (0.21 eV), indicating the effective H2O adsorption ability and H* adsorption kinetics of the MoO2–FeP heterostructure (Fig. 7h and i). The MoO2–FeP@C electrocatalyst exhibits a small overpotential of 103 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 48 mV dec−1.
The electron effect can also occur between metal/metal or metal/carbon hybrids. Cui et al. synthesized Pd–Pt bimetallic heterostructures by epitaxially growing Pt nanoparticles on Pd nanosheets.101 Comprehensive DFT calculations and XPS characterization demonstrate that an electronic interaction presents at the Pd/Pt heterointerface with electron accumulation on the Pt sides. The charge transfer level is also highly dependent on the interfacial facets of the Pd substrates. Consequently, the Pd/Pt heterojunction with rich Pd (100)–Pt planar interfaces shows superior activity and long-term stability for the alkaline HER. Besides, Che et al. reported the synthesis of ultrafine Ru nanocrystals uniformly dispersed on N-doped carbon (Ru/NC) with abundant hierarchical interfaces via a one-step pyrolysis method.102 The Ru/NC electrocatalyst demonstrates an outstanding performance in 1 M KOH, which only requires an ultrasmall overpotential of 17 mV to attain 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1, outperforming commercial Pt/C. Impressively, the charge distribution and electrostatic potential are visualized by off-axis electron holography for the first time on the Ru/NC heterointerface. This structure provides a decreased energy barrier for H2O dissociation and an optimal Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption at the same time. The above studies not only provide rational designing schemes to accelerate HER kinetics in alkaline media, but also bring in-depth insights into the confusing mechanism of the alkaline HER.
In summary, we list the alkaline HER performances of typical heterointerface catalysts and compare them with those of the corresponding single component catalysts in Table 2. As the benchmark catalyst, commercial Pt/C normally outputs a low overpotential of ∼45 mV at 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of ∼ 40 mV dec−1. After engineering the heterointerface, the performance of Pt-based catalysts can be optimized to ∼30 mV at 10 mA cm−2 by combining with oxyphilic components (NiO, Co(OH)2, etc.).103,104 In addition, transition metal compounds (phosphides, nitrides, sulfides, etc.) have also been widely studied in recent years for the alkaline HER.67,72,105 Their non-ideal water dissociation ability can also be improved by heterointerface engineering. For example, a Ni3N/MoO2 heterointerface catalyst shows an ultralow overpotential of 21 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much better than that of Ni3N and even superior to that of commercial Pt/C.68 These results point out atomic heterointerface engineering is of high significance for optimizing the atomic configuration and electronic structure, thus overcoming the rate-determining step for the alkaline HER.
Table 2 The alkaline HER performance comparison of heterointerface catalysts and their corresponding single component catalysts




Type
Catalyst

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.




Benchmark catalyst
Pt/C
45 ± 15
40 ± 5
—






Metal oxide-based catalysts
PtSA–NiO/Ni
26
27

103



PtSA–NiO
35
38


PtSA–Ni
36
37


CoP–CeO2/Ti
43
45

67



CoP/Ti
70
52


Ni3N/MoO2
21
46

68



Ni3N
217
129






Metal hydroxide-based catalysts
Pt/NiRu–OH
38
39

106



NiRu–OH
191
106


Pt–Co(OH)2/CC
32
70

104



Pt/CC
75
93


Co(OH)2/CC
∼285
125


Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2
50
49

72



Ni(OH)2
∼95
60


Ni3S2
∼90
99






Metal-based catalysts
Co–Mo2N@NC
47
43

105



Co@NC
256
120


Mo2N@NC
85
54


Ru@WNO-C
24
40

55



WNO-C
542
134






Carbon-based catalysts
ZIF67-Pt/RGO
37
33

107



Pt/RGO
∼110
43


NC/VO-WON
16
33

87



VO-WON
123
68





4. Breaking the scaling relationship of the alkaline OER
4.1 Mechanisms and challenges for the alkaline OER

4.1.1 Reaction path and intermediates. 
The OER is a crucial half reaction, which requires a much larger overpotential than the HER to reach the same production rate; thus it has been considered as the bottleneck of water splitting.108 It is widely accepted that the OER can proceed through two different mechanisms: adsorbate oxygen evolution mechanism (AOEM) and lattice oxygen mechanism (LOM).109 The AOEM is a more general mechanism for OER catalysts and the LOM normally occurs on highly covalent oxides such as SrCoO3−x, La0.5Sr1.5Ni0.7Fe0.3O4+x, and Zn0.2Co0.8OOH.110,111 In this section, we will focus on the AOEM and the scaling relationship between different reaction intermediates.
The AOEM is assumed to involve four consecutive proton–electron transfer steps that occurred on the metal active site (*), as described in eqn (4)–(7).108,112 At first, a hydroxyl radical (OH−) is adsorbed onto the active site (*) to form *OH by one electron oxidation. Then, the coupled proton and electron remove from *OH to form *O. The subsequent O–O bond formation step is normally considered to be the rate-determinate step for most of the catalysts. In this step, *O reacts with another OH− to form *OOH. Finally, O2 is evolved through deprotonation with OH− and the free active site is regenerated. OH− + * → *OH + e− (ΔG1)(4) *OH + OH− → *O + H2O + e− (ΔG2)(5) *O + OH− → *OOH + e− (ΔG3)(6) *OOH + OH− → O2 + * + H2O + e− (ΔG4)(7)
The free energies of all reaction steps are given as ΔG1−4 and their equilibrium free energies under standard conditions (pH = 0, T = 298.15 K) with zero applied potential (U = 0) are denoted as ΔG01–4, which is the intrinsic feature of the electrocatalyst. The largest equilibrium free energy among ΔG01–4 is equal to GOER (eqn (8)), which is used to estimate the catalytic performance under the applied potential. The theoretical overpotential is given by eqn (9).109 GOER = MAX[ΔG01, ΔG02, ΔG03, ΔG04](8) (9)


4.1.2 Challenges of the scaling relationship. 

Fig. 8a shows the energy diagram of an ideal OER catalyst for all four charge transfer steps, in which each step has the same reaction free energy of 1.23 eV. This means that the theoretical overpotential (η) for the ideal catalyst is 0 V and the applied potential for the OER is equal to the equilibrium potential of 1.23 V. However, this ideal condition is almost impossible to achieve in real catalytic systems because of the existence of the adsorption-free energy scaling relationship for OER intermediates on the real catalyst surface. These intermediates (*OOH, *OH, and *O) are adsorbed onto the catalyst surface through a single O atom, and contain an internal interconnection regardless of the binding site. Man et al. found a linearly correlated adsorption-energy scaling between *OH and *OOH (ΔG*OOH = ΔG*OH + 3.2 ± 0.2 eV) on a broad variety of oxide surfaces, including spinels, perovskites, rutiles, and rock salt, as shown in Fig. 8b.113 Based on this universal scaling relationship, they successfully simplified the complexity of the OER with multi-intermediate steps and introduced a single descriptor (ΔG*O − ΔG*OH) to elucidate the structure–activity relationship. The origin of the theoretical overpotential is further analyzed. Take the benchmark RuO2 catalyst as an example, which is close to the optimal intermediate adsorption position (red star) of the ideal catalyst in Fig. 8b. Its energy diagram is displayed in Fig. 8c, where a large free energy gap of 1.74 eV between *OH and *O responds to the limitation of OER performance. Theoretically, a minimum applied potential of 1.43 V (η = 0.2 V) is required for RuO2 to make a downhill in free energy and drive the OER. Afterwards, by summarizing the theoretical calculation results with practical OER performance of series of catalysts, a volcano-shaped plot (Fig. 1c) was exhibied to reveal that the scaling relationship is the limitation for OER.
 Fig. 8  Standard free energy diagram for the OER at zero potential (U = 0), the equilibrium potential for oxygen evolution (U = 1.23 V), and the potential for which all steps become downwards: (a) the ideal catalyst and (c) RuO2. (b) The scaling relationship between the free energy of the water dissociation on top of oxygen (ΔG*OOH − ΔG*O (eV)) and the free energy of proton removal (ΔG*O − ΔG*OH (eV)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Single site OER route and (e) multiple site OER route. 


4.1.3 Role of heterointerface engineering for the OER. 
Recently, atomic heterointerface engineering has been a viable strategy to circumvent this scaling relationship by creating multi-component active sites at the interface. Different active sites largely improve the adsorption energies of different oxygen reaction intermediates and thus accelerate the overall OER kinetics.16Fig. 8d and e compare the potential reaction routes for single catalytic site (M) and multiple catalytic site (M–A) models. In the single site OER route, the adsorption of intermediates onto the M active site is still limited by the scaling relationship since the internal interconnection between intermediates only depends on the single binding site. Differently, the adsorption of intermediates in the multiple site OER route onto the M active site would change after introducing the second binding site (A). The A at the interface serves as a promoter to modulate the electronic structure of M or directly participate in the reaction, thus breaking the scaling relationship. Moreover, the strong interaction between M and A at the heterointerface can significantly regulate the electronic structure and energy band structure on both sides. As mentioned above, atomic heterointerface engineering is efficient in optimizing the atomic configuration and electronic structure of catalysts for improving the performance of the OER. In the following section, the roles of atomic heterointerfaces in OER performance will be discussed based on the ensemble effect and electron effect. The typical compositions for constructing heterointerfaces based on different effects are also demonstrated.

4.2 Ensemble effect dominated heterointerface electrocatalysts for the alkaline OER
As per the above discussion, the OER process involves the participation of many oxygen-containing intermediates. The ensemble effect of heterointerfaces can provide more flexible adsorption sites or reaction pathways for accelerating catalytic reaction kinetics. Generally, the design of heterointerfaces for the OER is based on the materials which have already demonstrated excellent OER activity, e.g. NiFe-based catalysts, and then integrates them with the corresponding promoters to construct the targeted heterointerface for improving the OER rate-determining steps.

4.2.1 NiFe-based heterointerface electrocatalysts. 
NiFe-Based catalysts have been widely recognized as the most potential precursors for excellent OER performance, such as NiFe oxides, hydroxides, oxyhydroxides, chalcogenides, and phosphates.114,115 Among them, NiFe layered double hydroxides (NiFe LDHs) have been mostly studied. Previous studies reported that the rate-determining step of NiFe LDHs is the *OOH intermediate formation process, which limits their OER performance.116 Therefore, many kinds of heterointerfaces have been constructed to introduce additional active sites for improving or accelerating the *OOH intermediate adsorption of NiFe LDHs. For example, Gao et al. designed a NiO/NiFe LDH hybrid catalyst by hydrothermal and subsequently electrochemical oxidation methods.117 The NiO/NiFe LDH heterointerface is displayed in Fig. 9a, where a NiO nanoparticle tightly attached onto a NiFe LDH nanosheet, forming an planar interface contact at the atomic-scale. The NiO/NiFe LDH (tested on Cu foam) can obtain an overpotential of 180 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much lower than that of the single NiFe LDH. After combining spectroscopy characterization and DFT calculation, the authors found that the tridimensional (3D) adsorption of oxygen reaction intermediates at the NiO/NiFe LDH heterointerface is the crucial factor for excellent OER activity. Fig. 9b displays the dynamic 3D adsorption of intermediates at the S1 site in the NiO/NiFe LDH heterointerface. Different from the single adsorption onto normal NiFe LDH sites, the additional adsorption site at the S1 sites from the NiO side assists the adsorption of intermediates independently during the OER process. Fig. 9c shows the theoretical overpotential volcano curve (solid line, ΔG*O − ΔG*OH as the descriptor) of different NiFe LDH adsorption sites (L1, T1, T2, T1′, T2′). By contrast, the S1 site of the NiO/NiFe LDH heterointerface deviates from the volcano curve. This result indicates that the construction of a tridimensional heterointerface configuration with a strong ensemble effect can break the scaling relationship as well as bypass the theoretical overpotential limit. A similar design strategy to construct oxyhydroxide-based heterointerfaces was also implemented. Hu and coworkers prepared a catalyst in which γ-FeOOH nanoclusters covalently bonded to γ-NiOOH nanosheets.118 At an overpotential of 270 mV, it shows a superior TOF of 0.78 s−1, and is much more active than state-of-the-art NiFeOxHy catalysts. The in situ XAS spectra in Fig. 9d reveal the structural formation of the γ-FeOOH/γ-NiOOH heterostructure. Under OER conditions, NiOx spontaneously transforms to γ-NiOOH and thus the γ-FeOOH is observed to locate at the surface sites of NiOOH. Based on this configuration, a bifunctional mechanism is proposed – O2 is directly formed on γ-FeOOH through a nucleophilic attack of OH− and combined with an associated H transfer process to the adjacent site on γ-NiOOH (inset of Fig. 9e). This alternative pathway to generate O2 can avoid the formation of rate-limited *OOH intermediates. As a result, an optimal free energy diagram of this bifunctional mechanism is achieved, which reduces the theoretical overpotential, indicating its remarkable ensemble effect. Analogous hierarchical heterointerface design strategies are also detected in other composite systems, such as NiFeCrOx–CeO2 and NiFe LDH–ZnO.119,120
 Fig. 9  (a) HRTEM images of NiFe LDH combined with NiO NPs, (b) schematic illustration of the OER pathway at the S1 site of the NiO/NiFe LDH intersection, (c) OER volcano curve of the theoretical overpotential for different NiO/NiFe LDH adsorption sites.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) In situ FT-EXAFS spectra of the Fe K-edge and Ni K-edge for Au–NiOx–Fe to form γ-FeOOH/γ-NiOOH during the OER. (e) Free energy diagram comparing the electrochemical potentials of water oxidation at γ-FeOOH proceeding through a mononuclear mechanism (black solid line) and a bifunctional mechanism with Ni3–O sites acting as hydrogen acceptors (green dashed line). Inset: Upper path, mononuclear mechanism; lower path, bifunctional mechanism.118 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Another large group of NiFe-based heterointerface catalysts is based on carbon supports, especially heteroatom-doped carbon, where the carbon can provide various kinds of adsorption sites as a promoter to support the main catalyst. Wang et al. prepared heterogeneous Ni–Fe sites anchored onto heteroatom-doped graphene (HG).121 It is revealed that the molecularly well-defined Ni–Fe dual sites can adsorb OH− with a bridge geometry on the carbon support, which improves the intermediate adsorption and facilitates the OER electrocatalysis. As a result, a high TOF of 0.53 s−1 for HG-NiFe is achieved at η = 0.35 V, which is ∼10 times higher than those of contrast samples. In addition, Long et al. synthesized an FeNi–GO hybrid electrocatalyst by finely combining FeNi LDH with electrically conducting graphene sheets.122 The synergistic effect between FeNi LDH and graphene results in superior OER performance with a low overpotential of 0.21 V. Besides, numerous different kinds of carbon support have been studied, such as oxidized graphene and single-walled carbon nanotubes.123
Many examples about the in situ growth of NiFe-based heterointerfaces are also introduced. Niu et al. in situ formed vertically aligned NiFe(OH)x nanosheets on conductive FeS microsheet arrays by a solution corrosion-reconstruction process.124 This hierarchical structure with abundant NiFe(OH)x/FeS heterointerfaces provides sufficient catalytically active sites; thus it shows a low overpotential of 245 mV at a current density of 50 mA cm−2. Fan and coworkers developed a magnetization-assisted chemical deposition method to prepare a Ni(Fe)OxHy shell covered NiFe alloy nanowire array.125 The in situ formed amorphous NiFe@Ni(Fe)OxHy electrocatalyst yields 1000 mA cm−2 at only η = 258 mV for the OER. Moreover, in situ electrochemical transformation is another attractive way to form atomic heterointerfaces. Jiang et al. utilized an in situ electrochemical oxidation strategy to convert np-Ir/NiFeP into np-Ir/NiFeO, where the Ir single-atom catalyst is anchored onto a Ni(Fe)OxHy surface.126 Based on the operando XAS results, they proposed that multiple catalytic centers consisting of Ir sites and Ni(Fe)OxHy could effectively accelerate the OER. Meanwhile, the Ni(Fe)–O bonds can stabilize and distribute the Ir single-atoms during the OER. Thus, the catalyst shows an outstanding OER performance with an ultralow overpotential of 197 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Recently, Xu et al. demonstrated a fluorination-enabled reconstruction strategy where defective NiFeOxFy nanosheets supported on NiFe alloy nanoparticles are transformed during electrochemical activation to form OER-active Ni(Fe)OxHy nanosheets owing to F-leaching.38 The in situ formed Ni(Fe)OxHy/NiFe alloy heterointerface gives a high TOF of 0.25 s−1 at η = 0.3 V.


4.2.2 Metal oxide/hydroxide-based heterointerface electrocatalysts. 
Metal oxides and hydroxides are promising candidates for engineering heterointerfaces. Some proposals are made to help the design of effective OER catalysts in noble metal systems. Markovic and coworkers found reactivity trends (Ni > Co > Fe > Mn) for the OER on M2+δOδ(OH)2−δ/Pt(111) surfaces.127 They concluded that the OER rates are driven by the strength of the interaction between OHad and M2+δOδ(OH)2−δ, satisfying the Sabatier principle (not too strong or weak) for catalyst design. Accordingly, Zhao et al. designed an Ir/Ni(OH)2 pre-catalyst in which Ir NPs homogeneously anchored onto Ni(OH)2 nanosheets.128 The wavelet transform images for the k3-weighted EXAFS signal after the OER (Fig. 10a) show the existence of Ir–O–Ni bonds and metastable electrophilic Ir(V) species in the reconstructed IrOx/NiOOH lateral heterointerface. The synergistic mechanism on the IrOx/NiOOH heterointerface is illustrated in Fig. 10b, where the OH* and O* intermediates are adsorbed onto the NiOOH and IrOx, respectively. These two intermediates then combine at the heterointerface to accelerate the formation of OOH*. This result indicates that the ensemble effect can help in break the scaling relationship and finally lead to enhanced OER kinetics. Thus, the catalyst exhibits exceptional OER activity (η = 224 mV at 10 mA cm−2) and long durability (>45 h) in alkaline media. Wang et al. reported similar experimental evidence that single Ir atoms anchored onto NiO can extremely increase OER activity.129 In addition, the synergistic effect between oxides and other noble metals is another hotspot for the design of efficient heterointerface electrocatalysts. Among them, Au has shown superior potential to cobalt oxide for the OER; however, its enhancement mechanism is still under debate. Fester et al. constructed a cobalt oxide/Au(111) heterointerface model to reveal that Au can suppress the formation of less active bulk cobalt oxide at the OER potential.130 They also emphasized that the atomic layer cobalt oxide on Au is important to facilitate the generation of the active phase during the catalytic process. Moreover, Jaramillo and coworkers reported an interesting study that combines the ensemble, electronic and support effects of NiCeOx–Au catalysts.131 They found that the coexistence of both Ce and Au in the vicinity of uncoordinated Ni edge sites is key to the OER activity enhancement.
 Fig. 10  (a) Wavelet transform images for the k3-weighted EXAFS signal for the Ni K-edge of the Ni(OH)2-OER and Ir/Ni(OH)2-OER, the Ir LIII-edge of the Ir NPs-OER and Ir/Ni(OH)2-OER. (b) Synergistic mechanism of IrOx/NiOOH heterointerfaces for the OER.128 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Illustration of metal-oxide-nanoparticle-embedded poly-[Co2(benzimidazole)4]. (d) Tafel plots for PCB/CC, M-PCB/CC, M-PCBN/CC, and RuO2/CC. (e) Calculated free energy diagrams of the OER on i-Co–Co, i-Co–Fe, and p-CoN4 at the equilibrium potential (1.23 V). (f) OER process on the interfacial i-Co–Co site.138 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the introduction of noble metals (Pt, Au and Ir), many nonprecious catalysts have also been studied.132–134 Huang et al. constructed a new type of Ni(OH)2–CeO2 electrocatalyst on carbon paper with an intimate hydroxide–oxide heterointerface.135 This interface with strong synergistic interactions largely improves the adsorption energy to reaction intermediates. Thus, the catalyst shows a small overpotential of 220 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Gao et al. designed an electrocatalyst in which CoO nanoclusters strongly coupled with CoFe LDHs through hierarchical heterointerfaces.136 Spectroscopic characterization studies reveal that the formation of interfacial Fe–O–Co bonds leads to electron transfer from CoII sites to FeIII sites, which considerably regulates the intermediate adsorption at the heterointerface. As a result, the CoO/CoFe LDH catalyst shows a lower overpotential of 254 mV than CoFe LDHs (296 mV). Similarly, Fu and coworkers prepared a CoO/CoNi LDH nanosheet electrocatalyst.137 They found that the as-formed heterointerfaces are connected by Ni–O–Co chemical bonds, which can improve the affinity of OHad and increase the accessible electrochemical area. Thus, CoO/CoNi LDHs exhibited a small onset overpotential of 250 mV. From the above discussion, it could be concluded that oxides and hydroxides can not only help precious catalysts improve the OH− adsorption, but also generate more active sites for implementing the ensemble effect with faster OER kinetics.


4.2.3 Other heterointerface electrocatalysts with ensemble effects. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been recognized as a class of promising OER catalysts owing to their diverse metal center coordination modes and structural tailorability. Recently, many MOF-based heterointerface electrocatalysts have been developed. Zhang et al. prepared a novel electrocatalyst by embedding CoFeOx nanocrystals in a monolayered CoN4-based MOF.138Fig. 10c shows the illustration of monolayered CoFeOx embedded poly-[Co2(benzimidazole)4] (M-PCBN), where abundant metal Co and Fe cross-linked sites are uniformly located at the atomically distributed CoFeOx/PCB lateral heterointerface. Structural characterization studies combined with theoretical study indicate that the interfacial i-Co–Co/Fe sites have higher valence with a changed 3d electronic configuration when compared with the normal CoN4 site. As a result, M-PCBN exhibits a low overpotential of 232 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1 (Fig. 10d). Furthermore, the calculated OER free energy diagrams on i-Co–Fe, p-CoN4 and i-Co–Co sites are exhibited in Fig. 10e. Both i-Co–Fe and i-Co–Co sites show the considerable reduction of their endothermic values for the limiting step in contrast to the p-CoN4 site, suggesting that the ensemble effect of different catalytic sites on CoFeOx/PCB heterointerfaces largely facilitates the entire OER process. The potential OER process of the i-Co–Co site is exhibited in Fig. 10f. Recently, Wang et al. reported the synthesis of NiCo/Fe3O4 nanoparticles inside MOF-74 for an efficient OER.139 By performing DFT calculations, they found the NiCo/Fe3O4 heterointerface can largely stabilize the *O intermediate, which is the potential limiting step for pure Fe3O4. As a result, NiCo/Fe3O4/MOF-74 delivers a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at η = 232 mV.

4.3 Electron effect dominated heterointerface electrocatalysts for the alkaline OER
Atomic heterointerface engineering normally shows a differential charge density gradient inside the catalyst, which comes from the electronic interactions between interfacial multiple components. These electronic interactions and their influence on the catalytically active sites are named electron effects. Generally, the delicate change of interfacial components will effectively regulate the key parameters or descriptors for the OER, such as intermediate adsorption energy, eg orbital occupancy, metal d band center, and metal–oxygen covalency.108 The most efficient strategy to modify the electron structure via heterointerface engineering is constructing Schottky heterojunctions, which was used to describe the assembly between a metal and a lightly doped semiconductor in the past and is currently expanded to describe the combination of metal/metallic materials and semiconductors. In this section, we will discuss atomic heterointerface engineering based on metal/metallic materials, conductive carbon materials and other systems.

4.3.1 Metal/metallic material-based Schottky electrocatalysts. 
The engineering of metal–semiconductor heterointerfaces is an effective way to change the electron structure. Normally, the metal with a lower Femi-energy (EF) becomes the electron-deficient state and the semiconductor becomes the electron-rich state. Shi et al. fabricated a Co/BP NS electrocatalyst where cobalt (metal) nanoparticles were fixed on black phosphorus (semiconductor) nanosheets via hierarchical interfaces.140 By analyzing the energy band structure difference, they found electron migration from BP (high EF) to Co (low EF), which further narrowed the bandgap to facilitate charge transfer. Thus, the Co/BP NS electrocatalyst delivers a small overpotential of 310 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much better than that of either Co NPs or BP NSs. Such an OER enhancement mechanism is also displayed on noble metal. Zhao et al. reported a class of electrocatalysts in which different sizes of Au nanoclusters are deposited on CoSe2.141 In this system, the electronic interactions between Au and CoSe2 regulate the adsorption of *O and further favor the formation of key *OOH intermediates during the OER process. Similarly, Wang and coworkers constructed a Au/nickel phosphide (Ni12P5) core/shell nanoparticle electrocatalyst.142 The strong structural and electronic coupling between the Au core and Ni12P5 shell effectively enhance OER activity.
It has also been reported that many metallic materials would form a Schottky contact with a semiconductor after interface engineering. Among them, Ni3S2 has attracted great attention due to its intrinsic metallic behavior.143 Zou and coworkers reported a novel interfacial reaction strategy to construct a series of amorphous Ni–M–OH (M = Fe, Co, Mn, Cr) on Ni3S2 nanosheets.144 The as-prepared electrocatalysts show a universally increased OER performance since the optimized electronic and surface structures are formed through hierarchical interfaces. In detail, the conductive Ni3S2 can effectively transfer electrons to Ni–M–OH outer catalytic layers and thus accelerate the OER kinetics. Interestingly, Xu et al. constructed a Ni3S2@NiOOH heterostructure via a fluorine-triggered surface reconstruction method.145 The in situ formed NiOOH species accelerates the rate-limiting step for the OER; thus the optimized catalyst shows a low Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1 and a small η = 239 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, Zhang et al. prepared a Ni3S2@NiFe LDH heterostructure electrocatalyst, where the Ni3S2 largely decreases the OH− adsorption energy on NiFe LDH through strong interfacial interaction.146 Consequently, a low overpotential of 190 mV is required to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Besides the combination of metallic materials and semiconductors, heterointerfaces between two metallic materials were also studied. Fu et al. reported a nanostructured Ni3S2/Ni12P5 1D/1D hybrid, where the band structure difference of two metallic components results in an optimized absorption energy for oxygen intermediates.147 Consequently, a fast electron transfer process is shown during the OER process. Such an atomic heterointerface engineering strategy can also be applied to other metallic chalcogenides, e.g. Co9S8, CoSe, and CuS.148,149 Similar to Ni3S2, Co9S8 has abundant metallic chemical-bonds (Co–Co) inside its crystal structure, and thus shows the intrinsic metallic behavior. Chen et al. constructed a Co9S8/Co-doped ZnS electrocatalyst with abundant atomic-level coupled heterointerfaces.150 The hierarchical interfaces display a strong electronic coupling with suitable charge injection to favor the local coordination environment of Co9S8, so a greatly enhanced OER performance is achieved. CoSe is another novel catalyst with a superior electron transfer ability. Yuan et al. engineered a CoSe–MoSe2 heterointerface via a polyoxometalate-assisted method.151 The d-band center of CoSe–MoSe2 is well-modified after hybridization, which further leads to high charge carrier density and low adsorption energy for oxygen intermediates. Consequently, CoSe/MoSe2 hybrids show a much-improved OER performance (η = 262 mV @ 10 mA cm−2).
Recently, the research into transition metal phosphide-based heterointerface catalysts has been intensified due to their excellent performance.152,153 Zhang et al. constructed a novel electrocatalyst with abundant Co3O4/Fe0.33Co0.66P heterointerfaces.154 Its atomic configuration at the interface is exhibited in Fig. 11a. Theoretical calculations reveal that the reactivity of interfacial Co sites largely depends on the nearby O-site and P-site. The unique effects of the O-site and P-site within the interface are further explained by their PDOS of the related bands, as shown in Fig. 11b. The deep localized P-3p band can restrain the surface oxidation rates for minimizing the overbinding effect of Co3O4, and the high lying O-2p band (near the EF) ensures targeted electronic activities for stabilizing the intermediates of H-adsorbates. As a result, Co3O4/Fe0.33Co0.66P shows a lower OER barrier and a low overpotential of 215 mV at 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11c). Qian and coworkers developed an FeNi LDH/CoP electrocatalyst with a built-in p–n junction, where the positively charged FeNi LDH presents boosting OER activity.155 DFT calculation reveals that the built-in p–n junction within the heterointerface enhances the OH− adsorption onto the FeNi LDH surface for accelerating OER kinetics. Interestingly, Liu et al. designed a multicomponent metallic Ni2P–Fe2P heterointerface.156 They found that the abundant Ni2P–Fe2P heterointerfaces can be more efficient in in situ generating highly-active oxyhydroxide layers, leading to an excellent OER activity of η10 = 179 mV. Similar phosphide-based heterointerface catalysts contain Fe–CoP/CoO, Ni2P-Mg2O(OH)2, etc.157,158 Besides, metallic nitrides, carbides and borides were also reported as effective electrocatalysts by engineering heterointerfaces, whereas they display more reactivity on the HER and OWS.
 Fig. 11  (a) The local atomic structure of the interface system built using Co3O4 and Co0.66Fe0.33P parts. (b) The PDOS of the P-3p- and O-2p-bands in the IF region and the different orbital overlapping effects (insertion). (c) Polarization curves of Co3O4/Fe0.33Co0.66P for the OER in 1 M KOH.154 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) HRTEM images of Co2P2O7@N,P–C. (e) Schematic energy band diagrams of the heterojunction between Co2P2O7 and N,P–C (Evac = vacuum energy, Ec = conduction band, Ev = valence band, Ef = Fermi level, Eg = energy gap, W = work function, Φ = depletion region). (f) The overpotential value and Tafel slope of Co2P2O7@N,P–C compared with those of the reported advanced Co-based electrocatalysts.169 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


4.3.2 Carbon-based Schottky electrocatalysts. 
Carbon materials are superstars in the energy field owing to their high surface area and superior conductivity.159,160 They are also the most potential candidates for constructing Schottky electrocatalysts. Many kinds of carbon materials have been developed as electrocatalysts, e.g. carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and derived carbons.161,162 Among them, CNTs are a valuable substrate to produce heterointerfaces with an excellent electron transfer ability. Dai and coworkers reported the synthesis of NiFe-LDH on slightly oxidized multi-walled CNTs, where oxygen-functionalised groups on the CNTs provide abundant adsorbed sites to coordinate with Ni2+/Fe2+ and thus generate a strongly coupled NiFe LDH–carbon hierarchical interface.163 NiFe-LDH/CNT shows a better OER performance than Ir/C at the same loading mass and a higher TOF of 0.56 s−1 than that of the most-promising Ni(Fe)OxHy catalyst (0.21 s−1). Its excellent intrinsic OER activity comes from the fast electron transfer between NiFe-LDH and CNTs that can make the most use of catalytically active sites. Similarly, Liu et al. controllably grew NiCo2O4 nanosheets on oxidized CNTs.164 The strong carboxyl–metal coordination on the NiCo2O4–CNT hierarchical interface can greatly reduce the electron cloud density of the metal center. As a result, NiCo2O4/CNT achieves a high current density of 83 mA cm−2 at η = 0.54 V. Besides the in situ growth of nanoparticles on modified CNTs, the pyrolysis of nanofibers prepared by the electrospinning technique is another effective strategy to engineer lateral heterointerfaces inside the 1D carbon materials. Zou and coworkers prepared NiFeOx nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibers by electrospinning and subsequently pyrolysis.165 The carbon nanofibers are derived from polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) nanofibers, which gives the conductive frameworks for NiFeOx to efficiently generate oxygen.
Graphene, sprang up after its rediscovery in 2004, is one of the most potential materials. Many research studies have reported the strong synergistic effect of graphene-based heterointerfaces, especially heteroatom doped graphene. Dou et al. designed an electrocatalyst of N-doped Co9S8 confined on graphene, where the N dopants not only improve the atomic coordination of Co9S8-graphene but also largely increase the number of active sites for oxygen electrocatalysis.166 Therefore, N-Co9S8/graphene shows both excellent OER and ORR performance. Kumar et al. discussed the oxide-carbon interfacial effect of Co3O4/N-doped reduced graphene oxide (NRGO) toward OER performance.167 The NRGO has an increased electrical conductivity and work function. A charge transfer can be observed from Co3O4 to NRGO through the interfacial Co–N chemical bonds. As a result, Co3O4/NRGO shows outstanding OER activity. Song and coworkers reported the construction of CoP–N-doped defective carbon (NDC) nanoparticles from a Co2+-containing polymer hydrogel.168 Structural characterization studies and theory calculations reveal a strong interfacial charge polarization between CoP and NDC, where the electrons gather on the NDC side and the holes accumulate on the CoP side. As a result, more active catalytic sites are generated for boosting the OER process.
The pyrolysis of MOFs is a convenient way to achieve heteroatom doped carbon-based hybrids. Liang et al. recently designed a Schottky electrocatalyst of Co2P2O7 nanoparticles embedded in N,P co-doped carbon nanocages, derived from Co-phy/2MIM nanocages.169Fig. 11d shows their heterointerface, in which one side corresponds to crystalline Co2P2O7 and the other side corresponds to N,P co-doped defective carbon. The energy band schematic diagrams of the heterojunction between Co2P2O7 and N,P–C are shown in Fig. 11e. The values inside the energy band diagrams are measured using ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) and secondary electron cutoff (SECO) spectra. They demonstrate that the built-in electric field across the heterointerface migrates electrons from Co2P2O7 to N,P–C, which further accelerates the OER rate-determining step on Co active sites. As a result, Co2P2O7@N,P–C exhibits a better OER performance than most of the Co-based electrocatalysts (Fig. 11f). Consistently, Ding et al. reported the synthesis of a heterostructure electrocatalyst in which yolk–shell Co@Co3O4 nanohybrids are embedded in hollow N-doped carbon by a two-step pyrolysis–oxidation strategy with the ZIF-67 as a precursor.170 Benefiting from the high conductivity of N-doped carbon and abundant oxygen adsorption sites throughout the heterostructure, the electrocatalyst shows efficient OER activity. Besides, Ma et al. prepared hybrid Co3O4–carbon porous nanowire arrays via a facile carbonization of a Co-naphthalene-dicarboxylate MOF.171 The strong interaction between Co3O4 and carbon via the lateral interfaces leads to a great OER performance enhancement. In summary, carbon materials, especially heteroatom doped or defective carbon, provide bright prospects for designing atomic heterointerface engineered Schottky electrocatalysts with strong electron effects for boosting OER performance.


4.3.3 Other heterointerface electrocatalysts with electron effects. 
With the development of advanced synthesis strategies, many new groups of two-dimensional (2D) materials appeared recently, such as black phosphorus and MXenes. They show high conductivity and stability like graphene and therefore are good candidates for constructing heterointerface engineered electrocatalysts with strong electron effects. Wu et al. prepared a novel Ni3N-BP nanosheet electrocatalyst with abundant planar interfaces, where rich Ni–P bonds in the interfacial region extremely facilitate electron transfer and OH− adsorption.172 Thus, the targeted sample shows a low η10 = 247 mV for the OER. Shi et al. discussed the mechanism about how BP modified the electronic structure of Co3O4 for an enhanced OER.173 The BP with a higher Fermi level tends to transfer electrons to Co3O4, which creates more Co2+ active sites for boosting the OER. Wang et al. discovered that Co2P nanocrystals can be selectively grown on BP defective-edges.174 BP/Co2P exhibits higher conductivity and more active sites after the hybridization due to the interfacial interaction. MXenes are a class of 2D inorganic compounds with special features. For example, Ti3C2 is a typical MXene with high conductivity and large active-surface area. Qiu and coworkers designed hierarchical structures of 2D Ti3C2-MXene and FeNi LDH nanosheets by ionic hetero-assembly.175 The well-designed nanohybrids show improved structural stability and electrical conductivity according to the strong interfacial interaction with prominent charge-transfer toward the heterointerface. As a result, the optimal nanohybrids enable a small overpotential of 240 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Consistently, a hybridized electrocatalyst of Ti3C2-MXene and CoFe LDH was prepared by Hao et al. They found that the formation of the Ti3C2–CoFe LDH heterointerface not only prevents the aggregation of nanohybrids for exposing more active sites but also brings in efficient charge transfer.176
In sum, we showcase the OER performance of typical heterointerface catalysts based on their chemical components, as shown in Table 3. For the best reported single component catalyst, Ni(Fe)OxHy shows an overpotential of ∼250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of ∼50 mV dec−1, much better than those of noble-metal IrO2 and RuO2 catalysts. After engineering the heterointerface, e.g., NiO/NiFe LDH catalyst, its OER performance can be further improved to 180 mV at 10 mA cm−2.117 In the aspect of intrinsic activity, the TOF value of Ni(Fe)OxHy can increase from ∼0.2 s−1 to 0.987 s−1 after forming the FeNi–GO heterointerface.122 These results indicate the great role of atomic heterointerface engineering in circumventing the scaling relationship and breaking through the performance limitation.
Table 3 The OER performance comparison of heterointerface engineered catalysts and the corresponding single component catalysts




Type
Catalyst

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
TOF (s−1) at 0.3 V
Ref.




Benchmark catalysts
IrO2
310 ± 20
67 ± 30
∼0.007
—


RuO2
300 ± 10
90 ± 20
∼0.016
—


Ni(Fe)OxHy
250 ± 20
50 ± 10
∼0.20
—






NiFe-Based catalysts
NiO/NiFe LDH
180
30
—

117



NiFe LDH
270
68
—


NiO
350
130
—


Ir/NiFeOx
197
29.6
—

126



NiFeOx
262
51.6
—


Ru/FeCoNi
205
40
—

177



FeCoNi
279
58
—






Metal oxide/hydroxide-based catalysts
Ir–NiO
215
38
1.37

129



NiO
370
113
0.054


CoO/CoFe LDHs
254
34
0.44

136



CoFe LDHs
296
52.5
0.05


CoO
338
61.5
0.0016


Ir/Ni(OH)2
224
41
3.8

128



Ir NPs
260
64
0.5


Ni(OH)2
437
127
—






Metal-based catalysts
CoP/FeNi LDH
220
22.5
—

155



FeNi LDH
238
53.2
—


CoP
310
58.4
—


CoSe/MoSe2
262
54.9
30 × 10−4

151



CoSe
364
105.8
1.72 × 10−4


MoSe2
386
126.2
1.34 × 10−4






Carbon-based catalysts
FeNi-GO LDH
206
39
0.987

122



FeNi LDH
232
48
0.028


NiFe-LDH/CNT
247
31
0.56

163



NiFe-LDH
270
45
—





5. Atomic heterointerface engineered bifunctional electrocatalysts
In recent years, exploring high-performance bifunctional electrocatalysts for alkaline overall water splitting (OWS) has become one of the major trends in the field of electrocatalysis, which not only simplifies the system and reduces the cost but also helps in improving the purity of gas phase products and maintaining the stability of catalysts.178 Nevertheless, it is still challenging for bifunctional electrocatalysts to simultaneously optimize the activities of the HER and OER so this limits the energy utilization efficiency of the OWS system. The most crucial reason is the incompatibility between HER and OER catalytically active sites. In detail, the HER and OER catalytically active sites have completely different electron affinities and hydrophilic/oxyphilic properties, which make single-component electrocatalysts often sensitive to only one class of reaction intermediates.179 Fortunately, atomic heterointerface engineering enables multiple catalytically active sites with the above ensemble effect and electron effect, which can provide an effective way to achieve the optimal performance for alkaline OWS. In this section, we will introduce the design strategy of heterointerfaces at the atomic level and their corresponding applications for alkaline OWS.
5.1 Design strategy of OWS electrocatalysts

5.1.1 Integration of HER- and OER-active components. 
Normally, an efficient HER electrocatalyst shows a non-ideal activity for the OER, and vice versa. To utilize the advantages of both HER and OER electrocatalysts, one general and effective strategy is to compatibly integrate HER- and OER-active components (Fig. 12). Numerous theoretical and experimental results have verified that this strategy could obtain high performance bifunctional electrocatalysts for OWS.180,181 For example, Co3O4/MoS2 is a typical bifunctional electrocatalyst obtained by integrating MoS2 and Co3O4 that responds to the HER- and OER-active components respectively.182 In this model, the HER- and OER-active components would not only consciously render their corresponding half-reaction, but also provide an unexpected reaction enhancement mechanism on the atomic heterointerface via the ensemble effect. The recent progress based on this integration strategy will be discussed in the following section.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of atomic heterointerface engineered bifunctional electrocatalysts. 


5.1.2 Electronic and band energy control via heterointerfaces. 
Modulating the electronic and energy band structures of catalysts is widely regarded as a compelling protocol to optimize the adsorption/desorption behavior of reaction intermediates.183–190 Many highly-active OWS electrocatalysts were constructed by engineering Schottky-contact dominated heterointerfaces.191–193 In detail, metals/metalloids and semi-conductors, in which obvious Fermi level differences exist, are integrated to form heterointerfaces with electron effects, leading to the bending of the band structure at the interface. To balance the Fermi levels and work functions, spontaneous and continuous electron structure redistribution occurs through the heterointerface, resulting in the simultaneous existence of electron-rich and electron-deficient components in single catalysts.194 Normally, the electron-rich component shows an optimized Gibbs free energy of H* adsorption for enhancing the HER, while the electron-deficient component will be active for water dissociation and the OER. Thus, the components on both sides of the heterointerface act as the electron donor and acceptor to regulate the HER and OER processes at the same time for efficient OWS. In the next section, we will introduce in detail the role and application of electron effects in alkaline OWS.

5.2 Alkaline OWS electrocatalysts

5.2.1 Integrated electrocatalysts for OWS. 
Integrating HER and OER-active components is an effective strategy to improve the catalytic performance of heterostructure catalysts. In general, HER-active components include noble metal Pt, metal compounds (sulfides, selenides, carbides, nitrides, phosphides), heteroatom-doped nanocarbons, etc.; OER-active components include precious metal oxides (RuO2 and IrO2), metal oxides (perovskites, spinels, LDHs, etc.), metal chalcogenides, metal nitrides, organometallics, etc. Many advanced OWS electrocatalysts have been developed by integrating the above components. Jiang et al. synthesized mutually beneficial Co3O4@MoS2 heterostructures to efficiently balance both the HER and OER performance.195 The schematic diagram of the Co3O4@MoS2 hierarchical interface for enhancing OWS is shown in Fig. 13a. In these heterostructures, Co3O4 preferentially enhances the adsorption of oxygen-containing intermediates during the OER process, while the MoS2 component observably accelerates the initial water dissociation kinetics and optimizes the subsequent H* adsorption for the alkaline HER. Systematic DFT calculations give in-depth insights into the internal interaction between Co3O4 and MoS2. As shown in Fig. 13b, the ΔGH2O value of Co3O4@MoS2 is significantly reduced to 0.56 eV in contrast to MoS2, indicating that Co atoms provide abundant active sites for water dissociation. For the OER (Fig. 13c), the calculated overpotential decreases from 0.74 eV to 0.48 eV after decorating Co3O4 nanoparticles on the MoS2 surface. The Fermi levels of MoS2 and Co3O4 are redistributed across the heterointerface, which is on account of the electron transfer from Co3O4 to MoS2 (Fig. 13d). As a result, the authors concluded that the S atoms accumulate electrons to weaken the interaction of H*, while Co atoms decrease the filling of antibonding states to enhance the O* adsorption. Accordingly, Co3O4@MoS2 heterostructures as dual-functional electrocatalysts require an ultralow work voltage of 1.59 V to realize a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for OWS. Lately, Qi et al. synthesized defect-rich heterogeneous MoS2/NiS2 nanosheets for alkaline OWS.196 The abundant MoS2/NiS2 planar interfaces with rich defects and disordered structures can enrich electrochemically-active sites and facilitate electron transfer. Consequently, the optimal MoS2/NiS2 nanosheets show a cell voltage of 1.59 V at 10 mA cm−2 for OWS. Similarly, Feng et al. constructed a MoS2/Ni3S2 heterointerface engineered electrocatalyst on Ni foam.197 DFT calculations show that the atomic heterointerfaces synergistically favor the adsorption of both hydrogen- and oxygen-containing intermediates, which is extremely beneficial for accelerating the OWS. Consequently, when utilizing the resultant MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructure to assemble an alkaline electrolysis cell, only 1.56 V is required to attain a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is superior to those of most of the OWS electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the OWS process on the Co3O4@MoS2 heterointerface. Free energy diagrams for the (b) HER and (c) OER on the MoS2 edge and Co3O4@MoS2 heterointerface. (d) Schematic of the charge transfer mechanisms.195 Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) HRTEM image of RuO2/NiO. (f) Schematic illustration of potential-induced interfacial synergy between RuO2 and NiO for an enhanced HER and OER under alkaline conditions.201 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The above studies focused on integrating multi-metal compounds; however, the engineering of heterointerfaces based on single-metal compounds is also attractive due to the more facile synthesis method. Transition metals (Ni, Co, etc.) have an appropriate binding energy for H*, while their corresponding oxides (NiO, CoO, Co3O4, etc.) are closed to the top of the volcano plot for the OER. Therefore, some Ni- or Co-based materials with multi-valence states have been fabricated to electrolyze water in alkaline media.198,199 In this model, metal oxides can boost the water dissociation to generate a hydroxide and a proton for the subsequent reaction process. The hydroxide preferably attaches to metal oxides with positively charged Mn+ species for an efficient OER and the proton tends to be adsorbed onto metallic M0 sites for a fast HER, thus realizing alkaline OWS. For example, Fu et al. synthesized Ni/NiO nanosheets wrapped in thin graphitic carbon, which had dual-valence Ni species for efficient OWS.200 The resulting metallic Ni and NiO can effectively boost the HER and OER, respectively. Moreover, the nearby Ni0 and Ni2+ sites on both sides of the Ni/NiO heterointerface exert an excellent ensemble effect for OWS. As a result, an electrolysis cell assembled using a Ni@C NSs/NF electrode-couple presents a small cell voltage of 1.64 V at 10 mA cm−2 with long-term durable stability.
The in situ transformation of a pre-catalyst under reaction conditions to a “true” catalyst is a new tendency in the elelctrocatalysis field. For OWS, the pre-catalyst could in situ transform into two different “true” catalysts under anode-oxidized and cathode-reduced conditions. This differential transformation can engineer the targeted heterointerfaces for the respective HER or OER based on one single pre-catalyst; thus it is compelling to further application. For instance, Qiao et al. reported the preparation of porous RuO2/NiO/NF nanosheet arrays by strongly coupling RuO2 nanoparticles with NiO vertically arranged on Ni foam, as shown in Fig. 13e.201 The resulting RuO2/NiO with remarkable bifunctional activities exhibits 2.6 times higher OER activity than RuO2 and HER activity superior to that of commercial Pt/C. The boosting bifunctional activities can be attributed to the potential-induced interfacial synergy between RuO2 and NiO as illustrated in Fig. 13f. On the cathode side, an in situ Ru/NiO heterointerface is successfully created by electrochemical reduction of RuO2. The NiO component can accelerate the water dissociation step due to its powerful affinity towards OH−, while the as-produced H* will be later absorbed onto nearby Ru sites and recombine into H2. On the anode side, NiO will convert to NiOOH by electrochemical oxidation at applied positive potentials. The in situ formed RuO2/NiOOH heterointerface improves the oxygen binding energy of RuO2 for an enhanced OER. As a result, the RuO2/NiO/NF system requires only 1.5 V to drive 10 mA cm−2 after self-assembling as an OWS device.


5.2.2 OWS electrocatalysts with electron effects. 
As discussed above, constructing atomic heterointerfaces can efficiently modulate the electronic and energy band structures of catalysts to offer moderate adsorption/desorption behavior, thereby improving the OWS performance. Some design principles to construct metal–semiconductor heterostructures have been developed. For instance, Li et al. reported a controllable vacuum-diffusion method to synthesize Co/CoP Janus nanoparticles by a gradual phosphorization strategy.202 The resulting Co/CoP Janus nanoparticles exhibit boosting HER and OER activity in alkaline electrolytes, mainly owing to the Mott–Schottky electron effect. Typically, as shown in Fig. 14a, CoP exhibits an n-type semiconductor nature with a band gap of 1.71 eV and a conduction band edge position at −0.21 eV. After constructing the Co/CoP heterostructure, electrons spontaneously transfer from CoP to Co through the Mott–Schottky heterointerface until work function equilibrium is reached. The charge redistribution at the Co/CoP heterointerface causes obvious band bending, which is synchronously beneficial to the HER or OER process occurring on Co or CoP, respectively. Reasonable control of the CoP content in the Co/CoP heterointerface efficiently optimizes its electrocatalytic activity, and the optimal Co/CoP-5 sample can achieve 10 mA cm−2 at only 1.45 V in 1 M KOH (Fig. 14b). Similarly, Zhu et al. developed an atomic epitaxial in-growth of a Co–Ni3N nanowire array, in which the Femi energy level difference of each component can promote electron transfer through the epitaxial heterointerface, leading to 10 and 16 times higher TOF values for the HER and OER compared to Ni3N nanorods, respectively.203
 Fig. 14  (a) Electronic structures of metallic Co, CoP, and the Co/CoP based Mott–Schottky contact. (b) Current densities of Co, Co/CoP-X, and CoP samples in 1 M KOH electrolyte at −0.30 and 1.60 V versus RHE for the HER and OER, respectively.202 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Spin-up and spin-down projected density of states (PDOS) of Co-3d and Mo-4d in LSC and LSC&2H-MoSe2, respectively. The vertical lines represent the positions of the d-band centers (εd). (d) Schematic diagrams of proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC.204 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Constructing atomic heterointerfaces using two kinds of semiconductors with different metal center states is also proved as a valid method to boost alkaline OWS. Kwak et al. reported a heterostructure containing La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ and MoSe2 as the bifunctional electrocatalyst (LSC&MoSe2) for OWS.204 As per the detailed PDOS shown in Fig. 14c, the d-band center (εd) of Co shifts upward by 0.1 eV when contacted with 2H-MoSe2, indicating its stronger electrophilic properties for improving the OER. Moreover, the εd of Mo downshifts by 0.9 eV at the same time, proving the electron transfer from the LSC to MoSe2 side. More impressively, spontaneous electron transfer from Co to Mo also leads to an in situ phase transition from 2H-MoSe2 to 1T-MoSe2 (Fig. 14d). As a result, the intrinsic conductivity of MoSe2 significantly improves. Together with these synergistic effects, LSC&MoSe2 shows excellent properties with an initiation potential of 1.52 V and a stability of over 1000 h at 100 mA cm−2, superior to those of the state-of-the-art Pt/C‖IrO2 couple. Recently, Xi et al. constructed a N-NiMoO4/NiS2 heterostructure by a novel top-down strategy for OWS.205 The abundant atomic heterointerfaces could promote the electron transfer from N-NiMoO4 to NiS2, which are beneficial to improving the catalytic activity of the HER/OER. Consequently, the assembled N-NiMoO4/NiS2 electrolysis cell only requires a small work voltage of 1.60 V to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline media. The abovementioned examples and other advanced OWS electrocatalysts are summarised in Table 4. These examples illustrate that the atomic heterointerface engineering strategy is viable to design alkaline OWS electrocatalysts with excellent activity and stability.206–208
Table 4 Summary of atomic heterointerface electrocatalysts for alkaline OWS in 1 M KOH




Type
Catalyst

E (V) @10 mA cm−2
Stability
Ref.




Ensemble effect
CoS–Co(OH)2@aMoS2+x/NF
1.58
Over 100000 s

181



MoS2–Ni3S2 HNRs/NF
1.50
1.53 V for 48 h

180



NC/CuCo/CuCoOx
1.53
1.65 V for 100 h

194



NiCo2S4@NiFe LDH
1.6
10 mA cm−2 for 12 h

192



V-CoP@a-CeO2
1.56
20 mA cm−2 for 35 h

183



Co3O4@MoS2
1.59
10 mA cm−2 for 12 h

195



MoS2/NiS2
1.59
50 mA cm−2 for over 12 h

196



MoS2/Ni3S2
1.56
10 mA cm−2 for 10 h

197



CoOx@CN
1.55
10 mA cm−2 for 9000 s

198



Ni@C NS
1.64
10 mA cm−2 for 12 h

200



RuO2/NiO/NF
1.5
10 mA cm−2 for 25 h

201







Electron effect
Co/CoP
1.45
20 mA cm−2 for 12 h

202



LSC&MoSe2
∼1.745
100 mA cm−2 for 1000 h

204



N-NiMoO4/NiS2
1.60
10 mA cm−2 for 20 h

205



Ni3N–NiMoN
1.54
10 mA cm−2 for 20 h

206



NiCoP@NiMn LDH/NF
1.519
100 mA cm−2 for 50 h

207



Co4S3/Mo2C-NSC
1.62
10 mA cm−2 for 8 h

208






6. Summary and outlooks
Interface engineering has been recently recognized as one of the most promising strategies to develop efficient electrocatalysts for the water splitting reaction. In this review, we have systematically summarized the fundamental understanding and experimental progress in atomic heterointerface engineering, with emphasis on how heterointerface engineering helps in overcoming the performance limitation of catalysts for alkaline water splitting. Different interface types based on combination forms and atomic arrangements are classified. By highlighting the ensemble effect and electron effect, the enhancement mechanism of interface engineering is discussed. Particularly, the ensemble effect enables creating interfacial multiple adsorption sites for optimizing the reaction pathways with enhanced reaction kinetics, while the electron effect balances the adsorption energies of reaction intermediates by coupling their electronic configurations. Moreover, advanced synthesis methods to realize heterointerface engineering are also introduced and classified by their synthetic chemical-environments. Accordingly, many rational design guidelines for fabricating the targeted electrocatalysts based on the heterointerface constituents and characteristics are elaborated for the HER, OER and OWS, respectively.
6.1 The key to atomic heterointerface engineering
The general design guideline to develop efficient catalysts is always to pursue achieving higher intrinsic activity and more active sites.11 Consistently, the key to interface engineering is to construct an optimized heterointerface with the highest intrinsic activity and the maximized interfacial regions. To design an optimized interface, it is significant to clearly identify the interfacial atomic structure and then analyze the structure–activity correlations at the interface. As discussed above, the bonding form and atomic arrangement at the interface not only determine the intermediates’ reaction pathways, but also affect the energy band structure between the combined components, which all together decide the interface's intrinsic activity. However, conventional characterization studies can hardly provide detailed atom-scale structure or direct bonding form information at the interface, which urgently requires more advanced characterization technologies. For example, spherical aberration corrected TEM is useful to illustrate the interfacial atom arrangement and lattice matching information; high-power XAFS is a significant technology to discover interfacial bonding information.117,118 Besides, the operando observation combined with theoretic analysis (e.g., molecular dynamics simulation or DFT calculations) is very helpful to clarify the dynamic reaction process at the interface,209–217 including the evolution of the reaction intermediates and the electronic structure change during the catalysis process. Most of the operando characterization studies reported until recently still have the drawback that they can only apply to the whole measurement region but not the targeted region (i.e., interface). Here, we highlight a natural technique – scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM), which is useful to directly explore the structure–activity correlation of catalysts at the nanoscale.218,219 The core part of SECCM is a mobile meniscus probe as an in situ electrochemical cell with a diameter of ∼150 nm (even smaller). By scanning the surface of the catalyst, SECCM can measure the electrocatalytic performance inside or outside the interface. Unwin and coworkers utilized high-resolution SECCM to prove that the edge plane of MoS2 has better HER catalytic activity than the basal plane. The successful application of SECCM and its combination with other operando characterization techniques would greatly assist in exploring the reaction mechanism in the interface region.220 Another up-to-date approach to optimize interfacial structures is based on advanced artificial intelligence and machine learning.221,222 Ge and coauthors successfully predicted novel two-dimensional van der Waals heterostructure materials (MoTe2/WTe2) for superior HER and OER performance by applying the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) process of artificial intelligence incorporating these descriptors together with quantum mechanics.223
On the other hand, more efforts are required to maximize the exposure of interfacial active sites. One of the most attractive ways is to construct atomically distributed heterointerfaces. In the extreme case, single atom and atomic cluster based catalysts would show an ideal interface, where active components are uniformly and densely anchored onto the support with the maximum interfacial region.224–227 Many promising materials have been reported that have great potential for constructing atomic heterointerfaces. For instance, MOF-based materials with the homogeneous distribution of metal ions in the organic ligand framework are suitable to engineer atomic metal–carbon heterointerfaces.121,122 Similarly, some specific anchoring effects between organic salts and support materials can also realize atomic heterointerfaces.228 Besides, advanced synthesis strategies to realize atomic arrangements of heterointerfaces are expounded in Section 2.
6.2 The real activity evaluation of heterointerfaces
To promote the development of atomic heterointerface engineering, it is crucial to compare heterointerface catalysts from different studies and screen for promising interface substance combinations. However, until recently, it has been meaningless to directly compare the catalytic performance (based on the parameter of η @ 10 mA cmgeo−2) for different heterointerface catalysts, mainly due to their discrepant nanostructures, mass loadings of active materials, testing conditions and so on.229 Therefore, it is essential to use more reasonable characteristics for evaluating their catalytic performance. Among the different characteristics, the specific activity and mass activity, based on electrochemical surface areas (ECSA) and mass loadings, respectively, have been proved to be effective ways to screen the catalyst under examination.230 For accurately estimating the specific activity, many strategies were developed to measure the real ECSA of catalysts. One widely accepted method is to cycle the electrode in the non-faradaic regions at different scan rates.231 The electrical double-layer capacitance (Cdl) is first calculated from the slope of the linear curve of non-faradaic current densities and scan rates. Then, the ECSA can be estimated by the equation: ECSA = Cdl/CdlRef, where CdlRef represents the double layer capacitance of a referenced flat surface. Finally, the ECSA normalized current density (jECSA, mA cm−2) can be achieved by dividing the ECSA value. jECSA directly reflects the intrinsic activity of the catalyst by avoiding the influence of the nanostructure. It's worth mentioning that the ECSA values obtained from the above method are the number of active sites on the electrodes that can electrochemically adsorb the solution-ion, but not the real electrochemically active sites for the catalysis. Other methods that normalized the current based on the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area or redox peak area of active metals are also reported.232 In general, the premise of these methods is that they assume that the given surface area can approximately convert to the number of real catalytically-active sites. On the other hand, the mass normalized current (A g−1) reflects the average mass activity of loaded catalysts on the electrode. It is suitable to evaluate the performance of nanocrystals with large surface exposure, but not for catalysts grown on substrates with large mass loadings and low surface exposure ratios.233 By selecting the rational method, the catalytic performances of heterointerface catalysts from different studies can be comparable. Objectively, however, these methods are still not precise enough to process the electrochemical data. They simply average the performance of heterointerface catalysts without distinguishing the interfacial region or single-component region. Therefore, there is still a need to develop more accurate methods (e.g. by combining with the SECCM technique) to evaluate the real activity of heterointerface catalysts.
6.3 The potential surface reconstruction of heterointerface catalysts
Due to the surface reconstruction phenomenon of most catalysts during electrocatalytic reactions (especially the OER), more and more recent research studies began to focus on reformed materials and their structure–property relationships on the catalytic performance.36 To some degree, the surface-reconstruction process would complicate the employed electrocatalytic systems, whereas it also provides a great chance for developing heterointerface catalysts due to the formation of a wide variety of interfacial environments. First of all, the surface reconstruction process can be one feasible and efficient electrochemical synthesis strategy to construct atomic heterointerfaces since it can directly generate precursor-derivative interfaces in the targeted region with only a few of atom layers.73,109,110 The details are summarized in Section 2. Moreover, on the positive side, complex interfacial environments mean more cooperative forms between various catalytic sites (ensemble effect) and greater electronic interactions between multiple components (electron effect). Therefore, a concrete analysis of each specific catalyst system is required to explore the influence of reconstruction on heterointerfaces based on their interface components and self-reconstruction types. Meanwhile, the further development of operando electrochemical characterization is needed to clarify the real structure of interface components and then conduct in-depth mechanistic analysis combined with comprehensive theory calculations.
Besides, we highlight two kinds of promising materials with specific structures that have few effects of surface reconstruction. One includes core–shell structured catalysts in which their heterointerfaces are hidden inside the shell layer. Thus, there is only shell layer that is exposed in the electrolyte and participates in the catalytic reaction. In this case, the electron effect plays a significant role in improving the catalytic performance, no matter whether surface reconstruction occurs or not. The core component remarkably improves the electron structure of the shell layer (or the reformed layer) by fast interfacial electron transfer.222 In addition, a catalyst with a core–shell structure may also show better catalytic stability relative to a normal heterointerface catalyst due to its limited exposure of the interfacial region. Another kind includes confined structure catalysts, where active species are usually encapsulated within layered materials. During the catalytic reaction, the strong interaction among the confined heterointerfaces would prevent the electrochemical reconstruction of active species.234 Furthermore, this specific structure also provides unique micro-environments for catalysis and thus has a positive effect on performance. Therefore, we encourage researchers to further develop heterointerface catalysts with novel and specific structures.
6.4 Industrial-scale application of heterointerface engineered catalysts
Apart from the design of heterointerface catalysts, how to utilize these catalysts in an industrial-scale alkaline water-splitting electrolyzer for realizing low-cost and scalable hydrogen production is another future trend.7,9 Among the various advanced-technologies reported to date, the AEM-based water electrolysis system, which enables directly utilizing alkaline water-splitting reaction catalysts, has been considered as one promising technology.10 However, the development of AEM-based electrolyzers is still at an early stage. Recently, Kim and co-workers reported a novel ammonium-enriched AEM ionomer that can extremely improve the performance of an AEM electrolyzer.235 It reached 2.7 A cm−2 at only 1.8 V when even using cost-efficient NiFe-based OER catalysts. Such excellent performance is comparable to that of the state-of-the-art PEM electrolyzer but provides substantial cost savings relative to the PEM system, demonstrating its great potential in commercial applications. Nevertheless, by considering the complex reaction conditions inside the electrolysis reactor system, more efforts need to be dedicated into integrating the fundamental research studies between materials science and reaction engineering.236
Overall, on the basis of these advances and challenges, we believe that atomic-heterointerface engineered electrocatalysts would overcome the activity limitation of the water splitting reaction and finally realize the practical applications in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21838003, 91834301 and 51621002), the Shanghai Scientific and Technological Innovation Project (18JC1410600), the National Program for Support of Top-Notch Young Professionals, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (222201718002).
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, Q. Fan, T. Ma, S. Liu, H. Gysling, J. Texter, F. Guo and Z. Sun, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 111, 100637 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov, W. I. F. David and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4356–4362 CrossRef .
T. Y. Amiri, K. Ghasemzageh and A. Iulianelli, Chem. Eng. Process., 2020, 157, 108148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, C. Pei and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3473–3495 RSC .
K. Ayers, N. Danilovic, R. Ouimet, M. Carmo, B. Pivovar and M. Bornstein, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2019, 10, 219–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
S. Shiva Kumar and V. Himabindu, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 442–454 Search PubMed .
R. Abbasi, B. P. Setzler, S. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, B. Pivovar, B. Tian, X. Chen, G. Wu and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805876 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, S. Dou, X. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Matter, 2019, 1, 1494–1518 CrossRef .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. López, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 971–976 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, H. Qing, K. Zhou, D. Sun and R. Wu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 108, 100618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. M. Wang and C. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 921–948 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kwon, M. Jun, J. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5090–5110 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Luo, W. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Chen and S. Guo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2054–2083 CAS .
T. A. Pham, Y. Ping and G. Galli, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 401–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6593–6604 RSC .
P. Liu and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 3814–3818 RSC .
C. J. Zhang, R. J. Baxter, P. Hu, A. Alavi and M.-H. Lee, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 5272–5277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Q. Ma, X.-J. Wu, L. Li, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, H. Li, H. Yang, W. Xiang, G. Zhou, Y. Wu and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4200–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Q. Liu, T. Li, Y. Luo, S. Lu, X. Shi, F. Zhang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2834–2867 RSC .
B. Zhang and Y. Qin, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10064–10081 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, M. Gu, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Meng, T. Ling, T.-Y. Ma, H. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhou, J. Mao, X.-W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604607 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Meng, J. Zhu, M. Huang, B. Wen, R. Guo and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2007344,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202007344 .
Y. Wang, L. Zhao, Y. Zhao, W. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Gu, J. Li, G. Zhang, T. J. Huang and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805686 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, Q. He, Y. Zhang and L. Song, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2968–2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liao, C. Wei, J. Wang, A. Fisher, T. Sritharan, Z. Feng and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701129 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, X. Duan, Z. Jiang, Y. Hu, S. W. Boettcher, W. Zhang, S. Guo and C. Li, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 492–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707522 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wenderich and G. Mul, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14587–14619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Veziroglu, A.-L. Obermann, M. Ullrich, M. Hussain, M. Kamp, L. Kienle, T. Leißner, H.-G. Rubahn, O. Polonskyi, T. Strunskus, J. Fiutowski, M. Es-Souni, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14983–14992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Safizadeh, E. Ghali and G. Houlachi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 256–274 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12495–12498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, Y. Yao, J. W. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700464 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu, E. H. Song, M. Y. Wang, W. Chen, F. Q. Huang, Z. X. Feng, J. J. Liu and J. C. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2001881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
G. Zhao, Y. Lin, K. Rui, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19074–19081 RSC .
L. Wang, C. Lin, D. Huang, J. Chen, L. Jiang, M. Wang, L. Chi, L. Shi and J. Jin, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3801–3806 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Feng, H. Xu, Y. T. Dong, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2960–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Gorji and K. Y. Cheong, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2015, 40, 197–222 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, K. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Yao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12859–12863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kundu, R. Mishra, T. Bhowmik and S. Barman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23531–23541 RSC .
G. Meng, H. Tian, L. Peng, Z. Ma, Y. Chen, C. Chen, Z. Chang, X. Cui and J. Shi, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105531 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, M. A. R. Anjum, M. Choi, H. Y. Jeong, S. H. Choi, N. Park and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and Y. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700644 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pi, C. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Song, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, B. Gao, J. Fu, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nanomicro Lett., 2018, 10, 75 CAS .
Z. Weng, W. Liu, L. C. Yin, R. Fang, M. Li, E. I. Altman, Q. Fan, F. Li, H. M. Cheng and H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7704–7710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Y. Zhong, H. A. Tahini, Z. Shao and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3361–3392 RSC .
T. T. Liu, W. B. Gao, Q. Q. Wang, M. L. Dou, Z. P. Zhang and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20423–20427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lu, Y. Liu, F. Lin, I. A. Cordova, S. Gao, B. Li, B. Peng, H. Xu, J. Kaelin, D. Coliz, C. Wang, Y. Shao and Y. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12613–12619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. F. Liu, L. Zhang, M. Y. Zu, Y. X. Yang and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10566–10569 RSC .
Z. Wang, H. Du, Z. Liu, H. Wang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2213–2217 RSC .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1985–1990 RSC .
S. Niu, Y. Fang, J. Zhou, J. Cai, Y. Zang, Y. Wu, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, W. Qu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10924–10929 RSC .
K. L. Zhou, C. H. Wang, Z. L. Wang, C. B. Han, Q. Q. Zhang, X. X. Ke, J. B. Liu and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3082–3092 RSC .
D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes, B. Genorio, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Zhao, L.-R. Zheng, Y. Tong, M. Zhang, G. Xu, C. Li, J. Ma and G. Shi, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 237–244 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Hu and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, Z. Chen, L. Y. Kuritzky, A. J. Forman and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1916–1923 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Ren, R. Ge, W. Teng, X. Sun and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16632–16637 RSC .
X. Zhang, S. Zhu, L. Xia, C. Si, F. Qu and F. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1201–1204 RSC .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1805511 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Guo, G. Lu, J. Yao and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Hou, P. Liu, J. Yang, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, B. Yang, L. Lei, C. Yuan, M. Qiu and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 149–156 RSC .
M. Lao, K. Rui, G. Zhao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5432–5437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, Q. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Yin, H. Zhong and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8337–8343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, S. A. Patil, L. Truong, A. A. Arbab, S. H. Jeong, S.-H. Chun, J. Jung and H.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 5061–5072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. H. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8851–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601390 CrossRef .
Q. Shao, P. Wang and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806419 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, J. Hou, Y. Wu, S. Cao, Z. Li, X. Nie, Z. Gao and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803693 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Lu, Z. Mao, C. Yan, G. Shen and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Ying, S. M. Wu, Y. Lu, J. Hu, J. S. Hu, L. Shen, Y. X. Xiao, W. Geng, G. G. Chang, C. Janiak, W. H. Li and X. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27641–27647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Zhang, B. Huang, J. Li and E. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18304–18310 RSC .
Y.-Y. Ma, Z.-L. Lang, L.-K. Yan, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, K. Feng, Y.-J. Xia, J. Zhong, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2114–2123 RSC .
A. B. Jorge, R. Jervis, A. P. Periasamy, M. Qiao, J. Feng, L. N. Tran and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902494 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, H. Liu and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802553 CrossRef .
L. Tao, Y. Wang, Y. Zou, N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, R. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1901227 CrossRef .
Z. Zhuang, Y. Li, Z. Li, F. Lv, Z. Lang, K. Zhao, L. Zhou, L. Moskaleva, S. Guo and L. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, X. Liu, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 690–697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Ni, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2645–2653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, Z. S. Fishman, Y. Wang, Z. Pan, X. Shen, R. Yanagi, G. S. Hutchings, M. Liu, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, E. I. Altman and S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20696–20705 RSC .
B. Long, H. Yang, M. Li, M.-S. Balogun, W. Mai, G. Ouyang, Y. Tong, P. Tsiakaras and S. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, X. Dong, D. Guo, C. Tian and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, K. Qi, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Yu and X. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18008–18014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, G. Ding, J. Yu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Guo, J. Zhang, W. Ren and R. Che, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18072–18080 RSC .
K. L. Zhou, Z. Wang, C. B. Han, X. Ke, C. Wang, Y. Jin, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xing, C. Han, D. Wang, Q. Li and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7131–7135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, M. A. Qadeer, G. Shen, R. Zhang, S. Yang, J. An, L. Pan and J.-J. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20579–20583 RSC .
D. Li, X. Chen, Y. Lv, G. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Liu, Y. Li, R. Chen, C. Nuckolls and H. Ni, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118824 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Lei, X. Wang, Y. Tan, N. Cheng and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10359–10368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, L. Bai, A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C. Hu, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7748–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Wei, Z.-F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 140–143 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, D. L. Huang, C. Y. Zhou, S. Chen, X. L. Yan, Z. H. Li and W. J. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 408, 213177 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Han, L. Yao, L. Liang, J. He, Q. Hao, J. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Liu, Small, 2021, 17, 2007334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Goncalves, P. R. Martins, L. Angnes and K. Araki, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 9981–9997 RSC .
Z.-W. Gao, J.-Y. Liu, X.-M. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, T. Ma, L. Li, W.-C. Wang and X.-W. Du, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804769 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Song, M. M. Busch, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, C.-S. Hsu, E. Petkucheva, M. Bensimon, H. M. Chen, C. Corminboeuf and X. Hu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 558–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, H. Zhao, B. Huang, L. Xu, M. Luo, J. Wang, F. Luo, Y. Du and C.-H. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Y. Wu, D. Wu, C. Huang, D. Xiao, H. Chen, S. Zheng and P. K. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42850–42858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Gan, W. Zhang, Y. Peng, H. Yu, Q. Yan, X. Xia and X. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap7970 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Long, J. Li, S. Xiao, K. Yan, Z. Wang, H. Chen and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7584–7588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, Q. Zhang, C. Yang and F. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24540–24546 RSC .
S. Niu, W.-J. Jiang, T. Tang, L.-P. Yuan, H. Luo and J.-S. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902180 CrossRef .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. J. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, M. Peng, Y. Yu, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, P. Li, N. Cheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Huang, Z. L. Zhao, M. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Feng, H. Xu and M. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fester, A. Makoveev, D. Grumelli, R. Gutzler, Z. Sun, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, K. Kern and J. V. Lauritsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11893–11897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. D. Ng, M. García-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16053 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Jiang and C. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 962–967 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Mao and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3993–4016 RSC .
Š. Kment, K. Sivula, A. Naldoni, S. P. Sarmah, H. Kmentová, M. Kulkarni, Y. Rambabu, P. Schmuki and R. Zbořil, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 110, 100632 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, Y. Pi, Q. Shao, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6245–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-W. Gao, T. Ma, X.-M. Chen, H. Liu, L. Cui, S.-Z. Qiao, J. Yang and X.-W. Du, Small, 2018, 14, 1800195 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Ren, S. Du, L. Kong, B. Liu, W. Xi, J. Zhu and H. Fu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 713–725 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zheng, R. Li, Y. Tang, B. Li, C. Zhu, L. You, M.-R. Gao, Z. Liu, S.-H. Yu and K. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1971–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Xiao, A. Li, Z. Li, S. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Gong, L. Zheng, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu, X. Han, J. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15336–15341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shi, Z. Geng, K. Huang, Q. Liang, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Cao and S. Feng, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800575 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, R. Jin, H. Abroshan, C. Zeng, H. Zhang, S. D. House, E. Gottlieb, H. J. Kim, J. C. Yang and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1077–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Duan, H. Li, M. Yang, S. Wang, X. Wang and R. Wang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3103–3112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, Y. Li, Q. Xu, S. Petr and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7548–7552 RSC .
X. Zou, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li, Y. Wu, D.-P. Liu, W. Li, H.-W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700404 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, M. Chu, M. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Jiang and C. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 411, 128488 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, J. Yuan, Y. Liu, W. Lu, N. Fu, W. Li and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10253–10263 RSC .
H. Q. Fu, L. Zhang, C. W. Wang, L. R. Zheng, P. F. Liu and H. G. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2021–2029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Hu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14451–14454 RSC .
H. Zhang, H. Jiang, Q. Xu, Y. Hu and C. Li, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 195, 665–670 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, M. Liu and R. Wu, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, S. Dipazir, M. Wang, Y. Sun, D. Gao, Y. Bai, M. Zhang, P. Lu, H. He, X. Zhu, S. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Luo and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3317–3326 RSC .
Y. Shi, M. Li, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4564–4582 RSC .
D. Liang, H. Jiang, Q. Xu, J. Luo, Y. Hu and C. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F1286–F1291 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, H. Zhu, X. Zhu, H. Xing, Y. Zhang, B. Huang, S. Guo and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803551 CrossRef PubMed .
K. He, T. Tadesse Tsega, X. Liu, J. Zai, X.-H. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, N. Ali and X. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11903–11909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Liu, X. Li, S. Yang, M. Y. Zu, P. Liu, B. Zhang, L. R. Zheng, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2257–2263 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, S. Zhang, J. Sun, L. Yu, X. Qian, R. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X.-K. Wei, J. D. Costa, J. L. Lado, B. Owens-Baird, L. P. L. Gonçalves, S. P. S. Fernandes, M. Heggen, D. Y. Petrovykh, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, K. Kovnir and Y. V. Kolen’ko, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5450–5455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Kong, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 116, 100717 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Fu, Y. Tang and J.-M. Lee, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1424–1434 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, Y. Li, D. Liang, Y. Hu and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, Y.-Z. Su, P.-Y. Kuang, G.-F. Chen and Z.-Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19314–19321 RSC .
H. Chen, X. Huang, L.-J. Zhou, G.-D. Li, M. Fan and X. Zou, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 992–1000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
K. Kumar, C. Canaff, J. Rousseau, S. Arrii-Clacens, T. W. Napporn, A. Habrioux and K. B. Kokoh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7949–7958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Z. Xiao, C. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Jiang and L. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703623 CrossRef .
D. Liang, C. Lian, Q. Xu, M. Liu, H. Liu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118417 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ding, K. Shen, X. Chen, H. Chen, J. Chen, T. Fan, R. Wu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7879–7888 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, S. Zhang, K. Bu, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, T. Lin, J. Huang, Y. Li and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22063–22069 RSC .
F. Shi, K. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Li, X. Wang and S. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17459–17466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, M. Wen, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2600–2604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 181–190 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hao, Y. Wu, Y. An, B. Cui, J. Lin, X. Li, D. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Cheng and S. Hu, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 453–462 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, G. Luo, L. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, F. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Li, T. Yao, C. Xiong, B. Yang, Z. Yu and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002816 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
B. Xiong, L. Chen and J. Shi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3688–3707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, K. Zhang, H. Lin, X. Li, H. C. Chan, L. Yang and Q. Gao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2357–2366 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoon and K. S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7386–7393 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muthurasu, V. Maruthapandian and H. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, R. Liu and L. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909618 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, S. Luo, C. Deng, S. Zhu, Q. Xu and Y. Min, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8306–8314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Riyajuddin, K. Azmi, M. Pahuja, S. Kumar, T. Maruyama, C. Bera and K. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5586–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Zhang, M. Liu, Q. Xu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2020, 227, 115915 CrossRef CAS .
U. P. Suryawanshi, U. V. Ghorpade, D. M. Lee, M. He, S. W. Shin, P. V. Kumar, J. S. Jang, H. R. Jung, M. P. Suryawanshi and J. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 234–245 CrossRef CAS .
N. Suo, Z. Dou and L. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hua, Q. Xu, Y. Hu, H. Jiang and C. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 37, 1–6 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, X. Y. Zhang, H. Wan, S. J. Wang, Y. F. Zhao, J. Q. Zhang, D. Zhou, W. C. Gao, R. Z. Ma, T. Sasaki and G. X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4518–4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, L. Lv, X. Ji, K. Xu, L. Miao and J. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15364–15372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, R. Ma, C. Wang, J. Liang, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Cao and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704447 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, H. Wan, X. Ji, K. Xu, D. Zha, L. Miao and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2067–2072 RSC .
J. Lin, P. Wang, H. Wang, C. Li, X. Si, J. Qi, J. Cao, Z. Zhong, W. Fei and J. Feng, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900246 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Liu, M. Ko, M. Park, M. G. Kim, P. Oh, S. Chae, S. Park, A. Casimir, G. Wu and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5799–5808 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xi, Z. Ren, L. Kong, J. Wu, S. Du, J. Zhu, Y. Xue, H. Meng and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7297–7304 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2018, 14, e1704073 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-H. Xue, H. Su, Q.-Y. Yu, B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602355 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, A. L. Wang, W. Xiao, D. Chao, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, S. Chen, J. Kang, X. Wang, J. Ding, J. Wang, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705516 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
L. An, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Liu, G.-C. Wang, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805298 CrossRef .
A. Wu, Y. Xie, H. Ma, C. Tian, Y. Gu, H. Yan, X. Zhang, G. Yang and H. Fu, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 353–363 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, J. Qi, X. Chen, C. Li, W. Li, T. Wang and C. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4385–4395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Luo, C. Zhou, S. Du, D. Zhen, B. Chen, J. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Iru and D. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118197 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Mefford, Z. Zhao, M. Bajdich and W. C. Chueh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 622–634 RSC .
H. N. Nong, L. J. Falling, A. Bergmann, M. Klingenhof, H. P. Tran, C. Spöri, R. Mom, J. Timoshenko, G. Zichittella, A. Knop-Gericke, S. Piccinin, J. Pérez-Ramírez, B. R. Cuenya, R. Schlögl, P. Strasser, D. Teschner and T. E. Jones, Nature, 2020, 587, 408–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Wang, L. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9567–9581 CAS .
B.-Y. Wen, Q.-Q. Chen, P. M. Radjenovic, J.-C. Dong, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2021, 72, 331–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
M. V. Varsha and G. Nageswaran, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Lemineur, P. Ciocci, J.-M. Noël, H. Ge, C. Combellas and F. Kanoufi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2643–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, S. Z. Oener, G. Lindquist, H. Jiang, C. Li and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Kong, J. Kim, S. Choi, F. Ciucci, Y. Hao, S. H. Yang, Z. P. Shao and J. Lim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154–9196 RSC .
O. J. Wahab, M. Kang and P. R. Unwin, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 22, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
E. Daviddi, K. L. Gonos, A. W. Colburn, C. L. Bentley and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 9229–9237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Bentley, M. Kang, F. M. Maddar, F. Li, M. Walker, J. Zhang and P. R. Unwin, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6583–6593 RSC .
Y. Sun, H. Liao, J. Wang, B. Chen, S. Sun, S. J. H. Ong, S. Xi, C. Diao, Y. Du, J.-O. Wang, M. B. H. Breese, S. Li, H. Zhang and Z. J. Xu, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 554–563 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, Y.-X. Zhang and Z. Niu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10886–10904 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, H. Yuan, Y. Min, L. Li, S. Chen, L. Xu and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 869–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Fu, Y. W. Wang, W. Tian, H. J. Zhang, J. Li, S. Y. Wang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23791–23799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Lei, Y. C. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Y. Song, Q. Li, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20794–20812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. A. Triana, W. Wan, D. P. Adiyeri Saseendran, Y. Zhao, S. E. Balaghi, S. Heidari and G. R. Patzke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2444–2485 RSC .
D. T. Tran, D. C. Nguyen, H. T. Le, T. Kshetri, V. H. Hoa, T. L. L. Doan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, M. G. Kim, P. Liu, G. Nam, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, B. Yang, J. Cho, M. Chen, C. Yuan, L. Lei and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1392 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla, Y. Gogotsi, N. A. Kotov, Y. Li, R. M. Penner, R. E. Schaak and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9635–9638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Chen, C. W. Jones, S. Linic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6392–6393 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, H. Li and Z. J. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1024–1027 CrossRef .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. Sam Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
J. Sanchez, M. B. Stevens, A. R. Young, A. Gallo, M. Zhao, Y. Liu, M. V. Ramos-Garcés, M. Ben-Naim, J. L. Colón, R. Sinclair, L. A. King, M. Bajdich and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003545 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, E. J. Park, W. Zhu, Q. Shi, Y. Zhou, H. Tian, Y. Lin, A. Serov, B. Zulevi, E. D. Baca, C. Fujimoto, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Lagadec and A. Grimaud, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1140–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Q. Xu and J. Zhang contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Qiucheng Xu
	Qiucheng Xu acquired his PhD in materials science and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in June 2021 (supervised by Prof. Jiang and Prof. Li), and had a 1-year joint PhD experience in the University of Oregon. He will join the Technical University of Denmark as a postdoctoral fellow very soon. His research interests include the synthesis of novel nanomaterials and the development of membrane-based electrochemical devices.

Jiahao Zhang
	Jiahao Zhang received his BS in composite materials and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST) in 2018. He is currently a PhD candidate in materials science and engineering under the supervision of Prof. Chunzhong Li and Prof. Hao Jiang at ECUST. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of novel electrocatalytic nanomaterials and the understanding of structure–performance relationships.

Hao Jiang
	Hao Jiang is a full professor of the Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of the Ministry of Education at East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). Prof. Jiang received his PhD in materials science and engineering from ECUST in 2009, and was also a postdoctoral fellow at Temasek Laboratories, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), until 2011. His research interests mainly focus on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials in the application of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Chunzhong Li
	Chunzhong Li is a Cheung Kong Chair Professor at East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). He is also the Dean of the School of Chemical Engineering at ECUST. Prof. Li received his BS (1989), MS (1992), and PhD (1997) in chemical engineering from ECUST. His research interests are highly interdisciplinary, including the accurate construction and application of nanoenergy materials, synthesis and processing of polymer-based nanohybrids, and the chemical basis and scale-up of nanomaterial production.

Broader context
Green hydrogen energy is the key to realizing the global energy transformation and social sustainability. Alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) driven by green-electricity has been considered to be one of the most hopeful ways to replace the traditional industrial technology for low-cost and scalable H2 production. In general, the development of AWE requires that highly-efficient electrocatalysts be designed for two half reactions, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Currently, the alkaline HER and OER are, respectively, limited by the water dissociation step and the scaling relationship of oxygen reaction intermediates. Among various strategies developed so far, atomic heterointerface engineering is the most promising strategy to overcome the intrinsic activity limitation of electrocatalysts. Its unique multi-component synergistic effect enables effectively balancing the optimization conditions for intermediate adsorptions and thus improves the reaction kinetics. However, the progress of interface engineering, especially the detailed protocols to design heterointerfaces based on the reaction mechanism, is still lacking in the recently reported reviews. In this review, we systematically summarize the fundamental features (e.g., interfacial types, synergistic effects), synthesis strategies and experimental progress in atomic heterointerface engineering, mainly discussing how interface engineering helps in overcoming the performance limitation of catalysts for water splitting in alkaline electrolyte. By highlighting the ensemble effect and electron effect, the enhancement mechanism of heterointerface engineering is discussed. Furthermore, rational design guidelines for fabricating the targeted electrocatalysts based on the heterointerface constituents and characteristics are elaborated for the HER, OER and overall water-splitting separately. Finally, we clarify the fact that the key to atomic heterointerface engineering is to optimize the interfacial structure and maximize the interfacial sites in the electrocatalysts. Some perspectives on the real activity evaluation and surface reconstruction effect of heterointerface catalysts are also critically discussed.


 	Fig. 1  The importance of alkaline water splitting and volcano-shape curves for HER and OER electrocatalysts.15,16 (Parts b and c are reproduced from ref. 15 and 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Copyright 2019, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Three heterointerface types and the characteristic effects of atomic heterointerface engineering.	 

 	Fig. 3  Advanced synthesis strategies to realize the atomic heterointerface engineering of catalysts.29,33,39,41 Reproduced with permission from Copyright 2015&2020, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2016&2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Volmer step: H2O + e− → H* + OH−	(1)
Heyrovsky step: H2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH−	(2)
or Tafel step: H* + H* → H2	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Free energy diagram of reaction pathways for the alkaline HER. (b) Schematic illustration of an ideal multi-site model. The contents in the gray dashed box are the major factors for the alkaline HER.	 

Noble metal based heterointerfaces	PtNi/NiOx	1 M KOH	50	17	
53

PtNi NWs	67
PtNi/NiOx	0.5 M H2SO4	35	−3
PtNi NWs	32
Rh–Rh2O3-NPs/C	0.5 M KOH	63	164	
54

RhNPs/C	227
Rh–Rh2O3-NPs/C	0.5 M H2SO4	13	7
RhNPs/C	20
Ru@WNO-C	1 M KOH	24	518	
55

WNO-C	542
Ru@WNO-C	0.5 M H2SO4	172	57
WNO-C	229


Transition metal based heterointerfaces	Co9S8–MoS2	1 M KOH	167	182	
56

MoS2	349
Co9S8–MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	229	42
MoS2	271
MoS2/Ni2+δOδ(OH)2−δ	1 M KOH	73	185	
57

1T-MoS2	258
MoS2/Ni2+δOδ(OH)2−δ	0.5 M H2SO4	212	−4
1T-MoS2	208
MoP@NC	1 M KOH	149	283	
58

MoP	432
MoP@NC	0.5 M H2SO4	96	74
MoP	170

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the alkaline HER on a Ni(OH)2/Pt heterointerface.21 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Comparison of HER activities expressed as overpotentials to achieve 50 A m−2 in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M KOH for pure metal surfaces and Ni(OH)2-modified surfaces.70 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Adsorption free energy diagram for the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps of α- or β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrodes. In situ Raman tests at low (d) and high (e) wavenumbers of the β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrode in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.71 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) High-resolution TEM image of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest structure. (g) Schematic illustration of the HER activity enhancing mechanism of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest structure in alkaline media.72 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the ensemble effect on the surfaces of Pd/FeOX(OH)2−2x NPs for the alkaline HER. (b) In situ XANES of the Fe K-edge of the Pd/FeOx(OH)2−2x NPs after various electrochemical cycles. Inset (b) shows the Fe valency (in 0.1 M KOH) as a function of the cycle number. (c) The overpotential versus FeOX(OH)2−2x coverage.37 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of a nitrogen-doped carbon/VO-WON heterostructure. (e) Free energy diagram for the HER on NC, WO3, VO-WON, and NC/VO-WON models.87 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of a CoMn/CoMn2O4 heterostructure. (b) UPS analysis of CoMn and CoMn2O4. (c) Energy band diagram of metallic CoMn and CoMn2O4 with Schottky contact.88 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) High-resolution TEM image of a S-MoS2@C electrocatalyst. (e) The side view of the optimized molecular orbital models for the S-MoS2@C electrocatalyst. (f) Polarization curves of commercial MoS2, MoS2@C, and S-MoS2@C electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Electron density difference plot at the MoO2–FeP heterointerface. (h) Calculated H2O adsorption energy and (i) H* adsorption energy of MoO2–FeP, FeP, and MoO2 systems.95 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Benchmark catalyst	Pt/C	45 ± 15	40 ± 5	—


Metal oxide-based catalysts	PtSA–NiO/Ni	26	27	
103

PtSA–NiO	35	38
PtSA–Ni	36	37
CoP–CeO2/Ti	43	45	
67

CoP/Ti	70	52
Ni3N/MoO2	21	46	
68

Ni3N	217	129


Metal hydroxide-based catalysts	Pt/NiRu–OH	38	39	
106

NiRu–OH	191	106
Pt–Co(OH)2/CC	32	70	
104

Pt/CC	75	93
Co(OH)2/CC	∼285	125
Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2	50	49	
72

Ni(OH)2	∼95	60
Ni3S2	∼90	99


Metal-based catalysts	Co–Mo2N@NC	47	43	
105

Co@NC	256	120
Mo2N@NC	85	54
Ru@WNO-C	24	40	
55

WNO-C	542	134


Carbon-based catalysts	ZIF67-Pt/RGO	37	33	
107

Pt/RGO	∼110	43
NC/VO-WON	16	33	
87

VO-WON	123	68
OH− + * → *OH + e− (ΔG1)	(4)
*OH + OH− → *O + H2O + e− (ΔG2)	(5)
*O + OH− → *OOH + e− (ΔG3)	(6)
*OOH + OH− → O2 + * + H2O + e− (ΔG4)	(7)
GOER = MAX[ΔG01, ΔG02, ΔG03, ΔG04]	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 8  Standard free energy diagram for the OER at zero potential (U = 0), the equilibrium potential for oxygen evolution (U = 1.23 V), and the potential for which all steps become downwards: (a) the ideal catalyst and (c) RuO2. (b) The scaling relationship between the free energy of the water dissociation on top of oxygen (ΔG*OOH − ΔG*O (eV)) and the free energy of proton removal (ΔG*O − ΔG*OH (eV)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Single site OER route and (e) multiple site OER route.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HRTEM images of NiFe LDH combined with NiO NPs, (b) schematic illustration of the OER pathway at the S1 site of the NiO/NiFe LDH intersection, (c) OER volcano curve of the theoretical overpotential for different NiO/NiFe LDH adsorption sites.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) In situ FT-EXAFS spectra of the Fe K-edge and Ni K-edge for Au–NiOx–Fe to form γ-FeOOH/γ-NiOOH during the OER. (e) Free energy diagram comparing the electrochemical potentials of water oxidation at γ-FeOOH proceeding through a mononuclear mechanism (black solid line) and a bifunctional mechanism with Ni3–O sites acting as hydrogen acceptors (green dashed line). Inset: Upper path, mononuclear mechanism; lower path, bifunctional mechanism.118 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Wavelet transform images for the k3-weighted EXAFS signal for the Ni K-edge of the Ni(OH)2-OER and Ir/Ni(OH)2-OER, the Ir LIII-edge of the Ir NPs-OER and Ir/Ni(OH)2-OER. (b) Synergistic mechanism of IrOx/NiOOH heterointerfaces for the OER.128 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Illustration of metal-oxide-nanoparticle-embedded poly-[Co2(benzimidazole)4]. (d) Tafel plots for PCB/CC, M-PCB/CC, M-PCBN/CC, and RuO2/CC. (e) Calculated free energy diagrams of the OER on i-Co–Co, i-Co–Fe, and p-CoN4 at the equilibrium potential (1.23 V). (f) OER process on the interfacial i-Co–Co site.138 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The local atomic structure of the interface system built using Co3O4 and Co0.66Fe0.33P parts. (b) The PDOS of the P-3p- and O-2p-bands in the IF region and the different orbital overlapping effects (insertion). (c) Polarization curves of Co3O4/Fe0.33Co0.66P for the OER in 1 M KOH.154 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) HRTEM images of Co2P2O7@N,P–C. (e) Schematic energy band diagrams of the heterojunction between Co2P2O7 and N,P–C (Evac = vacuum energy, Ec = conduction band, Ev = valence band, Ef = Fermi level, Eg = energy gap, W = work function, Φ = depletion region). (f) The overpotential value and Tafel slope of Co2P2O7@N,P–C compared with those of the reported advanced Co-based electrocatalysts.169 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

Benchmark catalysts	IrO2	310 ± 20	67 ± 30	∼0.007	—
RuO2	300 ± 10	90 ± 20	∼0.016	—
Ni(Fe)OxHy	250 ± 20	50 ± 10	∼0.20	—


NiFe-Based catalysts	NiO/NiFe LDH	180	30	—	
117

NiFe LDH	270	68	—
NiO	350	130	—
Ir/NiFeOx	197	29.6	—	
126

NiFeOx	262	51.6	—
Ru/FeCoNi	205	40	—	
177

FeCoNi	279	58	—


Metal oxide/hydroxide-based catalysts	Ir–NiO	215	38	1.37	
129

NiO	370	113	0.054
CoO/CoFe LDHs	254	34	0.44	
136

CoFe LDHs	296	52.5	0.05
CoO	338	61.5	0.0016
Ir/Ni(OH)2	224	41	3.8	
128

Ir NPs	260	64	0.5
Ni(OH)2	437	127	—


Metal-based catalysts	CoP/FeNi LDH	220	22.5	—	
155

FeNi LDH	238	53.2	—
CoP	310	58.4	—
CoSe/MoSe2	262	54.9	30 × 10−4	
151

CoSe	364	105.8	1.72 × 10−4
MoSe2	386	126.2	1.34 × 10−4


Carbon-based catalysts	FeNi-GO LDH	206	39	0.987	
122

FeNi LDH	232	48	0.028
NiFe-LDH/CNT	247	31	0.56	
163

NiFe-LDH	270	45	—

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of atomic heterointerface engineered bifunctional electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the OWS process on the Co3O4@MoS2 heterointerface. Free energy diagrams for the (b) HER and (c) OER on the MoS2 edge and Co3O4@MoS2 heterointerface. (d) Schematic of the charge transfer mechanisms.195 Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) HRTEM image of RuO2/NiO. (f) Schematic illustration of potential-induced interfacial synergy between RuO2 and NiO for an enhanced HER and OER under alkaline conditions.201 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electronic structures of metallic Co, CoP, and the Co/CoP based Mott–Schottky contact. (b) Current densities of Co, Co/CoP-X, and CoP samples in 1 M KOH electrolyte at −0.30 and 1.60 V versus RHE for the HER and OER, respectively.202 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Spin-up and spin-down projected density of states (PDOS) of Co-3d and Mo-4d in LSC and LSC&2H-MoSe2, respectively. The vertical lines represent the positions of the d-band centers (εd). (d) Schematic diagrams of proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC.204 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Ensemble effect	CoS–Co(OH)2@aMoS2+x/NF	1.58	Over 100000 s	
181

MoS2–Ni3S2 HNRs/NF	1.50	1.53 V for 48 h	
180

NC/CuCo/CuCoOx	1.53	1.65 V for 100 h	
194

NiCo2S4@NiFe LDH	1.6	10 mA cm−2 for 12 h	
192

V-CoP@a-CeO2	1.56	20 mA cm−2 for 35 h	
183

Co3O4@MoS2	1.59	10 mA cm−2 for 12 h	
195

MoS2/NiS2	1.59	50 mA cm−2 for over 12 h	
196

MoS2/Ni3S2	1.56	10 mA cm−2 for 10 h	
197

CoOx@CN	1.55	10 mA cm−2 for 9000 s	
198

Ni@C NS	1.64	10 mA cm−2 for 12 h	
200

RuO2/NiO/NF	1.5	10 mA cm−2 for 25 h	
201



Electron effect	Co/CoP	1.45	20 mA cm−2 for 12 h	
202

LSC&MoSe2	∼1.745	100 mA cm−2 for 1000 h	
204

N-NiMoO4/NiS2	1.60	10 mA cm−2 for 20 h	
205

Ni3N–NiMoN	1.54	10 mA cm−2 for 20 h	
206

NiCoP@NiMn LDH/NF	1.519	100 mA cm−2 for 50 h	
207

Co4S3/Mo2C-NSC	1.62	10 mA cm−2 for 8 h	
208

Footnote
† Q. Xu and J. Zhang contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
