Emerging trends in porous materials for CO 2 capture and conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00075B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00075B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4360-4404Emerging trends in porous materials for CO2 capture and conversion

        
          
            Gurwinder 
            Singh
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jangmee 
            Lee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ajay 
            Karakoti
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rohan 
            Bahadur
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiabao 
            Yi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongyuan 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Khalid 
            AlBahily
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ajayan 
            Vinu
          
          
        
      *a
aGlobal Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials, Faculty of Engineering & Built Environment, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, 2308, Australia. E-mail: Ajayan.Vinu@newcastle.edu.au
bDepartment of Chemistry, Laboratory of Advanced Nanomaterials, iChEM (Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy materials), Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P. R. China
cSABIC Corporate Research and Development Centre at KAUST, Saudi Basic Industries Corporation, Thuwal, 23955, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      31st March 2020
    First published on 27th May 2020AbstractThe presence of an excessive concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere needs to be curbed with suitable measures including the reduction of CO2 emissions at stationary point sources such as power plants through carbon capture technologies and subsequent conversion of the captured CO2 into non-polluting clean fuels/chemicals using photo and/or electrocatalytic pathways. Porous materials have attracted much attention for carbon capture and in the recent past; they have witnessed significant advancements in their design and implementation for CO2 capture and conversion. In this context, the emerging trends in major porous adsorbents such as MOFs, zeolites, POPs, porous carbons, and mesoporous materials for CO2 capture and conversion are discussed. Their surface texture and chemistry, and the influence of various other features on their efficiency, selectivity, and recyclability for CO2 capture and conversion are explained and compared thoroughly. The scientific and technical advances on the material structure versus CO2 capture and conversion provide deep insights into designing effective porous materials. The review concludes with a summary, which compiles the key challenges in the field, current trends and critical challenges in the development of porous materials, and future research directions combined with possible solutions for realising the deployment of porous materials in CO2 capture and conversion.
Gurwinder Singh
Dr Gurwinder Singh is working as a Research Fellow at the Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials (GICAN), the University of Newcastle, Australia. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science (2018) under the supervision of Prof. Ajayan Vinu. After completing his PhD, he joined Prof. Vinu's research group at GICAN as a research associate and recently got promoted to Research Fellow. His current research interests include the design and development of micro/mesoporous materials for carbon capture/conversion, energy storage, and various environmental applications.
Jangmee Lee
Dr Jang Mee Lee received her BS degree in Chemistry (2011), MS degree (2013), and PhD degree from Ewha Womans University, Korea. Currently, she is working as a Research Fellow at GICAN, the University of Newcastle. Her research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of low-dimensional inorganic nanosheet-based nanohybrids for a diverse range of energy-related applications including CO2 capture, photocatalysis, Li/Na-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and electrocatalysis.
Ajay Karakoti
Dr Ajay Karakoti is an Associate Professor at the GICAN, The University of Newcastle, Australia. Dr Karakoti is a full-scale materials researcher and works on the synthesis of bare and functionalized nanoparticles for applications in biology, catalysis, and sensing. His research is focused on the applications and detailed surface and bulk characterization of nanoparticles. A significant portion of his research deals with developing a detailed understanding of the reaction of cerium oxide nanoparticles with reactive oxygen species and the consequences of size, structure, doping, and surface functional groups on its enzyme-like activity.
Dongyuan Zhao
Prof. Dongyuan Zhao received his BS (1984) and PhD (1990) from Jilin University. After his post-doctoral experiences in the Weizmann Institute of Science and the University of California at Santa Barbara, he joined Fudan University as a Professor in 1998. He was selected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 and as a member of The World Academy of Sciences in 2010. His research interests focus on the synthesis of mesoporous materials for catalysis, energy, water purification, and biomedical applications.
Khalid Al-Bahily
Dr Khalid Al-Bahily has been the director of SABIC CRD at KAUST, Saudi Arabia since 2014. Prior to this, he worked as a senior manager for the Polypropylene Catalysis Section, SABIC, Saudi Arabia. He received his MSc from Texas A&M University, United States in 2004 and a PhD in Chemistry from the University of Ottawa in 2011. Dr Albahily was awarded the Pierre Laberge Prize by the University of Ottawa for the best PhD thesis and was also the winner of the IUPAC prize for outstanding academic achievements. Dr Albahily has published in top-quality journals such as JACS and Angewandte Chemie and has authored more than 20 patents.
Ajayan Vinu
Prof. Ajayan Vinu is the Global Innovation Chair and Director at the Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials, University of Newcastle. In his 20 years of research, Prof. Vinu has made tremendous contributions in the field of nanoporous materials and their application in sensing, energy storage, fuel cells, adsorption and separation, and catalysis. His contribution to the field of nanoporous materials is also clearly reflected by the Science Watch international ranking as he is one of the top 15 researchers in the field and has 400 original research papers in high impact factor journals with ca. 19500 citations and an H-index of 72. He was selected as an academician and fellow of World Academy of Ceramics, World Academy of Arts and Sciences, and Asia-Pacific Academy of Materials, and is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, the Royal Australian Chemical Institute, and the Maharashtra Academy of Science.
1. Introduction
The rise in the global population and increasing industrialization have created a high demand for energy, which is a much-needed requirement for continued economic development.1 The main drawback of the energy generating units (EGUs) and related industries, however, is the use of fossil fuels for combustion, which, undoubtedly, emit large quantities of CO2 into the atmosphere.2 Consequently, the past decades have witnessed a continuous build-up of excessive CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, which has resulted in global climate change, the most challenging issue of the 21st century.3 The latest CO2 emission data as per the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii suggest that the current concentration of CO2 sits at ∼410 ppm (Fig. 1), which is excessively higher as compared to what it was in the middle of the last century and has become a huge environmental concern.4 The fact that it is not easy to replace fossil fuels as the source of energy in the foreseeable future is even more concerning as it is linked with global warming as well as hypercapnia and could impact every living species on the planet. For example, in open spaces, a high concentration of CO2 would mean decreased availability of oxygen required for respiration and the effect will be more pronounced in the case of confined compartments such as spaceships or submarines. Most importantly, it has been predicted that the concentration of CO2 would reach 950 ppm by the end of this century, which could bring drastic changes in the atmospheric chemistry of the planet.5 The cumulative effect of the above-mentioned points has resulted in a serious concern for government organizations all over the globe and has triggered significant research and development in the area of carbon capture. In line with these developments, various research and non-research strategies have been explored for mitigating anthropogenic climate change due to CO2 emission, thus constructing a global model against carbon emissions for modern society.
 Fig. 1  Global trend for the increase in CO2 concentration in the last 10 years measured at different observatories contained in the Global Monitoring Division (GMD) of the Earth System Research Laboratory (ESRL). 
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is one of the promising technologies that could be utilized to minimise and/or reduce CO2 emissions from the point sources of heavy CO2 emissions such as power plants.6 CCS involves CO2 capture and transportation of the captured CO2 to the storage site where it could be stored under high pressure for a longer period.7 The biggest challenge in the whole process is the operation of CO2 capture as the costs associated with this process are very high and hinder the applicability of CCS in the commercial sector. Despite the challenges, CCS has been commercially deployed across some places around the world. For instance, Dowell et al. have previously reviewed the current status of CCS including the technology readiness levels of CCS technologies on a global scale.8 It was reported that United States is notably ahead of the rest of the world in capturing the highest amounts of CO2 (7–8.4 MtCO2 per year) using CCS, followed by China (0.4–2 MtCO2 per year) and Europe (0.7–1 MtCO2 per year). For more detailed information on CCS, readers are directed to some of the recent authoritative review articles in the field.9–12
There are two primary processes involved in CO2 capture, namely, pre- and post-combustion, and their schematic illustration is depicted in Fig. 2. Low-pressure CO2 capture, referred to as post-combustion CO2 capture, is expected to be more relevant for addressing climate change challenges as the highest number of the current point sources of emissions, such as electricity generating units (EGUs), can only work with post-combustion capture technologies to limit CO2 emission into the atmosphere. Among a mixture of gases emitted as flue gas stream from power plants, CO2 can be effectively captured via chemical absorption using amine solutions such as monoethanolamine (MEA) and diethanolamine (DEA). Post combustion CO2 capture is a subject of intense research within the scientific community as its operation is possible at conditions close to the ambient conditions. The conventional amine-based adsorption technology has been implemented on a large commercial scale.13 However, the harmful effects of the toxic volatiles, corrosion, hazardous by-products, solvent loss, and most importantly, high energy penalties for the regeneration process14 are some of the limitations of the system. Calcium looping, which involves the conversion of CO2 into carbonates, is another promising approach for post-combustion CO2 capture. However, this technology is expensive for industries due to its high capital costs.15 Apart from post-combustion CO2 capture, the high-pressure capture of CO2, which is usually referred to as pre-combustion CO2 capture, is another subject of interest that involves CO2 capture before the combustion of fossil fuels (integrated gasification combined cycle – IGCC) or natural gas (natural gas combined cycle – NGCC) in the respective type of power plants.16,17 As a minor stream for CO2 capture, oxy-fuel combustion is another area of interest, which involves the combustion of the fuel with O2 and CO2, with the latter being captured in the exhaust flue gas stream from a mixture of CO2 and H2O.18
 Fig. 2  Schematic of CO2 capture in post-combustion and pre-combustion scenarios. 
Taking into account the difficulty in CO bond cleavage in the CO2 molecule due to from its high bond energy of 750 kJ mol−1, the release of hazardous products, and the requirement of high energy regeneration of the chemical absorbents, the physical adsorption strategy using porous materials is considered as an attractive alternative to conventional chemical adsorption using aggressive amine solvents.19 Porous materials with pore sizes in the nano dimensions could play a vital role in the CCS field as they not only offer a high adsorption capacity and good selectivity but also have the advantage of low cost. Besides, the properties of these materials can be easily manipulated to fit the prospect of optimal adsorption energy for CO2 molecules. Recently, significant research progress has been made in the field of micro and mesoporous materials for CO2 capture, which is primarily focussed on materials such as metal–organic frameworks (MOF),20 zeolites,21 zeolitic imidazole frameworks (ZIF),22 porous activated biocarbons,23 porous polymers,24 porous polymer foams,25 and mesoporous carbon nitrides.26 Although various factors including specific surface area, pore-volume, pore size, density, and the surface functional groups contribute to CO2 adsorption, recent studies on CO2 adsorption with a variety of nanomaterials having tunable pore diameter suggest that the pore size of the adsorbent is a key factor; in particular, materials with micropores are well-suited for the low-pressure capture of CO2 and hence, these are highly useful for post-combustion CO2 capture.27 On the other hand, the presence of pores with sizes greater than those of micropores and a large pore volume are ideal factors for the adsorption of CO2 at high pressures.28
As shown in Fig. 3, several aspects of the CO2 molecule and the capture process need to be considered while designing efficient materials for CO2 capture.29 Despite the recent advances in porous materials in terms of their structural engineering, surface functionalization, and on par adsorption capacities with the conventional amine solvents, their success in terms of technology readiness levels has not reached the commercial scale. Therefore, it becomes imperative to add more knowledge to this research field with active participation from funding agencies to further delve into the potential of porous materials for CO2 capture in large-scale commercial deployment. Although it is difficult to completely solve the existing issue of CO2 through CCS using porous materials, however, it is strongly believed that it would, at least, minimise CO2 emissions and help address climate change.
 Fig. 3  Properties of CO2 molecule, CO2 capture process requirements, and material attributes for CO2 capture. 
Another prospect that can help to address the increasing CO2 crisis is to transform the captured CO2 into useful products including clean fuels and chemicals through cost-effective and environmentally benign pathways including photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. The underlying principle of CO2 conversion into different species such as CO, HCOO−, and CH3OH is that it requires electron transfer, which requires a catalyst that could provide a platform with a greater number of catalytic centres and high porosity for high charge transfer and high CO2 conversion rates. With porous materials, CO2 conversion could be accomplished in a single system, wherein the same material captures CO2 owing to its porosity, CO2 could be desorbed, and then the material acts as a catalyst for the conversion of desorbed CO2 by utilizing its catalytic features.30 MOF and POP based porous heterogeneous catalysts are good candidates for CO2 capture and conversion owing to their high surface areas, microporous crystalline structures, metal active centres, tunable bandgaps, and easy manipulation of the surface with functional moieties.31,32 In comparison, bare zeolites and porous carbons show relatively lesser activity for CO2 conversion due to the lack of appropriate catalytic features.
This review article covers the recent research progress made in the field of porous materials for CO2 capture and conversion. From the materials’ perspective, a thorough overview of the porosity of the materials and their functionalization is discussed. Much more emphasis is given to microporous materials for CO2 capture in terms of their tunable pore structures and surface chemistry manipulations for low-pressure CO2 capture. The scope of mesoporous materials for CO2 capture at high pressures is also briefly touched upon. A special focus is also given to the recent advances in the field of CCS using porous materials and the role of physico-chemical and structural properties of the materials on the CO2 capture performance of the porous materials. Some selected examples and highlighted emerging trends in carbon capture and conversion with a special focus on the adsorbent materials are provided. Porous materials as heterogeneous catalysts for CO2 conversion are also discussed based on their porous, surface, and other functional features that control their catalytic activity and selectivity. The review concludes with a summary and a discussion of the outlook of porous materials for CO2 capture and conversion.
2. Designing an ideal CO2 sorbent
The adsorption of CO2 onto the surface of porous materials could occur through either physical or chemical pathways but the mechanism of CO2 capture is strongly dependent on their pore geometry, structural configuration, and surface chemistry. By far, the dominant factor in CO2 adsorption over porous materials is the pore/volume filling, which is a direct result of their highly developed porous features such as surface area and pore volume. The tuning of these porous features in either microporous or mesoporous domains provides precise control for enhancing CO2 capture at either low or high pressures, respectively. For example, MOFs, zeolites, and porous organic polymers (POPs) possess high microporosity and hence show good capabilities for CO2 adsorption at low pressures or post-combustion conditions. Nanoporous carbons offer ease of manipulation of their pore structure to either micro or mesoporous dimensions, which may be suitable for adsorption at both low and high pressure conditions. On the other hand, mesoporous materials including porous silica or carbon or hybrid materials with pore diameter larger than 2 nm are well suited for high-pressure CO2 capture. In addition to pore filling, the surface functionalization and/or the doping of porous materials with basic functional groups and metal centres provide space for further interactions such as acid–base, electrostatic, and hydrogen bonding.33 These interactive forces depend on the type of porous material, surface charge, surface functional groups, framework composition, polarizability, and quadrupole moment of CO2 and help in further improving the overall adsorption capacity. Porous materials such as MOFs, zeolites, and POPs, which usually possess inherent metal active sites and can also be easily functionalized with basic moieties, show all three types of interactions with CO2 molecules.34–36 The doping or the surface functionalization of nanoporous carbons with basic species usually supports enhanced CO2 adsorption as a result of the acid–base interactions. However, the presence of doped nitrogen can also be beneficial for generating hydrogen bonding between the carbon surface and CO2 molecules, which is an added advantage for increasing the overall CO2 adsorption.37 It is surmised that the doped N atoms could alter the electronic state of the H atoms in the –CH and –NH groups on porous carbons and allow the formation of hydrogen bonding between H and the O atom of CO2 molecule.
An ideal CO2 adsorbent should have high selectivity and adsorption capacity, low heat of adsorption (Qst), high recyclability, good thermal and chemical stability, and fast kinetics, together with high cost-effectiveness. These set of criteria, as represented in Fig. 4, for designing an ideal adsorbent suited for CO2 capture under different conditions will be discussed in this section.
 Fig. 4  Principal criteria for designing an ideal sorbent for CO2 capture. 
Firstly, the energetics of the CO2 capture process is one of the most important criteria to understand the nature of the bonding between the porous materials and CO2 molecules. In general, the concentration of CO2 to be captured in the post-combustion scenario is much lower (15–16%) than that in the pre-combustion process (25–35%).38 This means that an adsorbent, which could even establish weaker interactions with CO2 based on physisorption, would serve the purpose for the latter case; however, in the former case, an adsorbent that can bind to CO2 based on chemisorption would be needed. More specifically, an adsorbent with meso/macropores will satisfy the requirements for pre-combustion CO2 capture whereas a highly microporous adsorbent with suitable functionalization would be more useful for post-combustion CO2 capture. The strength of interactions between the porous material and CO2 molecules is quantified as the isosteric heat of adsorption (Qst). A high Qst value results in high energy-intensive regeneration of the spent material whereas the CO2 adsorption capacity could be compromised at relatively lower Qst values. The Qst value for porous materials varies depending upon their configuration. Among porous materials, pristine MOFs usually possess Qst in the range of 25–35 kJ mol−1, which, however, could increase up to 50 kJ mol−1 when the MOF is modified with functional groups such as amines.39,40 The Qst value for zeolites41 resides in the range of 30–60 kJ mol−1, while porous carbons usually show Qst of ∼20–30 kJ mol−1. Porous organic polymers and their functionalized derivatives generally show Qst in the range of 20–50 kJ mol−1.42 These Qst values for porous materials represent that the process of CO2 adsorption is predominantly physical, which could also be shifted towards chemisorption with the introduction of different functional groups. Any new adsorbent should have lesser material regeneration costs in comparison to the industrial absorbent MEA (84 kJ mol−1),43 the regeneration of which accounts for ∼30% of the total power produced with the overall cost of CO2 capture estimated at 40–100$ per 1 tonne of CO2.44 Therefore, a right balance between the adsorption capacity and Qst needs to be realized. For the industrial-scale application of any new material, Qst should lie in the range of 35–50 kJ mol−1 and its working capacity should be high enough to compete with the working capacity of MEA (1.5 mmol g−1) under similar conditions.45
Secondly, high and selective adsorption of CO2 from a mixture of gases in the flue stream is the utmost criteria for any porous adsorbent. Porous materials such as MOFs, zeolites, and POPS are well suited for high CO2 adsorption and selectivity in the post-combustion scenario, wherein the partial pressure of CO2 is close to 0.10–0.15 bar. This is attributed to their high intrinsic microporosity and the presence of metal active centres and other functionalities. Porous carbons with suitable surface functionalization could perform well in low-pressure CO2 capture although the selectivity might not be high enough to compete with other materials, whereas mesoporous materials are more suited for high-pressure CO2 capture. The separation of CO2 from CH4 or N2 in the natural gas processing sector is another area where the CO2 selectivity is an important parameter. The CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivities are usually calculated based on the relative mole fractions of the individual components in the binary mixture. These can be formulated as S = (xCO2/xN2) (yCO2/yN2) and (xCO2/xCH4) (yCO2/yCH4), where x and y refer to the mole fractions of the components in the adsorbed and the bulk phase, respectively.46 For example, the well-known Mg-MOF-74 shows a selectivity of ∼150 at 50 °C, which is almost double in comparison to the selectivity of the NaX zeolite (∼87) under the typical post-combustion scenario.47 Porous carbons usually possess lower selectivity than MOFs/zeolites48 and porous organic polymers49 due to the nature of adsorption on them being purely physical.
Thirdly, thermal, chemical, and water stability should be addressed. The combustion of coal for power generation releases flue stream containing a mixture of waste gases and water vapour. In a typical post-combustion capture, CO2 in the flue gas stream comes out at a low partial pressure of ∼15 bar but at a high temperature of 40–80 °C, which, along with the presence of moisture, presents a challenging situation for its separation. However, the presence of other multiple components in the flue stream including gases other than CO2 such as N2, NO2, and SO2 also lead to significant stability issues. This requires a material that possesses high CO2 adsorption capacity, high selectivity, high tolerance to water, and requires lesser contact time with the adsorbate CO2 gas. In terms of porous materials, MOFs, zeolites, and POPs with high surface areas, microcrystalline structures, and metal active centres can achieve high CO2 adsorption and selectivity; however, most of them are prone to degradation in the presence of moisture. These porous adsorbents along with nanoporous carbons usually operate via physisorption, which can lead to diminished CO2 adsorption at high temperatures and low pressures. However, their surface could be suitably manipulated by introducing functional groups for stronger interactions with CO2 in post-combustion capture. Therefore, the intended adsorbent should be robust, must have good thermal/chemical stability, and enhanced resistance towards water for maximising CO2 adsorption. Porous materials could suffer from either of the above-mentioned limitations, which affect their performance for CO2 capture.
The fourth important consideration is related to the rate of CO2 uptake by the porous materials from a mixture of gases. Any porous material with the fast kinetics would be suitable for this purpose; however, it could be limited by the presence of many extremely small pores in materials such as MOFs and zeolites. Since CO2 needs to access pores smaller than or equal to its kinetic diameter of 0.33 nm and adsorb strictly physically, fast and efficient diffusion of CO2 is desirable. The diffusion in the micropores is relatively more significant at low pressures but at high pressures, CO2 is occupied in the total available volume comprising micro and larger sized pores. Since the diffusion of CO2 into the micropores in the early stages of adsorption is the rate-determining step, it is expected that any porous material with good CO2 adsorption capacity would be able to accomplish this step in a relatively short time of 2–4 minutes.50 The adsorption kinetics might occur at a faster rate when the porous materials are either decorated with amine, nitrogen, and alkali metal or metaloxyhydroxide functional groups due to enhanced acid–base interactions.51
The fifth significant factor affecting the commercialization of porous materials-based CO2 adsorption technology is the recyclability of the spent material. Commercial amine-based solvents such as MEA can be recycled without much loss in the CO2 capture capacity but, as previously mentioned, it is accompanied by huge energy penalties due to high regeneration temperatures, excessive loss of solvents, and corrosion of the equipment. It would be much easier to desorb CO2 from the porous materials at relatively low temperatures and the regenerated materials are not expected to lose much of their CO2 adsorption capacity owing to the physical nature of CO2 adsorption.
The sixth and perhaps the most significant factor for the commercialization of the CO2 capture process is the overall cost. The cost of the whole process is directly linked with the quality of the materials and their cost. In terms of the porous adsorbent material, the cost will be directly dependent on the quantity of the materials required by the industries, which ultimately depends on their effectiveness in carbon capture. Ideally, a solid adsorbent with high CO2 adsorption capacity, high CO2 selectivity, good stability at variable temperatures and in the presence of impurities in the flue gas including water, faster kinetics, and high recyclability with low-temperature requirements for desorption would be desirable for the industry. The adsorbent with the above properties would be the best alternative for the existing amine-based absorption method for carbon capture. Based on the above factors, the research and development for the design of porous adsorbents have gained significant momentum recently. In the next section, we will discuss the recent advances in the design of various porous adsorbents with different functionalities for CO2 adsorption.52
From a mechanistic point of view, porous features including surface area, pore volume, and pore size have a direct effect on CO2 capture by a porous material. Generally, ultramicroporous materials with pore size <0.8 nm are very well adapted for CO2 capture at a very low partial pressure of CO2 (0.15 bar), which is encountered in industrial post-combustion CO2 capture.53 The presence of ultramicropores presents an ideal space for facilitating easier movement of the CO2 molecule with a kinetic diameter of 0.33 nm within the porous matrix. At high pressures, the CO2 molecules tend to occupy all the available space after the initial adsorption leads to the filling of the micropores. The presence of meso and macroporous structures is beneficial for high-pressure CO2 capture. The total surface area and pore volume of a material is an indication of the overall CO2 adsorption by a porous material; however, the percentage of micropores and mesopores of these two along with the pore size determine CO2 capture at low and high pressures. Materials with a high surface area and pore volume might not respond well during low-pressure CO2 capture if the contribution of the microporous features is diminished. The large-sized or perhaps the small-sized pores could be functionalized to enhance CO2 capture.54 However, the common problem encountered with surface functionalization is the blockage of pores, which might limit the CO2 capture ability of a porous material. Therefore, careful consideration and balance of all the porous features and surface functionalization is crucial for achieving high CO2 capture ability of porous materials under a given set of temperature and pressure conditions.
3. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
MOFs consist of three-dimensional coordination polymer networks, constructed by the combination of metal ions/clusters with organic linkers/ligands.55 An illimitable number of MOFs has been realised by altering the composition of the linkers in the organic phase or the metal ions. Owing to their unique structural properties including high specific surface area, active metal sites, and tunable pore structures, MOFs have recently attracted significant interest, which has seen their evolution into the forefront of many industrial applications such as sensing,56 gas separation,57 and catalysis.58 Significant contributions in the field of MOFs have been made by Yaghi et al.,59 Kitagawa et al.,60 Batten and Robson,61 and G. Ferey.62 Some of the representative MOFs are listed in Fig. 5.63 In addition to the attractive structural chemistry of MOFs, the textural parameters such as extremely high BET surface area (∼7000 m2 g−1) and high pore volume (4.4 cm3 g−1) along with easier manipulation of the pore structure and surface functionalization are the other interesting features of MOFs, which present a strong case for their application in the field of CO2 capture.64 A high surface area to weight ratio in the MOFs is an extremely crucial factor for their CO2 capture capability at low pressures, which allows them to display better CO2 adsorption than other materials such as zeolites. The MOFs can also be suitably exploited for the selective capture of CO2 using the polarizable force of the CO2 molecule (polarizability: 26.5 × 10−25 cm3 and quadrupole moment: 4.3 × 10−26 esu cm2). For example, a 3D MOF, [Ni(bt-zip)(H2btzip)]·2DMF·2H2O (H2btzip = 4,6-bis(triazol-1-yl)isophthalic acid) with a polar surface acquired from carboxyl groups (–COOH) displayed a better selectivity for CO2 (29.1) than that for CH4 (25.90) or CO (19.5).65 This is due to the enhanced interactions between the CO2 molecule and the polar channels of the MOF as the polarizability of CO2 is higher than that of CH4 or CO.
 Fig. 5  The crystalline structure of some well-known MOFs. Adapted with permission from ref. 63, copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Another area of interest is the applicability of MOFs under humid conditions. For example, a loss in the adsorption capacity for different pollutants in the presence of water has been observed with the reference framework HKUST-1 (Cu-BTC). This occurs due to the shortening of the pore size from 0.45 to 0.35 nm in hydrated MOF, which prevents the entry of the adsorbate molecules (Fig. 6).81 In contrast, theoretical simulations cum experimental data for the same material Cu-BTC proved that the presence of water enhances CO2 adsorption through increased interactions between the electric field generated by water molecules and the polar character of CO2 molecules.82
 Fig. 6  Adsorption of water molecules in HKUST-1. The small oxygen atoms at the top of the blue pyramids belong to the absorbed water molecules. Purple, green, and yellow are the different sized pores of the MOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 81, copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Very recently, a new approach known as “Crumple zone” (Fig. 7) has come into light, in which a simple alteration in the ligand and surface topology leads to an enhancement in the structural stability of the MOF under humid conditions.83 This approach could be extended to the adsorption of CO2 by MOFs in the presence of moisture.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the ‘crumple zone’ mechanism in MOFs. Water adsorption for a water sensitive MOF with (a) and without (b) sacrificial bonds. Note: grey rods – ligands, red spheres – O, white spheres – H, blue and yellow spheres – copper centres in different environments; green dashed lines – sacrificial bonds. Adapted with permission from ref. 83, copyright (2018) Springer Nature. 
Although the application of MOFs in gas storage relies largely on their pore structure, however, the functionalization of the inner and outer surface with different groups that could potentially increase their adsorption efficiency and impart more stability has also garnered a great deal of interest.84 The typical approaches for the functionalization of MOFs include the generation of open metal sites (OMSs), modification with Lewis basic sites (LBSs) such as nitrogen, and the incorporation of polar functional groups including halides, hydroxides, and carboxylates.85 For example, the functionalization of the open coordination sites in the MOF Mgdobdc, having Mg(II) ions linked to 2,5-dioxido-1,4-benzenecarboxylate (dobdc) organic ligands, with ethylenediamine (ED-Mgdobdc) caused the pore volume and surface area to reduce from 0.57 to 0.40 cm3 g−1 and from 1094 to 469 m2 g−1, respectively. However, the corresponding CO2 adsorption capacity increased from 1.35 to 1.51 mmol g−1 in dry airflow containing 400 ppm CO2 and argon.86 The presence of open metal sites or the groups with polar character could also increase the efficiency of the MOFs towards CO2 adsorption.
Overall, a synergistic effect of all the factors including the structure, functional groups, pore sizes, and the metallic sites needs to be taken into consideration while considering MOFs for CO2 capture. A summary of different MOFs and their CO2 adsorption capacities under various conditions is provided in Table 1. In the forthcoming subsections, we will explore a few MOFs categorically and discuss their CO2 adsorption capacities under pre- and post-combustion capture scenarios.
Table 1 Textural features and CO2 adsorption characteristics of MOFs under different conditions




Metal–organic framework

S
BET (m2 g−1)

V
t (cm3 g−1)
CO2 adsorption characteristics
Ref.



Q/P/T (mmol g−1/bar/°C)

S

x/a/Sy/b

Q
st (kJ mol−1)





S
BET – Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area, Vt – total pore volume, Q – amount of CO2 adsorption reduced to the nearest significant figure, P – pressure, T – temperature, S – selectivity at x = 0 °C/1 bar and a = mixture ratio of CO2 and N2, selectivity at y = 25 °C/1 bar and b = mixture ratio of CO2 and CH4, Qst – isosteric heat of adsorption, o – open metal sites MOF, fl – breathing/flexible MOFs, fu – functionalized MOFs, MOF-74 linker dobdc – 2,5-dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate, BTT – 1,3,5-benzenetristetrazolate, G – guest of DMA = (N,N′-dimethylacetamide) and H2O, SHF – sheffield framework, DMF – dimethylformamide, ZU – Zhejiang University, Sm – samarium, DMA – dimethylacetamide, and HL = 5,5′-(2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-phenylene)bis(methylene)bis(azanediyl)diisophthalic acid, PEI – polyethyleneimine, TAEA – tris(2-aminoethyl)amine.





oNU-100
6143
2.82
46.4/40/25
—
—

66




oFeMOF-74
1536
—
7.2/1.1/25
—
34.1

67




oMgMOF-74
1690
0.93
7.9/1/25
—
42.0

68




oPCN-68
5109
2.17
30.4/35/25
—
21.2

69




oInOF-15
935.6


3.5/1/0
98.2x/15:85a
31.1

70




oJLU-Liu46
1787
0.87
4.6/1/25
6.5y/5:95b
—

71




oJLU-Liu47
1800
0.90
4.8/1/25
7.3y/5:95b
—

71




oHKUST-1
1326
0.58
1.8/0.48/30
—
—

72




oCu5(BTT)3
701
0.30
0.6/0.15/25
40y/15:85a
31.4

73




flSHF-61-DMF
2.9
—
2.4/18/25
—
22

74




flSHF-61-CHCl3
544
—
6.2/19.5/25
—
35.8

74




flZU-66
177
0.40
4.6/1/25
355y/15:85a
39

75




fl[Sm (HL) (DMA)2]·DMA·2H2O
—
—
3.8/20/0
22x/—
29

76




fuPEI/MIL-101(Cr)
33.5
0.13
3.6/0.15/25
—
∼120

77




fuCAU-1/Al4(OH)2(OCH3)4(H2N–BDC)3
1268
1.32
7.2/1/0
101x/—
48

78




fuMIL-101-NH2
3176
1.6
3.4/1/25
∼40y/15:85a
∼30

79




fuCr-MIL-101-SO3H-TAEA
—
—
2.3/0.15/40
—
87

80





3.1 MOFs with unsaturated open metal sites (UOMSs)
UOMSs in MOFs are useful for enhancing their CO2 adsorption capacities in the post-combustion conditions of CO2 capture. The UOMSs are generated by heating or vacuuming of the metal atoms that are partially coordinated with the solvent molecules in the MOFs. The type of metal cation in the MOFs plays a crucial role in tuning the strength of interaction with the CO2 molecule. It is believed that these metallic sites can generate electric fields, which also provide a perfect platform for the efficient separation of polar and non-polar gases in a mixture, for example, CO2 (polar) and CH4 (non-polar). Recently, the M-BTT open site framework with sodalite and M-BTT (H3[(M4Cl)3(BTT)8], M = M2+ metal, BTT = 1,3,5-benzenetristetrazolate) has been reported (Fig. 8a).87 The van der Waals corrected density functional theory (DFT+D2) simulation studies showed that the binding energies for CO2 adsorption are significantly enhanced (73.2–80.2 kJ mol−1) in the presence of early transition metals such as Ti and V in the UOMSs as compared to the binding energies (32.2–50.8 kJ mol−1) with UOMSs created by later transition metals (Cr to Zn) or the binding energies (60.6–67.2 kJ mol−1) obtained with alkaline earth metals (Mg and Ca).88
 Fig. 8  (a) 3,8-Connected three-dimensional net derived from the structure of [Mn(DMF)6]3[(Mn4Cl)3(BTT)8(H2O)12]2·42DMF·11H2O·20CH3OH. Gray 3-connected nodes represent BTT3-ligands, while green 8-connected nodes represent square-planar Mn4Cl clusters surrounded by eight tetrazolate rings. Adapted with permission from ref. 87, copyright (2006) American Chemical Society. (b) The structure of Mg-MOF-74. Adapted with permission from ref. 92, copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) The schematic illustration of CO2 uniaxial rotation at the open Mg2+ site in Mg2(dobdc). Gray – C, red – O, and green – Mg atoms; H atoms are omitted for clarity. The blue circle is the arbitrary rotation axis. Adapted with permission from ref. 91, copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Generally, strong binding energies for CO2 adsorption rely heavily on the population of antibonding molecular orbitals of the transition metal and the resulting interaction between the metal dz2 orbital and the lone pairs on the oxygen in the CO2 molecule. In case of Ti/V possessing d electrons less than 4, empty antibonding orbitals could be formed in UOMSs without any geometrical distortion, which attract CO2 molecules with strong affinity. The occupation of d ≥ 4 at high spin would fill up the antibonding orbital, thus weakening the binding energies for CO2 molecule. Using similar simulation studies, the same group also reported that the interaction between the CO2 molecules and MOFs can be altered by introducing an organic ligand in the MOF. A good combination of the UOMSs and the organic ligand can support a significant enhancement in the CO2 adsorption energy. The group studied sodalite type frameworks (BTT) and concluded that by simply altering the organic ligand and the metal centre, the binding energy could be controlled in the range from 34.8 kJ mol−1 for CaBTTri to 64.5 kJ mol−1 for MgBTT.89 Higher CO2 adsorption energy is expected to enhance the CO2 adsorption capacity of the MOFs.
The presence of UOMSs could help to increase the effective charge on the metal, leading to an increase in the strength of interactions with the CO2 molecules and resulting in enhanced CO2 adsorption, as was demonstrated in the M-CPO-27 frameworks, wherein metal M is Mg, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn.90 Among these frameworks, Mg-CPO showed the highest CO2 adsorption of 9.0 mmol g−1 at 25 °C and 1 bar. The GGA simulation showed that the CO2 molecule undergoes head-on coordination with UOMSs, which not only deforms the linearity of the CO2 molecule slightly (178°–180° in the entire studied sample) but also alters the bond lengths (CO bond closer to the open metal becomes longer and vice versa). The initial Qst follows the order of Mg2+ > Ni2+ > Co2+ ∼ Fe2+ > Mn2+ > Zn2+, which depends upon the effective charge of the open metal cation site as the first incoming CO2 molecule is adsorbed exclusively on the open metal site. Similarly, the open metal sites in MOF Mg2(dobdc) (H4dobdc = 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid), Mg-MOF-74, and CPO-27-Mg were shown to interact with the CO2 molecule, which rotates at a fixed angle in a uniaxial fashion, as shown in Fig. 8c and d.91
The adsorption of CO2 has been reported on numerous occasions for the MOF-74 series of materials that contain UOMSs along with high thermal stability and well-developed textural parameters (Fig. 8b).92 These MOFs can be made with different metal ions including Mg and Co. It has been reported that the properties of these materials significantly change with the synthetic method employed. For example, a series of Ni-MOF-74 materials synthesized using Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and H4 dhtp (2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid) via a microwave reactor (MW), hydrothermal treatment (HT), and reflux condensation (CE), respectively, possess open metal Ni2+ sites.93 These open metal sites are expected to increase the polarization and the binding energy, which are the key factors for enhancing the interaction with CO2 molecules, thus resulting in high CO2 adsorption capacity at low-pressure conditions. In addition, the preparation of materials using microwave radiation is considered as a better synthetic approach as compared to the other two conventional methods as the MW approach requires much shorter time. The choice of the synthetic method affects the morphology and the textural parameters of the materials. The MW, HT, and CE show rice-like, cauliflower-like, and broken rice-like morphology, respectively. The textural parameters are better developed in CE, followed by MW and HT materials. The change in the synthetic methods also affects the nature and availability of the open metal sites on the surface of MOF-74 and is reflected in the final CO2 adsorption capacity. The three materials showed CO2 adsorptivity of 3.47 (MW), 2.44 (HT), and 3.66 (CE) mmol g−1, respectively, at 0.15 bar and 25 °C. Besides, the Qst values of all the materials were in the range of 20–38 kJ mol−1, which indicates the physical nature of the adsorption process. The lack of open sites in HT material is responsible for lower CO2 adsorption as compared to the other two (MW and CE), which was confirmed with in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) measurements. These findings are significant in terms of manipulating the UOMSs for designing MOFs with better capabilities for CO2 adsorption. Among the MOFs, Mg-MOF-74 registered the highest CO2 adsorption capacity of ca. 8 mmol g−1 at 1 bar and 25 °C. Other MOF-74 with metal ions such as Ni, Zn, and Co registered much lower CO2 adsorption capacity than that of Mg-MOF-74.94,95 This unique performance of Mg-MOF-74 was attributed to the increased ionic character of the Mg–O bond, which supports the enhanced adsorption of CO2. It was assumed that the higher specific surface area of Mg-MOF-74 as compared to that of the other MOF-74 was also the possible reason for its enhanced CO2 adsorption capacity. These findings revealed that the role of the metal ions, the surface properties, and the presence of UOMSs should be carefully considered for the design of the best adsorbent for CO2 capture. The high CO2 adsorption resulting from the strong end-on coordinate interactions between CO2 and the open metal sites in M-MOF-74 (M = Mg, Ni, and Cu) has been demonstrated on other occasions as well.96–98 Although MOFs show good CO2 adsorption capacities at low pressures under dry conditions, however, the ongoing research on how the MOFs behave under humid conditions is quite a challenge in this field. The most striking feature of the M-MOF-74 materials is that the CO2 adsorption capacities are increased in the presence of moisture. For example, the computational calculations based on the pore space partition energy for Zn-MOF-74 indicated a higher adsorption capacity and a better selectivity for CO2 molecules in a binary mixture of CO2 and H2O.99 In this particular study, it was revealed that the presence of water leads to a reduction in the pore size so that it is closer to the diameter of CO2 molecules, which is a crucial factor for increasing CO2 adsorption. However, the regeneration and recyclability of Mg-MOF-74 for CO2 adsorption in the presence of water is poor. This is mainly due to the difference in the competition between adsorption of water and CO2 molecules on the Mg sites. Hence, suitable MOFs with different metal ions must be developed based on the nature of gas adsorption. MIL (Matériaux Institut Lavoisier) is another popular series of frameworks explored for CO2 adsorption at the open metal sites. The Fe-MIL-127 and MIL-88A frameworks adsorbed a high amount of CO2 (5.24 mmol g−1 and 4.95 mmol g−1, respectively) at 30 °C/1 bar in a binary mixture of CO2 and N2.100 The adsorption isotherm data fitted with the Langmuir model indicated that one unsaturated open Fe2+ site could coordinatively bind to one molecule of CO2. As for the selectivity, the dynamic breakthrough measurements at the post-combustion CO2 capture conditions suggested that these two MOFs favourably adsorbed CO2 over N2, which can be ascribed to the higher polarizability (2.63 × 10−24 cm3) and quadrupole moment (13.4 × 10−40 C m2) of CO2 than that of N2 (polarizability: 1.76 × 10−24 cm3, quadrupole moment: 4.7 × 10−40 C m2). Furthermore, a decrease in the adsorption capacity was observed in the presence of moisture in the source mixture of gases due to the difference in the competition between adsorption of water and CO2 on the surface. This behaviour is completely different from that observed for HKUST-1. It is believed that the pore size of the different MOFs and the amount of relative humidity could be crucial factors in deciding the increase or decrease in CO2 adsorption by a MOF in the presence of moisture.
3.2 Flexible/breathing MOFs
Rigid MOFs possess the capability to resist changes in their porosity or the structural framework even upon perturbation with external stimuli such as temperature, pressure, or guest molecules, whereas flexible MOFs are prone to structural collapse and concomitant reduction in the porosity or pore size with an external stimuli or in and out movement of the guest solvent molecules. The main structural transformation that occurs in flexible frameworks after the removal of the solvent molecule is the reduction in pore size, which is detrimental to the gas adsorption capability. To overcome this issue, fine-tuning of the pore size using pressure and temperature variations on the flexible MOFs can be a solution for the better adsorption of gases such as CO2.101 Such frameworks that undergo pore structural transformation are also called breathing MOFs. The flexibility of the porous structure in breathing MOFs is marked by the appearance of a sudden gate opening step in the adsorption isotherms. There is no gas adsorption before the gate opening step; however, the gas molecules could go in after the pores are open for gas diffusion. This is a significant mechanistic pathway for the selective adsorption of gases in a mixture of CO2 and N2 or CO2 and CH4. However, the underlying challenges of confined gas types passing through the pore openings and limited selectivity for only one gas still exist and need to be addressed carefully. For example, the rigid Cr-MIL-101 does not show any changes in the crystal structure before and after gas adsorption; however, the breathing MOF Cr-MIL-53 undergoes significant changes in its crystal structure from monoclinic to orthorhombic phases.102
Structural flexibility arising from the framework with organic ligands could have a highly beneficial impact on the gas selectivity. The staggering CO2/N2 selectivity of the flexible 3D framework of [Zn2(bpdc)(bpee)]·2DMF (bpdc = 4,4′-biphenyl dicarboxylate) and bpee = 1,2-bis(4-pyridyl-ethylene) (inset Fig. 9) is the highest when compared to other reported MOFs with a rigid structure.103 While a fully reversible structural change occurred during the process of addition or removal of the DMF solvent molecules, a significant reduction in the pore size was observed after the loss of the solvent molecule, according to PXRD analysis. An abrupt gate opening effect for CO2 adsorption was observed at 0.1 bar (Fig. 9) and the materials recorded 5.4 wt% of CO2 adsorption at 1 bar and 15 °C. In contrast, the adsorption capability for nitrogen was very little, which led to high CO2/N2 selectivity of 294 at 25 °C, thus clearly indicating the high capability of the flexible MOF for selective CO2 capture and separation.
 Fig. 9  CO2 and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms in flexible MOF [Zn2(bpdc)(bpee)]·2DMF at 25 °C/1 bar. The filled symbols are adsorption and the open symbols are desorption branches. Inset is the structure of the flexible MOF [Zn2(bpdc)(bpee)]·2DMF. The inset figure represents the structure of the MOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 103, copyright (2010) WILEY-VCH. 
As previously discussed, a key feature of the breathing MOFs is the observation of distinct steps such as gate opening effect in their adsorption isotherms. This is useful for understanding the behaviour of flexible MOFs in CO2 adsorption under post- and pre-combustion CO2 capture conditions. Moon et al. demonstrated the control of the gate opening behaviour of the flexible MOF (flexMOF) based on nickel metal and H4BPTC (2,2′,5,5′-biphenyl tetra carboxylic acid) organic linker with two propyl chains, upon stimulation with CO2 molecules.104 The flexMOF experienced gate opening at a relatively lower pressure of CO2 (0.18 bar) at 195 K than those at 273 K (7.76 bar) and 298 K (15 bar), as can be seen in Fig. 10a. After the initial gate opening, the MOF showed good CO2 adsorption due to the breathing effect of the framework (Fig. 10b). According to the in situ PXRD analysis, the breathing behaviour of this MOF was confirmed by the reversible alteration in the cell volume without any structural changes, depending on the CO2 pressure. The MOF underwent gate opening at 15 bar, which triggered the breathing effect and the cell volume calculations showed 146% expansion, followed by retention of the original cell volume after the desorption cycle was completed (Fig. 10c). Based on this observation, the mechanism of gate opening and the breathing behaviour was predicted as depicted in Fig. 10d.
 Fig. 10  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms of flexMOF at 195/273/298 K and 30 bar, (b) CO2 sorption isotherm at 298 K/30 bar, (c) cell volume expansion based on the in situ PXRD results, and (d) the mechanism of gate opening and breathing of the flexMOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 104, copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
The structural transformation in the flexMOFs can also be induced by the application of a combination of external electric field and CO2 guest molecules, which allows the tuning of the pore size to the desired level for the selective capture of CO2 gas, as in the case of Cr-MIL-53.105 The result of dynamic molecular simulations suggested that the application of a high external electric field was capable of reducing the large pores (LP) of the MOF from 8 Å to the contracted aperture (CP) size of 3.5 Å (Fig. 11a). The structural switching between the LP and CP forms changed the torsional angle distribution (unit cell parameters b and β), which contributes to simultaneous shear and compression of the MOF (Fig. 11b). It was suggested that the pressure changes in the structure upon the introduction of an electric field result in the structural transformation of the MOF. The adsorption of CO2 molecules along with the application of the electric field as the stimuli caused a smoother transition between the two structural states (Fig. 11c). The cumulative effect of CO2 adsorption and the electric field produced a fully reversible structural transition, which is favourable for gas adsorption under these conditions. Interestingly, a combination of CH4 adsorption and the electric field was not able to trigger a structural transition in the MOF, which indicates that CO2 can be effectively captured from a mixture of CO2 and CH4, as shown in Fig. 11d.
 Fig. 11  (a) Changes in the unit cell volume of the empty Cr-MIL-53 as a function of the external electrical field (E) at 300 K/1 bar. The full and empty symbols correspond to the increasing and decreasing electrical field range, respectively. (b) Changes in the unit cell parameters b and β as a function of time at E = 1.75 V nm−1 at 300 K and 1 bar. (c) Evolution of the unit cell volume of CO2 loaded Cr-MIL-53 with different CO2 concentrations, circle, triangle, and square symbols for 5, 4, and 3 CO2 per u.c., where the full and empty symbols correspond to increasing and decreasing electrical field range, respectively, and (d) CH4 loaded Cr-MIL-53 as a function of the electrical field. Adapted with permission from ref. 105, copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
A new MOF, [Co3(tzba)2(bpy)3(F)2]·DMF·C2H5OH·2H2O, reported recently with interpenetrated 3D pillar layers and trinuclear clusters of [Co3(CN4)2(F2)] shows not only dynamic structural stability for the guest solvent molecules but also structural flexibility in terms of gate opening and closing, which allows for high adsorption capacity and selectivity for CO2 in a binary mixture of CO2 and CH4.106 CO2 adsorption is marked by the peculiar S shape of the adsorption branch and a well-developed hysteresis loop exists during the desorption of CO2. The CO2 adsorption isotherms recorded at 273 K and 283 K showed the gate opening effect at 0.47 bar and 0.71 bar, which indicated that a higher number of CO2 molecules are necessary to access the pores at a higher temperature (Fig. 12a). This result highlighted the pivotal role of temperature and pressure in the structural transformation of the flexMOF for the accommodation of CO2 molecules and their subsequent release. Furthermore, a significantly larger amount of CO2 (19.4 cm3 g−1) appeared to be adsorbed as compared to CH4 (2.6 cm3 g−1) at 298 K and the CO2/N2 selectivity was 9.7 as per the Ideal Adsorbed Solution Theory (IAST) method, as can be seen in Fig. 12b. The observed selectivity is not among the highest values when compared to other MOFs or non-MOF based materials. As depicted in Fig. 12c and d, Grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations accounted for two main sites for the attachment of CO2 molecule in the porous structure of MOF, viz., CO2-I where CO2 molecule is coordinatively attached to the O, F, and N atoms, and CO2-II where CO2 molecules form interactions with organic linkers.
 Fig. 12  (a) CO2 sorption isotherms of [Co3(tzba)2(bpy)3(F)2]·DMF·C2H5OH·2H2O at 0/10/25 °C at 1 bar and CH4 at 25 °C/1 bar, (b) CO2/CH4 selectivity of the MOF at 25 °C/1 bar, (c) CO2 molecule bonding with O, F, and N, and (d) CO2 molecule bonding with organic linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 106, copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
Structural transformation in the non-uniform pores is another aspect of the flexMOFs that has not been addressed at the same scale as the uniform pores. The presence of pores with different sizes could prove to be conducive for the selective capture of gases with high adsorption capacity. For example, zeolitic imidazole based framework ZIF-7 (Zn(bIm)2, bIm: benzimidazolate) consisting of zinc connected to benzimidazolate possessed four different pores, which include a six-membered ring pore A with a typically large void in ZIF-7, a six-membered ring pore B, a type of four-membered ring pores, and a cage made up of sodalite (Fig. 13a).107 It is generally believed that pore A is responsible for gate opening in ZIF-7 frameworks; however, in this case, the structural transformation stimulated by CO2 adsorption occurred at all types of pores, including the non-uniform pores. Based on the CO2 adsorption data, it was observed that ZIF-7 exhibited two-phase transitions, i.e., ZIF-7-I and ZIF-7-II, with two different pore types, pore A and pore B, respectively. As shown in Fig. 13b, the CO2 adsorption isotherm at 195 K indicated that the non-uniform pore B is responsible for the initial high CO2 adsorption, which is followed by the filling of pore A. ZIF-7 initially adsorbed 2.7 mmol g−1 of CO2 at pore B under the low pressure of 0.1 bar, which is two-thirds of the saturated CO2 uptake at 0.3 bar (4.2 mol g−1). Since pore A was not accessible at low pressure, it was concluded that pore B was filled in the initial stages. As a result, pore A underwent significant structural transformation while pore B showed an almost similar structure in both the transition phases (Fig. 13c and d). A similar pore structural transformation effect was also theoretically predicted for MIL-53(Cr).108 The adsorption of CO2 resulted in the expansion of the MOF pores both in the longitudinal and transverse directions with an overall 28% increase in the size of the unit cell, suggesting that a significant alteration in the flexible framework of the MOF takes place during the process of adsorption.
 Fig. 13  (a) Different types of pores in ZIF-7, (b) adsorption of CO2 in the six-membered pores A and B of ZIF-7 at 195 and 298 K. Structural transformation in ZIF-7 for (c) pore A and (d) pore B as a result of CO2 adsorption. Zn – gray, N – blue, C – green, H – white. Adapted with permission from ref. 107, copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
3.3 Surface functionalized/hybrid MOFs
The addition of functional groups can change the surface polarity or charge of porous adsorbents. The incorporation of polar functional groups or the amine-based moieties on the MOFs surface is a common strategy that is employed to enhance the interactions with CO2 molecules, particularly at low-pressure conditions.109 Any such modification is, however, expected to compromise the porosity and affect the CO2 adsorption capacity, selectivity, and Qst. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to realise that establishing a right balance between these three parameters is highly crucial for designing functionalized MOFs with significantly high CO2 capture capacities, especially at low-pressure conditions. Considering that MOFs are high specific surface area materials, careful manipulation of their porous structure with functionalization agents could result in a significant enhancement in their chemical interaction with the CO2 molecule. It also needs to be mentioned that the modification of MOFs with amine-based moieties could enhance the chemisorption of CO2via the strong affinity of basic amine groups towards acidic gas molecules. In such a scenario, the energy penalties for material regeneration become significant costly. The commercially used liquid alkanolamine solvents for CO2 capture incur a high cost due to the regeneration of the spent material, in addition to their toxic and corrosive nature.110 Hence, functionalized MOFs with high CO2 adsorption capacity, high selectivity, and low Qst are highly desired. The functionalization of MOFs could be achieved with organic linkers or UOMSs during synthesis.
Yaghi and co-workers have extensively studied MOFs and their functionalization for CO2 adsorption under various conditions.111,112 Very recently, they reported IRMOF-74-III with a series of organic linkers, which were synthesized using the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction and functionalized with –CH3, –NH2, –CH2NHBoc (Boc: tert-butyloxycarbonyl), –CH2NMeBoc, –CH2NH2, and –CH2NHMe groups.113 All the MOFs, except the ones containing the protective Boc groups, showed a high and similar CO2 adsorption at 25 °C/800 Torr, however, at low pressure, primary amine- and secondary amine-functionalized MOFs (IRMOF-74-III-CH2NH2 and IRMOF-74-III-CH2NHMe, respectively) outperformed the other modified MOFs. Interestingly, high CO2 adsorption was accompanied by hysteresis in the desorption arm (Fig. 14a and b). The further exploration of IRMOF-74-III-CH2NH2 using dynamic CO2 adsorption under dry (16% CO2; 84% dry N2) and wet (16% CO2; 84% wet N2) experimental conditions indicated a negligible difference in the breakthrough time for the CO2 adsorption of 670 ± 10 s g−1 and 610 ± 10 s g−1, respectively. This result suggested the structural stability and performance of the IRMOF-74-III-CH2NH2 under humid conditions. According to the 13C NMR analysis, the successful formation of carbamate ions and carbamic acids for IRMOF-74-III-CH2NH2 and IRMOF-74-III-CH2NHMe materials was confirmed, which is a direct result of the strong interactions between the CO2 molecules and the functionalized organic linkers. Later on, it was also demonstrated that the incorporation of diamine groups into the same MOF (IRMOF-74-III-(CH2NH2)2) would provide a comparatively higher CO2 adsorption at 25 °C/800 Torr (75 cm3 g−1) than that of the IRMOF-74-III-CH2NH2 counterpart, which was discussed previously (67 cm3 g−1).114 The significant enhancement in CO2 adsorption on IRMOF-74-III-(CH2NH2)2 could be ascribed to the presence of diamine groups on the MOFs, which strengthened the CO2–MOF interactions at low pressure, as revealed by the 13C NMR analysis, thus showing the exclusive formation of carbamic acid for the IRMOF-74-III-(CH2NH2)2 material.
 Fig. 14  (a) CO2 adsorption capacities of IRMOF-74-III-CH3 (grey), –NH2 (green), CH2NH2 (red), –CH2NHMe (blue), –CH2NHBoc (purple), and –CH2NMeBoc (cyan), and (b) low-pressure CO2 adsorption capacities. Adapted with permission from ref. 113, copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 adsorption capacities of samples 1–4 at 25 °C (the dashed line – absolute pressure of 150 mbar), and (d) breakthrough curves for sample 4 in a binary mixture of 15:85 CO2/N2 by volume at 25 °C (inlet pressure is 1.2 bar and outlet pressure is 1 bar), yi and yi0 are the mole fractions of a gaseous species at the inlet and outlet, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 115, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, an alkyl amine-modified Cr-MIL-101 proved to be highly efficient for CO2 adsorption (4.21 mmol g−1 at 0.15 bar/25 °C) at the post-combustion conditions and also displayed good capability for the selective capture of CO2 molecules in a mixture of gaseous CO2 and N2 in the volume ratio of 15:85.115 Four samples prepared by altering the solvent or alkylamine solution (1 = DCM + DETA, 2 = DCM + TAEA, 3 = CH + DETA, and 4 = CH + TAEA; DCM: dichloromethane, TAEA: tris(2-aminoethyl)amine, CH: cyclohexane, and DETA: diethylenetriamine) were evaluated as adsorbents for CO2 molecules. As shown in Fig. 14c, samples 3 and 4 outperformed samples 1 and 2, which indicates the high significance of the type of solvent species in sample preparation for improving the CO2 adsorption capability. The CO2/N2 separation capability using the breakthrough measurements suggested that N2 is detected immediately when the CO2 injection amount is 0.45 mmol g−1 while CO2 is not detected until its injection amount is 4.96 mmol g−1, thus leading to the high selectivity of 75 (Fig. 14d).
Functionalization with amine groups is often employed to introduce non-hydrophilic sites on the pore surface and strengthen the crystalline structure of the MOFs, which would help in providing good control over their CO2 adsorption capability under humid conditions. For example, a framework of Mg/DOBDC constructed from 2,5-dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (DOBDC) ligands contains UOMSs, which could serve as binding sites for CO2 and H2O molecules, preferentially adsorbing CO2 molecule when the MOF is functionalized with ethylenediamine (ED-Mg/DOBDC).116 The CO2 adsorption capacity of Mg/DOBDC was drastically reduced from 4.27 mmol g−1 to 1.71 mmol g−1 under humid conditions whereas the ED-Mg/DOBDC framework showed a negligible change in the CO2 adsorption from 4.66 mmol g−1 to 4.47 mmol g−1 in the presence of humidity. Exposure to steam deformed the crystalline and porous structure of Mg/DOBDC, as confirmed by XRD and porosity measurements, whereas ED-Mg/DOBDC showed stable crystalline and pore structure in the presence of steam. Furthermore, the introduction of amine groups on the MOF caused a reduction in the affinity for H2O and an increase in the interactions with CO2. These results suggested that the interaction between the CO2 molecules and the surface of the MOFs could be easily altered through simple modification with organic or inorganic moieties, which not only controls the total adsorption capacity but also the selectivity by adjusting the competition for adsorption of different gases through different surface charges.
The functionalization or loading of polymers onto MOFs is another effective strategy for improving their CO2 adsorption capacity. The overall porosity of MOFs could be compromised by polymer loading; however, the presence of surface functional groups generated by the polymers is beneficial for enhanced CO2 adsorption. For example, Chen et al. incorporated MIL-101 with polyethyleneimine (PEI) and at 100% loading of the polymer, and an impressive 4.2 and 3.4 mmol g−1 of CO2 was captured at 25 and 50 °C, respectively, which, along with its high selectivity in a 0.15 bar/0.75 bar CO2/N2 mixture (770/25 °C and 1200/50 °C), makes it an all-round promising adsorbent for CO2.117 Jhung et al. also observed a 2.5 and 11 times increase in the CO2 adsorption capacity and selectivity, respectively, in a polyvinyl amine-modified MIL-101 MOF.118 The same group recently reported that the loading of polymethacrylamide is also a suitable strategy for increasing the CO2 adsorption and selectivity of the MIL-101 MOF by 3 and 10 times, respectively.119 Polymer loading is generally highly rewarding in terms of the enhanced selectivity of the MOF, which is attributed to the increased interactions between the surface functional groups contributed by the polymer and the CO2 molecules.
An endless number of possibilities could be explored for the functionalization of MOFs by using amines on UOMSs and/or modifying the organic linkers. The functionalized MOFs show much greater structural and porous stability and perform very well under humid conditions, which are desirable characteristics in real-world scenarios related to post-combustion CO2 capture. Overall, these functionalization strategies prove useful in tuning their CO2 adsorption capacities, selectivity, and Qst. It is worthwhile to mention that the practical applicability of MOFs in industries is hindered by their lower stabilities, and susceptibility to degradation by chemicals and water, which could be improved on a large scale by their functionalization with suitable moieties. More studies focussing on the CO2 adsorption behaviour of MOFs via pressure or temperature swing processes in comparatively larger adsorption beds should be carried out to assess their suitability for industrial applications.
3.4 Hydrophobic MOFs
Although MOFs perform very well in low-pressure CO2 capture, the hydrophilicity of their structure allows the competition with adsorption of water, which affects their CO2 capture abilities significantly. Over the years, around 100 hydrophobic MOFs have been reported, which is an extremely small number as compared to 20000 hydrophilic MOFs reported so far.120 The high instability of the metal–ligand bond in the presence of water is a significant challenge that has to be addressed. The plausible solution for avoiding water adsorption and the breakage of the metal–ligand bond in the MOFs is to decrease their hydrophilicity via surface modification with different agents and engineering of the internal pore structure. The surface of the hydrophobic or superhydrophobic materials needs to have a contact angle of >90 and >150° with water, respectively, and the alkyl and fluorine-based modifiers are the best-known agents for enhancing the contact angle in MOFs.121 The generation of water-resistant sites on the MOF surface curbs their hydrolysis or degradation and a stable crystalline structure with high intrinsic porosity is attained that is suitable for achieving high adsorption of CO2.
Cohen et al. used alkyl chain as modifiers122 and Miljanic et al. employed perfluorinated linkers123 for the fabrication of hydrophobic and superhydrophobic MOFs. Hydrophobic MOFs NH2-MIL-125 [Ti], ZIF-67, and HKUST-1 obtained after modification with the organosilane groups retained 76, 83, and 86% of their CO2 adsorption capacities, whereas, in comparison, the non-modified MOFs showed 21, 20, and 16% retainment after their exposure to water.124 The modification of the MOFs with organosilane groups was beneficial for obtaining a water contact angle of ∼146°, which rendered them passive towards the adsorption of water and imparted enhanced stability to the structure. The drawback of the surface modification of MOFs with hydrophobic functional groups is the reduction in porosity, which compromises their CO2 capture abilities. However, as is obvious from the previous example, it is still much higher than that of bare MOFs without any modification, which could be viewed as a win–win situation. The partitioning of MOFs into hydrophobic centres using in situ polymerization is another viable method for generating high water stability, which is beneficial for CO2 capture.125 The surface modification enhanced the CO2 adsorption by two times and the CO2/N2 selectivity by 23 times; at the same time, it also provided stability towards water adsorption, which helped in retaining 90% of the CO2 adsorption capacity during cycling. While rendering the MOFs hydrophobic, creating a permeable layer of hydrophobicity without an appreciable loss of the porosity and internal crystalline structure is highly desired and is a subject of ongoing and future research.
3.5 Pore size control
The pore size in the MOFs is a crucial factor that affects their CO2 adsorption capability and selectivity. In general, the intrinsic microporosity in the crystalline framework of the MOFs allows for high adsorption of the CO2 molecule, which has a kinetic diameter of 0.33 nm, especially at low partial pressures. Along with the micropores, it is also possible to synthesize MOFs with pores falling in the range of either mesopores or macropores, which is beneficial for uplifting their CO2 adsorption at higher pressures as well. The pore size in the MOFs is largely influenced by the nature of the starting metal precursor and the organic linkers used during the synthesis. Zou et al. synthesized three isostructural MOFs (IR-MOF-74-III) using cobalt metal and organic linkers with slightly different configurations.126 The three MOFs showed a variable pore size of 2.6, 2.4, and 2.2 nm, which arises due to the fusion of a different number of benzene rings from the organic linkers. The benzene rings were termed as pore size tuners and the CO2 adsorption of the three MOFs was enhanced as the pore size decreased from 2.6 to 2.2 nm.
Lan et al. demonstrated that the functionalization of the inner micropore walls of MOF [Zn2L2]·2DMF (NENU-520, H2L = 4-(1H-tetrazole-5-yl)biphenyl-4-carboxylic acid) with nitrogen atoms, which helps not only in reducing the pore size but also offers basic sites, enhanced its CO2 adsorption capacity and selectivity.127 Kim et al. proposed via computational calculations that the competing adsorption of water could be avoided by narrowing the pore size of the M-MOF-74 in a post-synthetic modification.128 The modification of the pore size was done by the insertion of a ligand (2,4,6-tri(4-pyridyl)-1,3,5-triazine (tpt)) within the hexagonal channels of MPF-74. The narrowing of the pores caused by the inserted ligand prevents water uptake by avoiding the formation of water clusters, which enhances the overall bonding with CO2. A MOF with an ultrasmall micropore size of 0.393 nm was developed by Zhao et al., which displayed high promise for CO2 adsorption in both post and pre-combustion CO2 capture.129 This zirconium based MOF (opt-UiO-66(Zr)-(OH)2) was synthesized using 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid (DOBDC) and ZrOCl2·8H2O, and showed a high working capacity of 2.50 mmol g−1 at 25 °C/0.15 bar and 5.63 mmol g−1 at 25 °C/1 bar. The material also demonstrated good CO2 selectivity in a mixture of CO2/N2 (105), CO2/H2 (2854), and CO2/CH4 (44). These findings revealed that proper control over the pore size along with the functionalization of the inner pore surface are crucial for achieving high CO2 adsorption capacity and selectivity.
4. Zeolites
Zeolites are another class of physical adsorbents, which contain a microporous crystalline framework consisting of aluminosilicates. The zeolite framework is built by the tetrahedral units comprising AlO4 or SiO4, which are interlocked together regularly through the bridging oxygen atoms.138 Zeolites are highly porous materials containing open channels and cavities present throughout the structure and as such are conducive materials for gas adsorption. These materials have been extensively explored both in the natural and synthetic methods for CO2 capture and some of them are summarized in Table 2. The substitution of Al3+ with Si4+ generates a negative charge, which is usually balanced by the exchangeable cation in the form of alkali (Na+/K+) or alkaline earth metal (Ca2+/Mg2+) ion. The gas adsorption properties of the zeolites are significantly dependent on the size, charge density, and the distribution of the exchangeable cations in the porous framework. At low pressures, zeolites such as 13X and 5A with medium-sized pores perform better for CO2 adsorption than their counterparts with small-sized pores such as Chabazite (CHA) type and Na-A.139 Zeolites are prone to show reduced CO2 adsorption in the presence of humidity and hence require high temperature for their regeneration, which is also a typical cost-related issue associated with commercial amine base solvents such as MEA. Nonetheless, zeolites have been widely studied for their CO2 adsorption behaviour at various conditions including low pressure and high pressure.
Table 2 Textural features and CO2 adsorption characteristics of selected zeolites




Zeolite
Textural features
CO2 adsorption characteristics
Ref.


SSA (m2 g−1)
PV (cm3 g−1)

Q/P/T (mmol g−1/bar/°C)

S

a/b


Q
st (kJ mol−1)




SSA – specific surface area, PV – pore volume, M – micropore volume, PD – pore diameter, Q – amount of CO2 adsorbed reduced to the nearest significant figure, S – selectivity, a = mixture ratio of CO2 and N2, b = mixture ratio of CO2 and CH4, Qst – isosteric heat of adsorption, [BMIM]Br – non-alkaline functionalized IL, 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium bromide.




NaX
926
0.40
5.39/1/25
735/15:85a
—

130



Li-LSX
660
0.32
4.43/—/60
85.7/14:86a
—

131



[BMIM]Br@NaY
—
—
2.5/1/30
—
35

132



CaCHA
660
0.35
5.9/1/25
17(20bar/200°C)/30:70a
—

133



13X
804
0.34
5.8/1/25
11(20bar/200°C)/30:70a
—

133



K-MER
—
—
3.5/1/25
850(25°C)/10:40b:50(He)
—

134



MgO@Y
399
0.27
2.78/5/30
37/15:85a
39

135



K-SSZ-13
600
0.19 (M)
∼5/1/25
—
45.2

136



Li-ZSM-25
—
—
1.9/2/30
66.9(2bar/30°C)/50:50b
40

137





As mentioned in the previous sections, it is important to design an adsorbent that has high CO2 adsorption capacity, selectivity, and low Qst to fit into the practical context of industrial post-combustion CO2 capture operations.140 Porous zeolites with nanoscale dimensions offer suitable properties for efficient CO2 adsorption such as a high surface area, a high pore volume, a large number of surface active sites, and easily manipulated porosity parameters. In general, porous zeolites tend to bind the CO2 molecules by the weak van der Waals interaction, depicting low Qst and confirming the physisorption mechanism. Physisorption is a much more common phenomena in dry conditions, whereas, in the presence of water, the formation of bicarbonate groups becomes dominant, indicating the facilitation of the CO2 adsorption capability by a small amount of water.141 The kinetic modelling of CO2 adsorption by Li–LSX–zeolite suggests that the adsorption mechanism is not only limited to physical adsorption but also chemisorption.142 The regeneration temperature for the spent zeolite would be between 250–300 °C, which incurs higher costs for the industries and hence would be a disadvantage. Moreover, zeolites do not perform very well in a humid environment as these possess a high affinity for water and their low stability in the presence of water is a major concern.
4.1 Metal cation exchanged zeolites
Among all the zeolites, Faujasite (FAU) type of framework (zeolite X or Y), both in its natural and synthetic (5A and 13X) states, has been extensively studied for the CO2 capture behaviour. The presence of metal cations with a high charge density is a favourable factor for the enhanced adsorption of CO2 in zeolites. Metal cations act as stronger adsorption sites that enhance the interaction with CO2 at low pressure and decrease the uptake at high pressure due to the reduction in free volume.143 For example, zeolite 5A (Na0.28Ca0.36AlSiO4, Ca-A) with Linde Type A (LTA) structure and zeolite 13X(NaAlSi1.18O4.36, Na-X) with FAU structure containing Ca2+/Na+ cations exhibited efficient CO2 capture capability, showing CO2 adsorption of over 3.1 mmol g−1 at 0.15 bar and 40 °C.144 Zeolites show promising CO2 adsorption at low-pressure conditions; however, their selectivity for CO2 in a mixture with other gases such as N2, H2O, and CH4 is always seen as a huge challenge. A careful selection of the extra-framework cation is a useful tool that could help to address the CO2 adsorption capacity as well as tge selectivity. For instance, among six zeolites with the combination of Na-A (NaAlSiO4), Mg-A (Na0.48Mg0.26AlSiO4), Ca-A (Na0.28Ca0.36AlSiO4), Na-X (NaAlSi1.18O4.36), Mg-X (Na0.38Mg0.31AlSi1.18O4.36), and Ca-X (Na0.06Al0.47Si1.18O4.36), the zeolite with Ca-A combination adsorbed the highest amount of CO2 (3.72 mmol g−1) at 0.15 bar and 40 °C.145 In comparison, the pure silica framework zeolite (PS-MFI) adsorbed lesser amounts of CO2 (0.371 mmol g−1), which signifies the pivotal role of Ca2+ as an extra-framework cation in zeolite Ca-A for enhancing the CO2 adsorption capability (Fig. 15a and b). Furthermore, the gravimetric and volumetric CO2 adsorption studies of zeolite Ca-A were compared with the best reported MOF Mg2(dobdc). Mg2(dobdc) and Ca-A adsorbed 5.57 and 3.72 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 0.15 bar and 40 °C, respectively, on a gravimetric basis. However, Ca-A showed a slightly higher CO2 uptake (5.63 mmol cm−3) than Mg2(dobdc) (5.07 mmol cm−3) when measured in a volumetric fashion (Fig. 15c and d). Zeolite Ca-A also showed a high Qst value (58 kJ mol−1) than Mg2(dobdc) (42 kJ mol−1), implying stronger interactions with CO2 molecules. Moreover, higher CO2/N2 selectivity of zeolite Ca-A was observed than that of Mg2(dobdc), showing 250 for zeolite Ca-A and 175 for Mg2(dobdc), which highlights the advantages of zeolites over MOFs in CO2/N2 selectivity.
 Fig. 15  CO2 and N2 adsorption isotherms of (a) PS-MFI and (b) Ca-A at 25 °C, (c) gravimetric and (d) volumetric CO2 adsorption capacities of Ca-A and Mg2(dobdc) measured at 40 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 145, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The addition of precious metal ions in the zeolitic framework could also boost the CO2 adsorption capacities. Computational and experimental screening of pristine zeolite (13X), lithium-containing zeolite (LiX), and polymetallic zeolite (LiPdAgX) with FAU type structure showed that LiPdAgX is a more effective material not only for CO2 adsorption but also for CO2/N2 selectivity than 13X and LiX.146 As compared to LiX, LiPdAgX exhibited ca. 25% higher CO2 adsorption and ca. 180% higher selectivity. The synergistic effect of electrostatic potential (ESP) and an increased number of surface-active sites generated by the precious metal cations play a major role in enhancing the interaction with CO2 molecules. Despite the above advantages of precious metal modified zeolite, the increase observed in the Qst was not significantly high. A similar report concluded that the enhanced thermal conductivity via the introduction of precious Pd and Ag ions into the zeolite framework could effectively dissipate the heat of adsorption, resulting in the enhancement of the CO2 adsorption capacity at post-combustion capture conditions.147 The thermal conductivities of 13X, LiX, and LiPdAgX were evaluated to be 0.1169, 0.1129, and 0.1192 W (m K)−1, respectively, which is an additional factor that controls CO2 adsorption and CO2/N2 selectivity in combination with the metal cation adsorption sites. Good thermal conductivity is also expected to lower the heat requirements for the regeneration of the materials.
4.2 Hydrophobic zeolites
The industrial flue gas stream is significantly wet and hence, an adsorbent, which has a high resistivity towards water, is highly desirable. The hydrophilic nature of zeolites such as LTA (zeolite A) and FAU (zeolite X and Y) hinders their CO2 adsorption capacities due to competition between adsorption of water and CO2 in humid streams. Zeolites such as 5A and 13X are more susceptible to the adsorption of water at low pressures, which could be a significant issue in their practical application in post-combustion capture.148 The degradation of CO2 adsorption capability due to the competitive adsorption of H2O could be avoided by selecting zeolites with a more hydrophobic nature or by rendering hydrophobicity to the hydrophilic zeolites using suitable functionalization strategies.
A higher Si to Al ratio can make the zeolite slightly more hydrophobic and hence more selective for CO2 in a mixture with H2O. For example, zeolite X has a Si/Al ratio of 1.3, while zeolite Y has a higher Si/Al ratio of 2 to 3, which increases the water tolerance of the latter. The hydrophilic character of a core–shell structured MFI zeolite with a hydrophilic ZSM-5 could be curbed by an epitaxial coating of hydrophobic silicalite-1 shell layer, which helps in attaining high resistance towards H2O adsorption and consequently, higher CO2 adsorption was observed.149 The XRF measurements showed that the Si/Al ratio of ZSM-5 was 34, which, however, increased to 44 upon the incorporation of the silicalite layer (silicalite/ZSM-5) and to 55 upon the addition of the silicalite layer with fluoride (silicalite-F/ZSM-5). The impact of the silicalite layer was much more prominent for the reduction in H2O adsorption than for the increase in CO2 adsorption. The amount of water adsorbed on ZSM-5 was 4.96 mmol g−1, which was reduced to 3.85 mmol g−1 for silicalite/ZSM-5 and a further dramatic reduction to only 0.56 mmol g−1 was observed for silicalite-F/ZSM-5. The difference in the water adsorption ability for these modified zeolites was due to the number of defects in the silanol network as hydrophobicity decreases with an increase in the number of defects. The high thermal and chemical stability of the modified zeolites was also much higher than that of the pure zeolite and could be useful in practical CO2 capture applications.
High tolerance towards H2O of the hydrophilic zeolite 5A can also be accomplished by constructing a core–shell structure, in which the zeolite 5A core is surrounded by a hydrophobic zeolitic imidazole framework shell (5A@ZIF-8).150 The presented 5A@ZIF8 material exhibited a high resistivity for H2O with significantly enhanced CO2/H2O selectivity of 6.61 in a 15% CO2 and 85% humidity mixture. The presence of the hydrophobic shell prevented the H2O molecules from entering inside the core of the zeolite. However, the CO2 adsorption capability decreased from 3.68 mmol g−1 for the pure zeolite 5A to 2.61 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/25 °C for the 5A@ZIF material due to partial blocking of the entering CO2 molecule. A similar effect was also observed in CHA. The siliceous components in the CHA zeolite could significantly increase the Si/Al ratio to ∼100, which provides an efficient matrix for the selective separation of CO2 molecules under severe humidity.151 The pore size of this particular zeolite (0.37 × 0.42 nm2) was ideally suited for the separation of CO2 molecules (0.33 nm) from the ones with larger diameters such as N2 (0.36 nm) and CH4 (0.38 nm). Furthermore, high silicon content in this zeolite deferred the adsorption of H2O molecule with a smaller diameter of 0.26 nm, indicating high sieving ability only for CO2 molecules in the presence of water. Greater than two times increase in the CO2/N2 selectivity for the CHA zeolite membrane in humid conditions (13.4) was observed as compared to that in dry conditions (5.2). In the real-world scenario of industrial post-combustion CO2 capture, zeolites are expected to be an ideal platform for securing high CO2 selectivity but the significant challenges associated with the reduction in the CO2 capture ability in the presence of water or other gases as well as the scale up process for industrial requirements cannot be ignored.
4.3 Functionalized zeolites
The functionalization of the zeolites allows for higher CO2 uptake and higher H2O tolerance at low-pressure conditions. Zeolite 13X and zeolite Y are the two most common zeolites that have been studied for their CO2 adsorption behaviour via amine functionalization.152,153 Zeolite beta is another material that has been explored for CO2 adsorption primarily due to its high silicon content.154 Functionalization could be achieved via different strategies, the most common being the pre- or the post-synthetic approaches. Zeolites have been typically modified with amines for this purpose, which increase their basicity, and at selected places with other materials to generate better performing hybrids for CO2 capture. For example, a diverse amine-modified binder containing zeolite 4A (Z4A) materials could be synthesized using various amines, such as propylamine (PA), butylamine (BA), pentylamine (PEA), iso-propylamine (IPA), iso-butylamine (IBA), and iso-pentylamine (IPEA).155 Among them, IBA-modified Z4A yielded the highest amount of CO2 uptake (2.56 mmol g−1) as compared to the unmodified zeolite Z4A (2.20 mmol g−1) at 1 bar/25 °C. The IBA-Z4A material also displayed higher CO2 adsorption at 0.15 bar/25 °C (1.34 mmol g−1) than Z4A (0.97 mmol g−1), as shown in Fig. 16a. Importantly, this functionalized zeolite exhibited much lower captured N2 amount of about 0.02 mol g−1 at either 0.15 bar or 1 bar when compared to the pristine zeolite (0.20 and 0.25 mmol g−1 at 0.15 bar and 1 bar), thus depicting high selectivity towards CO2 molecule (Fig. 16b).
 Fig. 16  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms and (b) N2 adsorption isotherms for binder-containing zeolite 4A (Z4A) and amine-modified Z4A at 1 bar/25 °C, CO2 and CH4 adsorption isotherms of (c) Z4A and (d) 27SiO2-CLD-4A at 25 °C, CO2 and N2 adsorption isotherms of (e) Z4A and (f) 27SiO2-CLD-4A at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 155 and 156, copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Indeed, the CO2/N2 selectivity of IBA-Z4A was almost fourteen times higher than that of Z4A. Functionalization with amines resulted in enhanced basicity due to the presence of electron-rich density sites generated by the lone pair of nitrogen atoms. Noticeably, the presence of bulky amines such as PEA or IPEA caused a decrease in the CO2 adsorption capacity due to the steric hindrance effect. This Z4A material with a pore size of 0.38 nm could also be suitably manipulated via chemical liquid deposition (CLD) method to synthesize a series of size-selective modified zeolites (16SiO2-CLD-4A, 23SiO2-CLD-4A, and 27SiO2-CLD-4A) with silica that could selectively adsorb CO2 from CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 mixtures.156 Pore size determination using CO2 adsorption-based non-local density functional theory (NLDFT) method suggested that the silica layer did not penetrate the core of the zeolite and was retained only on the surface. Even though the CO2 capture ability for 27SiO2-CLD-4A, which is an optimized material, was lesser as compared to pristine Z4A, possibly due to the blockage of the pores, the selectivity for CO2 molecule was greatly improved upon the CLD process, showing the selectivity of 76 and 44 in CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 mixtures, respectively, as can be seen in Fig. 16c–f. This study also highlighted the importance of a suitable pore aperture size for the selective separation of CO2 molecules in the presence of N2 or CH4.
Small pore size and pore volume of zeolite could hinder the efficient incorporation of amine-functionalized groups inside the framework. To overcome this drawback, zeolites with larger pore size and pore volume could be explored for enhancing the functionalization effect without any loss in the CO2 adsorption capability. For example, zeolite 13X with plentiful mesopores (meso-13X) could be synthesized using dimethyloctadecyl[3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl]ammonium chloride (TPOAC) as a templating agent during the synthetic procedure.157 The meso-13X material possessed a larger number of mesoporous domains as compared to pristine 13X, as evidenced by the appearance of a hysteresis loop in the N2 adsorption isotherms and an increase in the pore volume from 0.35 nm to 0.46 nm. PEI reagent was introduced inside meso-13X to obtain the amine-functionalized meso-13X(meso-13X-PEI). Despite the remarkably depressed surface area and porosity of meso-13X-PEI due to the filling up of the mesopores by PEI, this material showed CO2 adsorption of about 5.5 mmol g−1, which is higher than that of PEI-functionalized 13X without meso-13X intermediate (4.0 mol g−1). Another interesting observation was that the mesoporosity along with a higher pore volume could be introduced into the LTA type zeolite using TPOAC surfactant without any significant change in the specific surface area.158 The zeolite LTA-000 precursor possesses a specific surface area of 656 m2 g−1 with a total pore volume of 0.35 cm3 g−1 and no mesopores. Upon reaction with a high amount of the TPOAC surfactant (LTA-125), the specific surface area reduced slightly to 551 m2 g−1 but a comparatively higher total pore volume (1.02 cm3 g−1) and mesopores with size of about 13.1 nm were observed. LTA-125 was further modified with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS, LTA-125-NH2) and N-[3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl]ethylenediamine (TMPED, LTA-125-diamine), which reduced its pore size from 13.1 nm to 9.1 nm and 8.8 nm, respectively (Fig. 17a). These amine-functionalized materials exhibited a higher amount of adsorbed CO2 (∼3.0 mmol g−1 and ∼1.5 mmol g−1 for LTA-125-NH2 and LTA-125-diamine, respectively) in comparison to the non-functionalized LTA-125 (1.0 mol g−1) at 60 °C and 1 bar, as depicted in Fig. 17b. However, these values are much lower than those of the amine-functionalized zeolites. Grafting magnesium oxide on the surface of the zeolites has also been used as a prominent strategy for enhancing the CO2 adsorption of the bare zeolite.159 For example, a 28% increase in the CO2 adsorption capacity was observed when the bare zeolite Y was functionalized with MgO (MgO@Y).135 Besides, a reasonable CO2/N2 selectivity of 32 was observed and a relatively low isosteric Qst of 27.8 kJ mol−1 suggested that the regeneration process of the spent MgO@Y would be less energy-consuming.
 Fig. 17  (a) BJH pore size distribution (PSD) calculated from the N2 sorption isotherms of LTA-125 functionalized with monoamine and diamine and (b) CO2 adsorption of the three materials at 60 °C and 1 bar. Adapted with permission from ref. 158, copyright (2016) WILEY-VCH. 
Zeolites perform very well for low-pressure CO2 adsorption owing to their microcrystalline framework and their low-cost availability is a plus factor that makes them even more attractive. However, it is significantly important to understand that moisture is present in all the CO2 capture operations, which affects the CO2 adsorption performance of the zeolites due to their hydrophilic nature. This aspect of the zeolites needs research as the introduction of hydrophobicity in the zeolite framework to avoid water interference could be more appealing and allows for higher CO2 adsorption in humid conditions. It could be achieved by either the introduction of hydrophobic functional groups or suitably manipulating the content ratio of Al and Si. Some of the zeolites also suffer from high energy requirements for regenerating the spent material, which becomes another area of research that needs to be addressed. Overall, zeolites are the preferred commercial materials for CO2 capture over other adsorbents such as MOFs, POPs, or carbons owing to their low cost and high efficiency.
5. Porous organic polymers (POPs)
Porous organic polymers (POPs) are an attractive class of porous materials, which include covalent organic frameworks (COFs), hyper-crosslinked polymers (HCPs), conjugated microporous polymers (CMP), covalent triazine based frameworks (CTFs), ionic organic polymers (IOPs), porous aromatic frameworks (PAFs), polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs), and polymeric organic networks (PONs),160 which have evolved for CO2 adsorption owing to their low density, high specific surface areas, easily tunable pore structures, good physicochemical stability, tailored surface manipulation with polar and/or amine groups, adjustable surface morphology, and diversification in the synthesis.161 The specific surface area, pore size and suitable functionalization of POPs have been widely explored for CO2 adsorption. Table 3 summarizes a few selected POPs with notable performance for CO2 capture under various conditions. A lot of research has been done on the synthesis of POPs; however, the focus of this section is to provide an update on the CO2 adsorption and selectivity of POPs that have been reported in the recent few years.
Table 3 Textural features and CO2 adsorption characteristics of selected porous organic polymers




POP
Textural features
CO2 adsorption characteristics
Ref.


SSA (m2 g−1)
PV (cm3 g−1)

Q/P/T (mmol g−1/bar/°C)

S

a/b


Q
st (kJ mol−1)




SSA – specific surface area, PV – pore volume, M – micropore volume, PD – pore diameter, Q – amount of CO2 adsorbed reduced to the nearest significant figure, S – selectivity, a = mixture ratio of CO2 and N2, b = mixture ratio of CO2 and CH4, Qst – isosteric heat of adsorption, TAP – triptycene-derived azo polymer, TAF – triphenylmethane aromatic framework, PCTP – porous covalent triazine polymer, TPECOF – tetraphenylethane covalent organic framework, KFUPM – cross linked porous polymer, PIM-OFP – imide-linked organic framework polymers with intrinsic microporosity, Zn-TPBMP – melamine based porous polymer, HCP-D – hyper-crosslinked polymer network, NUT – Nanjing Tech University, TMCOP – triazine based microporous covalent organic polymer, CTPP – covalent triazine-piperazine linked polymer, PAF-26-COOH – carboxyl decorated porous aromatic framework, BILP-101 – benzimidazole linked polymer, PEI (40 wt%) – PAF-5 polyethyleneimine impregnated porous aromatic framework, SNU-C1-sca – porous organic polymer functionalized with carboxyl and triazole groups, note: all numerical values have been rounded to the nearest significant figure.




TAP3
729
1.04
2.3/1/25
91(1bar/25°C)/15:85a
∼40

162



TAF
1383
0.95
1.5/1/25
14(1bar/25°C)/—a
26

163



TAF-NH2
1190
0.68
1.9/1/25
19(1bar/25°C)/—a
54

163



PCTP-1
1200
0.62
3.2/1/25
46(1bar/25°C)/—a
44.5

164



TPE-COF-II
2168
2.14
2.7/1/25
—
—

165



KFUPM-1
305


1.0/1/25
141(1 bar/25°C)/20:80a
34

166



PIM-OFP-3
1374
0.63 (M)
3.2/1/22
75(1bar/22°C)/—a
28.8

167



Zn-TPBMP
705
0.66
0.53/1/25
—
—

168



HCP-D
343
0.55
1.3/1/25
—
—

169



NUT-1
99.9
0.07
1.4/1/25
10140(1bar/25°C)/—a
75

170



TMCOP
1104
—
1.5/1/0
24.5(1bar/25°C)/—a
26.7

171



CTPP
779
0.77
3.5/1/0
128/—a
34

172



PAF-26-COOMg
572
0.28
2.8/1/0
73(1.1bar/25°C)/—a
30

173



BILP-101
536
0.41
1/0.15/25
71(1bar/25°C)/10:90a
33

174



PEI (40 wt%)-PAF-5
40.3
0.05
2.6/0.15/25
1200(1bar/25°C)/15:85a
68.7

175



SNU-C1-sca
830
—
4.4/1/25
—
31.2

176





5.1 Covalent organic frameworks (COFs)
COFs are crystalline solid and porous materials that are formed with the building blocks strongly connected through covalent bonds. They have exceptional thermal stabilities due to a rigid framework structure and better textural properties than that of zeolites and other porous silicates, which make them available for interesting applications including the adsorption of CO2. The synthesis of COFs was first realized by Yaghi and co-workers, who reported the preparation of COF-1 and COF-5 through strong covalent bonding between the lightweight elements H, B, C, N, and O.177 Not long after, the earliest report on CO2 adsorption by COFs also came from Yaghi and co-workers.178 COFs, particularly in their 3D form, possess a high potential for gas capture due to their high specific surface areas (>4000 m2 g−1), pore-volume, and low framework densities (∼1.7 g cm−3).179 The CO2 adsorption simulation studies using Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) provided firm evidence that COFs could be more suitable for CO2 adsorption than MOFs under humid conditions.180 Furthermore, the atomistic simulation of high-pressure CO2 adsorption on a series of 1D, 2D, and 3D COFs using Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC) showed that the 3D COFs possess the largest CO2 adsorption capacity, which could be directly linked to their enhanced porosity, large free volume, and extremely high specific surface areas.181 3D COF-105 showed a specific surface area of 6636 m2 g−1, a pore volume of 5.22 cm3 g−1, and a very low density of 0.18 g cm−3. Benefiting from the combination of these three factors, the high CO2 adsorption capacity of 96 mmol g−1 at 30 bar/27 °C for this 3D COF-105 was predicted. This predicted amount even surpasses the theoretically predicted CO2 adsorption capacity of MOF-177 (33 mmol g−1) under similar conditions. Although these materials are considered as superabsorbent materials based on the theoretical calculations, the experimental evidence of this finding is yet to be reported and therefore, research continues to develop these nanostructures with improved CO2 adsorption. In comparison to 3D COF-105, 2D and 1D COFs showed comparatively lesser CO2 adsorption due to the relatively limited porosity and the associated parameters. The low porosity of 2D COFs could be compensated through functionalization with CO2-philic groups such as –COOH, which significantly improved their CO2 adsorption capacity. For example, a 2D COF [HO]100%-H2P-COF and its carboxylic acid-functionalized counterpart [HO2C]100%-H2P-COF, as shown in Fig. 18a and b, possessed different pore structures and hence showed different CO2 adsorption capacities at 1 bar/25 °C.182 The functionalized COF showed higher CO2 adsorption (∼1.7 mmol g−1) than that of the parent COF (∼0.80 mmol g−1) at 1 bar/25 °C with pure CO2 feed. Both materials showed a similar trend in CO2 adsorption with [HO2C]100%-H2P-COF showing 0.55 mmol g−1 and [HO]100%-H2P-COF showing 0.15 mmol g−1 CO2 adsorption from a 15:85 CO2/N2 mixture, as can be seen in Fig. 18a. COF based porous membranes are considered as good candidates for tge separation of CO2 from other gases in a mixture. For example, Wiu et al. devised a mixed membrane composed of a MOF grown on the surface of a COF, which displayed good capabilities for the separation of CO2 from H2 in a mixture.183 They designed two different types of COF-MOF membranes composed of COF-300 and [Zn2(bdc)2(dabco)], and COF-300 and ZIF-8, which showed higher abilities for the separation of CO2 from H2 in a 50:50 mixture. In another instance, Wang et al. demonstrated that the penetration of a COF with polyvinyl amine is an ideal strategy for the fabrication of membranes for the selective adsorption of CO2 in a mixture with N2.184
 Fig. 18  (a) Parent COF, [HO]100%-H2P-COF, and (b) carboxylic group functionalized COF [HO2C]100%-H2P-COF, as seen from the top and (c) their CO2 adsorption in a 15:85 CO2/N2 mixture at 1 bar/25 °C (red dots are the functionalized and black dots are for the parent COF). Adapted with permission from ref. 182, copyright (2015) WILEY-VCH. 
5.2 Hyper-crosslinked polymers (HCPs)
The HCPs are a special class of POPs with a great promise for CO2 capture, particularly at low pressure, due to the presence of abundant micropores and high specific surface area existing in the cross-linked structure.185 In addition, the use of FeCl3 and diversification of the starting precursors including benzene, aniline, and phenol promote HCPs as low-cost materials.186 The rigidity of the porous network formed because of extensive cross-linking of the precursors helps to impart a non-collapsible nature to the HCPs. A recent report by Jiang and co-workers suggested the importance of the ratio of the starting precursors in generating HCPs with different porosity parameters, which significantly affected their CO2 adsorption behaviour.187 In this report, HCPs were prepared using different combinations of tetraphenylethylene (TPE) and 1,1,2,2-tetraphenylethane-1,2-diol (TPD) as the precursors based on the Friedel–Crafts alkylation reaction (Fig. 19a). In addition, FeCl3 and formaldehyde dimethylacetal (FDA) was used as the catalyst and the cross-linker, respectively. The homo-coupled HCPs with pure TPE or TPD, which are referred to as Network-1 and Network-7, showed the highest (1980 m2 g−1) and the lowest specific surface areas (618 m2 g−1) with the micropore contributions of ∼50% and ∼84%, respectively. It was demonstrated that within this range, the surface area and microporosity of HCPs could be finely controlled by altering the TPE and TPD ratios. The CO2 adsorption capacity of Network-1 was 3.63 and 1.99 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C, respectively. However, a comparatively low CO2 adsorption capacity of Network-7 of about 1.92 and 1.12 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C, respectively, was observed (Fig. 19b and c). Interestingly, despite the low surface area and porosity, Network-7 exhibited the highest CO2/N2 selectivity of 119 due to the strong interaction of the polarizable CO2 molecules with a large amount of –OH groups. These observations suggest that the nature of the functional groups on the surface of the porous materials rather than the porosity dictate the adsorption selectivity of the COF based adsorbents.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis route for Networks 1–7 (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms at 0 °C and (c) CO2 adsorption isotherms at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 187, copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To change the surface charge of the adsorbents to increase the CO2 adsorption capacity, heteroatoms such as N, B, or O atoms are doped on the framework structure of COFs. Zhang et al. reported a series of N and O-doped HCPs with high microporosity through simple Friedel–Crafts alkylation using FeCl3 and utilized them as efficient CO2 sorbents.188 Despite a lesser surface area of 992 m2 g−1, the N and O doped HCPs prepared from benzyl alcohol (BA) and 2-phenylimidazole (PID) showed high CO2 adsorption of 3.55 and 2.72 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C. The observed CO2 capture ability is due to the abundant micropores and the highly polar surface caused by heteroatom doping. These two examples illustrate that the choice of the building blocks and the functionalization with heteroatoms are crucial factors for determining the textural parameters and, hence, the CO2 adsorption capability of the HCPs. In other studies, Manović et al. and Liu et al. also demonstrated the synthesis of N or O functionalized HCPs as an efficient template for CO2 adsorption.189,190 They showed that the textural features and the CO2 adsorption of HCPs can also be controlled by manipulating the length of the cross-linking. Sun et al. fabricated three kinds of HCPs, namely, NUT-5, NUT-6, and NUT-7, prepared from different precursors of 2,4,6-tris(chloromethyl)-mesitylene (TCM), p-dichloroxylene (DCX), and 4,40-bis(chloromethyl)-1,10-biphenyl (BCB), respectively, through Friedel–Crafts alkylation route by using treatment with FeCl3 and dichloroethane at 80 °C for 24 hours (Fig. 20a).191 Depending on the precursor used, the NUT-5, NUT-6, and NUT-7 materials possess a different length of cross-linking and hence showed different specific surface areas of 771, 1137, and 987 m2 g−1 and pore volumes of 0.4, 0.7, and 0.6 cm3 g−1, respectively. Among them, NUT-6 with a medium type of cross-linking length outperformed the others with either no or the longest length of cross-linking and displayed the adsorption capacity of 4.7 and 3.7 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C, respectively (Fig. 20b and c). The enhancement in CO2 adsorption can be attributed to the availability of many adsorption sites together with the appropriate pore size for accommodating the CO2 molecules.
 Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis of NUT HCPs with different lengths of cross-linking and their CO2 adsorption at (b) 0 °C and (c) 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 191, copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.3 Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs)
CMPs have recently evolved as potential materials for gas storage owing to their rigid structure due to π-electron conjugation and developed textural features such as high specific surface area and high micropore volume.192 These are typically prepared using coupling reactions such as Sonogashira–Hagihara, Suzuki, and Yamamoto.193,194 The Buchwald–Hartwig coupling, which involves the palladium-catalyzed cross-linking of arylamines and aryl halides, was also reported recently as an efficient synthetic pathway for CMP materials.195 It is generally observed that the filling of the voids in the CMPs may compromise CO2 adsorption but with a large improvement in the selectivity and Qst.196 For example, Han et al. introduced pyrene and alkyne groups into the highly conjugated microporous polymers (LKK-CMP-1) with 1,3-diyne linkages synthesized using oxidative coupling reaction with 1,3,6,8-tetraethynylpyrene and showed that the prepared material has small micropores with a size of about 0.59 nm and high thermal stability. Along with the conjugated structure, high stability, and small pore size of LKK-CMP-1, the present material exhibited considerable CO2 adsorption of 2.22 and 1.38 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C, respectively. LKK-CMP-1 exhibits a low affinity toward N2 and CH4 and correspondingly shows high selectivities for CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 based on the ideal-adsorption-solution theory (IAST).
In another study, three phosphine oxide-based CMPs (TEPO-1, TEPO-2, and TEPO-3) were prepared via Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling of tris(4-ethynylphenyl)phosphine oxide with three different linkers (tris(4-ethynylphenyl)phosphine oxide, triphenylphosphine oxide, and tri(thiophen-2-yl)phosphine oxide).197 Even though TEPO-1, TEPO-2, and TEPO-3 possessed a moderate surface area of 485, 534, and 593 m2 g−1, respectively, these materials displayed considerable CO2 adsorption amounts of 1.48, 1.73, and 1.90 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C due to their high affinity towards CO2 molecules. The variation in the CO2 adsorption capability of these three materials was directly linked to their cross-linking framework and the amount of functionalization. The syntheses of CMPs with high specific surface areas and enhanced CO2 adsorption performances have also been reported. For example, thermally stable co-polymerized CMPs (CP-CMPs) for CO2 capture were prepared from the co-polymerization of 1,4-benzenediboronic acid (BDA) with 1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene (TBrPy) and 1,3,6,8-tetrabromocarbazole (TBrCz).198 The optimized CP-CMPs synthesized by using 60 mol% of TBrCz showed a significantly high surface area of 2241 m2 g−1 with a high pore volume of 2.07 cm3 g−1 and hence, recorded impressive CO2 adsorption of 4.57 mmol g−1 at 1.13 bar/0 °C. Other CP-CMPs materials prepared using different mole ratios of TBrPy and TBrCz showed lesser affinity towards CO2 adsorption, suggesting the importance of tuning the starting precursors’ ratio for exploring high performing CMPs for CO2 capture. The functionalization of CMPs with basic groups containing nitrogen or amine-based moieties can also enhance their CO2 adsorption capacities.199,200 For instance, nitrogen-rich CMPs that were synthesized using Pd catalyzed Suzuki/Sonogashira coupling reaction from diamino-containing (DA-CMPs) and azo-fused monomers (Azo-CMPs) were reported to be capable of the enhancing CO2 adsorption capabilities.201 The azo-CMPs material exhibited higher CO2 adsorption (3.72 and 3.17 mmol g−1 at 1.13 bar/0 °C and 1.13 bar/25 °C, respectively) than that of DA-CMPs (2.28 and 1.64 mmol g−1 at 1.13 bar/0 °C and 1.13 bar/25 °C, respectively). This significant enhancement in the adsorption can be attributed to the more polar character of the azo groups.
POPs are attractive as CO2 adsorbents under various conditions. However, from a practical point of view, the potential of POPs for CO2 adsorption under realistic post-combustion conditions, which involves very low pressure and high-temperature conditions, needs to be tested on a wider scale. Furthermore, the involvement of costly chemicals during the synthetic procedure would hinder the application of POPs at a commercial level as industries always look for cutting the cost while still maintaining high material efficiency for CO2 adsorption performance. Therefore, the large-scale production of such materials could be problematic. Moreover, as in the case of any porous adsorbent material, the recyclability and regenerability over a long period without considerable loss in the CO2 adsorption capacity are some of the other constraints that need to be addressed.
6. Nanoporous carbons
Carbons with a porous structure in the nano dimensions are competitive contenders of MOFs, COFs, and zeolites in the field of CO2 capture. The CO2 uptakes of MOFs at post-combustion capture conditions is above par when compared to zeolites, POPs, or the carbons; however, their feasibility of commercialization in CO2 capture industries is hindered because of their higher costs. Alternatively, porous carbons, in particular, the ones prepared from inexpensive precursors such as carbon-rich waste, are deemed to be highly cost-effective adsorbents for CO2 adsorption that could be utilized in the post-combustion as well as pre-combustion industries.216
Porous carbons are highly efficient candidates for CO2 capture at high pressure owing to their high specific surface areas and high pore volumes.217 Even though porous carbons show low CO2 capture capacity at low-pressure conditions, they hold significant potential as low-pressure adsorption could be increased by using suitable functionalization strategies. The overall merits of porous carbons including low-cost starting precursors, non-complicated preparation, hydrophobicity, high specific surface area and pore volume, tunable textural parameters, easily manipulated surface functionalization, and relatively low Qst are attractive features for CO2 capture.218 Several ways could be used to synthesize porous carbons in concentrated form, the most common being pyrolysis/carbonization in an inert atmosphere or hydrothermal carbonization in a high-pressure system.219 Carbonization helps in the polymerization and aromatization of the carbon with the elimination of volatiles, whereas activation using physical or chemical agents can generate high porosity in the carbon framework. Table 4 lists some of the porous carbons derived from different precursors and their performance in CO2 adsorption. In the following subsections, porous carbons prepared from various precursors will be discussed along with their CO2 capture capabilities under pre- or post-combustion conditions and wherever possible, their performance would be compared with other porous materials such as MOFs and zeolites, to highlight the prospects of porous carbons in CO2 capture.
Table 4 Textural features and CO2 adsorption characteristics of selected porous carbons derived from different precursors




Porous carbon/source precursor
Textural features
CO2 adsorption characteristics
Ref.


SSA (m2 g−1)
PV (cm3 g−1)

Q/P/T (mmol g−1/bar/°C)

Q
st (kJ mol−1)




SSA – specific surface area, PV – pore volume, M – micropore volume, PD – pore diameter, Q – amount of CO2 adsorbed reduced to the nearest significant figure, Qst – Isosteric heat of adsorption. Note: the numerical values have been rounded to the nearest significant figure.




T-GU-700-6/graphene
1032
0.82
2.4/1/25
33

202



ARA/asphaltene
1590
0.87
3.0/1/25
23

203



NEPB/biomass
982
0.62
2.2/1/25
39

204



CS-Py-K100/pyrrole
1051
0.91
4.9/1/25
36

205



N,S-HPCK-1/waste paper
1770
0.83
5.2/1/25
35

206



KBM-700/MOF
1129
0.55
4.7/1/25
—

207



CKHP800-2/organic salt
1256
0.67
4.5/1/25
29

208



APCS-3/D-glucose
1917
0.85
3.5/1/25
25

209



CS*-P-A/phenolic resin
2400
1.07
4.6/1/23
—

53



PMMC-700/mesitylene
1451
0.71
4.4/1/25
21

210



SNMC-2-600/polymer
1884
0.78
4.2/1/25
34

211



PHC-4/casein
1080
0.59
1.8/1/25
35

212



FC4/polyimide
941
0.93
2.9/1/25
25

213



ZNC-950/zeolitic imidazole framework
1534
1.45
3.5/1/25
30

214



CPC2/chitosan
2278
1.00
3.4/1/25
28

215





6.1 Nanoporous carbons from biomass
Biomass is a natural and widely available source of organic carbon that can be sequestered into high performance porous carbon for CO2 capture. Governments spend millions of dollars on the eradication of potentially invasive biomasses around the world. Carbonization of biomass at high temperature would not only be able to solve this problem but also generate suitable adsorbents for the capture of CO2 gas. In the past couple of decades, a plethora of research literature on the conversion of different types of biomass into porous carbon for CO2 capture has appeared.220–223 Although vastly explored, porous carbons from biomass do not hold good promise for CO2 capture at low-pressure conditions, which represents the post-combustion capture of CO2 from industries. Their CO2 capture abilities at high pressure are well known. The porous carbons derived from biomass are generally prepared via carbonization and activation of the precursors and the desired type of porosity in the micro or meso domains could be easily obtained. Our group has significantly contributed towards the research on transforming biomass into porous activated biocarbons (PABs), which have shown great promise for CO2 capture at both low and high pressures. For example, the porous carbon generated from lotus seeds possessed a high specific surface area of 2230 m2 g−1, a pore volume of 0.96 cm3 g−1, and adsorbed good quantities of CO2 at both high (26.4 mmol g−1/30 bar/0 °C) and low-pressure conditions (6.8 mmol g−1/1 bar/0 °C).224 A moderate value of Qst (30.4 kJ mol−1) was observed as well, indicating that the regeneration of materials is much easier than for other porous carbons. The carbonization of giant reed (Arundo donax) and subsequent single-step direct zinc chloride activation resulted in mesoporous carbons with 3.5 nm pore size, possessing a high specific surface area of 3298 m2 g−1 and a high pore volume of 1.9 cm3 g−1. This mesoporous carbon also exhibited high adsorption of CO2 at high pressures (30.2 mmol g−1 at 30 bar/0 °C). Very recently, our group reported that casein could be explored for devising porous carbons with an extremely high specific surface area of 3617 m2 g−1 along with a high pore volume of 2.16 cm3 g−1 in the mesoporous domains, as illustrated in Fig. 21a.225 The porous carbons from casein showed promising behaviour with CO2 adsorption of about 4.12 mmol g−1 and 39.1 mmol g−1 at both low pressure (1 bar/0 °C) and high pressure (30 bar/0 °C) conditions, respectively, as can be seen in Fig. 21b. This is the best performance that we have achieved so far for high-pressure CO2 capture using porous carbons derived from biomass. The textural parameters of these materials can be tuned by the simple adjustment of the carbonization temperature and the activation strategies. Sevilla and co-workers have worked extensively on fabricating nanoporous carbons from biomass using different carbonization and activation strategies. For example, porous carbon produced from the chemical activation of sawdust delivered high CO2 adsorption of 4.8 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/25 °C (Fig. 21c) despite a relatively moderate specific surface area of 1260 m2 g−1.226 Later on, it was established that micropores of size <0.8 nm are highly crucial for the adsorption of CO2 at low-pressure conditions for porous carbons.227 The fabrication of porous carbons from biomass was generally achieved either by using physical or chemical activation with the latter usually requiring high temperatures in the range of 700–900 °C.228 The surface modification of porous carbons with hetero atoms or basic surface functional groups can enhance the CO2 adsorption capacity and selectivity. The pre- or post-functionalization of porous carbons with heteroatoms or amine-containing groups have been attempted to increase their CO2 adsorption capacities.229–231 New biomass precursors are reported almost daily and a wide variety of activating or functionalization agents have been developed in recent times. A particularly interesting property of the biomass-derived porous carbon is that a part of the heteroatoms present as functional groups in the original precursor could be inherited even at high-temperature carbonization. The presence of heteroatoms such as nitrogen and oxygen on the surface of the porous carbons help in increasing CO2 adsorption at low-pressure conditions. The functionalization or modification of biomass-derived porous carbons can also be done easily using the synthetic processes either in a pre or post-synthetic method. To introduce N-atoms on the surface of porous carbons derived from chestnut shell, Hu et al. used a unique one-step strategy, in which sodium amide was used as the activating agent as well as the N donor, and synthesized N-doped porous carbons. The prepared material exhibits reasonably high CO2 adsorption of 4.50 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/25 °C and 6.01 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C.232 The CO2/N2 selectivity of the prepared material based on IAST method, 0.96 mmol g−1 of CO2 adsorption in dynamic flow, and the physisorption range of Qst (28–38 kJ mol−1) suggested that these porous carbons are good CO2 adsorbents. However, the highly explosive reaction of sodium amide with water prohibits its large-scale application. Sodium amide activation has also been used with a phenolic resin but higher CO2 adsorption, in comparison to the example discussed previously, is observed at 0 °C (7.13 mmol g−1) and 25 °C (4.64 mmol g−1) at 1 bar, which is due to the larger nitrogen content in the porous carbon derived from phenolic resin.233 In some cases, nitrogen precursors were added together with the activating agent to introduce nitrogen functionalities on the surface of the porous carbons. For example, Han et al. synthesised N-doped porous carbon from chestnut shell and melamine activated with KOH. The prepared N-doped porous carbon displays similar CO2 adsorptions of 6.0 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 4.7 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/25 °C.234 N doping can also be introduced by using the precursor that contains a high content of nitrogen. Yang et al. synthesized N-doped porous carbon from poplar catkin, which is an environmental concern, without any external nitrogen source and used ZnCl2 as the activating agent. The synthesized material showed CO2 adsorption of 6.22 mmol g−1 and 4.05 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C, respectively.235 There are numerous citations in the published literature on the conversion of biomass into highly porous carbons with great promise for CO2 capture, some of which are summarized in Table 4. These results reveal that the microporosity and the surface functionalization of the carbon surface with heteroatoms are the key factors for achieving a high CO2 adsorption at low pressure and room temperature. New techniques such as ionic activation and sol–gel are promising for the fabrication of nanoporous carbons with good capabilities for CO2 capture. Zhang et al. modified the conventional KOH activation process into a new ionic activation approach to synthesize porous carbon spheres with high microporosity for CO2 capture.236 The idea here is to produce hydrochar via hydrothermal treatment in an autoclave, followed by calcination in air to generate abundant surface –COOH groups, which could then be ion-exchanged with K to produce surface –COOK groups. Further carbonization of the ion-exchanged materials at 800 °C yielded porous carbon spheres with a high content (95.5%) of uniformly distributed micropores. As a result, the material displayed high CO2 adsorption of 1.58 mmol g−1 at 0.15 bar and 25 °C. Sol–gel is another technique that has evolved for the synthesis of nanoporous carbons with controlled porosity, morphology, and size.237 For example, Zhu et al. prepared nanoporous carbons from glucose using the combined strategy of soft templating and sol–gel process, and utilized these for CO2 capture.238 A solution comprising Pluronic F127 block copolymer, ethanol, HCl, and glucose was converted into a gel using hydrothermal treatment in an autoclave. The further carbonization of the gel at 800 °C in an inert atmosphere followed by CO2 activation at 900 °C resulted in nanoporous carbons with a hierarchical structure.
These nanoporous carbons adsorbed 3.32 mmol of CO2 per gram at 25 °C and 1.6 bar, which was made possible owing to their microporous structure.
 Fig. 21  (a) Preparation of porous carbon from casein, (b) CO2 adsorption at 0, 10, and 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 225, copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 adsorption of sawdust derived porous carbon at 0, 10, and 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 226, copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.2 Nanoporous carbons from fossil fuels
Fossil fuels are an inevitable source of energy for humankind that have existed for the past hundreds of years. Due to their carbon richness, fossil fuels and related precursors have conventionally served as the source of activated carbon, which could be used for a variety of adsorption related applications including CO2 capture. The fabrication of porous carbons from coal and petroleum pitch have been significantly reported in the literature.239–242 For example, petroleum coke, when activated with KOH at 500 °C, produced microporous carbons with a specific surface area of 1470 m2 g−1, which adsorbed 4.17 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 1 bar/2 °C.243 A high CO2/N2 selectivity of >15 and low Qst in the range of 26–33 kJ mol−1 were measured as well. Interestingly, Lee and co-workers also activated petroleum coke with KOH at a temperature of 700 °C to obtain porous carbons with a specific surface area of 2433 m2 g−1 and a high pore volume 1.11 cm3 g−1 but CO2 adsorption at similar conditions of 25 °C/1 bar was lowered to 3.68 mmol g−1.244 This can be attributed to the difference in the number of pores with the size less than 0.8 nm in these samples prepared at different temperatures. Therefore, the selection of the synthetic conditions such as the carbonization temperature is crucial for attaining the desired level of microporosity in the porous carbon for efficient CO2 adsorption. However, it might be difficult to control or perhaps even reproduce the same porosity levels due to entirely different compositions of the coal samples. Coal tar pitch usually shows more developed porosity parameters when prepared using chemical activation as compared to physical activation. For example, among a series of KOH and steam activated porous carbons derived from coal tar pitch under similar preparation conditions, the KOH activated porous carbons showed higher surface areas in the range of 2283–2981 m2 g−1 and larger pore volumes of 1.1–1.5 cm3 g−1 than the ones activated with steam, possessing surface areas in the range of 52–1288 m2 g−1 and pore volumes in the range of 0.01–0.35 cm3 g−1.245 These parameters are decisive factors that control the physisorption of CO2 molecules on the surface of porous carbons and hence, this strategy could be exploited to devise good coal tar pitch-based CO2 adsorbents. It was shown that the combination of heteroatom doping and the activation process can promote the adsorption of CO2. This was demonstrated by Liu et al. who synthesized N-doped porous carbon through direct carbonization and further activation with FeCl3 at different carbonization temperatures (500 to 700 °C), which showed enhanced CO2 adsorption at 0 °C (7.18 mmol g−1) and 25 °C (4.58 mmol g−1) at 1 bar.246 This performance was shown by the material prepared at 600 °C (N-AC-600-2) while the materials prepared at either 500 or 700 °C showed lesser CO2 adsorption performance. The material prepared at 600 °C has both high microporosity and nitrogen contents, which is a key factor for enhanced CO2 adsorption capacity. This research highlights the role of the carbonization temperature towards the development of ideal porosity parameters such as surface area, micropore volume, and pore size for the conducive adsorption of CO2 in the carbon framework (Fig. 22a–d).
 Fig. 22  (a and b) TEM images of the N-doped coal tar pitch derived microporous carbon N-AC-600-2 synthesized at a carbonization temperature of 600 °C and (c and d) CO2 adsorption isotherms of N-AC-600-2 at 25 °C and 0 °C, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 246, copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. 
6.3 Nanoporous carbons from polymers/resins
Nanoporous carbons prepared from polymers and resins have also gained attention for CO2 capture owing to their highly microporous nature and ease of functionalizing the surface with basic groups. Synthetic polymers are an exclusive class of starting materials that could be effectively employed for the preparation of nanoporous carbons with high porosity and surface functionalization with heteroatoms. Several methods including hard/soft templating, template free, self-assembly, and activation using chemical or microwave have been utilized for the fabrication of nanoporous carbons that find use in CO2 capture. Chang et al. used a template-free strategy to fabricate porous carbon from a triazine based polymer and used it for the effective capture of CO2.247 They synthesized three different porous organic polymers labelled as NT-POP-4, NT-POP-5, and NT-POP-6, which were directly carbonized at 800 °C without the intervention of any templating process to produce nanoporous carbons. The material NT-POP-4@800 absorbed 3.96 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 25 °C and 1.05 bar whereas NT-POP-4@800 showed a good CO2/N2 selectivity of 36.9. Through the templating strategy, it is possible to devise nanoporous carbons with the incorporation of heteroatoms. For example, Tan et al. used a soft template-assisted self-assembly approach to fabricate nanoporous carbons from the KOH activation of an imine-linked polymer synthesized through the soft templating of aniline and benzaldehyde.248 The synthesized nanoporous carbons adsorbed 6.35 and 4.82 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 0 and 25 °C, respectively, along with a selectivity of 123 at 0 °C. The hard templating of the polymers produces materials that are rich in mesopores and might be suitable for low-pressure CO2 capture after functionalization of the pore surface with basic groups. Recently, there have been more instances of N-doped porous carbon from polymers for CO2 capture reported in the literature than bare porous carbon. Some of these research results will be discussed to gauge their standing with respect to other porous materials discussed earlier or later. The nitrogen contained in the polymer itself is inherited into the porous carbon during the high-temperature carbonization and activation processes. For example, Nanjing Tech University-21 (NUT-21) polymer with an N content of 46.16% was synthesized from two monomers, namely, 2,4,6-tris(bromomethyl)mesitylene and 3,5-diamino-1,2,4-triazole.249 The nitrogen content of 7.41% was retained when this polymer was simultaneously carbonized and activated at a temperature of 600 °C to generate a porous carbon with a specific surface area of 2208 m2 g−1 and a high pore volume of 0.79 cm3 g−1. The effect of high microporosity and high nitrogen content of the optimized sample resulted in an extremely high value of CO2 adsorption of 8.3 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C, which is comparable to some of the benchmark porous materials in the category of MOFs, zeolites, or porous carbons derived from other precursors.
Another method is to generate nitrogen-containing groups on the polymer surface itself, which can be fixed into the porous carbons. For example, Sun et al. adopted this strategy of modifying the NUT-50 polymer, which was synthesized with mesitylene and 1,4-benzenedimethanol via Friedel–Crafts alkylation with amine groups to produce an N content of 6.4 wt% and then carbonized and activated with KOH to produce lightly N-doped porous carbons (1.5 wt%) with a specific surface area of 1620 m2 g−1. The prepared N-doped porous carbons exhibited the CO2 adsorption capacity of 6.4 mmoles of CO2 g−1 at 0 °C and 1 bar, which is lower than that of the porous carbon prepared from NUT-21.250 The above two examples illustrate that the amount of N-doping is another factor that could affect CO2 adsorption at low pressure, together with the surface area. Recently, the superior CO2 adsorption capability of 9.14 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/0 °C for N-doped porous carbons derived from polyaniline stands among the highest values of CO2 adsorption reported so far for porous carbons.251 Porous carbons such as those derived from triazine based polymers,252 HCPs,253 and CMPs254 have also been reported recently for their CO2 adsorption capability. Resin-based porous carbons derived from an assembly of phenol, formaldehyde, and their N-doped counterpart, usually using urea as the nitrogen source, have been reported more frequently than any other combination in the literature. For example, a PUF (phenol-urea-formaldehyde) resin freeze-dried under vacuum for 48 hours was carbonized at 900 °C to produce N-containing porous carbon, which showed a specific surface area of 1710 m2 g−1 and a nitrogen content of 2.08 wt%.255 It showed 5.5 mmol g−1 and 4.5 mmol g−1 of CO2 adsorption at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C conditions, respectively, which could be ascribed to the microporosity and the presence of nitrogen. In another instance, commercial phenolic resin, when modified with urea, carbonized, and further activated with KOH, yielded porous carbons that adsorbed 4.61 mmol g−1 and 7.13 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 25 °C and 0 °C, respectively.256 Again, it was demonstrated that the presence of microporosity in a narrow region along with the presence of nitrogen substituents contributed to the overall CO2 adsorption at low-pressure conditions.
6.4 Nanoporous carbons from ionic liquids
There has been good progress in the recent past on the development of bare and N-functionalized porous carbon derived from ionic liquids and task-specific ionic liquids including polyionic liquids (PILs). In this section, we will highlight a few examples of nanoporous carbons derived from ionic liquids and their application in CO2 capture. Guant et al. used a polyionic liquid with bis-vinylimidazolium units (PIL-Ac) and employed zinc acetate as the templating and activating agent at 800 °C for the fabrication of N-enriched porous carbon.257 A combination of features in the N-doped porous carbon (NPC-1) such as the high specific surface area of 1354 m2 g−1, pore volume of 0.66 cm3 g−1, and nitrogen content of 6.47 cm3 g−1 allowed for the good CO2 adsorption capacity of 2.50 mol g−1 at 25 °C and 1 bar, which is 5.45 times higher than the value for non-porous carbon but much lower than porous activated carbons derived from sawdust or polyaniline.
Polyionic liquid can also be suitably functionalized in a pre-synthesis fashion with N-containing groups, which are then retained during the high-temperature carbonization of porous carbon. For example, N-doped porous carbon with different nitrogen contents (∼4–11 wt%) was prepared by using PILPhAc containing imidazolium units, which were treated with NaN(CN)2, followed by the treatment with different amounts of KOH.258 The presence of nitrogen was differentiated into pyridinic, pyrrolic, graphitic, and oxidized types (Fig. 23a) and pyridinic-N was prominent among them with the highest weight of ∼34–48 wt%, as evidenced by the high-resolution XPS analysis. Despite the presence of high nitrogen content, these porous carbons displayed high specific surface areas in the range of 1141–1742 m2 g−1, which are dependent on the amount of KOH used for activation. The optimized material NPC-4, with a combination of the good specific surface area of 1742 m2 g−1, pore volume of 1.41 cm3 g−1, and nitrogen content of 5.4 wt%, adsorbed 6.2 and 4.5 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 1 bar/0 °C and 1 bar/25 °C conditions, as shown in Fig. 23b and c, respectively. The overall CO2 adsorption was controlled by pore filling and the role of pyridinic- and pyrrolic-N in efficiently establishing the acid–base interactions with the CO2 molecules. PILs can also be employed as soft activating agents for the nitrogen functionalization of porous carbon exclusively on the surface of a carbon–carbon biphasic heterojunction, which could then be used for CO2 capture.259 PILs can also be transformed into porous carbon nanosheets that possess a further tendency to be functionalized with nitrogen-containing species.260 To avail the properties of the metal, ILs, and porous support, metal-functionalized ILs are immobilized in the porous channels of the support. For example, Zn-functionalized ILs were immobilized into the pores of the porous support and the surface of the non-porous silica particles. It was demonstrated that the functionalization process on the non-porous silica support creates core–shell structures, which significantly enhances the adsorption of CO2 molecules, thus revealing the importance of both the metal and ILs in the selective capture of CO2 molecules.261 By varying the nature of the ILs, Dai et al. controlled the nature of the pores from microporous to hierarchical architecture as well as the surface functional groups on the surface of the porous carbons, which showed enhanced CO2 adsorption capacity. The same group also introduced nitrile crosslinking groups in the ILs for the incorporation of N atoms in the final porous carbon adsorbents, which also showed a significant enhancement in the final adsorption capacity as well as the selectivity towards CO2 molecules.262,263 These results conclude that the combination of tunable porosity with specific surface functional groups is critical for achieving high CO2 adsorption capacity and selectivity.
 Fig. 23  (a) The existence of different forms of nitrogen in porous carbons (NPC) derived from the KOH activation of PILPhDCA and the CO2 adsorption of NPCs at (b) 0 °C and (c) 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 258, copyright (2017), Elsevier. 
6.5 Nanoporous carbons from MOFs
MOFs are a good candidates for low-pressure CO2 capture and also offer the convenience of their transformation into nanoporous carbons that find a fit for various energy and environmental applications including CO2 capture. In general, nanoporous carbons from MOF could be obtained through their direct carbonization and pre- or post-treatment with different reagents including activating agents.264 Although the synthesis of MOFs and their further conversion into nanoporous carbons is a more expensive operation as compared to synthesizing nanoporous carbons from biomass, fossil fuels, and other precursors, however, the high quality of the produced nanoporous carbons in terms of their controllable pore size, morphology, surface functionalization, and performance efficiency for CO2 capture presents a strong case. Herein, a few recent findings from the literature will be discussed to ascertain the capabilities of MOF-derived nanoporous carbons in CO2 capture. The direct carbonization of MOFs to produce nanoporous carbons is a convenient approach as it does not require any modification including pre- or post-treatment of the MOF. For example, Mijowska et al. demonstrated that the direct carbonization of MOF-5 (formed by zinc nitrate and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) at 1000 °C produces nanoporous carbon (CMOF-5) with a surface area of 1884 m2 g−1 and good capabilities for CO2 adsorption over a wide range of temperature and pressure.265 CMOF-5 showed 2.43 mmol g−1 of CO2 adsorption at 25 °C and 1 bar, which was found to be higher than several similar carbons derived from other MOFs. Azizian et al. also fabricated nanoporous carbon from MOF-5 but at a much lower carbonization temperature of 500 °C, which led to a diminished surface area (473 m2 g−1).266 As such, the role of the carbonization temperature becomes a crucial factor in obtaining carbons with different surface areas from the direct carbonization of MOFs. In another instance, the pretreatment of MOF-5 with urea, followed by carbonization at 900 °C, produced nanoporous carbons with a surface area of 2307 m2 g−1 and nitrogen enrichment on the surface due to which the material adsorbed 2.31 mmol of CO2 per gram at 25 °C and 1 bar.267 The generation of high porosity in the nanoporous carbon obtained through direct carbonization of the MOFs could be attributed to the activity of the metal cation species that could help in the formation of pores in the carbon walls. Zeolitic imidazole frameworks (ZIFs) are a class of MOFs that have been studied extensively for their conversion into nanoporous carbons for CO2 capture. Similar to MOFs, the direct carbonization of ZIFs is a popular choice for producing nanoporous carbons. For example, ZIF-8 synthesized from zinc nitrate and 2-methylimidazole on carbonization at high temperature yielded nanoporous carbons that were utilized for CO2 capture.268 The porosity and N-surface functionalization of the nanoporous carbons could be controlled by varying the temperature, holding time, and heating rate during the carbonization. It was revealed that the carbons derived at 700 °C were better suited for CO2 adsorption at 1 bar and 0 °C wherein 5.3 mmol of CO2 per gram was adsorbed. The CO2 capture performance of nanoporous carbons derived from MOFs is dependent on a variety of factors including the source MOF, carbonization conditions, and modification with external agents.
Carbon is a fascinating element and in its porous form, presents an indefinite number of opportunities, especially in the field of adsorption.269 As a universal element, carbon can be extracted from almost everything, which diversifies the scope of material synthesis and application. The suitability of porous carbons for gas adsorption is a popular research theme that is largely due to their highly developed textural features such as high specific surface area, tunable porosity, good chemical/thermal stability, hydrophobicity, ease of synthesis, and functionalization. Porous carbons are considered as important industrial materials for several adsorption-based applications; however, in comparison, their application in commercial level CO2 capture is still lagging far behind. Their porous nature is conducive for high CO2 adsorption capacities but it is hard to compete with materials such as zeolites and MOFs for very low-pressure CO2 adsorption. Moreover, it is still very unclear as to which features of porous carbons help in achieving high CO2/N2 selectivity even though the specific surface functional groups on the surface of the carbons enhance the selectivity of adsorption of CO2 molecules. Although there have been a lot of reports on the control of the porous structure, and surface modification with hetero atoms or amine functionalities, still, they are not enough and more elaborative research is needed on these two concerns to make these materials commercially viable. The overall merits of porous carbons in terms of easy regeneration, inherent hydrophobicity, good stability, and low-cost promising performance for CO2 capture under different pressure or temperature swing conditions present good perspectives for their application in the field of CO2 separation in industries and related sectors. To summarize, CO2 capture using nanoporous carbons is a feasible option at both pre- and post-combustion conditions. Nanoporous carbons derived from different resources such as biomass, fossil fuels, polymers/resins, ionic liquids, and MOFs have their advantages and disadvantages when compared against each other. For example, the biomass and fossil fuels-derived carbons are much cheaper due to the easy availability of the raw precursors, whereas the same is not the case for polymers/resins, ionic liquids, and MOF-based carbons. Moreover, the complexity of synthesis in the latter three also contributes to increase the overall cost of the materials. However, from a qualitative point of view, nanoporous carbons derived from polymers/resins and ionic liquids could offer more ease of control over their pore shape, size, and morphology as the composition of the starting precursors is homogenous. On the other hand, biomass and coal contain a variety of components with varying compositions, which may not help in the precise control over the porous features and surface functionalization. Nonetheless, all types of porous carbon materials discussed here have evolved alongside each other and are good contenders for CO2 capture.
7. Mesoporous materials
Mesoporous materials have a pore size larger than 2 nm, which makes them a ubiquitous choice for the high-pressure adsorption of CO2. However, with suitable tailoring of the pore structure using different functionalization strategies, it is possible to increase their CO2 adsorption at low pressures as well. The presence of large-sized pores in mesoporous materials can allow for the accommodation of a high density of the functionalization agents, such as amines or other N-rich groups, which help in increasing their CO2 adsorption at low pressures. Mesoporous silica-based materials are well explored for their CO2 adsorption under different conditions270,271 and several other materials such as mesoporous carbons,272 mesoporous carbon nitrides,273 mesoporous metal oxides,274 and mesoporous ceria275 have also been effectively utilized for CO2 adsorption in the past few years. Although the control of highly developed textural features and facile functionalization is possible for mesoporous materials, their synthesis is quite expensive due to the high cost of the starting precursors or the templates used. In the following discussion, some of the examples from the recent literature on CO2 adsorption by mesoporous materials will be provided with a comparison with other sorbents.
In the mesoporous materials category, SBA-15 is one of the most studied materials for CO2 adsorption owing to its unique porous structure, high thermal and mechanical stability, and the combination of micropores and mesopores in a single system. As the pore size of these materials is larger than the diameter of CO2 molecules, the adsorption capacity of the material at low-pressure conditions is very low. Therefore, much attention has been given to the functionalization of SBA-15 with basic functional groups.
Xu et al. reported that the mesoporous 2D silica SBA-15 with a specific surface area of ∼633 m2 g−1 and pore size of 7.07 nm can be suitably manipulated by filling the pores with different amounts of tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA) to enhance its CO2 adsorption capacity at low pressure.276 The pore sizes of the functionalized silicas ranged from 2.97 to 6.51 nm while the nitrogen content varied from 10.5 to 22.12 wt%. TEPA was uniformly distributed on the inner and outer pore surface of the silica pores and strong chemisorption with CO2 molecules resulting in the formation of carbamates and cationic amine products was observed. Derived from the strong chemisorption property, the present TEPA-modified SBA-15 adsorbed 5.39 mmol g−1 of CO2 molecules at 75 °C at high pressure but only a reduction of 7.8% was observed when the pressure was reduced to 1 atm. The structure of mesoporous silica also plays a crucial role in enhancing the CO2 adsorption. For this, researchers have used mesoporous silica with different structures including hexagonal mesoporous silica,277 MCM-41,278 MCM-48, SBA-16, and 3D KIT-6,279 which demonstrated different adsorption properties. Among these materials, amine-functionalized materials with interconnected and wide pores are considered as effective adsorbents for CO2 molecules. This is because the wide pores allow for the easy impregnation of many amine molecules whereas the interconnected pores offer micropores that are required for the effective adsorption of CO2 molecules.
Ordered mesoporous carbons (OMCs) are also promising materials for CO2 capture.280 Furthermore, activated ordered mesoporous carbons (AOMC) with a high specific surface area and retained ordered morphology have emerged recently, which can accommodate large amounts of amine groups into their porous framework. For example, an OMC prepared from the self-assembly of phloroglucinol–formaldehyde resol and triblock copolymer Pluronic F-127 when activated with sodium amide (AOMC) shows enhanced ability for CO2 capture.281 The OMC has a specific surface area of 367 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.52 cm3 g−1, which upon activation increase to 2903 m2 g−1 and 3.40 cm3 g−1, respectively, without much loss in the morphology (Fig. 24a and b). The activation effect also split the pore size of 8.2 nm into trimodal pore size distribution centred at 2.2, 8.2, and 65.8 nm. The loading of PEI into OMC and AOMC indicated that almost double of the amount of PEI could be introduced into AOMC (∼60 wt%) as compared to OMC (∼28 wt%). As a result of the higher accommodation of PEI into the porous framework and a high specific surface area, PEI-AOMC showed higher CO2 adsorption capacity (2.58 and 1.84 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/30 °C and 1 bar/75 °C, respectively) than PEI-OMC (1.61 and 0.72 mmol g−1 at 1 bar/30 °C and 1 bar/75 °C, respectively), as shown in Fig. 24c. However, these values are much lower than that observed for the porous activated biocarbons. This could be attributed to the lack of microporosity in the samples that are required for a high amount of CO2 adsorption in a low-pressure region. The presence of nitrogen on the surface could help in enhancing the CO2 capture ability of the mesoporous carbons. For example, high surface area (1690 m2 g−1) mesoporous carbon functionalized with nitrogen obtained from melamine showed well preserved hexagonal mesostructures connected with open pores, which proved to be conducive for high-pressure CO2 capture at different conditions (9.6 mmol g−1/10 bar/15 °C and 7.5 mmol g−1/10 bar/30 °C).282 Mesoporous carbon nitrides (MCNs) have also emerged as good candidates for CO2 capture owing to their high specific surface areas, high pore volumes, and high nitrogen content. Mesoporous carbon nitrides (MCNs) have not been explored for their CO2 capture behaviour, unlike other porous materials. Recently, we have reported on the utilization of mesoporous carbon nitrides for high-pressure CO2 adsorption, which has added new knowledge to the field. For example, MCNs synthesized using the SBA-15 template, showing specific surface areas and pore sizes within the range of 596–655 m2 g−1 and 2.8–5.7 nm, respectively, were tested for their CO2 capture ability at 0, 10, and 25 °C within the pressure range of 0–30 bar.283 A combination of good porosity and basicity imparted due to the presence of nitrogen allowed the optimized materials to adsorb 15.4 mmol g−1 of CO2 at 30 bar/0 °C. Considering the low specific surface area and pore volume, this value is considered as one of the best among ordered mesoporous materials. It is believed that the modification of these nanostructures with a metal, other heteroatoms, amines, or different nitrogen atoms would significantly enhance their adsorption capacity. Recently, several mesoporous carbon nitrides with different chemical structures composed of tetrazine,284 triazole,285 and triazine286 molecular structures have also been explored. It is expected that these materials would offer a new platform for the development of a novel adsorbent system for CO2 adsorption. The incorporation of functionalized moieties such as amines and nitrogen-containing groups into the large-sized mesopores of the above-mentioned materials is an attractive prospect for low-pressure CO2 capture but more exploration in the future is required to realise the potential of these attractive materials. Zhao et al. reported mesoporous carbon nitride spheres with a high amount of nitrogen (17.8 wt%) prepared from silica hard templating of ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride.287 These nitrogen groups provided abundant basicity, which, along with the porous nature of the CN spheres, accounted for their good CO2 capture performance at atmospheric conditions (2.90 mmol g−1 at 25 °C).
 Fig. 24  (a and b) TEM micrographs of OMC and AOMC, and (c) CO2 uptakes of PEI loaded AOMCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 281, copyright (2019), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Mesoporous metal oxides such as MgO, TiO2, and CeO2 have also been widely explored either in the bare form or in combination with other materials as hybrid sorbents for CO2 adsorption. For example, mesoporous MgO prepared using the triple salt method possessed a large number of mesopores in the size range of 2–4 nm with a mesopore volume of 0.295 cm3 g−1.288 The doping of the triple salt-promoted mesoporous MgO with 10% calcium resulted in a higher mesopore volume of 0.529 cm3 g−1, which enabled it to achieve 60% of the total saturation capacity within 10 minutes, while the non-calcium doped MgO reached only 9%, suggesting that calcium doping as well as an increase in the mesoporosity can significantly facilitate CO2 adsorption. A mesoporous mixed metal oxide (Ti0.5Sn0.5O2) functionalized with tantalum was also shown to adsorb a higher amount of CO2 (0.90 mmol g−1) than bare TiO2 (0.58 mmol g−1) at 20 °C, highlighting the role of porosity and hybridization in enhanced CO2 capture.289 Similarly, MgO could also be combined with CeO2 to synthesize a mesoporous MgO–CeO2 composite for enhanced CO2 capture.290 The pelletization of the metal oxides such as CaO is a feasible approach to realize their application potential for CO2 capture in the real world.291 Although these materials are highly stable and can be synthesized in a large quantity, the adsorption capacity of these materials is lower than that of the zeolites or porous activated carbons, which needs to be addressed in the future. Porous materials possess great potential for CO2 capture and each of their categories and sub-types discussed offer specific advantages and disadvantages, which have been summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Specific advantages and disadvantages of different porous materials and their sub types for CO2 capture




Material
Specific advantages
Specific disadvantages




MOFs


UOMSs
Open metal sites for easier manipulation of the binding energy for enhanced interactions with CO2
Water instability


Flexible/breathing
Flexible pore structure transformation for the effective adsorption of CO2
Limited selectivity


Functionalized/hybrid
The functional moieties on the surface enhance the interactions with CO2 and increase the hydrophobicity
Compromised porosity


Hydrophobic
Hydrophobic surface enhances CO2 capture by non-adsorption of competing water molecules
Cycling issues






Zeolites


M+ exchanged
Metal cations act as strong sites for CO2 adsorption, which helps in achieving higher values of Qst
Water instability


Hydrophobic
Hydrophobicity achieved by manipulation of the Si to Al ratio helps in the stability in the presence of water.
Pore blockage


Functionalized
Surface functionalization is a useful tool to enhance low-pressure CO2 adsorption.
Thermal stability






POPs


COFs
Strong covalent bonds for high thermal stability
High cost, low porosity


HCPs
Crosslinking provides a non-collapsible structure
High cost, low porosity


CMPs
A rigid structure with high surface area and micropore volume
High cost, low porosity






Nanoporous carbons


Biomass
Low cost, abundant precursors, easy synthesis and manipulation of the surface
Less capture at low pressure


Fossil fuels
Low-cost starting precursor, easier synthesis, and ease of surface functionalization
Less capture at low pressure


Polymers/resins
Inherent nitrogen and other doping and microporous structure
Low adsorption, high cost


Ionic liquids
Ease of synthesis and tuning of the surface
Low adsorption, high cost


MOFs
Homogenous distribution of the pores
High cost






Mesoporous


Silica/metal oxides
Homogenous and ordered pore systems
Less capture at low pressure




8. Porous materials as catalysts for CO2 conversion
CO2 capture is of paramount importance in addressing the increasing CO2 emissions; however, the storage, conversion, and/or utilization of the captured CO2 is also a significant aspect of the whole process, which needs to be addressed to mitigate climate change. The storage of CO2, either underground or in oceans, has the challenges of potential leakage or increased acidity, which could have adverse impacts on the environment. However, the conversion of CO2 into useful products using environment-friendly pathways presents a more feasible and viable option for achieving a carbon neutral cycle. As previously discussed, porous materials possess the right attributes for capturing high amounts of CO2 and these can offer a perfect platform for the conversion of the captured CO2 into useful products.
The gas capture and conversion using porous materials occurs in four stages; (i) the diffusion of the incoming gases to the accessible areas of the catalyst; (ii) adsorption of the gas molecules on the active sites; (iii) catalytic conversion of the gases into desirable products; and (iv) desorption and diffusion of the products.292 Several porous materials including MOFs, zeolites, POPs, and porous carbons have been identified as promising catalysts for the conversion of CO2 into different products. These porous materials are equipped with unique physico-chemical properties, which make them ideal candidates for CO2 conversion. Through a simple surface modification/functionalization of these porous materials with catalytic components, their stability and catalytic activity for CO2 conversion into either lightweight (short carbon chain) or high-weight (large carbon chain) products could be enhanced as the modification process creates plentiful catalytically active centres on the surface. Recently, a lot of research has also been conducted with a special focus on the fundamental aspects of the materials such as stability, reactivity, efficiency, and recyclability and the process challenges associated with CO2 conversion.
Although porous materials usually have a high surface area, tunable micro and meso interfaces, and changeable morphology, the nature of the porous structure and the framework composition play a critical role in controlling the activity towards CO2 conversion. For example, materials such as MOFs and zeolites can offer high surface area in the microporous domains and present metal cations on the surface, which act as active centres for CO2 catalysis.293,294 On the other hand, porous organic polymers with a crystalline structure and tunable pore environment as well as different chemical moieties are attractive for CO2 conversion owing to their unique and specific catalytic active sites for CO2 conversion.295 In the case of porous carbons, their relatively lower cost of synthesis, higher surface area and hydrophobicity, and highly flexible surface for manipulation with different molecules, as compared to other materials, make them attractive candidates for CO2 conversion.296 The above-mentioned features allow the four categories of porous materials to show high efficiency for the catalytic CO2 conversion reactions. However, the CO2 conversion process has its challenges in terms of the high kinetic and thermodynamic stability of the CO2 molecule, and high negative potentials required for multielectron redox reactions for producing various CO2 conversion products such as methanol (CH3OH), ethanol (C2H5OH), formic acid (HCOOH), formaldehyde (HCHO), carbon monoxide (CO), and methane (CH4).297 Therefore, a heterogeneous catalyst should be specific, have a good number of basic and/or electronic sites to activate the acidic/stable CO2 molecules, and sufficient metal active sites to activate the substrate.
Several chemical processes including photochemical, solar-thermal, chemical/catalytic, enzymatic, electrochemical, and homogeneous catalytic approaches are widely used for the conversion of CO2 molecules. Among these processes, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic pathways are considered as two major state-of-the-art pathways for CO2 conversion. Both these pathways require milder conditions as compared to chemical reduction and each of these is associated with its pros and cons. These conversion processes are analogous to natural photosynthesis and the possible pathways for the reduction of CO2 using these two methods are shown in Fig. 25.298 The CO2 conversion reactions, including the quantitative information on the electron transfer and the respective potentials, are outlined below.299 CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → COOH (E = −0.61 V)(1) CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2O (E = −0.53 V)(2) CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → HCHO + H2O (E = −0.48 V)(3) CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → CH3OH + H2O (E = −0.38V)(4) CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH4 + 2H2O (E = −0.24 V)(5)In this review, we have mainly discussed the applications of porous materials such as MOFs, zeolites, POPs, and porous carbons in CO2 conversion using photocatalytic and electrocatalytic CO2 conversion processes.
 Fig. 25  (a) Natural photosynthesis, (b and c) photocatalytic and electrocatalytic CO2 conversion processes that mimick natural photosynthesis, (d) fundamental steps in the photocatalytic conversion of CO2, and (e) the possible reaction pathways in the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 298, copyright (2017) WILEY-VCH. 
8.1 Photocatalytic CO2 conversion
The utilization of CO2via the least energy-intensive route using solar energy to produce value-added products is envisaged as a feasible option towards a carbon-free world. The photosynthetic approach is mimicked for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, which offers a variety of chemical products (C1 to C4 species including methanol). Porous materials have emerged as potential candidates for this purpose owing to their unique physico-chemical characteristics with high stability and sustainability, and impressive CO2 photoreduction performances. Typically, a photocatalytic CO2 reduction system includes a light-harvesting agent that can convert visible light into chemical energy by the generation of electron–hole pairs that drive the redox reactions.300 Semiconductors are the most commonly employed materials for photocatalytic CO2 conversion; however, the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes limits their efficiency.301 Various semiconducting nanostructures with porous morphologies have also been developed for visible light-driven photocatalysis as they are expected to offer enhanced visible light absorption and high photocatalytic activity for the transformation of CO2 into useful products.302–305 As these materials have shown good promise in this regard, we will discuss more about these nanostructures and compare their photocatalytic CO2 conversion performance in this section.

8.1.1 MOFs. 
MOFs are a versatile class of materials that can offer the complete functions of a photocatalytic reactor in a single system through the combination of a photosensitizer, a photocatalyst, and a CO2 adsorbent for the effective reduction of CO2.5 The catalytic efficiency of the MOFs lies in their ability to boost the kinetics of charge separation and surface CO2 conversion reactions.306 The efficacy of a MOF towards photocatalytic CO2 reduction is dependent on the value of its bandgap and the position of the lowest unoccupied crystal orbital (LUCO) band edge, which should sit above the redox potential of the CO2 reduction half reaction.307 Several investigations on MOFs and their composites with other materials have been carried out to gauge their performance for photocatalytic CO2 conversion. Metal centres inside the porous matrix of the MOFs help to promote their photocatalytic activity. Qin et al. demonstrated that the presence of copper in porphyrin-derived MOF resulted in enhanced CO2 capture and activation, which tends to distort the linear shape of the CO2 molecule and lower the energy barrier for the photoreduction of CO2.308 CO2 photoreduction was reported to be seven times higher in the copper-modified MOF as compared to its non-modified counterpart.
Rhenium, ruthenium, and iridium-based homogenous complexes along with porphyrin-based materials are well known for their photocatalytic CO2 conversion; however, their diminished long term stability, poor recyclability, mixing with reaction components, and corresponding contamination make them unfavourable candidates.309 These drawbacks, however, could be overcome by the inclusion of these compounds inside the porous matrix of the MOFs, which provide a stable, porous, crystalline, and non-collapsible structure to facilitate easier and faster charge transfer for better CO2 conversion rates.
Ruthenium-based complexes are one of the popular categories of photosensitizers that are used in conjunction with MOFs for CO2 photocatalytic reduction. For example, exfoliated 2D nanosheets of the MOF Ni3(HITP)2 as the photocatalyst in combination with [Ru(byp)3]2+ as the photosensitizer and TEOA as the electron donor formed a good assembly for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO.310 The combined features in the framework led to a high CO2 to CO reduction activity of 3.45 × 104 μmol g−1 h−1, which was accompanied by a high efficiency of 97% and decent stability of the material for over 6 cycles. In another instance, the presence of ruthenium-based ligand Ru(phen)3 as the photosensitizer in lanthanide-derived [Eu(III)]2 catalytic clusters presented a highly selective MOF for the conversion of CO2 into HCOOH at the rate of 321.9 μmol h−1 mmol−1 of the MOF in a two-electron process.311 The cyclometallation of lanthanum-based MOF [La2(bpdc)3(DDDMF)3]n with the ruthenium complex [RuCl2(p-cymene)]2 yielded the hybrid Ru(II)@JMS (JMS – Johannesburg and Midlands State)-1a, which showed 98% conversion efficiency for the reduction of CO2 to HCCO−.312 Rhenium is another good choice as a light-harvesting agent for MOF-based photocatalytic CO2 conversion. Yaghi et al. showed that a modified MOF (Ren-MOF – n is the number of Re complexes) with silver nanocubes, formed by the incorporation of the rhenium complex ReI(CO)3(BPYDC)Cl, BPYDC – 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate into the interior of MOF UIO-67, showed high stability and enhanced photocatalytic activity for the conversion of CO2 to CO through the plasmon induction effect generated by the silver atoms.313 The coating of the hybrid MOFs on the silver nanocubes (Ag⊂Re3-MOF) resulted in a spatial arrangement, where the Re-based photoactive centres were displaced to the surface of the electric field of the silver nanocubes that helped to achieve seven times higher conversion rate of CO2 to CO (Fig. 26). The combination of MOF and plasmonic nanoparticles in such hybrids is a perfect approach, which not only increases the visible light capture ability but also provides a platform for obtaining high conversion efficiencies.314 Zhang et al. showed that the light-harvesting properties of TiO2 films could be coupled with CO2 harvesting properties of the ZIF-8 framework to devise a single system for converting CO2 into CO and CH4.315 The chemical bonding of TiO2 and ZIF-8 in the hybrid ensured that the recombination of charge carriers was reduced, which lead to a 38 and 157% increase in the CO and CH4 yields, respectively.
 Fig. 26  (a) The synthesis and structure of Ren-MOF and its silver nanotubes coated counterpart, Ag⊂Ren-MOF, (b) the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into CO using Ag⊂Ren-MOF. Colour design: carbon – black, oxygen – red, zirconium – blue polyhedral, Re – tellow, Cl – green. Adapted with permission from ref. 313, copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Hybrids with ternary MOF based compositions have also been tried for the conversion of CO2. Ternary MOF based compositions are an effective way to promote the separation and movement of photogenerated charge carriers, which allows the fast adsorption of CO2 on the surface active sites and the subsequent conversion of adsorbed CO2 into useful products.316 For example, a semiconductor heterojunction of TiO2 and Cu2O in combination with the MOF Cu3(BTC)2 yielded a ternary nanocomposite, which showed enhanced charge carrier density, increased CO2 activation, and high efficiency for the conversion of CO2 to CH4.317 The number of photogenerated holes in this nanocomposite was 3.28 times higher than that of pure TiO2, which helped with the increased charge carrier density. To enhance the conversion of CO2 molecules, the surface of the porous supports can be attached with functional groups that can selectively capture CO2 molecules. This was realized by Kang et al., who showed that the amine-based functional groups could help to increase the CO2 conversion efficiency of a hybrid of a rhenium complex and a MOF via the introduction of varying bond lengths of Re and CO.318 From these examples, it may be concluded that MOFs are promising porous materials for photocatalytic CO2 conversion; however, challenges concerning their stability, efficiency, selectivity, and cost still exist, which could be addressed by the continuous ongoing research in this field.


8.1.2 Zeolites. 
Zeolites mimic nanoreactors with cages and channels that could host active sites such as metal/metal oxides and provide a good platform for the CO2 capture and conversion processes. Zeolites serve as porous supports for CO2 photocatalysts and their acidity and/or basicity could be controlled with relative ease as compared to other porous materials. The improvement in the hydrophobicity of the zeolites using steam treatment is an added advantage, which renders them unable to attract water during CO2 hydrogenation reactions. The zeolites, in general, are used as photocatalyst supports; however, their intrinsic properties such as high microporosity, high CO2 capture ability at low pressure, and their capacity for providing an excellent platform for stabilizing radical cations and trapping electrons make them promising candidates as photocatalysts.319 Zeolites with mono and multi-metallic compositions as the active sites and as composites with other materials have been employed as catalysts for CO2 photoreduction and some of these will be discussed in this section.
Zeolites can act as porous supports for photocatalytically active semiconductors and the hybrid combination offers excellent electronic properties required for CO2 conversion. Filo et al. prepared a hybrid of zeolite Na-ZSM-5 with organic semiconductor polythiophene having high thermal stability and insolubility in organic solvents.320 The light-harvesting properties of the semiconductor coupled with the better charge transfer properties of the hybrid accounted for high CO2 photoreduction into acetic acid and formic acid. Wang et al. showed that a hybrid formed using a combination of titanium and HZSM-5 could boost the concentration of the excited state electrons and hence increase the CO2 to CO reduction activity, as compared to the hybrid formed with the zeolite loaded with TiO2 nanoparticles.321 Another report showed that the transformation of zeolite into thin nanosheets is a good method to increase its photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CH4.322 The authors reported that the 2D nanosheets (thickness 3.0 nm) of zeolite SAPO-5 synthesized using the hydrothermal treatment showed better performance than the SAPO-5 microrods due to the availability of high surface area and surface active sites. The nanosheets serve as a platform for prolonging the duration of the excited state, which causes an enhancement in the photocatalytic activity.
The precise control over the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of a zeolite is a significant factor that can affect its photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance. Anpo et al. showed that two types of Ti-β zeolites, synthesized using either OH− or F− anionic contributions from the structure-directing agent, possess hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, respectively.323 The higher affinity of the OH−-based zeolite for water accounted for its higher reactivity towards the conversion of CO2 to CH4 and CH3OH, whereas the F−-containing zeolite exhibited high selectivity for CH3OH production. Recently, Cool et al. also proposed that the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of Ti-β zeolites could be tuned by varying the experimental parameters and they intended to use these materials for photocatalytic CO2 reduction in the future.324


8.1.3 POPs. 
POPs are another interesting class of polymeric materials, which offer the convenience of tuning the reactive groups present in the parent monomer units for catalytic reactions. These unique functional groups, along with their high surface area, allow for enhanced mass transfer during photocatalytic CO2 conversion. Their CO2 catalytic properties can be further enhanced by the introduction of CO2 attractive groups and additional metal active centres to facilitate higher CO2 adsorption and its subsequent conversion into useful products. Metal-included or metal-free and POPs acting as porous support for metal active centres are some of their popular prospects in the photoreduction of CO2. Liu et al. showed that the inclusion of heteroatoms N, O, and P in the framework of the porous organic polymer derived from the condensation of hexachlorocyclotriphosphazene with barbituric acid (NOP-COP) could promote the absorption of visible light and enhance the longevity of the photogenerated carriers for better CO2 photoreduction.325 The authors reported that phosphorus played a major role in enhancing the photocatalytic performance and CO2 was reduced to CH4 at the rate of 22.5 μmol g−1 h−1 with high selectivity of >90%.
A high photoelectrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO was made possible using an assembly of pyridine-based covalent triazine framework (CTF) synthesized from 2,6-dicyanopyridine as the porous support on which the Re-carbonyl complex (Re(Co)3Cl) was attached to generate a hybrid system of Re-CTF-py.326 These hybrids displayed an extraordinary CO2 to CO photoreduction of 353.05 μmol g−1 h−1 over a duration of 10 hours. A low-cost prospect of POPs towards CO2 photoreduction is to functionalize them with a dye, as reported by Liu et al.327 The synthesized eosin Y-functionalized conjugated organic polymer as a selective catalyst for the conversion of CO2 to CO exhibited an evolution rate of 33 μmol g−1 h−1 and a selectivity of 92%. The DFT calculations revealed that the eosin Y sites could adsorb and activate CO2 and H2O, whereas these sites together with the alkyne carbon bond sites and conjugated structure of the hybrid helped in the enhancement of light absorption, charge separation, and adsorption activation of CO2 and H2O. The binding energies from the DFT calculations (Fig. 27) suggested that the –OH and –COO− sites could preferentially adsorb H2O and CO2, respectively, which could be activated later on.
 Fig. 27  The binding distance and binding energy between –OH and –COO− in eosin Y-functionalized conjugated organic polymer for (a and b) CO2 and (c and d) H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 327, copyright (2019) WILEY-VCH. 
The adsorption of CO2 on the –COO− sites withdraws photoexcited electrons from the LUMO of the hybrid, whereas the adsorption of H2O on –OH proceeds by receiving holes from the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO). Ternary CO2 photocatalytic systems analogous to MOFs could also be designed for POPs. Jin et al. designed a ternary organic–inorganic hybrid comprising α-Fe2O3, the porous covalent triazine framework (Por-CTF), and Ru(bpy)3Cl2, which acted as an electron transfer relay system and reduced the recombination of the photoinduced charges, thus leading to a higher rate of conversion of CO2 to CO.305 The ternary system is beneficial for suppressing the backward process of electron transfer, which allows for faster forward electron transfer. In another instance, the ternary combination of a POP, TiO2, and graphene offered simultaneously high CO2 adsorption due to plentiful porous features, resulting in the high production of CH4 (27.62 μmol g−1 h−1).328 This material is advantageous in terms of non-usage of any precious metal co-catalysts for the CO2 conversion process.


8.1.4 Nanoporous carbons. 
Porous carbons are utilized in a multitude of catalytic applications owing to their high specific surface area, ease of synthesis from a variety of natural and synthetic precursors, tunable micro and mesoporosity, and ease of integration of the catalytic metal and metal oxide catalysts. While these low-cost materials present an ideal host or support system for catalysis, the highly absorbing nature of carbon hinders its use in photocatalytic applications and hence, there are no reports on the use of porous carbons for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
The photocatalytic conversion of CO2 using porous materials is an environment-friendly approach that could pave the way for the generation of clean fuels/fine chemicals in a more convenient and prosperous way as compared to some of the other approaches. Porous materials can play the important role of a photocatalyst in the CO2 conversion process, which is largely possible due to their high surface area and the presence of metal active centres. MOFs, zeolites, and POPs are well suited for this purpose and their modification using different functional groups or other moieties could be utilized to fabricate a suitable photocatalyst. In comparison, porous carbons are ruled out for photocatalytic activity due to their high absorbing power for visible light. Although various hybrid nanostructures with ordered/disordered porous structures with unique photocatalytic sites are used for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 molecules, unfortunately, their performance is not as high or selective as that of natural photocatalysts. Existing challenges in the field include cost-effectiveness of the materials for large-scale use and addressing their stability, selectivity, and regenerability. There have been a few trials on mimicking natural catalysts but they lack stability or sustainability. Therefore, further research and development is needed for the design of novel and highly selective and active porous photocatalysts to advance this research to a higher level.

8.2 Electrocatalytic CO2 conversion
The electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 is one of the possible solutions for mitigating global warming and can be effectively used for converting CO2 into clean fuels and other value-added products. This simple process can be executed with electrical energy produced from various sources including renewable energy resources. Many products such as CO, HCOO−, HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4 can be obtained from the electrochemical reduction of CO2 molecules. The standard reduction potential for this half-reaction is within the range of −0.2 V to 0.2 V versus RHE but practical CO2 conversion requires much more negative potentials (overpotential) due to the energy barrier restriction.329 The heterogeneous electrocatalysis of CO2 using porous materials is an attractive prospect from several points of view. The high surface area and pore volume provide access to the bulk of the material and the CO2 reduction reaction is not limited only to the surface of the materials. The crystalline network in a porous matrix helps to avoid the deactivation of the active sites that promote their longevity and is beneficial for eliminating the chances of interference between the two half-cell reactions. A porous matrix containing catalytically active centres along with enhanced conductivity is expected to improve the charge transfer, increase the liberation of products, and hence contribute to the overall improvement of the electrocatalytic reduction process. An ideal CO2 reduction electrocatalyst should offer low-energy kinetics, easy electron transfer to the activated CO2, show high efficiency and selectivity, and be highly recyclable for repeated use. Porous materials exhibit several of the above-mentioned characteristics and are continuously being explored for CO2 electrocatalysis on a large scale.

8.2.1 MOFs. 
MOFs. 
Several MOFs and related hybrid systems including a diverse range of metal active sites as the catalytic centres have been explored for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The notable candidates among these include Cu based frameworks, which possess electrocatalytically active centres on the electrode and provide a low potential for CO2 reduction.330 Recent approaches such as growing Cu-MOF thin films into 3D porous structures (Cu-gauze) could be seen as a more effective way of devising in situ electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction.331 Such porous hybrid structures possess in situ created electrocatalytic active centres in the bulk and along the edges of the material, and the controlled tuning of the MOF structure is beneficial for the formation of Cu dendrites so as to show higher catalytic activity for CO2 conversion to HCCO−. In another instance, a combination of a Cu(II) paddle wheel cluster and a porphyrinic MOF yielded porous electrocatalysts (Cu2(CuTCPP)) in the form of nanosheets that show both good efficiency and selectivity for the transformation of CO2 to formate and acetate (Fig. 28a and b).332 The production of formate proceeded with a faradaic efficiency of 68.4% at −1.55 V while C–C coupling generated acetate between −1.40 V and 1.62 V, accompanied by a faradaic efficiency (FE) in the range of 38.8–85.2%.
 Fig. 28  (a) Structure of the nanosheet-based electrocatalyst Cu2(CuTCPP); colour design: oxygen – red, nitrogen – blue, carbon – grey, copper – cyan. (b) CO2 electrochemical reduction to formate and acetate using Cu2(CuTCPP). Adapted with permission from ref. 332, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) POP synthesized from 2,6-dicyanopyridine using ZnCl2 polymerization and thermal treatment for CO2 to CO conversion. Adapted with permission from ref. 340, copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
In addition to Cu, several other MOFs with inorganic active centres including Co, Ni, and Fe metals have also been considered as potential materials for CO2 electrocatalysis. For example, a Fe-porphyrin based CO2 electrocatalyst incorporated into the MOF-525 thin film showed a high coverage of the surface active sites, which resulted in close to 100% faradaic efficiency for CO2 conversion to CO.333 The authors concluded that the highly porous MOF provided the much-needed surface for the high distribution of the Fe-porphyrin based catalyst, which facilitated a higher transportation of CO2 and the charge carriers, thus resulting in high reduction activity. Recently, Buonsanti et al. reported that silver colloidal nanocrystals could be combined with a MOF (Al-PMOF) to form a hybrid platform (Ag@Al-PMOF) for the effective conversion of CO2 to CO.334 They reported that the hybrid could suppress the HER while promoting CO2 reduction at the same time as compared to the silver nanocrystals alone. The synergic effects of the nanocrystals and MOF improved the electronic properties of the hybrid through the removal of the native MOF ligands. The field of CO2 electrocatalytic reduction using MOFs has witnessed a continuous growth in the recent past and several challenging aspects that include the design of new MOF-based electrocatalysts that possesses high efficiency, a large number of redox sites, selectivity, and stability over longer times still need to be continuously explored.335–337


8.2.2 Zeolites. 
The interconnected channels of zeolites with a microporous structure, coupled with tunable acidity/basicity and surface functionalization are attractive features for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The important areas including catalyst stability, activity, and selectivity are being continuously explored to better establish zeolites as low-cost materials for CO2 capture and conversion.338 As described in the previous section, zeolites have been widely used as catalysts for photocatalytic CO2 reduction but it is hard to locate instances where these have been employed for electrochemical CO2 reduction. This could be due to the poor electronic conductivity of the zeolite materials, which is one of the key parameters required for the electrochemical reduction of CO2. It is surmised that these materials may find applications in this sector if they are hybridized with conducting materials both inside the porous channels and on the external surface. However, this has not materialized so far and there is room for further research and development in this area.


8.2.3 POPs. 
POPs and their composites have evolved alongside other porous materials for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. The hybridization of POPs with other electrochemically active materials allows for the tuning of porous and electro-chemical features that are required for efficient CO2 electrocatalytic reduction. Alkordi et al. demonstrated that a combination of graphene and pyrimidine containing POP (PyPO@G) could overcome the low CO2 capture and electrocatalytic reduction capability of the individual components.339 Similarly, a triazine based POP, which has a rich content of pyridinic N-doped sites, showed a good faradaic efficiency for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO.340 This POP was synthesized from ZnCl2 based polymerization of 2,6-dicyanopyridine and contained plentiful pyridinic sites, which are beneficial for the conversion of CO2 to CO (Fig. 28c), following the two-electron transfer reaction. Yoon et al. reported that the functionalization of the covalent triazine framework with iridium(III)–N-heterocyclic carbene complex (Ir–NHC–CTF) is a perfect combination to achieve an outstanding conversion of CO2 to formate and reported a turn over frequency and number of 16000 h−1 and 24300, respectively.341 The apparent reason for the excellent CO2 reduction was attributed to the strong σ-donating and poor π-accepting abilities of the N-heterocyclic carbene ligands (NHC), which resulted in a high concentration of the electrons around the Ir(III) cation. In another instance, a hybrid (POP@MWCNTs) of POP and multiwalled carbon nanotubes was synthesized and it showed good CO2 capture ability as well as CO2 electrocatalytic reduction.342 It was reported that none of the individual components could match the CO2 capture and conversion performance of the hybrid, which highlights the advantage of hybrid systems for such applications. Moreover, the authors reported that the CO2 conversion activity of the catalyst could be tuned by the introduction of Cu(I) ions using the wet impregnation method.


8.2.4 Nanoporous carbons. 
Employing porous carbons for CO2 reduction has the advantage of easy exposure of its active sites to CO2 molecules and the electrolyte owing to numerous open pores. However, porous carbon itself without any chemical modification is unlikely to be highly active for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 due to the inert nature of its surface. To activate the inert carbon template for CO2 reduction, several N-substituted porous carbon structures have been explored. It has been shown that the N-defect sites constructed in the hexagonal graphitic framework could play a pivotal role in driving the CO2 reduction activity of the N-doped carbon structure. Although there is still some debate,343,344 it has been generally accepted that the pyridinic N sites have a significant influence on the selectivity as well as the CO2 reduction capacity by tuning the basicity of adjacent carbon atoms, facilitating the chemisorption of CO2 molecules, and the following electron-transfer reduction.345 For instance, Ye et al. prepared N-doped porous carbon from MOFs and the concentration of N-containing groups was controlled by varying the calcination temperature and time of the MOFs to adjust the types of N.346 The highest FECO of 98.4% towards CO formation at the potential of −0.55 V (vs. RHE) could be observed, which is attributed to the synergistic effect of active N-site concentration and high porosity.
Apart from the CO2 conversion into C1 compounds, the transformation of CO2 molecules into multi-carbon compounds using N-doped porous carbon structure has also been studied. To enable the production of multi-carbon compounds by inhibiting the production of C1 compounds and hydrogen gas, facilitating the C–C bond formation and subsequent single/multiple proton-coupled electron transfer is required during the reduction process. Song et al. reported the CO2 reduction activity of N-doped mesoporous carbon for the conversion of CO2 into ethanol with FEC2H2OH of 77% at the potential of −0.56 V (vs. RHE).347 The observed high activity could be ascribed to the even distribution of pyridinic and pyrrolic N sites within the ordered cylindrical channel of N-doped porous carbon, thus effectively offering electrons for the C–C coupling of CO* intermediates. Besides, the introduction of the dual-doping system into the porous carbon structure could significantly improve the CO2 reduction activity towards CO and CH4 formation by stabilizing the CO2˙− intermediate.348,349 Porous carbon also acts as an efficient hybridization support for immobilizing the active catalysts towards electrochemical CO2 reduction such as metals, metal compounds, and molecular complexes.350–352
Grafting active catalysts on the surface of porous carbon could not only provide numerous active sites that are accessible to CO2 molecules and the electrolyte but also prevent the agglomeration of catalytic particles during the CO2 reduction process, thus resulting in a significant enhancement in the CO2 conversion capability. For example, MoP nanoparticles, showing promising CO2 reduction activity towards formic acid, were immobilized on the surface of In-substituted porous carbon, as reported by Sun et al.350 The incorporation of MoP nanoparticles with In-substituted porous carbon led to higher CO2 reduction capability towards formic acid, exhibiting a FECH2O2 of 96.5% at the potential of −2.2 V (vs. Ag/Ag+), as compared to the bare MoP particles (∼10%). In addition to the above-mentioned role, the effective anchoring of the active catalyst on the surface of porous carbon gives rise to synergistic effects by facilitating the intermediate steps for CO2 reduction so that multi-carbon products could be obtained with comparatively low overpotential. Liu et al. anchored the Ru(II)–polypyridyl carbene complex on the N-doped porous carbon by π–π stacking, which converted CO2 molecules into ethanol with FEC2H5OH of 27.5% in the potential range of −0.87 to −1.07 V (vs. NHE).351 The observed CO2 reduction into ethanol products could be attributed to the synergistic effects of the Ru(II)–polypyridyl carbene complex and the N-doped porous carbon that are responsible for CO˙− intermediate formation and C–C dimerization, respectively. Despite the promising progress in porous carbon structures for CO2 reduction, achieving high selectivity remains a challenging task, particularly when converting CO2 molecules into multi-carbon products.
Undoubtedly, porous materials offer advantages such as large surface-to-volume ratio, which provides an enhanced number of active catalytic sites and tunable surface chemical composition to optimize the binding energy between the catalyst and the reaction intermediates for CO2 conversion. Among the porous materials discussed above for electrocatalytic CO2 conversion, MOFs and POPs appear to be inherently better suited for the purpose due to their unique structural chemistry, inbuilt metal active centres, and well-developed and controllable porous features. However, their high cost and long-term recyclability for industrial-scale usage still demand more research. In comparison, zeolites have not evolved much whereas surface-functionalized porous carbons could become a more viable option in terms of the cost-effectiveness. Overall, porous materials are a better platform for electrocatalytic CO2 conversion than other non-porous materials.
Overall, CO2 conversion over porous materials using convenient and affordable methods such as photocatalytic and electrocatalytic conversion is a financially attractive proposition, which could potentially be upscaled to fit large-scale operations. Dual functional porous materials with reticular chemistry, including catalytic active centres such as MOFs and POPs, are favourable options for moving forward towards CO2 capture and conversion in a single reactor. The materials such as zeolites and/or porous carbons are relatively cheaper choices compared to organic frameworks; however, their catalytic efficiency needs more fine-tuning via exploration. Therefore, further development in the research direction of porous materials and their hybrids, including the fundamental and mechanistic studies on both the structure and the active sites of these hybrid nanostructures, is needed. This will help to design highly efficient catalytic systems for the conversion of CO2 with high efficiency and selectivity for high-value products.

9. Conclusions and future outlook
The ever-growing problem of climate change caused by aggravated CO2 emissions is the most complex challenge faced by modern-day society. CO2 is released in almost all kinds of industrial operations; however, the composition might vary depending upon the type of industrial operation. The capture of CO2 before its release in the atmosphere is deemed more effective as compared to the removal of excess CO2 directly from air. The former scenario is being addressed on a commercial scale by using alkanolamine-based solvents for CO2 capture and the latter is still in its infancy. However, enough is not being done to prevent the large additions of CO2 into the atmosphere. The major type of CO2 capture operation, namely, post-combustion CO2 capture, in which CO2 needs to be captured at very low concentrations (15%) and very low pressures (0.1–1 bar), is widely recognized as an area that could help address global CO2 emissions. In this review, new trends in the development of porous materials with a major focus on their ability for post-combustion CO2 capture have been highlighted. Pre-combustion CO2 capture, wherein CO2 needs to be captured at high pressures, has also been addressed.
A countless number of possibilities exist in the development of porous materials towards CO2 capture. Consequently, the recent past has witnessed a significant rise in the number of publications devoted to this research field. The primary focus of these investigations is to manipulate the porous structure to compete with the CO2 adsorption capacity of well-established and commercially deployed alkanolamine solvents. A systematic summary of different porous materials and how their physico-chemical and structural properties affect CO2 adsorption and selectivity has been provided in this review. From the porous materials’ perspective, four distinct types, including MOFs, zeolites, porous organic polymers, and porous carbons, have been thoroughly discussed with a major emphasis on their CO2 capture behaviour under different conditions. It is worthwhile to say that MOFs are at the forefront in terms of their CO2 adsorption capacities at low pressures. The superior CO2 adsorption capacity of 5.3 mmol g−1 at 0.15 bar and 40 °C shown by Mg2(dobdc) MOF exemplifies the ability of the MOFs in the post-combustion CO2 capture process. The zeolites are not far behind with the 13X variants showing remarkable performance in the low-pressure ranges. Porous organic polymers have evolved alongside MOFs/zeolites and shown good promise for CO2 adsorption. Porous carbons derived from various precursors are good candidates for high-pressure CO2 adsorption unless suitably modified for post-combustion capture conditions. Mesoporous materials such as carbon nitride are continuously evolving and fit well into the criteria for CO2 adsorption at high pressures. The surface chemistry of carbon nitrides can be easily altered using different functional groups, which can make it possible to compete with well-established materials for low-pressure CO2 adsorption. The main features of the porous materials that control CO2 adsorption are dependent on their surface texture and chemistry. Porous materials with extremely high specific surface area, pore volume, and pore size in the microporous region possess good surface activity and are ideally suited for accumulating high quantities of CO2 on the surface at low pressures. This could further be boosted by the functionalization of their surface with CO2-philic groups such as those containing nitrogen or basic metal cations in the alkali or alkaline earth categories. At high pressure, the overall surface area, total pore volume, and mesoporous character of the porous materials are the governing factors for CO2 adsorption. These two guidelines should be considered for the rational design of any new porous material for desired CO2 application in the pre- or post-combustion scenarios.
From the technical requirements of the capture process, porous materials are expected to satisfy several criteria for their successful deployment in the commercial sector and a right balance must be achieved among all of them. These factors are listed below;45
1. High CO2 adsorption capacity (≥2 mmol g−1) that could compete with the commercially deployed amines such as 30% monoethanolamine.
2. High selectivity for CO2 (preferable ≥100) in a mixture with N2 and other components under conditions that mimic industrial post-combustion capture.
3. High resistance towards the adsorption of water (100 °C) as the flue gas stream is usually moist.
4. High recyclability without an appreciable loss in the CO2 adsorption capacities over several thousand cycles.
5. Fast adsorption–desorption kinetics (80% uptake within two minutes) for achieving high efficiency of the overall capture process.
6. Good stability towards high temperature (>150 °C) and chemicals (acids and bases) to make sure that the materials could be used over a wide range of conditions without collapsing the porous structure or alterations in the surface chemistry.
7. Low heats of adsorption ideally within the range of 25–50 kJ mol−1, which would ensure that the energy penalties associated with the material regeneration are lesser as compared to that of commercial alkanolamine solvents.
8. Low cost of material availability (<$10 kg−1) and the overall capture process (<$50 kg−1) through an amalgamation of all the above factors in comparison to commercial alkanolamine solvents to make sure it is appealing to the industries.
Undoubtedly, there has been tremendous progress in the fabrication and CO2 capture performance of porous materials in the recent past; however, there are still several areas where future research could be focussed on for further improvements. A better understanding of the fundamentals of the CO2 adsorption mechanism on the surface of porous materials could be explored further for devising much more efficient CO2 sorbents.
Much of the published literature is based on the adsorption of CO2 from the simulated flue gas streams numbers, which might be different from the concentration of CO2 in the real gas stream encountered in industries. The real flue gas stream contains water and acidic gases in addition to CO2 and hence, materials with real high selectivity for CO2 but a high resistivity towards other components are required. Another most important aspect from the industrial point of view would be the cost, which is a culmination of the expenses incurred from the synthesis of the porous adsorbent, retrofitting amine-based absorption units with adsorption systems, materials regeneration, and materials recyclability. It is hard to imagine that materials such as MOFs and POPs could be able to compete with commercial amines because of the expensive nature of their synthesis and the fact that their porous structure is prone to changes in different conditions such as temperature and pressure. Zeolites and porous carbons do have potential in terms of cost, however, more significant advances in terms of science and engineering need to be achieved in the foreseeable future to reveal their full potential in the sustainable CO2 capture process. In the absence of these features, porous materials will continue to serve as adsorbents for niche applications with better control of the exhaust stream and where methanolamine based systems cannot be used due to design or scaling limitations. The challenge would be with the supply of millions of tonnes of porous materials at a relatively cheaper price than the commercial amines. Despite these challenges, CO2 capture using adsorbents is still seen as a feasible strategy that could help minimise emissions into the atmosphere and help in addressing the issue of climate change. To meet these challenges, the research and development on the design of functionalized porous materials with specific functional groups coupled with ultra-microporosity or interconnected porosity that could enhance the CO2 adsorption capacity as well as the selectivity of the adsorption of CO2 in the presence of other molecules such as nitrogen, methane, or water molecules must be promoted. With these measures, novel and highly effective adsorbent systems may be developed for the capture of CO2 molecules soon.
The conversion of captured CO2 also addresses the issue of climate change as it could sweep away the captured CO2 and utilize it for conversion into useful products. Porous materials such as MOFs and POPs are highly regarded for their abilities to convert CO2, which relies on their unique physico-chemical properties and surface metal activity. These materials could be synthesized via several routes using an abundant variety of building blocks or units with diverse functional groups. Their synthetic design and application perspectives have seen a large growth in the past few years and their charge transfer properties coupled with high surface areas are ideal characteristics that are useful for both photo and electrocatalytic conversion of CO2. These materials also offer ease of manipulation of their size, shape, porosity, catalytically active centres, and so on. The continuous growth of these materials through future research is imminent and work involving the synthesis of the lightest of these materials with thin pore walls and high surface area could improve their CO2 conversion efficiencies. Future research can also be based on binding energies, wherein the material adsorbing high CO2 initially and later desorbing it quickly for the conversion process could be the focus. Zeolites and porous carbons usually act as porous supports for CO2 reduction and their evolution is based on their low cost. These two materials are promising for CO2 capture at low and high pressures; however, their CO2 conversion abilities need more exploratory research in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
One of the authors, A. Vinu, acknowledges the University of Newcastle for the start-up funds and funding support from Australian Research Council for the award of future fellowship (FT100100970).
Notes and references
N. F. Attia, M. Jung, J. Park, H. Jang, K. Lee and H. Oh, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, D. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Fan, S. Huang and W. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10276–10282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Snoeckx and A. Bogaerts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5805–5863 RSC .

          https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/gl_trend.html
        .
M. Ding, R. W. Flaig, H.-L. Jiang and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2783–2828 RSC .
L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2785–2824 RSC .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7833–7853 RSC .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
J.-H. Wee, Appl. Energy, 2013, 106, 143–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koh, B. Ju and W. Seo, Energy Procedia, 2019, 159, 315–320 CrossRef .
L. I. Eide, M. Batum, T. Dixon, Z. Elamin, A. Graue, S. Hagen, S. Hovorka, B. Nazarian, P. H. Nøkleby and G. I. Olsen, Energies, 2019, 12, 1945 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. D. Tapia, J.-Y. Lee, R. E. Ooi, D. C. Foo and R. R. Tan, Sustainable Production and Consumption, 2018, 13, 1–15 CrossRef .
G. Cui, J. Wang and S. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4307–4339 RSC .
S. Wang, S. Yan, X. Ma and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3805–3819 RSC .
E. De Lena, M. Spinelli, M. Gatti, R. Scaccabarozzi, S. Campanari, S. Consonni, G. Cinti and M. C. Romano, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2019, 82, 244–260 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Theo, J. S. Lim, H. Hashim, A. A. Mustaffa and W. S. Ho, Appl. Energy, 2016, 183, 1633–1663 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jansen, M. Gazzani, G. Manzolini, E. van Dijk and M. Carbo, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2015, 40, 167–187 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. Zhou and D. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1334–1347 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
N. Li, Z. Chang, H. Huang, R. Feng, W. W. He, M. Zhong, D. G. Madden, M. J. Zaworotko and X. H. Bu, Small, 2019, 1900426 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xu, S. Chen, D.-K. Seo and S. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 693–705 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, D. Zhu, Z. Zhang, H. Li, G. Chen and B. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 248, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, I. Y. Kim, K. S. Lakhi, P. Srivastava, R. Naidu and A. Vinu, Carbon, 2017, 116, 448–455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 32–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, Z. Liu, Z. Du, W. Zou and C. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47844 CrossRef .
S. N. Talapaneni, G. Singh, I. Y. Kim, K. AlBahily, A. A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, A. S. Karakoti, E. Tavakkoli and A. Vinu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904635 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, B. Li, W. Wang, K. Wu and B. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5703–5707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, I. Y. Kim, S. Kim, P. Srivastava, R. Naidu and A. Vinu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29782–29793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-H. Lu and G.-P. Hao, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem., 2013, 109, 484–503 RSC .
J. W. Maina, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, L. Kong, J. Schütz, M. Hill and L. F. Dumée, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 345–361 RSC .
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600423 CrossRef .
M. H. Alkordi, L. J. Weselinski, V. D'Elia, S. Barman, A. Cadiau, M. N. Hedhili, A. J. Cairns, R. G. AbdulHalim, J. M. Basset and M. Eddaoudi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7453–7460 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Z. P. Cano, D. Luo, H. Dou, A. Yu and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20985–21003 RSC .
N. Planas, A. L. Dzubak, R. Poloni, L.-C. Lin, A. McManus, T. M. McDonald, J. B. Neaton, J. R. Long, B. Smit and L. Gagliardi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7402–7405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Bien, Q. Liu and C. R. Wade, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lan, M. S. Liu, X. Y. Lu, X. Zhang and J. M. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8727–8735 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, S. Zhuo, Z. Yan, H. Gao, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7323–7327 RSC .
L. Zou, Y. Sun, S. Che, X. Yang, X. Wang, M. Bosch, Q. Wang, H. Li, M. Smith, S. Yuan, Z. Perry and H.-C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 170229 Search PubMed .
H. J. Park and M. P. Suh, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 685–690 RSC .
F. Martínez, R. Sanz, G. Orcajo, D. Briones and V. Yángüez, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 142, 55–61 CrossRef .
M. Sun, Q. Gu, A. Hanif, T. Wang and J. Shang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 1450–1458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Y. Chuah and T.-H. Bae, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1227–1234 CrossRef CAS .
D. Britt, H. Furukawa, B. Wang, T. G. Glover and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20637–20640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Song, Q. Liu, N. Ji, S. Deng, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Song and H. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 215–231 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Patel, J. Byun and C. T. Yavuz, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1303–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, P. K. Thallapally, B. P. McGrail, D. R. Brown and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2308–2322 RSC .
J. Yu, L.-H. Xie, J.-R. Li, Y. Ma, J. M. Seminario and P. B. Balbuena, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9674–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Luo, Z. Zhong and A. Borgna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 42–55 RSC .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
N. Chanut, S. Bourrelly, B. Kuchta, C. Serre, J. S. Chang, P. A. Wright and P. L. Llewellyn, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1543–1553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Creamer and B. Gao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 7276–7289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Boot-Handford, J. C. Abanades, E. J. Anthony, M. J. Blunt, S. Brandani, N. Mac Dowell, J. R. Fernández, M.-C. Ferrari, R. Gross, J. P. Hallett, R. S. Haszeldine, P. Heptonstall, A. Lyngfelt, Z. Makuch, E. Mangano, R. T. J. Porter, M. Pourkashanian, G. T. Rochelle, N. Shah, J. G. Yao and P. S. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 130–189 RSC .
N. P. Wickramaratne and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 112–116 RSC .
L. Wang and R. T. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1099–1106 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. J. Zhou and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415–5418 RSC .
M. Tchalala, P. Bhatt, K. Chappanda, S. Tavares, K. Adil, Y. Belmabkhout, A. Shkurenko, A. Cadiau, N. Heymans and G. De Weireld, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Benoit, N. Chanut, R. S. Pillai, M. Benzaqui, I. Beurroies, S. Devautour-Vinot, C. Serre, N. Steunou, G. Maurin and P. L. Llewellyn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2081–2090 RSC .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1438–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S.-i. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Batten and R. Robson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1460–1494 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191–214 RSC .
A. Modak and S. Jana, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 276, 107–132 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Farha, I. Eryazici, N. C. Jeong, B. G. Hauser, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, R. Q. Snurr, S. T. Nguyen, A. O. z. r. Yazaydın and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15016–15021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Li, H.-H. Wang, H.-Y. Yang, L. Hou, Y.-Y. Wang and Z. Zhu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. O. K. Farha, A. Ö. Yazaydın, I. Eryazici, C. D. Malliakas, B. G. Hauser, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. T. Nguyen, R. Q. Snurr and J. T. Hupp, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Queen, M. R. Hudson, E. D. Bloch, J. A. Mason, M. I. Gonzalez, J. S. Lee, D. Gygi, J. D. Howe, K. Lee, T. A. Darwish, M. James, V. K. Peterson, S. J. Teat, B. Smit, J. B. Neaton, J. R. Long and C. M. Brown, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4569–4581 RSC .
D.-A. Yang, H.-Y. Cho, J. Kim, S.-T. Yang and W.-S. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6465–6473 RSC .
D. Yuan, D. Zhao, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5357–5361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, Q. Li, L. Liang, T.-T. Li, Y. Hu and S. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 14102–14106 RSC .
B. Liu, S. Yao, X. Liu, X. Li, R. Krishna, G. Li, Q. Huo and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32820–32828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, X. Jiang, L.-W. Ruan, B. Liu, Y.-M. Wang, J.-F. Zhu and L.-G. Qiu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 179, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Dong, S. Y. Zhang, W. L. Liu, Y. C. Wu, J. Ge, L. Song and Y. L. Teng, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5691–5694 RSC .
E. J. Carrington, C. A. McAnally, A. J. Fletcher, S. P. Thompson, M. Warren and L. Brammer, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Cui, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Suo and H. Xing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3138–3144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Li, J. G. Bell, X. Lv, S. Tang, X. Zhao and K. M. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1502–1516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, H. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Suo, B. Li, C. Kong and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14658–14665 RSC .
X. Si, C. Jiao, F. Li, J. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Li, L. Sun, F. Xu, Z. Gabelica and C. Schick, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4522–4527 RSC .
K. Zhang, Y. Chen, A. Nalaparaju and J. Jiang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10358–10366 RSC .
H. Li, K. Wang, D. Feng, Y.-P. Chen, H.-C. Zhou, Y.-P. Chen, H.-C. Zhou and W. Verdegaal, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2832–2840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chevalier, J. Martin, D. Peralta, A. Roussey and F. Tardif, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103131 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ö. Yazaydın, A. I. Benin, S. A. Faheem, P. Jakubczak, J. J. Low, R. R. Willis and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1425–1430 CrossRef .
J. Senker, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Forgan, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 9037–9042 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Q. Gong, Z. Li and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 653–661 RSC .
S. Choi, T. Watanabe, T.-H. Bae, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1136–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dinca, A. Dailly, Y. Liu, C. M. Brown, D. A. Neumann and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16876–16883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Poloni, R. Poloni, K. Lee, B. Smit, R. Poloni, K. Lee, R. F. Berger, J. B. Neaton, J. B. Neaton and J. B. Neaton, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Poloni, B. Smit and J. B. Neaton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6714–6719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, A. O. Yazaydin, J. R. Lane, P. D. C. Dietzel and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3544–3556 RSC .
X. Kong, E. Scott, W. Ding, J. A. Mason, J. R. Long and J. A. Reimer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14341–14344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-A. Yang, H.-Y. Cho, J. Kim, S.-T. Yang and W.-S. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6465–6473 RSC .
C. Chen, X. Feng, Q. Zhu, R. Dong, R. Yang, Y. Cheng and C. He, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 2717–2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ö. Yazaydın, R. Q. Snurr, T.-H. Park, K. Koh, J. Liu, M. D. LeVan, A. I. Benin, P. Jakubczak, M. Lanuza, D. B. Galloway, J. J. Low and R. R. Willis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18198–18199 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Caskey, A. G. Wong-Foy and A. J. Matzger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10870–10871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. C. Dietzel, R. E. Johnsen, H. Fjellvåg, S. Bordiga, E. Groppo, S. Chavan and R. Blom, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5125–5127 RSC .
A. L. Dzubak, L.-C. Lin, J. Kim, J. A. Swisher, R. Poloni, S. N. Maximoff, B. Smit and L. Gagliardi, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Millward and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17998–17999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Suh, S. Lee and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24444–24451 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wongsakulphasatch, W. Kiatkittipong, J. Saupsor, J. Chaiwiseshphol, P. Piroonlerkgul, V. Parasuk and S. Assabumrungrat, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 383–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, J. Shang, Q. Gu, G. Li, J. Li, R. Singh, P. Xiao and P. A. Webley, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14716–14719 RSC .
Y. Gao, K. Liu, R. Kang, J. Xia, G. Yu and S. Deng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 359, 248–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, R. S. Reali, D. A. Smith, M. C. Trachtenberg and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 13951–13954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-m. Hyun, J. H. Lee, G. Y. Jung, Y. K. Kim, T. K. Kim, S. Jeoung, S. K. Kwak, H. R. Moon and D. Moon, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1920–1925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghoufi, K. Benhamed, L. Boukli-Hacene and G. Maurin, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 394–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Yang, Y.-Z. Li, C.-Y. Jiang, H.-H. Wang, L. Hou, Y.-Y. Wang and Z. Zhu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 3044–3050 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, H. Fang, S. Mukhopadhyay, A. Li, S. Rudić, I. J. McPherson, C. C. Tang, D. Fairen-Jimenez, S. E. Tsang and S. A. Redfern, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Salles, A. Ghoufi, G. Maurin, R. G. Bell, C. Mellot-Draznieks and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8487–8491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghalei, K. Sakurai, Y. Kinoshita, K. Wakimoto, A. P. Isfahani, Q. Song, K. Doitomi, S. Furukawa, H. Hirao, H. Kusuda, S. Kitagawa and E. Sivaniah, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17086 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Dong, Z. Zhao, S. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6668–6681 RSC .
H. Deng, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, R. B. Ferreira, J. Towne, C. B. Knobler, B. Wang and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 327, 846–850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Fracaroli, H. Furukawa, M. Suzuki, M. Dodd, S. Okajima, F. Gándara, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8863–8866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Flaig, T. M. Osborn Popp, A. M. Fracaroli, E. A. Kapustin, M. J. Kalmutzki, R. M. Altamimi, F. Fathieh, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12125–12128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, K. Wang, Z. Hu, Y.-P. Chen, W. Verdegaal, D. Zhao and H.-C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7867–7874 RSC .
D. Andirova, Y. Lei, X. Zhao and S. Choi, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3405–3409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Q. Yan, C. Kong and L. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1859 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shin, D. K. Yoo, Y.-S. Bae and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 123429 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Yoo, T.-U. Yoon, Y.-S. Bae and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122496 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Xie, M.-M. Xu, X.-M. Liu, M.-J. Zhao and J.-R. Li, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jayaramulu, F. Geyer, A. Schneemann, Š. Kment, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril, D. Vollmer and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900820 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Nguyen and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4560–4561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Chen, I. Popov, O. Zenasni, O. Daugulis and O. Š. Miljanić, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6846–6848 RSC .
X. Qian, F. Sun, J. Sun, H. Wu, F. Xiao, X. Wu and G. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2003–2008 RSC .
N. Ding, H. Li, X. Feng, Q. Wang, S. Wang, L. Ma, J. Zhou and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10100–10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, Y. Zeng, Z. Liang, W. Guo, C. Zhi, Y. Wu, R. Zhong, C. Qu and R. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3751–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Bao, R. Krishna, Y.-B. He, J.-S. Qin, Z.-M. Su, S.-L. Li, W. Xie, D.-Y. Du, W.-W. He, S.-R. Zhang and Y.-Q. Lan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7361–7367 RSC .
B. L. Suh, S. Lee and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem., 2017, 121, 24444–24451 CAS .
Z. Hu, Y. Wang, S. Farooq and D. Zhao, AIChE J., 2017, 63, 4103–4114 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, S. Yu, C. Zeng, L. Yu, C. Wang and L. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 278, 267–274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kodasma, J. Fermoso and A. Sanna, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, J. Mai, L. Wang, X. Li, Z. Jiang and F. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Hong, M.-S. Jang, S. J. Cho and W.-S. Ahn, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4927–4930 RSC .
V. M. Georgieva, E. L. Bruce, M. C. Verbraeken, A. R. Scott, W. J. Casteel, S. Brandani and P. A. Wright, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12744–12759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, S. Wang, G. Chen, J. Duan, J. Dong and W. Wang, Adsorption, 2019, 1–9,  DOI:10.1007/s10450-019-00147-w .
J. K. Bower, D. Barpaga, S. Prodinger, R. Krishna, H. T. Schaef, B. P. McGrail, M. A. Derewinski and R. K. Motkuri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14287–14291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, K. Xie, R. Singh, G. Xiao, Q. Gu, Q. Zhao, G. Li, P. Xiao and P. A. Webley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18933–18941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schroeder, M. R. Hansen and H. Koller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14281–14285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, Q. Dong, W. L. Xu, F. Zhou, X. Liang and M. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 769–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Chen, M. Zhu, Y. Fu, Y. X. Huang, Z. C. Tao and W. L. Li, Appl. Energy, 2017, 191, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Polisi, J. Grand, R. Arletti, N. Barrier, S. Komaty, M. Zaarour, S. Mintova and G. Vezzalini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2361–2369 CrossRef .
R. Kodasma, J. Fermoso and A. Sanna, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, L.-C. Lin, J. A. Swisher, M. Haranczyk and B. Smit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18940–18943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, T.-H. Bae, J. E. Bachman, K. Sumida, J. R. Long, J. J. Dutton and S. S. Kaye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4787–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Bae, M. R. Hudson, J. A. Mason, W. L. Queen, J. J. Dutton, K. Sumida, K. J. Micklash, S. S. Kaye, C. M. Brown and J. R. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 128–138 RSC .
S. Chen, M. Zhu, Y. Tang, Y. Fu, W. Li and B. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19570–19583 RSC .
S. Chen, M. Zhu, Y. Fu, Y. Huang, Z. Tao and W. Li, Appl. Energy, 2017, 191, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and M. D. LeVan, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2009, 54, 2839–2844 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyamoto, S. Ono, K. Kusukami, Y. Oumi and S. Uemiya, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1756–1760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, Y. Li, Z. Bian, J. Hu and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8091–8097 RSC .
M. Lee, S. Hong, D. Kim, E. Kim, K. Lim, J. C. Jung, H. Richter, J.-H. Moon, N. Choi and J. Nam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3946–3960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Bezerra, R. S. Oliveira, R. S. Vieira, C. L. Cavalcante and D. C. Azevedo, Adsorption, 2011, 17, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, H. S. Cho, S. Chang, S. J. Cho and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1803–1811 RSC .
C.-W. Tsai, J. W. Niemantsverdriet and E. H. G. Langner, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 262, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
D. Panda, E. A. Kumar and S. K. Singh, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5301–5313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and R. T. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3301–3308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, S.-S. Kim, W.-S. Cho and W.-S. Ahn, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 332, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Nguyen, S. Kim, M. Yoon and T. H. Bae, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 455–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Signorile, J. G. Vitillo, M. D’Amore, V. Crocellà, G. Ricchiardi and S. Bordiga, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 17214–17224 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. Zhou and D. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1334–1347 RSC .
L. Tan and B. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3322–3356 RSC .
R. Bera, M. Ansari, A. Alam and N. Das, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 959–968 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perego, D. Piga, S. Bracco, P. Sozzani and A. Comotti, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9321–9324 RSC .
P. Puthiaraj, S.-S. Kim and W.-S. Ahn, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, X. Li, G.-H. Ning, H.-S. Xu, C. Liu, B. Tian, W. Tang and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1762–1768 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Abdelnaby, A. M. Alloush, N. A. Qasem, B. A. Al-Maythalony, R. B. Mansour, K. E. Cordova and O. C. S. Al Hamouz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6455–6462 RSC .
S. Makhseed and J. Samuel, Polymer, 2015, 74, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tang, J. Hou, K. Liang, J. Huang and Y. N. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 4175–4180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, J. Zhu, S. A. Snyder, A. J. Morris and S. R. Turner, Polymer, 2018, 154, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
L.-B. Sun, Y.-H. Kang, Y.-Q. Shi, Y. Jiang and X.-Q. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3077–3085 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, X. Wang and Z. Lai, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 255, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, X. Wang, M. M. Ostwal, Y. Zhao, Y. Han and Z. Lai, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 145, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, H. Ren, X. Zou, S. Meng, F. Sun and G. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 144–152 RSC .
A. K. Sekizkardes, J. T. Culp, T. Islamoglu, A. Marti, D. Hopkinson, C. Myers, H. M. El-Kaderi and H. B. Nulwala, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13393–13396 RSC .
S. Sung and M. P. Suh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13245–13249 RSC .
L. H. Xie and M. P. Suh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 11590–11597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8875–8883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, X. Ding and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6010–6022 RSC .
Y. Ge, H. Zhou, Y. Ji, L. Ding, Y. Cheng, R. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Wu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27495–27506 CrossRef CAS .
R. Babarao and J. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 139–143 RSC .
N. Huang, X. Chen, R. Krishna and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2986–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, S. Das, G. Xing, T. Ben, V. Valtchev and S. Qiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7673–7680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Wang, Z. Qiao, S. Zhao and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5306–5315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Martín, E. Stöckel, R. Clowes, D. J. Adams, A. I. Cooper, J. J. Pis, F. Rubiera and C. Pevida, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5475–5483 RSC .
P. Puthiaraj and W.-S. Ahn, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 7917–7923 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, X. Yang, M. Yu, Y. Zhang and J.-X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8054–8059 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Jia, J. Liu, X. Fan, B. Zhang, A. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 33, e5025 Search PubMed .
K. A. Fayemiwo, G. T. Vladisavljević, S. A. Nabavi, B. Benyahia, D. P. Hanak, K. N. Loponov and V. Manović, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 2004–2013 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, L. Shao, J. Huang and Y.-N. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 264, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mane, Z.-Y. Gao, Y.-X. Li, D.-M. Xue, X.-Q. Liu and L.-B. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23310–23318 RSC .
Y. Xu, N. Mao, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zeng, Y. Chen, F. Wang and J.-X. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 228, 1–9 CrossRef .
S. Qiao, Z. Du and R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1877–1885 RSC .
H. Zhou, B. Zhao, C. Fu, Z. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Ding, B.-H. Han and A. Hu, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 3935–3941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. Yan, E. J. Townsend, J. Feng, L. Pan, V. Del Angel Hernandez and C. F. Faul, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 11841–11845 CrossRef .
S.-B. Ren, P.-X. Li, A. Stephenson, L. Chen, M. E. Briggs, R. Clowes, A. Alahmed, K.-K. Li, W.-P. Jia and D.-M. Han, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 9254–9260 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiao, W. Huang, Z. Du, X. Chen, F.-K. Shieh and R. Yang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 136–141 RSC .
M. Yu, X. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Zhao and J.-X. Jiang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3217–3223 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Q. Huang and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16277–16284 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Li, F. Zhang, X. Zhuang, Z. Zeng and J. Wei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30048–30055 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Wei, C. Zhang and J.-X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21185–21193 RSC .
L. An, S. Liu, L. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wu, C. Ma, Q. Yu and X. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 3349–3358 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kueh, M. Kapsi, C. M. Veziri, C. Athanasekou, G. Pilatos, K. S. K. Reddy, A. Raj and G. N. Karanikolos, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 11718–11730 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, D.-H. Park, P. Srivastava, R. Naidu and A. Vinu, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dassanayake and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19456–19466 RSC .
W. Shi, R. Wang, H. Liu, B. Chang, B. Yang and Z. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 23241–23253 RSC .
Y. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, Y. Wang, C. Jiang, Q. Liu, Q. Fang, M. Xue and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9544–9552 RSC .
B. Adeniran, E. Masika and R. Mokaya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14696–14710 RSC .
G. Singh, I. S. Ismail, C. Bilen, D. Shanbhag, C. I. Sathish, K. Ramadass and A. Vinu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 255, 113831 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Qi, Y. Liu, A.-Z. Peng, D.-M. Xue, X. Liu, X.-Q. Liu and L.-B. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 945–952 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Zhong, J. Ding, J. Wang, M. Xu, Q. Deng, Z. Zeng and S. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 963–973 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, K. Ramadass, J. M. Lee, I. S. Ismail, M. Singh, V. Bansal, J.-H. Yang and A. Vinu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 287, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, H. Huang, Y. Yu, J. Shi, C. He, R. Albilali and H. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 584–594 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, L. Li, R. Chen, C. Wang, H. Li and H. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2069–2076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, S. Tiburcius, S. M. Ruban, D. Shanbhag, C. Sathish, K. Ramadass and A. Vinu, Emergent Mater., 2019, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D.-P. Yang, Z. Li, M. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Xue, E. Ye and R. Luque, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 4564–4585 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Benzigar, S. N. Talapaneni, S. Joseph, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, J. Scaranto, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2680–2721 RSC .

          M. Sevilla, G. A. Ferrero and A. B. Fuertes, in Nanoporous Materials for Gas Storage, ed. K. Kaneko and F. Rodríguez-Reinoso, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2019, pp. 287–330 DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-3504-4_11 .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, S. Sil, S. V. Bhosale, I. Kim, K. Albahily and A. Vinu, Carbon, 2019, 148, 164–186 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Hirst, A. Taylor and R. Mokaya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12393–12403 RSC .
Y. Li, R. Xu, X. Wang, B. Wang, J. Cao, J. Yang and J. Wei, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 19818–19826 RSC .
G. Singh, I. Y. Kim, K. S. Lakhi, S. Joseph, P. Srivastava, R. Naidu and A. Vinu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21196–21204 RSC .
M. Wang, X. Fan, L. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Wang, R. Cheng, M. Li, J. Tian and J. Shi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17593–17600 RSC .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, K. Ramadass, C. I. Sathish and A. Vinu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7412–7420 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, C. I. Sathish, K. Ramadass, J.-H. Yang and A. Vinu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1604–1613 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1765–1771 RSC .
M. Sevilla, J. B. Parra and A. B. Fuertes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6360–6368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, J. Chen, D. Li, H. Chen and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Ismail, G. Singh, P. Smith, S. Kim, J.-H. Yang, S. Joseph, S. Yusup, M. Singh, V. Bansal, S. N. Talapaneni and A. Vinu, Carbon, 2020, 160, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Du, J. Jin, J. Chen and J. Mi, Appl. Energy, 2020, 260, 114265 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Adio, S. A. Ganiyu, M. Usman, I. Abdulazeez and K. Alhooshani, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122964 CrossRef .
L. Rao, S. Liu, L. Wang, C. Ma, J. Wu, L. An and X. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Rao, B. Xia, L. Wang, L. Yue, Y. Liang, H. DaCosta and X. Hu, Carbon, 2018, 130, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Chen, N. Fu, H. Chen, H. Lin and S. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 266, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chang, W. Shi, H. Yin, S. Zhang and B. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1507–1518 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, D. Luo, G. Lui, G. Li, G. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, Y.-P. Deng, X. Du, S. Yin, Y. Chen, M. Zhang, Z. Yan and Z. Chen, Carbon, 2019, 143, 531–541 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Danks, S. R. Hall and Z. Schnepp, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 91–112 RSC .
T. Liang, R. Wei, P. Shen, G. Xiao, L. Gao and W. Zhu, J. Porous Mater., 2017, 24, 1637–1645 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, J. Guo, D. Jia, H. Zhao, Z. Sun, X. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21178–21184 RSC .
F. Tong, W. Jia, Y. Pan, J. Guo, L. Ding, J. Chen and D. Jia, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 6184–6192 RSC .
P. Abudu, L. Wang, M. Xu, D. Jia, X. Wang and L. Jia, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 702, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, H.-f. Zhang, X.-j. He, H. Ma, S.-a. Dong and X.-y. Xie, New Carbon Mater., 2019, 34, 132–139 CrossRef .
E. Jang, S. W. Choi and K. B. Lee, Fuel, 2019, 248, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jang, S. W. Choi, S.-M. Hong, S. Shin and K. B. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 62–71 CrossRef CAS .
T. Guan, J. Zhao, G. Zhang, D. Zhang, B. Han, N. Tang, J. Wang and K. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 271, 118–127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, J. Hu, L. Zhou, J. Li, J. Tang, C. Peng and H. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 3726–3732 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, G. Li, J. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Chang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1867 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alabadi, H. A. Abbood, Q. Li, N. Jing and B. Tan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-Z. Peng, S.-C. Qi, X. Liu, D.-M. Xue, S.-S. Peng, G.-X. Yu, X.-Q. Liu and L.-B. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 656–664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S.-C. Qi, A.-Z. Peng, D.-M. Xue, X.-Q. Liu and L.-B. Sun, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 11013–11021 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Kutorglo, F. Hassouna, A. Beltzung, D. Kopecký, I. Sedlářová and M. Šoóš, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 1199–1212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, G. Li, J. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Chang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1867 CrossRef .
L. Shao, M. Liu, J. Huang and Y.-N. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 304–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Wu, S. Ren, J. Ji, Y. Yue and J. Shen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32496–32501 RSC .
Z. Li, T. Chen, X. Wu, L. Luo, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Fan, Z. Su and W. Zhao, J. Porous Mater., 2019, 26, 847–854 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yue, L. Rao, L. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Wu, H. DaCosta and X. Hu, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 2081–2088 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Chen, Z. Li, X. Li, H. Wang, N. Feng, H. Wan and G. Guan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 414–423 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, H. Lin, K. Grygiel and J. Yuan, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 7, 159–168 CrossRef .
J. Gong, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7557–7563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, H. Lin, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7313–7321 RSC .
I. H. Arellano, J. Huang and P. Pendleton, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65074–65083 RSC .
S. M. Mahurin, P. F. Fulvio, P. C. Hillesheim, K. M. Nelson, G. M. Veith and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3284–3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, P. C. Hillesheim, S. M. Mahurin, C. Wang, C. Tian, S. Brown, H. Luo, G. M. Veith, K. S. Han, E. W. Hagaman, H. Liu and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1912–1917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Hu, Q. Yang and J. Cai, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4238–4268 RSC .
W. Kukulka, K. Cendrowski, B. Michalkiewicz and E. Mijowska, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 18527–18537 RSC .
N. Bakhtiari and S. Azizian, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 16954–16959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, L. Li, R. Chen, C. Wang, H. Li and S. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 435, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gadipelli and Z. X. Guo, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2123–2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, W. Li, Q. Shi, Y. Li, J. Chen, Y. Ling, A. M. Asiri and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 329–331 RSC .
Q. T. Vu, H. Yamada and K. Yogo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2638–2644 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lakhi, G. Singh, S. Kim, A. V. Baskar, S. Joseph, J.-H. Yang, H. Ilbeygi, S. J. M. Ruban, V. T. H. Vu and A. Vinu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 267, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, D. Zhou, Z. Sun, Y. Deng, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2322–2328 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lakhi, W. S. Cha, S. Joseph, B. J. Wood, S. S. Aldeyab, G. Lawrence, J.-H. Choy and A. Vinu, Catal. Today, 2015, 243, 209–217 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, G. Ji, W. Liu, X. He, E. J. Anthony and M. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 332, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Azmi, N. Ngadi, M. J. Kamaruddin, Z. Y. Zakaria, L. P. Teh, N. H. R. Annuar, H. D. Setiabudi, A. A. Jalil and M. A. Ab Aziz, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2019, 72, 403–408 Search PubMed .
G. Zhang, P. Zhao, L. Hao and Y. Xu, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 22–33 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sanz-Pérez, A. Arencibia, G. Calleja and R. Sanz, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 260, 235–244 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Yang, H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Luo, Z. Liang and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6094–6102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mei, L. Geng, Z. Lin, S. Chen, J. Wei and L. Liao, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065520 CrossRef .
K. S. Lakhi, W.
S. Cha, J.-H. Choy, M. Al-Ejji, A. M. Abdullah, A. M. Al-Enizi and A. Vinu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 233, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong and J. Liu, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6040–6047 RSC .
Z. Wu, P. A. Webley and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11379–11389 RSC .
K. S. Lakhi, D.-H. Park, G. Singh, S. N. Talapaneni, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16220–16230 RSC .
S. N. Talapaneni, G. P. Mane, D.-H. Park, K. S. Lakhi, K. Ramadass, S. Joseph, W. M. Skinner, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18183–18192 RSC .
G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, K. S. Lakhi, H. Ilbeygi, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily, T. Mori, D.-H. Park and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8481–8485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, K. S. Lakhi, H. Ilbeygi, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily, T. Mori, D. H. Park and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8481–8485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Yang, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Q. Wu, S. S. Park, C.-S. Ha and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 632–642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, K. Ho and C.-H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1605–1613 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bargougui, N. Bouazizi, J. F. Hochepied, F. Le Derf, J. Vieillard and S. Ammar, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 728, 391–399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, G. Bang, L. Liu and C.-H. Lee, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 288, 109587 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, M. H. Sedghkerdar, J. Saayman, N. Mahinpey, N. Ellis, D. Zhao and S. Kaliaguine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16577–16588 RSC .
A. W. Thornton, D. A. Winkler, M. S. Liu, M. Haranczyk and D. F. Kennedy, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44361–44370 RSC .
M. H. Beyzavi, C. J. Stephenson, F. Liu, O. Karagiaridi, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 2, 63 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. H. Yu, Chem, 2017, 3, 928–949 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ozdemir, I. Mosleh, M. Abolhassani, L. F. Greenlee, R. R. Beitle and M. H. Beyzavi, Front. Energy Res., 2019, 7, 1–32 CrossRef .
R. A. Molla, A. Iqubal, K. Ghosh and M. Islam, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 3100–3107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Deng, J. Albero, L. Z. Xu, H. Garcia and Z. H. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 8276–8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef .
I. I. Alkhatib, C. Garlisi, M. Pagliaro, K. Al-Ali and G. Palmisano, Catal. Today, 2020, 340, 209–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Q. Wang, C. Y. Sun, T. T. Zheng, L. K. Yan, M. T. Li, K. Z. Shao, X. L. Wang and Z. M. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12498–12505 RSC .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Zhang, Y. H. Jin, Y. S. Shi, M. C. Li, J. N. Li and C. Y. Duan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 380, 201–229 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Xu, J. H. Hu, D. K. Wang, Z. H. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yamashita, M. Honda, M. Harada, Y. Ichihashi, M. Anpo, T. Hirao, N. Itoh and N. Iwamoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10707–10711 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Zhang, S. Y. Wang, L. P. Guo, H. Chen, B. Tan and S. B. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 192–200 RSC .
Q. Q. Mu, W. Zhu, G. B. Yan, Y. B. Lian, Y. Z. Yao, Q. Li, Y. Y. Tian, P. Zhang, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21110–21119 RSC .
R. Grau-Crespo, A. Aziz, A. W. Collins, R. Crespo-Otero, N. C. Hernández, L. M. Rodriguez-Albelo, A. R. Ruiz-Salvador, S. Calero and S. Hamad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16012–16016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, Y. M. Yang, Q. L. Sun, Z. Y. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Y. Qin and X. Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7654–7658 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, D. K. Wang, X. Y. Deng and Z. H. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4893–4904 RSC .
W. Zhu, C. F. Zhang, Q. Li, L. K. Xiong, R. X. Chen, X. B. Wan, Z. Wang, W. Chen, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Yan, M. H. Du, J. X. Liu, S. Y. Jin, C. Wang, G. L. Zhuang, X. J. Kong, L. S. Long and L. S. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3353 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tshuma, B. C. E. Makhubela, L. Ohrstrom, S. A. Bourne, N. Chatterjee, I. N. Beas, J. Darkwa and G. Mehlana, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 3593–3605 RSC .
K. M. Choi, D. Kim, B. Rungtaweevoranit, C. A. Trickett, J. T. D. Barmanbek, A. S. Alshammari, P. D. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Xu, C. M. Shi, B. Liu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, W. P. Li, D. P. Liu and X. H. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 593–610 RSC .
Z. Huang, P. Dong, Y. Zhang, X. Nie, X. Wang and X. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, T. B. Wu, H. H. Wu, H. Z. Liu, Q. L. Qian, Z. M. Liu, G. Y. Yang and B. X. Han, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8890–8894 RSC .
X. He and W. N. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 932–940 RSC .
U. J. Ryu, S. J. Kim, H. K. Lim, H. Kim, K. M. Choi and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 612 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, Y. Zhang, N. Tong, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Zhu, F. Li and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7579–7585 RSC .
J. Kianicka, G. Cik, F. Sersen, I. Spanik, R. Sokolik and J. Filo, Molecules, 2019, 24, 992 CrossRef .
Y. C. Tong, L. Chen, S. B. Ning, N. Tong, Z. Z. Zhang, H. X. Lin, F. Y. Li and X. X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 725–730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhu, S. J. Liang, Y. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, F. Y. Li, H. X. Lin, Z. Z. Zhang and X. X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ikeue, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and T. Takewaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8350–8355 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hoeven, G. Mali, M. Mertens and P. Cool, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 288, 109588 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Yu, Y. Zhao, Z. Yang, B. Han and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4576–4581 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, X. S. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Lin, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2224–2230 RSC .
X. X. Yu, Z. Z. Yang, B. Qiu, S. E. Guo, P. Yang, B. Yu, H. Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhao, X. Z. Yang, B. X. Han and Z. M. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 632–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Wang, M. Xu, T. Y. Peng, C. X. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Y. Wang and B. E. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kim, H. J. Kim, H. Lim, Y. Kwon and H. M. Jeong, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, D. Yang, H. Liu, X. Sun, C. Chen, J. Bi, J. Liu, H. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1–7 CrossRef .
J.-X. Wu, S.-Z. Hou, X.-D. Zhang, M. Xu, H.-F. Yang, P.-S. Cao and Z.-Y. Gu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2199–2205 RSC .
I. Hod, M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6302–6309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Guntern, J. R. Pankhurst, J. Vávra, M. Mensi, V. Mantella, P. Schouwink and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12632–12639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Zhang, J. Z. Li, Q. Tan, L. L. Lu, Z. B. Wang and G. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18137–18157 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhao, X. Y. Dai, T. Yao, W. X. Chen, X. Q. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Q. Wei, Y. E. Wu and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Graça, L. V. González, M. C. Bacariza, A. Fernandes, C. Henriques, J. M. Lopes and M. F. Ribeiro, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 101–110 CrossRef .
A. B. Soliman, R. R. Haikal, Y. S. Hassan and M. H. Alkordi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12032–12035 RSC .
X. Zhu, C. C. Tian, H. H. Wu, Y. Y. He, L. He, H. Wang, X. D. Zhuang, H. L. Liu, C. G. Xia and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43588–43594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Gunasekar, K. Park, V. Ganesan, K. Lee, N. K. Kim, K. D. Jung and S. Yoon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6740–6748 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Haikal, A. B. Soliman, M. Amin, S. G. Karakalos, Y. S. Hassan, A. M. Elmansi, I. H. Hafez, M. R. Berber, A. Hassanien and M. H. Alkordi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 347–357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Kan, R. Huang, B. Zhang, B. Wang, K.-H. Wu, Y. Lin, X. Sun, Q. Li, G. Centi and D. Su, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1085–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Sharma, J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, C. J. Wright, C. S. Tiwary, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan and X.-D. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13701–13705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Yang, H. Wang, G. P. Ji, X. X. Yu, Y. Chen, X. W. Liu, C. L. Wu and Z. M. Liu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2869–2872 RSC .
L. Ye, Y. Ying, D. Sun, Z. Zhang, L. Fei, Z. Wen, J. Qiao and H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3244–3251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, W. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Li, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10840–10844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, M. Seredych, E. Rodríguez-Castellón and T. J. Bandosz, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 606–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Shi, X.-M. Hu, M. R. Madsen, P. Lamagni, E. T. Bjerglund, S. U. Pedersen, T. Skrydstrup and K. Daasbjerg, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3608–3615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, L. Lu, Q. Zhu, C. Wu, D. Yang, C. Chen and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Fan, A. Nayak, Y. Wang, B. Shan, X. Quan and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 26353–26358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, Y. Noh, Y. Kim, S. Park, W. Yoon, D. Jang, S. M. Choi and W. B. Kim, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 71–84 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Gurwinder Singh
	Dr Gurwinder Singh is working as a Research Fellow at the Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials (GICAN), the University of Newcastle, Australia. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science (2018) under the supervision of Prof. Ajayan Vinu. After completing his PhD, he joined Prof. Vinu's research group at GICAN as a research associate and recently got promoted to Research Fellow. His current research interests include the design and development of micro/mesoporous materials for carbon capture/conversion, energy storage, and various environmental applications.

Jangmee Lee
	Dr Jang Mee Lee received her BS degree in Chemistry (2011), MS degree (2013), and PhD degree from Ewha Womans University, Korea. Currently, she is working as a Research Fellow at GICAN, the University of Newcastle. Her research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of low-dimensional inorganic nanosheet-based nanohybrids for a diverse range of energy-related applications including CO2 capture, photocatalysis, Li/Na-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and electrocatalysis.

Ajay Karakoti
	Dr Ajay Karakoti is an Associate Professor at the GICAN, The University of Newcastle, Australia. Dr Karakoti is a full-scale materials researcher and works on the synthesis of bare and functionalized nanoparticles for applications in biology, catalysis, and sensing. His research is focused on the applications and detailed surface and bulk characterization of nanoparticles. A significant portion of his research deals with developing a detailed understanding of the reaction of cerium oxide nanoparticles with reactive oxygen species and the consequences of size, structure, doping, and surface functional groups on its enzyme-like activity.

Dongyuan Zhao
	Prof. Dongyuan Zhao received his BS (1984) and PhD (1990) from Jilin University. After his post-doctoral experiences in the Weizmann Institute of Science and the University of California at Santa Barbara, he joined Fudan University as a Professor in 1998. He was selected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 and as a member of The World Academy of Sciences in 2010. His research interests focus on the synthesis of mesoporous materials for catalysis, energy, water purification, and biomedical applications.

Khalid Al-Bahily
	Dr Khalid Al-Bahily has been the director of SABIC CRD at KAUST, Saudi Arabia since 2014. Prior to this, he worked as a senior manager for the Polypropylene Catalysis Section, SABIC, Saudi Arabia. He received his MSc from Texas A&M University, United States in 2004 and a PhD in Chemistry from the University of Ottawa in 2011. Dr Albahily was awarded the Pierre Laberge Prize by the University of Ottawa for the best PhD thesis and was also the winner of the IUPAC prize for outstanding academic achievements. Dr Albahily has published in top-quality journals such as JACS and Angewandte Chemie and has authored more than 20 patents.

Ajayan Vinu
	Prof. Ajayan Vinu is the Global Innovation Chair and Director at the Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials, University of Newcastle. In his 20 years of research, Prof. Vinu has made tremendous contributions in the field of nanoporous materials and their application in sensing, energy storage, fuel cells, adsorption and separation, and catalysis. His contribution to the field of nanoporous materials is also clearly reflected by the Science Watch international ranking as he is one of the top 15 researchers in the field and has 400 original research papers in high impact factor journals with ca. 19500 citations and an H-index of 72. He was selected as an academician and fellow of World Academy of Ceramics, World Academy of Arts and Sciences, and Asia-Pacific Academy of Materials, and is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, the Royal Australian Chemical Institute, and the Maharashtra Academy of Science.

 	Fig. 1  Global trend for the increase in CO2 concentration in the last 10 years measured at different observatories contained in the Global Monitoring Division (GMD) of the Earth System Research Laboratory (ESRL).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of CO2 capture in post-combustion and pre-combustion scenarios.	 

 	Fig. 3  Properties of CO2 molecule, CO2 capture process requirements, and material attributes for CO2 capture.	 

 	Fig. 4  Principal criteria for designing an ideal sorbent for CO2 capture.	 

 	Fig. 5  The crystalline structure of some well-known MOFs. Adapted with permission from ref. 63, copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Adsorption of water molecules in HKUST-1. The small oxygen atoms at the top of the blue pyramids belong to the absorbed water molecules. Purple, green, and yellow are the different sized pores of the MOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 81, copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the ‘crumple zone’ mechanism in MOFs. Water adsorption for a water sensitive MOF with (a) and without (b) sacrificial bonds. Note: grey rods – ligands, red spheres – O, white spheres – H, blue and yellow spheres – copper centres in different environments; green dashed lines – sacrificial bonds. Adapted with permission from ref. 83, copyright (2018) Springer Nature.	 




oNU-100	6143	2.82	46.4/40/25	—	—	
66


oFeMOF-74	1536	—	7.2/1.1/25	—	34.1	
67


oMgMOF-74	1690	0.93	7.9/1/25	—	42.0	
68


oPCN-68	5109	2.17	30.4/35/25	—	21.2	
69


oInOF-15	935.6	
	3.5/1/0	98.2x/15:85a	31.1	
70


oJLU-Liu46	1787	0.87	4.6/1/25	6.5y/5:95b	—	
71


oJLU-Liu47	1800	0.90	4.8/1/25	7.3y/5:95b	—	
71


oHKUST-1	1326	0.58	1.8/0.48/30	—	—	
72


oCu5(BTT)3	701	0.30	0.6/0.15/25	40y/15:85a	31.4	
73


flSHF-61-DMF	2.9	—	2.4/18/25	—	22	
74


flSHF-61-CHCl3	544	—	6.2/19.5/25	—	35.8	
74


flZU-66	177	0.40	4.6/1/25	355y/15:85a	39	
75


fl[Sm (HL) (DMA)2]·DMA·2H2O	—	—	3.8/20/0	22x/—	29	
76


fuPEI/MIL-101(Cr)	33.5	0.13	3.6/0.15/25	—	∼120	
77


fuCAU-1/Al4(OH)2(OCH3)4(H2N–BDC)3	1268	1.32	7.2/1/0	101x/—	48	
78


fuMIL-101-NH2	3176	1.6	3.4/1/25	∼40y/15:85a	∼30	
79


fuCr-MIL-101-SO3H-TAEA	—	—	2.3/0.15/40	—	87	
80


 	Fig. 8  (a) 3,8-Connected three-dimensional net derived from the structure of [Mn(DMF)6]3[(Mn4Cl)3(BTT)8(H2O)12]2·42DMF·11H2O·20CH3OH. Gray 3-connected nodes represent BTT3-ligands, while green 8-connected nodes represent square-planar Mn4Cl clusters surrounded by eight tetrazolate rings. Adapted with permission from ref. 87, copyright (2006) American Chemical Society. (b) The structure of Mg-MOF-74. Adapted with permission from ref. 92, copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) The schematic illustration of CO2 uniaxial rotation at the open Mg2+ site in Mg2(dobdc). Gray – C, red – O, and green – Mg atoms; H atoms are omitted for clarity. The blue circle is the arbitrary rotation axis. Adapted with permission from ref. 91, copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  CO2 and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms in flexible MOF [Zn2(bpdc)(bpee)]·2DMF at 25 °C/1 bar. The filled symbols are adsorption and the open symbols are desorption branches. Inset is the structure of the flexible MOF [Zn2(bpdc)(bpee)]·2DMF. The inset figure represents the structure of the MOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 103, copyright (2010) WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms of flexMOF at 195/273/298 K and 30 bar, (b) CO2 sorption isotherm at 298 K/30 bar, (c) cell volume expansion based on the in situ PXRD results, and (d) the mechanism of gate opening and breathing of the flexMOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 104, copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Changes in the unit cell volume of the empty Cr-MIL-53 as a function of the external electrical field (E) at 300 K/1 bar. The full and empty symbols correspond to the increasing and decreasing electrical field range, respectively. (b) Changes in the unit cell parameters b and β as a function of time at E = 1.75 V nm−1 at 300 K and 1 bar. (c) Evolution of the unit cell volume of CO2 loaded Cr-MIL-53 with different CO2 concentrations, circle, triangle, and square symbols for 5, 4, and 3 CO2 per u.c., where the full and empty symbols correspond to increasing and decreasing electrical field range, respectively, and (d) CH4 loaded Cr-MIL-53 as a function of the electrical field. Adapted with permission from ref. 105, copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) CO2 sorption isotherms of [Co3(tzba)2(bpy)3(F)2]·DMF·C2H5OH·2H2O at 0/10/25 °C at 1 bar and CH4 at 25 °C/1 bar, (b) CO2/CH4 selectivity of the MOF at 25 °C/1 bar, (c) CO2 molecule bonding with O, F, and N, and (d) CO2 molecule bonding with organic linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 106, copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Different types of pores in ZIF-7, (b) adsorption of CO2 in the six-membered pores A and B of ZIF-7 at 195 and 298 K. Structural transformation in ZIF-7 for (c) pore A and (d) pore B as a result of CO2 adsorption. Zn – gray, N – blue, C – green, H – white. Adapted with permission from ref. 107, copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CO2 adsorption capacities of IRMOF-74-III-CH3 (grey), –NH2 (green), CH2NH2 (red), –CH2NHMe (blue), –CH2NHBoc (purple), and –CH2NMeBoc (cyan), and (b) low-pressure CO2 adsorption capacities. Adapted with permission from ref. 113, copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 adsorption capacities of samples 1–4 at 25 °C (the dashed line – absolute pressure of 150 mbar), and (d) breakthrough curves for sample 4 in a binary mixture of 15:85 CO2/N2 by volume at 25 °C (inlet pressure is 1.2 bar and outlet pressure is 1 bar), yi and yi0 are the mole fractions of a gaseous species at the inlet and outlet, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 115, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



NaX	926	0.40	5.39/1/25	735/15:85a	—	
130

Li-LSX	660	0.32	4.43/—/60	85.7/14:86a	—	
131

[BMIM]Br@NaY	—	—	2.5/1/30	—	35	
132

CaCHA	660	0.35	5.9/1/25	17(20bar/200°C)/30:70a	—	
133

13X	804	0.34	5.8/1/25	11(20bar/200°C)/30:70a	—	
133

K-MER	—	—	3.5/1/25	850(25°C)/10:40b:50(He)	—	
134

MgO@Y	399	0.27	2.78/5/30	37/15:85a	39	
135

K-SSZ-13	600	0.19 (M)	∼5/1/25	—	45.2	
136

Li-ZSM-25	—	—	1.9/2/30	66.9(2bar/30°C)/50:50b	40	
137


 	Fig. 15  CO2 and N2 adsorption isotherms of (a) PS-MFI and (b) Ca-A at 25 °C, (c) gravimetric and (d) volumetric CO2 adsorption capacities of Ca-A and Mg2(dobdc) measured at 40 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 145, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms and (b) N2 adsorption isotherms for binder-containing zeolite 4A (Z4A) and amine-modified Z4A at 1 bar/25 °C, CO2 and CH4 adsorption isotherms of (c) Z4A and (d) 27SiO2-CLD-4A at 25 °C, CO2 and N2 adsorption isotherms of (e) Z4A and (f) 27SiO2-CLD-4A at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 155 and 156, copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) BJH pore size distribution (PSD) calculated from the N2 sorption isotherms of LTA-125 functionalized with monoamine and diamine and (b) CO2 adsorption of the three materials at 60 °C and 1 bar. Adapted with permission from ref. 158, copyright (2016) WILEY-VCH.	 



TAP3	729	1.04	2.3/1/25	91(1bar/25°C)/15:85a	∼40	
162

TAF	1383	0.95	1.5/1/25	14(1bar/25°C)/—a	26	
163

TAF-NH2	1190	0.68	1.9/1/25	19(1bar/25°C)/—a	54	
163

PCTP-1	1200	0.62	3.2/1/25	46(1bar/25°C)/—a	44.5	
164

TPE-COF-II	2168	2.14	2.7/1/25	—	—	
165

KFUPM-1	305	
	1.0/1/25	141(1 bar/25°C)/20:80a	34	
166

PIM-OFP-3	1374	0.63 (M)	3.2/1/22	75(1bar/22°C)/—a	28.8	
167

Zn-TPBMP	705	0.66	0.53/1/25	—	—	
168

HCP-D	343	0.55	1.3/1/25	—	—	
169

NUT-1	99.9	0.07	1.4/1/25	10140(1bar/25°C)/—a	75	
170

TMCOP	1104	—	1.5/1/0	24.5(1bar/25°C)/—a	26.7	
171

CTPP	779	0.77	3.5/1/0	128/—a	34	
172

PAF-26-COOMg	572	0.28	2.8/1/0	73(1.1bar/25°C)/—a	30	
173

BILP-101	536	0.41	1/0.15/25	71(1bar/25°C)/10:90a	33	
174

PEI (40 wt%)-PAF-5	40.3	0.05	2.6/0.15/25	1200(1bar/25°C)/15:85a	68.7	
175

SNU-C1-sca	830	—	4.4/1/25	—	31.2	
176


 	Fig. 18  (a) Parent COF, [HO]100%-H2P-COF, and (b) carboxylic group functionalized COF [HO2C]100%-H2P-COF, as seen from the top and (c) their CO2 adsorption in a 15:85 CO2/N2 mixture at 1 bar/25 °C (red dots are the functionalized and black dots are for the parent COF). Adapted with permission from ref. 182, copyright (2015) WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis route for Networks 1–7 (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms at 0 °C and (c) CO2 adsorption isotherms at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 187, copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis of NUT HCPs with different lengths of cross-linking and their CO2 adsorption at (b) 0 °C and (c) 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 191, copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



T-GU-700-6/graphene	1032	0.82	2.4/1/25	33	
202

ARA/asphaltene	1590	0.87	3.0/1/25	23	
203

NEPB/biomass	982	0.62	2.2/1/25	39	
204

CS-Py-K100/pyrrole	1051	0.91	4.9/1/25	36	
205

N,S-HPCK-1/waste paper	1770	0.83	5.2/1/25	35	
206

KBM-700/MOF	1129	0.55	4.7/1/25	—	
207

CKHP800-2/organic salt	1256	0.67	4.5/1/25	29	
208

APCS-3/D-glucose	1917	0.85	3.5/1/25	25	
209

CS*-P-A/phenolic resin	2400	1.07	4.6/1/23	—	
53

PMMC-700/mesitylene	1451	0.71	4.4/1/25	21	
210

SNMC-2-600/polymer	1884	0.78	4.2/1/25	34	
211

PHC-4/casein	1080	0.59	1.8/1/25	35	
212

FC4/polyimide	941	0.93	2.9/1/25	25	
213

ZNC-950/zeolitic imidazole framework	1534	1.45	3.5/1/25	30	
214

CPC2/chitosan	2278	1.00	3.4/1/25	28	
215


 	Fig. 21  (a) Preparation of porous carbon from casein, (b) CO2 adsorption at 0, 10, and 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 225, copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 adsorption of sawdust derived porous carbon at 0, 10, and 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 226, copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) TEM images of the N-doped coal tar pitch derived microporous carbon N-AC-600-2 synthesized at a carbonization temperature of 600 °C and (c and d) CO2 adsorption isotherms of N-AC-600-2 at 25 °C and 0 °C, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 246, copyright (2018), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) The existence of different forms of nitrogen in porous carbons (NPC) derived from the KOH activation of PILPhDCA and the CO2 adsorption of NPCs at (b) 0 °C and (c) 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 258, copyright (2017), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a and b) TEM micrographs of OMC and AOMC, and (c) CO2 uptakes of PEI loaded AOMCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 281, copyright (2019), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

MOFs
UOMSs	Open metal sites for easier manipulation of the binding energy for enhanced interactions with CO2	Water instability
Flexible/breathing	Flexible pore structure transformation for the effective adsorption of CO2	Limited selectivity
Functionalized/hybrid	The functional moieties on the surface enhance the interactions with CO2 and increase the hydrophobicity	Compromised porosity
Hydrophobic	Hydrophobic surface enhances CO2 capture by non-adsorption of competing water molecules	Cycling issues


Zeolites
M+ exchanged	Metal cations act as strong sites for CO2 adsorption, which helps in achieving higher values of Qst	Water instability
Hydrophobic	Hydrophobicity achieved by manipulation of the Si to Al ratio helps in the stability in the presence of water.	Pore blockage
Functionalized	Surface functionalization is a useful tool to enhance low-pressure CO2 adsorption.	Thermal stability


POPs
COFs	Strong covalent bonds for high thermal stability	High cost, low porosity
HCPs	Crosslinking provides a non-collapsible structure	High cost, low porosity
CMPs	A rigid structure with high surface area and micropore volume	High cost, low porosity


Nanoporous carbons
Biomass	Low cost, abundant precursors, easy synthesis and manipulation of the surface	Less capture at low pressure
Fossil fuels	Low-cost starting precursor, easier synthesis, and ease of surface functionalization	Less capture at low pressure
Polymers/resins	Inherent nitrogen and other doping and microporous structure	Low adsorption, high cost
Ionic liquids	Ease of synthesis and tuning of the surface	Low adsorption, high cost
MOFs	Homogenous distribution of the pores	High cost


Mesoporous
Silica/metal oxides	Homogenous and ordered pore systems	Less capture at low pressure
CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → COOH (E = −0.61 V)	(1)
CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2O (E = −0.53 V)	(2)
CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → HCHO + H2O (E = −0.48 V)	(3)
CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → CH3OH + H2O (E = −0.38V)	(4)
CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH4 + 2H2O (E = −0.24 V)	(5)

 	Fig. 25  (a) Natural photosynthesis, (b and c) photocatalytic and electrocatalytic CO2 conversion processes that mimick natural photosynthesis, (d) fundamental steps in the photocatalytic conversion of CO2, and (e) the possible reaction pathways in the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 298, copyright (2017) WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) The synthesis and structure of Ren-MOF and its silver nanotubes coated counterpart, Ag⊂Ren-MOF, (b) the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into CO using Ag⊂Ren-MOF. Colour design: carbon – black, oxygen – red, zirconium – blue polyhedral, Re – tellow, Cl – green. Adapted with permission from ref. 313, copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  The binding distance and binding energy between –OH and –COO− in eosin Y-functionalized conjugated organic polymer for (a and b) CO2 and (c and d) H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 327, copyright (2019) WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Structure of the nanosheet-based electrocatalyst Cu2(CuTCPP); colour design: oxygen – red, nitrogen – blue, carbon – grey, copper – cyan. (b) CO2 electrochemical reduction to formate and acetate using Cu2(CuTCPP). Adapted with permission from ref. 332, copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) POP synthesized from 2,6-dicyanopyridine using ZnCl2 polymerization and thermal treatment for CO2 to CO conversion. Adapted with permission from ref. 340, copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
