 Illustrations towards quantifying the sustainability of technology   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B000015I View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B000015I
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2000, 2, 108-114Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Illustrations towards quantifying the sustainability of 
technology


        
          
            J. 
            Dewulf
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Van Langenhove
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Mulder
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            M. M. D. 
            van den Berg
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            H. J. 
            van der Kooi
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            J. 
            de Swaan Arons
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Organic Chemistry, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, B-9000, Gent, Belgium
bLaboratory for Applied Thermodynamics and Phase 
Equilibria, Delft University of Technology, Julianalaan 136, NL-2628 BL, Delft, The Netherlands.. E-mail: J.deSwaanArons@STM.TUDelft.nl
Received 
      5th January 2000
    First published on 17th May 2000AbstractThis paper attempts to quantify the sustainability of 
technological processes. It is based on thermodynamics with energy carriers 
and materials (products, waste, etc.) expressed in the same 
calculable quantity–exergy (Joule). The results have three 
considerations. One factor reflects to that extent renewable resources are 
used. In addition, the technological efficiency has to be accounted for as 
it affects sustainability. Finally, the results take into account the 
generation of waste products and the exergy required for converting the 
waste into products which are harmless or assimilable in the ecosphere. The 
proposed measure of sustainability has been illustrated for two types of 
products. In the first illustration, ethanol production was studied. Two 
routes were investigated, one starting from fossil oil and the other from 
agricultural products. Additionally, a route based on the synthesis from 
carbon dioxide and hydrogen was examined, in which hydrogen was generated 
by splitting water with electricity from photovoltaic solar energy 
conversion. The second product studied was electricity, generated from the 
combustion of natural gas or from photovoltaic solar energy conversion. The 
merit of the obtained results are that they treat technological 
sustainability not only in qualitative but also in quantitative terms. The 
insights obtained can help to account for sustainability in the development 
of new concepts of chemical technology.


Green Context
Sustainability is a much used but also much mis-used term. This paper 
examines the meaning of the word in the context of technology and attempts 
to introduce a degree of quantification to it. A technological process such 
as the manufacture of a chemical product can be non-sustaining if it takes 
raw materials from the ecosphere at a rate faster than the raw material is 
being generated or if it produces products (typically waste) that can 
damage the ecological mechanisms and hence resource production. Here, three 
aspects of sustainability, the use of renewable resources, the 
technological efficiency and the waste produced, are quantified for two 
types of products. It seems very likely that this type of calculation will 
be increasingly applied as we seek the least eco-threatening option for 
future manufacturing.
JHC


Introduction
The term ‘sustainability’ has several definitions. The 
current definition by Brundlandt in 1987 is widely accepted: 
‘Sustainable development is a social development which fulfils the 
needs of present generations without endangering the possibilities of 
fulfilment of the needs of future generations’.1 From this definition, it is clear that sustainable 
development can only be accomplished if it is approached in a 
multidisciplinary way. The definition raises questions in philosophic, 
economic, political, social and natural sciences.
In this view, natural sciences are highly important. They generate the 
technology to manufacture goods for society, starting from natural 
resources. Although these ‘applied sciences’ or technology are 
essential for the delivery of goods, they can simultaneously endanger 
current and future generations. The threat can be direct (acute danger or 
toxicity) or, on a longer time scale, the technosphere can endanger future 
generations in two ways. The technosphere interacts with the ecosphere 
via two mechanisms. It extracts material and energy resources from 
the ecosphere. So, the first threat of the technology on sustainability 
lies in the rate of consumption of resources. If the consumption rate of 
these resources in technological applications is higher than the rate of 
resource production in the ecosphere, then the needs of mankind in the 
future may be endangered. Secondly, the technosphere emits waste products 
into the ecosphere. This means that these emitted products may damage the 
ecological mechanisms and hence the resource production capacity of the 
ecosphere.
Sustainable development can only be guaranteed if a number of boundary 
conditions, drawn from different science fields, are fulfilled. From the 
previous paragraph, it is clear that from the applied natural sciences two 
direct boundary conditions can be mentioned: resources required for 
producing goods must not run out and emissions from the technosphere must 
not endanger the ecological system since it can affect natural resource 
production. These two important boundary conditions are also reflected in 
the life cycle analysis approach.2,3 
From these two conditions, it is evident that a sustainable technology must 
be as efficient as possible. High efficiencies reduce the required amount 
of input resources and generated output emissions. The efficiency can be 
seen as a third indirect condition of sustainability for the 
technosphere.4 In this view van den Berg 
et al.5 identified three aspects of 
sustainability: use of renewable resources, efficiency of processes and 
emissions.
The first sustainability condition requires an insight into the 
different resources available in the ecosystem. First, mineral resources 
are available, e.g. metal ores, mineral oils, which need millions 
of years to be generated and hence are non-renewable. These stocks can be 
seen as natural deposits. Secondly, there are so-called renewable 
resources, which are delivered by the ecosphere on a time scale of years 
and can be considered as funds.
The second condition for a sustainable technosphere is the prevention of 
emissions interfering with processes in the ecosphere. Emissions of 
damaging products, like chlorofluorocarbons and dioxins, must be avoided. 
Indeed the assimilation capacity of the ecosphere for these types of 
compounds is very limited. However, even this prerequisite can be 
unsatisfactory to meet the second condition: too high emission rates of 
‘harmless’ compounds might disturb the ecosphere (e.g. 
CO2). The second condition for sustainability implies also that 
the production of ‘harmless’ (waste) products may not exceed 
the assimilative uptake rate of these compounds in the ecosphere. The two 
previous points can be unified into one overall condition: the solar driven 
closed cycle of materials exchange between ecosphere and technosphere. This 
is represented in Fig. 1. High quality 
products delivered by the ecosphere as wood and wheat, are consumed by the 
technosphere and subsequently returned to the ecosphere as low quality 
products, carbon dioxide and water. Thanks to solar power, the ecosphere is 
able to assimilate these waste products and to deliver high quality 
products.
 Fig. 1  
Solar driven closed cycle condition for a sustainable 
ecosphere/technosphere interaction.
 
Technology is basically a set of processes in which input materials and 
energy carriers are transformed. The second law of thermodynamics states 
that all these processes generate entropy, reflecting a quality loss of the 
input energy. The exergy concept, related to availability, is the 
thermodynamic tool which expresses the quality of energy: it is the amount 
of the work that can be obtained from a non equilibrium state with respect 
to an equilibrium environmental state, the so-called dead state, 
via a reversible process initially adiabatically to 
T0, isothermally to P0 and finally 
into equilibrium with the dead state. There is extensive information 
available in the literature about the exergy concept.6–10 The theoretical background has 
been developed for decades as presented in the overview of Gaggioli;11 however the implementation in practice was 
rather limited. Nowadays, increasing attention is paid to the development 
of technological operations in the thermomechanical and chemical technology 
field, see Bejan12 and Hinderink et 
al.13,14 Wall explored the 
potential of the exergy concept in several fields, e.g. in 
analysing national economies.15–17 He proposed to introduce an exergy tax to 
improve present resource use and to decrease environmental 
destruction.15 The potential to use exergy 
as an ecological indicator has been recently investigated by Gong.18
The irreversibility of each technological process and the inherent 
degradation of the quality of energy is related to a decrease of exergy. 
This degradation process in the technosphere is illustrated in Fig. 1. Starting from high exergetic materials 
delivered by the ecosphere, the technosphere degrades the exergy content. 
The exergy approach provides a quantitative base with the same unit (Joule) 
for all types of energy carriers and materials. The exergy concept has the 
capability to serve as a basis to quantify the sustainability of the 
technological aspect of the society. All different types of material 
streams, including resources, products and non-products (wastes), and 
technological operation efficiencies can be judged on the same scale.
The aim of this work is to find a measure to quantify sustainability. 
Nowadays technologies are not completely sustainable, therefore it is 
useful to develop a quantitative tool indicating in how far technology is 
sustainable. In a first step, different thermodynamically based factors 
contributing to sustainability will be treated. Starting from these 
contributions, a sustainability coefficient is to be defined. Further on, 
the developed quantitative approach of sustainability will be illustrated 
for two types of product. In a first illustration, three technological 
options to produce ethanol will be compared for their sustainability. 
Secondly, two routes to produce electricity will be treated.
Proposed quantification of sustainability
As a first element in investigating the sustainability of technological 
processes, the nature of the resources has to be considered. First, a 
distinction has to be made between resources that are renewable and those 
that are non-renewable resources. Renewable resources are defined as 
resources that are generated at a rate at least as high as the consumption 
rate; and non-renewables are those with a higher consumption rate than 
production rate. This is illustrated in eqn 
(1), i.e. for a renewable resource the renewability 
condition ρ is equal to or higher than 1:  
        (1)
      Now, based on the renewability condition, consumed resources can 
be divided into renewables and non-renewables. Next, a renewability 
parameter α can be defined as the fraction of renewable exergy 
consumption with respect to the total exergy consumption: 
        (2)
      If one wants to calculate the coefficient α, then all 
resources used in the production processes to manufacture the product have 
to be considered. All energy carriers brought into the production process 
have to be traced back to the resources from the ecosphere required to 
produce them. Main extractables are fossil organic resources (ρ = 0), 
inorganic ores (ρ = 0) and solar energy (ρ = 1). The first two 
categories are non-renewable. By consequence, the coefficient α 
reflects the fraction of direct solar exergy in the exergy consumption of a 
process.
Apart from solar energy, some other resources based on solar energy such 
as wind or hydropower are renewable. These two resources are driven by 
solar energy in an indirect way: wind is generated by solar induced 
atmospheric pressure gradients whereas hydropower is available due to 
rainfall produced via solar driven water evaporation. Next to the 
main ‘high quality’ (or high exergetic) inputs as solar energy, 
mineral resources and fossil fuels, processes may need some ‘low 
quality’ products, e.g. carbon dioxide or water. In 
exergetic calculations, their role is almost negligible: atmospheric carbon 
dioxide, important for photosynthesis, has a zero exergy value, whereas the 
exergy of liquid water at 25 °C is only 0.05 MJ kg−1 
in the environment as defined by Szargut et al.9 Basically these resources are renewable provided 
that they are recycled into the ecosphere in the same form.
Sustainable technology has to meet a second condition: no harmful 
products are to be emitted by the technosphere. All resources consumed must 
include exergy required for the production of the desired product, but also 
for the abatement of harmful emissions generated both during the production 
and destruction stage of the product. This is represented in Fig. 2. The total exergy required for a production 
process is: Rcons = 
R1 + R2 + 
R3
        (3)
      with R1 the exergy required for the 
abatement of emissions during production, R2 the exergy 
required for the production process and R3 the exergy 
required for transforming the product, after its use and if possible 
recycling, into harmless products (all in GJ yr−1). The 
emission of harmful waste streams is basically a double loss for a process. 
Indeed, the waste stream can contain exergy which may be used in the 
process. Secondly, it can require an abatement exergy.
 Fig. 2  
Exchange of resources and waste in a sustainable ecosphere/technosphere 
system.
 
Now we can define an environmental parameter η1 of the 
production process: 
        (4)
      where 0 ⩽
η1
⩽1. If we have an 
environmental parameter η1 = 1 for the production process, 
the abatement exergy requirements R1 and 
R3 become zero. The second condition does not mean that 
the emitted compounds have no exergy content after treatment: this is not 
always necessary. The emissions have to be treated using exergy inputs 
R1 and R3 so that they can be 
assimilated by the ecosphere or at least that they do not affect the 
resource production capacities of the ecosphere.
Next to the environmental parameter, the efficiency of the production 
process is also important to express sustainability: the more efficient a 
process can generate a product out of a fixed number of exergy resources, 
the higher the sustainability. A production efficiency parameter 
η2 is defined as 
        (5)
      with 0 ⩽
η2
⩽1 and E + 
P + IP = R2 (see Fig. 2). E represents the non-useful 
exergetic emission rate of the production process (in GJ 
yr−1), whereas P is the exergetic production rate 
of useful products (GJ yr−1). The irreversibility of the 
process is expressed by IP (GJ yr−1). 
By combination of the eqns. (4) and (5) and considering eqn. 
(3), it can be found that the resource consumption is proportional 
to the exergy content of the useful products generation rate P (GJ 
yr−1) and inversely proportional to the environmental and 
production efficiency parameters η1 and 
η2: 
        (6)
      or 
        (7)
      in which η = η1η2 is the 
overall exergetic efficiency of the technosphere.
From the two previous paragraphs expliciting the two boundary conditions 
for sustainability in quantitative terms, it is deduced that the maximal 
level of sustainability of the technosphere is attained if it does not 
extract resources faster than produced by the ecosphere (α = 1) and 
if all extracted resources are fully transformed into products, without 
damaging the ecosphere (η=1). From this point of view, a sustainability 
coefficient (S) can be defined: 
        (8)
      The meaning of the coefficient S is illustrated 
graphically in Fig. 3. A technology can 
score values of 0 <α/√2 <1/√2 and 
0<η/√2<1/√2 on the renewability and efficiency axis, 
respectively. Projecting these scores on the sustainability axis, 
contributions to sustainability due to renewability and efficiency results 
in 0 <Sα <1/2 and 0 < 
Sη <1/2, so that the sustainability coefficient 
S = Sα + Sη is 
normalised between 0 and 1. The higher the coefficients α and η, 
the closer the technosphere is to overall sustainability. If both 
coefficients are equal to 1, then S = 1. The case with the largest 
distance to sustainability (α=η = 0) gives rise to S = 
0.
 Fig. 3  
Graphical representation of the sustainability S on the 
sustainability axis, with contributions by renewability 
Sα and efficiency Sη; and 
the scores α/√2 and η/√2 on the renewability and 
efficiency axis, respectively.
 
Illustrations
The measures of sustainability as proposed in the previous section, are 
now applied to two products: ethanol and electricity. Ethanol is a widely 
used chemical produced by industry as well from mineral resources 
via cracking of ethylene and hydration to ethanol, as by a 
combination of agriculture and fermentation. It can serve as an energy 
carrier for e.g. vehicles (Brazil, United States), and as a 
solvent or chemical reacting agent in industry. Moreover, ethanol produced 
from agricultural products is consumed by man in several types of 
beverages. Mulder et al.19 have 
evaluated the exergetic efficiency of several technological pathways for 
the production of ethanol. First, they examined the ethanol production from 
fossil resources and the pathway via agriculture and fermentation. 
Next, they examined the production via hydrogen by use of 
photovoltaic cells and water electrolysis. In this route ethanol is 
synthesised in a second step, starting from hydrogen and carbon dioxide, 
the latter captured from flue gases from power plants. The basic idea was 
to enhance the content of renewable resources (solar energy) in the final 
product and to close the material cycle as much as possible. As in 
agriculture, which can be seen as a technology based on the same biological 
mechanisms as occurring in the ecosphere, the basic resources are water and 
carbon dioxide, converted by means of solar energy into high quality 
products (photosynthesis). These products are degraded in nature into the 
initial low quality products, CO2 and H2O, as also 
after use as fuel in furnaces to produce steam and/or electricity, closing 
the material cycles.
Next, electricity can be generated by combustion of fossil fuels such as 
gas, coal and oil. For example, Tsatsaronis and Moran20 evaluated an electric power cogeneration system, 
fueled by natural gas, delivering electricity and steam. Next to this 
cogeneration power system, the production of electricity by 
multicrystalline silicon photovoltaic solar cells can be considered based 
upon already available production facilities.19
Evaluation of the sustainability parameters of ethanol 
production routes
The required inputs for the production of ethanol from fossil resources 
are presented in Table 1. The input 
requirements for the ethylene intermediate are those for an averaged 
weighted situation over 19 European production facilities, where the 
process consists of two main steps, i.e. oil refining and nafta 
cracking.21 Next to this input, ethanol 
production without damaging the environment requires that all 
‘harmful’ waste products from the production process and from 
the waste product are treated. The input of non-renewable fuels, which are 
transformed into CO2 and H2O, gives rise to 
environmental problems by increasing the atmospheric CO2 
concentration. So the ideal sustainable way to emit this product, would be 
to transform it into the original fuel and store it into its original 
underground location. However, from a technological point of view this is 
not an option: there is no technology available at the moment. One of the 
leading options to reduce the impact of CO2 is to store it 
underground in depleted oil and gas wells.22 In this way, impact on climate change is 
avoided. Therefore, CO2 has to be recovered from flue gases and 
subsequently pumped underground. Based on the data on CO2 
recovery via ethanolamine absorption and stripping, and subsequent 
compression to 80 atm23 for storage 
underground, it can be calculated that 5.86 MJ exergy is required per kg 
CO2 produced from non-renewables. So from the information on the 
required fossil resources to produce ethylene21 and considering the amount of carbon remaining 
in the intermediate ethylene, the amount of emitted CO2 during 
the ethylene production stage can be calculated (0.97 kg CO2/kg 
EtOH). If ethylene is converted to ethanol at 60 atm and 300 °C with 
zeolite catalysts,24 then it can be 
calculated that 158.6 kJ of compression work/mole EtOH has to be delivered. 
If the compressor has an exergetic efficiency of 80% and if the electricity 
delivery, using e.g. natural gas, for the compressor has a 35.3% 
efficiency,20 then 0.305 kg natural gas/kg 
EtOH is needed, resulting in a CO2 production of 0.65 kg/kg 
EtOH. So, given that 0.97 and 0.65 kg CO2 are produced per kg 
ethanol at the ethylene production and hydration stage respectively, an 
abatement exergy of R1 = 9.5 MJ/kg EtOH is required. 
Next, ethanol is converted to CO2 and water, e.g. when 
it is used as a fuel or by combustion after its use as a solvent. With a 
production of 1.91 kg CO2/kg EtOH, an abatement exergy 
R3 of 11.2 MJ/kg EtOH must be delivered.
Table 1 
Exergetic inputs, intermediates and outputs for the production of 
ethanol from fossil resources





Products
GJ/hayr Total




Input data for the production of 
ethylene are mean European data 19





Inputs



Oil for ethylene production
23.12


Gas for ethylene production
23.85


Other mineral resources for ethylene 
production
 0.94


Gas for work production for hydration
12.20


Water input for hydration
 0.02



Intermediate



Ethylene
29.6



Outputs



Ethanol
29.5




Concerning the agriculture/fermentation pathway, at a first glance one 
could expect a coefficient α = 1, since the main source input is 
solar energy. However, industrial agriculture and fermentation require 
mineral resources and fossil fuels for the production of nutrients and 
pesticides, and power for the use of machinery in agriculture and 
fermentation (Table 2). Further more, 
this production method delivers also wheat straw (from agriculture), gluten 
and cake (both from fermentation), being all useful products. Therefore the 
resources in the agricultural step must be attributed in a proportional way 
to ethanol and the other useful products (Table 
2). So it is found that the production of ethanol requires an 
input of R2 = 13243 GJ/hayr.
Table 2 
Exergetic inputs, intermediates and outputs for the production of 
ethanol via agriculture/fermentation19





Products
GJ/hayr Total
GJ/hayr Attributed to EtOH





Inputs



Sun
33480
13220


Seeding material
2.4
0.9


Fuel for agriculture
5.6
2.2


Fuel for nutrients/ pesticides
 13
5.1


Fuel for fermentation
 24
 15.5



Intermediate



Wheat grain
147
147



Outputs



Wheat straw
 91


Gluten
 44


Cake
6


Ethanol
 92
 92




Next to this input, to produce ethanol without damaging the environment, 
all ‘harmful’ waste products from the production process and 
from the waste product must be treated. The abatement exergy 
R3 of the product is zero, since it is converted back 
into CO2 and H2O, closing the material cycle. Also 
the CO2 emitted by converting starch into ethanol and 
CO2 does not have to be treated since it closes the carbon 
cycle. However, at the agricultural production step and during the 
fermentation, non-renewable resources are used. For the production of 
wheat, diesel fuel for mechanical power is required, next to fossil 
resources for the production of nutrients and pesticides,19 resulting in an emission of 1064 kg 
CO2/ha. Next, use of natural gas for electricity and steam 
production19 for fermentation results in an 
emission of 1179 kg CO2/ha. This means that an abatement exergy 
to be attributed to ethanol of R1 = 6.94 GJ/hayr is 
required.
As a third option, Mulder et al.19 evaluated the ethanol production via 
solar cells based on currently available production techniques. The 
exergetic inputs and outputs are shown in Table 
3. Similar to the agricultural/fermentation route, all exergetic 
inputs must be attributed in a proportional way to the outputs (see 
Table 3). Next, all CO2 
emissions caused by input of non-renewables have to be treated. So, with a 
production of 106.2 × 103 kg CO2/ha yr from 
non-renewables, a total abatement exergy of 733 GJ/hayr is needed, 
resulting in an emission abatement exergy of R1 = 106 
GJ/hayr for ethanol. Similar as for the agricultural/fermentation pathway, 
the abatement exergy R3 is zero.
Table 3 
Exergetic inputs, intermediates and outputs for the production of 
ethanol based on hydrogen production via solar cells and 
hydrolysis, and CO2 from flue gases19





Products
GJ/hayr Total
GJ/hayr Attributed to EtOH





Inputs



Solar power
33480
4681


Solar cell production
658
92


Water for electrolysis
 11
 1.5


Flue gas delivering CO2
 80
11.2


Fuel for CO2 recovery
944
 132


Fuel for EtOH synthesis from 
CO2/H2
921
 129



Intermediates



Electricity
 4285
 599


Hydrogen
 2883
 403


CO2
 81
11



Outputs



Ethanol
409
 409


Methanol
145


CH4 + CO
 2035


Steam
336




Based on the theoretical development and data presented in the previous 
paragraphs, the renewability coefficient α, the environmental 
efficiency coefficient η1, the production efficiency 
coefficient η2 and the overall efficiency η are 
presented in Table 4, for the production 
of ethanol from fossil fuels, via the agriculture/fermentation 
route and the hydrogen/CO2 synthesis process, based on solar 
driven hydrogen production.
Table 4 
Ethanol production: renewability coefficient α, environmental 
efficiency coefficient η1, production efficiency coefficient 
η2, overall efficiency η, and sustainability S





Production pathway
α
η1
η2
η

S





Synthesis from fossil resources
0.0002
0.744
0.491
0.365
0.18


Agriculture/Fermentation
0.998
0.9995
0.00694
0.00694
0.50


Synthesis from Hydrogen/CO2, with 
solar driven H2 production
0.909
0.978
0.081
0.0792
0.49




The ethanol production starting from mineral oil cannot be fully 
sustainable, because of its large input of non-renewables. The coefficient 
α for this production pathway is almost zero (α = 0.0002, 
reflecting water input). The process efficiency η2 is high 
(η2 = 0.49), but due to its low environmental efficiency 
(high CO2 production) (η1 = 0.74), the overall 
efficiency decreases to η = 0.365. These figures result in the smallest 
sustainability S of all ethanol synthesis pathways (S = 
0.18).
From Table 4, it is noticed that 
agriculture and fermentation show a higher ratio of renewables (α = 
0.998). Also the coefficient η1 (= 0.9995) is higher for the 
photosynthesis based pathway, due to the fact that less non-renewables have 
to be treated. On the other hand, the production efficiency of the 
biologically based route is the lowest one of all routes (η2 
= 0.00695): less ethanol can be produced out of the same amount solar 
exergy than for the solar cell/hydrogen route. This low efficiency for the 
bio-route is due to the agriculture step. Indeed, the conversion of solar 
exergy into wheat grain and straw is low. The production efficiency factor 
η2 is higher for the solar cell/hydrolysis route than for 
the agricultural/fermentation route (η2 = 0.081). The 
combination of η2 with both parameters α and 
η1 results in a better sustainability S for the 
agriculture/fermentation route. So in conclusion, it can be stated that the 
agriculture route is more sustainable than the solar driven 
CO2/H2 synthesis route, due to its higher renewable 
resources coefficient α and its higher environmental efficiency 
η1, although it has a lower production efficiency factor 
η2.
Evaluation of the sustainability of electricity production 
routes
Electricity production of 30 MWe by a cogeneration plant as 
described by Tsatsaronis and Moran20 shows 
exergetic inputs of natural gas and water of 84.99 and 0.06 MW 
respectively, resulting in two useful outputs: net power of 30.00 MW and 
steam with an exergetic flow of 12.81 MW. Next, flue gas is produced (2.77 
MW). In order to reduce the impact of the emissions into the eco-system, 
CO2 in the emitted flue gases must be removed. The emission rate 
of CO2 is 0.577 kg s−1 and with an exergetic 
requirement of 5.862 MJ/kg CO2, a total abatement exergy rate of 
3.38 MW is needed. This abatement exergy rate is not complete since it 
doesn’t take into account the abatement of other emissions, waste 
products and of CO2 emission during fossil fuel production. 
However, it gives an idea of the required amount of abatement exergy.
The production of electricity by means of multicrystalline silicon 
photovoltaic solar cells19 delivers 4285 
GJ/yrha net power. An exergetic input to construct the solar cells of 885 
GJ/hayr non-renewable resources is needed, producing 40360 kg 
CO2/hayr and requiring an abatement exergy of 236.6 GJ/hayr. 
Based on these figures, parameters reflecting sustainability are presented 
in Table 5.
Table 5 
Electricity production: renewable coefficient α, environmental 
efficiency coefficient η1, production efficiency coefficient 
η2, overall efficiency η, and sustainability 
S





Production pathway
α
η1
η2
η

S





Gas fueled cogeneration power plant
0.0007
0.9617
0.5033
0.4841
0.24


Multicrystalline Si solar cells
0.9676
0.9932
0.1247
0.1238
0.55




The electricity generation via solar cells scores better on the 
use of renewable resources (α = 0.9676 vs. 0.0007), since 
the only input of renewables in the natural gas fueled system is water for 
the production of steam. Just because of the extensive use of 
non-renewables, the gas fueled system requires a higher input of exergy for 
the abatement of emissions resulting in a lower 
η1-coefficient (η1 = 0.9932 vs. 
0.9617). On the other hand, the conversion of inputs into useful outputs is 
much higher for the gas based power system, showing an overall exergetic 
efficiency of η2 = 0.5033. In this sense, the solar cell 
system is inferior (η2 = 0.1247). Taking into account all 
these contributions in order to assess the overall sustainability, it is 
demonstrated by the sustainability coefficient S that the solar 
cell driven electricity generation is more sustainable than the gas powered 
generation (S = 0.55 vs. 0.24). However, also solar 
photovoltaic conversion cannot achieve 100% sustainability. First, it needs 
an input of non-renewables to produce the conversion facilities. Secondly, 
from a theoretical point of view, solar conversion by photovoltaics can 
attain a maximally possible efficiency of 40.8%, because only a limited 
range of the irradiated frequencies can be converted into 
electricity.25 Taking into account this 
efficiency and neglecting exergetic inputs for the production of converters 
and for the abatement of outputs harmful for the ecosphere, a maximal 
sustainability S of 0.70 is found for multicrystalline silicon 
based photovoltaic cells.
Discussion
The proposed judgement of the sustainability of technologies shows that 
100% sustainability cannot be attained, because it would require only solar 
exergy resources (or other nearly 100% renewables as wind energy and 
hydropower) and reversible processes. On the other hand, the approach 
demonstrates that technologies used nowadays are always not completely 
unsustainable (S > 0), since they all deliver a product with an 
exergetic content higher than zero.
The developed coefficient S covers the whole life cycle of a 
product, starting from the resources delivered by the ecosphere, down to 
the abatement step of the product at the end of its life cycle. The 
approach of van den Berg et al.5 
also contained a renewability and efficiency aspect. However, their 
approach considered the life cycle, also starting from the resources, but 
ending at the end of the production process, resulting in a useful product 
for society. The effect of emissions and the subsequent fate of the 
product, i.e. its use and its disposal after use, were not 
considered. The current approach has taken into account the waste 
production of the technosphere, not only during the manufacturing of the 
‘useful product’, but also during the use and in the disposal 
phase after the use of the ‘useful product’.
In the definition of the sustainability coefficient S, three 
coefficients α, η1 and η2 have been 
reduced to two coefficients α and η, i.e. to a 
renewability and a total efficiency coefficient. An alternative approach 
could be to define the sustainability based on 3 parameters in a 
3-dimensional space (cf.Fig. 3). 
However, the splitting of η into η1 and 
η2 might be artificial in some cases. For example if a 
factory treats its wastewater, then the exergetic cost of this treatment 
can be considered either as an essential element of the production facility 
or as a treatment to be separated from the essential manufacturing process. 
In these two approaches, the exergetic cost of the wastewater treatment 
affects η2 and η1. But the overall efficiency 
η, and hence the sustainability S, remains the same.
The sustainability coefficient S shows several challenges to 
enhance the level of sustainability of technologies. The first challenge is 
that technology should be more solar energy driven: it is the only 100% 
renewable resource (α = 1). It results in a direct contribution to 
higher sustainability by avoiding depletion of non-renewable resources. 
Moreover, it can enhance in an indirect way the environmental efficiency 
η1. Organic products, containing C, H and eventually O, 
generated by solar driven conversion, do not require abatement 
exergy—the degradation products CO2 and water close the 
material cycle.
Next, each process innovation enhancing the exergetic efficiency 
(η2) and decreasing the amount of ‘lost work’ or 
irreversibility of the production process (IP), contributes to 
sustainability. In this view, the production chain of subsequent process 
steps starting from the raw material must be limited as much as possible. 
If for example a process is 100% solar energy driven (α = 1) and each 
production step results in an efficiency ηstep = 0.4, then 
the sustainability S decreases from 0.7 for a single stage process 
(η = ηstep = 0.4), down to 0.51 for a four stage process 
(η = η4step
 = 0.026). Development of technologies with highly efficient operations and 
with a minimal number of operations is a second challenge. In the design of 
an overall production process, not only high production efficiencies by 
decreasing irreversibility must be achieved, attention has to be also paid 
to the generation of non-products or waste. This means that 
η2 can also be increased by reduction of the emissions 
E. In this sense disciplines such as e.g. clean 
production strategies, green chemistry and implementation of green taxes 
contribute to a more sustainable technosphere.15,26–29
Finally, waste treatment technologies will remain an important 
technological issue. The approach includes the environmental efficiency 
(η1). The abatement technology must be able to reduce the 
emissions so that the impact of the pollutants does not affect the 
ecosystem, e.g. by enhancing (re)use of product and waste streams 
for as long as possible within the technosphere. The abatement does not 
necessarily mean that the waste products are converted into the original 
resources in a same rate as they are emitted. Carbon dioxide for example, 
produced by combustion of coal is not transformed back into coal at the 
same rate as it is extracted from the ecosphere. Full sustainability would 
mean that the carbon in the produced carbon dioxide would be brought back 
to its original form, coal. From a technological point of view, this is not 
a viable option and a possible solution for the time being is the 
underground storage of carbon dioxide in ‘used’ gas or oil 
fields. The emission limits must be based on emission standards, reflecting 
no negative (harmful) effects onto the ecosystem. Therefore, the emissions 
of the technosphere are called ‘harmless’ or 
‘assimilable’, rather than ‘zero exergy’ emissions. 
Despite the reduction of waste production by implementation of clean 
production strategies, near zero exergy or harmless emissions will remain 
hard to achieve. The challenge for the abatement technology discipline is 
to develop technologies transforming waste streams into harmless products 
with a minimal requirement of exergy. In addition, these technologies can 
be made more sustainable by implementing photocatalytic and hence solar 
driven processes.30
The exergy based sustainability coefficient S, scaled between 0 
and 1, provides a quantitative tool to assess technologies on their 
sustainability, including the three main steps of technology: resource 
extraction from the ecosphere, generation of products for the society and 
delivery of emission outputs to the ecosphere. This tool can be useful in 
decision making. However, the selection of the technological option will 
also depend on the preferred type of society.31 Indeed, the technological option depends on 
selection criteria in the social, economical and political sector, 
determining how far the needs of the current generation can be fulfilled, 
without endangering the needs of the future generations.
Conclusions
For the first time, the assessment of the sustainability of 
technological processes has been performed in a quantitative way, based on 
the basic laws of thermodynamics. This should make qualitative discussions 
on the technological conditions of the sustainability concept more 
substantial. Indeed, it is possible to associate numbers to proposed 
technological options. Of course ethanol and electricity are only examples. 
However, these illustrations indicate the wider applicability of our 
approach.
References

Our Common Future, The World Commission on Environment and 
Development, Oxford University Press, 
New York,  1987, p. 
383. Search PubMed .

          H. Wenzel, 
M. Hauschild and 
L. Altig, 
Environmental Assessment of Products: Methodology, Tools and Case 
Studies in Product Development, Chapman and Hall, 
London,  1997, vol. 1, p. 
543. Search PubMed .

          M. Z. Hauschild and 
H. Wenzel, 
Environmental Assessment of Products: Scientific Background, 
Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht, 
 1997, vol. 2, p. 584. Search PubMed .
A. P. Hinderink, H. J. van der Kooi and J. de Swaan Arons, Green Chem., 1999, 1, G176–180 RSC .

          M. M. D. Van den Berg, 
H. J. van der Kooi and 
J. de Swaan Arons, 
A Thermodynamic Basis for Sustainability, in Proceedings of ECOS 
’99,  1999, June 8–10, ed. M. Ishida, G. 
Tsatsaronis, M. J. Moran and H. Kataoka, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 
270–275. Search PubMed .

          Y. A. Çengel 
and M. A. Boles, 
Thermodynamics, an Engineering Approach, McGraw-Hill 
Inc., New York,  1994, 
2nd edn., pp. 387–448. Search PubMed .

          T. J. Kotas, 
The Exergy Method Of Thermal Plant Analysis, 
Butterwoods, London, 
 1985, p. 296. Search PubMed .

          M. J. Moran, 
Availability Analysis, a Guide To Efficient Energy Use, 
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
New York,  1989, corrected 
edn., p. 260. Search PubMed .

          J. Szargut, 
D. R. Morris and 
F. R. Steward, 
Exergy Analysis of Thermal, Chemical and Metallurgical 
Processes, Hemisphere Publ. Corp., New 
York/Springer Verlag, 
Berlin,  1988, p. 
332. Search PubMed .
G. Wall, Exergetics, (Preliminary version), Mölndal, 
1998, p. 149. (http://www.exergy.se/exergetics.pdf)..

          R. A. Gaggioli, 
Reflections on the History and Future of Exergy, in Proc. of ECOS 
‘99,  1999, June 8–10, ed. M. Ishida, G. 
Tsatsaronis, M. J. Moran and H. Kataoka, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, Tokyo, Japanpp. 
5–13. Search PubMed .
A. Bejan, Appl. Phys. Rev., 1996, 79, 1191 Search PubMed .
A. P. Hinderink, F. P. J. M. Kerkhof, A. B. K. Lie, J. De Swaan Arons and H. J. Van Der Kooi, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1996, 51, 4693 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Hinderink F. P. J. M. Kerkhof, A. B. K. Lie, J. De Swaan Arons and H. J. Van Der Kooi, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1996, 51, 4701 CrossRef .
G. Wall, Exergy, Ecology and Democracy—Concepts of a 
Vital Society or a Proposal for an Exergy Tax, Int. Conference on 
Exergy systems and ecology, 1993, July 5–9, Krakow, Poland, Publ. 
Proc. ed. J. Szargut, Z. Kolendak, G. Tsatsuronis and A. Zielik, pp. 
111–121 (http: //exergy.se/goran/eed/index.html)..
G. Wall, Exergy—A Useful Concept within Resource 
Accounting, Report No. 77–42, Chalmers University of Technology, 
Göteborg, 1977, p. 58. (http://exergy.se/ftp/paper1.pdf)..
G. Wall, Exergy—A Useful Concept, Chalmers 
University of Technology, Göteborg, 1986, p. 46. 
(http://exergy.se/goran/thesis/index.html)..

          M. Gong, Exergy 
as an Environmental Indicator, Chalmers University of 
Technology, Göteborg,  1999, 
p. 65. Search PubMed .
J. Mulder, H. J. van der Kooi, J. de Swaan Arons and J. Dewulf, 
Chemicals from renewable resources, Proceedings of ECOS 2000, July 
5–7, 2000, University of Twente, Enschede..
G. Tsatsaronis and M. J. Moran, Energy Convers. Mgmt., 1997, 38, 1535 Search PubMed .
I. Boustead, Eco-profiles of the European Plastics 
Industry, report 2: Olefin Feedstock Sources. A report for 
the European Centre for Plastics in the Environment (PWMI), Brussels, May 
1993, p. 23..
H. J. Herzog and E. M. Drake, Annu. Rev. Energy Environ., 1996, 21, 145 Search PubMed .
C. Hendriks, Carbon Dioxide Removal from Coal-fired Power Plants, 
PhD thesis, University of Utrecht, 1994, p. 259..
E. S. Mortikov, http://cacr.ioc.ac.ru/Labs/Labs47/pr23.htm, 
1997..

          A. De Vos, 
Endoreversible Thermodynamics of Solar Energy Conversion, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
 1992, p. 186. Search PubMed .

          T. Jackson, 
Clean Production Strategies, Developing Preventive Environmental 
Management in the Industrial Economy, Lewis, 
Boca Raton,  1993, p. 
415. Search PubMed .

          P. T. Anastas and 
J. C. Warner, 
Green Chemistry, Theory and Practice, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford,  1998, 
p. 135. Search PubMed .

          T. T. Shen, 
Industrial Pollution Prevention (Environmental Engineering), 
Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 
 1995, p. 371. Search PubMed .

          M. M. El-Halwagi, 
Pollution Prevention through Process Integration: Systematic Design 
Tools, Academic Press, New 
York,  1997, p. 
328. Search PubMed .

          K. Koike and 
K. Takeuchi, 
Photoenergy Utilization for Solving Energy and Environmental 
Issues, J. Japan Inst. Energy,  1998, 
vol. 77, pp. 396–402. Search PubMed .

          G. Wall, 
Exergy, Society and Morals, J. Human Values, 
 1997, vol. 3, pp. 193–206, 
 Search PubMed (http://www.exergy.se/ftp/esm.pdf)..

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:

Green Context
Sustainability is a much used but also much mis-used term. This paper 
examines the meaning of the word in the context of technology and attempts 
to introduce a degree of quantification to it. A technological process such 
as the manufacture of a chemical product can be non-sustaining if it takes 
raw materials from the ecosphere at a rate faster than the raw material is 
being generated or if it produces products (typically waste) that can 
damage the ecological mechanisms and hence resource production. Here, three 
aspects of sustainability, the use of renewable resources, the 
technological efficiency and the waste produced, are quantified for two 
types of products. It seems very likely that this type of calculation will 
be increasingly applied as we seek the least eco-threatening option for 
future manufacturing.
JHC


 	Fig. 1  
Solar driven closed cycle condition for a sustainable 
ecosphere/technosphere interaction.
	 
	
        (1)
      
	
        (2)
      
Rcons = 
R1 + R2 + 
R3	
        (3)
      

 	Fig. 2  
Exchange of resources and waste in a sustainable ecosphere/technosphere 
system.
	 
	
        (4)
      
	
        (5)
      
	
        (6)
      
	
        (7)
      
	
        (8)
      

 	Fig. 3  
Graphical representation of the sustainability S on the 
sustainability axis, with contributions by renewability 
Sα and efficiency Sη; and 
the scores α/√2 and η/√2 on the renewability and 
efficiency axis, respectively.
	 



Inputs

Oil for ethylene production	23.12
Gas for ethylene production	23.85
Other mineral resources for ethylene 
production	 0.94
Gas for work production for hydration	12.20
Water input for hydration	 0.02

Intermediate

Ethylene	29.6

Outputs

Ethanol	29.5


Inputs

Sun	33480	13220
Seeding material	2.4	0.9
Fuel for agriculture	5.6	2.2
Fuel for nutrients/ pesticides	 13	5.1
Fuel for fermentation	 24	 15.5

Intermediate

Wheat grain	147	147

Outputs

Wheat straw	 91
Gluten	 44
Cake	6
Ethanol	 92	 92


Inputs

Solar power	33480	4681
Solar cell production	658	92
Water for electrolysis	 11	 1.5
Flue gas delivering CO2	 80	11.2
Fuel for CO2 recovery	944	 132
Fuel for EtOH synthesis from 
CO2/H2	921	 129

Intermediates

Electricity	 4285	 599
Hydrogen	 2883	 403
CO2	 81	11

Outputs

Ethanol	409	 409
Methanol	145
CH4 + CO	 2035
Steam	336

Synthesis from fossil resources	0.0002	0.744	0.491	0.365	0.18
Agriculture/Fermentation	0.998	0.9995	0.00694	0.00694	0.50
Synthesis from Hydrogen/CO2, with 
solar driven H2 production	0.909	0.978	0.081	0.0792	0.49

Gas fueled cogeneration power plant	0.0007	0.9617	0.5033	0.4841	0.24
Multicrystalline Si solar cells	0.9676	0.9932	0.1247	0.1238	0.55

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
