Recent advances in bimetallic metal–organic frameworks (BMOFs): synthesis, applications and challenges  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ01994A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ01994A
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 13818-13837Recent advances in bimetallic metal–organic frameworks (BMOFs): synthesis, applications and challenges

        
          
            Si 
            Liu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuzhi 
            Qiu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yafen 
            Liu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wenfeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhong 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Devyani 
            Srivastava†
b, 
      
        
          
            Abhinav 
            Kumar
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Pan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jianqiang 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Research and Development of Natural Drugs, and School of Pharmacy, Guangdong Medical University, Guangdong Medical University Key Laboratory of Research and Development of New Medical Materials, Dongguan, 523808, China. E-mail: yingpan@gdmu.edu.cn; jianqiangliu2010@126.com
bThe First Dongguan Affiliated Hospital, Guangdong Medical University, Dongguan, 523808, China
cDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Lucknow, Lucknow 226 007, India. E-mail: abhinavmarshal@gmail.com
Received 
      23rd April 2022
    , Accepted 27th June 2022First published on 27th June 2022AbstractBimetallic metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) possess two different metal ions as nodes in their molecular frameworks. They are prepared by either one-pot syntheses, wherein different metals are mixed with suitable ligands and linkers, or by adopting post-synthetic modifications by soaking a monometallic MOF in a concentrated solution of a different (but compatible) metal ion. These bimetallic MOFs exhibit synergistic effects and enhanced properties compared to their monometallic counterparts, such as improved adsorption selectivity, selective catalysis and structural stability. Certainly, there are still many open challenges, given that bimetallic MOFs suffer from the typical drawbacks of MOFs, including high moisture sensitivity, easy oxidation due to their varying oxidation states, and possible metal leaching in liquids. In the present perspective, progress in the research on the synthesis and properties of bimetallic MOFs has been reviewed systematically, describing the synthetic strategies adopted to prepare targeted bimetallic MOFs and their applications in gas adsorption, catalysis, energy storage and conversion, and luminescence sensing. Additionally, the challenges facing the synthesis of stable and robust bimetallic MOFs have been discussed with a final outlook on their further development prospects.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordination polymers (PCPs), are a new type of porous crystalline hybrid material consisting of metal ions and organic linkers both precisely connected by strong coordination bonds and netted together to form frameworks with permanent porosity. Structural properties such as high/tunable porosity (up to 90% free volume), large surface area, flexible surface chemistry, tunability and the presence of redox active metal centers make MOFs potentially useful for a wide range of applications in gas storage and separation, catalysis, energy conversion, sensing technology, biomedicine and so on.1–6
Targeted MOFs can be designed and synthesized with desirable architectures by rationally selecting suitable metal ions and organic linkers. The design of MOF structures is an important topic, and the design and construction of heterogeneous metal frameworks has proven to be an effective strategy for tuning the structural properties and applications of MOFs (Fig. 1a). Wang and co-workers designed a series of isostructural Co-Ni-MOFs by varying the Co/Ni molar ratio, where the synergistic effect of Co and Ni improved their lithium storage performance.1a Meanwhile, the level of Co ion doping can be monitored by observing the variation in the morphology of bimetallic MOFs. Specifically, the morphology of Co-Ni-MOF transformed from irregular fragments to nano-spheres as the Co ion doping decreased. Overall, very small modifications in the secondary building units (SBUs) enabled them to be precisely woven into the topology at different active sites as nodes and edges. Furthermore, by systematically exploiting the flexibility of SBUs, the structural stability of MOFs can be improved, leading to various bimetallic MOFs with desirable properties. In recent years, extensive investigations into the design and synthesis of bimetallic MOF structures have exponentially increased due to the need for the production of high-performance materials with highly selective and synergistic functionalities.
 Fig. 1  Graphical representation of the publications in the last ten years on bimetallic MOFs, revealing their scope in this research field. 
Due to the synergistic effect between different metals, bimetallic MOFs possess the following advantages: (1) they exhibit enhanced electrical conductivity and adsorption capacity by doping a second metal site and adjusting the molar ratio of the two metals; (2) they exhibit good catalytic activity or selective adsorption capacity by integrating metal ions with characteristic open metal sites (OMSs); and (3) they show fascinating luminescence properties due to energy transfer mechanisms such as d–d transitions, MLCT, LMCT and especially metal-to-metal charge transfer (MMCT) between the bimetals. The related pertinent examples are discussed in the Applications section. Due to the versatility of bimetallic MOFs in a variety of advanced practical applications, they have become an emerging research hotspot with an increasing number of publications each year (Fig. 1b). The increasing number of papers published in various prestigious journals present evidence of the rising research interest in this field. In the present review, a detailed analysis of the structures of bimetallic MOFs produced by integrating two different classes of metals and organic linkers is provided. Also, the chemical properties and driving factors behind these synthetic strategies are discussed. Secondly, a detailed understanding of the various means by which bimetallic MOFs can be prepared to tailor their surface area, pore volume, porosity, etc. with corresponding properties, highlighting key developments in their various practical applications such as adsorption, catalysis, electrochemical energy storage and luminescence sensing, is explored. In addition, the challenges faced during the design and synthesis of bimetallic MOFs and the directions and prospects for their further development are discussed.
2. The synthetic strategies for bimetallic MOFs
The purpose of introducing skeleton heterogeneity is to introduce metal ions at the symmetry equivalent position of SBUs to construct bimetallic MOFs. This is mainly achieved via one-pot synthesis, metal exchange, modification after covalent synthesis or solvent/gas phase metal exchange reaction. Significant attention had been paid to the fact that the combination of metals/metal clusters endows MOFs with many interesting functional features. In most cases it has been observed that (i) two different SUBs are well mixed in the MOF structure, and two different metal ions occupy either symmetry equivalent lattice positions (ordered arrangement) or random positions (disordered arrangement) in the resulting MOF. However, diverse permutations of metal ions are possible, where (ii) the coordination of two different metals in the same SBU or metal and linker provides sites during post-synthesis covalent modification, (iii) equivalence of a particular metal ion is shared between two MOF units, and (iv) oxometalates/metal cluster bound in the MOF pores (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Synthetic strategies and structural arrangements of bimetallic MOFs: (i) ordered and disordered arrangements of two metals in a bimetallic MOF obtained by one-pot synthesis; (ii) metal insertion in linkers and OMSs by covalent post-synthetic modification (CPSM); (iii) two metals shared equivalently between two unit cells and (iv) oxometallate/cluster incorporation inside the lattice by CPSM. 
For all synthetic strategies, ensuring the structural stability of bimetallic MOFs to prevent the nucleophilic attack of solvent molecules is a common key challenge. Among them, the strength of the metal-linking bond is one of the major factors determining the structural integrity of bimetallic MOFs, which mainly depends on the ionic percentage.2 The ionic percentage is significantly affected by the oxidation state of the metal ion and the radius difference in the metal ion from the other components. The greater these influencing factors, the stronger the ability of metal ions to attract the electron cloud of the other components towards themselves. Thereby, the nature of the metal ligand is more significant and more stable. In addition, due to electron cloud overlap, the formed σ-bond and π-bond also have a certain positive effect on the metal connection bond stability. Another major factor determining the stability of bimetallic MOFs is the number of open metal sites. Due to the efficient filling of atoms in the crystal lattice, the number of open metal sites decreases, which plays a vital role in elevating the stability. However, the presence of crystallographic defects is also a major reason why bimetallic MOFs can be employed in applications such as catalysis and adsorption, and thus cannot be regarded stereotypically as a drawback. Among the factors affecting stability, the most important is the attraction between ions, which is greater than repulsion. It is worth noting that metal ions having small radii are not recommended to replace metal ions having larger radii in order lattice collapse in bimetallic MOFs.
In addition, studying the thermodynamic and kinetic conditions under which bimetallic MOFs crystallize so that they can crystallize smoothly under conditions that keep their topology intact is a major challenge in the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs. When the free energy of the liquid phase is larger than that of the solid phase, crystals of bimetallic MOFs begin to form spontaneously. Specifically, the crystallization process is essentially a non-equilibrium phase transition process, which will yield a thermodynamically stable phase. Certainly, the influence of kinetic parameters on the system, such as the effect on the crystallization process due to the driving forces provided by the existence of differences in some parameters, also needs to be considered, which assists in properly understanding the growth mechanism of MOFs. In addition, the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs also faces related issues that need attention, such as controlling the periodicity of the synthesized crystals and avoiding the occurrence of phase separation.
It is important to assess these aspects by employing mathematical models and theoretical algorithms for the rational design of bimetallic MOFs before their synthesis. For example, it is an excellent strategy to deduce the feasibility of using pre-synthesized bimetallic MOFs by utilizing methods such as constructing logical building blocks, which not only help in expanding the scope of synthesis, but also reduce the pre-experimental generated waste to some extent. However the steps added to one-step evaluation are necessary and practical.
2.1 One-pot synthesis
One-pot synthesis is a method utilized for the self-assembly of MOFs using specific solvents (water or other organic solvents) as reaction media and utilizes direct mixing of metal salts, organic ligands and metal precursors for their doping in MOFs.3 This method also requires assistance from auxiliary methods, such as solvothermal, ultrasonic, microwave, or steam-assisted methods. This is an entropy-governed process, which can spontaneously change a system from disorder to order driven by internal forces. It can directly convert simple-structured raw materials into more complex-structured molecules and does not require the process of removing impurities and separation and purification. Simultaneously, the simple operation and low cost of one-pot synthesis also provide new possibilities for solving the pivotal problem of the difficult large-scale production of MOFs (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the possible synthetic routes for bimetallic MOFs along with their advantages and disadvantages. 
One-pot synthesis, as a typical self-assembly process, is a process of molecular rearrangement under thermodynamic equilibrium. By comparing self-assembly, traditional supramolecular synthesis and retrosynthesis, it can be assessed that: (1) traditional strategies for supramolecular synthesis generate weak non-covalent bonds, while self-assembly generates strong coordination bonds.6 (2) Retrosynthesis generate crystals by destroying secondary building units, while self-assembly preserves the structural integrity and stiffness of secondary building units. Hence, the products generated by this method perform excellently in terms of stability compared to other two methods. Simultaneously, the effect of solvent as the reaction medium on the results of the one-pot synthesis is also significant. Given that the entire synthetic process operates in the same solvent system, the polarity of the solvent and the solubility of the organic linker and their pro hydrolytic properties largely influence the rate, equilibrium, and mechanism of the reaction.
During the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs, although one-pot synthesis can ensure the uniform distribution of metal ions, there is still a limitation of periodic uncertainty in the arrangement of heterogeneous metals, which leads to the inability to control whether the heterogeneous metals of the synthesized products are specifically distributed in symmetrically equivalent lattice positions or they are randomly distributed. Also, because the introduced metal cations do not have similar coordination modes, coordination capabilities and affinity, the two metal cations cannot react at the same time, resulting in mixed phases containing multiple MOFs or amorphous phases during nucleation and growth. Thus, to avoid this, Serre and team selected the less reactive Fe0 instead of the more reactive Fe3+, considering that Cr3+ is inert in their experiments in one-pot synthesis of bimetallic MOFs (MIL-53(Cr/Fe)).4 This experiment controlled the reaction of these two metals by selecting the reactivity of the metal ions to be introduced to achieve the desired framework.
The heterogeneous metals incorporated via one-pot synthesis can exert significant influence on the reactions of the metal centers and organic ligands of the original MOFs. Ebrahim and co-workers used one-pot synthesis to load cerium on two single metal MOFs containing zirconium, resulting in the formation of Ce-UiO-66 and Ce-UiO-67, respectively.5 The redox cycling of Ce ions (Ce4+/Ce3+) resulted in bimetallic MOFs, generating more centers capable of binding to NO2 than the original Zr MOFs. Meanwhile, Ce ion doping led to the formation of new micropores due to the crystal surface inhomogeneity. The results showed that heterogeneous metal doping can provide additional adsorption sites for MOFs, thereby increasing the gas absorption capacity of MOFs. The crystal structure of bimetallic MOFs are significantly different from that of the parent material, which also indicates that doping heterometals can disturb the interaction between metal centers and organic ligands in a one-pot system to some extent and affect the growth of the original MOF crystals, thus increasing the possibility of crystal defects in bimetallic MOFs.
In addition, given that bimetallic MOFs are characterized by poor water stability and easy occurrence of rapid region-regular oxidation, the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs via the one-pot method also presents great challenges in terms of stability. Overall, when selecting one-pot synthesis, it is often necessary to strictly control the incorporation of metal ions, the interaction between the metal ions and linkers, the size difference between the two heterogeneous metals and the reaction temperature to ensure the stability and absence of crystal defects in the synthesized bimetallic MOFs.
Aguirre et al. employed one-pot synthesis to control the synergistic effect of two heterogeneous metals in bimetallic MOFs by changing the ratio of the two metal ion concentrations in bimetallic MOFs,5a thus largely affecting the characteristics of the structure and performance of bimetallic MOFs.6 This group utilized two metals, Ga and In, to prepare InGaPF-1, InGaPF-2, and InGaPF-3 with the general formula [InxGa1−x(O2C2H4)0.5(hfipbb)] (x = 0.72, 0.55, and 0.28, respectively) (Fig. 4a), and compared their catalytic activity with that of AlPF-1. Although monometallic MOFs of Ga and In (GaPF-1 and InPF-11β, respectively) and Alpf-1 are topologically identical, the large differences in the reaction pathways induced during their activation of the catalytic reactants result in their failure to give the expected α-aminonitrile products. After using the three MOFs separately as catalysts for the A3 Strecker reaction, this team found that InGaPF-3 gave a reaction rate comparable to that of AlPF-1 with the best conversion efficiency. The results showed that in gallium indium bimetallic MOF materials with a large amount of indium, the cleavage of cyano groups was greatly hindered and the reaction rate greatly decreased, while the presence of a small amount of indium favoured the formation of imines.
 Fig. 4  (a) The organic ligand H2hfipbb reacts with aluminium, gallium, indium, and a combination of gallium and indium to form a series of new MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright 2015, the Journal of the American Chemical Society. A schematic representation of the tandem reaction using a site-isolated heterogeneous catalyst. (b) The mesoporous structure of MIL-101(Al/Fe)-NH2 and (c) the Lewis acidic sites (Al3+/Fe3+ centers) and Brønsted basic sites (–NH2 groups of the organic linkers). Copyright 2020, RSC with permission from ref. 5a. 
Hu and co-workers7 reported the synthesis of core–shell bimetallic MOFs for MIL-101(Al/Fe)-NH2(X) (Al3+:Fe3+ = 20:1, 15:1, 10:1, 5:1) via one pot-synthesis and used them as catalysts for a series of reactions (Fig. 4b and c). Compared to monometallic MIL-101(Fe)-NH2, MIL-101(Al/Fe)-NH2(X) exhibited better thermal stability and catalytic activity. The data analysis revealed that among the four groups of MOFs with different metal ratios, the catalytic activity was the highest when Al:Fe = 15:1. This investigation indicated that the concentration ratio of different metal ions can affect the catalytic activity of the products.
In addition, after one-pot synthesis to obtain bimetallic MOFs, spectroscopic techniques are used to examine their products. The one-pot synthesis of Co/Fe MOFs (Fe/Co = 1:0, 1:1, 1:3, 1:9, 1:19, and 0:1) was reported by Iqbal et al.8 The group studied the morphology, grain size, and elemental composition of mono- and bimetallic MOFs using SEM-EDX techniques (Fig. 5). Their analysis indicated that the incorporated cobalt was retained and the A–D catalysts exhibited a spindle-shaped morphology. With an increase in cobalt content, the phase separation phenomenon became more obvious, and the octahedral (distorted) and spindle morphological structures could be observed for the C and D catalysts, respectively. The spindle-shaped appearance of E almost disappeared, while the monometallic Co-MOFs exhibited a rod-like appearance. Thus, it is clear that the spectroscopic examination results can serve as an important reference to assess the success of the one-pot synthesis.
 Fig. 5  Top: Schematic illustration for the synthesis of mixed-metal (Fe/Co) MOFs with the NH2-BDC linker. Various possibilities for the existence of SBUs are shown at the bottom. (a) Individual trinuclear Fe3(μ3-O) cluster. (b) Individual Co3(μ3-O) cluster. (c) Co coordination with the NH2 functional groups of the linker. Color codes: Co (purple), Fe (orange), O (red), C (gray). Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission. Copyright 2019, Chemistry – A European Journal. 
2.2 Covalent post-synthetic modification (CPSM) strategies to prepare bimetallic MOFs
Covalent post-synthetic metal exchange modification strategies are an effective pathway for the synthesis of bimetallic MOF materials given that it can assist in the synthesis of unconventional bimetallic MOF materials that are difficult or nearly impossible to obtain using direct synthesis approaches (Fig. 3). To date, the majority of studies on post-synthetic modifications mainly employed the mixed linker strategy and only few examples dealt with metal ion exchange to synthesize bimetallic MOFs. Sometimes the metal exchange process can be very fast, but sometimes it can take more than a week, provided that the inserted metal ions have similar reactivity, size, electronegativity, etc. Although this post-synthetic exchange process is efficient, very few studies have analyzed the factors that govern the kinetics and thermodynamics of this metal transfer. Dinca and co-workers reported for the first time the ionic re-decomposition process of MZn3O(–O2C)6 clusters formed by Zn4O(1,4-benzodicarboxylate)3 (MOF-5) as hosts for Ti3+, V2+/3+, Cr2+/3+, Mn2+ and Fe2+ ions.9 The shape of the crystal and unaltered crystalline mass during the double decomposition indicated that substitution occurs in a crystal-to-crystal manner rather than a solution phase dissolution-recrystallization mechanism (Fig. 6). The distribution of metal ions in the crystal was confirmed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and optical microscopy images. The same group further presented a method to determine the approximate thermodynamic parameters of the cation exchange process in MOFs, using MOF-5 and MFU-4l cation exchange to study the mechanism of factors such as solvent selection and cation properties. It was found that the choice of solvent and cationic properties exhibited a significant impact on the cation exchange balance of a specific MOF system, and the thermodynamics of different MOF systems also changed significantly.10 Liu and co-workers11 reported that in the JLU-Liu40-I system, which was based on single-core and dual-core paddle wheels, the metal skeleton underwent post-synthesis metal ion re-decomposition through a single-crystal to single-crystal (SCSC) process, selectively replacing the paddle wheel In(III) with Cu(II) ions. This was verified with the help of ICP analysis and it was found that 60% of the In(III) ions in the framework was gradually exchanged with Cu(II) ions within 12 h, and the equilibrium time of the compound decomposition of the synthesized metal ions was shorter than that reported previously, ranging from a few days to several weeks.12–14 The change of the rate was mainly determined by the coordination intensity and ion radius of the outgoing In(III) and incoming Cu(II) metal ions. The hybrid bimetal-assembled MOFs exhibited a significantly improved gas adsorption and separation performance. The post-synthetic metathesis approach proved to be very versatile, making it possible to completely exchange metal ions from the MOF structure without affecting the structural integrity, topological structure, and crystallinity of the material.
 Fig. 6  Post-synthetic metal exchange to introduce reduced metal cations in MOF-5 networks. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. 
In addition, Song and co-workers conducted in-depth studies to determine the factors that affect the dynamics and thermodynamics of the metal exchange processes.15 The selection of solvent, concentration of immersion solution and reaction temperature during the exchange of post-synthetic metals were studied. They immersed an MOF in Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O methanol solution at room temperature and prepared Zn analogues of HKUST-1. The metal transfer process proceeded smoothly in methanol solvent, and Zn2+ ions were effectively replaced by Cu2+ ions. The amount of skeleton metal ions replaced varied with the concentration of immersion solution and immersion time. However, this did not occur in DMF, which may be due to the slow reaction kinetics of DMF at ambient temperature. On elevating the temperature, transmetallation in DMF occurred, but the side products of MOFs were obtained rather than the transmetallated product. Meanwhile, a flexible Zn-PMOF-2 with the same Zn2(COO)4 cluster was synthesized. Unlike Zn-HKUST-1, ICP analysis showed complete transmetallation even when immersed in a lower concentration Cu2+ methanol solution. When the Zn-PMOF-2 framework contained a large organic linker, complete metal transfer occurred. However, only partial metal transfer was observed in the rigid Zn-HKUST-1 skeleton system comprised of small and rigid organic linkers. The metal transfer kinetics was affected not only by the chemical properties but also the flexibility of the skeleton metal center. Metal transfer reactions are subject to the flexibility of the framework and the chemical environment of the ligand, and different site reactivity resulted in the formation of core–shell hetero-structures (Fig. 7). Nevertheless, the reverse transmetallation for both Zn-MOFs was not possible. Kim and co-workers reported the complete and reversible metal exchange between Cd-MOF and Pb-MOF through a transition from single crystal to single crystal, where the complete and reversible exchange between the skeleton of Cd(II) ions and Pb(II) in aqueous solution at room temperature, which not only not changed the single crystallinity but also maintained the structural integrity of the skeleton.16 This metal exchange was a one-week process, where Cd-MOF was completely replaced by Pb2+. The ICP-atomic emission spectroscopy (AES) analysis revealed that approximately 50% exchange of Pb2+ by Cd2+ occurred in 1 day. However, the complete reverse process required almost 3 weeks.
 Fig. 7  Transmetallation in two MOFs (Zn-HKUST-1 and Zn-PMOF-2) with different framework flexibilities. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission. Copyright 2012, CrystEngComm. 
In general, the post-synthetic exchange of metal ions is mainly concentrated on unstable MOFs with unstable metal ligand bonds.17,18 However, metal ion exchange was also found in MOFs with high structural stability, such as ZIF-, UIO- and MIL-based materials. Cohen and co-workers19 reported that metal ion exchange also occurred between two solid MOF solids. They mixed MIL-53(Al)-Br and MIL-53(Fe)-Br as dry solids and cultured them in water at 85 °C for 5 days. Later, positive ion aerosol time-of-flight mass spectrometry (ATOFMS) spectra showed that about 40% of the particles contained both iron and aluminium, and all the negative ion spectra showed the presence of bromine ions, which could be attributed to the presence of Br-BDC ligands. Simultaneously, Zr in metal ion exchange UIO-66(Zr) was also studied. After soaking UIO-66(Zr) in a DMF solution of Ti4+ (TiCp2Cl2, TiCl4 (THF)2 or TiBr4) at 85 °C for 5 days, it was found that Zr4+ was partially replaced by Ti4+. Moreover, the degree of substitution of Ti4+ was related to the type of Ti4+ salt. The results showed that the exchanged Ti-MOFs maintain thermal stability comparable to the parent material. In addition, this group also explored another post-synthetic scheme of metal ion exchange, solid/liquid cation exchange20 to obtain new bimetallic MOFs, which cannot be compared with direct solvothermal synthesis. ZIF-71(Zn) was incubated in Mn(acac)2 solution in methanol to obtain ZIF-71(Zn/Mn). According to ATOFMS and SEM-EDX monitoring, it was established that all ZIF-71 particles were involved in the exchange process. When ZIF-71(Zn/Mn) was exposed to more than 3 mol of Zn(acac)2 in MeOH, almost all Mn(II) centers were exchanged back to Zn. Further, the EDX results revealed that the atom ratio of Zn:Mn was 99:1 compared with 7.3:1 before the reintroduction of Zn(II), indicating that the PSE process was kinetically controlled.
3. Applications of bimetallic MOFs
3.1 Adsorbents
The uncontrolled burning of fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas to meet growing energy demand is leading to the emission of lethal gases, which are worsening air quality.21,22 Similarly, the discharge of toxic and carcinogenic compounds into clean water by human activities including agriculture and industry is rapidly degrading the water quality.23,24 Rapid industrial development is deteriorating the air and water quality, posing a threat to human health and safety. Therefore, effective and affordable remedial measures are required to cope with these problems.25 MOFs with peculiar features such as high surface area, good porosity, flexible surface, and chemical tunability can be used as effective adsorbents to capture these pollutants.26–28 To further improve the adsorption capacity of MOFs for pollutants, the partial replacement of the metal ions in MOFs by different metal ions creates bimetallic MOFs with different SBUs. In this section, we highlight the application of bimetallic MOFs as adsorbents in air decontamination and wastewater remediation (Table 1).
Table 1 Some reported bimetallic metal–organic framework (MOF) materials as adsorbents




Sr. no.
Bimetallic MOF
Adsorbate
Adsorption capacity
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume
Ref.




1
UiO-66Ti56
CO2
4 mmol g−1 (273 K)
1844
1.18 cm3 g−1

30



2
Co75Zn25-ZIF-8
CO2
0.90 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)
1571
0.7750 cm3 g−1

35



3
Cu-TMA(Fe)
CO2
4.4 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)
1487
0.636 cc g−1

36



4
CPM-200-V/Mg
CO2
80.4 cm3 g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)
1011
0.50 cm3 g−1

37



5
MIL-101(Cr,Mg)-2#
CO2
3.28 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)
3274
1.61 cm3 g−1

38



6
MIL-53(Cr-Fe)
CO2
—
1200
—

4



7
FeCu-MOFs
Hg0
12.27 mg g−1
854.7
0.36 cm3 g−1

40



8
MIL-53(Al,Cr)
H2S
—
—
—

41



9
Fe0.05HKUST-1
Pb(II)
564.9 mg g−1 (pH = 5)
522.6
0.232 cm3 g−1

42



10
UiO-67-Co
Cefradine
1091 mg g−1
1637
0.67 cm3 g−1

43



11
MLB-8
Tetracycline
83.8 mg g−1
2422.685 ± 157.475
1.282 ± 0.083 cm3 g−1

51



12
Ni@ZIF-67
Methyl orange
151.74 mg g−1 (T = 30 °C, pH = 6)
1156
0.4642 cm3 g−1

52



13
ZnCo-ZIF
Uranium
564.7 mg g−1
998.42
—

53



14
Fe/Al-BDC-NH2(1:1)
Arsenic
146.8 mg g−1 (298 K)
690
0.681 cm3 g−1

55



15
FeNi1/15-BDC
Methylene blue
—
201.80
0.35 cm3 g−1

56



16
FeNi1/15-BDC
Methyl orange
—
201.80
0.35 cm3 g−1

56





The superiority of bimetallic MOFs as adsorbents can be attributed to their unique structural characteristics such as high surface area, wide pore volume and flexible surface chemical tunability.26–28 In general, the larger the surface area and pore volume, the larger the adsorption capacity. Although surface chemistry has a strong influence on the adsorption performance of bimetallic MOFs, other factors also affect the adsorption, e.g., the interaction between adsorbates and bimetallic MOFs, adsorbate concentration, adsorption kinetics, particle size, temperature, pH, contact time and the reusability or recyclability.24 In addition, the stability of bimetallic MOFs is as important as surface chemistry in wastewater remediation, given that leaching of the toxic MOF components (metals and ligands) may lead to secondary contamination.29 As shown in Fig. 8, the adsorption mechanism of bimetallic MOFs operates mainly through the combination of bimetal synergy, electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, acid–base interaction, π–π interaction and hydrophobic interaction.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the possible mechanisms for the adsorptive removal of bimetallic MOFs. 

3.1.1 Air decontamination. 
Carbon dioxide emission is a major contributor to global warming. Therefore, it is necessary to develop bimetallic MOFs for CO2 capture and storage. In CO2 adsorption, the adsorption performance of bimetallic MOFs is closely related to their surface area and pore volume. Lau and co-workers obtained UIO-66 with different Ti(IV) loadings through post-synthetic exchange.30 They observed that the replacement of heavy metals with light metals increased the surface area of the MOFs.31,32 Similarly, smaller Ti4+ ions reduced the pore size in the frame, which was closer to the ideal pore size for CO2 adsorption.33,34 It was shown experimentally that the CO2 uptake of UIO-66 Zr100 was 2.2 mmol g−1, while the CO2 uptake of UIO-66 Ti32 and UIO-66 Ti56 increased sharply from 2.3 mmol g−1 to 4 mmol g−1, respectively, showing an increase in CO2 uptake by 81%. The results demonstrated that with an increase in Ti(IV) loading, the surface area and pore volume of the Ti-exchanged UiO-66 increased with a concomitant increase in CO2 intake. Kaur and co-workers successfully synthesized CoxZn100−x-ZIF-8(x = 0–100) via a one-pot strategy.35 Amongst them, CO75Zn25-ZIF-8 displayed the highest CO2 adsorption capacity. The CO2 uptake was 0.126 mmol g−1 at 298 K and 0.5 bar and 0.90 mmol g−1 at 298 K and 1 bar. This was because CO75Zn25-ZIF-8 possessed the largest surface area of 1571 m2 g−1 (40% increase compared to Zn-ZIF-8) and pore volume of 0.7750 cm3 g−1 (33% increase compared to Zn-ZIF-8). Interestingly, the incorporation of Co2+ could be monitored by the colour change of the material in Zn-ZIF-8. The colour of the bimetallic CoZn-ZIF-8 changed from white to purple with an increase in the content of Co.
It is worth mentioning that the CO2 adsorption performance of bimetallic MOFs can be attributed to the interaction between their open metal sites and CO2. The interaction strength was adjusted by changing the metal ions to regulate the gas adsorption behaviours of bimetallic MOFs, proving to be an effective measure. Wang and co-workers employed the micro-droplet spray method to synthesize a series of bimetallic MOFs by incorporating different metal ions (i.e., Fe, Mg, Co, and Al) in Cu-TMA.36 The bimetallic MOFs exhibited different isothermal heat of adsorption values from the parent MOFs under different CO2 loadings, indicating the interaction of different intensities between CO2 molecules and different metal ions. The Qst of Cu-TMA (Fe), Cu-TMA (Mg) and Cu-TMA (Co) was found to be 24.5 kJ mol−1, 23.2 kJ mol−1 and 21.9 kJ mol−1, respectively. This indicates that Cu interacted with CO2 molecules more strongly than secondary metal ions under the initial CO2 loading. The adsorption Qst in Cu-TMA decreased to 22.8 kJ mol−1 with an increase in the CO2 loading, while Cu-TMA(Fe) and Cu-TMa(Co) showed an increasing trend, which may be related to the enhancement of the CO2–CO2 interaction. In particular, the pore volume of bimetallic MOFs was positively correlated with the radius of the substituted metal. Specifically, the atomic radius of Fe, Cu, Mg, and Co are 126, 128, 173, and 200 pm, respectively. Accordingly, the pore volumes of Cu-Tma(Fe), Cu-TMA(Mg) and Cu-Tma(Co) were 0.636 cc g−1, 0.662 cc g−1, 0.709 cc g−1 and 0.782 cc g−1, respectively. This indicates that metal substitution is an effective method to adjust the pore structure of MOFs. Zhai and co-workers37 studied the systematic combination of a heterometallic MOF family (CPM-200 series) with trivalent metals (In3+, Ga3+, Fe3+, V3+, and Sc3+) and divalent metals (Mg2+, Mn2+, Co2+, and Ni2+), showing CO2/N2 selectivity (Fig. 9a). The isometric heat of CO2 adsorption for CPM-200-V/Mg was −79.6 kJ mol−1, which was the highest value reported for MOFs with Lewis acid sites. The adsorption selectivity experiment of CPM-200S for CO2 (50%) and N2 (50%) was carried out at 273 K. It was shown experimentally that CPM-200-V/Mg had the best selectivity value of 406. The order of the selectivity value matched well with the Qst sequence (Fig. 9b). They observed a strong correlation between the isometric heat of CO2 and the charge radius ratio (z/r) of the metal ions in MOFs. Zhou and co-workers reported that the CO2/N2 adsorption selectivity of MIL-101(Cr, Mg)-2# (Mg/Cr atomic ratio of 0.038) was about 4-times higher than that of MIL-101(Cr).38 Meanwhile, the CO2 adsorption capacity of MIL-101(Cr, Mg)-2# at 298 K and 1 bar reached 3.28 mmol g−1, which was 40% higher than that of MIL-101(Cr). The enhanced CO2 selectivity and adsorption capacity of MIL-101(Cr, Mg)-2# could be attributed to the increased surface area and the stronger interaction between MIL-101(Cr, Mg)-2# and CO2 caused by Mg2+ doping.
 Fig. 9  (a) M2+ and M3+ combination for CPM-200s in this work. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature-dependent X-ray diffraction (top) and schematic of the phase transitions upon heating (bottom). Co radiation, Ka1 = 1.78896 Å. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright 2012, Chemical Communications. (c) Schematic of the ion-exchange mechanism (values in brackets include hydration radius and hydration energy of the ions). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission. Copyright 2022, Chemical Engineering Journal. 
In particular, porous MOFs exhibit structural flexibility and can reversibly converted between narrow and large pore phases under external stimuli (for example, temperature, pressure, guest inclusion and light).39 This structural flexibility is also known as the breathing behaviour of MOFs. Nouar and co-workers reported three main forms of breathing behavior of MIL-53(Cr-Fe) under temperature stimulation.4 MIL-53(Cr-Fe) was the monoclinic narrow-pore (NP) form at low temperature (293–343 K), empty obturator (CP) form at intermediate temperature, and transformed into large-pore (LP) form above 463 K (Fig. 9b). The CO2 adsorption experiments showed that MIL-53(Cr-Fe) solid mainly adopts the CP form at room temperature. The CO2 adsorption of the MIL-53(Cr-Fe) solid was related to a two-step transition from the CP to NP form, and then to the LP form. The transitions between these forms were attributed to the internal thermodynamic effects and/or host-object interactions.
In addition, bimetallic MOFs can be used as adsorbents for toxic gases to mitigate their threat to air quality and human health. Zhang and co-workers employed an ultrasound-assisted strategy to synthesize chlorine-rich FeCu-MOFs for the removal of gaseous element mercury (Hg0).40 They further systematically studied the removal performance for gaseous mercury and structural stability of FeCu-MOFs under different simulated flue gas conditions. The results demonstrated that FeCu-MOFs had high elemental mercury removal efficiency and good resistance towards SO2 and water vapour poisoning. The removal efficiency of elemental mercury could be improved by increasing the concentration of O2, NO and hydrochloric acid in flue gas. Hamon and co-workers studied the H2S adsorption behaviour of the MIL series.41 The adsorption of H2S in macroporous MIL-100 and MIL-101 seemed to be partially irreversible, while in microporous MIL-53(Al, Cr) showed completely reversible one-step or two-step adsorption behaviour.


3.1.2 Wastewater remediation. 
MOFs are commonly used for the removal of pollutants in wastewater through adsorption. However, they have some disadvantages, such as the structure of conventional MOFs collapses when exposed to moisture or chemicals, which limits their use adsorbents.42 Thus, to improve the water stability of HKUST-1, Goyal and co-workers adopted a one-pot strategy to incorporate different concentrations of Fe3+ in HKUST-1 for the removal of Pb(II).43 It was shown experimentally that Fe0.05HKUST-1 exhibited better water stability than HKUST-1, and its structure remained intact after 10 h of water treatment. Similarly, the amount of copper leached from Fe0.05-HKUST-1 decreased by 53%, which indicated that the stability of HKUST-1 improved after Fe3+ doping. The removal efficiency of Fe0.05HKUST-1 for Pb(II) was 94% and the its adsorption capacity for Pb(II) was 564.9 mg g−1. As shown in Fig. 9c, the mechanism of lead ion removal by Fe0.05HKUST-1 was through ion exchange, in which the copper in HKUST-1 was replaced by Pb2+ ions. Zr-MOFs (MOFs based on the Zr(IV) cubic octahedron secondary building unit Zr6O4(OH)4(CO2)12) have unique thermal stability, water stability and chemical stability.44–48 Nevertheless, they also have disadvantages such as low chemical activity,49,50 which limit their application in chemical adsorption. Zhou and co-workers employed a post-synthetic metallization strategy to incorporate Co in Zr-MOFs to synthesize UIO-66-Co and UIO-67-Co, which were used to remove cefradine.42 Experiments demonstrated that UiO-67-Co had special stability for aqueous solution in a wide pH range. The adsorption capacity of cefradine followed the order of UiO-67-CO > UIO-67 > UIO-66-CO > UIO-66. In contrast, the adsorption capacity of UIO-67-Co was largest at ∼1091 mg g−1. The investigators proposed that the combination of π–π coupling, bimetal synergistic effect, electrostatic interaction and appropriate pore structure were the primary reasons for the higher cefradine capture performance of UiO-67-Co.
 Fig. 10  (a) Proposed mechanism for the adsorption process of MO on Ni@ZIF-67. (b) Efficiency of the regenerated ZIF-67 and Ni@ZIF-67 nanocomposites for the adsorption of methyl orange. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission. Copyright 2021, the International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry. 
Similarly, the reusability of bimetallic MOFs is also another important parameter to evaluate their adsorption performance, which is of great significance for practical application on an industrial scale. Jin and co-workers51 reported a novel adsorbent MIL-101, namely CuCo/MIL-101, and applied it to remove tetracycline (TC) from aqueous solution. They evaluated the reproducibility and reuse of the adsorbents through recycle experiments. It was shown experimentally that MIB-8 (Cu2+/Co2+ mol ratio 0.8) maintained a high adsorption capacity for TC after 4 reuses and its structure remained intact, although the adsorption capacity of TC decreased slightly with an increase in the number of cycles. Nazir and co-workers52 investigated the reusability of Ni@ZIF-67 adsorption methyl orange, where the maximum adsorption capacity calculated using Langmuir isotherm model after the second regeneration cycle was as high as 141.24 mg g−1 (Fig. 10a). The re-adsorption capacity of Ni@ZIF-67 for methyl orange was 42.5 mg g−1, which indicated that Ni@ZIF-67 had good reusability (Fig. 10b). Fig. 10a shows the mechanism of Ni@ZIF-67 adsorption of methyl orange.
In addition, the majority of studies on the adsorption capacity of adsorbents are limited to the experimental scale. Batch studies and real water sample treatment studies are of great significance for developing bimetallic MOF adsorbents with potential for application in practical water treatment. Singh and co-workers synthesized a bimetallic ZnCo-ZIF using a rapid room-temperature method for the removal of radioactive uranium from aqueous solution.53 The applicability of ZnCo-ZIF in practical water treatment was verified in batch treatment mode and column study. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Commission (AERB) has set the permissible limit of uranium concentration in drinking water at 60 mg L−1.54 Ten groundwater samples with a uranium content exceeding 60 mg L−1 were treated in batches with ZnCo-ZIF. It was found that the optimal adsorbent dose was 0.4 g L−1 at room temperature. The uranium removal effect reached 100%. In addition, the column study results showed that the contaminated groundwater after uranium passing through the ZIF column did not contain uranium. Likewise, the uranium adsorption efficiency of ZnCo-ZIF was 100%. Yin and co-workers constructed Fe/Al-BDC-NH2via the solvothermal method and evaluated the feasibility of using Fe/Al-BDC-NH2 (1:1) to remove arsenic from real environmental water samples.55 Fe/Al-BDC-NH2 (1:1) was selected to treat water samples without any pre-treatment. The concentration of arsenic in water decreased from 2420 g L−1 to 350 g L−1 upon the addition of 0.05 g L−1 of adsorbent. The absorption dose increased to 0.20 g L−1 and the arsenic removal efficiency reached 95%. In addition, when the adsorption dose was 0.8 g L−1, the arsenic content was less than 10 g L−1, which meets the drinking water standard. The high arsenic removal efficiency indicated the potential of the adsorbent in the treatment of arsenic-contaminated water.
In particular, the development of bimetallic MOFs with catalytic and adsorption properties provides a new direction for the development of adsorbents. Wu and co-workers56 selected cationic methylene blue (MB) and anionic methyl orange (Mo) as model organic pollutants to explore the removal effect of FeNiX-BDC (X: Ni/Fe mole ratio) through the dual function of adsorption and catalytic degradation (Fig. 11b). They observed that the adsorbent could remove organic pollutants mainly through the process of “adsorption–degradation–adsorption”. The adsorption capacity of MB and Mo increased significantly with the addition of Ni, while the maximum adsorption capacity was reached when the molar ratio of Ni/Fe was 1:15. However, FeNi1/15-BDC had different adsorption behaviours for the two types of organic pollutants. The surface of FeNi1/15-BDC had a positive charge, which decreased gradually with an increase in the incorporation of Ni. The electrostatic repulsion between the cation MB and FeNi1/15-BDC was weakened, thus promoting the adsorption of MB on the nanomaterial. For the anion Mo, the reduction of electrostatic attraction between the two was not conducive to the adsorption process. The catalytic performance of FeNiX-BDC was derived from the active site of Fe, which determined the oxidation capacity and reaction rate of the system. The more iron replaced by nickel, the inferior the catalytic performance. After comprehensive consideration, FeNi1/60-BDC was selected as a dual-function adsorbent to achieve the best removal efficiency.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of CuCo/MIL-101 and adsorption of tetracycline. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission. Copyright 2019, Science of the Total Environment. (b) Schematic illustration of contaminant removal in the FeNi1/60-BDC/H2O2/visible light system. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission. Copyright 2021, the Journal of Hazardous Materials. 

3.2 Catalysis
With the increasing demand and attention on energy, environmental science and other fields, such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),57 water oxidation or oxygen evolution reaction (OER),58 oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),59 carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and photodegradation of organic pollutants, have become the focus of research. These demands have prompted researchers working in this field to continuously explore catalysts with higher catalytic performance to improve the production efficiency of the reaction. Among them, MOFs have attracted significant attention due to their versatility in composition and structure, high specific surface area and ability to introduce many different types of active sites such as metals, organic functions and organic metal complexes.60 Based this, the addition of a second metal site can significantly improve the catalytic performance of MOFs. In this section, we present the applications of bimetallic MOFs as multifunctional platforms for electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.
Influenced by their structural features such as high porosity, high surface area and high density active sites, bimetallic MOFs have natural advantages such as good light absorption, strong photogenerated charge separation, high conductivity, prolonged active sites, high charge capacity and adjustable electrochemical activity, which are conducive for photocatalysis and electrocatalytic reactions.61,62 In addition, the tunable ligand field around the isolated metal ion (or cluster) centers in bimetallic MOFs provide catalytic active centers that are well defined as in homogeneous molecular catalysts (although crystal defects may exist). However, their porous channels contribute to a higher utilization rate of active centers than in typical heterogeneous catalysts. Li and co-workers63 synthesized Pd/Cu MOF heterogeneous catalysts via the solvothermal method and post-synthetic modification to realize palladium-catalyzed aerobic oxidation systems (AOSs), which successfully solved the homogeneous Pd catalysis problems (such as high Pd loading, excess ETMs, difficult separation, and low atom economy) (Fig. 12). Thus, the rational design of bimetallic MOF materials may offer the advantages of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts in one system.64
 Fig. 12  (a) Oxidation problem and (b) catalysis problem in homogeneous Pd catalysis for AOSs. (c) MOF-based Pd catalysis system using an all-in-one strategy. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright 2019, Angewandte Chemie, International Edition. 

3.2.1 Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalysis is the epicentre of many renewable energy conversion and storage technologies, which provide a sustainable path for the production of fuels and chemicals. Catalysts based on bimetallic MOFs offer a significant number of active sites and present the advantage of being able to combine both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts in a single system.64–66 In the field of electrocatalysis, the research on bimetallic OER electrocatalysts has been a focus. Among them, Fe/Ni-based electrocatalysts have been shown to significantly increase the reaction rate67–71 and their conductivity and richness of unsaturated metal active sites are significantly improved72,73 compared with nickel based MOFs (Table 2).
Table 2 Some reported bimetallic metal–organic framework (MOF) materials as catalysts




Sr. no.
Classification
Bimetallic MOFs
Component 1
Component 2
Synthesis approach
Reaction type
Ref.




1
Electrocatalysis
UiO-67-phen-Pd/Cu(1:2)
Pd, Cu
1,10-Phenanthroline-3,8-dicarboxylic acid
One-pot synthesis
ORR

63



2
FeNi3-BTC MOFs
Fe, Ni
1,3,5-Trimesic acid
One-pot synthesis
OER

74



3
(CuxRh1−x)3(BTC)2
Cu, Rh
1,3,5-Trimesic acid
Covalent post-synthetic modification
HER

79



4
FeNi-DOBDC-3
Fe, Ni
2,5-Dihydroxyterephthalic acid
One-pot synthesis
OER

127



5
Photocatalysis
Co/Fe-MOF
Co, Fe
1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
One-pot synthesis
Photodegradation

86



6
MTV-MIL-100(Ti,Co)
Ti, Co
Aromatic carboxylates
Covalent post-synthetic modification
Photodegradation

87



7
BMOF(Sr)-0.2Fe
Sr, Fe
2-Amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid
One-pot synthesis
Ammonia synthesis

88



8
Ni/Ti Bimetallic MOFs
Ni, Ti
2-Aminoterephthalic acid
One-pot synthesis
CO2RR

128



9
InBi-MOF microsphere
In, Bi
1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
One-pot synthesis
Z-scheme

129





Zheng and co-workers 74 prepared three bimetal–organic frameworks (Fe/Ni-MOFs) doped with different metal ratios (Fe:Ni = 1:10, 1:3, 1:1) via the solvothermal method (Fig. 12a).
The LSV curves for the OER (Fig. 13b) indicated that all bimetallic MOFs exhibited more negative potentials and higher current densities than single-metal nickel-based MOFs. Bimetallic MOFs also have a smaller Tafel slope (Fig. 13c), which indicate that they are more effective in enhancing the kinetics of the OER reaction. Most importantly, at 1.5 V potential, the semi-circular diameter of the Nyquist EIS spectra of bimetallic MOFs is smaller than that of pure nickel-based MOFs, indicating that the electron transfer resistance of all bimetallic MOFs is lower than that of Ni-BTC MOFs (Fig. 13e). This result demonstrated that Fe doping in Ni-MOFs is beneficial for the improvement of conductivity and OER catalytic activity. In addition, MOFs have become one of the preferred heterogeneous catalysts for liquid reactions and other reaction types.75–78 Shakya and co-workers79 reported heterogeneous catalysis on metal nodes (CuxRh1−x)3 (BTC)2. The results showed that Rh2+ brings unique hydrogenation activity to the material, while Cu2+ was used to prevent Rh2+ from being reduced to stabilize the MOF framework. It is worth noting that this MOF catalyst displayed similar high selectivity to homogeneous catalysts but was more stable. More importantly, given that the reaction is a gas-phase heterogeneous catalytic reaction, it was easy to separate the catalyst from the product.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe/Ni-BTC and its direct utilization for the oxygen evolution reaction. (b) Polarization curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of Ni-BTC, FeNi10-BTC, FeNi3-BTC, FeNi-BTC and RuO2 at a potential scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in O2-saturated 1 M KOH with 80% iR correction. (d) The corresponding overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and current densities at 300 mV versus the RHE for the studied catalysts. (e) Nyquist EIS plots of Ni-BTC, FeNi10-BTC, FeNi3-BTC and FeNi-BTC at 1.5 V. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission. Copyright 2019, the Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. 


3.2.2 Photocatalysis. 
Photocatalysis is eco-friendly technology that possess ability to convert solar energy into other types of chemical energy.80 The disadvantages of traditional photocatalysts, such as poor structure stability,81 low load separation and transfer rate,82 and low light absorption capacity,83–85 are important factors that limits their industrial application. It is very important to develop efficient photocatalysts. Therefore, it is a good idea to dope another heterogeneous metal in MOFs as a co-catalyst to improve the photo-degradation performance. Tran and co-workers 86 reported the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs, commonly denoted as M/Fe-MOF (M = Co, Cu, and Mg), via the solvothermal method as photocatalysts for the degradation of RhB organic pigments (Fig. 14a). The experimental analysis indicated that the crystal structure of the Fe-MOFs modified by Co, Cu and Mg remained unchanged and possessed a uniform grain size, high crystallinity and high surface area, which were conducive for the improvement of photocatalytic activity. Simultaneously, the doping of heterogenous metals also increased the light absorption in the visible light region, resulting in a high photocatalytic degradation rate of 85–92% for RhB organic pigments under visible light conditions. It is worth mentioning that the M/Fe-MOF material also has a low band gap of 2.3–2.42 eV, which is conducive to sunlight absorption and can further improve the photocatalytic activity. Wang and co-workers87 reported a series of new multi-metal–organic frameworks named MTV-MIL-100. This team studied the catalytic activity and reaction kinetics of MTV-MIL-100 (Ti, Co) at different temperatures (Fig. 14b). The results showed that the bimetallic MOFs had high catalytic activity, which increased with an increase in the reaction temperature. In addition, the crystal structure of the bimetallic MOFs remained intact without any obvious degradation or phase transition and it showed good catalytic stability.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photodegradation of RhB. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2022, Open Chemistry. (b) Catalytic activities and corresponding Arrhenius plots of MTV-MIL-100(Ti,Co) collected at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2021, the Journal of the American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the synergistic effect between two heterogeneous metals may also affect the photocatalytic process of bimetallic MOFs to some extent. Zhao and co-workers88 proposed a strategy to decouple the electron acceptance and transfer processes using a bimetallic organic framework to facilitate the activation of N2 (Fig. 14). There are two types of metal nodes in bimetallic MOFs, in which hard acid metal nodes with a high ionization potential (In) accept electrons from N2, while soft acid metal nodes with low ionization potential supply electrons to N2. The calculation revealed that the potential activation energy barrier of N2 was significantly reduced due to the synergistic effect of the two heterogeneous metals. The results showed that the difference in the ionization potential between two metal nodes in the active state exhibited a profound effect on N2 activation and the synergistic effect of bimetallic MOFs only occurred when the difference in ionization potential is not less than 6 eV. This experiment revealed the influence of the synergistic effect between heterogeneous metals on the photocatalytic process, which lays a foundation for the subsequent use of bimetallic MOFs as photocatalysts.

3.3 Energy storage and conversion
The global energy demand is growing with population growth to meet our daily needs. The depletion of fossil fuel resources rapidly raising environmental concerns has prompted researchers to explore renewable energy sources and energy storage devices.89,90 Electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors are sustainable and efficient energy storage systems.91 MOFs are a promising electrode material for electrochemical capacitors and rechargeable batteries due to their high specific surface area, adjustable pore structure and redox metal center, and thus have attracted extensive attention from researchers.92–94 However, the inherent low electrical conductivity of MOFs is one of the biggest obstacles in achieving high-performance capacitors. In bimetallic MOFs, their electrochemical properties can be tuned by mixing two different metals in their SBUs, and consequently bimetallic MOFs with enhanced conductivity have been used as electrode materials for energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors.95–98 Jiao and co-workers prepared hybrid supercapacitors by partially exchanging Ni2+ in Ni-MOF ([Ni3(OH)2(TP)2(H2O)4] 2H2O, TP = C8H4O42−) with Co2+ or Zn2+, thereby improving the conductivity of MOFs.99 The specific capacities of Co/Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF and Ni-MOF were 236.1, 161.5 and 142.3 mA hg−1 at 1 A g−1, and their specific capacity retention at 10 Ag−1 was 82.8%, 56% and 37%, respectively. The assembled hybrid supercapacitors (Co/Ni-MOF//CNTs-COOH) displayed an energy density of 49.5 W h kg−1 and power density of 1450 W kg−1. The metal ion exchange resulted in an increase in free holes and interlayer distance, consequently leading to an enhancement in the electrical conductivity and surface area, explaining the enhanced performance of bimetallic MOFs for capacitors. Also, the flower-like structure of the Co/Ni-MOF and Zn/Ni-MOF facilitated the OH− diffusion rate during the charge-discharge process and efficiently provided a large contact area between the active materials and the electrolyte (Fig. 15). In addition, the inter-space between sheets effectively alleviated the volume change of the MOFs during OH− insertion and extraction.88
 Fig. 15  (a) Simplified schematic of N2 bonding to the single-metal site, (b) arranged transition metal ions in the active state based on the In value, (c) schematic diagram of N2 bonding to the dual-metal sites, and (d) schematic drawing of the dual-metal structure in the designed BMOF. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission. Copyright 2021, ACS Catalysis. 
However, to assess whether the introduced ions have an optimal ion concentration to increase the capacitance and conductivity of MOFs, Chen and co-workers prepared a bimetallic Co/Ni organic backbone material (Co/Ni-MOF) via a one-step solvothermal method (Fig. 16a). The electrochemical properties of the bimetallic MOF were investigated by adjusting the concentration of inserted metal Ni.100 The specific capacities of Co-MOF, Co/Ni-MOF-1, Co/Ni-MOF-2, Co/Ni- MOF-3 and Ni-MOF at 15 A g−1 were 298.7, 735.0, 1687.7, 1314.3 and 502.7 F g−1, and the retention rates compared to the specific capacitance of 1 A g−1 56%, 53%, 65%, 62% and 58%, respectively, indicating that the Co/Ni-MOF-2 material has excellent multiplicative properties and electrochemical capacity, and can be found to have a maximum specific capacitance value of 2608 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 when the cobalt to nickel ratio was 1:2 (Fig. 16b). In addition, the real capacitance, C′(ω), of Co/Ni-MOF-2 declined slower than the other materials (Fig. 16c), indicating the rapid diffusion and migration of electrolyte ions.101 The minimum characteristic relaxation time, τ0, was 16.7 s (the minimum time required for a discharge efficiency of >50%), which was smaller than the characteristic relaxation times of the other materials (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 16  (a) The fast charging and discharging mechanism of Ni-MOF. (b) Schematic diagram of ion and charge transfer in the Co/Ni-MOF electrode. (c) Specific capacity of pristine Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF and Co/Ni-MOF at various current densities. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission. Copyright 2017, the Journal of Materials Chemistry A. 
Therefore, the preparation of bimetallic MOFs by introducing a second metal into the framework of pure MOFs can effectively improve the electrical conductivity of MOFs and their shortest ion transfer time enables them to have ultra-capacitive performance. A bimetallic MOF was assembled with biochar to form an asymmetric supercapacitor, Co/Ni-MOF-2//BC, with a high energy density of 47.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 780 W kg−1 and a specific capacitance value of 85% of the initial specific capacitance after 5000 cycles. Seo and co-workers prepared bimetallic Co/Mn-MOF nanoparticles on the surface of nickel foam via a simple hydrothermal method and used them as electrode materials for supercapacitors.102 The Co/Mn-MOF electrode showed a larger area under the CV curve, and the cathodic and anodic current response was the highest, which means that it can store more charge than the Co-MOF and Mn-MOF electrodes. Also, GCD measurements were carried out at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the GCD curve of the Co/Mn-MOF electrode exhibited a similar trend as the CV curve. This indicated that its charge and discharge times are longer than that of the other two electrodes and it had a higher specific capacitance and energy storage capacity. The specific capacitance of the Co/Mn-MOF electrode was calculated from the GCD curve to be 1176.59 F g−1. In addition, EIS analysis was used to study the reaction kinetics and electrode resistance in more detail. The Rs values for the Co-MOF, Mn-MOF and Co/Mn-MOF electrodes were 1.62, 1.36 and 1.27, respectively. The low resistance of the Co/Mn-MOF electrode was due to the synergistic effect between the two metals and good interface between the active electrode material and the electrolyte, where the electrode electrical conductivity improved. Table 3 summarizes some reported bimetallic MOF materials as supercapacitors. In addition, Li and co-workers prepared a hydrangea-like Ni/Co-MOF using a controlled solvent heat and cation exchange process to achieve both bimetallic nodes and layered ultrathin structures (Fig. 17).103 This structural advantage allowed Ni/Co-MOF to have an extended electron transfer pathway and a large number of diffusion channels for the electrolyte, which significantly improved the pseudo-capacitance performance (Fig. 17e). Combining bimetallic properties and structural advantages, Ni/Co-MOF showed superior electrical capacity (832.6 C g−1 at 1 A g−1) and electrochemical kinetic properties compared to Ni-MOF and Co-MOF. Importantly, the quasi-solid-state hybrid supercapacitor (HSC) based on the NiCo-MOF cathode and active carbon (AC) anode delivered a desirable energy density (45.3 W h kg−1 at 847.8 W kg−1), favorable power density (7160.0 W kg−1 at 23.3 W h kg−1), remarkable cyclability (82.4% capacity retention over 7000 cycles), and capability of driving miniature electronics, exhibiting potential for practical applications. This provides an effective design strategy for the development of multi-degree-of-freedom energy storage materials with good kinetic properties.
Table 3 Some reported bimetallic metal–organic framework (MOF) materials as supercapacitors




Sr. no.
Bimetallic MOF
Specific conductance
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Power density (W kg−1)
Ref.




1
Co/Ni-MOF
236.1 mA h g−1
49.5
1450

99



2
Co/Ni-MOF-2
2608 F g−1
47.3
780

100



3
Co/Mn-MOF
1176.59 F g−1
57.2
2000

102



4
Ni/Co-MOF
832.6 C g−1
45.3
7160.0

103



5
Ni-MOF@Co-MOF
1088 C g−1
66.5
825

104



6
NiCo-MOF
775.7 F g−1
47.6
798.9

105



7
Co/Ni-MOF-74
732 C g−1
46.9
425.3

106



8
NiCo-MOF
1315 F g−1
36.98
801.5

107



9
Mn/Mo-MOF
1162 F g−1
31
388.3

108



10
Ni/Zn-BDC MOF
1198 F g−1
28
748.9

109





 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the synthetic mechanism of bimetal Co/Ni-MOF. (b) Specific capacity at different current densities of the various MOFs: (a) Co-MOF, (b) Co/Ni-MOF-1, (c) Co/Ni-MOF-2, (d) Co/Ni-MOF-3, and (e) Ni-MOF. (c) Real capacitances. (d) Imaginary capacitance depending on the frequency of the prepared MOFs. (d) Schematic diagram of the quasi-solid-state hybrid supercapacitor with Ni/Co-MOF and activated carbon (AC) as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. Schematic diagram of ion and charge transfer in the Ni/Co-MOF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission. Copyright 2022, Inorganic Chemistry. 
Bimetallic MOFs have been investigated as anode and cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). When using bimetallic MOFs as anode materials, the adjustable pores can allow Li-ions to be stored and reversibly inserted/extracted, leading to insertion-type electrodes.110 Zheng and co-workers reported the synthesis of nickel and cobalt 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid bimetallic cobalt organic skeletons (Ni-Co-BTC) using a conventional solvothermal method and investigated their electrochemical properties as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries.111 The Ni-Co-BTC anode had a current density of 200 mA g−1 in the potential window of 0.01–3.0 V (relative to Li/Li +) and showed a high specific capacity of 1242 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 and excellent multiplicative performance (384 mA h g−1 at a current density of 4 A g−1), which can be attributed to the presence of conjugated carboxylate with strong π–π interactions and the synergistic effect of the two cations. Furthermore, the mechanism of lithium storage suggested the insertion of Li+ into (or extraction from) the carboxylate and benzene rings during constant current charge/discharge measurements, without the direct involvement of metal ions, which can be ascribed to be intercalation/de-lamination process. Song and coworkers synthesized bimetallic metal–organic frameworks (CeLipma and PrLipma) via the hydrothermal method,112 and the results from the structural refinement showed that they crystallised both in a three-dimensional skeletal structure with trigonal symmetry and a P space group, with both cerium (or praseodymium) and lithium atoms involved in coordination bonding with the phthalic acid ligand to form a three-dimensional structure. Interestingly, the framework excluded any coordination water and lattice water. In CeLipma, phthalic acid plays a key role in the construction of the three-dimensional framework as a bridging ligand connecting cerium atoms. As an anode material for Li-ion batteries, CeLipma has a maximum capacity of 800.5 mA h g−1 with an improved coulombic efficiency and a retention rate of 91.4% at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for 50 cycles.
Bimetallic MOFs can be applied as cathode materials for lithium-oxygen batteries (LOBs). The porous structures and tunable bimetallic active sites of bimetallic MOFs enable the optimization of their performance. Kim and co-workers synthesized the bimetallic MnCo-MOF-74 material as a cathode catalyst for Li–O2 batteries via a simple hydrothermal method.113 Despite the high molar amount of Mn in the precursor, the amount of Co in this MOF is four-times higher than that of Mn. The results indicated that compared with the single-metal Mn-MOF-74 and Co-MOF-74, which only have catalytic activity for LiOH formation or oxygen release reaction and poor cyclability due to the lower efficiency of the Mn clusters for the cleavage of LiOH in the former, the bimetal MnCo-MOF-74 benefits from the complementary effect of Mn and Co metal clusters, giving it a discharge and charge cycle with better reversibility and improved efficiency. MnCo-MOF-74 provided a higher full discharge capacity of 11150 mA h g−1 and excellent cycling performance (44 cycles) with a low overpotential at a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1, superior to that of the single-metal Mn-MOF-74 and Co-MOF-74 (Fig. 18b), whose discharge products were composed of a mixture of Li2O2 and LiOH.
 Fig. 18  (a) Structural schematic and unique electrochemical properties of bimetallic Ln-Li-MOFs (Ln = Ce and Pr). (b) (i–v) Galvanostatic cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries using Mn-MOF-74, Co-MOF-74, and MnCo-MOF-74 electrodes at a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 with a current density of 200 mA−1. (vi) Graph between the end voltage and cycle number of the electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission. Copyright 2018, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. 
3.4 Luminescent sensing
Luminescence is the term used to describe the process in which fluorescence or phosphorescence is produced by molecules absorb energy in their ground state. Fluorescence refers to the emitting of light between energy states of the same spin multiplicity, and the process generally takes less than 10 ns. However, phosphorescence refers to the emitting of light between states with difference spin multiplicity (Fig. 19a), and the process lasts from one microsecond to seconds.114 Luminescent metal–organic frameworks (L-MOFs) are rapidly developing crystalline materials with great potential for collaborative multifunctional luminescence. The luminescence mechanisms of L-MOFs include ligand–ligand charge transfer (LLCT), ligand–metal charge transfer (LMCT), metal–ligand charge transfer (MLCT) and metal–metal charge transfer (MMCT) (Fig. 19b), as well as processes involving guest molecules in LMOF pores.115 To date, the majority of studies have focused on lanthanide metal–organic frameworks (Ln-MOFs), which act as promising candidates for simple, rapid and effective detectors due to their high colour purity, long fluorescence lifetime and strong emission in the visible region.116,117 Variety of Ln-MOFs have been used in many fields (Table 4).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the various photophysical processes and (b) schematic representation of the various possibilities contributing to the emission of MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission. Copyright 2017, the Chemical Society Reviews. 
Table 4 Some reported bimetallic metal–organic framework (MOF) materials as luminescent sensors




Sr. No.
Bimetallic MOF
Applications/analytes
Excitation wavelength (nm)
Emission wavelength (nm)
Ref.




1
Eu0.0069Tb0.9931-DMBDC
Thermometer
488
Eu3+: 613; Tb3+: 545

118



2
Tb0.99Eu0.01(BDC)1.5(H2O)2
Thermometer
320
—

119



3
Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4
Thermometer
808
Nd3+: 1060; Yb3+: 980

120



4
Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH
Fe3+
314
Eu3+: 616; Tb3+: 547

123



5
SMOF-10-10h membrane
Ornidazole
365
—

124



6
Tb@1
Nitro explosives
225
Tb3+: 486, 541, 583, 618

125



7
1-EuxTb1−x
Barcode
280
Eu3+: 617; Tb3+: 544

126





Pathological cells have different temperatures from normal cells due to their abnormal metabolic rate,118 which means that intracellular temperature can be used as a potential indicator to discover related diseases.119 Therefore, Ln-MOF thermometers operating in the physiological temperature range have become an active research field and are promisingly applied to biomedical diagnostics. Cui and co-workers reported the first bimetallic Ln-MOF thermometer Eu0.0069Tb0.9931-DMBDC.120 Eu0.0069Tb0.9931-DMBDC showed higher sensitivity and reliability than Tb-DMBDC over a wide temperature range of 10–300 K. However, the thermometer only had a good linear response between 50–200 K and did not work over the physiological temperature range.
Based on the reports of Cui et al., Cadiau and co-workers developed the first Ln-MOF thermometer Tb0.99Eu0.01(BDC)1.5(H2O)2 sensitive in the physiological temperature range via a microemulsion strategy.121 The temperature dependence of the 5D0 to 7F2(Eu3) and5D4 to 7F5(Tb3+) transitions were used to determine the specific heat parameter. They verified that the aqueous suspension of the thermometer performed well in the range of 300–320 K (Fig. 20a and b). Lian and co-workers123 selected H2BDC-F4 as an organic linker to construct Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4 with near infrared (NIR) luminescence (Fig. 20c). The intensity ratio of Nd3+ to Yb3+ conversion was used as the thermal parameter for the detection of temperature. The intensity conversion of Nd3+ and Yb3+ was a typical energy transfer process, which could be attributed to the effective energy transfer from the Nd3+ to Yb3+ ions and based on the thermally driven phonon-assisted transfer mechanism increasing with an increase in temperature (Fig. 20d). The resolution of the Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4 temperature measurement was accurate enough to detect the temperature difference in the primary pathological cells, which was 0.029 K, indicating that this thermometer has application prospect in biomedical diagnosis.
 Fig. 20  Emission spectra of 1 in (a) the solid state and (b) aqueous suspension (0.36 g L−1) in the physiological temperature range excited at 320 nm. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission. Copyright 2013, ACS Nano. (c) Energy transfer processes in Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4. (d) Emission spectra of Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4 in the range of 293–313 K excited at 808 nm; inset: temperature dependence of the normalized intensity of the corresponding transitions. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright 2015, Chemical Communications. 
Jia and co-workers123 selected BHM-COOH as the organic ligand and successfully synthesized a series of bimetallic Ln-MOFs containing Eu3+ and Tb3+ for the detection of the toxic metal ion Fe3+. The results demonstrated that Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH possessed interesting photophysical property in aqueous solution. As a fluorescent probe for Fe3+ in aqueous solution, Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH exhibited high selectivity and sensitivity. The sensing mechanism was the fluorescence quenching caused by the excitation wavelength competition between Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH and Fe3+. In addition, Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH was also suitable for fluorescence sensing under acidic conditions and could be reused. Dong and co-workers synthesized a series of isostructural bimetallic Eu1−xTbx-MOFs using the flexible ligand H4L and reported a cheap and convenient bimetallic MOF-based membrane, SMOF-10-10H, as a luminescent sensor to detect various antibiotics for the first time.124 The SMOF-10-10H membrane was obtained by controlling the size of the bimetallic crystal Eu0.30Tb0.70-MOF and changing the reactant time, improving the flexibility and practical application of MOFs. The capability of the SMOF-10-10H membrane to detect antibiotics was ascribed to the ligand-to-metal energy transfer process. Specifically, the H4L ligand absorbed the energy of the excitation wave, and then transferred the energy to Eu3+ and Tb3+, resulting in the luminescence of Eu3+ and Tb3+. Nevertheless, antibiotics could be successfully detected due to the competition between the ligand and antibiotics, inhibiting or blocking the energy transfer from the ligand to Eu3+ and Tb3+, which restricted or quenched the luminescence emission. It was shown experimentally that with an increase in the concentration of ornidazole (ODZ), the emission intensity decreased and the emission color changed from orange to colorless. The value of the quenching constant, KSV, was 0.017, indicating the high quenching efficiency of ODZ for the SMOF-10-10h membrane. Meanwhile, the SMOF-1010h membrane had good reusability. In particular, experiments using real water samples to monitor ODZ solution verified that the SMOF-1010h membrane has application prospect in real samples.
4. Conclusion and challenges
The gradual shift in research interest from single-component MOFs to bimetallic MOFs is due to their vast versatile applications, and thus their detailed exploration has been undertaken to date. The doping of different metal ions in bimetallic MOFs enhances the durability of the functional materials and offers enhanced applications in heterogeneous catalysis, luminescence sensing, gas adsorption and separation, energy storage, etc. In this review, we highlighted the principles of the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs and their current research status, which is still in its infancy. With the help of advanced spectroscopic techniques, some materials have been shown to be true bimetallic MOFs. Likewise, characterisation methods can provide sound evidence for the dispersion of the metal centres, where it has been found that the metals are arbitrarily dispersed at the nodes. Hence, further improvements with respect to the synthesis and characterization techniques are highly desirable. To achieve a better performance, further changes are necessary in bimetallic MOFs in terms of framework skeleton, porosity, structural arrangement, size and morphology. Concerning the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs, the main advantage of the one-pot synthesis method is the one-step reaction, but the lack of control over the final metal distribution limits its relevance. However, one-pot synthesis can efficiently generate well-dispersed MOFs compared with single-metal-based MOFs, which is a significant synthetic challenge. Furthermore, among the different techniques, the transmetallation process, which includes the insertion of new metals, the exchange or insertion of different metals in vacancies, nodes or OMSs, and even the epitaxial (core–shell) growth of CPSM modifications, is promising for the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs. In a few cases, the epitaxial development of metal clusters on the surface of MOFs with other MOFs, considered as core MOFs, in a mixture of different metal clusters, provides core–shell bimetallic MOFs.
Bimetallic MOFs with complex compositions and structures can exhibit synergistic effects (electronic or geometric modifications) compared to their parent metals and ions (sometimes clusters in regions of the same metal nodes). This presence of related disorder can result in novel properties that are superior to that of their single-metal counterparts. The most important advantage is controlling the affinity of MOFs for particular gases by adjusting the metal concentration, which can enhance their stability (for example, by making the material more hydrophobic or by adding more “noble” metals to the nodes) or enhance their affinity. This tunability of the physical and chemical properties of bimetallic MOFs makes them suitable candidates for broad application prospects in gas adsorption, catalysis, energy storage and conversion, and luminescence sensing.
Therefore, if bimetallic MOFs are to be used in industrial production, their stability needs to be solved first, and subsequently general and simple strategies for different bimetallic MOF systems need to be developed. Hence, a systematic study of the chemical and physical stability of bimetallic MOFs is necessary. Currently, improving the stability of MOFs via post-synthetic modification of organic linkers or coating with protective layers has become a hot topic of research. Although the rational construction of bimetallic MOFs is still a great challenge, numerous bimetallic MOFs have been developed in recent years due to their potential properties, which agrees well with the application aspects of bimetallic MOFs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2019A1515110260), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2021A1515011616), Scientific research project of Traditional Chinese Medicine Bureau of Guangdong Province (20211227), Featured Innovation Project of Guangdong Province (2019KTSCX052 and 2019KTSCX053), and Key scientific research project of Colleges and Universities of Education Department of Guangdong Province (20202ZDZX2046 and 2021ZDZX2052), and the Panfeng 100 Joint Training Program of Guangdong Medical University (PF100-1-03), Guangdong Medical University Research Project (4SG21265P) and Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Fund (No. 4SG21006G and 4SG22006G), and Special Funds for Scientific Technological Innovation of Undergraduates in Guangdong Province (pdjh2021a0218, pdjh2022a0216, pdjh2022b0225 and pdjh20220224) and Innovative experimental project for College students of Guangdong Medical University (ZZDM005, ZYDM 003 and ZZDM001).
References

  (a) S. H. He, Z. P. Li and J. Q. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2022, 307, 122726 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Pan, C. Y. Rao, X. L. Tan, Y. Ling, A. Singh, A. Kumar, B. H. Li and J. Q. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133857 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Y. Rao, L. Y. Zhou, Y. Pan, C. Y. Lu, X. Y. Qin, H. Sakiyama, M. Muddassir and J. Q. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 897, 163178 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. L. Hu, Y. M. Mohammad and A. Morsali, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 387, 15–435 CrossRef ; 
  (e) G. C. Liu, Y. Li, J. Chi, N. Xu, X. L. Wang, H. Y. Lin and Y. Q. Chen, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 174, 108064 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Z. J. Lu, W. Z. Luo, X. N. Huang, H. X. Yu, Z. W. Li, G. C. Liu, J. W. Liu and X. X. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 611, 599–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. C. Liu, Q. W. Yan, C. Xia, X. X. Wang, A. Kumar, Y. Wang, Y. W. Liu, Y. Pan and J. Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 4459–4474 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-Q. Liu, Z.-D. Luo, Y. Pan, A. K. Singh, M. Trivedi and A. Kumar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 406, 213145 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Pan, Z. Luo, X. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Guan, D. Liu, H. Xu and J. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5291–5301 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Pan, Q. Ding, H. Xu, C. Shi, A. Singh, A. Kumar and J. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 4578–4585 RSC ; 
  (e) M. L. Hu, V. Safarifard, E. Doustkhah, S. Rostamnia, A. Morsali, N. Nouruzi, S. Beheshti and K. Akhbari, Microporous Mesporous Mater., 2018, 256, 111–127 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. He, L. Hashemi, M. L. Hu and A. Morsali, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 319–347 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J.-H. Qin, W.-J. Qin, Z. Xiao, J.-K. Yang, H.-R. Wang, X.-G. Yang, D.-S. Li and L.-F. Ma, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 18593–18597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) N. Stock and S. Biswas, J. Cheminformatics, 2012, 43, 933–969 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-H. Qin, P. Xu, Y.-D. Huang, L.-Y. Xiao, W. Lu, X.-G. Yang, L. Ma and S.-Q. Zang, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8468–8471 RSC ; 
  (c) J. H. Qin, H. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. D. Huang, Q. Shen, X. G. Yang and L. F. Ma, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 17772–17778 RSC ; 
  (d) J.-H. Qin, J.-R. Zhang, Z. Xiao, Y.-P. Wu, H.-M. Xu, X.-G. Yang, L.-F. Ma and D.-S. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2022, 22(7), 4018–4024 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. M. Li, S. H. Yin, M. Z. Lin, X. L. Chen, Y. Pan, Y. Q. Peng, J. B. Sun, A. Kumar and J. Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2022 10.1039/D2TB00742H ; 
  (f) Y. J. Zhang, X. P. Kang, P. H. Guo, H. J. Tan and S. H. Zhang, Arab. J. Chem., 2022, 15, 103955 CrossRef ; 
  (g) S. H. Zhang, Z. H. Chen, T. Zhou and G. Z. Li, Organometallics, 2022, 41, 829–835 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Nouar, T. Devic, H. Chevreau, N. Guillou, E. Gibson, G. Clet, M. Daturi, A. Vimont, J. M. Greneche, M. I. Breeze, R. I. Walton, P. L. Llewellyne and C. Serre, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10237–10239 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Q. Zheng, J. R. Guo, X. Y. Cai, L. J. Bin, C. Y. Lu, A. Singh, M. Trivedi, A. Kumar and J. Q. Liu, Colloids Surf., B, 2022, 213, 112432 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Q. J. Ding, Z. J. Xu, L. Y. Zhou, C. Y. Rao, W. M. Li, M. Muddassir, H. Sakiyama, B. L. Q. Ouyang and J. Q. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 621, 180–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) G. M. Ye, C. Chen, J. Z. Lin, X. S. Peng, A. Kumar, D. Liu and J. Q. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 17438–17454 RSC .

  (a) A. M. Ebrahim and T. J. Bandosz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 5, 10565–10573 CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Y. Zhong, C. Chen, S. Liu, C. Y. Lu, D. Liu, Y. Pan, H. Sakiyama, M. Muddassir and J. Q. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 18016–18026 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. Z. Qiu, G. J. Tan, Y. Q. Fang, S. Liu, Y. B. Zhou, A. Kumar, M. Trivedi, D. Liu and J. Q. Liu, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 20987–21000 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Wang, C. Y. Rao, L. Lu, S. L. Zhang, M. Muddassir and J. Q. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 741–747 RSC ; 
  (e) A. Dutta, Y. Pan, J. Q. Liu and A. Kumar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 445, 214074 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Singh, A. K. Singh, J. Q. Liu and A. Kumar, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 3946–3989 RSC ; 
  (g) N. Abdollah, S. A. A. Razavi, A. Morsali and M. L. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 387, 121667 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) L. M. Aguirre-Diaz, F. Gandara, M. Iglesias, N. Snejko, E. G. Puebla and M. A. Monge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6132–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. H. Zhou, L. Lu, D. Liu, J. Wang, H. Sakiyama, M. Muddassir, A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh and J. Q. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 8043–8052 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Wang, C. Y. Rao, L. Lu, S. L. Zhang, M. Muddassir and J. Q. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 741–747 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Y. Zhong, W. C. Liu, C. Y. Rao, B. H. Li, X. X. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Pan and J. Q. Liu, Curr. Med. Chem., 2021, 28, 6179–6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Y. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Q. Shen, W. Y. Huang, A. G. Zhong and H. R. Wen, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 640–646 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) X. F. Cao, C. Y. Rong, A. G. Zhong, T. Lu and S. B. Liu, J. Comput. Chem., 2018, 39, 117–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) A. G. Zhong, D. Chen, R. R. Li and T. Zhou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 633, 265–272 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) A. G. Zhong, Monatsh. Chem., 2017, 48, 1259–1267 Search PubMed ; 
  (i) A. G. Zhong, J. Y. Xian, L. R. Rong, H. Qin and Z. Jie, Monatsh. Chem., 2019, 150, 1355–1364 CrossRef .
Y. J. Hu, J. Zhang, H. Huo, Z. Wang, X. Z. Xu, Y. L. Yang, K. F. Lin and R. Q. Fan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1–9 RSC .
I. Bushra, S. Murtaza, A. Salman Noshear, R. Jamshaid, H. Naveed and Z. Muhammad, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 10490–10498 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Brozek and M. Dincã, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12886–12891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Brozek and M. Dincã, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11780 RSC .
S. Liu, B. Liu, S. Yao and Y. Liu, Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1591–1597 CAS .
S. Xing, Q. Bing, L. Song, G. Li, J. Liu, Z. Shi, S. Feng and R. Xu, Chem, 2016, 22, 16230–16235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. S. Li, G. Li, Q. Huo and Y. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 3556–3561 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, T. Xu, N. Zhao, L. Zhang, Q. Huo and Y. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 3332–3337 RSC .
X. Song, S. Jeong, D. Kim and M. S. Lah, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5753–5756 RSC .
S. Das, H. Kim and K. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3814–3815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Prasad, D. H. Hong and M. P. Suh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 14043–14050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Wojtas, P. Nugent, M. Eddaoudi and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 924–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, J. F. Cahill, H. H. Fei, K. A. Prather and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18082–18088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. F. Cahill, K. A. Prather and S. M. Cohen, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 4011–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Kim, J. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 854, 94–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, S. H. Yang and M. Schröder, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 108–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Andrade, M. F. Oliveira, M. G. C. Silva and M. G. A. Vieira, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 3103–3127 CrossRef .
S. Rojas and P. Horcajada, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8378–8415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. López, H. Viltres, N. K. Gupta, P. Acevedo-Peña, C. Leyva, Y. Ghaffari, A. Gupta, S. Kim, J. Bae and K. S. Kim, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 1295–1334 CrossRef .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
R. E. Morris and P. S. Wheatley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4966–4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. L. Kong, Q. J. Zhang and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1601296 CrossRef .
O. K. Farha, I. Eryazici, N. C. Jeong, B. G. Hauser, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, R. Q. Snurr, S. T. Nguyen, A. Ö. Yazaydin and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15016–15021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lau, R. Babarao and M. R. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3634–3636 RSC .
T. Takei, J. Kawashima, T. Ii, A. Maeda, M. Hasegawa, T. Kitagawa, T. Ohmura, M. Ichikawa, M. Hosoe, I. Kanoya and W. Mori, Bull.Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2008, 81, 847–856 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kaye and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6506–6507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Bae, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and R. Q. Snurr, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2131–2134 RSC .
J. R. Li, Y. G. Ma, M. C. McCarthy, J. Sculley, J. M. Yu, H. K. Jeong, P. B. Balbuena and H. C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1791–1823 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaur, R. K. Rai, D. Tyagi, X. Yao, P. Li, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, Q. Xu and S. K. Singh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14932–14938 RSC .
X. He, D. R. Chen and W. N. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 382, 122825 CrossRef .
Q.-G. Zhai, X. H. Bu, C. Y. Mao, X. Zhao and P. Y. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(8), 2524–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhou, L. Mei, C. Ma, F. Xu, J. Xiao, Q. B. Xia and Z. Li, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 147, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schneemann, V. Bon, I. Schwedler, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6062–6096 RSC .
Z. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Wang and J. Y. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 781–789 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hamon, C. Serre, T. Devic, T. Loiseau, F. Millange, G. Ferey and G. D. Weireld, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8775–8777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. T. Zhou, L. Yu, Y. Gao, J. F. Wu and W. Dai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 19202–19210 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Esrafili, A. Morsali, M. L. Hu, A. A. Tehrani, L. Carlucci, P. Mercandelli and D. Proserpio, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 16421–16429 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. G. Liu, X. W. Wei, F. Bigdeli, X. M. Gao, J. Z. Li, X. W. Yan, M. L. Hu and A. Morsali, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 2248–2254 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) K. G. Liu, F. Bigdeli, H. J. Li, J. Z. Li, X. W. Yan, M. L. Hu and A. Morsali, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 6684–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) L. Esrafili, F. D. Firuzabadi, A. Morsali and M. L. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Goyal, A. Paruthi, D. Menon, R. Behara, A. Jaiswal, K. V, A. Kumar, V. Krishnan and S. K. Misra, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133088 CrossRef CAS .
W. Morris, B. Volosskiy, S. Demir, F. Gándara, P. L. McGrier, H. Furukawa, D. Cascio, J. Fraser Stoddart and O. M. Yaghi, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6443–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Liu, D. Feng, Y. P. Chen, L. Zou, M. Bosch, S. Yuan, Z. Wei, S. Fordham, K. Wang and H. C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 413–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Yu, Z. Zhao, X. Niu, X. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Ma and Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16273–16281 RSC .
T. He, S. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Gong, Z. Wu, L. Song, L. Gu, W. Hu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3493–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Planas, J. E. Mondloch, S. Tussupbayev, J. Borycz, L. Gagliardi, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha and C. J. Cramer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3716–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, Y. P. Chen, J. Qin, W. Lu, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, M. Bosch, T. F. Liu, X. Lian and H. C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14696–14700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kandiah, M. H. Nilsen, S. Usseglio, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, M. Tilset, C. Larabi, E. A. Quadrelli, F. Bonino and K. P. Lillerud, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6632–6640 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jin, Z. H. Yang, W. P. Xiong, Y. Y. Zhou, R. Xu, Y. R. Zhang, J. Cao, X. Li and C. Y. Zhou, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 650, 408–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Nazira, T. Najamb, K. Zarinc, K. Shahzad, M. S. Javedd, M. Jamshaida, M. A. Bashira, S. S. A. Shahf and A. U. Rehman, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2021, 2, 15 Search PubMed .
S. Singh, B. S. Bajwa and I. Kaur, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 93, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Bajwa, S. J. Kumar, S. Singh, S. K. Sahoo and R. M. Tripathi, J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci., 2017, 10, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yin, S. J. Li, L. L. Liu, Q. L. Huang, G. P. Zhu, X. J. Yang and S. X. Wang, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 117101 Search PubMed .
Q. S. Wu, M. S. Siddique and W. Z. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 401, 123261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) B. Geng, F. Yan, X. Zhang, Y. He, C. Zhu, S. L. Chou, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2106781 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Zhang, W. Q. Li, X. Feng, L. Zhu, Q. Z. Fang, S. Li, L. Y. Wang, Z. J. Li and Z. K. Kou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 607, 281 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Q. Li, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, W. X. Hu, Z. Z. Cheng, H. Chen, X. Feng, T. Peng and Z. K. Kou, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 306, 121095 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Z. Hong, L. L. Zhang, H. P. Fang, X. Feng and Z. J. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Proc., 2021, 106134 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, L. Z. Dong, M. Qiao, Y. J. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Li, S. L. Li, J. X. Su and Y. Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9556 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Z. Huang, B. Wang, Z. Liang and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14805 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. L. Dang, G. Yang, L. F. Ma, D. S. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 62, 1998756 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Zhou, R. Abazari, J. Chen, M. Tahir, A. Kumar, R. R. Ikreedeegh, E. Rani, H. Singh and A. M. Kirillov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, M. Hao and Z. Li, Curr. Org. Chem., 2018, 22, 1825–1835 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Li, J. H. Liao, Y. W. Ren, C. Liu, C. L. Yue, J. M. Lu and H. F. Jiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1443–1445 CrossRef .

  (a) J. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1443–1445 CrossRef ; 
  (b) K. G. Liu, F. Rouhani, H. Moghanni-Bavil-Olyaei, X. W. Wei, X. M. Gao, J. Z. Li, X. W. Yan, M. L. Hu and A. Morsali, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12975–12983 RSC ; 
  (c) M. L. Hu, M. Abbasi-Azad, B. Habibi, F. Rouhani, H. Moghanni-Bavil-Olyaei, K. G. Liu and A. Morsali, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 2397–2418 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) X. Feng, Y. Q. Feng, N. Guo, Y. L. Sun, T. Zhang, L. F. Ma and L. Y. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 1713–1721 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) X. Feng, R. F. Li, L. Y. Wang, S. W. Ng, G. Z. Qin and L. F. Ma, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7878–7887 RSC ; 
  (f) X. Feng, Y. Q. Feng, L. Liu, L. Y. Wang, H. L. Song and S. W. Ng, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 7741–7754 RSC ; 
  (g) X. Feng, X. L. Ling, L. Liu, L. Y. Wang, S.-W. Ng and B. Y. Su, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 10292–10303 RSC ; 
  (h) G. Li, T. Wang, S. H. Zhou, J. Wang, H. Lv, M. L. Han, D. P. Singh, A. Kumar and J. C. Jin, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 130, 108756 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Majewski, A. W. Peters, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 598–611 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, Y. Wang, H. L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703663 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Wang, L. Z. Dong, M. Qiao, Y. J. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Li, S. L. Li, J. X. Su and Y. Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9660–9664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Osgood, S. V. Devaguptapu, H. Xu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 601–625 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621 CrossRef .
F. L. Li, Q. Shao, X. Q. Huang and J. P. Lang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, Z. Zhang, D. Xiang, P. Li and W. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 541–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, B. Li, H. He, W. Zhou, B. Chen and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. B. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
A. Corma, H. Garcia and F. X. Llabres i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Farrusseng, S. Aguado and C. Pinel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Shakya, O. A. Ejegbavwo, T. Rajeshkumar, S. D. Senanayake and D. A. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 8, 761 Search PubMed .
Y. Qian, F. Zhang and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2104231 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Dang, Q. L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 3, 17075 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Y. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Q. Shen, W. Y. Huang, A. G. Zhong and H. R. Wen, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 640–646 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. B. Yao, J. L. Wang, A. G. Zhong, J. S. Li and J. G. Yang, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 8086–8090 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) W. B. Yao, J. L. Wang, Y. P. Lou, H. J. Wu, X. X. Qi, J. G. Yang and A. G. Zhong, Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 4554–4559 RSC .

  (a) Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Y. Liu, D. G. Wang, A. G. Zhong and H. R. Wen, Org. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 653–661 RSC .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .
W. Zhan, L. Sun and X. Han, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, W. Zhang and K. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705512 CrossRef PubMed .
T. K. N. Tran, H. L. Ho, H. V. Nguyen, B. T. Tran, T. T. Nguyen, P. Q. T. Bui and L. G. Bach, Open Chem., 2022, 20, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Lv, E. S. Grape, C. A. Gaggioli, A. Tayal, A. Dharanipragada, T. Willhammar, A. Ken Inge, X. D. Zou, B. Liu and Z. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6333–6338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, H. Ren, D. Yang, Y. Han and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 9986–9995 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Giménez-Marquéz, A. Santiago-Portillo, S. Navaló, M. Álvaro, V. Briois, F. Nouar, H. Garcia and C. Serre, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20285–20292 RSC .

  (a) M. Y. Suberu, M. W. Mustafa and N. Bashir, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 35, 499–514 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. J. Wang, T. Kitao, N. Guillou, M. Wahiduzzaman, C. Martineau-Corcos, F. Nouar, A. Tissot, L. Binet, N. Ramsahye, S. Devautour-Vinot, S. Kitagawa, S. Seki, Y. Tsutsui, V. Briois, N. Steunou, G. Maurin, T. Uemura and C. Serre, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1660 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) V. P. Santos, T. A. Wezendonk, J. J. Delgado Jaén, A. L. Dugulan, M. A. Nasalevich, H. U. Islam, A. Chojecki, S. S. Sartipi, X. H. Sun, A. A. Hakeem, A. C. J. Koeken, M. Ruitenbeek, T. Davidian, G. R. Meima, G. Sankar, F. Kapteijn, M. Makkee and J. Gascon, Nat. Commum., 2015, 6, 6451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Mahlia, T. J. Saktisahdan, A. Jannifar, M. H. Hasan and H. S. Matseelar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 33, 532–545 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, S. L. Li, Z. M. Su and Y. Q. Lan, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 1, 100021 Search PubMed .
K. B. Wang, Q. Xun and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 2, 100025 Search PubMed .
B. Zhu, Z. Liang, D. Xia and R. Zou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 757–771 CrossRef .
J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19005–19010 RSC .
L. Z. Shao, F. Zhao, G. Cheng, L. Yu and H. Q. Zeng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 605–609 CrossRef .
D. Tian, N. Song, M. Zhong, X. Lu and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1280–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, M. K. Wu, K. Tao, J. J. Zhou, Y. L. Li, X. Han and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5639–5645 RSC .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, D. H. Chen, C. S. Yan, Y. Y. Hu, Q. Zhang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1094–1102 RSC .
H. Y. Chen, Y. Q. Huo, K. Z. Cai and Y. Teng, Synth. Met., 2021, 276, 116761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, R. Liu, Y. M. Wang, H. H. Xiao, Y. Liu and G. H. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43294–43302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Seo, P. A. Shinde, S. H. Park and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. F. Wang, L. L. Dai, F. J. Guo, H. Y. Mi, C. C. Ji and L. Y. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 3866–3874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, H. Guo, L. Yue, L. Li, R. Xue, H. Liu, W. Yao, M. Xu, W. Yang and W. Yang, Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 2020, 600, 124967 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Y. Gong and K. Tao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134582 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Cui, D. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Shu, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. Vajtai, M. Ajayan and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2018, 6, 8396–8404 RSC .
H. Mei, Y. Mei, S. Zhang, Z. Xiao, B. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Fan, Z. Huang, W. Kang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10953–10960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Yan, J. Y. Long, Q. F. Zhou, Y. Gong and J. H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5390–5405 RSC .
G. C. Li, M. Liu, M. K. Wu, P. F. Liu, Z. Zhou, S. R. Zhu, R. Liu and L. Han, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103517–103522 RSC .
P. Nie, L. Shen, H. Luo, B. Ding, G. Xu, J. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5852–5857 RSC .
W. Zheng, W. Y. Bi, X. N. Gao, Z. G. Zhang, W. H. Yuan and L. Li, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5757–5764 RSC .
X. Y. Song, Y. Zhang, P. P. Sun, J. Gao and F. N. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 5654–5661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, Y. J. Lee, D. H. Kim and Y. J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 660–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. J. Cui, Y. F. Yue, G. D. Qian and B. L. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M.-L. Hu, S. A. Razavi, M. Piroozzadeh and A. Morsali, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1598–1632 RSC .
W. P. Lustig, S. Mukherjee, N. D. Rudd, A. V. Desai, J. Li and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3242–3285 RSC .
D. M. Chen, N. N. Zhang, C. S. Liu and M. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2311–2317 RSC .
Q. S. Wang, J. J. Li, M. N. Zhang and X. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 358–364 CrossRef CAS .
M. Monti, L. Brandt, J. Ikomi-Kumm and H. Olsson, Scand. J. Haematol., 1986, 36, 353–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Cui, F. L. Zhu, B. L. Chen and G. D. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7420–7431 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, H. Xu, Y. F. Yue, Z. Y. Guo, J. C. Yu, Z. X. Chen, J. K. Gao, Y. Yang, G. D. Qian and B. L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3979–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cadiau, C. D. S. Brites, P. M. F. J. Costa, R. A. S. Ferreira, J. Rocha and L. D. Carlos, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7213–7218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Lian, D. Zhao, Y. J. Cui, Y. Yang and G. D. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17676–17679 RSC .
P. Jia, Z. H. Wang, Y. F. Zhang, D. Zhang, W. C. Gao, Y. Su, Y. B. Li and C. L. Yang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 230, 118084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, S. L. Hou and B. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38124–38131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Singh, S. Bhattacharya, P. Majee, S. K. Mondal, M. Kumara and P. Mahata, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20908 RSC .
B. Li, J.-P. Dong, Z. Zhou, R. Wang, L.-Y. Wang and S.-Q. Zang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3429 RSC .
F. Q. Zheng, D. Xiang, P. Li, Z. W. Zhang, C. Du, Z. H. Zhuang, X. K. Li and W. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9743–9749 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chen, X. L. Xu, H. Y. Gao, J. J. Wang, A. Li and X. W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 9200–9209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Zhang, Y. M. Li, H. Ren, Q. C. Zhai, C. L. Zhang and L. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127267 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The authors have the equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Graphical representation of the publications in the last ten years on bimetallic MOFs, revealing their scope in this research field.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthetic strategies and structural arrangements of bimetallic MOFs: (i) ordered and disordered arrangements of two metals in a bimetallic MOF obtained by one-pot synthesis; (ii) metal insertion in linkers and OMSs by covalent post-synthetic modification (CPSM); (iii) two metals shared equivalently between two unit cells and (iv) oxometallate/cluster incorporation inside the lattice by CPSM.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the possible synthetic routes for bimetallic MOFs along with their advantages and disadvantages.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The organic ligand H2hfipbb reacts with aluminium, gallium, indium, and a combination of gallium and indium to form a series of new MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright 2015, the Journal of the American Chemical Society. A schematic representation of the tandem reaction using a site-isolated heterogeneous catalyst. (b) The mesoporous structure of MIL-101(Al/Fe)-NH2 and (c) the Lewis acidic sites (Al3+/Fe3+ centers) and Brønsted basic sites (–NH2 groups of the organic linkers). Copyright 2020, RSC with permission from ref. 5a.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top: Schematic illustration for the synthesis of mixed-metal (Fe/Co) MOFs with the NH2-BDC linker. Various possibilities for the existence of SBUs are shown at the bottom. (a) Individual trinuclear Fe3(μ3-O) cluster. (b) Individual Co3(μ3-O) cluster. (c) Co coordination with the NH2 functional groups of the linker. Color codes: Co (purple), Fe (orange), O (red), C (gray). Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission. Copyright 2019, Chemistry – A European Journal.	 

 	Fig. 6  Post-synthetic metal exchange to introduce reduced metal cations in MOF-5 networks. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Transmetallation in two MOFs (Zn-HKUST-1 and Zn-PMOF-2) with different framework flexibilities. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission. Copyright 2012, CrystEngComm.	 

1	UiO-66Ti56	CO2	4 mmol g−1 (273 K)	1844	1.18 cm3 g−1	
30

2	Co75Zn25-ZIF-8	CO2	0.90 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)	1571	0.7750 cm3 g−1	
35

3	Cu-TMA(Fe)	CO2	4.4 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)	1487	0.636 cc g−1	
36

4	CPM-200-V/Mg	CO2	80.4 cm3 g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)	1011	0.50 cm3 g−1	
37

5	MIL-101(Cr,Mg)-2#	CO2	3.28 mmol g−1 (298 K, 1 bar)	3274	1.61 cm3 g−1	
38

6	MIL-53(Cr-Fe)	CO2	—	1200	—	
4

7	FeCu-MOFs	Hg0	12.27 mg g−1	854.7	0.36 cm3 g−1	
40

8	MIL-53(Al,Cr)	H2S	—	—	—	
41

9	Fe0.05HKUST-1	Pb(II)	564.9 mg g−1 (pH = 5)	522.6	0.232 cm3 g−1	
42

10	UiO-67-Co	Cefradine	1091 mg g−1	1637	0.67 cm3 g−1	
43

11	MLB-8	Tetracycline	83.8 mg g−1	2422.685 ± 157.475	1.282 ± 0.083 cm3 g−1	
51

12	Ni@ZIF-67	Methyl orange	151.74 mg g−1 (T = 30 °C, pH = 6)	1156	0.4642 cm3 g−1	
52

13	ZnCo-ZIF	Uranium	564.7 mg g−1	998.42	—	
53

14	Fe/Al-BDC-NH2(1:1)	Arsenic	146.8 mg g−1 (298 K)	690	0.681 cm3 g−1	
55

15	FeNi1/15-BDC	Methylene blue	—	201.80	0.35 cm3 g−1	
56

16	FeNi1/15-BDC	Methyl orange	—	201.80	0.35 cm3 g−1	
56


 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the possible mechanisms for the adsorptive removal of bimetallic MOFs.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) M2+ and M3+ combination for CPM-200s in this work. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature-dependent X-ray diffraction (top) and schematic of the phase transitions upon heating (bottom). Co radiation, Ka1 = 1.78896 Å. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. Copyright 2012, Chemical Communications. (c) Schematic of the ion-exchange mechanism (values in brackets include hydration radius and hydration energy of the ions). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission. Copyright 2022, Chemical Engineering Journal.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Proposed mechanism for the adsorption process of MO on Ni@ZIF-67. (b) Efficiency of the regenerated ZIF-67 and Ni@ZIF-67 nanocomposites for the adsorption of methyl orange. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission. Copyright 2021, the International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of CuCo/MIL-101 and adsorption of tetracycline. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission. Copyright 2019, Science of the Total Environment. (b) Schematic illustration of contaminant removal in the FeNi1/60-BDC/H2O2/visible light system. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission. Copyright 2021, the Journal of Hazardous Materials.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Oxidation problem and (b) catalysis problem in homogeneous Pd catalysis for AOSs. (c) MOF-based Pd catalysis system using an all-in-one strategy. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright 2019, Angewandte Chemie, International Edition.	 

1	Electrocatalysis	UiO-67-phen-Pd/Cu(1:2)	Pd, Cu	1,10-Phenanthroline-3,8-dicarboxylic acid	One-pot synthesis	ORR	
63

2	FeNi3-BTC MOFs	Fe, Ni	1,3,5-Trimesic acid	One-pot synthesis	OER	
74

3	(CuxRh1−x)3(BTC)2	Cu, Rh	1,3,5-Trimesic acid	Covalent post-synthetic modification	HER	
79

4	FeNi-DOBDC-3	Fe, Ni	2,5-Dihydroxyterephthalic acid	One-pot synthesis	OER	
127

5	Photocatalysis	Co/Fe-MOF	Co, Fe	1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid	One-pot synthesis	Photodegradation	
86

6	MTV-MIL-100(Ti,Co)	Ti, Co	Aromatic carboxylates	Covalent post-synthetic modification	Photodegradation	
87

7	BMOF(Sr)-0.2Fe	Sr, Fe	2-Amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid	One-pot synthesis	Ammonia synthesis	
88

8	Ni/Ti Bimetallic MOFs	Ni, Ti	2-Aminoterephthalic acid	One-pot synthesis	CO2RR	
128

9	InBi-MOF microsphere	In, Bi	1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid	One-pot synthesis	Z-scheme	
129


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe/Ni-BTC and its direct utilization for the oxygen evolution reaction. (b) Polarization curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of Ni-BTC, FeNi10-BTC, FeNi3-BTC, FeNi-BTC and RuO2 at a potential scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in O2-saturated 1 M KOH with 80% iR correction. (d) The corresponding overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and current densities at 300 mV versus the RHE for the studied catalysts. (e) Nyquist EIS plots of Ni-BTC, FeNi10-BTC, FeNi3-BTC and FeNi-BTC at 1.5 V. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission. Copyright 2019, the Journal of Colloid and Interface Science.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photodegradation of RhB. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2022, Open Chemistry. (b) Catalytic activities and corresponding Arrhenius plots of MTV-MIL-100(Ti,Co) collected at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2021, the Journal of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Simplified schematic of N2 bonding to the single-metal site, (b) arranged transition metal ions in the active state based on the In value, (c) schematic diagram of N2 bonding to the dual-metal sites, and (d) schematic drawing of the dual-metal structure in the designed BMOF. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission. Copyright 2021, ACS Catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The fast charging and discharging mechanism of Ni-MOF. (b) Schematic diagram of ion and charge transfer in the Co/Ni-MOF electrode. (c) Specific capacity of pristine Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF and Co/Ni-MOF at various current densities. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission. Copyright 2017, the Journal of Materials Chemistry A.	 

1	Co/Ni-MOF	236.1 mA h g−1	49.5	1450	
99

2	Co/Ni-MOF-2	2608 F g−1	47.3	780	
100

3	Co/Mn-MOF	1176.59 F g−1	57.2	2000	
102

4	Ni/Co-MOF	832.6 C g−1	45.3	7160.0	
103

5	Ni-MOF@Co-MOF	1088 C g−1	66.5	825	
104

6	NiCo-MOF	775.7 F g−1	47.6	798.9	
105

7	Co/Ni-MOF-74	732 C g−1	46.9	425.3	
106

8	NiCo-MOF	1315 F g−1	36.98	801.5	
107

9	Mn/Mo-MOF	1162 F g−1	31	388.3	
108

10	Ni/Zn-BDC MOF	1198 F g−1	28	748.9	
109


 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the synthetic mechanism of bimetal Co/Ni-MOF. (b) Specific capacity at different current densities of the various MOFs: (a) Co-MOF, (b) Co/Ni-MOF-1, (c) Co/Ni-MOF-2, (d) Co/Ni-MOF-3, and (e) Ni-MOF. (c) Real capacitances. (d) Imaginary capacitance depending on the frequency of the prepared MOFs. (d) Schematic diagram of the quasi-solid-state hybrid supercapacitor with Ni/Co-MOF and activated carbon (AC) as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. Schematic diagram of ion and charge transfer in the Ni/Co-MOF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission. Copyright 2022, Inorganic Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Structural schematic and unique electrochemical properties of bimetallic Ln-Li-MOFs (Ln = Ce and Pr). (b) (i–v) Galvanostatic cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries using Mn-MOF-74, Co-MOF-74, and MnCo-MOF-74 electrodes at a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 with a current density of 200 mA−1. (vi) Graph between the end voltage and cycle number of the electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission. Copyright 2018, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the various photophysical processes and (b) schematic representation of the various possibilities contributing to the emission of MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission. Copyright 2017, the Chemical Society Reviews.	 

1	Eu0.0069Tb0.9931-DMBDC	Thermometer	488	Eu3+: 613; Tb3+: 545	
118

2	Tb0.99Eu0.01(BDC)1.5(H2O)2	Thermometer	320	—	
119

3	Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4	Thermometer	808	Nd3+: 1060; Yb3+: 980	
120

4	Eu0.24Tb0.76-BHM-COOH	Fe3+	314	Eu3+: 616; Tb3+: 547	
123

5	SMOF-10-10h membrane	Ornidazole	365	—	
124

6	Tb@1	Nitro explosives	225	Tb3+: 486, 541, 583, 618	
125

7	1-EuxTb1−x	Barcode	280	Eu3+: 617; Tb3+: 544	
126


 	Fig. 20  Emission spectra of 1 in (a) the solid state and (b) aqueous suspension (0.36 g L−1) in the physiological temperature range excited at 320 nm. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission. Copyright 2013, ACS Nano. (c) Energy transfer processes in Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4. (d) Emission spectra of Nd0.577Yb0.423BDC-F4 in the range of 293–313 K excited at 808 nm; inset: temperature dependence of the normalized intensity of the corresponding transitions. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright 2015, Chemical Communications.	 
Footnote
† The authors have the equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
