Recent progress on graphene -based photocatalysts: current status and future perspectives  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR31480K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR31480K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792-5813Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent progress on graphene-based photocatalysts: current status and future perspectives

        
          
            Nan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanhui 
            Zhang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Photocatalysis, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350002, Fujian, P.R. China. E-mail: yjxu@fzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 591 83779326;   Tel: +86 591 83779326
Received 
      13th June 2012
    , Accepted 25th July 2012First published on 26th July 2012AbstractGraphene (GR) has become a sparkling rising star on the horizon of material science. Due to its unique planar structure, excellent transparency, superior electron conductivity and mobility, high specific surface area, and high chemical stability, GR is regarded as an ideal high performance candidate to prepare GR-based nanocomposites for energy storage and conversion. During the past few years, GR-based photocatalysts have been attracting ever-increasing research attention. In this tutorial review, the applications of GR-based nanocomposites in photocatalysis, including nonselective processes for degradation of pollutants, selective transformations for organic synthesis and water splitting to clean hydrogen energy, are summarized systematically. In particular, in addition to discussing opportunities offered by GR, we will also describe the existing challenges for future exploitation and development of GR-based nanocomposites, which we hope would significantly advance us to rationally and efficiently harness the outstanding structural and electronic properties of GR to design smarter and more efficient GR-based photocatalysts instead of joining the graphene “gold rush”.Nan ZhangNan Zhang was born in Hebei, P. R. China, in 1987. She received her bachelor degree in chemical engineering & technology from East China Institute of Technology (2009), P. R. China. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Xu at the National Research Center for Environmental Photocatalysis Engineering and Technology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis-State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell and carbon-based nanocomposites for potential target applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.Yanhui ZhangYanhui Zhang was born in Fujian, P. R. China in 1986. He received his bachelor degree in applied chemistry from Zhangzhou Normal University (2009), P. R. China. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Xu at National Research Center for Environmental Photocatalysis Engineering and Technology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis-State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. His main research interests include the synthesis of nanostructured materials, especially graphene-based composites nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.Yi-Jun XuProf. Yi-Jun Xu received his PhD degree in heterogeneous catalysis at the School of Chemistry, Cardiff University, U.K. in 2006 with Prof. Graham J. Hutchings (FLSW FRS). From 2007 to 2009, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, Berlin, Germany. After that, he joined the faculty as a Minjiang Scholar Professor at Fuzhou University. His current research interests are mainly focused on synthesizing nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based nanocomposites and core–shell nanostructured materials, and exploring their applications in the area of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
Dating back to October 2004, a revolution in science and technology was triggered by the report that condensed-matter physicists Geim and Novoselov had prepared two-dimensional sheets of carbon atoms—graphene (GR).1,2 GR, as an allotrope of carbon, is composed of layers of carbon atoms packed into a honeycomb network that can be exfoliated from bulk graphite using different approaches, including thermal exfoliation, mechanical cleavage, chemical vapor deposition, and chemical functionalization.3–10 Recent years have witnessed a cornucopia of approaches toward the exploration of GR, this sparkling rising star on the horizon of material science.11–13 Considering its planar state, GR can be wrapped up into zero-dimensional spherical fullerenes with the introduction of pentagons, rolled along a given direction into one-dimensional carbon nanotubes or staked into three-dimensional graphite.1 Hence, GR is recognized as the basic building block of all-dimensional carbon materials. Its lamellar structure bestows remarkable and unique properties, such as a high mobility of charge carriers (>200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at electron densities of 2 × 1011 cm−2), exceptional Young’s modulus values (∼1.0 TPa), large spring constants (1–5 Nm−1), theoretically high specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), excellent thermal conductivity (∼5000 Wm−1 K−1) and optical transmittance (∼97.7%),14 which have spurred enormous interest in the scientific and industrial communities. On account of its favorable characteristics, GR has been utilized in diverse areas, such as nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, chemical and biochemical sensing, polymer composites, H2 production and storage, intercalation materials, drug delivery, supercapacitors, catalysis and photovoltaics.15–62
Among various topics, the fabrication of GR-based catalysts, especially those for photocatalysis, is currently an important issue of particular concern. In the 21st century, aggravating energy and environmental problems such as pollution, fossil fuel depletion and global warming are ringing the alarm bells for human society.46 Photocatalysis has attracted intense attention during the past decades because of its potential for environmental purification and converting photon energy into chemical energy.12,16 This green technology has been widely applied to nonselective processes for the degradation of pollutants, selective organic transformations for synthesis of fine chemicals, water splitting to hydrogen energy and other photoelectrochemical processes in both the gas and liquid phases.63–86 However, the practical applications of this technique are limited by the inability to utilize visible light, insufficient quantum efficiency, or the possible photodegradation of the catalyst. Designing novel catalysts to meet these technical needs is still a challenge. Due to its unique atom-thick 2D structure, excellent transparency, high specific surface area, locally conjugated aromatic system, superior electron mobility, and high chemical, electrochemical stability, GR is regarded as an ideal high performance candidate for photocatalyst carriers or promoter.46 That is, to synthesize GR-based nanocomposites toward specific photocatalytic reaction opens up a new promising pathway for the further development of photocatalysis.
It is undoubted that the discovery of GR brings about enormous opportunities for science and technology. Although there have been vast numbers of reports on GR, including exploration of novel approaches to synthesize GR or GR-based nanomaterials and their utilization,10,87–96 most of them typically involve introduction of GR merely for the sake of GR itself via relatively simplistic methods such as mixing instead of putting it into full play with elaborate design. The improvements seen with the optimization of preparation methods and making full use of GR are still unsatisfactory.45 Therefore, research attention should focus on how to utilize fully GR, rather than separately imposing hype on the ‘miracle of GR’ in much the same way as its carbon forebears (fullerenes or carbon nanotubes), which could significantly advance our rational fabrication of smart GR-based nanocomposites for various applications.78
This tutorial review aims to give a relatively systematic, updated summary of the current status of GR-based nanocomposites applied in photocatalysis, including nonselective degradation of pollutants, selective transformations for organic synthesis of fine chemicals and water splitting to clean hydrogen energy. Notably, the application of GR-based nanocomposites in photocatalytic selective transformation is not covered by previous reviews.12,16,45,46,48 Furthermore, some challenges confronted by GR-based photocatalysts are discussed in the future perspectives section. It is hoped that this updated review would promote us to harness efficiently and rationally the outstanding structural and electronic properties of GR to design more efficient GR-based photocatalysts toward numerous applications in conversion of solar to chemical energy. As the editorials published in Nature put it,97 GR is not a miracle material, just a very promising one and it will take restraint and sustained interest to deliver its potential. Although the hunt is on for applications that can exploit graphene's remarkable properties, the research work necessary to find out how it could best be harnessed remains relatively incomplete. Such targeting of graphene's potential will be vital to its success including its application in photocatalysis. What we should do is to exploit its properties and applications in a more reasonable and rational way instead of joining the graphene “gold rush”.97
2. Photocatalytic nonselective processes
Nonselective photocatalysis has been attracting research interest because of its great potential for environmental remediation, such as the removal of stubborn, noxious compounds or non-biodegradable molecules from air, soil and water.15,98–103 During these nonselective processes, the contaminants are mineralized into stable inorganic compounds such as carbon dioxide, water and salts. On account of the superior electron conductivity and mobility, high adsorption capacity, high specific surface area and transparency of graphene (GR), GR-based nanocomposites can serve as a new type of promising photocatalyst and have been utilized in the nonselective degradation of pollutants for environmental amelioration.104–177 Kamat's group178 has demonstrated the capability of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) to store and shuttle electrons via a stepwise electron transfer process and to serve as a catalyst nanomat (Fig. 1), which confirms the feasibility of applying GR in photocatalysis and paves the way for the development of next generation catalyst systems.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of selective catalysis at different sites on RGO as a 2-D conducting support, and (B) photographs showing the color changes observed during stepwise transfer of electrons: ① storing electrons in TiO2 by irradiating the deaerated ethanol suspension with UV light (λ > 300 nm) for 30 min; ② addition of deaerated ethanol suspension of GO until no blue color remains (gray-colored solution results due to the formation of RGO); ③ reduction of Ag+ to Ag nanoparticles (red color) by stored electrons in RGO following the addition of deaerated AgNO3 solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Li and coworkers109 have prepared a chemically bonded TiO2 (P25)–graphene (GR) nanocomposite via a facile one-step hydrothermal method using graphene oxide and P25 as the precursors. It can be seen from Fig. 2A that the introduction of GR causes the bandgap narrowing of P25, which should be attributed to the chemical bonding between P25 and GR.109 The results of photoactivities demonstrate that P25–GR exhibits enhanced activity toward the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) compared to the bare P25 under both UV and visible light irradiation. Moreover, it also shows higher photodegradation rate than the P25–CNTs with the same carbon content, as displayed in Fig. 2C and D, which can mainly be ascribed to the giant 2D planar structure, and enhancement of the adsorption of dyes and of charge carrier transportation due to the addition of GR. The tentative processes of photodegradation of MB over P25–GR are illustrated in Fig. 2B. This work opens new possibilities in the application of TiO2–carbon composites as photocatalysts for environmental protection. However, the effect of different weight addition ratios of carbon materials on the photocatalytic performance is not taken into account. Consequently, it may be insufficient to conclude that the TiO2–graphene composite is essentially different from other TiO2–C (fullerene, carbon nanotube, or activated carbon) composites in enhancement of the photocatalytic activity of TiO2.15
 Fig. 2  (A) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectra of P25–GR; (B) schematic structure of P25–GR and tentative processes of the photodegradation of MB over P25–GR; comparison of photocatalytic activity in the degradation of MB under (C) UV light (λ = 365 nm) and (D) visible light (λ > 400 nm) over (1) P25, (2) P25–CNTs, and (3) P25–GR photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
With the unaddressed fundamental issue, our group15 prepared a series of TiO2–carbon nanocomposites with different weight addition ratios of carbon materials to investigate the difference of graphene (GR) compared with other carbon materials, e.g., carbon nanotubes (CNTs), on improving the photoactivity of semiconductor TiO2. We found that the introduction of GR into the matrix of TiO2 could enhance the stability and activity of TiO2 in the photodegradation of pollutants, as shown in Fig. 3. However, the higher addition of GR leads to the deterioration of photoactivity. All of these features can also be observed in TiO2–CNT composites. Our results indicate that TiO2–GR composite should be in essence the same as other TiO2–carbon materials in the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity of TiO2. More attention should be paid to rationally design TiO2–GR composites in a more reasonable way.
 Fig. 3  Photocatalytic performance the P25–GR nanocomposites for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation of (a) benzene, (b) mineralization ratio and liquid-phase photocatalytic degradation of MB under the irradiation of (c) UV light (λ = 365 nm), (d) visible light (λ > 400 nm); (e) the proposed schematic illustration showing the reaction mechanism for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants over the P25–GR in which pink spheres and black sheet represent TiO2 nanoparticles and GR, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to coupling GR with semiconductor nanoparticles, there are some other reports using the semiconductor precursor with specific morphology, such as nanorods and nanotubes. For instance, self-assembly of TiO2 nanorods on the graphene oxide sheets (GO–TiO2 NRCs) has been achieved by a water/toluene two-phase process.139,140 Compared with GO–P25 and the original TiO2 nanorods, the GO–TiO2 NRCs exhibit higher photocatalytic activity toward degradation of contaminant methylene blue (MB) and acid orange 7 (AO 7) under UV light irradiation.139,140
Obviously, the above research works all focus on simply random “hard” integration of pre-synthesized or commercially available semiconductor solids with GO sheets as also reported in some other works.117–119,126,128,131,134,138 Such an ex situ hybridization makes pre-selection of nanostructures with desired functionalities possible; however, it cannot make good use of the structural advantages of GR, thus suffering from a low-density and non-uniform coverage of the particles on GR sheets and poor interfacial contact between the semiconductors and GR, which is unfavorable for GR to play its role during the photocatalytic processes.47,78 In contrast, an in situ crystallization which allows the precursors of GR and metal compound to pre-mix together can mitigate these problems and result in a uniform coverage of nanocrystalline semiconductor nanoparticles on GR sheets, thus favoring improvement of the photocatalytic performance.
For example, Du et al.148 have fabricated hierarchically ordered macro-mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite films through a confinement self-assembly method. As illustrated in Fig. 4A, macro-mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite films are prepared by adding graphene oxide (GO) to the system of colloidal crystals assembled from monodisperse polystyrene (PS) spheres with controlled sizes and subsequently reducing GO in situ within the films. The obtained samples are designated as (GR)–Ti–(Ma170/200)–Me, for which the presence of bracketed components depends on the preparation process. The diameter of Ma170/200 replicated by the PS template spheres is ca. 240/300 nm, respectively. It can be seen from Fig. 4B and C that 3D ordered macropores are formed. Due to the specific, hierarchical structure and the introduction of GR, these TiO2–GR films show an enhanced capacity to rapidly adsorb and photodegrade organic dyes under UV light irradiation (Fig. 4D). These materials, with a hierarchical structure and morphology composition, could potentially provide an attractive opportunity for environmental purification.
 Fig. 4  (A) Illustration for the preparation of a macro–mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite film; (B) typical SEM and (C) TEM micrographs of a macro–mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite film assembled from 300-nm diameter polystyrene spheres; (D) photocatalytic degradation of MB under UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm) using (a) Ti–Me, (b) GR–Ti–Me, (c) Ti–Ma200–Me, (d) GR–Ti–Ma200–Me, (e) Ti–Ma170–Me, and (f) GR–Ti–Ma170–Me films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
In another report, TiO2–graphene composites (TGC) have been synthesized by a facile wet chemistry route during which the TiO2 nanoparticles in situ grow in the interlayers of expanded graphite (EG) accompanied by the simultaneous exfoliation of EG under ethanol-assisted solvothermal conditions.150 It can be observed from Fig. 5A and B that the TiO2 coating is uniform on the graphene surface. These thermally treated composites obtained under different experimental conditions possess a higher photocatalytic efficiency for the degradation of phenol than P25 under both visible and UV lights (Fig. 5C and D).
 Fig. 5  (A and B) representative TEM images of TGC3 with 12 hours solvothermal time (the inset of B shows the SAED pattern); variation of normalized C/C0 for phenol with time under (C) visible light irradiation (λ > 410 nm) and (D) UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm; C0: the initial phenol concentration after adsorption equilibrium). Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
It is known that crystals usually exhibit the specific surface-dependent properties. As for anatase TiO2, the {001} facets are the most reactive facets with a high surface energy.179 There are some studies on the nanocomposites consisted of anatase TiO2 with exposed {001} high-energy facets and graphene.151,152,174 For instance, nano-sized anatase TiO2 sheets mainly dominated by {001} facets have been prepared on graphene sheets (T–GS) via a facile solvothermal route, as shown in Fig. 6A–D.152 In comparison with commercial P25 and pure TiO2 nanosheets, the composite exhibits significant improvement in photocatalytic degradation of the azo dye Rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light irradiation (Fig. 6E and F), which results from the effective charge anti-recombination of graphene and the high catalytic activity of {001} facets. Such a unique structure and advanced chemical constitution holds promise for environment remediation and energy conversion such as solar cell and water splitting.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic flowchart of the formation of TiO2–graphene nanosheets (T–GS); (B) schematic of tetrabutyl titanate grafted on the GO surface by chemisorption; (C and D) typical TEM images of T–GS–6h; (E) liquid-phase photocatalytic degradation of RhB under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 400 nm) and (F) photocatalytic degradation reaction kinetics of RhB over P25, T–GS–6h and pure TiO2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Beyond the most studied photocatalyst TiO2, some attention has been devoted to other semiconductors coupled with graphene.108,113,117,119,126–128,135,145,153,156,157,173 For example, Zou et al.157 have prepared sandwich-like metal oxide/graphene/metal oxide (MO/G/MO) heterostructures by a simple and general nanocrystal-seed-directed (NSD) hydrothermal route, which realizes large-scale growth of nanorod arrays of various semiconductor metal oxides, including TiO2, ZnO, MnO2, CuO, and ZrO2 on both sides of flexible graphene sheets (Fig. 7a–f). They found that in the NSD hydrothermal processes, the MO nanocrystals seeded on the graphene sheet play a key role in growth of the nanorod arrays on the graphene surfaces; the size of the nanocrystal seeds on the graphene sheets has an obvious effect on the size of the nanorods grown on the graphene sheets. The photocatalytic property of the TiO2/G/TiO2 has been evaluated by degradation of methylene blue (MB) under UV/Vis irradiation. As displayed in Fig. 7g, compared with P25 and TiO2 nanorods, TiO2/G/TiO2 catalysts exhibit remarkably enhanced photocatalytic performance, indicating that MO/G/MO heterostructures can serve as promising candidates for photocatalytic decontamination. Besides, these heterostructures with highly ordered nanoscale texturing on flexible substrates could provide potential opportunities for flexible-device fabrication with optimal performance, such as field-effect transistors, field emission displays, photocatalysis, and energy-harvesting devices.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the growth process of metal oxides nanorods on both sides of graphene sheets by the NSD hydrothermal route; (b–f) SEM images of sandwich MO/G/MO heterostructures obtained by the NSD hydrothermal route: (b) TiO2/G/TiO2, (c) ZnO/G/ZnO, (d) MnO2/G/MnO2, (e) CuO/G/CuO, (f) ZrO2/G/ZrO2; (g) photocatalytic degradation of MB under UV/Vis irradiation with a 500 W Xe lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Besides the conventional semiconductors, it is desirable to develop unique yet efficient hybridizers for the visible-light drivable and recyclable GO-based photocatalysts to provide more varied and new opportunities for environmental remediation.114 An efficient visible-light-driven plasmonic photocatalyst in terms of Ag/AgX/GO (X = Br, Cl) nanocomposites fabricated via a water/oil system at room temperature has been reported by Zhu et al. (Fig. 8A and B).114 As shown in Fig. 8C and D, these hybrids exhibit distinctly enhanced photoactivity for degradation of methyl orange (MO) pollutant under visible light irradiation due to the good adsorptive capacity of Ag/AgX/GO, the smaller size of the Ag/AgX nanoparticles, the facilitated charge transfer, and the suppressed recombination of electron–hole pairs in Ag/AgX/GO. Subsequently, they found that Ag/AgBr/GO synthesized through an oil/water microemulsion displays a higher photocatalytic activity than that of the corresponding Ag/AgBr/GO nanomaterial obtained by a water/oil microemulsion for degradation of MO under sunlight irradiation, which can be ascribed to the higher surface content of Ag and the higher mole ratio of metallic Ag0 to Ag+ (Fig. 8E and F).115 Their investigations open up new possibilities for development of stable and efficient GO-based plasmonic photocatalysts to utilize visible light as an energy source.
 Fig. 8  Typical SEM images of the synthesized (A) Ag/AgBr/GO, (B) Ag/AgCl/GO nanospecies via a water/oil system and (C and D) the photocatalytic activities for photodegradation of MO under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (E) schematic explanation for the one-pot surfactant-assisted synthesis of Ag/AgBr-based nanostructures via an oil/water (top panel) and a water/oil (bottom panel) microemulsion system; (F) photocatalytic activities of Ag/AgBr-based plasmonic photocatalysts for the photodegradation of MO under sunlight irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114 and 115. Copyright 2011, 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the aforementioned examples, increasing interest has also been devoted to fabricating graphene-based nanocomposite photocatalysts by developing new synthetic strategies, such as premodification of graphene sheets and adopting aided techniques including electrostatic interaction, electrospinning, electrodeposition, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and ultrasonication.107,113,124,127,129,154,155,159,161 For instance, graphene oxide (GO)-wrapped amorphous TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) have been synthesized by co-assembly of positively charged TiO2 NPs with negatively charged GO nanosheets, as illustrated in Fig. 9A.124 The SEM images indicate that bare amorphous TiO2 NPs are entirely wrapped by GO nanosheets; after a hydrothermal treatment for the reduction of GO to GR and the crystallization of amorphous TiO2 NPs, the dense precursors turn into porous nanospheres having a hierarchical structure that consists of interconnected nanocrystals with intact graphene nanosheets (Fig. 9B–D). These GR–TiO2 NPs exhibit enhanced photoactivity under visible light irradiation for degradation of methylene blue (MB), as shown in Fig. 9E. This can be attributed to the bandgap narrowing of the hybrid material, which consequently allows enhanced absorption of visible light and more efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from excited MB to TiO2 NPs through graphene nanosheets (Fig. 9F). This new synthetic strategy could enable a tight integration of functional semiconductor NPs and graphene nanosheets for the synthesis of highly photoactive graphene-based metal oxide hybrid materials.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of synthesis steps for graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs and corresponding SEM images of (B) bare amorphous TiO2 NPs, (C) GO-wrapped amorphous TiO2 NPs, and (D) graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs (scale bar: 200 nm); (E) photodegradation of MB under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) by (a) P25, (b) bare anatase TiO2 NPs, (c) graphene–TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal), and (d) graphene–TiO2 NPs; (F) the suggested mechanism for the photocatalytic degradation of MB by graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Zhao and coworkers121,129,159,161 have carried out a series of studies on utilization of graphene in photocatalytic nonselective processes. They pillared layered graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) platelets with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) using the CVD method with acetonitrile as the carbon source and nickel nanoparticles as the catalysts (Fig. 10a–g).159 The composite materials with RGO layers pillared by CNTs form a robust three-dimensional porous structure of specific surface as high as 352 m2 g−1. The unique porous structure and the excellent electron transfer properties of graphene provide the CNT-pillared RGO composites with an excellent visible light photoactivity in the degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB), as shown in Fig. 10h and i. The proposed photocatalytic mechanism is schematically illustrated in Fig. 10j. Under visible light irradiation, the electron would transfer from the excited dye, RhB*, to graphene. Since the work-functions of CNTs and Ni are much higher than graphene, the injected electron on graphene plane can continuously transfer to the CNTs and Ni particles, spatially separating the RhB˙+ radical and the electron, thus effectively decreasing electron accumulation. Such CNT–RGO composites represent a new family of innovative carbon materials for visible-light-activated photocatalysis. Besides, they have prepared gold or copper modified-graphene composite photocatalysts for dye degradation under visible light irradiation.129,161 As shown in Fig. 11, the graphene-based composites can possess enhanced visible light photoactivities for dye degradation and the corresponding photocatalytic mechanism is also proposed.129,161
 Fig. 10  FESEM images of (a) GOCNT-30-17, (b) GOCNT-15-17, (c) GOCNT-30-9, (d) GOCNT-15-9, (e) RGOCNT-15-4, and (f) RGOCNT-15-0.6 (the samples were denoted as GO/RGOCNT-X-Y where X and Y refer to CVD time and the mass ratio of Ni/C); (g) experimental steps of pillaring GO and RGO platelets with CNTs; (h) photocatalytic degradation for RhB under different experimental conditions with catalysts GOCNT-15-4 and P25; (i) photocatalytic properties of different samples in degrading RhB (λ > 420 nm); (j) energy diagram showing the proposed mechanism of photosensitized degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (A) TEM image of the reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–Au (the insets are an HRTEM image and particle size distribution of the Au particles); (B) degradation of RhB over (a) RGO–Au in the dark, (b) without catalyst, (c) RGO, (d) P25, (e) P25–Au and (f) RGO–Au under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm); (C) the proposed mechanism of photosensitized degradation of dyes over RGO–Au under visible light irradiation; (D) degradation of RhB over RGOCu–NO3 in the dark (□), without catalyst (▶), RGO (●), P25 (▲), RGOCu–Cl (○), and RGOCu–NO3 (♦) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) (the insets are TEM and HRTEM images of RGOCu–NO3); (E) the possible mechanism of photosensitized degradation of dyes over RGOCu composite under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In order to remove catalysts effectively and readily, magnetic components have also been introduced in the preparation of magnetically separable graphene-based photocatalysts. The composites of ZnFe2O4–graphene (G), MnFe2O4–G and NiFe2O4–G have been prepared by Wang's group.111,112,158 Under visible light irradiation, these graphene-based composite photocatalysts are not only photoactive in degradation of methylene blue (MB), but can also be separated easily, as displayed in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Typical TEM images of (a) ZnFe2O4–G, (c) MnFe2O4–G (the inset is the particle size distribution for MnFe2O4), (e) NiFe2O4–G and (b, d and f) the corresponding photocatalytic activities for degradation of MB under visible light irradiation with different catalysts (λ > 420 nm) (the inset is the magnetic separation property of the nanocomposite). Reprinted with permission from ref. 111 and 158 (Copyright 2012, 2011, American Chemical Society) and from ref. 112 (Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc). 
Besides the applications of graphene-based nanocomposites in the photodegradation of organic dyes in the liquid phase, they have also been applied in the gas phase.15,133,169 Our group15 has utilized TiO2–graphene nanocomposites for the photocatalytic degradation of a volatile organic pollutant (VOC), benzene, in the gas phase for the first time (Fig. 3a and b). We found that the P25–GR nanocomposites exhibit much higher activity and stability than the reference catalyst of bare P25. Afterwards, nonstoichiometric TiO2–graphene nanocomposites have been fabricated by thermal hydrolysis of a suspension of graphene nanosheets and a titania–peroxo complex.133 The photoactivity is assessed by the photodegradation of butane in the gas phase under UV and visible light irradiation. It can be seen clearly from Table 1 that the sample labelled as TiPC0100 possesses the highest photoactivity for gas-phase decomposition of butane under UV and visible light irradiation. An increasing content of graphene will lower the photodegradation rate, which has also been observed for the gas-phase degradation of benzene over P25–GR nanocomposites reported by our group.15
Table 1 Samples composition, bandgap energy, rate constant k, and TICa for CO, CO2, and H2O of TiO2–graphene133




Sample
Graphene/g

E
bg/eV

k (365 nm)/h−1
CO [TIC]
CO2 [TIC]
H2O [TIC]

k (400 nm)/h−1
CO [TIC]
CO2 [TIC]
H2O [TIC]





a TIC: total ion current.





TiPC0000
0
3.20
0.02686
4
7
2
0.00959
7
8
2


TiPC0005
0.005
3.10
0.01350
10
18
4
0.00911
4
6
2


TiPC0010
0.01
3.05
0.03689
4
4
1
0.01317
5
7
1


TiPC0050
0.05
2.90
0.01357
4
15
4
0.00770
6
10
3


TiPC0100
0.1
2.70
0.01991
58
28
27
0.00530
36
15
3


TiPC0200
0.2
2.40
0.01245
6
20
3
0.00360
8
9
2


TiPC0500
0.5
>2
0.01004
11
34
3
0.00527
5
5
2




In addition, graphene-based nanocomposites have also been utilized in the photoinactivation of bacteria.140,170,171 The TiO2–graphene films (Fig. 13A) prepared via deposition of graphene oxide platelets on TiO2 thin films followed by annealing and irradiation process have been used for photocatalytic degradation of E. coli bacteria in an aqueous solution under solar light irradiation.170 As shown in Fig. 13B, the sample irradiated for 4 h exhibits the highest antibacterial activity and its activity is improved by a factor of about 6 and 7.5 relative to the activity of the annealed graphene oxide/TiO2 and the bare TiO2 thin film, respectively. More recently, Akhavan's group fabricated graphene–tungsten oxide (GR–WO3) composite thin films with sheet-like surface morphology.171 The GR–WO3 composite thin films show an excellent visible light photocatalytic performance in the photoinactivation of viruses as compared to WO3, which is assigned to the formation of W–C and W–O–C bonds. Their results could provide useful information for controlling the effects of upcoming graphene-containing photocatalysts, which work efficiently on the destruction of environmental bio-organisms under solar light irradiation.171
 Fig. 13  (A) AFM image of graphene oxide/TiO2 thin films exposed to UV visible light irradiation for 4 h in the photocatalytic reduction process; (B) number of bacteria cultured from the viable E. coli on the surface of the graphene oxide/TiO2 thin films reduced by UV visible light-assisted photocatalytic process for (a) 0, (b) 0.5, (c) 1, (d) 2, and (e) 4 h irradiation time, (f) bare TiO2 thin film, (g) graphene oxide/glass film under solar light irradiation and (h) graphene oxide applied as in part g but in the dark, as a control sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
3. Photocatalytic selective organic transformations
Growing endeavors have been devoted to applying photocatalysis, a green technique, to photocatalytic selective transformations.71,73,76,86,180,181 Although photocatalytic processes have often been thought to be highly unselective, recent progress indicates that semiconductor photocatalysis can also serve as an alternative to conventional synthetic routes for synthesis of fine chemicals through the selection of appropriate semiconductors and control of the reaction conditions.78,79,84,86,169,182–187 It is now recognized that heterogeneous photocatalysis holds great potential for organic synthesis due to its possibility to avoid environmentally detrimental heavy metal catalysts, strong chemical oxidants or reducing agents, such as CrIV, MnO4−, ClO−, Cl2, H2 and CO, as well as harsh reaction conditions such as high temperature and high pressure.80,83,188,189 Hitherto, as mentioned above, most reports on graphene-based nanocomposites often focus on their applications in nonselective processes for environmental protection, whereas the utilization for selective organic transformations is relatively scarce.
Our group has carried out a series of relative studies in this respect.78,79,182,183 We have prepared graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites by interfacial engineering of the unique 2D mat of GR with TiF4 as precursor via a facile two-step wet-chemistry approach and applied them for selective oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes using dioxygen as oxidant under mild conditions.78 Compared with its analogue CNT–TiO2 featuring a poor interfacial contact, the GR–TiO2 nanocomposites featuring an intimate interfacial contact exhibit enhanced visible light photoactivity, as displayed in Fig. 14a. The superior structure-directing role of GO over CNT results in a more intimate interfacial contact between GR and TiO2 (Fig. 14b–e), thus leading to better separation of the photogenerated carriers (Fig. 14f) over GR–TiO2 as compared to CNT–TiO2. From Table 2, it can be seen that TiO2–5% GR can photocatalyze a range of benzylic alcohols and allylic alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes under visible light irradiation with high selectivity (90–100%). This work conceptually demonstrates how to synthesize a more efficient GR–semiconductor photocatalyst and the key importance of preparative methods in affecting the morphology of as-prepared GR–semiconductor nanocomposites and their photocatalytic activity. Moreover, the comparison between GR–TiO2 and CNT–TiO2 counterparts will promote an in-depth fundamental understanding of the analogies and differences between GR and CNTs in controlling the morphology of GR (or CNT)–semiconductor nanocomposites and enhancing the photocatalytic performance of a semiconductor. This seminal work is expected to open a new doorway to exploit graphene–semiconductor composite materials as photocatalysts in the field of selective organic synthesis under mild conditions, which would further enrich the potential applications related to graphene's role in photocatalysis.
 Fig. 14  (a) Time-online profile of yield of benzyl aldehyde from selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol over TiO2–5% GR and TiO2–5% CNT nanocomposites under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (b) SEM, (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of TiO2–5% GR; (e) TEM image of TiO2–5% CNT; (f) photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Table 2 Selective oxidation of a range of alcohols over the TiO2–5% GR photocatalyst under the irradiation (λ > 400 nm) of visible light for 20 h78




Entry
Substrate
Product
Conv. (%)
Yield (%)
Sel. (%)




1






62
62
100


2






70
70
100


3






80
80
100


4






74
73
99


5






45
43
96


6






84
76
91


7






50
46
92


8






41
37
90




According to previous reports,78,169 a combined strategy has recently been developed by our group to improve the photocatalytic performance of GR–TiO2 nanocomposites.182 We found that the photoactivity of GR–TiO2 can be further enhanced by decreasing defects of GR and increasing interfacial contact between GR and semiconductor TiO2. As seen in Fig. 15A–E, the solvent exfoliated graphene (SEG) with lower defects can contact with TiO2 intimately, making more efficient use of the electron conductivity of graphene, by which the lifetime and transfer of photoexcited charge carriers can be improved more efficiently. Accordingly, compared with GR–TiO2 and SEG–P25, SEG–TiO2 exhibits enhanced photocatalytic performance for selective oxidation of various alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes under visible light irradiation at ambient conditions, as exemplified in Fig. 15F and G. This work highlights the key importance of rational fabrication and design of GR–semiconductor nanocomposites with improved photocatalytic performance toward specific applications.
 Fig. 15  (A) Raman spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and solvent-exfoliated graphene (SEG); photographs of (B) GO and (C) SEG dispersions in water; (D) SEM image of TiO2–5% SEG nanocomposite; (E) photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation; photocatalytic selective oxidation of (F) benzyl alcohol and (G) 3-methyl-2-buten-1-ol to corresponding aldehydes over the nanocomposites of TiO2–5% SEG, TiO2–5% GR, P25–1% SEG and P25–1% GR under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) of 4 h at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides TiO2, we have also studied another common semiconductor, CdS, to couple with GR. A series of cadmium sulfide–graphene (CdS–GR) nanocomposites with different weight addition ratios of GR have been synthesized via a facile one-step solvothermal approach.79 It is found that, in the CdS–GR nanocomposites, the CdS nanoparticles evenly overspread on the graphene scaffold (Fig. 16A–C) and the introduction of GR affects the morphology, optical and electronic nature of the samples. Compared to blank-CdS obtained in the absence of GR, CdS–GR exhibits enhanced photoactivity toward selective oxidation of alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes under ambient conditions, as reflected by two representative examples in Fig. 16E and F. The high photoactivity of CdS–GR nanocomposites can be attributed to the integrative effect of the enhanced light absorption intensity, high electron conductivity of GR, and its significant influence on the morphology and structure of the samples. A possible mechanism has been proposed, as illustrated in Fig. 16D. Our results demonstrate that graphene-based nanocomposites can serve as a type of promising photocatalyst for selective organic transformations, which, however, has not received adequate attention from the research community. Therefore, it is hoped that our work could pave the way for the exploration of GR-based semiconductor nanocomposites for visible-light-driven photocatalytic selective organic transformations.
 Fig. 16  (A) SEM, (B) TEM, and (C) HRTEM images of the as-prepared CdS–5% GR (the inset of C is the SAED pattern); (D) schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism for selective oxidation of alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes over the CdS–GR nanocomposite under visible light irradiation; time-online photocatalytic selective oxidation of (E) benzyl alcohol and (F) cinnamyl alcohol to aldehydes over blank-CdS and CdS–5% GR nanocomposite under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 420 nm) under ambient conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to binary nanocomposites, very recently, we have constructed ternary hybrids composed of CdS–GR–TiO2 on the flatland of graphene oxide through an in situ strategy.183 As displayed in Fig. 17A and B, the CdS nanoparticles carpet the GR nanosheets evenly and the TiO2 nanoparticles decorate the CdS–GR base foundation uniformly. The introduction of TiO2 has no effect on the morphology and porosity properties of the samples, whereas it can enhance the photoactivity toward the selective oxidation of alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes under visible light illumination, as demonstrated in Fig. 17C. The improved photocatalytic performance can be ascribed to the combined interaction of the longer lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, the faster interfacial charge transfer rate and the larger surface area. As a proof-of-concept, this work demonstrates that the careful design of GR–based composites by coupling GR with multiple semiconductor compounds is favorable to the development of next generation photocatalyst systems with improved photocatalytic capacity.
 Fig. 17  (A) SEM and (B) TEM images of the as-prepared CdS–5% GR–10% TiO2 nanocomposite (the panels below are the elemental mapping patterns of the boxed area of A); (C) time-online photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde over CdS–5% GR and CdS–5% GR–10% TiO2 nanocomposites under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 420 nm) at ambient conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Besides photocatalytic selective oxidation processes, graphene-based nanocomposites have been utilized in selective photoreduction reactions. Hersam and coworkers169 have reported that graphene–titania (P25) nanocomposites are active for photoreduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) to methane (CH4) under UV and visible light irradiation. They have produced graphene via two different pathways, oxidation–reduction and solvent exfoliation, which are indicated as SRGO and SEG, respectively. It is found that SEG–P25 nanocomposites exhibit a significantly larger enhancement for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 compared to SRGO–P25, especially under visible light irradiation (Fig. 18A). This can be ascribed to the fewer defects and superior electrical mobility of SEG, implying a longer electronic mean free path, which allows photoexcited electrons to diffuse more effectively to reactive sites from the SEG–P25 interface, thus decreasing the likelihood of their recombination with holes on TiO2. The proposed mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 18B. Upon illumination, the photoexcited electron is injected into the graphene nanoplatelet, leaving behind a TiO2 confined hole. Due to its lower density of defects, electrons in SEG are able to diffuse farther, thus sampling a larger surface area for adsorbed CO2. This work strongly suggests that a promising way to improve graphene-based photocatalysts may benefit from careful consideration of the electrical properties of the graphene component.
 Fig. 18  (A) Photocatalytic activity of SEG–P25 and SRGO–P25 nanocomposites for CO2 photoreduction under UV (λ = 365 nm) and visible light illumination (λ > 400 nm); (B) the proposed photocatalytic mechanism for graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites. The color scheme is: carbon (gray), hydrogen (white), oxygen (red), and titanium (blue), hole (green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
More recently, noncovalently bound SEG–titania nanosheets (TiNS) nanocomposites with low carbon defect densities have been synthesized and utilized in photoreduction of CO2.187 As shown in Fig. 19, the 2D-2D SEG–TiNS nanocomposites demonstrate enhanced CO2 photoreduction activities under UV excitation compared with 1D–2D single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)–TiNS, which can be ascribed to the stronger optoelectronic coupling between 2D–2D nanomaterials. The results highlight the effects of nanomaterial dimensionality on interfacial charge transfer and hence the photoactivity. This work also motivates us to develop a reasonable system with an identical contact degree of the carbon materials and the semiconductor, by which a reasonable comparison between semiconductor-carbon (GR, CNT) photocatalysts can be made.
 Fig. 19  The SEM images of (A) 1 wt% SWCNT–TiNS and (B) 1 wt% SEG–TiNS nanocomposites (the inset is the corresponding schematic); (C) photocatalytic activity of SWCNT–TiNS and SEG–TiNS for CO2 reduction to CH4 under UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In the light of the above studies it can be concluded that, despite that photocatalytic processes are often regarded being unselective, careful design of GR-based nanomaterials and selection of proper reaction conditions make possible the effective utilization of these GR-based composite photocatalysts in selective transformations, which provides a promising alternative to more conventional synthetic pathways for synthesis of fine chemicals.78,79,169,181–183,187
4. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
As the energy issues become increasingly serious worldwide, the development of low-cost and efficient light-harvesting materials has attracted increasing research interest for their great potential to produce renewable energy sources. Hydrogen is regarded as one of the ultimate clean fuels. The production of hydrogen with a proper photocatalyst and solar power plays an important role in clean and renewable energy systems not only because it is a promising way of providing large-scale clean and renewable hydrogen, but also it could avert probable problems associated with energy storage.190–192 Photocatalytic water splitting is one of the most convenient approaches in this regard.193 Thus far, some graphene-based nanocomposites have been utilized for photocatalytic water splitting.175,194–220
Amal's group has prepared graphene–semiconductor nanocomposites via a photocatalytic reduction process, including RGO–TiO2, RGO–WO3, RGO–BiVO4 and RGO–Ru/SrTiO3.205,207,221 Their photoelectrochemical properties and applications in water splitting have been studied. For example, BiVO4–RGO has been synthesized by incorporating BiVO4 with RGO using a facile single-step photocatalytic reduction, and the typical SEM image is shown in Fig. 20A.205 Under visible light illumination, a steady evolution of H2 and O2 can be obtained and quantified on BiVO4–RGO at the rate of 0.75 and 0.21 μmol h−1, respectively, whereas negligible gas production is observed in the pure BiVO4 cell. This improvement of photocatalytic water splitting is attributed to the longer electron lifetime of excited BiVO4 as the electrons are injected to RGO instantly at the site of generation, leading to a minimized charge recombination and the improved contact between BiVO4 particles and transparent conducting electrode RGO scaffold, as reflected in Fig. 20B and C. Recently, they have developed an ingenious Z-scheme photocatalysis system for water splitting under visible light irradiation.207 Mixtures of photoreduced graphene oxide (PRGO) with BiVO4 (PRGO/BiVO4) and Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (PRGO/Ru/SrTiO3:Rh) are prepared by photocatalytic reduction of GO on BiVO4 and Ru/SrTiO3:Rh, respectively, under visible light illumination in the presence of methanol as a hole scavenger (Fig. 21A). In this system, PRGO functions as a solid-state electron mediator, transferring the electrons from the conduction band of BiVO4 to the vacancies in the impurity levels of Ru/SrTiO3:Rh. The electrons in Ru/SrTiO3:Rh reduce water to H2 on the Ru cocatalyst, while the holes in BiVO4 oxidize water to O2, accomplishing a complete water splitting cycle, as shown in Fig. 21B. The time courses of H2 and O2 evolution indicates that this system is stable after the second cycle (Fig. 21C). This significant work has opened a new doorway for the use of graphene in the design of new and efficient systems for water splitting.
 Fig. 20  (A) SEM image of BiVO4–RGO; (B) visible light voltage–photocurrent functions of BiVO4, BiVO4–RGO, and TiO2 (under UV irradiation); (C) illustration of photocatalytic water splitting in a photoelectrochemical cell based on BiVO4–RGO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 21  (A) SEM image of (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4); (B) illustration of water splitting mechanism in a Z-scheme photocatalysis (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4) system under visible light irradiation; (C) overall water splitting under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) by the (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4) system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
A new type of composite containing graphene–Pt and nitrogen-doped tantalite (Sr2Ta2O7−xNx) has been fabricated by mixing graphene–Pt with Sr2Ta2O7−xNx, as shown in Fig. 22a.209 It is clear to see that the total amounts of generated hydrogen during a testing course of over 4 h suggest the good stability of the composite photocatalysts (Fig. 22c). The composite with an optimal ratio exhibits a ca. 80% and 177% increase in the hydrogen production compared to Sr2Ta2O7−xNx and undoped Sr2Ta2O7, respectively, as displayed in Fig. 22d. In this system, graphene serves as a scaffold and charge carrier transport “highway” to shuttle electrons to the platinum cocatalysts, mitigating the recombination of charge carriers and facilitating the electron transfer to photocatalyst surfaces for hydrogen production reaction, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 22b. This strategic combination of nitrogen doping and the use of a conductive electron transport “highway” makes possible further improvement of the hydrogen production efficiency and provides a new, promising approach to enhance the performance of photocatalysts.
 Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of graphene–Sr2Ta2O7−xNx; (b) schematic diagram for charge carrier separation and photocatalytic H2 production on Pt-loaded graphene–Sr2Ta2O7−xNx photocatalyst under simulated solar light irradiation; (c) hydrogen evolution rates in the course of 4.5 h using a 300 W Xe lamp and (d) hydrogen evolution rate (per hour) of various photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Fan et al.210 have prepared TiO2–reduced graphene oxide (P25–RGO) nanocomposites through several techniques, including UV-assisted photocatalytic reduction, hydrazine reduction, and hydrothermal methods. For comparison, titanium dioxide–carbon nanotubes (P25–CNTs) composites have also been synthesized via a hydrothermal approach. Their photocatalytic activities are evaluated by the evolution of hydrogen from alcohol solution under UV-vis irradiation. These results demonstrate that the P25–RGO composites prepared by all of the three methods exhibit significantly higher rates of H2 evolution than P25 alone. Among the P25–RGO composites, the P25–RGO-hydrothermal composite affords the highest rate of H2 evolution, which is also higher than that over P25–CNT catalyst (Fig. 23). They have proposed that the intimate contact between P25 and RGO may accelerate the transfer of photogenerated electrons on P25 to RGO, suppressing the recombination of charge carriers. However, using semiconductor solid particles may not make good use of the structural advantages of GR/GO, thus leading to an unsatisfactory contact between the semiconductor particles and GR sheets. Therefore, more efficient preparation methods are expected to give a further improvement of photoactivity of GR-based photocatalysts for water splitting.
 Fig. 23  (a) TEM image of P25–RGO-hydrothermal (P25/RGO = 1/0.2); (b) comparison of photocatalytic performances of P25, P25–CNT composites with different mass ratios of P25/CNT, and P25–RGO composites (mass ratio of P25/RGO = 1/0.2) prepared by different methods for the evolution of H2 from methanol aqueous solution using a 200 W Xe arc lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
CdS-cluster-decorated graphene nanosheets have been fabricated through a solvothermal method, as shown in Fig. 24a, which can be used as an efficient visible-light-driven photocatalyst for hydrogen production.211 It was found that graphene nanosheets in the composite could enhance the crystallinity and the specific surface area of CdS clusters. An appropriate amount of graphene can dramatically improve the photocatalytic activity. The optimal weight percentage of graphene is found to be 1.0 wt%, which results in a high visible-light photocatalytic H2 production rate of 1.12 mmol h−1 with 0.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst, as displayed in Fig. 24b. The proposed mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 24c. The photoexcited electrons transfer from the conduction band of semiconductor CdS not only to the located Pt, but also to the carbon atoms on the graphene sheets, which are accessible to protons that could readily transform to H2. This work demonstrates that the unique features of graphene enable it to be an excellent supporting material for semiconductor nanoparticles as well as an excellent electron collector and transporter to separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of sample CdS–1% GR (denoted as GC1.0); (b) comparison of the visible light photocatalytic activity of samples GC0, GC0.5, GC1.0, GC2.5, GC5.0, GC40, and G for H2 production using 10 vol% lactic acid aqueous solution as a sacrificial reagent and 0.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst (λ > 420 nm); (c) schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the graphene–CdS system under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the utilization of pristine graphene, N-doped graphene (N-graphene) has also been prepared to couple with CdS nanocomposites for hydrogen production from water under visible light irradiation (Fig. 25a).212 The results, as displayed in Fig. 25b, demonstrate that N-graphene/CdS nanocomposites had a higher photocatalytic activity than pure CdS, which could be attributed to the decreased recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the presence of N-graphene. Moreover, the N-graphene/CdS photocatalyst shows no deactivation for H2 evolution for longer than 30 h reaction time, indicating that the cocatalyst of N-graphene as a protective layer prevents CdS from photocorrosion under light irradiation (Fig. 25c). Thus, N-doped graphene could serve as a protective material for semiconductors, promoting potential application for hydrogen production by using solar energy.
 Fig. 25  (a) HRTEM image of N-graphene (2 wt%)/CdS photocatalyst; (b) H2 evolution of CdS, N-graphene/CdS composites with different contents of N-graphene (λ > 420 nm); (c) a typical time course of hydrogen yield over N-graphene/CdS, six runs in one continuous reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Xiang et al.213 have fabricated a ternary composite material consisting of TiO2 nanocrystals grown in the presence of a layered MoS2/graphene (MG) hybrid as a high-performance photocatalyst for H2 evolution by a two-step simple hydrothermal process, as shown in Fig. 26A. Even without a noble-metal cocatalyst, the TiO2/MG composite containing 0.5 wt% MG cocatalyst with 95 wt% MoS2 and 5 wt% graphene shows high photocatalytic H2 production activity with a rate as high as 165.3 μmol h−1 under UV light irradiation (Fig. 26B). The corresponding apparent quantum efficiency reaches 9.7% at 365 nm. This unusual photocatalytic activity arises from the positive synergetic effect between MoS2 and graphene components in this hybrid cocatalyst, which serve as an electron collector and a source of active adsorptive sites, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 26C. This work also presents an inexpensive noble metal free photocatalyst to achieve highly efficient H2 evolution.
 Fig. 26  (A) TEM image of T/95M0.5G composite; (B) photocatalytic H2 evolution of TiO2/MG composites under UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm); (C) schematic illustration of the charge transfer in TiO2/MG composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the particles-on-a-sheet geometry of graphene-based nanocomposites, TiO2@nanographene oxide (NGO) core–shell structure (NGOTs) has been reported by Choi's group, as shown in Fig. 27a and b.215 Compared with reduced GO/TiO2, consisting of TiO2 nanoparticles loaded on a larger graphene sheet (r-LGOT), the reduced NGOTs (r-NGOTs) exhibit higher activity for photocatalytic H2 production under UV irradiation (λ > 320 nm), which is ascribed to the better contact between the r-GO shell and TiO2 (Fig. 27c). This study indicates that the geometry of the core/shell structure could be effective in the design of a graphene/TiO2 composite for solar energy conversion applications.
 Fig. 27  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of r-NGOT-0.7; (c) illustration of the preparation procedure of r-NGOT and r-LGOT and the photocatalytic production of hydrogen in the aqueous suspension of TiO2, r-LGOT, and r-NGOT (λ > 320 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Besides graphene-based nanocomposites, graphite oxide might be able to become a next generation photocatalyst.216,222 Yeh et al.216 have reported that graphite oxide (GO) at an appropriately oxidized level can serve as a photocatalyst for stable H2 generation from water in an aqueous solution or pure water under UV or visible light irradiation. In GO (Fig. 28a), the conduction band edge, which is mainly formed by the anti-bonding π* orbital, has a higher energy level than that needed for H2 generation, thus leading to electron injection into the solution phase for H2 generation. The results in Fig. 28b and c indicate that the total evolution of H2 from the aqueous methanol solution after 6 h irradiation is ca. 17000 μmol, which far exceeds the amount of hydrogen obtained from pure water (ca. 280 μmol). This difference can be ascribed to the role of methanol as a sacrificial hole scavenger, which means that the effective interaction with the photogenerated holes in the valence band of GO can avoid electron–hole recombination. Besides, they found that a cocatalyst, such as Pt, is not essential for steady H2 production from water using GO photocatalyst. The corresponding mechanism is also proposed, as illustrated in Fig. 28d. Efficient H2 generation on GO can be attributed to the fact that GO sheets are molecule-like and highly dispersed in water and the carbon atoms on the sheets are therefore accessible to protons that can readily transform to H2 by accepting photogenerated electrons from the carbon atoms. This work demonstrates the potential of graphitic materials as a medium for water splitting under solar illumination.
 Fig. 28  (a) TEM image of GO wrinkled sheets; time course of H2 evolution from a 20 vol% aqueous methanol solution (MeOH/water) or pure water with suspended photocatalysts under (b) mercury-lamp irradiation and (c) visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (d) schematic energy-level diagram of GO relative to the levels for H2 and O2 generation from water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
5. Future perspectives
In this updated review, the current status of applications of graphene (GR)-based nanocomposites for photocatalytic processes have been summarized, including nonselective processes for degradation of pollutants, selective organic transformations for synthesis of fine chemicals and water splitting to clean hydrogen energy. It is clear that GR-based materials can serve as a new family of promising photocatalysts. The introduction of GR into various semiconductor photocatalysts as well as metal nanoparticles can improve the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors or metal nanoparticles owing to the extended light absorption range, high adsorption capacity, specific surface area and superior electron conductivity of GR.
Undoubtedly, the promising opportunities offered by GR are outstanding. However, some existing challenges merit attention in order to achieve more efficient GR-based photocatalysts. In other words, some fundamental and essential issues are still unaddressed. For instance, as discussed in previous reviews,12,16,45,46,48,223 the underlying mechanisms of GR-based materials applied in energy related systems are not fully understood and careful designs of the functional composites are required to achieve more efficient performance. In fact, in addition to these problems, there are other challenges in this regard, which have not been brought into special focus so far. To realize these challenges is of great importance for further development of GR-based nanocomposites for photocatalytic applications in a more rational manner.
Firstly, a thoughtful and necessary comparison among GR and its carbon allotropes e.g., CNT, C60 and activated carbon, which is often neglected in the literature, ought to be carried out in order to better understand the essential advantages of GR and make use of it more reasonably and efficiently.106,146 Recalling the history of carbon materials, it should be noted that the discovery of C60 and CNT gave rise to a huge research upsurge at one time224–227 and recent years have seen a quite same phenomenon caused by the emergence of GR. Before the research interest in synthesis of GR-based composite photocatalysts, a large body of research works regarding CNT-, C60- and activated carbon-based photocatalysts have also been reported in literature.146,228 In view of these facts, we wonder since the functions of carbon materials lie in their chemical inertness, high adsorption capacity and excellent charge mobilities,46 is GR different from other carbon allotropes in essence and what is the substantial advantages of GR over its forbears? Our group15,78 has carried out some preliminary studies in this intriguing aspect. Taking CNT–P25 as an example and degradation of pollutants as model reactions, we found that the key features for GR–P25, including enhancement of adsorptivity of pollutants, light absorption intensity, electron–hole pairs lifetime, extended light absorption range and decreased photocatalytic activity with high content of GR, can also be observed in the composite of CNT–P25.15 Considering the unique structural property of graphene oxide (GO), the precursor of GR, we improved the synthesis approach by using “soft” integration which leads to an intimate interfacial contact between TiO2 and GR. In order to harness the electron conductivity of GR efficiently, one should utilize the superior and easily accessible “structure-directing” role of GO. Compared with the CNT–TiO2 counterpart, GR–TiO2 exhibits a much more active visible light photocatalytic activity toward selective oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes. Our results indicate that more efficient GR–semiconductor photocatalysts can be developed through rational design and engineering of the GR surface with semiconductor ingredients. Our comparison study suggests that it is inevitable to draw a comparison amongst the carbon materials (GR, CNT, C60 and activated carbon) to get answers to the above questions and, thus, enable GR to play its part better in improving the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors. More recently, Ye et al.175 have reported that the CdS–GR nanocomposites with an optimized mass ratio exhibit higher photocatalytic activities than the CdS–CNT counterpart for both the evolution of hydrogen and the degradation of methyl orange under visible light irradiation, which is ascribed to the stronger interaction or larger contact interface between CdS and GR. However, there are still fundamental questions worthy of further study. For example, if we prepare GR–semiconductor and CNT–semiconductor nanocomposites which both feature intimate interfacial contact in a similar way, how different is their photoactivity? Currently, our group is actively carrying out studies in this regard.
Secondly and notably, one of the most common approaches reported in the literature to prepare GR-based nanocomposites is based on the dispersion of semiconductor solid particles, which refers to “hard” integration, on the surface of GR nanosheets. Such a strategy introduces GR merely for the sake of GR itself without putting it into full play with elaborate design and is unable to utilize the structural advantage of 2D GR.78 Consequently, a quite poor interfacial contact between the semiconductor and GR scaffold is often obtained. Since one of the key roles of GR in the GR-based composite photocatalysts is to transfer the photogenerated electrons, an unsatisfactory interfacial contact is not propitious for GR to play its role, and will weaken the synergetic effect of GR and photoactive semiconductor and diminish the photocatalytic performance of the GR-based photocatalysts. Given this issue, the development of more efficient synthesis methods or strategies is much more desirable to make full use of the structural and electronic merits of GR for achieving improved, superior photocatalytic performance.
Thirdly, as mentioned above, there is room to improve the interfacial contact between GR and semiconductor components in GR-semiconductor photocatalysts in order to improve the overall photocatalytic performance. However, this significant issue is not just a problem of tighter connection between each respective component in GR-based composite photocatalysts, but also about optimization of the atomic charge transfer path from the different respective components materials, which probably needs to involve band bending calculations. In addition, some interfacial mediators, possibly transition metal ions or metal nanoparticles, could help optimize the charge transfer in the interface of GR-based composite photocatalysts. In this regard, besides the experimental efforts, theoretical calculations on the interfacial band composition and regulation should be paid attention. A joint effort between experiment and theory would significantly advance our in-depth insight into the microscopic charge transfer pathway for GR-based photocatalysts, which in turn offers a guide towards the design target of smarter GR-based photocatalysts for potential applications.
Fourthly, the approaches for producing GR need to be improved with more work on the preparation of GR or graphene oxide (GO) sheets with high quality, such as high purity, few defects, controlled size, lateral area and shape. So far, one of the most commonly used methods to produce GR is the strong oxidative exfoliation of graphite in a solution phase (GO is obtained by this step) followed by chemical reduction of GO. Although this approach is effective for mass production of GR, it inevitably produces a large number of defects in the GR nanosheets due to the change in its aromatic structure and the formation of oxygen-containing groups, which could diminish the electrical conductivity and mechanical strength of GR, thereby deteriorating the photocatalytic performance of the GR-based nanocomposites. Although most of the functional groups can be removed by the reduction procedure, only partial restoration of the sp2-conjugated graphene network can be achieved. Banhart et al.229 have reported that some of the predicted extraordinary properties of GR can only be observed at an extremely low defect concentration. The defects strongly affect the electronic, optical, thermal and mechanical properties of GR; besides, each defect has a certain mobility parallel to the GR plane which weakens the ability of GR sheets in the transport of electrons. The results obtained by Hersam's group demonstrate the effects of defects on the photocatalytic performance of GR.169 They found that the nanocomposites based on the less defective solvent-exfoliated graphene (SEG) exhibit significant enhanced photocatalytic activity compared to that of solvent-reduced graphene oxide (SRGO), which is due to the superior electrical mobility of SEG. Thus far, studies on the production of high-quality GR are scarce.169 Therefore, the production of large-scale GR sheets with minimal defects or oxidation sites, particularly with controlled size and shape, is still challenging and significant for practical applications.
Fifthly, it is necessary to clarify that a single GR nanosheet is the standard form of GR and the superior properties of GR are associated with an individual sheet, such as the extremely large specific surface area and optical transparency. However, due to the strong cohesive van der Waals energy of the π-stacked layers in graphite and the high surface area of GR, the GR or GO tends to undergo irreversible agglomeration, being present in the multi-layer form. Notably, when the layer number is fewer than 10, GR properties vary as a function of layer number and interlayer ordering.4 For example, single-layer GR is a zero-gap semiconductor with a linear energy dispersion so that its charge carriers can be viewed as massless particles that travel at an effective speed of ∼106 m s−1. Bilayer GR is likewise a zero-gap semiconductor whose electrons obey a parabolic energy dispersion. A tunable bandgap of several hundred meV can be induced in bilayer GR by breaking the symmetry between the two GR layers by carefully applying a gate bias.230 As for trilayer GR, it is a semi-metal with a band overlap that can be controlled by an external electric field.231 Despite the recent burst of activity on the production of GR, comparatively little progress has been made toward the generation of GR with tailored thickness, lateral area, size and shape.4 Therefore, in order to further improve and exploit the performance of GR and GR-based composite photocatalysts, the precise definition and synthesis of free-standing GR must be taken into account and paid sufficient attention. Notably, the stacking of GR has been observed widely for research works regarding GR-based photocatalysts in literature so far.15,78,79,104–177,194–220 Thus, it is a challenging but significant task for the synthesis of GR-based photocatalysts in which the present form of GR remains as a single GR nanosheet. If this technical challenge can be overcome, perhaps, the full superlative potential of GR as always claimed in literature could be released to the maximum.
Finally, the reported GR-based nanocomposite photocatalysts are mostly focused on binary components. In other words, GR is only coupled with another single compound. Considering that the main force behind the rapid development of the GR-based nanocomposites is the aspiration to combine the favorable properties of GR with other constituent nanomaterials,12 therefore, beyond binary hybrid systems, the multi-component GR-based hybrid nanostructures may provide new insight into the development of novel 3D nanoarchitectures with versatile and extraordinary properties and applications. For instance, Kamat and coworkers232 have observed a remarkably high photocurrent generation in a organic/inorganic ternary composites of porphyrin, ZnO nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide as a hierarchical electron transfer cascade system. This pioneering research work suggests that more efforts should be devoted to preparing the multi-component GR-based nanocomposites for better performance and wider applications instead of getting stuck in binary composites.
Undoubtedly, GR-based nanocomposites hold a great potential for being robust materials to address various environmental and energy-related issues. In spite of the remarkably rapid progress, the ability of GR nanosheets in this field has yet to be exploited fully. The research field of GR-based photocatalysts is still very young. Opportunities as well as challenges exist together for the development of GR-based multifunctional photocatalytic systems. With the reasonable design and full exploration of graphene's potential, the applications of GR-based composite photocatalysts for conversion of solar to chemical energy would significantly be enriched in a more rational way. The intense and rational efforts from the union between academia and industry would open a revolution of clean and renewable energy by utilizing GR-based composite materials, which we believe will be far beyond what has been reported in this review paper.
Acknowledgements
The support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (20903023, 21173045), the Award Program for Minjiang Scholar Professorship, the Natural Science Foundation (NSF) of Fujian Province for Distinguished Young Investigator Grant (2012J06003), Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in Universities (PCSIRT0818), Program for Returned High-Level Overseas Chinese Scholars of Fujian province, and the Project Sponsored by the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry, is gratefully acknowledged.
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Schniepp, J.-L. Li, M. J. McAllister, H. Sai, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. H. Adamson, R. K. Prud'homme, R. Car, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8535–8539 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 544–549 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Juang, C.-Y. Wu, A.-Y. Lu, C.-Y. Su, K.-C. Leou, F.-R. Chen and C.-H. Tsai, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Brodie, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1860, 59, 466–472 Search PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9336–9344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bunch, A. M. van der Zande, S. S. Verbridge, I. W. Frank, D. M. Tanenbaum, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2007, 315, 490–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
N. Park, S. Hong, G. Kim and S.-H. Jhi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8999–9003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, K.-S. Lee, G. Bozoklu, W. Cai, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S.-E. Wu, S.-F. Chen, C.-P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Stampfer, E. Schurtenberger, F. Molitor, J. Güttinger, T. Ihn and K. Ensslin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2378–2383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Lee, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and A. Dodabalapur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 023304–023306 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2710–2714 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, K. R. Ratinac, S. P. Ringer, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding and F. Braet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2114–2138 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Craciun, S. Russo, M. Yamamoto and S. Tarucha, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 42–60 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
J.-U. Park, S. Nam, M.-S. Lee and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 120–125 CrossRef .
N. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. E. Halpert, J. Zhai, D. Wang and L. Jiang, Small, 2012, 8, 1762–1770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780–5782 RSC .
F. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Huang, X. Zou, G. Lu, P. Sun, S. Wu, W. Ai, M. Yi, X. Qi, L. Xie, J. Wang, H. Zhang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3027–3033 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5420–5426 CAS .
X. Xia, Q. Hao, W. Lei, W. Wang, H. Wang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8314–8320 RSC .
F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G.-W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chu and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2992–3006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, S. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
S. Deng, V. Tjoa, H. M. Fan, H. R. Tan, D. C. Sayle, M. Olivo, S. Mhaisalkar, J. Wei and C. H. Sow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4905–4917 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Radich and P. V. Kamat, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 807–816 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, R. H. Davies and D. Worsley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 417–425 RSC .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 1265–1270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, M. E. Osugi, W. Chanmanee, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, M. V. B. Zanoni, P. Kajitvichyanukul and R. Krishnan-Ayer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 171–192 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1983, 16, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2003, 7, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 157–170 CrossRef CAS .
L. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, M. Bellardita, A. Di Paola, E. García López, V. Loddo, G. Marcì, G. Palmisano and S. Yurdakal, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1431–1438 CrossRef CAS .
G. Palmisano, E. Garcia-Lopez, G. Marci, V. Loddo, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7074–7089 RSC .
G. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, M. Pagliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3425–3437 RSC .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501–23511 CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8152–8158 RSC .
N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9136–9145 CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22901–22909 CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 41, 1097–1111 Search PubMed .
N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5042 RSC .
Z.-R. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1772–1777 RSC .
Z.-R. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1512–1520 CAS .
Z. Spitalsky, M. Danko and J. Mosnacek, Curr. Org. Chem., 2011, 15, 1133–1150 CAS .
J. K. Wassei, M. Mecklenburg, J. A. Torres, J. D. Fowler, B. C. Regan, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, Small, 2012, 8, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, J. Wei, K. Wang and D. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1461–1470 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
Y. H. Hu, H. Wang and B. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 782–796 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
P. L. Chiu, D. D. T. Mastrogiovanni, D. Wei, C. Louis, M. Jeong, G. Yu, P. Saad, C. R. Flach, R. Mendelsohn, E. Garfunkel and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5850–5856 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
Editorial, Nature,  2011, 473, p. 419 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 445–452 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-R. Tang, F. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7880–7886 CAS .
Y. Zhuang, H.-Y. Song, G. Li and Y.-J. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2491–2493 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Xu, Y. Zhuang and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2669–2676 CAS .
A. Mills and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. Tsuzuki, B. Tang, X. Hou, L. Sun and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3084–3090 CAS .
F. Wang and K. Zhang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 346–352 CrossRef .
Z. Peining, A. S. Nair, P. Shengjie, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 581–585 CAS .
Y.-L. Min, K. Zhang, Y.-C. Chen and Y.-G. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 86, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, H.-I. Kim, W. Choi and S.-J. Hwang, Small, 2012, 8, 1038–1048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, P. Xiong, H. Chen, X. Sun and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 725–731 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, H. Chen, X. Sun and X. Wang, AIChE J., 2011 DOI:10.1002/aic.13716 .
P. Chen, T.-Y. Xiao, H.-H. Li, J.-J. Yang, Z. Wang, H.-B. Yao and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, X. Jiang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 353–359 RSC .
F. Zhou, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 340, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and C. Pan, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 46, 2622–2626 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. He, X. Chem, D. Hu, L. Li, T. Yin and L. Ji, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
H. Zhang, P. Xu, G. Du, Z. Chen, K. Oh, D. Pan and Z. Jiao, Nano Res., 2010, 4, 274–283 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. Fan, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Yoo, T. V. Cuong, V. H. Pham, J. S. Chung, N. T. Khoa, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hahn, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 805–808 CrossRef .
H. Ying, Z.-Y. Wang, Z.-D. Guo, Z.-J. Shi and S.-F. Yang, Acta Phys. Sin., 2011, 27, 1482–1486 CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Ren, C. Zhang, S. Huang and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2779–2785 CAS .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiong, L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2428–2434 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Mao, X.-P. Huang, Y.-P. Huang, S.-Q. Feng, J. Yi, C.-Y. Zhang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 29, 267–272 CAS .
F. Wang and K. Zhang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 345, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Cao and L. Lu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 550–562 CrossRef CAS .
V. Štengl, D. Popelková and P. Vláčil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25209–25218 Search PubMed .
T.-D. Nguyen-Phan, V. H. Pham, E. W. Shin, H.-D. Pham, S. Kim, J. S. Chung, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hur, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lv, L. Pan, X. Liu, T. Lu, G. Zhu and Z. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 10086–10091 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Pan, T. Lv, G. Zhu, Z. Sun and C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11984–11986 RSC .
X. Liu, L. Pan, T. Lv, G. Zhu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and C. Sun, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1245–1249 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Liu and W. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13216–13221 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang and D. D. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, X. Zhang, M. Sun, X. Cui and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1800–1804 RSC .
C. Liu, Y. Teng, R. Liu, S. Luo, Y. Tang, L. Chen and Q. Cai, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5312–5320 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, X. Shen, X. Zhong, Y. Liu, G. Zhu, X. Xu and K. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2337–2346 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3346–3349 RSC .
R. Leary and A. Westwood, Carbon, 2011, 49, 741–772 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, R. Mohan and S.-J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 244101 CrossRef .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jiang, Z. Lin, C. Chen, L. Zhu, Q. Chang, N. Wang, W. Wei and H. Tang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2693–2701 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, C. Tian, W. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Xie, Q. Pan, Z. Ren, Y. Dong, D. Fu, J. Han and H. Fu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8379–8387 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, C. Tian, Q. Pan, Z. Jiang, J.-Q. Wang, W. Yan and H. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23718–23725 CAS .
L. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 613–620 RSC .
H. Hu, X. Wang, F. Liu, J. Wang and C. Xu, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Yu, Q. Liu, J. Li, C. Feng and D. Zhang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 1082–1090 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gopalakrishnan, H. M. Joshi, P. Kumar, L. S. Panchakarla and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 511, 304–308 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gao, W. Wang, M. Shang and J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2887–2893 RSC .
R. Zou, Z. Zhang, L. Yu, Q. Tian, Z. Chen and J. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13912–13917 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 7210–7218 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7030–7036 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Tian, Y. Yang, H. Wang, W. Zheng and Y. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 524, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiong, L. L. Zhang, J. Ma and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6099–6101 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 179–183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kamegawa, D. Yamahana and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15049–15053 CAS .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-P. Luo, X.-Y. Yu, B.-X. Lei, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8111–8117 CAS .
S. D. Perera, R. G. Mariano, K. Vu, N. Nijem, O. Seitz, Y. J. Chabal and J. K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20214–20220 CAS .
O. Akhavan, M. Choobtashani and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9653–9659 CAS .
X. Qi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11765–11771 RSC .
X. An, J. C. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, X. Yu and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8525–8531 RSC .
B. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Wen, L. Du, W. Zeng, Y. Shi, F. Zhang, G. Zhu, X. Xu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7484–7491 RSC .
A. Ye, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 969–978 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 339–344 CAS .
Y. Wen, H. Ding and Y. Shan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4411–4417 RSC .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and R. Amadelli, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3811–3836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2812–2822 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9167–9175 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012 DOI:10.1021/jp303503c .
M. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9730–9733 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, H. Ji, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3934–3937 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, O. Lyandres, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1760–1765 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wang, C. Chen, L. Zang, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6081–6084 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2227–2238 RSC .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, Fd. Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35–54 CAS .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Cui and Z. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 811–815 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jang, Y. Myung, H. S. Im, Y. S. Seo, Y. J. Cho, C. W. Lee, J. Park, A.-Y. Jee and M. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 696–698 RSC .
P. Zeng, Q. Zhang, T. Peng and X. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21496–21502 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
J. Shen, B. Yan, M. Shi, H. Ma, N. Li and M. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3415–3421 RSC .
J. Shen, M. Shi, B. Yan, H. Ma, N. Li and M. Ye, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 795–806 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mou, Y. Dong, S. Li, Y. Du, X. Wang, P. Yang and S. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 8885–8893 CrossRef CAS .
S.-X. Min and G.-X. Lv, Acta Phys. Sin., 2011, 27, 2178–2184 CAS .
S. Min and G. Lv, J. Mol. Catal., 2011, 25, 166–179 CAS .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13938–13945 CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li, X.-L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801–2806 RSC .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li and X.-L. Cui, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 25, 1903–1907 CAS .
A. Mukherji, B. Seger, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3483–3492 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fan, Q. Lai, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10694–10701 CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, S.-H. Kang and W. Choi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9425–9431 RSC .
H.-I. Kim, G.-H. Moon, D. Monllor-Satoca, Y. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1535–1543 CAS .
T.-F. Yeh, J.-M. Syu, C. Cheng, T.-H. Chang and H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, J. F. Rick, J.-F. Lee, W.-N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 13849–13854 RSC .
J. Hou, Z. Wang, W. Kan, S. Jiao, H. Zhu and R. V. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7291–7299 RSC .
P. Gao, J. Liu, S. Lee, T. Zhang and D. D. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2292–2298 RSC .
X.-J. Lv, W.-F. Fu, H.-X. Chang, H. Zhang, J.-S. Cheng, G.-J. Zhang, Y. Song, C.-Y. Hu and J.-H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 RSC .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, N. J. Bell, A. Kudo and R. Amal, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yeh, F.-F. Chan, C.-T. Hsieh and H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22587–22597 CAS .
B. Luo, S. Liu and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1097–1109 RSC .
P. Innocenzi and G. Brusatin, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3126–3139 CrossRef CAS .
D. Eder, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1348–1385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Chen, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1076–1098 RSC .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski and A. V. Krasheninnikov, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 26–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Craciun, S. Russo, M. Yamamoto, J. B. Oostinga, A. F. Morpurgo and S. Tarucha, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 383–388 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hayashi, I. V. Lightcap, M. Tsujimoto, M. Takano, T. Umeyama, P. V. Kamat and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7684–7687 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Nan Zhang	Nan Zhang was born in Hebei, P. R. China, in 1987. She received her bachelor degree in chemical engineering & technology from East China Institute of Technology (2009), P. R. China. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Xu at the National Research Center for Environmental Photocatalysis Engineering and Technology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis-State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell and carbon-based nanocomposites for potential target applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Yanhui Zhang	Yanhui Zhang was born in Fujian, P. R. China in 1986. He received his bachelor degree in applied chemistry from Zhangzhou Normal University (2009), P. R. China. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Xu at National Research Center for Environmental Photocatalysis Engineering and Technology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis-State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. His main research interests include the synthesis of nanostructured materials, especially graphene-based composites nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Yi-Jun Xu	Prof. Yi-Jun Xu received his PhD degree in heterogeneous catalysis at the School of Chemistry, Cardiff University, U.K. in 2006 with Prof. Graham J. Hutchings (FLSW FRS). From 2007 to 2009, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, Berlin, Germany. After that, he joined the faculty as a Minjiang Scholar Professor at Fuzhou University. His current research interests are mainly focused on synthesizing nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based nanocomposites and core–shell nanostructured materials, and exploring their applications in the area of heterogeneous photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of selective catalysis at different sites on RGO as a 2-D conducting support, and (B) photographs showing the color changes observed during stepwise transfer of electrons: ① storing electrons in TiO2 by irradiating the deaerated ethanol suspension with UV light (λ > 300 nm) for 30 min; ② addition of deaerated ethanol suspension of GO until no blue color remains (gray-colored solution results due to the formation of RGO); ③ reduction of Ag+ to Ag nanoparticles (red color) by stored electrons in RGO following the addition of deaerated AgNO3 solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectra of P25–GR; (B) schematic structure of P25–GR and tentative processes of the photodegradation of MB over P25–GR; comparison of photocatalytic activity in the degradation of MB under (C) UV light (λ = 365 nm) and (D) visible light (λ > 400 nm) over (1) P25, (2) P25–CNTs, and (3) P25–GR photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocatalytic performance the P25–GR nanocomposites for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation of (a) benzene, (b) mineralization ratio and liquid-phase photocatalytic degradation of MB under the irradiation of (c) UV light (λ = 365 nm), (d) visible light (λ > 400 nm); (e) the proposed schematic illustration showing the reaction mechanism for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants over the P25–GR in which pink spheres and black sheet represent TiO2 nanoparticles and GR, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Illustration for the preparation of a macro–mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite film; (B) typical SEM and (C) TEM micrographs of a macro–mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite film assembled from 300-nm diameter polystyrene spheres; (D) photocatalytic degradation of MB under UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm) using (a) Ti–Me, (b) GR–Ti–Me, (c) Ti–Ma200–Me, (d) GR–Ti–Ma200–Me, (e) Ti–Ma170–Me, and (f) GR–Ti–Ma170–Me films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A and B) representative TEM images of TGC3 with 12 hours solvothermal time (the inset of B shows the SAED pattern); variation of normalized C/C0 for phenol with time under (C) visible light irradiation (λ > 410 nm) and (D) UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm; C0: the initial phenol concentration after adsorption equilibrium). Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic flowchart of the formation of TiO2–graphene nanosheets (T–GS); (B) schematic of tetrabutyl titanate grafted on the GO surface by chemisorption; (C and D) typical TEM images of T–GS–6h; (E) liquid-phase photocatalytic degradation of RhB under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 400 nm) and (F) photocatalytic degradation reaction kinetics of RhB over P25, T–GS–6h and pure TiO2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the growth process of metal oxides nanorods on both sides of graphene sheets by the NSD hydrothermal route; (b–f) SEM images of sandwich MO/G/MO heterostructures obtained by the NSD hydrothermal route: (b) TiO2/G/TiO2, (c) ZnO/G/ZnO, (d) MnO2/G/MnO2, (e) CuO/G/CuO, (f) ZrO2/G/ZrO2; (g) photocatalytic degradation of MB under UV/Vis irradiation with a 500 W Xe lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 8  Typical SEM images of the synthesized (A) Ag/AgBr/GO, (B) Ag/AgCl/GO nanospecies via a water/oil system and (C and D) the photocatalytic activities for photodegradation of MO under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (E) schematic explanation for the one-pot surfactant-assisted synthesis of Ag/AgBr-based nanostructures via an oil/water (top panel) and a water/oil (bottom panel) microemulsion system; (F) photocatalytic activities of Ag/AgBr-based plasmonic photocatalysts for the photodegradation of MO under sunlight irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114 and 115. Copyright 2011, 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of synthesis steps for graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs and corresponding SEM images of (B) bare amorphous TiO2 NPs, (C) GO-wrapped amorphous TiO2 NPs, and (D) graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs (scale bar: 200 nm); (E) photodegradation of MB under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) by (a) P25, (b) bare anatase TiO2 NPs, (c) graphene–TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal), and (d) graphene–TiO2 NPs; (F) the suggested mechanism for the photocatalytic degradation of MB by graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  FESEM images of (a) GOCNT-30-17, (b) GOCNT-15-17, (c) GOCNT-30-9, (d) GOCNT-15-9, (e) RGOCNT-15-4, and (f) RGOCNT-15-0.6 (the samples were denoted as GO/RGOCNT-X-Y where X and Y refer to CVD time and the mass ratio of Ni/C); (g) experimental steps of pillaring GO and RGO platelets with CNTs; (h) photocatalytic degradation for RhB under different experimental conditions with catalysts GOCNT-15-4 and P25; (i) photocatalytic properties of different samples in degrading RhB (λ > 420 nm); (j) energy diagram showing the proposed mechanism of photosensitized degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) TEM image of the reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–Au (the insets are an HRTEM image and particle size distribution of the Au particles); (B) degradation of RhB over (a) RGO–Au in the dark, (b) without catalyst, (c) RGO, (d) P25, (e) P25–Au and (f) RGO–Au under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm); (C) the proposed mechanism of photosensitized degradation of dyes over RGO–Au under visible light irradiation; (D) degradation of RhB over RGOCu–NO3 in the dark (□), without catalyst (▶), RGO (●), P25 (▲), RGOCu–Cl (○), and RGOCu–NO3 (♦) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) (the insets are TEM and HRTEM images of RGOCu–NO3); (E) the possible mechanism of photosensitized degradation of dyes over RGOCu composite under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Typical TEM images of (a) ZnFe2O4–G, (c) MnFe2O4–G (the inset is the particle size distribution for MnFe2O4), (e) NiFe2O4–G and (b, d and f) the corresponding photocatalytic activities for degradation of MB under visible light irradiation with different catalysts (λ > 420 nm) (the inset is the magnetic separation property of the nanocomposite). Reprinted with permission from ref. 111 and 158 (Copyright 2012, 2011, American Chemical Society) and from ref. 112 (Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc).	 


TiPC0000	0	3.20	0.02686	4	7	2	0.00959	7	8	2
TiPC0005	0.005	3.10	0.01350	10	18	4	0.00911	4	6	2
TiPC0010	0.01	3.05	0.03689	4	4	1	0.01317	5	7	1
TiPC0050	0.05	2.90	0.01357	4	15	4	0.00770	6	10	3
TiPC0100	0.1	2.70	0.01991	58	28	27	0.00530	36	15	3
TiPC0200	0.2	2.40	0.01245	6	20	3	0.00360	8	9	2
TiPC0500	0.5	>2	0.01004	11	34	3	0.00527	5	5	2

 	Fig. 13  (A) AFM image of graphene oxide/TiO2 thin films exposed to UV visible light irradiation for 4 h in the photocatalytic reduction process; (B) number of bacteria cultured from the viable E. coli on the surface of the graphene oxide/TiO2 thin films reduced by UV visible light-assisted photocatalytic process for (a) 0, (b) 0.5, (c) 1, (d) 2, and (e) 4 h irradiation time, (f) bare TiO2 thin film, (g) graphene oxide/glass film under solar light irradiation and (h) graphene oxide applied as in part g but in the dark, as a control sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Time-online profile of yield of benzyl aldehyde from selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol over TiO2–5% GR and TiO2–5% CNT nanocomposites under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (b) SEM, (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of TiO2–5% GR; (e) TEM image of TiO2–5% CNT; (f) photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

1	

	

	62	62	100
2	

	

	70	70	100
3	

	

	80	80	100
4	

	

	74	73	99
5	

	

	45	43	96
6	

	

	84	76	91
7	

	

	50	46	92
8	

	

	41	37	90

 	Fig. 15  (A) Raman spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and solvent-exfoliated graphene (SEG); photographs of (B) GO and (C) SEG dispersions in water; (D) SEM image of TiO2–5% SEG nanocomposite; (E) photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation; photocatalytic selective oxidation of (F) benzyl alcohol and (G) 3-methyl-2-buten-1-ol to corresponding aldehydes over the nanocomposites of TiO2–5% SEG, TiO2–5% GR, P25–1% SEG and P25–1% GR under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) of 4 h at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) SEM, (B) TEM, and (C) HRTEM images of the as-prepared CdS–5% GR (the inset of C is the SAED pattern); (D) schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism for selective oxidation of alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes over the CdS–GR nanocomposite under visible light irradiation; time-online photocatalytic selective oxidation of (E) benzyl alcohol and (F) cinnamyl alcohol to aldehydes over blank-CdS and CdS–5% GR nanocomposite under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 420 nm) under ambient conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) SEM and (B) TEM images of the as-prepared CdS–5% GR–10% TiO2 nanocomposite (the panels below are the elemental mapping patterns of the boxed area of A); (C) time-online photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde over CdS–5% GR and CdS–5% GR–10% TiO2 nanocomposites under the irradiation of visible light (λ > 420 nm) at ambient conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Photocatalytic activity of SEG–P25 and SRGO–P25 nanocomposites for CO2 photoreduction under UV (λ = 365 nm) and visible light illumination (λ > 400 nm); (B) the proposed photocatalytic mechanism for graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites. The color scheme is: carbon (gray), hydrogen (white), oxygen (red), and titanium (blue), hole (green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  The SEM images of (A) 1 wt% SWCNT–TiNS and (B) 1 wt% SEG–TiNS nanocomposites (the inset is the corresponding schematic); (C) photocatalytic activity of SWCNT–TiNS and SEG–TiNS for CO2 reduction to CH4 under UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) SEM image of BiVO4–RGO; (B) visible light voltage–photocurrent functions of BiVO4, BiVO4–RGO, and TiO2 (under UV irradiation); (C) illustration of photocatalytic water splitting in a photoelectrochemical cell based on BiVO4–RGO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) SEM image of (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4); (B) illustration of water splitting mechanism in a Z-scheme photocatalysis (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4) system under visible light irradiation; (C) overall water splitting under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) by the (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh)–(PRGO/BiVO4) system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of graphene–Sr2Ta2O7−xNx; (b) schematic diagram for charge carrier separation and photocatalytic H2 production on Pt-loaded graphene–Sr2Ta2O7−xNx photocatalyst under simulated solar light irradiation; (c) hydrogen evolution rates in the course of 4.5 h using a 300 W Xe lamp and (d) hydrogen evolution rate (per hour) of various photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) TEM image of P25–RGO-hydrothermal (P25/RGO = 1/0.2); (b) comparison of photocatalytic performances of P25, P25–CNT composites with different mass ratios of P25/CNT, and P25–RGO composites (mass ratio of P25/RGO = 1/0.2) prepared by different methods for the evolution of H2 from methanol aqueous solution using a 200 W Xe arc lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of sample CdS–1% GR (denoted as GC1.0); (b) comparison of the visible light photocatalytic activity of samples GC0, GC0.5, GC1.0, GC2.5, GC5.0, GC40, and G for H2 production using 10 vol% lactic acid aqueous solution as a sacrificial reagent and 0.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst (λ > 420 nm); (c) schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the graphene–CdS system under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) HRTEM image of N-graphene (2 wt%)/CdS photocatalyst; (b) H2 evolution of CdS, N-graphene/CdS composites with different contents of N-graphene (λ > 420 nm); (c) a typical time course of hydrogen yield over N-graphene/CdS, six runs in one continuous reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) TEM image of T/95M0.5G composite; (B) photocatalytic H2 evolution of TiO2/MG composites under UV light irradiation (λ = 365 nm); (C) schematic illustration of the charge transfer in TiO2/MG composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of r-NGOT-0.7; (c) illustration of the preparation procedure of r-NGOT and r-LGOT and the photocatalytic production of hydrogen in the aqueous suspension of TiO2, r-LGOT, and r-NGOT (λ > 320 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) TEM image of GO wrinkled sheets; time course of H2 evolution from a 20 vol% aqueous methanol solution (MeOH/water) or pure water with suspended photocatalysts under (b) mercury-lamp irradiation and (c) visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm); (d) schematic energy-level diagram of GO relative to the levels for H2 and O2 generation from water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
