Ultralong cycle life and outstanding capacitive performance of a 10.8 V metal free micro-supercapacitor with highly conducting and robust laser-irradi ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE01458F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE01458F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2507-2517Ultralong cycle life and outstanding capacitive performance of a 10.8 V metal free micro-supercapacitor with highly conducting and robust laser-irradiated graphene for an integrated storage device†

        
          
            Navpreet 
            Kamboj
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Taniya 
            Purkait
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Manisha 
            Das
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Subhajit 
            Sarkar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kiran Shankar 
            Hazra
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ramendra Sundar 
            Dey
          
        
      *
      Institute of Nano Science and Technology (INST), Mohali-160064, Punjab, India. E-mail: rsdey@inst.ac.in
Received 
      6th May 2019
    , Accepted 7th June 2019First published on 7th June 2019AbstractInterconnected porous graphene plays a crucial role as supercapacitive material as well as a current collector in developing metal free microsupercapacitor (MSC) because of its unique structure and superior conductivity. Electrochemical reduction followed by use of a laser irradiation method shows advances for the fabrication of the conductive graphene-based robust device. Use of Raman spectra proves that the laser irradiation method is capable of healing the defects with fused interconnected sheets, as a result, high conductivity and improved crystallinity of the laser irradiated graphene (LIG) sample is achieved. The LIG film on a flexible substrate was patterned with the aim to develop an on-chip flexible MSC, which offers a large working voltage of 1.2 V in an aqueous solid electrolyte. Interestingly, the MSC, without any metal current collector, shows a unique electrical-double layer behavior and unprecedented cycling stability. It is worth noting that the retention of the initial capacitance after 100000 continuous cycles was 100%. A large cell voltage of 10.8 V was realized by modularizing the array of devices without much degradation of the rectangular shapes of the voltammogram even at higher scan rates (100 V s−1). The array of LIG-MSC was integrated with a commercial solar cell module for hybrid energy harvesting and as a storage device. This study provides an effective strategy to build a metal free supercapacitor with exceptional cycle life and facilitates progress towards self-sustainable energy in the future.

Broader context
Small-scale, self-powered hybrid energy resources have become basic needs for various widespread applications such as implantable devices and portable electronics. A micro supercapacitor (MSC) with high energy density and long-term stability is featured in this paper, and has great potential to replace bulky electrolytic capacitors and battery in circuits to make miniaturized electronics. Extensive development in supercapacitor technology aims to focus on the electrochemical performance of electrode materials and their superiority as current collectors. Graphene is an important candidate for use as an electrode material in supercapacitors because of its intrinsic physical properties, such as: flexibility, high electrical conductivity and porous structure. This paper provides a novel strategy for the fabrication of highly conducting graphene film using electrochemical reduction followed by use of a laser irradiation method. An on-chip metal free MSC using graphene as the current collector as well as the electrode material shows advantages of a large working voltage, high energy-density and ultralong cycling stability. The working voltage can be potentially increased to 10.8 V by connecting a number of devices in series to make an integrated modular structure. This finding enables the development of highly durable and high-voltage flexible MSCs, which may be integrated with solar cells to make a self-charging hybrid device for next-generation energy storage systems.

Introduction
Because of the continuous production of new technologies and the internet of things, flexible, low cost and high performance integrated energy storage systems are in considerable demand.1,2 An energy storage device with a high cell voltage, high energy density and ultralong cycle life is the fundamental requirement for today's technology and has potential for use in state-of-the-art consumer electronics,3 microrobots,4 integrated sensors5 and hybrid devices. A large working voltage in aqueous media is an age old problem, because the potential for electrochemical stability of water is 1.23 V.6 Therefore, to meet the actual demand of a high voltage, a number of supercapacitor cells have to be connected in series/in parallel. Traditional microscale supercapacitors and batteries with a nonplanar or stacked geometry do not satisfy the rigorous conditions required for high-voltage flexible electronic devices.7 A planar microsupercapacitor (MSC) is a type of miniaturized electrochemical storage device, which can be easily embedded in microelectronics systems offering a larger power density (by several fold) than conventional batteries or supercapacitors with their short ion-diffusion length.8 However, because of the moderate lifetime of MSCs, they suffer from costly maintenance and periodic replacement, which often damages the embedded electronics. The major drawback of using metal as a current collector in an aqueous electrolyte is corrosion9 which leads to the reduction in their cycle life and also increases the total weight of the supercapacitor. A metal current collector may include the interfacial resistance between the metal and the active material, which could impede the charge storage properties of the supercapacitor. Dissolution, phase change and the side reactions of the active material also induce a negative effect on the cycling performances of the device.10 To overcome these issues, considerable efforts have been made to develop a metal free current collector as well as active material.11–13 Therefore, the development of highly conductive carbonaceous materials that will work under a large voltage window in aqueous electrolyte and perform for a long time remains a challenge to researchers in this field.
Carbonaceous materials such as carbon nanotubes,14 carbon nanofibers,15 graphitic carbon nitride,16 onion-like carbon,17 carbide-derived carbon,18 graphene19 and reduced graphene oxide (rGO)20 have been investigated for the fabrication of MSCs because of their extraordinary properties such as: high effective surface area, electrical conductivity and mechanical robustness. From the material perspective, graphene stands out as a very promising candidate for use in supercapacitors because of its many pleasing properties such as: good thermal and chemical stability, a wide potential window, porous structure and excellent mechanical flexibility.21 The supercapacitive performance of graphene primarily depends on the quality of the graphene, which is directly related to its porosity, conductivity, number of layers and presence of defects. It is established that mass production of graphene by micromechanical exfoliation or chemical vapour deposition methods is not possible because of low yield, and a high cost, however, it exhibits ideal properties such as negligible defect density and single layer structure and is thus not suitable for energy storage applications.22 It is therefore highly desirable to look for an inexpensive process that does not involve any reducing agents and high-end equipment to produce a high quality graphene-based film with fewer defects and superior conductivity.
Electrochemical reduction and simultaneous deposition of rGO networks on a metal substrate has drawn considerable interest because of its versatile applications in large area devices.23,24 Despite its several advantages, electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ErGO) has some shortcomings as an active material as well. Firstly, it does not have sufficient conductivity and not all the pores are open to the electrolyte when it is used as a supercapacitor because of a significant decrease in the active surface area, caused by the re-stacking of the ErGO sheets and ion transportation through the channels is limited. Furthermore, as the metal current collectors (copper (Cu), gold, or nickel) are used for the deposition of ErGO, the interfacial resistance between the metal and ErGO is sometimes considerably high. Nowadays, laser scribed graphene derived from polyimide (PI) sheets shows potential for the development of flexible MSCs,25–27 however, it fails to achieve a large potential window in aqueous electrolyte and high conductivity. As a result, the cycling performance of the devices are not superior for practical applications. Therefore, laser irradiation (LI) reduction of rGO or ErGO using computer controlled laser writing methods for the preparation and patterning of the electrode have gained substantial attention because it simplifies the development of an on-chip MSC.7,28,29 The combination of electro-reduction and LI reduction to achieve the complete graphitization of the network may revolutionize the field of storage technology even though there are still challenges to overcome.
In this paper, a new strategy is presented, in which highly conductive graphene networks are synthesized that can act as a current collector, by replacing metals with combinations of electrochemical and LI methods for the development of metal free flexible MSCs. The LIG-based MSC is efficient in displaying unique capacitive behavior and extraordinary life cycle. Furthermore, a laser irradiated graphene (LIG) supercapacitor was extended in series and in parallel to make a high voltage module. In particular, a hybrid structure of a solar cell and a supercapacitor was fabricated to power the supercapacitor module for the demonstration of self-powered small electronics.
Experimental section
Simultaneous electrochemical reduction and deposition of a graphene oxide network
The overall synthesis procedure is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. First a graphene oxide (GO) suspension was prepared from natural graphite powders, using a modified Hummers’ method as reported elsewhere.30,31 The rGO network was electrochemically grown on galvanostatically deposited copper foam (Cuf) (see details in the ESI†) using the electrolysis of GO suspension in perchloric acid at an applied potential of −1.0 V for 60 s to 120 s to obtain the desired thickness (Fig. S1, ESI†). The as-prepared ErGO thin film deposited on the Cuf/Cu was kept in ammonium persulfate solution (with the rGO side facing up) for the etching of Cu from the ErGO film. The freestanding ErGO thin film was washed three to four times with deionized water and finally transferred by scooping it up on to a poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) sheet (Fig. 1). The ErGO/PET was kept at ambient conditions overnight (∼12 h) to dry film in preparation for further use.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the electrochemical synthesis followed by laser-irradiated reduction used for the preparation of LIG-MSC. 
Laser irradiation method for the synthesis of LIG
The LI method was used to further reduce the partially reduced or unreduced functional group present in the ErGO film. Laser irradiation of ErGO/PET was conducted with a 10.6 μm carbon dioxide (CO2) laser engraver system at various laser pulse powers (48–60 W) at room temperature. The LI exposure was made using a circled laser spot with speed of 1.6 m s−1, a focal point of two inches and a frequency of 1000 Hz in one pass. The actual mechanism of the LI process has for a long time not been well known. However, it is reported that the LI process is responsible for making a huge change in the local temperature (>2500 °C), which could easily break the bonds (C–O and CO) present in the ErGO surface.6,32–34 Then, either the released small atoms/molecules recombined to form gases or the edge group undergoes a rearrangement process to form the graphitic structures.28 The latter path is actually responsible for the fusion/interconnection of two graphene sheets, which may revolutionize the structural and electrical properties of the film. The LI process involves a two-step reduction pathway. First, the photochemical removal of oxygen was realized on the surface followed by the thermal restoration of the π-cloud in the graphene networks.35 The depth of penetration mainly depends on the wavelength of the laser radiation, the laser power output and the duration of exposure, which was optimised in the present study. Therefore, the LI process results in the restoration of the sp2 carbons and makes the film more compact and flattened because of the removal of the oxygen functionalities present in the surface. Furthermore, the thickness of the film was reduced to 7 μm in LIG from 25 μm in ErGO (Fig. S1, ESI†); in addition, it retains the mechanism of the LI process discussed previously. The laser irradiated GO (LIGO) was prepared using a similar method with drop casting of the GO sample on a flexible substrate for comparison.
Fabrication of a flexible interdigitated microsupercapacitor (IMSC)
The LIG film was patterned with interdigitated structures of five positive and five negative microelectrodes having actual width, length and inter-finger distances of about 670 μm, 5000 μm and 200 μm, respectively. Patterning was carried out using a 1.06 μm near-infrared laser source with a power of 30 W, speed 0.5 m s−1 and 20000 Hz frequency in one pass. The laser-engraving process took about 30 s to pattern a single device. To fabricate the solid-state IMSC, a clear solution of poly(vinyl alcohol)/phosphoric acid (PVA/H3PO4) gel electrolyte was prepared by successively adding H3PO4 (0.6 mL) and PVA (1 g) into 9.4 mL deionized water and heating to 85 °C under continuous stirring for 2 h. The transparent PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte was drop casted on the active interdigitated electrode areas and then dried for 24 h under ambient conditions. Different patterned electrodes were obtained using a laser engraving system and the corresponding LIG-module was fabricated using a similar procedure to that described for interdigitated electrode.
Results and discussion
Physicochemical characterization of electrode materials
Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) and transmission electron microscopic (TEM) investigations were carried out to investigate the structure and morphology of the ErGO and LIG materials. The SEM and TEM (Fig. S2, ESI†) micrographs of ErGO revealed the interconnected three-dimensional porous morphology of the graphene networks obtained using the electrochemical deposition method. Fig. 2a shows the SEM image of the film containing both ErGO and LIG material as indicated, whereas the ErGO shows a wrinkled morphology that was flattened after laser irradiation. The morphology differences of the film clearly demonstrate the conversion of ErGO to LIG. A comparative SEM analysis was performed for both the ErGO and LIG film and the results are shown in Fig. 2b–g. A high-resolution SEM study of the ErGO revealed a networked structure with wrinkled sheets at the pore (Fig. 2b), wall (Fig. 2c) as well as at the boundary (Fig. 2d) of the pore. The LIG film after laser irradiation was flattened throughout its surface (Fig. 2e–g). The detailed SEM study of LIG MSC (Fig. 2h, i and Fig. S3, ESI†) confirmed that the graphene sheets were fused together (as marked with the dotted line) and formed a continuous sheet on the surface during the LI. Fig. 2j and k are the SEM images of the patterned MSC device, which show the actual width, length and inter-finger distances of about 670 μm, 5000 μm and 200 μm, respectively. High-resolution TEM analysis taken from the edge of a graphene sheet revealed the uniform and transparent nature of the sheet (Fig. 2l and m). As shown in the proposed mechanistic pathway (Fig. 2n), interconnected networks and partially reduced GO were obtained using the electrochemical methods. However, the LI method helped to achieve fully reduced GO with a fused interconnected sheet, as confirmed from the SEM study (Fig. 2i). The electrochemical method utilizes the edge functional group of GO to create the network-like structure, whereas the LI method accelerated the generation of the fused sheet-type architecture (Fig. 2n) on the surface of the film. It was observed that the C–C bonds present in the ErGO network could absorb the frequency 927–951 cm−1, generally used for a CO2 laser (10.6 μm), thus it was useful for the complete graphitization of the networks.36,37 The atomic percentages of C and O were quantified using energy dispersive spectral analysis, and found to be 93.35% and 6.65%, respectively (Fig. S4, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  The SEM image of the film (a) with ErGO (top half) and LIG (bottom half), the yellow dashed line is used to distinguish the different materials. The SEM images focusing on pore, boundary of pore and planar surface of ErGO (b–d) and LIG (e–g). The SEM images (h and i) of the LIG sheet showing the fused architecture of the film. The SEM images (j and k) of the MSC device taken after laser patterning. High-resolution TEM images (l and m) of the LIG sheet from the edge of the networks. Proposed reaction mechanism (n) for the conversion of GO to ErGO and to LIG. 
The degree of reduction for oxygen containing functionalities was monitored using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra (Fig. 3a). The FTIR spectra of GO shows peaks for the O–H stretching (3420 cm−1), CO stretching (1714 cm−1), and stretching of other oxygen functionalities, which was reduced to ErGO and almost disappeared in the LIG sample, confirming the reduction of GO to LIG.38 The X-ray diffraction pattern (Fig. S5, ESI†) of GO shows a sharp peak at 2θ = 11° with d-spacing of 0.398 nm, whereas ErGO and LIG show a broad peak at 2θ = 24.6° (with d-spacing at 0.190 nm). However, a more intense peak observed for LIG indicated the highly crystalline nature of the sample.39 The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results further confirmed the effects of laser irradiation on the oxygen functionalities. Fig. 3b shows the C1s XPS spectra of ErGO consisted of three peaks at 284.3 eV (C–C/CC), 286.0 eV (CO/C–O), and 288.3 eV (O–CO), whereas LIG contained two peaks at 284.3 eV (C–C/CC) and 285.5 eV (CO/C–O). The peak intensities for the oxygen-containing groups of LIG were impressively reduced, confirming that the adequate reduction of ErGO using the LI method and transformation of C (sp3) to C (sp2) occurred in LIG.
 Fig. 3  The FTIR spectra (a) of GO, ErGO and LIG samples. Deconvoluted C1s XPS spectra (b) obtained from ErGO and LIG films. Representative Raman spectra (c) of LIG, the inset shows the Lorentzian single peak fitting of the 2D band. Optical image (d) of LIG obtained during the Raman measurements. Raman mapping (e) shows the distribution of the 2D peak. Raman spectra (f) of LIG at different positions as described in the mapping, indicating the various intensity ratios of 2D to G. 
To investigate the disorder, defects and crystalline nature of the graphene, Raman spectroscopy was conducted for GO, LIGO, ErGO and LIG thin film samples (Fig. S6a and b, ESI†). The G-band is responsible for the first order scattering of the E2g phonon, whereas the D-band occurred because of the elastic scattering from the defects with a single phonon transition of A1g symmetry and required defect sites for activation.40 The position of D-, G- and 2D-bands for all the samples are given in the ESI† (Table S1). The IG/ID ratio, which quantified the defects for GO, was calculated to be 0.71, which was improved compared to the ∼0.94 for ErGO, confirming that the smaller defect site of ErGO film appeared after the electrochemical reduction. However, a dramatic increase in the IG/ID ratio (∼16.1) was observed in the LIG sample, which was ∼20 times larger than that of the GO. Therefore, the LI method helped to greatly reduce the defect density nD (cm−2) from 3.1 (ErGO) to 0.2 (LIG) (Table S1, ESI†). The degree of optimization for the reduction was determined using Raman analysis and the results can be seen in Fig. S7a–f and Tables S2, S3 (ESI†). As demonstrated in Fig. S7a and d (ESI†), the IG/ID ratio and 2D peak intensity increases and the corresponding sheet resistance decreases with increasing laser power as well as decreasing laser speed. The degree of graphitization was a consequence of the photothermal process, which was proportional to the laser power and exposure time. Therefore, a higher degree of graphitization occurred with a higher laser power. The laser speed also had a direct influence on the formation of the local temperature.35 In this case, by decreasing the scan rate, the exposure time of the laser beam per unit area increased, which certainly increased the local temperature. The optimum laser power and speed of the laser were found to be 60 W and 1.6 m s−1, respectively. Surprisingly, a very sharp 2D-band occurs only for the LIG sample (Fig. 3c) at ∼2693 cm−1 upon LI, which originated because of a two phonon transition at the highest optical branch near the K.41 The full width half maxima (FWHM) was calculated to be 50 cm−1. To confirm the uniform distribution of the 2D peak in the LIG sample, Raman mapping analysis was carried out. Fig. 3d and e show the optical image and Raman mapping at different positions of LIG, respectively. The corresponding 3D plot of the Raman spectra at seven different regions is shown in Fig. 3f. An intense 2D-band was observed in all the positions except point number 7 (on the silica (Si) substrate), confirming the homogeneous distribution of the 2D peak. Although the LIG sample has a multilayer configuration, it unexpectedly shows an intense 2D peak throughout the sample with single Lorentzian peak fitting, indicating an insignificant interlayer hopping interaction unlike conventional multilayer graphene samples, where a broad 2D peak with multiple Lorentzian peaks are observed.42 The graphene flakes in the LIG sample were crosslinked to each other in a 3D architecture and after laser irradiation, the film became fused at the surface, and as a result the whole film behaved unitedly as a monolayer graphene film with a very high electrical conductivity. The double resonance peak D′ and its overtone 2D′ appeared at 1618 cm−1 and 3238 cm−1, respectively. These peaks originated from momentum conservation of two phonons with opposite wave vectors.40 The LIG sample showed the D + D′′ and the D + G peaks at 2469 cm−1 and 2950 cm−1, respectively. The calculated crystalline size (La) of ErGO was 18.4 nm, and this was improved to 309 nm for LIG, which further proved the improved crystallinity achieved upon LI reduction.
The electrical property of the material was investigated to evaluate the performance of the LIG material as an active material as well as a current collector. The conductivity of the LIG was calculated (Fig. S8, ESI†) to be 5963 S m−1, which was almost three times larger than that of the ErGO (2123 S m−1) material. The electrical conductivity of the LIG film was much higher than that of activated carbon (10–100 S m−1),43 rGO (100–2000 S m−1)44 and also that of the laser-scribed graphene (1738 S m−1)45 synthesized by El-Kady et al. The high conductivity of the LIG material was associated with the significant structural changes, which appeared during the LI process. As can be seen from the proposed mechanism shown in Fig. 2n, the reduced defect density and improved crystallinity in LIG helps the restoration of the π–π electron clouds. Furthermore, the continuous sheet-like architecture promoted faster electron transportation in the LIG material, which was responsible for the very high conductivity of LIG. The excellent electrical conductivity value suggested that the LIG material could be a suitable choice as current collector for a supercapacitor.
Electrochemical characterization of IMSC
Best-practice methods, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) were conducted in the solid state with a symmetrical, interdigitated LIG-MSC device (shown schematically in Fig. 4a) to demonstrate the superior electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC) behavior of the material. The CV curve of LIG-MSC (Fig. 4b) at 50 mV s−1 showed a perfect rectangular shape unlike that of the ErGO-MSC which exhibited a distorted rectangular shape because the material was less conductive, which impeded the ion transfer from the electrolyte to the electrode. The potential window of the device was optimized in aqueous-gel electrolyte to avoid the interference from oxygen evolution reaction (Fig. S9a, ESI†) and the corresponding GCD curve is shown in Fig. 4c. Interestingly, the LIG-based MSC could achieve a large working voltage of 1.2 V (0–1.2 V), which was the highest working voltage ever obtained up to now in aqueous electrolyte with carbon-based supercapacitors (Table S4, ESI†). A dramatic change in the CV of LIG-MSC appeared after LI and the device retained a rectangular shape even at a high scan rate (Fig. 4d), which demonstrated the perfect electrochemical double layer formation and fast charge storage mechanism of the device. The quasi-isosceles triangular GCD profiles at different current densities further validated the ideal EDLC behaviour and the efficient mass-transport across the porous LIG fingers shown in Fig. 4e and Fig. S9b, c (ESI†). A retention of 42% of its initial capacitance even at a higher current density showed that the device had a good rate capability (Fig. S9d, ESI†). The areal capacitance (CA) of the MSC, taken from the GCD curve was calculated to be 2.32 mF cm−2 at a current density 10 μA cm−2, which was quite high compared to most of the reported graphene-based MSCs, such as methane-plasma rGO (8 μF cm−2),46 inkjet-printed graphene (0.7 mF cm−2)47 and laser written graphene (0.51 mF cm−2).48 The corresponding volumetric capacitance (CV) was found to be 3.3 F cm−3 at 40 mA cm−3. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopic study showed a vertical line in the lower frequency region, further proving the perfect double layer formation in the MSC (Fig. S9e, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the interdigitated LIG-MSC. The cyclic voltammetry response (b) obtained from ErGO and LIG-based MSCs at 50 mV s−1. Galvanostatic charge–discharge profile (c) of the LIG-MSC, used to optimize the working voltage of the device. Cyclic voltammetric response (d) of the in-plane LIG-MSC at different scan rates. Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (e) at different current densities. (f) Comparative Ragone plot of LIG-MSC with various devices using results taken from the literature. Mechanistic model (g) illustrating that the ionic and electronic transport occurs in the three-dimensional networks of the LIG material. (h) Cycling stability performance and faradaic efficiency of an IMSC showing the percentage retention of the initial capacitance up to 100000 cycles. Inset shows the GCD response for three consecutive cycles of the device during the cycling test obtained after each 20000 cycles. 
The energy and power densities are powerful tools used to check the performance of the MSC. The highest area normalized energy density (EA) and power density (PA) of LIG-MSC were calculated to be 0.46 mW h cm−2 (0.65 W h cm−3) and 0.57 W cm−2 (822 W cm−3), respectively. The volumetric energy density and the power density value of the LIG device were far better than those previously reported for metal free supercapacitors25,49,50 (Fig. 4f). The area normalized Ragone plot is shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). The superior performances of the device can be explained by the ionic and electronic transport through the device as shown in Fig. 4g. The laser irradiation method produced highly conductive graphene networks with a minimum defect density, where the graphene sheets were interconnected to each other and this facilitated the transport of the electronic current. However, the porous nature of the electrode maximized the surface area exposed to the electrolyte and this resulted in the favourable ionic transport of the electrolyte. Combinations of these two factors expedite the accomplishment of the high energy density of the device.
To explore the commercial viability of the MSCs, the cycling performance was compared to the number of cycles and percentage retention of the specific capacitance and was one of the essential measurements. Usually, most of previously studied nanocarbon-based supercapacitors failed to show cycling performances not more than 30000 cycles withholding 90–95% of the initial capacitance (Table S4, ESI†). The cycling stability of the LIG-based MSC was evaluated by using continuous cycling via a GCD process at a current density of 0.166 mA cm−2. Interestingly, the retention of the initial Csp after 100000 continuous cycles was ∼100%, demonstrating the outstanding stability of the LIG material in an aqueous solid electrolyte (Fig. 4h). The CV response was checked after 100000 cycles and, as expected, the CV response was found to be almost similar to the one taken before the cycling stability was measured (Fig. S11, ESI†). The inset of Fig. 4h shows the GCD response of the LIG-MSC derived after every 20000 cycles. As expected, a similar charge–discharge phenomenon was observed throughout the course of the 100000 cycles, thus revealing the exceptional electrochemical stability of the material during continuous cycling. Such extraordinary cycling performances of the supercapacitor had not been achieved up to now, as far as is known (Table S4, ESI†). The interconnected sheet-like structure of LIG and the minimum defect in its backbone are the reasons for the good electronic transport during GCD cycling. The unique porous structure and absence of metal current collector of the LIG-based MSC is the reason for the achievement of the astonishing cycling performance of the LIG-IMSC.
The flexibility and durability of the LIG-MSC on poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) was evaluated using the electrochemical performances of the IMSC at bending condition (Fig. S12, ESI†). The electrochemical response of the device was recorded in horizontal and vertical bending conditions, like the digital images shown in Fig. S12b–g (ESI†). The CV curves for all the cases exhibited an almost identical current response with the non-bending or planar mode, suggesting an outstanding durability of the LIG-IMSC under mechanical bending. The excellent flexibility of the LIG-MSC shows great potential for future use in portable energy storage devices and microelectronics.
Structural versatility and device performance
To meet the requirements of specific voltage and capacitance rating for different portable devices, a study of the commercial supercapacitors’ demand in-series and/or in-parallel connections to provide large output voltage and sufficient capacity to store energy was made.25,51Fig. 5a shows the digital images of LIG/PET (3 × 3 cm2), a patterned module, a flexible LIG-module and different letters (INST Mohali) and structures written on the LIG sheet. In order to fabricate a series of complex modular LIG-MSCs, miniaturising the basic unit cell and their shape is one of the basic criteria that needs to be checked. Therefore, versatile structural LIG-MSC devices with circular, linear, rectangular and interdigitated planar geometries were fabricated with specific size parameters as shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†), while keeping a constant geometrical area of the different structures. Similar CV curves (Fig. 5b) and approximately equal areal capacitances were observed at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for all versatile LIG-MSCs, which demonstrated an exceptionally good shape compatibility and superior suitability for further applications. Furthermore, as the linear LIG-MSC exhibited better performances in terms of specific capacitance and the shape of the CV graph, supported by their CV and GCD tests (Fig. S14, ESI†), the module was patterned with linear-shaped MSC.
 Fig. 5  Digital images (a) of LIG film (3 × 3 cm2), patterned and flexible LIG-module, various letters and patterns written on the film. (b) CV curves for different shaped LIG-MSCs at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The inset shows a diagram of the diverse shapes of the LIG-MSCs. (c) CV curves for linear LIG-MSCs connected in series (1S to 9S) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and the inset shows the schematic for the series combination of the nine cells. (d) GCD profile of LIG-MSCs connected in series (1S to 9S) at a current of 10 μA. The calculated capacitance and output voltage (e) as a function of the number of devices in series. The CV response (f) and GCD (g) obtained from mS × nP (m = 5 and n = 1 to 5) configured module where m = number of cells in series and n = number of cells in parallel. 
Modularization of LIG-MSC for high output voltage
To meet the demand of a high voltage, a number of MSC units can be connected in series, without compromising with the total current and capacitance. However, to increase the total current and capacitance, a number of supercapacitor cells in series must be configured together with supercapacitor cells in parallel to make an effectively powered system. The output voltage can be increased from a few to thousands of volts from these patterned structures without compromising the capacitance. To explore the high voltage applications of LIG-MSC, first, CV and GCD tests were performed with the linear LIG-based MSC devices both in series and in parallel as shown in Fig. 5c–g. As projected, all the linear LIG-MSCs connected in series, from a single device to nine devices, showed a nearly rectangular shape with EDLC behaviors (Fig. 5c) and exhibited a stepwise linear increase in the working voltage from 1.2 V to 10.8 V (9 × 1.2 V). The GCD profile also recorded a similar stepwise increase at a current of 10 μA (Fig. 5d). Surprisingly, as shown in Fig. 5d, the working voltage gradually increases whereas the discharge time almost remains similar in all cases. Fig. 5e shows that the working voltage increases and the corresponding capacitance decreases with the number of devices configured in series. To enhance the overall capacitance, five devices were assembled in parallel (as shown in Fig. S15a and b, ESI†), which exhibited a gradual increase of current as well as capacitance. Fig. 5f and g show a classic demonstration of the LIG-MSC module with 25 linear devices, arranged as five in parallel rows of five serially connected devices (5S × 5P) on PET substrate. Interestingly, two (5S × 2P) and five (5S × 5P) such rows in parallel nearly doubled and increased five-fold the current and capacitance, respectively, when compared to one single row (5S × 1P), attaining a working voltage of 6 V. To evaluate the power capability of the MSC module with nine devices in series, acquiring 10.8 V cell voltage, CVs were recorded at various scan rates starting from 0.1 V s−1 to 100 V s−1 (Fig. 6a–f). It is worth noting that the nearly rectangular pattern was maintained up to a ultrahigh scan rate of 10 V s−1 and slight deformation in the shape was observed up to 100 V s−1, which demonstrated the high rate capability and instantaneous power delivery capacity of the LIG-MSC module.
 Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammetry response (a–f) of the LIG-module with nine devices in series at different scan rates (0.1–100 V s−1). 
Integrated self-powered supercapacitor with solar cell
To support the development of sustainable self-powered system for portable electronics, supercapacitors need to be hybridized with energy generation devices such as solar cells for a proper power management strategy.52,53 The integration of a solar cell and a supercapacitor module, termed a “self-charging power unit”, can help to compensate for the power fluctuation in a solar cell, yielding a stable power output. Furthermore, for constant use of electric charge for consumer electronics, a renewable energy source such as a solar cell can be assembled in parallel with a supercapacitor replacing heavy batteries.54 At first, the discharge performance of a single LIG-MSC was recorded after charging the device for 2 min at 2 V. The discharge voltage was plotted against discharge time as shown in Fig. 7a. Surprisingly, the retention of the self-discharge voltage was ∼65% after 10 min and more than 50% after 30 min, indicating the excellent device performance of the LIG-MSC. The device performance testing was extended by using it to light up two light-emitting diodes (LEDs) after charging the MSC-module (5S × 5P) at 5 V for 3 min (Fig. 7b). The life span of the LEDs during discharge was videoed (Video S1, ESI†) at different times as shown in Fig. 7b. Thereafter, in order to understand the superiority of the LIG-MSC as a hybrid system, a solar cell with an open circuit potential of 5 V was integrated with the flexible LIG-module (5S × 5P) as shown schematically in Fig. 7c. Fig. 7d shows the integrated solar cell/supercapacitor power pack, which was connected to the LEDs. Before charging, the open circuit voltage of the LIG-module was recorded as 0.135 V. After charging with the solar cell (open circuit voltage of 5.082 V and acting as the power source to charge the supercapacitor), the stable open circuit potential of the module was increased to 5.004 V (Fig. S16, ESI†), indicating the superiority of the module as a power pack unit. The solar cell was then subjected to light illumination for 10 s and then the light source was removed. The charged supercapacitor connected with the solar cell was used to light up an LED (Fig. 7d) for another 35 s as shown in Video S2 (ESI†). Another demonstration of the LIG-module was obtained by using two already glowing LEDs simultaneously (Fig. 7d) by charging the module for 10 s with a solar panel. This demonstration of LED with a solar-powered LIG-MSC validated the concept of the self-charging unit by transferring enough energy from an energy conversion unit towards a storage system. The excellent device performances of the MSC module proved the suitability of the LIG-MSC for commercialization in the future.
 Fig. 7  Discharge voltage profile with time (a) obtained using the LIG-IMSC device after charging it at 2 V for 2 min. (b) Lighting the two LEDs using the LIG-module after charging the module at 5 V for 3 min. (c) Schematic representation of the solar cell/supercapacitor hybrid system. (d) Digital photograph of the assembled solar cell/supercapacitor hybrid power pack in charging mode (marked as ‘in light’) and lighting the LED after switching off the solar cell (marked as ‘in dark’). 
Conclusions
In conclusion, a new combination of electrochemical reduction and a laser irradiation technique has been introduced for the first time for the synthesis of a highly conducting and robust graphene film. A flexible, on-chip microsupercapacitor was established for the demonstration of supercapacitive behaviour of the device with a cell voltage of 1.2 V. The notable improvement of the stability performances (100000 cycles) of LIG-MSC open up a new field for the development of a metal free supercapacitor. The unique structure of LIG and the interconnected highly conductive graphene sheets with fewer defects are responsible for the ion and electron transport channel with a short diffusion length. The cost-effective and environmental friendly synthesis approach makes it a model candidate for the next generation supercapacitor electrode design.
The LIG-based MSCs were organized in series with an in parallel arrangement for the demonstration of high-voltage output without sacrificing the capacitance of the module. Furthermore, the LIG-based MSC module was integrated with a solar cell to realize its advantage for the development of a hybrid storage system. The synthetic approach, modularization and hybridization can be scaled-up with a proper electrochemical set-up and could greatly influence the field of microelectronics and wearable integrated storage devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
NK acknowledges SERB EMR and INST, Mohali for providing fellowship. TP acknowledges DST INSPIRE for providing fellowship. This work was financially supported by the DST SERB EMR grant (EMR/2016/000040) and the DST INSPIRE grant (DST/INSPIRE/04/2015/000337). The authors wish to acknowledge staff from INST, Mohali for their support with instrumentation.
Notes and references
Z. Cao and B. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3183–3201 RSC .
Y. Fu, H. Wu, S. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 RSC .
G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1592–1605 RSC .
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1890–1895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. H. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Desmulliez and A. Richardson, 2009 4th International Design and Test Workshop (IDT),  2009, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Tomiyasu, H. Shikata, K. Takao, N. Asanuma, S. Taruta and Y.-Y. Park, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, C. Lethien, S. Pinaud, K. Brousse, R. Laloo, V. Turq, M. Respaud, A. Demortiere, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, B. Chaudret, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2016, 351, 691–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Majid Beidaghi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
Z. Hu, Q. Liu, S. Chou and S. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700606 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Blomquist, T. Wells, B. Andres, J. Bäckström, S. Forsberg and H. Olin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 39836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Y. Li, B. Yao, J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16213–16218 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, L. Zhang, J. B. Wagner, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 119–126 CrossRef .
L. Manjakkal, C. G. Núñez, W. Dang and R. Dahiya, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, M. Beidaghi, V. Penmatsa, K. Bechtold, L. Kumari, W. Z. Li and C. Wang, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2010, 9, 734–740 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601257 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 7–15 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. H. Ouyang and D. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19831–19842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hilder, B. Winther-Jensen, D. Li, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9187–9193 RSC .
T. Purkait, G. Singh, D. Kumar, M. Singh and R. S. Dey, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 640 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hu, M. Mao and S. Ghosal, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 395501 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Zhang, F. Liu and S. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1802350 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strong, S. Dubin, M. F. El-Kady, A. Lech, Y. Wang, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Dey, H. A. Hjuler and Q. Chi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6324–6329 RSC .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Lin, K. H. Chih, C. T. Yuan, J. L. Shen, C. A. J. Lin and W. R. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2708–2715 RSC .
Z. Wan, E. W. Streed, M. Lobino, S. Wang, R. T. Sang, I. S. Cole, D. V. Thiel and Q. Li, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700315 CrossRef .
B. S. Yilbas, Z. Yilbas and M. Sami, Opt. Laser Technol., 1996, 28, 513–519 CrossRef .
Y. Chyan, R. Ye, Y. Li, S. P. Singh, C. J. Arnusch and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2176–2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. N. Patel, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, A1187–A1193 CrossRef .
M. K. Panigrahi, S. Hajra, R. K. Sahu, R. S. Dey and C. R. Raj, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1787 RSC .
M. P. Down and C. E. Banks, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 891–899 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari and D. M. Basko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 235–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Thomsen and S. Reich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 5214–5217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fossheim, Acta Chem. Scand., 1985, 39, 785–790 CrossRef .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Y. Li, B. Yao, J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16213–16218 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Z. S. Wu, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, C. Sun, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4283–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Sollami Delekta, P. Zhang, S. Yang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and M. Östling, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8249–8256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Peng, R. Ye, J. A. Mann, D. Zakhidov, Y. Li, P. R. Smalley, J. Lin and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5868–5875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Moon, J. B. Joo and Y. Yin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11577–11581 RSC .
Y. Xue, Y. Ding, J. Niu, Z. Xia, A. Roy, H. Chen, J. Qu, Z. L. Wang and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1400198 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, S. M. Lee, Y.-H. Hwang, S. Lee, B. Park, J.-H. Jang and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1906–1912 RSC .
X. Fu, Z. Xia, R. Sun, H. An, F. Qi, S. Wang, Q. Liu and G. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2425–2432 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, C. Bumgardner, N. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Li and X. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11586 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01458fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Small-scale, self-powered hybrid energy resources have become basic needs for various widespread applications such as implantable devices and portable electronics. A micro supercapacitor (MSC) with high energy density and long-term stability is featured in this paper, and has great potential to replace bulky electrolytic capacitors and battery in circuits to make miniaturized electronics. Extensive development in supercapacitor technology aims to focus on the electrochemical performance of electrode materials and their superiority as current collectors. Graphene is an important candidate for use as an electrode material in supercapacitors because of its intrinsic physical properties, such as: flexibility, high electrical conductivity and porous structure. This paper provides a novel strategy for the fabrication of highly conducting graphene film using electrochemical reduction followed by use of a laser irradiation method. An on-chip metal free MSC using graphene as the current collector as well as the electrode material shows advantages of a large working voltage, high energy-density and ultralong cycling stability. The working voltage can be potentially increased to 10.8 V by connecting a number of devices in series to make an integrated modular structure. This finding enables the development of highly durable and high-voltage flexible MSCs, which may be integrated with solar cells to make a self-charging hybrid device for next-generation energy storage systems.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the electrochemical synthesis followed by laser-irradiated reduction used for the preparation of LIG-MSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  The SEM image of the film (a) with ErGO (top half) and LIG (bottom half), the yellow dashed line is used to distinguish the different materials. The SEM images focusing on pore, boundary of pore and planar surface of ErGO (b–d) and LIG (e–g). The SEM images (h and i) of the LIG sheet showing the fused architecture of the film. The SEM images (j and k) of the MSC device taken after laser patterning. High-resolution TEM images (l and m) of the LIG sheet from the edge of the networks. Proposed reaction mechanism (n) for the conversion of GO to ErGO and to LIG.	 

 	Fig. 3  The FTIR spectra (a) of GO, ErGO and LIG samples. Deconvoluted C1s XPS spectra (b) obtained from ErGO and LIG films. Representative Raman spectra (c) of LIG, the inset shows the Lorentzian single peak fitting of the 2D band. Optical image (d) of LIG obtained during the Raman measurements. Raman mapping (e) shows the distribution of the 2D peak. Raman spectra (f) of LIG at different positions as described in the mapping, indicating the various intensity ratios of 2D to G.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the interdigitated LIG-MSC. The cyclic voltammetry response (b) obtained from ErGO and LIG-based MSCs at 50 mV s−1. Galvanostatic charge–discharge profile (c) of the LIG-MSC, used to optimize the working voltage of the device. Cyclic voltammetric response (d) of the in-plane LIG-MSC at different scan rates. Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (e) at different current densities. (f) Comparative Ragone plot of LIG-MSC with various devices using results taken from the literature. Mechanistic model (g) illustrating that the ionic and electronic transport occurs in the three-dimensional networks of the LIG material. (h) Cycling stability performance and faradaic efficiency of an IMSC showing the percentage retention of the initial capacitance up to 100000 cycles. Inset shows the GCD response for three consecutive cycles of the device during the cycling test obtained after each 20000 cycles.	 

 	Fig. 5  Digital images (a) of LIG film (3 × 3 cm2), patterned and flexible LIG-module, various letters and patterns written on the film. (b) CV curves for different shaped LIG-MSCs at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The inset shows a diagram of the diverse shapes of the LIG-MSCs. (c) CV curves for linear LIG-MSCs connected in series (1S to 9S) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and the inset shows the schematic for the series combination of the nine cells. (d) GCD profile of LIG-MSCs connected in series (1S to 9S) at a current of 10 μA. The calculated capacitance and output voltage (e) as a function of the number of devices in series. The CV response (f) and GCD (g) obtained from mS × nP (m = 5 and n = 1 to 5) configured module where m = number of cells in series and n = number of cells in parallel.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammetry response (a–f) of the LIG-module with nine devices in series at different scan rates (0.1–100 V s−1).	 

 	Fig. 7  Discharge voltage profile with time (a) obtained using the LIG-IMSC device after charging it at 2 V for 2 min. (b) Lighting the two LEDs using the LIG-module after charging the module at 5 V for 3 min. (c) Schematic representation of the solar cell/supercapacitor hybrid system. (d) Digital photograph of the assembled solar cell/supercapacitor hybrid power pack in charging mode (marked as ‘in light’) and lighting the LED after switching off the solar cell (marked as ‘in dark’).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01458f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
