Directing the film structure of organic semiconductors via post-deposition processing for transistor and solar cell applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42615G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42615G
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 592-608Directing the film structure of organic semiconductors via post-deposition processing for transistor and solar cell applications

        
          
            Anna M. 
            Hiszpanski
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yueh-Lin 
            Loo
          
        
      *
      Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. E-mail: ahiszpan@princeton.edu; lloo@princeton.edu;  Fax: +1 609 258 0211;   Tel: +1 609 258 9091
Received 
      1st August 2013
    , Accepted 4th November 2013First published on 7th November 2013AbstractThe morphology of thin films of molecular and polymeric semiconductors, which is structurally complex and heterogeneous across multiple length scales, is known to significantly affect the device performance. Yet, controlling the film structure is challenging, typically requiring chemical modification of the organic semiconductors, substrates, or the conditions under which the films are formed. Post-deposition processing offers an opportunity to decouple film formation from structural development, providing greater control over molecular ordering in organic semiconductor thin films. This review highlights recent advances in post-deposition processing, focusing specifically on methods that control three important aspects of the film structure – the in-plane and out-of-plane molecular orientations and molecular packing – and correlating these structural changes with device performance in organic thin-film transistors and solar cells.

Broader context
Organic electronic devices can often be processed from solution under or close to ambient conditions; their fabrication thus promises to be less energy-intensive compared to the processing of inorganic counterparts. The resulting devices are also light-weight and mechanically flexible, effectively reducing payload and energy-expenditure needed to incorporate them into field-deployable systems. The performance of organic electronic devices is not determined solely by the chemical structure of the organic semiconductors composing the electrically active layer; the solid-state structure adopted by these molecules in thin films vitally influences device performance as well. Yet, the structure is often complex, spanning multiple length scales, and highly dependent on the details of processing conditions. In this perspective, we highlight processing methods that can be applied to tune the solid-state structure of organic semiconductors after they have been deposited. Decoupling these two processes brings about control over structural evolution of organic semiconductors, enabling rational processing to improve the performance of organic electronic devices.

1. Introduction
The field of organic electronics has made significant strides in improving device performance over the last decade, particularly with organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which are gaining a commercial foothold. However, mimicking OLEDs' success for other device geometries has not come readily. Though field-effect mobilities of organic thin-film transistors (TFTs) and power conversion efficiencies of organic solar cells have increased steadily over the last decade, much of the progress has been made through time-intensive, repetitive, Edisonian cycles of materials design and synthesis, and optimization of processing conditions during device fabrication.1
Density functional theory (DFT), which allows for calculation of an organic semiconductor's optical properties and molecular energy levels,2 has provided some guidance for materials design. Accurately predicting electrical properties of macroscopic films of new organic semiconductors, however, also requires knowledge of their structure, which is not considered in typical DFT calculations.3 Without taking the morphological structure into account, it is difficult to predict how an organic semiconductor candidate will behave in devices. Yet, the structure of such films is often complex and traverses several length scales. Attributes across these length scales, such as the organic semiconductor's packing motif or crystal structure at the molecular scale; in-plane and out-of-plane molecular orientations at the nanometer and micrometer scales, respectively; fractional crystallinity, grain size, and – in two component systems – phase separation at the tens to hundreds of nanometers or even micrometer scale, all aggregately contribute to the collective structure of organic semiconductor thin films, and must be considered when evaluating the performance of devices comprising them, as depicted graphically in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The performance of devices composed of organic semiconductors is intimately related to the molecular structure of the organic semiconductor and the ordering of the molecules in the solid state, typically referred to as the film structure. Elucidating the impact of the film structure on device performance may be enhanced by considering individually the various aspects of ordering that may occur in the organic semiconductor thin film across several length scales. 
Further complicating matters is the fact that the structure of organic semiconductor thin films strongly depends on processing conditions. This adaptability is a double-edged sword to the field of organic electronics. The fact that the structure of the film is processing-dependent complicates optimization during device fabrication, but it also provides an opportunity to manipulate the film towards a desired structure, provided we understand what the desired film structure may be.
What, exactly, the desired structure ultimately depends on is the device platform in which the organic semiconductor is incorporated. Different molecular orientations, for example, are desired depending on the device geometry and materials system. In small molecules, charge transport occurs most efficiently in the π-stacking direction. A “face-on” orientation in which the π-planes of the organic semiconductor are aligned with the substrate should result in preferential charge transport normal to the substrate. Such an orientation is desirable for stacked devices, such as OLEDs and solar cells. Conversely, an “edge-on” orientation in which the π-planes of the organic semiconductor are aligned normal to the substrate should result in lateral π-stacking. This preferential orientation is more desirable in devices requiring lateral charge transport, such as thin-film transistors. The charge transport mechanism in polymer semiconductor thin films is more nuanced than in molecular semiconductor thin films because charges can, and often prefer to, transport intra-molecularly along the backbone rather than inter-molecularly through π-orbital overlap.4–8 Hence, in devices where charge transport should occur normal to the substrate, such as solar cells and OLEDs, polymer chains should ideally be aligned normal to the substrate. Yet, the finite length of polymer chains mandates the importance of intermolecular transport as well, as charges have to travel across macroscopic distances in functional devices. Further complicating matters is the fact that polymer semiconducting thin films are often semicrystalline, so charge transport across and within both crystalline and amorphous phases needs to be considered. While bottlenecks to charge transport, these amorphous regions are perceived to be critical as polymer chains acting as tie-molecules connect adjacent crystalline lamellae and facilitate intercrystal transport.4–8
Other reviews have highlighted methods to alter the structure of organic semiconductor thin films and have examined the effects these structural changes have imposed on the device function.9–13 In this review, we focus specifically on post-deposition processing methods of altering the film structure and the effect these changes have on the device function. With post-deposition processing, one can decouple film formation from organic semiconductor structural development. This decoupling enables further manipulation of molecular interactions before the structure is vitrified, thereby providing better structural control. The most common post-deposition processing methods include thermal and solvent-vapor annealing, which have been used to increase crystallinity or coarsen grains, ultimately resulting in an increase in the extent of π-overlap and a decrease in trap density, respectively, when such films are incorporated into electronic devices. Recent advances, which we have highlighted below, demonstrate that applying such post-deposition treatments in combination with manipulation of molecule–substrate and molecule–molecule interactions allows for greater tunability of structural development of organic semiconductor thin films across multiple length scales, providing control over the crystal structure and the in-plane and out-of-plane molecular orientation that are ultimately adopted. This review is organized by these three aspects of the film structure, examining in detail how the in-plane and out-of-plane orientations of organic semiconductors, as well as the crystal structures they adopt, can be influenced by post-deposition processing (Fig. 2). Control over these three parameters in combination – molecular packing and in-plane and out-of-plane molecular orientation – would essentially provide control over the ordering of these organic semiconductors in three-dimensions.
 Fig. 2  (a) This review focuses on post-deposition processing methods to specifically control three aspects of the film structure – the molecular packing and in- and out-of-plane molecular orientations – which involve ordering across different length scales. Various possibilities for each type of ordering are depicted graphically for the small molecule organic semiconductor, contorted hexabenzocoronene (HBC). The crystal structure of HBC was obtained from ref. 21. (b) The ordering of molecules along these length scales requires tuning of the forces and intermolecular interactions that are relevant to each of these dimensions, which are here qualitatively described as a function of the distance over which they act. Fig. 2b is reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2007, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Focus has been dedicated in recent years to the self-assembly of organic semiconductors, control over which typically involves careful chemical design.14 Though films of organic semiconductors that do not readily self-assemble or crystallize have generally been seen as less desirable in the organic electronics community, we propose instead that such films provide a unique opportunity to direct assembly. The appropriate post-deposition processing conditions provide a means to tune subtle and competing molecule–molecule, molecule–substrate, and molecule–solvent interactions to form structures that we desire, rather than accepting the often kinetically trapped structures that are formed under deposition conditions. The concept of directed assembly is not new, as it has been previously used in block copolymer systems to obtain long-range ordering of microdomains.15–17 Building upon these previous developments, researchers in the field of organic electronics are increasingly gaining better understanding of and control over structural development during post-deposition processing of active materials.
2. Criteria for post-deposition processing
The structural development of organic semiconductor thin films is dictated by the subtle competition between molecule–molecule, molecule–substrate, and molecule–solvent interactions.14,18 If any one of these Angstrom-scale interactions dominates and dictates molecular assembly during deposition, subsequent structural evolution via post-deposition processing methods can be difficult, or even impossible. As such, successful post-deposition solvent-vapor annealing to induce molecular reorganization and crystallization requires the appropriate choice of solvent so that molecule–molecule, molecule–substrate, and molecule–solvent interactions are appropriately balanced. The molecule–solvent interactions must be strong enough to disrupt the van der Waals forces between molecules and between the molecules and the substrate. However, if the solvent–molecule interactions are too strong (i.e., the solvent quality is too high), the organic semiconductor thin film has a tendency to dewet.19,20 If, on the other hand, intermolecular interactions dominate so that the organic semiconductor film crystallizes upon solvent evaporation or thermal sublimation, as is often the case for small molecule organic semiconductors, post-deposition processing can do little aside from modestly increasing crystallinity or coarsening grains to improve the properties of the thin film. It follows that the ability to manipulate competing interactions of comparable strength is critical for structural development.
A necessary requirement for post-deposition processing is thus that the organic semiconductor of interest exhibits limited long-range order upon film formation or that the long-range order that is induced during deposition can be “erased” and reconstructed by some means. Some examples of systems or methods that have yielded disordered films that can be subsequently subjected to post-deposition processing include:
(1). Bulky small molecules
While strong intermolecular interactions are ultimately desirable for increased likelihood of intermolecular charge hopping, molecular interactions that are too strong can result in crystallization upon film formation, thereby eliminating the opportunity to tune aspects of the film structure. Bulky substituents and non-planar molecular conformations tend to reduce π–π interactions and thereby hinder crystallization on deposition, kinetically trapping the film in a disordered state. For example, contorted hexabenzocoronene (HBC) has a non-planar geometry;21 deposition by thermal sublimation results in amorphous films that may be subsequently crystallized with processing.22 Similarly, molecules that tend to adopt multiple conformations often form amorphous films upon deposition, as is commonly the case with materials used in organic light-emitting diodes, such as 4,4′-bis(N-carbazole)-biphenyl (CBP) and 4,4′-bis[N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenylamino]biphenyl (α-NPD).23 The addition of long alkyl chains tends to induce thermotropic liquid-crystalline behavior, allowing access to semiordered and disordered liquid phases. While clearly the addition of bulky functional groups will affect the efficiency with which molecules pack, more subtle changes in the structure, such as the position of the nitrogen atom in the pyridyl group of narrow-band-gap semiconducting molecules, have also been shown to have a profound effect on the self assembly of molecules, presumably due to changes in the net dipole moment.24
(2). Polymers
Polymers generally form more disordered films than small molecules. This natural disorder provides opportunities for improved ordering with post-deposition processing, but it is also responsible for the lower mobilities typically observed in devices comprising semiconducting polymers, as opposed to small molecules organic semiconductors. Hence, in designing polymers that may be candidates for post-deposition processing, the right balance of attractive and dispersive intermolecular interactions must be achieved so that both disordered and, with post-deposition processing, highly crystalline films are attainable. The degree of ordering in polymer films typically improves with decreasing polymer molecular weight, lower polydispersity, and higher regioregularity.25 Subtle changes in the side-chains that are added to increase polymer solubilities can have profound effects on the ordering, too.26–28 Ho and co-workers found that by changing the lengths of the side-chains of poly(alkyl-thiophene), they could tune the extent of molecule–molecule interaction during solution deposition and obtain an essentially amorphous film.29 Yet more subtle is the introduction of a heteroatom to the repeat units of semiconducting polymers. Scharber and co-workers demonstrated, for example, that changing the bridging atom of poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b; 3,4-b′']-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) from carbon to silicon resulted in increased molecule–molecule interactions.30 Similarly, Tsoi et al. found that changing the sulfur atom of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) to selenium enhanced aggregation of the polymer chains, resulting in films with lower fractions of crystallinity overall but better packing within the crystalline lamellar portions of the film.31 To enhance solvent–molecule interactions, substitution of furan for thiophenes in diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based polymers has also shown to enhance solubility.32
In cases of semi-ordered systems, it may be possible to “erase” the crystalline structures that were formed during deposition and subsequently apply post-deposition treatments to re-crystallize the semiconducting polymer films under controlled conditions, obtaining the desired morphology. Crossland et al. demonstrated this approach with P3HT thin films by exposing them to a good solvent, in this case carbon disulfide, so that the crystalline lamellae dissolved.33 By subsequently reducing the vapor pressure of carbon disulfide and allowing the polymer chains to aggregate once again, the authors were able to control the kinetics of P3HT recrystallization and the nucleation density, ultimately demonstrating control over the grain size in these P3HT films.
(3). Vitrification of the crystallization process
Rapid deposition of an organic semiconductor as might be achieved via spin-coating or deposition from a low-boiling point solvent may result in vitrification of the organic semiconductor in a kinetically trapped state. For example, triethylsilylethynyl anthradithiophene, TES ADT, forms a mostly amorphous film when spincast from solution.19,34 If the organic semiconductors tend to crystallize upon film formation, yet another way to vitrify the film in an amorphous state is to add a glass-inducing species, as Stingelin-Stutzmann et al. demonstrated with rubrene.35 For thermally sublimated species, however, deposition often results in ordered films. In particular, deposition onto heated substrates or at slow rates tends to increase ordering.36,37 Hence, if one desires to begin with an amorphous or less ordered film for post-deposition processing, then deposition of the material onto a cooled substrate or at a faster rate should yield kinetically trapped organic semiconductor thin films.
As most macromolecules cannot be thermally sublimated, polymers require alternative means by which to form kinetically trapped, disordered films.38 Electrospray deposition is one such promising alternative that has been demonstrated with conducting polymers.39,40 In this process, a polymer solution is charged and ejected from a nozzle, forming charged droplets that are then deposited onto a target substrate. The deposited droplets form a homogeneous film of disordered globules whose morphology may then be tuned using post-deposition processing.39,40 Yet another technique by which amorphous films of polymers may be deposited is matrix-assisted pulsed-laser evaporation (MAPLE).38 In this technique, a frozen polymer solution target is irradiated by a pulsed laser, causing ablation of the material and subsequent deposition onto a substrate. The frozen solvent absorbs the laser energy; this prevents or reduces degradation of the polymer during deposition.38 Though this process has not yet been directly applied to organic semiconductors, it can potentially be promising as a means to deposit amorphous films with low free volumes.
3. Tuning in-plane molecular orientation
The in-plane molecular orientation of organic semiconductor thin films over macroscopic distances critically affects charge transport in devices, especially those in which charge transport occurs parallel to the substrate. Hence, controlling the in-plane molecular orientation of organic semiconductor active layers is pertinent for the operation of organic thin-film transistors, but perhaps less so for the operation of solar cells and diodes in which vertical charge transport dominates. Given that conduction is often anisotropic along different crystallographic planes, the organic semiconductors should ideally be aligned so that the fastest charge transport axis coincides with the desired direction of charge transport in the device. If a transistor channel consists of a macroscopic single crystal, satisfying this need is theoretically straightforward, as it requires placement of electrodes defining the transistor channel length along the correct crystallographic axis of the single crystal. Transistor channel lengths over which charges have to travel, however, typically span several microns to hundreds of microns. This distance is many times larger than the size of grains that typically form in polycrystalline organic semiconductor thin films. These neighboring grains can adopt vastly different molecular orientations resulting in grain boundaries that can detrimentally impact device characteristics. Controlling the in-plane molecular orientation thus becomes challenging as it ideally involves eliminating grain boundaries and maintaining the same molecular orientation over large areas. This section of the review highlights post-deposition methods that can induce preferential in-plane orientation over macroscopic distances; these methods can be broadly classified into one of the two approaches: those that focus on guiding crystal growth by tuning the delicate competition between molecule–substrate, molecule–molecule, and – in cases where solvents are present – molecule–solvent interactions, and those that focus on overcoming these interactions in the presence of an external field.
3.1. By tuning molecular interactions
In the first approach, molecular alignment can be prescribed through surface energy gradients where, by introducing surfaces with either favorable or unfavorable molecule–surface interactions, one can guide the direction with which organic semiconductors crystallize. For example, by patterning the underlying substrate to exhibit differential surface energies prior to deposition, Lee et al. can guide the in-plane direction of crystallization of the subsequently deposited TES ADT during post-deposition solvent-vapor annealing.19 As-cast, TES ADT exhibits limited crystallinity. Post-deposition solvent-vapor annealing plays a critical role; the solvent vapors plasticize TES ADT, allowing structural rearrangement and large-scale spherulitic crystallization to occur.19 Interestingly, the rate at which TES ADT crystallizes, as indicated by the propagation of the crystalline growth front, can differ by almost three-fold depending on the surface energy of the underlying substrate during solvent-vapor annealing. Fig. 3a shows the crystal growth rate as a function of the substrate's surface energy. When there is little difference between surface energies on a patterned substrate, such as in the case of Au and SiO2, the crystal growth rate is nearly the same on both surfaces and spherulites grow indiscriminately over the pattern, as seen in Fig. 3b. However, by treating Au with self-assembled monolayers to decrease its surface energy, Lee and co-workers created a growth differential that they were able to exploit to induce preferential in-plane molecular orientation of TES ADT along patterns of different shapes, and also around bends and corners, as shown in Fig. 3c.34 While such films remain polycrystalline, the ability to guide in-plane propagation of crystalline growth has reduced the extent of molecular orientation mismatch across grain boundaries, effectively eliminating high-angles of mismatch in molecular orientation. As such, molecules across these grain boundaries maintain a general orientation in which their π-planes remain preferential along the propagation front. As shown by Lee and co-workers in a subsequent publication, charge transport across such low-angle grain boundaries is less resistive compared to that across high-angle grain boundaries.41 While the active channels of TES ADT transistors with in-plane molecular orientation are not single-crystalline in nature, guiding the in-plane crystalline growth is still desirable as it eliminates high-angle grain boundaries and thus yields devices with higher mobilities as compared to devices with multiple spherulites in the channel, which inadvertently include high-angle inter-spherulitic boundaries.41
 Fig. 3  (a) The growth rate of TES ADT spherulites upon exposure to solvent vapor varies non-monotonically as a function of the surface energy of the underlying substrate. (b) TES ADT grows at nearly equal rates on untreated SiO2 and Au, and thus, spherulites grow isotropically over a pattern with these surfaces. (c) If Au is treated with a monolayer of pentafluorobenzenethiol (PFBT), TES ADT's retarded crystal growth rate on this surface results in directional crystallization around corners. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Intriguingly, TES ADT's growth rate dependence on surface energy is not monotonic (Fig. 3a). Lee and co-workers reported that the growth rate of TES ADT is highest on silicon dioxide; surfaces exhibiting both higher and lower surface energy reduces TES ADT growth rate by approximately 3-fold. This non-monotonic growth rate on the surface energy of the underlying substrate stems from competition between molecule–molecule and molecule–substrate interactions. On substrates with high surface energies, strong molecule–substrate interactions retard molecular assembly during crystallization. Alternatively, on substrates with low surface energies, molecule–molecule interactions dominate; the presence of pre-existing, randomly oriented nanoclusters of crystalline TES ADT in turn inhibits the propagation of the macroscopic spherulitic growth front during crystallization.
During solvent-vapor annealing of TES ADT, crystallization can be retarded when either molecule–surface or molecule–molecule interactions dominates. The crystallization rate is the fastest when a delicate balance is achieved between these two competing interactions. By patterning substrates with regions exhibiting different surface energies, Lee et al. were able to utilize the differential growth rates to control the directionality of crystal growth.34 This method of guiding in-plane molecular orientation through surface energy gradients is likely adaptable to other molecular and polymeric systems. By manipulating molecular interactions, we can spatially sculpt pathways favorable for crystal growth, thereby controlling the general orientation of molecules over macroscopic distances.
Rather than prescribing in-plane molecular orientation by tuning the strength of molecule–surface interactions, as Lee et. al. have done, one could alternatively tune the surface area over which molecule–surface interactions take place. By introducing topographical features prior to organic semiconductor deposition, its surface-to-volume ratio can be increased, thereby increasing the area over which molecules interact with the surface. One means of introducing such features is via nanoimprint lithography (NIL), which was first pioneered in 1995, and has been generally used to pattern micro- and nanostructures in polymeric films.42 In this process, as depicted in Fig. 4a, a mold, typically produced by patterning and reactive ion etching of silicon wafers, is treated with an anti-adhesion self-assembled monolayer, such as 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS), and subsequently pressed into a polymer film of interest that has been heated above its glass transition temperature. The polymer film is then cooled and allowed to solidify while still in contact with the mold, thereby adopting the surface topography.43–46Fig. 4 shows images of several such silicon molds and P3HT gratings and pillars produced with them. Interestingly, in many cases, the imposed topography of the mold also induces preferential alignment of the polymer chains relative to the mold. Aryl et al. reported that P3HT orients with its backbone oriented perpendicular to the underlying substrate within the mold cavities, as depicted in Fig. 5.44 Hlaing et al., however, observed the opposite – that a significant population of P3HT is preferentially oriented with its lamellar face-on within NIL-produced gratings.45 This contradiction highlights the current challenge in predicting the orientation of NIL-processed polymeric films and has been hypothesized to be due to differences in the dimensions of the gratings used in the two papers.47
 Fig. 4  (a) In nanoimprint lithography (NIL), a P3HT film is heated and contacted with a topographically patterned Si mold. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) a Si grating, viewed top-down, and (c) the P3HT gratings that resulted from NIL, viewed at a 45° tilt. Insets within each image show the cross-sectional view. Cylindrical geometries are also possible, as seen by (d) the top-down view of a Si nanopillar mold and (e) the corresponding P3HT nanopillars, viewed at a 45° tilt. Scale bars measure 200 nm unless otherwise noted. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Polymer flow dynamics into the nanocavity. Interactions between P3HT and the walls of the cavity coated with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS), an anti-adhesion layer, during NIL are hypothesized to cause the chains to align perpendicular to the side walls. Depicted is the idealized P3HT ordering resulting from NIL-produced (b) gratings and (c) nanopillars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Though the geometry of the nanostructures is clearly a critical factor in NIL-induced preferential orientation, the chemical structure and rigidity of the polymer are also vital in determining whether the polymer chains align preferentially along or normal to the primary axis of the topographical features.44,47,48 For example, subjecting liquid-crystalline poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole), F8BT, to NIL induces preferential alignment of its backbone parallel to the imprinted grooves,49 but subjecting poly(3,3′′-dido-decyl-quarterthiophene), PQT, to NIL, on the other hand, preferentially aligns the polymer backbone normal to the grooves.48,50 Deciphering the exact nature of the molecule–molecule and molecule–substrate interactions that are at play and their effects on molecular orientation are complicated, as polymer properties change under nanoconfinement.51,52 Though a thorough understanding to predictably orient polymer chains under confinement remains lacking, some guiding principles, such as those outlined by Hu and Jonas in a review on NIL-induced crystal orientation, exist.48
Ordering through confinement typically occurs when topographical features are on comparable length scales as the material parameter dictating self-assembly. Hence, while semiconducting polymers that tend to aggregate require nanoscale features to induce preferential alignment, semiconducting polymers that tend to form micron-sized spherulites or grains require topographical features that are micrometers in dimensions to induce preferential alignment of the grains. Fischer et al., for example, induced preferential orientation of P3HT grains in micrometer channels using confinement and post-deposition processing.7 By pre-treating the source and drain electrodes of a transistor with a hydrophobic self-assembled monolayer, Fischer et al. induced dewetting of the P3HT film from the electrodes during subsequent solvent-vapor annealing, thereby allowing the excess P3HT to flow into the untreated channel region. As the solvent-vapor pressure is subsequently reduced to induce recrystallization, the polymer chains orient with their π-stacking direction – the fastest crystal growth direction – aligned parallel to the confining electrodes (Fig. 6a). Fig. 6b shows an atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a film aligned in this matter that clearly shows P3HT crystalline lamellar ordering parallel to the electrodes. Not surprisingly, the degree of in-plane ordering correlates strongly with the length of the transistor channel (the confined dimension), with a substantial decrease in the extent of in-plane orientation when the channel lengths exceed 5 micrometers.7 Fabricating transistors from films of P3HT with molecular weights of 30.9 kg mol−1 and 58.8 kg mol−1 resulted in field-effect mobilities of 0.003 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.0095 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The higher mobility from devices with the higher molecular weight polymer is thought to stem from the fact that the polymer chains are longer and can therefore effectively bridge between crystalline lamellae.
 Fig. 6  (a) Recrystallizing P3HT films that are confined to a transistor channel causes the chains to orient such that the fastest crystal growth direction, which corresponds to the π-stacking direction, is aligned parallel to the confining electrode walls and the polymer backbone is aligned perpendicular to the electrodes, traversing the transistor channel. (b) AFM of films recrystallized under such confinement shows lamellar ordering parallel to the electrodes. (c) If an electric field is applied during the recrystallizing process, the preferred orientation of the polymer chains switches, with π-stacking now occurring perpendicular to the electrodes. (d) AFM of such films recrystallized in the presence of an electric field shows lamellar ordering perpendicular to the electrodes. Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2. By use of external fields

3.2.1. Electric fields. 
The second approach for introducing long-range in-plane molecular orientation in organic semiconductor thin films is to use external fields, which may be mechanical, electrical, magnetic or thermal in nature. External fields are generally better suited to ordering organic semiconductors over large areas compared to the previously discussed techniques, which rely on confinement, whose relevant length scales may or may not be compatible with large area processing. The use of an external field to induce long-range order is a “brute force approach” as the external field may induce the molecular system to overcome unfavorable molecule–electrode interactions to preferentially align with the field. For example, to overcome unfavorable molecule–electrode interaction and induce P3HT to preferentially organize with its π-stacking direction along – as opposed to normal to – the channel length, Fischer et al. applied an AC electric field across the source and drain electrodes during the solvent-vapor annealing procedure outlined above.7 In this case, the imposed electric field overwhelms confinement effects and induces P3HT to preferentially crystallize with π-stacking perpendicular and chains parallel to the electrodes (Fig. 6c). The corresponding AFM image in Fig. 6d shows the P3HT crystalline lamellae now oriented normal to the electrodes. Fisher et al. again fabricated transistors from films of two P3HTs with different molecular weights; they found that the higher molecular weight P3HT, when aligned in the electric field, produced transistors with an average field-effect mobility of 0.005 cm2 V−1 s−1, at half the mobility obtained in devices in which P3HT was preferentially oriented with its backbone normal to the electrodes. In contrast, the mobilities of transistors having the lower molecular weight P3HT were comparable regardless of the orientation of the polymer in the channel regions. These observations support the postulate that amorphous portions of long polymer chains spanning neighboring crystalline lamellae are crucial for charge transport across macroscopic distances. For devices with the higher molecular weight P3HT, chain alignment in the direction of charge transport results in the most efficient charge transport. For devices comprising the lower molecular weight P3HT, the polymer chains are likely too short to span neighboring lamellae, and as such transport across amorphous regions dominate device characteristics independent of how the crystalline lamellae are oriented.
Both AC and DC electric fields have been used to induce preferential in-plane alignment in a number of small molecule organic semiconductors53 and semiconducting polymers.54,55 When an external electric field is applied to polar molecules, the molecules will align so that their dipole moments are generally oriented in the direction of the electric field. A molecule need not be polar, however, to respond to an electric field. Electric fields can induce a dipole in a nonpolar molecule through slight distortion of the distribution of charges within the molecule. In such materials systems, the strength of the induced dipole is proportional to the molecule's frequency-dependent electric susceptibility, which is rarely, if ever, isotropic along molecular axes. The anisotropy arises from asymmetry in the molecular structure, which can be exploited to induce preferential in-plane ordering. If the molecule's electrical susceptibility differs along two orthogonal molecular axes, then the molecule will align so that the axis with the largest electrical susceptibility (and hence largest induced dipole) aligns with the applied electrical field.53 For example, when an electric field is applied to a drop-cast, thin film of nonpolar hexa(p–n-dodecylphenyl)hexabenzocoronene, HBC-PhC12 (Fig. 7a), during the course of solvent-evaporation, the molecules preferentially align with their coronene planes parallel to the electric field, resulting in π-stacking normal to the field, presumably because the largest induced dipole is parallel to the molecular plane.53 P3HT, on the other hand, aligns with its π-stacking direction parallel to the imposed electric field, suggesting that the electrical susceptibility normal to the polymer backbone is greater than that along its backbone.7 Little work, however, has been done theoretically or experimentally to quantitatively determine the electrical susceptibility tensors for organic semiconductors so while this method has been demonstrated with a handful of organic and polymeric semiconductors, it remains difficult to predictively orient these electrically active compounds with electric fields. The ability to pre-specify and realize specific molecular orientations accordingly will bring about a better understanding of the impact of the chemical structure on anisotropies of molecular properties.
 Fig. 7  (a) The chemical structure of HBC-PhC12. (b and c) In the presence of a magnetic field, diamagnetic HBC-PhC12 order into π-stacked fibrils preferentially aligned perpendicular to the direction of the field. (d) HBC-PhC12 films with fibrils aligned such that π-stacking is perpendicular, as opposed to parallel, to the electrodes show up to 75 times higher mobilities when incorporated into field-effect transistors. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2. Magnetic fields. 
In addition to using electric fields to align molecules, magnetic fields have similarly been shown as an option to induce long-range in-plane alignment. As with using the electric field to induce alignment, magnetic fields are best applied when some solvent is still present in the film to provide mobility to the molecules. Shklyarevskiy et al. induced long-range, in-plane ordering in drop-cast HBC-PhC12 films by applying a horizontal magnetic field during the course of solvent evaporation.56 HBC, like most organic semiconductors, is diamagnetic, meaning that although it has no permanent magnetic dipole, a weakly opposing magnetic dipole moment can be induced whose strength is proportional to the material's diamagnetic susceptibility in the presence of an externally applied magnetic field.57 Analogous to alignment with electric fields, long-range alignment of molecules in a magnetic field is thus possible if the molecules have large anisotropies in their diamagnetic susceptibility along two orthogonal molecular axes. Aromatic molecules, such as planar HBC, have a high anisotropy in diamagnetic susceptibility between the axes parallel (low diamagnetic susceptibility) and perpendicular (high diamagnetic susceptibility) to the plane of the molecule.56,58 Because the diamagnetic susceptibility induces a magnetic dipole moment that opposes the external magnetic field, energy is minimized when molecules align such that the axis with the lowest diamagnetic susceptibility is parallel to the direction of the magnetic field. In the case of HBC, the π-plane is preferentially oriented along the direction of the magnetic field, giving rise to π-stacked fibrils that align perpendicular to the direction of the field, as seen in AFM images in Fig. 7b and c.56 As a result of such long-range ordering, transistors having magnetically aligned HBC films as active layers show anisotropy in field-effect mobility as high as 75 times when molecules are aligned such that π-stacking occurs perpendicular, rather than parallel, to the electrodes (Fig. 7d).56
The use of magnetic fields to induce preferential orientation in organic semiconductor thin films has encountered some practical limitations that have prevented their more widespread use. Most molecules have low magnetic susceptibility anisotropy; large magnetic fields are thus required to achieve preferential alignment. In the HBC work described above, for example, a 20 Tesla field was used to induce preferential alignment. For reference, this magnetic field is roughly equivalent to twice that of a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer. Furthermore, alignment using magnetic fields is not possible across small grains or domain volumes containing few molecules.59 Because the magnetic susceptibilities of organic molecules are so small, the reduction in free energy from aligning a single molecule is significantly smaller than the molecule's thermal energy, kT, even with the strongest manmade magnetic fields currently available.59,60 Some critical number of molecules, the number of which depends on the strength of the field used and the magnitude of magnetic susceptibility anisotropy, is necessary in order to overcome thermal energy and induce alignment. For example, inducing preferential orientation of a thermotropic aromatic liquid crystal in a 6 Tesla magnetic field at room temperature requires critical domain sizes of the order 100–200 nm laterally.59,61 Despite these limitations, magnetic field alignment remains a useful tool, particularly given that it does not require physical contact with the organic semiconductor thin film, and is scalable to large areas and compatible with continuous processing, and can be easily coupled with other post-deposition processing techniques, such as solvent-vapor annealing, given the space pervasive nature of the field.59


3.2.3. Mechanical force fields. 
Mechanical forces are amongst the most common external fields applied to organic semiconductor thin films, typically through mechanical shearing of films. Shear forces can be applied via mechanical rubbing5,62,63 or stretching64 and are highly effective at ordering polymer chains in-plane. In polymer films, the degree of in-plane orientation achievable via mechanical rubbing is inversely correlated with the molecular weight of the polymers, as longer chains tend to tangle and, as a consequence, have reduced motion in the melt.63 Applying mechanical force to induce in-plane ordering has also shown in some instances to simultaneously alter the out-of-plane ordering. For example, Hartmann and co-workers found that when subjecting P3HT to mechanical rubbing to induce in-plane orientation, the out-of-plane orientation is altered as well, with the thiophene π-plane switching from an edge-on to a face-on orientation.63 A similar edge-on to face-on transition upon mechanical rubbing was observed for poly(2,5-bis(3-dodecyl-2-yl)-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene), C12-pBTTT.5 In addition to possibly affecting the out-of-plane molecular orientation, mechanical rubbing also has the potential to affect the crystal structure, as Giri et al. found 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilythynyl) pentacene, TIPS-pentacene, to undergo a polymorphic transition under shear.65 Because mechanically rubbing a polymer or small molecule organic semiconductor thin film can produce scratches that may reduce effective charge transport, often mechanically rubbed films are simply used as thin alignment layers for the subsequently deposited active layer.10,66 Indeed, mechanical rubbing is typically better suited for the alignment of thin films (less than 100 nm) as the ordering must propagate from the surface through the film.63,67
Photoresponsive polymers that preferentially cross-linked under polarized light have also been demonstrated as effective alignment layers.68 However, with such layers in place, alignment is dictated during deposition of the organic semiconductor. Recently, Park et al. introduced post-deposition alignment of TIPS-pentacene.69 As opposed to sequential deposition of the alignment layer and the organic semiconductor, poly(vinylcinnamate), PVCi, a photoactive polymer, was pre-mixed with TIPS-pentacene in solution; deposition of the cosolution formed a common active layer.69 Upon thermal annealing and irradiation of the film with nonpolarized light, spherulites form with no macroscopic in-plane ordering. However, if linearly polarized ultraviolet light is used instead, the TIPS-pentacene grains are preferentially aligned parallel to the direction of polarization, as shown in Fig. 8, with its π-stacking occurring in the direction of grain growth. By inducing π-stacking preferentially along – as opposed to normal to – the channel length, the authors measured field-effect mobilities that differ by a factor of 50, the highest mobility anisotropy reported for TIPS-pentacene-based transistors.69 Park et al. hypothesized that this structural anisotropy stems from preferential interactions between TIPS-pentacene's soluble side groups and the cinnamate groups of PCVi, which dissociate from the polymer backbone upon illumination. Though the exact mechanism by which this alignment occurs is not yet understood, Park et al. believed that the side-groups of TIPS-pentacene play an important role as control experiments with unsubstituted pentacene and showed no preferential alignment.
 Fig. 8  Optical micrographs of TIPS-pentacene/PVCi films after exposure to (a) non-polarized light, (b) vertically polarized light, and (c) horizontally polarized light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2013, the American Institute of Physics. 


3.2.4. Thermal gradients. 
Thermal gradients also have the potential to induce long-range in-plane orientation, though their application after film formation has not been widely explored. The use of thermal gradients to control crystallization has long been used in metal and semiconductor industries, where zone-annealing is a robust means of producing large grains. A derivative of this method, zone-casting, has been shown to produce ordered films of several organic semiconductors.11,70,71 But zone-casting, as implied by its name, produces preferential alignment of organic semiconductors during film formation and not post-deposition. Recently, Schweicher et al. demonstrated post-deposition ordering of terthiophene, 3T, with thermal gradients.72 A film of 3T was moved at a constant velocity from a plate heated above its melting temperature to another plate that is just below its crystallization temperature, as depicted in Fig. 9a. This transfer induces crystallization of the films with molecules uniaxially aligned in the plane of the substrate (Fig. 9b).72 Interestingly, Schweicher et al. were also able to access a previously unreported metastable polymorph of 3T using the thermal gradient recrystallization process. In addition to providing a means of tuning the molecular packing and in-plane molecular orientation, thermal gradient processing may also potentially provide a means of tuning the out-of-plane molecular orientation as well. Thermal gradients were applied to poly(styrene-block-methyl methacrylate), PS-b-PMMA diblock copolymer thin films, to induce preferential orientation of the hexagonally packed cylinders either parallel or perpendicular to the substrate.73 This technique is promising and warrants further investigation, particularly in its applicability to organic semiconductors and in probing the effects of thermal gradient processing on the electrical properties of such electrically active thin films.
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic of the set-up used to create a thermal gradient across a terthiophene film. (b) A cartoon of terthiophene crystals depicts their orientation with respect to the substrate and thermal gradient direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

4. Tuning out-of-plane molecular orientation
As in the case with in-plane molecular orientation, the large-scale ordering of molecules in the out-of-plane direction of organic semiconductor thin films has similarly been shown to critically affect charge transport in devices. While in-plane molecular orientation in organic semiconductor thin films mostly affects devices in which lateral charge transport occurs (i.e., thin-film transistors), the out-of-plane molecular orientation can affect device performance across various platforms, including OLEDs, TFTs, and solar cells.74,75 The necessity for controlling the out-of-plane orientation has been long known, but doing so in practice has proven to be challenging. Out-of-plane orientation must typically be specified prior to organic semiconductor deposition through modification of the substrate surface energy76–78 or modification of the molecule's chemical structure,79 or during deposition under stringent conditions.80 There have been only a handful of demonstrations where the out-of-plane molecular orientation of organic semiconductor thin films is tuned with post-deposition processing after film formation.
4.1. By tuning molecular interactions
We have recently demonstrated the ability to tune the degree of out-of-plane orientation of contorted hexabenzocoronene thin films on a common substrate through a myriad of post-deposition treatments.22 By exposing the film to either hexane solvent-vapor or the residual oligomers from a partially cured poly(dimethylsiloxane), PDMS, stamp, we can induce HBC to crystallize and adopt either a semi face-on or a highly edge-on orientation, respectively (Fig. 10a and b). Thermally annealing the organic semiconductor thin film, in contrast, results in HBC adopting a distribution of orientations with both edge-on and face-on populations. Our ability to tune the molecular orientation stems from the fact that HBC forms amorphous films when deposited, making them ideal candidates for structural development via post-deposition processing. HBC's non-planar conformation, with its outer aryl rings bent out-of-plane from its coronene core, frustrates HBC self-assembly during deposition, resulting in an amorphous film. We can thus apply post-deposition treatments to the film to control the out-of-plane orientation without necessitating any modification to the substrate or the need for different deposition conditions. As expected, field-effect mobilities in thin-film transistors constructed with HBC films correlate positively with the degree of edge-on orientation. TFTs having PDMS-treated HBC films as channels exhibit a field-effect mobility that is two orders of magnitude higher than TFTs with amorphous HBC as active layers (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) Amorphous HBC films may be crystallized through a variety of post-deposition processes: hexane-vapor annealing, thermal annealing, and contact with PDMS. Crystallizing HBC films by making them come into contact with PDMS oligomers produces crystals with a clearly defined out-of-plane orientation, as observed by the appearance of spots in the 2D-GIWAXS image. (b) The azimuthal (φ) distribution of intensity of the (100) crystallographic plane in a 2D-GIWAXS pattern indicates how crystals are oriented relative to the substrate. Intensity near φ = 0° indicates edge-on orientation and intensity near φ = 70° indicates a nearly face-on orientation, as depicted graphically. (c) TFTs fabricated from treated HBC films exhibit field-effect mobilities that are strongly correlated with an edge-on molecular orientation. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
4.2. By external fields
As in the case with tuning in-plane molecular orientation, external fields have also been applied to tune the out-of-plane molecular orientation. However, the length scale across which these fields are applied is significantly smaller for out-of-plane molecular ordering compared to those required for in-plane ordering. External fields to induce in-plane molecular orientation are often applied over macroscopic distances of several to tens of microns, given that these are the relevant length scales over which molecules have to be oriented for functional devices. Preferential molecular orientation in the out-of-plane direction, however, needs only to be imposed on the film thickness, which is typically ca. 100–200 nm. Creating external fields over such small length scales where molecule–substrate interactions may be more pronounced can be challenging, as it requires finer control.
Stress and strain fields have been demonstrated as means of controlling the out-of-plane molecular orientation, in addition to controlling the in-plane orientation of organic and polymer semiconductors. As previously noted, mechanical rubbing of P3HT films results in polymer chains orienting along the direction of shear. However, the applied force also results in P3HT re-orienting in the out-of-plane direction. Specifically, P3HT chains re-orient under mechanical rubbing such that the thiophene π-plane is preferentially face-on, rather than edge-on, dramatically altering the π-stacking direction.63 A similar transition from preferential edge-on to face-on orientation was also observed in highly strained films of P3HT.8 Recently, coupling mechanical alignment with thermal annealing has also been shown to affect the out-of-plane orientation in polymer semiconductor thin films. Hosokawa and co-workers formed films of poly[benzo[1,2-d:4,5-d′]bisthiazole-2,6,-diyl(3′,4,4′′,4′′′-tetradodecyl[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophene]-5,5′′′-diyl)], PTB, using a friction-transfer process, during which a solid pellet of the polymer is drawn into a film atop a heated substrate, as depicted in Fig. 11a.6 This is not an example of post-deposition processing in the strictest sense, as the friction-transfer process occurs while the film is being formed. However, we have chosen to include this example since the friction-transfer process is similar to the post-deposition process of mechanical rubbing as it induces the PTB backbone to preferentially align along the direction of shear. While the in-plane orientation of PTB is invariant with the substrate temperature, the conjugated backbone's out-of-plane orientation depends on processing conditions. At a substrate temperature of 100 °C during friction-transfer, PBT adopts a face-on orientation with π-stacking occurring out-of-plane, shown in Fig. 11b. However, friction-transfer above 240 °C causes PBT to adopt a purely edge-on orientation, with π-stacking parallel to the substrate, shown in Fig. 11c. At intermediate temperatures, the authors observe a distribution of molecular orientations with the fraction of edge-on orientation dependent on the processing temperature. The authors attribute this change in orientation with temperature to the increased motion of the alkyl side chains.6 A similar observation of a transition from face-on to edge-on orientation at elevated temperatures was also recently made by Biniek et al. in mechanically rubbed films of C12-pBTTT films.5 Like the previous authors, Biniek and co-workers hypothesized that the alkyl side chains gain greater motion at elevated temperatures, thereby weakening molecule–substrate interactions and resulting in the semiconducting polymer adopting an increasingly edge-on orientation. Prior work has demonstrated control of the out-of-plane molecular orientation by changing the functional groups of the parent compound, thereby altering the balance between molecule–molecule and molecule–substrate interactions.79 However, Hosokawa's and Biniek's studies demonstrate that these interactions can be tuned under post-deposition processing conditions without the need to access different derivatives, making comparison of electrical performance less convoluted and solely dependent on molecular orientation. Accessing both face- on and edge-on orientations as well as directing the in-plane orientation of the polymer backbone, Hosokawa et al. were able to probe the field-effect mobilities of PBT along its three primary axes. They found the mobility to be 15 times higher along the polymer backbone than that along its π-stacking direction, and 103 times higher along the backbone than that along the alkyl chains. Likewise, Biniek et al. also observed the highest field-effect mobilities along the polymer backbone when C12-pBTTT chains were aligned perpendicular to the transistor electrodes.
 Fig. 11  (a) Films of PTB, whose chemical structure is depicted, are formed by the friction-transfer process shown on a heated substrate. 2D-GIWAXS patterns taken on films prepared at (b) 100 °C and (c) 240 °C indicate that the polymers adopt face-on and edge-on orientations, respectively, in each case. Adapted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. 
Electric and magnetic fields should also provide means of controlling the out-of-plane molecular orientation in organic semiconductor thin films, given their success in controlling in-plane molecular orientations. However, external electric fields have not been as widely used to control the out-of-plane molecular orientation as they have been in controlling the in-plane molecular orientation, with liquid crystalline systems being one pronounced exception.81,82 The lack of use of electric fields to align molecules in the out-of-plane direction is surprising given their success with producing in-plane alignment and given that stronger fields can be produced over shorter distances for the same voltage drop. Certainly, the need for a top electrode in a vertical geometry creates complications. With increased contact between the film and electrodes, confinement effects may also limit the amount of out-of-plane molecular orientation achievable by imposing an electric field. Additionally, to probe the resulting film structure, the top electrode would have to be removed. With recent demonstrations of laminating and delaminating electrode contacts, this difficulty should be surmountable.83 Working with scientists at the National Institute of Standards and Technology as well as the Brookhaven National Laboratory, our group has also explored variants of near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS) during which the fluorescence signals stemming from the organic semiconductor underneath the electrode are maximized. In this manner, we have been able to conduct in situ measurements to probe structural changes in organic semiconductor active layers in the presence of an electric field.84
In contrast, liquid crystalline (LC) devices, whose field-assisted assemblies under bias have led to the commercial success of liquid crystal displays, have avoided confinement issues since the liquid crystalline films are microns thick and form excellent physical and electrical contact with the electrodes. Furthermore, the ordering effect of applied electric fields can be characterized optically in liquid crystalline devices through the transparent electrodes without the necessity for more advanced techniques, such as NEXAFS or grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GI-WAXS). Materials development and structural characterization techniques will advance the use of electric-field assisted assembly.
Magnetic fields have been used during film formation85 or nanowire growth86 to subtly improve out-of-plane molecular orientation (i.e., from edge-on to highly edge-on). However, magnetic fields have not been widely applied as a means of post-deposition processing to controllably tune the out-of-plane molecular orientation of organic semiconductor thin films or nanostructures. Using stronger magnetic fields and designing molecular or polymeric systems with larger magnetic susceptibility anisotropy may aid in overcoming this barrier.59,87,88 Hybrid organic–inorganic materials systems may prove a more accessible starting-point; Pelligra et al. recently induced out-of-plane ordering of Co-doped ZnO nanowires in thin-films of P3HT and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) through magnetic-field directed assembly.89
Perhaps the least utilized external field to induce preferential alignment of organic semiconductors is gravitational. Smith et al. recently demonstrated an elegant way that takes advantage of gravity to tune the out-of-plane alignment of inorganic, segmented, anisotropic particles.90 They formed silica-encased gold wires with varying centers-of-mass by partially etching the interior gold wire. The wires with highly offset, non-symmetric center-of-masses aligned vertically upon sedimenting, while wires with symmetrically located centers-of-masses laid in the plane of the substrate. By tuning the geometry of the segmented wires, Smith et al. have thus demonstrated control over the degree of out-of-plane orientation. Such an approach may be practically extended to organic semiconductors, particularly with increasing interest in hybrid organic–inorganic devices, as the density differences between the organic and inorganic components may be greater. For example, segmented wire geometries composed of Au and P3HT similar to those investigated by Smith et al.90 were recently synthesized, though their ordering properties were not explored.91
5. Tuning the crystal packing
The smallest length scale of ordering in organic semiconductors films is defined by the molecular crystal lattice, which specifies how the molecules are arranged with respect to one another within a unit cell. In conjunction with the chemical structure of the molecule, the molecular crystal determines the intrinsic charge transport characteristics of a crystalline film. While tuning the in- and out-of-plane molecular orientations alters how crystals are oriented with respect to the substrate – allowing one to align the crystallographic direction with highest charge mobility with the direction of charge transport in the device – such changes do not affect the intrinsic electronic properties of the organic semiconductor. Changing the crystal structure is thus an appealing proposition as it provides the opportunity to potentially increase the intrinsic charge transport of the organic semiconductor. However, doing so in practice first requires an understanding of the relationship between the crystal structure and its charge transport characteristics so that one might know the ideal crystal structure to target. It further requires a means of modifying the crystal structure of the organic semiconductor. To the first point, while we still do not have a crisp understanding of what the ideal crystal structure might be, some general guidelines exist. For example, in solution-processable anthradithiophenes, Anthony and co-workers have observed that derivatives that have at least two close contact neighboring molecules, as opposed to one, in their unit cell tended to form more two-dimensional crystals in films, thereby yielding devices with higher field-effect mobilities.92 Furthermore, given that the degree of π-orbital overlap between adjacent molecules directly affects the rate of intermolecular charge transfer,93 crystal structures that maximizes π-orbital overlap are generally desired in crystalline organic semiconductors.
To the second point of modifying the molecular packing, the introduction of different substituents to the parent organic semiconductor compound has been the most common approach to modify molecular packing. By introducing different substituents to a parent compound, one can influence the intermolecular interactions, thereby providing an opportunity to alter the solid-state packing of the molecules.92,94,95 However, our ability to predict the intermolecular interactions and the resulting crystal structures based on chemical structures alone is still lacking, making it challenging to specify the desired molecular packing a priori and synthesize accordingly. Further complicating matters is the fact that derivitization of a molecule will necessarily affect other properties, including its solubility in common solvents, optical absorbance, stability in air, and the placements of its highest-occupied and lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital energy levels relative to the vacuum level.94 Hence, polymorphism – the ability of a molecule to adopt more than one crystal structure – has garnered increasing interest in the organic semiconductor community as it provides the unique opportunity to study the effects of molecular packing without the need for altering the chemical structure of the compound. A greater understanding of crystal structure may provide opportunities to improve the intrinsic charge transport capability of the organic semiconductor.
Many organic semiconductors have already been shown to be polymorphic; pentacene,80,96 rubrene,97–99 sexithiophene,100,101 tetrathiophene,102 TES-ADT,103 and dithiophene-tetrathiafulvalene (DT-TTF)104,105 all have polymorphs. While the occurrence of polymorphism is not uncommon, predicting which compounds will demonstrate polymorphism and then further predicting the crystal packing of each polymorph and, accordingly, their properties can be challenging.106 Modeling intermolecular interactions to computationally predict polymorphs is an area of growing interest, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry where polymorphism can lead to improvements in the drugs' solubility and efficacy.107 However, even if we may computationally map the energy landscape to capture all the polymorphs, we still lack an understanding of how to experimentally traverse this energy landscape and access the different polymorphic structures of a given organic semiconductor. As we still lack predictive methods by which to experimentally access the different polymorphs of organic semiconductors, they are generally found serendipitously under varying crystal growth conditions. Pentacene, for example, has been reported to have four polymorphs – two “thin-film phases” and two “bulk phases”80,96 – where the dominance of each polymorph depends on appropriate selection of the substrate, film thickness, and temperature during deposition.80
Post-deposition processes, such as thermal and solvent-vapor annealing, have frequently been used to access the thermodynamically favored polymorph of organic semiconductors.80,100,101,108–110 These conditions provide the organic semiconductors with sufficient molecular motion so they can rearrange and transform from the metastable polymorph to ones at lower energy states. For example, metastable, thin-film polymorphs of pentacene, identified by their d(001) spacings of 15.4 Å and 15.0 Å, irreversibly convert to the more favored, “bulk phase” polymorphs with d(001) spacings of 14.4 and 14.1 Å, respectively, upon thermal annealing80 or exposure to solvent vapors.108,109 Similarly, quarterthiophene and sexithiophene irreversibly convert to their thermodynamically favored polymorphs when heated above 191 °C110 and 270–290 °C,100,101 respectively. These examples demonstrate the ability to reproducibly access the lower energy polymorph of a molecular crystal. Accessing the metastable structure in a reproducible manner, however, remains challenging. Given that post-deposition processing methods are applied to amorphous films and crystallization takes place in a controlled manner, post-deposition processing may provide a means of accessing the more energetic, metastable polymorphs.
In this regard, Giri et al. recently accessed a metastable polymorph of TIPS-pentacene via solution-shearing, where a shearing plate is pulled across a heated TIPS-pentacene solution deposited on SiO2, as shown in Fig. 12a.65 By controlling the shearing speed, Giri et al. can control the rate of solvent evaporation and thereby also the structural development in the film. At fast shearing rates at or above ∼1.6 mm s−1, the packing motif of TIPS-pentacene changes; molecules adopt a metastable, strained-lattice polymorph that can revert to the thermodynamically favored crystal structure of TIPS-pentacene upon subsequent toluene-vapor annealing. The metastable packing is only accessible at fast shearing speeds during which solvent evaporation is rapid, thereby kinetically trapping TIPS-pentacene in the metastable polymorph before it can equilibrate. Furthermore, the rapid solvent evaporation provides less time for molecular rearrangement before vitrification, and consequently a less edge-on oriented film with smaller and more spherulitic domains is accessed (see Fig. 12b). At a slower shearing rate of 0.4 mm s−1, the solvent evaporates more slowly, providing time for molecular rearrangement. Thus, not surprisingly, these slowly sheared crystalline films adopt the thermodynamically favored polymorph of TIPS-pentacene with large and well-oriented crystals up to a centimeter in length within which the molecules are preferentially oriented “edge-on” to the substrate (see Fig. 12c). Hence, the shearing speed provides an indirect tuning knob to adjust the relative strengths of molecule–molecule and molecule–solvent interactions, allowing molecule–solvent interactions to dominate at slow shearing speeds and molecule–molecule interactions to dominate at faster shearing speeds.
 Fig. 12  (a) Different polymorphs of TIPS-pentacene, whose chemical structure is shown, are accessible by varying the speed at which the solution is sheared. (b) The polarized optical image shows a TIPS-pentacene film sheared at a relatively high rate, 4 mm s−1, resulting in a film with a kinetically trapped, metastable crystal structure. (c) At a lower shearing speed (0.4 mm s−1 shown), the thermodynamically favored crystal structure is accessed. Despite having better in-plane alignment, the slowly sheared films demonstrate poorer field-effect mobilities in transistors, suggesting that the metastable crystal structure is more favorable for charge transport. The scale bars denote 200 μm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, ref. 63, copyright 2011. 
Interestingly, though films sheared at slow speeds contained larger and more “edge-on” oriented crystals, the attributes that should lead to higher mobilities when incorporated into transistors, transistors comprising these films instead demonstrated mobilities that were a factor of 5.8 lower than those comprising films sheared at higher speeds. This difference in field-effect mobilities implies that the metastable TIPS-pentacene crystal packing is intrinsically better for charge transport. Indeed, the unit cell of the metastable crystal suggests that the characteristic spacing between π-planes in the metastable polymorph is smaller than that in the thermodynamically favored polymorph; the more extensive π-orbital overlap between molecules is presumed to be more effective at facilitating intermolecular charge transport.
As Giri et al.'s work with TIPS-pentacene demonstrated, accessing different polymorphs ultimately depends on the competition between thermodynamics and kinetics and post-deposition processing provides us with the unique opportunity to tune the parameters affecting this competition. Thermodynamics will always favor the more stable polymorph, regardless of whether its charge transport characteristics are better or worse than the metastable polymorph. But different processing conditions enable the organic semiconductor thin films to be kinetically trapped in metastable polymorphs. Because post-deposition processing often provides finer control over the crystallization process than during the often more rapid process of film formation, we believe post-deposition processing to be a valuable tool to increase access to metastable polymorphs.
All the polymorphic systems discussed thus far appear to be monotropic, meaning that only one polymorphic structure is thermodynamically favored over the temperature range extending to the polymorph's melt temperature.106 Thus, accessing the metastable polymorph is only possible by kinetically trapping the system, and if the metastable polymorph is heated above a given transition temperature, it irreversibly transforms to the stable polymorph. If, however, the polymorphic transition temperature lies below the lowest melting temperature of the two polymorphs, then each structure is thermodynamically favored over a distinct temperature range and may be reversibly accessed by changing temperature. This condition is defined as enantiotropism.106 Jurchescu et al. demonstrated that fluorinated 5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene (diF-TES-ADT) exhibits enantiotropism as it is possible to reversibly convert between its two polymorphic structures at 21 °C.103 The two polymorphs are not drastically different in the structure – each crystallographic axis of the unit cell changes by a mere 1–2% – but these small changes in the lattice dimensions manifest themselves as distinct differences in the performance of transistors fabricated from both single crystals and thin films of the low- and high-temperature polymorphs. Charge transport is often thermally activated in organic semiconductors so a positive correlation between temperature and field-effect mobility is to be expected, but the two polymorphs demonstrate different thermal dependencies, with the lower temperature polymorph's field-effect mobility increasing more sharply with increasing temperature than the high-temperature polymorph.
Tuning the pressure is yet another common method of accessing different polymorphs. Phase diagrams, common for inorganic alloys, indicate how changes in pressure and temperature affect the crystal structure. Though organic semiconductors are commonly thermally treated, pressure-treatment is less often applied and yet has significant potential to affect packing. For example, the application of 5 GPa of pressure has been shown to alter the packing of C60, a commonly used electron acceptor in organic solar cells.111 Depending on the temperature at which the pressure is applied (between 300 and 800 °C), different polymorphs of carbon (i.e., allotropes) are accessed.111 If pressure is applied without simultaneous heating, however, C60 irreversibly collapses first into graphitic carbon at 17 GPa and then into an amorphous phase at 50 GPa.112 Wang and co-workers recently reported repeating such high-pressure and ambient-temperature experiments with m-xylene-solvated C60.113 Despite peak broadening, weakening, and slight shifts of peak positions in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of this compound, the pattern associated with the hexagonal closed-pack structure of C60 persists up to a pressure of 60 GPa,113 whereas unsolvated C60 begins to irreversibly amorphize at 30 GPa.114 While XRD suggests the preservation of long-range structural order, Raman spectroscopy of solvated C60 films indicates that C60 cages collapse and amorphize locally at 32 GPa. Thus, the information from these two complimentary, structure-probing techniques provided evidence for the presence of ordered amorphous carbon clusters (OACC), where amorphous carbon clusters are organized on a hexagonally closed-pack lattice.
This study is an excellent example of how pressure enables tuning of the molecular interactions between the solute and solvent, thereby providing a means for macroscopic structural manipulation. Because of molecule–solvent interactions, the hexagonally closed-packed lattice is maintained under high pressures even as the carbon–carbon bonds are broken and C60 is locally amorphized.113 The inclusion of solvent molecules critically maintains the hexagonal closed-pack structure as the solvent molecules create isolated pockets of C60 in the lattice. Hence, when the fullerene cages collapse at high pressures, the amorphous carbon clusters remain isolated at the lattice site. This role of the solvent is further supported by the fact that if m-xylene is subsequently evaporated from OACC by thermal annealing, the film loses its long-range periodicity, ultimately resulting in the formation of amorphous carbon.
Aside from a few examples, such as C60 and rubrene,115 little work has been done in characterizing the mechanical properties of small molecule organic semiconductor crystal lattices; efforts have generally focused on understanding the electronic properties instead. However, a better understanding of the mechanical properties may lead to greater applications of mechanical forces to tune the crystal packing motifs that are desirable for organic electronic devices.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Post-deposition processing methods, such as thermal and solvent-vapor annealing, are routinely utilized in organic device fabrication, most commonly as a means of increasing crystallinity and grain coarsening. Now, increasingly promising post-deposition processing methods, as we have reviewed, have been demonstrated as means of controlling other attributes of the film structure: the in-plane and out-of-plane crystal orientation and molecular packing. Arguments against post-deposition processing have included the fact that it is an extra step, thereby increasing processing time, expense, and complexity for device fabrication. Indeed this assertion is true. We should ideally be able to specify the assembly of molecules and their structure in the solid state through chemical design alone, negating the necessity for any further manipulation of the film structure. However, doing so is currently beyond our capabilities. While chemical approaches have been demonstrated for tuning individually the in- and out-of-plane molecular orientations and molecular packing, finding chemical modifications that yield the desired film structure in all three of these regards is complicated. Post-deposition processing, however, can allow us to tune these various aspects simultaneously, providing a non-synthetic route by which to direct the assembly of molecules in electrically active films.
As our understanding of processing–structure–function relationships for organic semiconductors grows, we will expand our ability to manipulate the film structure into desired morphologies through coupled post-deposition processing treatments. For example, application of non-uniform and gradient fields has not been widely explored. Alternatively, combinations of post-deposition processing techniques may yield further tuning knobs over the film structure. Building upon the work demonstrated thus far, future research direction for post-deposition processing will include applying it to multicomponent systems to control the various aspects of the film structure in a more complex phase space. Additionally, though a substantial library of post-deposition processing techniques has been demonstrated to control the in-plane ordering of grains, few techniques have been demonstrated to control the out-of-plane molecular orientation and even fewer for controlling the crystal structure. Extending post-deposition processing techniques to control ordering at smaller length scales, such as the molecular packing, is also likely to be an area of growing interest.
As controlling the film structure at these smaller length scales ultimately requires control over the molecule–molecule, molecule–substrate, and molecule–solvent interactions, a more quantitative understanding of these interactions will be necessary. In this regard, computational efforts to model molecular interactions may play an important role in furthering our understanding. Greater exploration of the experimental phase space with a variety of organic semiconductors may also aid in enhancing our understanding of molecular interactions and control ordering at smaller length scales. Often post-deposition processing techniques are demonstrated in films of a single organic semiconductor. Though the ability to tune these various film attributes is certainly material-specific, demonstration of the applicability or lack thereof of these techniques to other molecules may provide greater intuition as to the molecule–substrate, molecule–molecule, and molecule–solvent interactions that are most important to direct structuring of organic semiconductor thin films.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from the NSF MRSEC program through the Princeton Center for Complex Materials (Grant DMR-0819860) and the SOLAR Initiative at the NSF (DMR-10135217). A. M. H. also acknowledges support through the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship.
References
P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-G. Zhan, J. A. Nichols and D. A. Dixon, J. Phys.Chem. A, 2003, 107, 4184–4195 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas, J. P. Calbert, D. A. da Silva Filho and J. Cornil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5804–5809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Lan and C.-I. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14555–14564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Biniek, N. Leclerc, T. Heiser, R. Bechara and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4014–4023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hosokawa, M. Misaki, S. Yamamoto, M. Torii, K. Ishida and Y. Ueda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 203305 CrossRef .
F. S. U. Fischer, K. Tremel, M. Sommer, E. J. C. Crossland and S. Ludwigs, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2138–2144 RSC .
B. O'Connor, R. J. Kline, B. R. Conrad, L. J. Richter, D. Gundlach, M. F. Toney and D. M. DeLongchamp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3697–3705 CrossRef .
V. Palermo and P. Samorì, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4428–4432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, W. M. Wang, A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1217–1232 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Luca, W. Pisula, D. Credgington, E. Treossi, O. Fenwick, G. M. Lazzerini, R. Dabirian, E. Orgiu, A. Liscio, V. Palermo, K. Müllen, F. Cacialli and P. Samori, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1279–1295 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Tsao and K. Müllen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2372–2386 RSC .
B. R. Kaafarani, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 378–396 CrossRef .
M. Muthukumar, C. K. Ober and E. L. Thomas, Science, 1997, 277, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Angelescu, J. H. Waller, R. A. Register and P. M. Chaikin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1878–1881 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Park, M. P. Stoykovich, R. Ruiz, Y. Zhang, C. T. Black and P. F. Nealey, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 607–611 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mezzenga, J. Ruokolainen, G. H. Fredrickson, E. J. Kramer, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and O. Ikkala, Science, 2003, 299, 1872–1874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Samori, A. Helman, F. Biscarini and F. Cacialli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Dickey, J. E. Anthony and Y. L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1721–1726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Ding, R. B. Xing, L. D. Zheng, Y. Sun, X. D. Wang, J. Q. Ding, L. X. Wang and Y. C. Han, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 15159–15166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Xiao, M. Myers, Q. Miao, S. Sanaur, K. L. Pang, M. L. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7390–7394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Hiszpanski, S. S. Lee, H. Wang, A. R. Woll, C. Nuckolls and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 294–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yokoyama, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19187–19202 RSC .
C. J. Takacs, Y. M. Sun, G. C. Welch, L. A. Perez, X. F. Liu, W. Wen, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16597–16606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Yiu, P. M. Beaujuge, O. P. Lee, C. H. Woo, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 2180–2185 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cabanetos, A. El Labban, J. A. Bartelt, J. D. Douglas, W. R. Mateker, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. D. McGehee and P. M. Beaujuge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4656–4659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595–7597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ho, B. W. Boudouris and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7895–7899 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, M. Koppe, J. Gao, F. Cordella, M. A. Loi, P. Denk, M. Morana, H.-J. Egelhaaf, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, R. Gaudiana, D. Waller, Z. Zhu, X. Shi and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 367–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Tsoi, D. T. James, E. B. Domingo, J. S. Kim, M. Al-Hashimi, C. E. Murphy, N. Stingelin, M. Heeney and J.-S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9646–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge, T. W. Holcombe, O. P. Lee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15547–15549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, K. Rahimi, G. Reiter, U. Steiner and S. Ludwigs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 518–524 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Lee, S. B. Tang, D.-M. Smilgies, A. R. Woll, M. A. Loth, J. M. Mativetsky, J. E. Anthony and Y.-L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2692–2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, E. Smits, H. Wondergem, C. Tanase, P. Blom, P. Smith and D. de Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 601–606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Gundlach, Y. Y. Lin, T. N. Jackson, S. F. Nelson and D. G. Schlom, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1997, 18, 87–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shtein, J. Mapel, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 268–270 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Shepard and R. D. Priestley, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 862–872 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, W.-S. Chung, K. Kim, D. Y. Kim, K.-J. Paeng, S. M. Jo and S.-Y. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3538–3546 CrossRef CAS .
S.-E. Park, S. Kim, K. Kim, H.-E. Joe, B. Jung, E. Kim, W. Kim, B.-K. Min and J. Hwang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7773–7779 RSC .
S. S. Lee, J. M. Mativetsky, M. A. Loth, J. E. Anthony and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9879–9886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chou, P. R. Krauss and P. J. Renstrom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 3114–3116 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cui, H. Li, H. Park and X. Cheng, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2008, 26, 2404–2409 CAS .
M. Aryal, K. Trivedi and W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hlaing, X. Lu, T. Hofmann, K. G. Yager, C. T. Black and B. M. Ocko, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7532–7538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aryal, F. Buyukserin, K. Mielczarek, X. M. Zhao, J. M. Gao, A. Zakhidov and W. C. Hu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2008, 26, 2562–2566 CAS .
Y. Yang, K. Mielczarek, M. Aryal, A. Zakhidov and W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2877–2892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu and A. M. Jonas, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 21–28 RSC .
Z. Zheng, K.-H. Yim, M. S. M. Saifullah, M. E. Welland, R. H. Friend, J.-S. Kim and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 987–992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, B. Muls, L. Gence, D. A. Serban, J. Hofkens, S. Melinte, B. Nysten, S. Demoustier-Champagne and A. M. Jonas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3639–3644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-S. Kim and R. H. Dauskardt, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1955–1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Guo and R. D. Priestley, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4001–4006 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cristadoro, G. Lieser, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 586–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mas-Torrent, D. den Boer, M. Durkut, P. Hadley and A. Schenning, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, S265–S269 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Martin, Polymer, 2002, 43, 4421–4436 CrossRef CAS .
I. O. Shklyarevskiy, P. Jonkheijm, N. Stutzmann, D. Wasserberg, H. J. Wondergem, P. C. M. Christianen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, D. M. de Leeuw, Ž. Tomović, J. Wu, K. Müllen and J. C. Maan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16233–16237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. A. Bothner-By and J. A. Pople, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1965, 16, 43–66 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Majewski, M. Gopinadhan and C. O. Osuji, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. M. Christianen, I. O. Shklyarevskiy, M. I. Boamfa and J. C. Maan, Physica B, 2004, 346–347, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gopinadhan, P. W. Majewski and C. O. Osuji, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3286–3293 CrossRef CAS .
H. Heil, T. Finnberg, N. Von Malm, R. Schmechel and H. Von Seggern, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hartmann, K. Tremel, S. Uttiya, E. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, N. Kayunkid, C. Vergnat and M. Brinkmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4047–4057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mårdalen, E. J. Samuelsen, O. R. Gautun and P. H. Carlsen, Synth. Met., 1992, 48, 363–380 CrossRef .
G. Giri, E. Verploegen, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. Atahan-Evrenk, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. A. Becerril, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nature, 2011, 480, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Chen, A. J. Lovinger, Z. Bao and J. Sapjeta, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1341–1348 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Toney, T. P. Russell, J. A. Logan, H. Kikuchi, J. M. Sands and S. K. Kumar, Nature, 1995, 374, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Jin, H.-U. Seo, D.-H. Nam, W. S. Shin, J.-H. Choi, U. C. Yoon, J.-W. Lee, J.-G. Song, D.-M. Shin and Y.-S. Gal, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5029–5036 RSC .
J. Park, C. M. Keum, J. H. Kim, S. D. Lee, M. Payne, M. Petty, J. E. Anthony and J. H. Bae, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013306 CrossRef .
C. M. Duffy, J. W. Andreasen, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, M. Ando, T. Minakata and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7252–7259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tracz, J. K. Jeszka, M. D. Watson, W. Pisula, K. Müllen and T. Pakula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1682–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schweicher, N. Paquay, C. Amato, R. Resel, M. Koini, S. Talvy, V. Lemaur, J. r. m. Cornil, Y. Geerts and G. Gbabode, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3663–3672 CAS .
G. Singh, K. G. Yager, D.-M. Smilgies, M. M. Kulkarni, D. G. Bucknall and A. Karim, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7107–7117 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, N. C. Giebink, S. Mothy, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J. L. Brédas and J. Genoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2987–2995 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, C. G. Shuttle, M. F. Toney, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15224–15231 RSC .
D. H. Kim, Y. D. Park, Y. S. Jang, H. C. Yang, Y. H. Kim, J. I. Han, D. G. Moon, S. J. Park, T. Y. Chang, C. W. Chang, M. K. Joo, C. Y. Ryu and K. W. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hu, Y. T. Tao, Y. J. Hsu, D. H. Wei and Y. S. Wu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2260–2266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Verreet, R. Muller, B. P. Rand, K. Vasseur and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2131–2139 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Q. Nguyen, M. L. Bushey, L. E. Brus and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15051–15054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mattheus, A. B. Dros, J. Baas, G. T. Oostergetel, A. Meetsma, J. L. de Boer and T. T. M. Palstra, Synth. Met., 2003, 138, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Stephen and J. P. Straley, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1974, 46, 617–704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takatsu, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2006, 458, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Kim, S. Lee, M. F. Toney, Z. H. Chen, A. Facchetti, Y. S. Kim and Y. L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4931–4938 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Wang, C. Jaye, Z. Fu, D. A. Fischer and Y.-L. Loo.
V. Kolotovska, M. Friedrich, D. R. T. Zahn and G. Salvan, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 291, 166–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takami, S. Furumi, Y. Shirai, Y. Sakka and Y. Wakayama, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8629–8633 RSC .
S. Sakurai, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2781–2796 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tran, M. Gopinadhan, P. W. Majewski, R. Shade, V. Steffes, C. O. Osuji and L. M. Campos, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5514–5521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. Pelligra, P. W. Majewski and C. O. Osuji, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10511–10517 RSC .
B. D. Smith, D. J. Kirby, I. O. Rivera and C. D. Keating, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 825–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. O'Carroll, C. E. Hofmann and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1223–1227 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, S. Subramanian, S. R. Parkin, S. K. Park and T. N. Jackson, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7984–7989 RSC .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, J. S. Brooks, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9482–9483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 5028–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mattheus, A. B. Dros, J. Baas, A. Meetsma, J. L. d. Boer and T. T. M. Palstra, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 2001, 57, 939–941 CAS .
L. W. Huang, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. B. Fu, J. S. Ma and J. N. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 159–166 RSC .
T. Matsukawa, M. Yoshimura, K. Sasai, M. Uchiyama, M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, Y. Takahashi, J. Takeya, Y. Kitaoka, Y. Mori and T. Sasaki, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 310–313 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsukawa, M. Yoshimura, M. Uchiyama, M. Yamagishi, A. Nakao, Y. Takahashi, J. Takeya, Y. Kitaoka, Y. Mori and T. Sasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 085502 CrossRef .
S. Destri, M. Mascherpa and W. Porzio, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 43–45 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Laudise, P. M. Bridenbaugh, T. Siegrist, R. M. Fleming, H. E. Katz and A. J. Lovinger, J. Cryst. Growth, 1995, 152, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .
T. Siegrist, C. Kloc, R. A. Laudise, H. E. Katz and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Jurchescu, D. A. Mourey, S. Subramanian, S. R. Parkin, B. M. Vogel, J. E. Anthony, T. N. Jackson and D. J. Gundlach, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 085201 CrossRef .
R. Pfattner, M. Mas-Torrent, I. Bilotti, A. Brillante, S. Milita, F. Liscio, F. Biscarini, T. Marszalek, J. Ulanski, A. Nosal, M. Gazicki-Lipman, M. Leufgen, G. Schmidt, L. W. Molenkamp, V. Laukhin, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4198–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Della Valle, E. Venuti, A. Brillante and A. Girlando, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6715–6722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Bernstein, Polymorphism in Molecular Crystals, Oxford University Press, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. L. Price, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1996–2009 RSC .
D. J. Gundlach, T. N. Jackson, D. G. Schlom and S. F. Nelson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3302–3304 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amassian, V. A. Pozdin, R. Li, D.-M. Smilgies and G. G. Malliaras, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2623–2629 RSC .
M. Campione, S. Tavazzi, M. Moret and W. Porzio, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 083512 CrossRef .
Y. Iwasa, T. Arima, R. M. Fleming, T. Siegrist, O. Zhou, R. C. Haddon, L. J. Rothberg, K. B. Lyons, H. L. Carter, A. F. Hebard, R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh, J. J. Krajewski, G. A. Thomas and T. Yagi, Science, 1994, 264, 1570–1572 CAS .
C. S. Yoo and W. J. Nellis, Science, 1991, 254, 1489–1491 CAS .
L. Wang, B. Liu, H. Li, W. Yang, Y. Ding, S. V. Sinogeikin, Y. Meng, Z. Liu, X. C. Zeng and W. L. Mao, Science, 2012, 337, 825–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, B. Liu, D. Liu, M. Yao, S. Yu, Y. Hou, B. Zou, T. Cui, G. Zou, B. Sundqvist, Z. Luo, H. Li, Y. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, G. Wang and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 103112 CrossRef .
M. A. Reyes-Martinez, A. Ramasubramaniam, A. L. Briseno and A. J. Crosby, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5548–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Organic electronic devices can often be processed from solution under or close to ambient conditions; their fabrication thus promises to be less energy-intensive compared to the processing of inorganic counterparts. The resulting devices are also light-weight and mechanically flexible, effectively reducing payload and energy-expenditure needed to incorporate them into field-deployable systems. The performance of organic electronic devices is not determined solely by the chemical structure of the organic semiconductors composing the electrically active layer; the solid-state structure adopted by these molecules in thin films vitally influences device performance as well. Yet, the structure is often complex, spanning multiple length scales, and highly dependent on the details of processing conditions. In this perspective, we highlight processing methods that can be applied to tune the solid-state structure of organic semiconductors after they have been deposited. Decoupling these two processes brings about control over structural evolution of organic semiconductors, enabling rational processing to improve the performance of organic electronic devices.


 	Fig. 1  The performance of devices composed of organic semiconductors is intimately related to the molecular structure of the organic semiconductor and the ordering of the molecules in the solid state, typically referred to as the film structure. Elucidating the impact of the film structure on device performance may be enhanced by considering individually the various aspects of ordering that may occur in the organic semiconductor thin film across several length scales.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) This review focuses on post-deposition processing methods to specifically control three aspects of the film structure – the molecular packing and in- and out-of-plane molecular orientations – which involve ordering across different length scales. Various possibilities for each type of ordering are depicted graphically for the small molecule organic semiconductor, contorted hexabenzocoronene (HBC). The crystal structure of HBC was obtained from ref. 21. (b) The ordering of molecules along these length scales requires tuning of the forces and intermolecular interactions that are relevant to each of these dimensions, which are here qualitatively described as a function of the distance over which they act. Fig. 2b is reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2007, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The growth rate of TES ADT spherulites upon exposure to solvent vapor varies non-monotonically as a function of the surface energy of the underlying substrate. (b) TES ADT grows at nearly equal rates on untreated SiO2 and Au, and thus, spherulites grow isotropically over a pattern with these surfaces. (c) If Au is treated with a monolayer of pentafluorobenzenethiol (PFBT), TES ADT's retarded crystal growth rate on this surface results in directional crystallization around corners. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) In nanoimprint lithography (NIL), a P3HT film is heated and contacted with a topographically patterned Si mold. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) a Si grating, viewed top-down, and (c) the P3HT gratings that resulted from NIL, viewed at a 45° tilt. Insets within each image show the cross-sectional view. Cylindrical geometries are also possible, as seen by (d) the top-down view of a Si nanopillar mold and (e) the corresponding P3HT nanopillars, viewed at a 45° tilt. Scale bars measure 200 nm unless otherwise noted. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Polymer flow dynamics into the nanocavity. Interactions between P3HT and the walls of the cavity coated with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS), an anti-adhesion layer, during NIL are hypothesized to cause the chains to align perpendicular to the side walls. Depicted is the idealized P3HT ordering resulting from NIL-produced (b) gratings and (c) nanopillars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Recrystallizing P3HT films that are confined to a transistor channel causes the chains to orient such that the fastest crystal growth direction, which corresponds to the π-stacking direction, is aligned parallel to the confining electrode walls and the polymer backbone is aligned perpendicular to the electrodes, traversing the transistor channel. (b) AFM of films recrystallized under such confinement shows lamellar ordering parallel to the electrodes. (c) If an electric field is applied during the recrystallizing process, the preferred orientation of the polymer chains switches, with π-stacking now occurring perpendicular to the electrodes. (d) AFM of such films recrystallized in the presence of an electric field shows lamellar ordering perpendicular to the electrodes. Adapted from ref. 7 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The chemical structure of HBC-PhC12. (b and c) In the presence of a magnetic field, diamagnetic HBC-PhC12 order into π-stacked fibrils preferentially aligned perpendicular to the direction of the field. (d) HBC-PhC12 films with fibrils aligned such that π-stacking is perpendicular, as opposed to parallel, to the electrodes show up to 75 times higher mobilities when incorporated into field-effect transistors. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optical micrographs of TIPS-pentacene/PVCi films after exposure to (a) non-polarized light, (b) vertically polarized light, and (c) horizontally polarized light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2013, the American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic of the set-up used to create a thermal gradient across a terthiophene film. (b) A cartoon of terthiophene crystals depicts their orientation with respect to the substrate and thermal gradient direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Amorphous HBC films may be crystallized through a variety of post-deposition processes: hexane-vapor annealing, thermal annealing, and contact with PDMS. Crystallizing HBC films by making them come into contact with PDMS oligomers produces crystals with a clearly defined out-of-plane orientation, as observed by the appearance of spots in the 2D-GIWAXS image. (b) The azimuthal (φ) distribution of intensity of the (100) crystallographic plane in a 2D-GIWAXS pattern indicates how crystals are oriented relative to the substrate. Intensity near φ = 0° indicates edge-on orientation and intensity near φ = 70° indicates a nearly face-on orientation, as depicted graphically. (c) TFTs fabricated from treated HBC films exhibit field-effect mobilities that are strongly correlated with an edge-on molecular orientation. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Films of PTB, whose chemical structure is depicted, are formed by the friction-transfer process shown on a heated substrate. 2D-GIWAXS patterns taken on films prepared at (b) 100 °C and (c) 240 °C indicate that the polymers adopt face-on and edge-on orientations, respectively, in each case. Adapted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Different polymorphs of TIPS-pentacene, whose chemical structure is shown, are accessible by varying the speed at which the solution is sheared. (b) The polarized optical image shows a TIPS-pentacene film sheared at a relatively high rate, 4 mm s−1, resulting in a film with a kinetically trapped, metastable crystal structure. (c) At a lower shearing speed (0.4 mm s−1 shown), the thermodynamically favored crystal structure is accessed. Despite having better in-plane alignment, the slowly sheared films demonstrate poorer field-effect mobilities in transistors, suggesting that the metastable crystal structure is more favorable for charge transport. The scale bars denote 200 μm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, ref. 63, copyright 2011.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
