STEP cement: Solar Thermal Electrochemical Production of CaO without CO 2 emission   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC31341C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC31341C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6019-6021Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSTEP cement: Solar Thermal Electrochemical Production of CaO without CO2 emission†

        
          
            Stuart 
            Licht
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Hongjun 
            Wu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Chaminda 
            Hettige
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Baohui 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Joseph 
            Asercion
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jason 
            Lau
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jessica 
            Stuart
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry, George Washington University, Ashburn, Virginia 20147, USA. E-mail: slicht@gwu.edu;   Tel: 703 726 8215
Received 
      22nd February 2012
    , Accepted 5th April 2012First published on 5th April 2012AbstractNew molten salt chemistry allows solar thermal energy to drive calcium oxide production without any carbon dioxide emission. This is accomplished in a one pot synthesis, and at lower projected cost than the existing cement industry process, which after power production, is the largest contributor to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.
Cement production accounts for 5–6% of all anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Society consumes over 3 × 1012 kg of cement annually, and the cement industry releases 9 kg of CO2 for each 10 kg of cement produced. The majority of CO2 emissions occurs during the decarbonation of limestone (CaCO3) to lime (CaO) described in eqn (1), and the remainder (30 to 40%) from burning fossil fuels, such as coal, to heat the kiln reactors to ∼900 °C, eqn (2):1–3
ClimateCentral.org recently wrote that no other sector has such a high potential for drastic emission reductions, and while other processes are being explored to sequester cement's CO2, none eliminate it. In forming CaO, solar thermal reactors have been studied as replacements to the fossil fuel heat in eqn (2).4 However, the majority of the CO2 emissions still occurs (as decarbonation in eqn (1)) in the conventional decarbonation of limestone to lime: CaCO3 + Qheat → CaO + CO2(1) nC + nO2 → nCO2 + Qheat(2)
Here we show a new thermal chemistry, based on anomalies in oxide solubilites, to generate CaO, without CO2 emission, in a high throughput, cost effective, environment conducive to the formation of cement. The aqueous solubility of CaCO3 (6 × 10−5 m, where molal ≡ moles per kg solvent) is 3 orders of magnitude less than the 2 × 10−2 m solubility of calcium oxide, dissolving as calcium hydroxide. Surprisingly, this situation is reversed at high temperatures in molten carbonates, which allows the endothermic, electrolytic one pot synthesis, and precipitation of CaO.
Conducive to our new solar process,5,6 electrolysis of molten carbonates forms oxides, which precipitate as calcium oxide when mixed with calcium carbonate. Thus no CO2 is formed, to eliminate cement's greenhouse gas contribution to anthropogenic climate change.
In STEP cement limestone undergoes low energy electrolysis to produce (i) lime, (ii) O2 and (iii) reduced carbonate without carbon dioxide emission. Alternative configurations of the electrolysis component of this STEP (olar hermal lectrochemical roduction) are represented in Scheme 1. Compared to the conventional cement thermochemical process (top left), in the STEP cement direct electrolysis configuration (top right), solar thermal heated molten carbonates are electrolyzed forming oxides, which in the presence of calcium carbonate precipitate as lime: below 800 °C: CaCO3 + Qsolar + Eelectrolysis → CaO↓ + C + O2(3) above 800 °C: CaCO3 + Qsolar + Eelectrolysis → CaO↓ + CO + 1/2O2(4)
Heat significantly decreases the required electrolysis potentials needed to split calcium carbonate and to drive eqn (3) and (4), to below the electrolysis potential required at room temperature. Our calculated values are summarized on the top of Fig. 1. The unit activity thermodynamic electrolysis potential is lower for CaCO3 than for lithium, sodium or potassium carbonate electrolyses. The high ratio of molten carbonate reactant to product is expected to further decrease the electrolysis potential.5–7 Below 800 °C in the top figure, the energetically preferred (lower potential) carbon electrolysis product of CaCO3 is solid carbon, while above that temperature CO is produced.
 Fig. 1  CO2 and carbonate splitting potentials. Top: The low thermodynamic potential to electrolyze calcium carbonate in the CO2-free production of lime. Bottom: The measured full electrolysis potential as a function of current density in either Li2CO3 at 750 or 950 °C, or eutectic molten carbonates at 500 °C. At negative currents, the cathode is iron wire, and at positive current, the anode is either nickel or iridium wire (both yield similar electrolysis potentials). 
 Scheme 1  Conventional thermal decomposition production of lime (top left) versus STEP direct solar conversion of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide (top right) eliminating CO2. Carbonate electrolysis is endothermic requiring lower potential at higher temperature or carbonate concentration. Solar thermal energy provides the heat to lower this Eelectrolysis. When this solar heated electrolysis energy is generated by a non-fossil fuel electricity source the process is fully carbon dioxide free. Bottom: the indirect mode of STEP cement as delineated in the ESI.† 
While calcium hydroxide is water soluble, calcium carbonate is highly insoluble in water, which leads to seashell stability. This situation is reversed at high temperatures in molten carbonates. Fig. 2, top, compares our measured solubility of oxides or calcium carbonate, in either molten lithium carbonate (squares) or a molten alkali carbonate mix (circles), to that of lithium oxide (triangles).
 Fig. 2  The low solubility of calcium oxide, compared to calcium carbonate and lithium oxide solubility in molten carbonates (top) facilitates the electrolysis and precipitation of calcium oxide. STEP cement (bottom) with carbonate electrolyzers (detailed in the Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI†)), CPV and Fresnel concentrators mounted on a Suntura dual axis heliostat. Photographs of 5 h, 1 A 750 °C molten electrolysis products, upper: C and CaO from Li2CO3, lower: CaO from Li2CO3 containing 1 m Li2O. 
As measured in Fig. 2, at each temperature in either a eutectic mix of carbonates or in pure lithium carbonate, the solubility of calcium oxide is low, and ranges from 30 to 100 times less than the solubility of calcium carbonate, and 50 times less soluble than that of Li2O. Beyond this low solubility of CaO, when molten carbonates undergo electrolysis to form oxides, added CaCO3 will precipitate the desired CaO product for extraction, and the added carbonate replenishes the electrolyte for ongoing CaO production.
In 2009 we introduced the STEP theory of an efficient solar chemical process, based on a synergy of solar thermal and endothermic electrolyses.5 Solar heat and high molten reactant concentration, substantially decreases the electrolysis energy.6 As delineated in the ESI, experimentally, STEP can synthesize chemicals at solar efficiencies of 50%, as demonstrated with CO2-free production of metals, fuels, and bleach.6,7
STEP cement, the direct CO2-free synthesis of CaO from calcium carbonate is described and introduced in Scheme 1. In addition to the desired calcium oxide product, lower temperature electrolysis favors the dense storage of captured CO2 as solid carbon (eqn (3)) at the cathode, while higher temperature electrolysis has the advantage of a lower electrolysis potential, and forms carbon monoxide at the cathode, a useful industrial reagent. The bottom of Fig. 1 summarizes the electrolysis potential measured in molten carbonates during the production of oxide. The indicated 1 A cm−2 is a high reaction rate, and higher rate, at even lower potential occurs with textured, or porous, rather than flat electrodes such as reticulated (spongy) Ni or iron. The oxide is formed at low energy (low electrolysis potential) and at high rate (high current densities), which is necessary to maintain production for commodities. For example aluminum is commercially produced at 0.8 A cm−2 in contemporary industrial plants.

Fig. 1 includes the measured full electrolysis potentials in a system constrained by either the anode or cathode surface area. Nickel and iridium are effective anode materials; CaO can improve nickel stability and decrease oxidative attack.8,9 Steel is an effective cathode material in this system.
The electrolysis of carbonates is endothermic, which provides the opportunity to add a significant portion of the required energy to drive the process as solar thermal heat. A two axis Suntura heliostat provides orthonormal orientation to sun. Details of the 20 cm2 steel cathode and 40 cm2 nickel anode cathode electrolysis cell are included in the Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI†). As seen in the bottom of Fig. 2, concentrators direct sunlight to the CPV and electrolysis cells, and within minutes melt the electrolyte.
Electrolysis electrode surface areas were chosen to match the solar cell generated power, and the 2.7 V, 3.5 W drives two electrolysis cells in series at 750 °C and three in series at 950°. A Spectrolab CDO-100-C1MJ concentrator solar photovoltaic cell is used to generate 2.7 V at maximum power point, with solar to electrical energy efficiencies of 37% under 500 suns illumination. At maximum power, the 0.99 cm2 cell generates 1.3 A at 100 suns, and when masked to 0.2 cm2 area generates 1.4 A at 500 suns. Molten salt heat storage, as currently used in concentrator solar power CSP electricity plants, can be adapted to the STEP process. This will facilitate continuous operation independent of the sunlight variation, but has not yet been incorporated into this outdoor STEP calcium oxide generator. Intermittent and variable sunlight incident on this STEP configuration limits temperature and electric control, and long duration (5 h) electrolyses are conducted indoor at constant temperature and current. Indoors, the measured electrolysis potential is steady throughout the electrolysis. In pure, molten Li2CO3 the 0.1 A electrolysis occurs at 1.2 V, and at 1 A occurs at 1.6 V, or 0.9 V, respectively at 750 °C, or 950 °C. At 750 °C and 1 A, the addition of 1 m Li2O lowers the observed potential to 1.5 V, and the addition of 1 to 6 m CaCO3 increases the electrolysis potential to 1.8 V.
Constant current Li2CO3 electrolysis reduces carbonate, and produces Li2O, which with the addition of CaCO3 precipitates CaO (Fig. 2 photo), while oxygen evolves from the anode as oxygen solubility is low.10,11 The precipitate is separately identified as CaO by FTIR, XRD, and AA analysis.† The products are CaO, C and oxygen without carbon dioxide evolution. The photo in Fig. 2 shows the carbon and CaO deposited after a 5 h electrolysis at 1 A, resulting in 0.56 g of carbon, 1.5 g of O2(gas) and 2.6 g of lime in quantitative accord with the 5 Ah, 4 electron splitting of carbonate.
This study presents a new chemistry of energy efficient, CO2-free lime production, and the challenge of system scale-up awaits. It should be noted that the carbonate product is readily removed (dropping cleanly from the extracted steel wire cathode when it is uncoiled, or at higher temperature as a simple evolved gas CO), oxygen evolution is confined to the vicinity of the anode, and the high density calcium oxide product does not decompose in the molten carbonate and forms a slurry at the bottom of the vessel where it may be removed by tap in the same manner in which molten iron is removed from conventional iron production kilns.
In the present study new molten salt chemistry is found which allows solar thermal energy to drive CO2-free lime production, in a one-pot synthesis, at lower projected cost than the existing cement industry process (details in ESI). After power production, the cement industry is largest single contributor to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.
This work has been partially supported by NSF award 1006568.
References
Y. Liu, Y. Kuang, N. Huang, Z. Wu and C. Wang, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2009, 37, 369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Allwood, J. Cullen and R. Milford, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1888 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haselbach, J. Environ. Eng., 2009, 135, 465 CrossRef .
A. Meier, E. Bonald, G. Cella, W. Lipinski and D. Wuillemin, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 1355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16283 CAS .
S. Licht, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht and H. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25138 CAS .
H. Yin, 
            et al.
          , Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, I. Sommerville and A. McLean, Trans. Ind. Met., 2006, 59, 655 CAS .
S. Scaccia and S. Frangini, J. Mol. Liq., 2006, 129, 133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scaccia and S. Frangini, J. Mol. Liq., 2009, 146, 39 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Expanded experimental details, stability, solubility and product analyses, economic assessment, STEP theory overview, STEP efficiencies and supplementary references. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc31341c‡ Present address: Northeast Petroleum Univ., Daqing, P. R. China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
CaCO3 + Qheat → CaO + CO2	(1)
nC + nO2 → nCO2 + Qheat	(2)
below 800 °C: CaCO3 + Qsolar + Eelectrolysis → CaO↓ + C + O2	(3)
above 800 °C: CaCO3 + Qsolar + Eelectrolysis → CaO↓ + CO + 1/2O2	(4)

 	Fig. 1  CO2 and carbonate splitting potentials. Top: The low thermodynamic potential to electrolyze calcium carbonate in the CO2-free production of lime. Bottom: The measured full electrolysis potential as a function of current density in either Li2CO3 at 750 or 950 °C, or eutectic molten carbonates at 500 °C. At negative currents, the cathode is iron wire, and at positive current, the anode is either nickel or iridium wire (both yield similar electrolysis potentials).	 

 	Scheme 1  Conventional thermal decomposition production of lime (top left) versus STEP direct solar conversion of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide (top right) eliminating CO2. Carbonate electrolysis is endothermic requiring lower potential at higher temperature or carbonate concentration. Solar thermal energy provides the heat to lower this Eelectrolysis. When this solar heated electrolysis energy is generated by a non-fossil fuel electricity source the process is fully carbon dioxide free. Bottom: the indirect mode of STEP cement as delineated in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 2  The low solubility of calcium oxide, compared to calcium carbonate and lithium oxide solubility in molten carbonates (top) facilitates the electrolysis and precipitation of calcium oxide. STEP cement (bottom) with carbonate electrolyzers (detailed in the Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI†)), CPV and Fresnel concentrators mounted on a Suntura dual axis heliostat. Photographs of 5 h, 1 A 750 °C molten electrolysis products, upper: C and CaO from Li2CO3, lower: CaO from Li2CO3 containing 1 m Li2O.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Expanded experimental details, stability, solubility and product analyses, economic assessment, STEP theory overview, STEP efficiencies and supplementary references. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc31341c
‡ Present address: Northeast Petroleum Univ., Daqing, P. R. China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
