Visible and infrared solar radiation upconversion for water splitting via a surface plasmon-passivated strategy   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09151D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09151D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3771-3781Visible and infrared solar radiation upconversion for water splitting via a surface plasmon-passivated strategy†

        
          
            Ruiting 
            Xue
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Chengyuan 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianmin 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ximei 
            Fan
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Advanced Technologies of Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, PR China. E-mail: xrt55@163.com; xmfan@swjtu.edu.cn
bUnited Technology Center of Western Metal Materials Co., Ltd, Northwest Institute for Non-ferrous Metal Research, Shaanxi Institute for Materials Engineering, Xi'an 710016, PR China
Received 
      25th October 2021
    , Accepted 10th January 2022First published on 10th January 2022AbstractThe current photocatalytic technology for water splitting is usually localized in specific short-wavelength photons. Herein, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of noble metals is used to respond to a broad solar spectrum, and to design polydopamine-passivated particulate photocatalysts for widely used visible-infrared water splitting. This plasmon-passivated effect promotes the charge transfer for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions to enter the Marcus inverted region for overcoming the kinetics barrier. Remarkably, this effect can also, facilitate thermodynamic upconversion processes for making efficient use of long-wavelength photons. Thus, its dequantization property should be insensitive to the energy-band structure and the energy loss would be mainly due to thermalization related to the incident power. When incident power is increased to 14 suns intensity, the efficiency in 500–750 nm region is up to 1.53%, which is a significant breakthrough for a particulate photocatalyst. Evidently, this plasmon-passivated strategy can solve the thermodynamic and kinetic challenges of photocatalysis and greatly promote visible-infrared solar water splitting applications.
Introduction
Solar water splitting is considered as a promising method to address the energy crisis and global warming.1–4 Its solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion will play an important role in a society with sustainable energy in the future because it can be stored, transported, and, if necessary, efficiently converted into electricity using fuel cells. Although the STH of photovoltaic-electrolysis (PV-E) and photoelectrocatalysis (PEC) can reach up to 10–30%,5,6 the difficultly in manufacturing large scale photovoltaic devices, high solution resistance and other problems limit its industrial applications.7 Whereas for particulate photocatalysis (PC), there are few obstacles to its large scale industrialization. However, most of the current conversions efficiencies are about 1%8 and it is very difficult to meet current application requirements (5–10%).9
Since the discovery of the Honda–Fujishima effect in the early 1970s,10 research on water splitting and the improvement of semiconductors have covered almost all the elements.11–13 To date, the research has mainly focused on Z-scheme water splitting.14–16 Although the apparent quantum yield (AQY) at a wavelength of 420 nm has been significantly improved in recent studies,17,18 no evident improvements have been made at wavelengths of longer than 500 nm. Because about half of the solar energy is in the wavelength range of 500–900 nm (Fig. 1a), it is necessary to develop new photocatalysts with a longer wavelength response. In this regard, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of recently reported noble metal nanoparticles has become a subject of intense study. Plasmonic nanostructures possess broadly tunable optical properties and, coupled with their catalytically active surfaces, exhibit potential dequantization, making them well suited for use solar photochemistry,19 therefore, SPR has good research potential, and numerous metal/semiconductor composites have been investigated.20,21 Recently, Sargent et al. used ZnO–Ag–ZnO as electron transport layers to achieve upconversion in photodetectors.22 However, such upconversion has not been substantially used in photocatalysis. A small number of researchers have observed plasmonic photocatalyst water splitting at long wavelengths, and the efficiency was rather poor and the mechanism remains unclear.23,24 The fundamental reason for this was mainly ascribed to the fact that there was no valence band–conduction band (VB–CB) energy separation associated with the surface plasmon.25,26 Such a lack of energy separation would intrinsically lead to the rapid thermal deactivation of the hot electrons (about 10−13 s), and eventually to the Fermi–Dirac distribution near the Fermi energy level. Therefore, it is difficult to participate in subsequent chemical reactions at a later time (>10−6 s). Thus, current research has focused on the separation, stabilization, and accumulation of plasmon-generated charges.19,27–29 In this context, except for the generally accepted thermal effect of localized SPR (LSPR),30,31 chemical interface damping (CID) has been proposed to induce a direct electron excitation process in an additional dephasing channel.28,32 This process has a surprisingly high charge separation efficiency and is crucial for the development of new plasmonic photocatalysts.33 (the details are shown in the ESI†: Comparison of plasmon-promoted reaction mechanisms). Plasmon-generated charges still suffer from the difficulties in stabilization and accumulation. Although the upconversion when a LSPR acts as a virtual state has been explored,34 laser excitation is still essential because the extremely short-lived plasmon hardly stays in the intermediate level. In recent years, it has been found that the excited-electron has a longer lifetime in inherent structural disorder in organic molecular semiconductors,35 and some research has found that polymer modification such as polydopamine (PDA) can produce passivation effect on Ag.36 Therefore, using PDA to passivate the plasmon, so that the hot charges can be accumulated and used for subsequent photocatalytic reaction, has a very considerable significance in research.
 Fig. 1  Rational design for an Ag-PDA/ZnO ternary plasmonic photocatalyst by adding a passivation layer. (a) Power spectra of the direct and circumsolar irradiation. (b) The experimental system and schematic illustration of Ag-PDA/ZnO for water splitting in the visible-infrared solar irradiation. When the PDA passivation layer is present, the reverse transfer process by thermal vibration lasts much longer than the LSPR excitation process, so that the hot electrons and holes can keep accumulating separately and then participate in the subsequent HER and OER reactions. (c) The schematic illustration of the plasmonic upconversion process. The dipole–dipole interaction between Ag and PDA prolongs the thermalization time of the plasmon, so that the plasmonic wave formed by resonant coupling of the surface plasmon with a photon has the potential to absorb an addition photon during its dephasing process, and thus excites the electron to a higher energy level. The high vibrational energy level is the intermediate energy level of the upconversion. 
In this study, a plasmonic layer-passivated ternary particulate photocatalytic water splitting system was designed which includes light-harvesting antennas and active sites for O2 evolution (Ag cluster), surface passivation layers (PDA), and active sites for H2 production (ZnO). The Ag nodes are embedded in the PDA and connected with the PDA by non-covalent bonding. Some Ag atoms are clustered to maintain a strong LSPR effect. The passivated effect of PDA is to thermodynamically and kinetically enhance the plasmonic system. Under a wavelength range of 500–900 nm, a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) can occur on the ZnO and Ag surfaces, respectively (Fig. 1b). In addition, the coupling of photons with plasmonic waves significantly facilitates upconversion excitation of the electrons in the dephasing channel (Fig. 1c). As a result of water splitting, the photocatalyst has the same extreme value of energy conversion efficiency (ECE) (1.53%) under continuous solar radiation, and so, this plasmonic layer-passivation mechanism is not like semiconductors which can only respond to specific wavelength photons, thereby showing a dequantization characteristic, which enables the photocatalyst to be used in a broader environment.
Results and discussion
Morphology and structure of Ag-PDA/ZnO
A strong metal–support interaction (SMSI) was formed between Ag-PDA and ZnO by in situ photoreduction. In the absence of oxygen, dopamine was only partially polymerized and adsorbed on ZnO surface (Fig. S2a and b, ESI†). The Ag+/Ag standard redox potential was regulated by coordination molecules reduced in situ by photogenerated electrons on the exposed ZnO surface. In the transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) results (Fig. S4c and d, ESI†), exciton bleaching (XB) of ZnO (at about 380 nm) could be observed at 550 nm pump excitation. Electron transfer from Ag to ZnO occurred at the femtosecond scale and the transfer efficiency was independent of wavelength, which proved the existence of the SMSI.28 The UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) and photoluminescence (PL) results showed that the best optical performance of the Ag-PDA/ZnO was with a 5% PDA mass ratio (Fig. S3a and b, ESI†). From Fig. 2a and b, it can be obviously seen that the PDA with a thickness of about 5–10 nm should closely attached onto the surface of ZnO according to transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images. The EDS mapping results demonstrated the remarkable uniformly distributed C, N and O main components (Fig. 2c). Embedded in PDA, the Ag clusters with size of about 10–20 nm acted as LSPR light-harvesting antennas. The accurate mass ratio of Ag was 0.21% and this was confirmed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), which was much lower than the EDS result (1.5%), indicating that Ag was mainly distributed on the ZnO surface (for the detailed EDS element mass ratios see Table S1, ESI†). Furthermore, according to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results (Fig. 2d–f), the C 1s peak profile of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO differed from one another. From curve fitting, the peak at 287.2 eV corresponded to indole C, and the peak at 399.5 eV corresponded to indole N. The presence of C and N containing indoles proved that PDA should successfully be found on the surface of the composite. More specific XPS and ultraviolet electron spectroscopy (UPS) results (Fig. S7a–i, ESI†) show that the PDA caused significant changes in the surface chemical states, i.e., SMSI. Also, the nonuniform-distributed Ag clusters coupled with the PDA layer could change the electronic structure of the composite surface, which resulted in a wide range of visible light responses. (For detailed results of analyses see Fig. S3a–f, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  The morphology, structure and element characteristics of the composite with a PDA mass ratio of 5%. (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image. (c) The EDS elemental mapping image. (d–f) The XPS spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO. The characteristic C 1s peaks of Ag-PDA/ZnO are ascribed to carbon impurities (284.6 eV) and indole carbon in the PDA (287.2 eV). The N 1s characteristic peak binding energy is 399.5 eV. 
Research on the Marcus inverted region of electron transfer
Particulate photocatalysts suffer kinetically from electron–hole recombination because the oxidation and reduction reactions occur simultaneously on the surface. Fig. 3a shows the passivation charge transfer kinetics strategy at the interface. For SMSI composites, the LSPR effect with excess energy and momentum could directly excite hot electrons to the CB of ZnO and leave holes on the Ag surface,37 which was confirmed by the TA results (Fig. S4d, ESI†). (The detailed mechanism is shown in the Analyses of direct electron excitation mechanism ESI†). Because there are no holes generated in the VB of ZnO under visible light, the interband recombination of the electron–hole did not occur.38 Also, the reverse transfer (i.e., excited electrons return to Ag) was restrained because the ZnO lattice did not have sufficient momentum. However, such a momentum conservation condition would be satisfied by collectively oscillating the electrons in the CB of ZnO with their increasing number. For a traditional plasmonic photocatalyst such as Ag/ZnO, the reverse transfer rate would soon be balanced with the excitation efficiency, resulting in the rapid kinetic-deactivation of electrons and holes. Whereas for Ag-PDA/ZnO, an electron would preferentially transfer to PDA because its thermal relaxation needed less momentum and the corresponding transfer process within PDA still required extra momentum. Therefore, a series of disordered band gap structures of the PDA became energy libraries,39 where the electrons and holes filled up one library, so that there was enough momentum to enter the next. Such an energy library effect could make the rate of the LSPR electron excitation be greater than the deactivation. Because electron deactivation is an exothermic process, the value of the Gibbs energy changes (ΔG0) was negative and increased with the accumulating excited electrons. Thus, when the absolute value of ΔG0 was larger than the recombinant energy (λ, constant), the reaction can enter the Marcus inverted region that is, the electron deactivation rate decreased with an increase of excited electrons (eqn (1)):40ΔG≠ = (ΔG0 + λ)2/4λ ket = Aexp(−ΔG≠/RT)2(1)where ΔG≠ is the activation Gibbs energy, ΔG0 is the thermodynamic potential, Gibbs energy, λ is the recombinant energy (constant), and ket is the electron deactivation rate.
 Fig. 3  The passivation layer prevents the recombination of electrons and holes, and the reaction can enter the Marcus inverted region. (a) A schematic illustration of electrons entering the Marcus inverted region. (b) The double integral results of the EPR signals of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO. The irradiation wavelengths are 325, 532, and 785 nm. (c–e) Time-dependent full EPR spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO, where T = 298 K, the irradiation times are 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 min (excitation wavelength: (c) 325 nm, (d) 532 nm, (e) 785 nm). 
The TA results (Fig. S4c and d, ESI†) reveal the charge transfer process, which is kinetically consistent with the Marcus inverted region41 (for detailed analyses see the ESI†). Furthermore, this mechanism was investigated over a longer time scale using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR). Fig. 3b shows the evolution of the unpaired electron number over time at different wavelengths (325, 532, 785 nm), as calculated by the double integral method. The full EPR spectra are shown in Fig. 3c–e. Under UV, the electron–hole pairs were ascribed to the ZnO interband transition, and the unpaired electron number decreased rapidly with the illumination time, and the PDA layer impacted little. However, under visible light irradiation, the unpaired electron number in Ag-PDA/ZnO increased over time, whereas the results were the opposite for Ag/ZnO. In the absence of spin traps, the number of unpaired electrons kept on increasing until it equalized with the diffusion rate in solution under continuous illumination, indicating that the electrons had transferred into the Marcus inverted region. The accumulation of electrons and holes could also be supported by the surface photovoltage and surface photovoltage phase results (SPV and SPP, Fig. S8a and b, ESI†). In particular, no obvious unpaired electron signals were detected in Ag/PDA, PDA/ZnO and pure ZnO (Fig. S9a–c, ESI†). However, in Fig. 3d and e (532 nm and 785 nm), the peaks of Ag-PDA/ZnO are split into finer structures than Ag/ZnO, which was ascribed to the hyperfine coupling of electrons to 1H and 14N in PDA. Such hyperfine coupling does not appear in Fig. 3c (325 nm, > ZnO bandgap), indicating that the electron deactivation pathway at 532 nm and 785 nm were not the interband recombination of ZnO. Thus, a lot of unpaired electron clouds were scattered in the PDA and this supports its energy library effect of electron transfer.
Evidence of plasmonic upconversion in an adiabatic process
Although the Ag plasmonic nanostructures could harvest the entire visible solar energy, the hot electrons could effectively participate in the subsequent reactions only when they are transferred to the CB of a wide band gap semiconductor (ZnO). The thermodynamic electron transferring modes are shown in Fig. 4a. Pathway 1 corresponds to the indirect transfer process of Ag/ZnO. Although non-radiative dephasing of coherent electron oscillation could generate high-energy hot electrons, their number decreased exponentially with the increase of the vibration energy level, and was proportional to the square of the incident light intensity. Even for the thermodynamic-satisfied electrons, only a few would eventually transfer to the CB of ZnO. Therefore, the quantum efficiency of this indirect transfer process under long wavelengths of a non-laser light source was hardly sufficient for the subsequent chemical reactions. Whereas for Ag-PDA/ZnO, a more efficient upconversion mechanism (pathway 2) should be included in the electron excitation process,42 which was confirmed by the results of the Raman spectrometry analyses (Fig. 4b–d). Pathways 1 and 2, corresponding to the ZnO interband luminescence, could not be distinguished. For Ag-PDA/ZnO, the anti-Stokes spectra could be observed at excitation wavelengths of 532 nm and 785 nm, but not at 325 nm. An abundance of anti-Stokes signals from the low energy incident photons should be caused by the direct transfer of electrons from the high vibration energy level of the plasmon to the Raman virtual state of ZnO, which obviously supported direct excitation (pathway 3).28,32 No anti-Stokes signals in the Ag/ZnO suggested that a direct excitation process could only have sufficient intensity in the presence of PDA. The unusual anti-Stokes signals were ascribed to the failure of the Placzek hypotheses (band gap > incident photons >> vibration level), and where the upconversion and the direct transfer correspond to the same electron excitation modes, that is, this excitation should fundamentally originate from the resonation between the dephasing of the plasmonic wave and photons prior to its thermalization (the detailed excitation mechanism and the PDA function are analyzed in ESI†: Analyses of direct electron excitation mechanism). Because the electrons in virtual states cannot be observed, all the information about the virtual state excitation process was contained in the intensity of the Raman peak at t = 0, meaning that the position and number of peaks should be similar for different excitation wavelengths. Surprisingly, the significant differences at the excitation wavelengths of 532 nm and 785 nm (Fig. 4c and d) were observed, which indicated that certain excitation processes occurred at t ≠ 0, i.e., the real state excitation. Because the band gap and defect level of ZnO was much larger than 785 nm, and the thermal vibration process could also be ignored in view of the electron transfer rate according to the Born–Oppenheimer approximation, and it confirmed that this real state excitation process was adiabatic and was upconverted by carrier tunneling,22i.e., plasmonic upconversion. Furthermore, the anti-Stokes signal could not be detected in Ag/PDA, PDA/ZnO and pure ZnO (Fig. S9d–f, ESI†), and this also supported that such unusual strong anti-Stokes signals should be related to adiabatic excitation. More specifically, such a plasmonic upconversion should consider two significant criteria: (i) the energy separation of the excited electron–hole should be larger than the incident photon. Because the energy levels on the Ag surface were almost continuous, electron transfer was essential;43 (ii) the upconversion should be a directed nonrandom process, that is, the excitation process should originate from the plasmonic quasi-particle resonating with the absorbed photon under the coupling of the interfacial electric field, rather than with a phonon coupled by thermal vibration. In this regard, plasmonic upconversion must be distinguished from plasmonic thermally-induced electron transfer.44 Additionally, when the wavelength was longer than 500 nm, only Ag-PDA/ZnO could produce a significant photocurrent response, which also supported the upconversion mechanism (Fig. S11a–f, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  The plasmonic upconversion scheme constructed using the results of the Raman spectroscopy research. The powder samples were pressed into a slide to obtain a smooth plane for testing. The laser attenuation parameters were all 5%. The plasmonic quasi-particle and photons are resonating at the femtosecond scale or less,45 and the information was obtained from the intensity, position and number of Raman peak. (a) The schematic illustration for plasmonic upconversion and direct excitation. The high vibrational state of the plasmon overlaps with the Raman virtual state of ZnO and becomes the upconversion intermediate energy level. (b–d) The Raman spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO (excitation wavelength: (b) 325 nm, (c) 532 nm, (d) 785 nm). 
Overall water splitting performance under visible-infrared solar irradiation
The overall photocatalytic water splitting experiments of Ag-PDA/ZnO were performed in pure water. The ZnO and Ag clusters acted as the HER and OER centers, respectively. In Fig. 5a, the H2 and O2 yields, and the AQY results revealed that the Ag-PDA/ZnO should effectively promote the overall water splitting at wavelengths of 532 nm and 633 nm, and the light absorption edge could be expanded to more than 900 nm. The STH was 0.28% (Fig. 5b black squares) and when the incident power increased, the ECE also improved in different ways in each region (Fig. 5b and c), presenting some amazing characteristics for the plasmonic photocatalyst (the detailed calculation of the H2 and O2 yield is given in Fig. S10a–f, Tables S2 and S3, ESI†). For the overall particulate photocatalytic water splitting, it was very difficult to realize single-electron-transfer due to the highly negative reduction potential from H2 to ˙H (−2.1 V, pH = 7, NHE). However, H2 reduction fundamentally requires the prolonging of the photo-generated charge lifetime in order for two electrons to transfer in one step. Kinetically, this condition can be satisfied by a PDA-passivated effect.46 Whereas if there were no PDA-passivated layers, the extremely short-lived excited electron was unavailable for the HER because the reaction lifetime must be more than 10−6 s. For the more complex electron transfer processes of OER, two H2O molecules were required for four electrons to transfer in one step. The slower OER can determine the total reaction rate. For pure photocatalysis without additional voltage, the maximum hole saturation in the surface reaction unit (i.e., an Ag atom), should be one and then Ag could exist in the of Ag+ form. It should be noted, that the femtosecond scale carrier formation time will naturally result in no chemical bond between Ag+ and the oxygen/solution molecules, so the free-holes on the Ag surface should satisfy the Poisson distribution (eqn (2)):47 p(x) = (μx/x!) × e−μ(2)where P, μ and x denote the probability, the hole saturation per reaction unit, and the number of charges transferred, respectively, (x = 4, μ = 1).
 Fig. 5  The water splitting experiments and stability testing of Ag-PDA/ZnO. (a) The H2 and O2 yields, and the calculated results of AQY for light sources with different wavelengths. For each wavelength, the system operates for 1 h, and then data collection begins. The result is an average of 20 tests, and the yield of H2 is close to twice that of O2. (b and c) The ECE corresponding to different wavelengths and its variation with incident power: (b) total solar spectrum, λ > 500 nm, 750 > λ > 500 nm, λ > 750 nm (by adding the appropriate filter). (c) λ = 325, 532, 633, 785 nm. The dashed lines are calculated by the Poisson distribution. (d and e) The Ag 3d XPS spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO before and after working for 10000 min. (f) The stability test of Ag-PDA/ZnO. Under the 532 nm light source, the deactivation rate of the carrier was balanced with the generation rate at about 60 min, under 785 nm it was about 170 min, and under AM 1.5G it was about 70 min. The performance of the material remained stable after continuous catalysis for 10000 min. The black dashed lines are to guide the eye. 
In Fig. 5c, the theoretical maximum ECE for the four electrons to transfer in one step was as high as 1.533%. Experimentally, the extreme ECE value at the wavelengths of 532 nm and 633 nm surprisingly approached the same value of 1.533% by increasing the incident power. The ECE is lower at the wavelengths of 325 nm and 785 nm. It is maintained that this is because when ZnO is excited by UV (325 nm), the nanosecond scale interband recombination occurs due to the simultaneous generation of a large number of holes on its VB, resulting in a short-lived excited charge. Whereas when the excitation wavelength was longer than 785 nm, the dramatically decreased ECE should be attributed to the fact that the ZnO band gap exceeded two 785 nm photons, resulting in an upconversion process of at least three photons. This is obviously much less efficient than two photons. In addition, the efficiency was also very low at 420 nm, which could be ascribed to the fact that the band gap of PDA, a disordered semiconductor was about 450–500 nm. Although almost no radiation deactivation occurred in PDA, when PDA was excited, plenty of electron–holes in PDA would accelerate the reverse transfer rate of the excited electrons, that is, its passivation effect would be greatly reduced.44 Therefore, considering electron reverse transfer kinetics and band gap thermodynamics, the most efficient region for upconversion should be at about 500–750 nm, which was consistent with the experimental results. In Fig. 5b (green triangles), the ECE in the whole range of 500–750 nm can also approach up to 1.533% by adding filters. These results not only confirm the four electron transfer mechanism but also indicate that the plasmon-dominated catalytic reaction should present the dequantization characteristic, that is, the photocatalytic efficiency is not restrained by the wavelength of the photons. This dequantization characteristic could allow the solar conversion not to be restricted by the Shockley–Queisser limit, representing a novel continuous visible-infrared plasmonic photocatalyst. In particular, Fig. 5f reveals the excellent photocatalytic performance stability of Ag-PDA/ZnO under different light sources, which was retained for 10000 min. It was noted from the XPS results before and after 10000 min (Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO), that there was a notable change in the Ag chemical state of Ag/ZnO which gave bad stability, but the Ag-PDA/ZnO demonstrated excellent Ag chemical state stability (Fig. 5d and e). Combined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) results (Fig. S12a and b, ESI†), Ag would be oxidized into Ag2O in water splitting without PDA. Therefore, such an outstanding stability in the Ag-PDA/ZnO could be ascribed to its four electron transfer in one step for the avoidance of the active intermediate formation. (Details are given in: Synergy within the ternary system, ESI†).
Mechanism and implication of the plasmon-passivation strategy
Although the ZnO band gap was about 380 nm, all the distinctive experimental results were observed at excitation wavelengths longer than 500 nm, instead of 325 nm. The fundamental reason for this is that ZnO acts as an electron-acceptor to promote plasmon-generated charge separation in the plasmonic system. Therefore, its interband electron–hole recombination should be inhibited. As a result, the electron-acceptor band gap should be larger than the incident wavelength, which would naturally suffer from the thermodynamic barriers. Therefore, a two multi-photon absorption principle for upconversion is proposed: (i) direct multi-photon absorption: the Ag absorbs a photon and excites an electron to the virtual state. Within the action time of the first photon, the electron could be further excited to the CB of ZnO via a second absorbed photon. Under near-infrared light, the action time of a photon is only about 2 × 10−16 s (the photons' action time at different wavelengths are shown in Table S4, ESI†). Thus, this adiabatic process usually requires a high intensity light field.48 (ii) Indirect multi-photon absorption: under ordinary light sources, it is very difficult to excite an electron by two photons in one step. However, the LSPR-generated electrons remain in a high plasmon vibrational energy level, so that it can be excited again by an additional photon coupling with the interfacial electric field (eqn (S2), ESI†). Generally, plasmon decay time via thermalization (about 10−13 s) was considerably longer than the action time of a photon. However, for multi-photon absorption, this time is still insufficient under solar radiation. When the PDA is present, the dipole–dipole interaction between Ag and PDA would prolong the plasmon thermalization time for much longer than 10−13 s (from the EPR and TA results), which effectively guarantees the upconversion ratio. This multi-photon absorption process can be further demonstrated by PL upconversion and TA experiments (Fig. S4a–d, ESI†). The high plasmon vibrational energy levels were similar to the organic molecules' triplet states, therefore the plasmonic upconversion with triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) was compared and is shown in Table 1.49 The electron lifetime on the plasmon vibrational energy level was much smaller than that of the molecules' triplet states, therefore, the PDA-passivated effect is indispensable for the critical task of prolonging the excited plasmon lifetime for coupling the second photon.
Table 1 The characteristics of plasmonic upconversion and TTA






Plasmonic
TTA




Intermediate excited state
Plasmon vibrational energy level (diversification)
Triplet (single)


Spin selection
Always permitted
Only T1(↑↑) + T1(↓↓) is permitted


Reaction conditions
The charge must be transferred to an adsorbent with a certain band gap (more complex)
Triplet initiators are usually required (simpler)


Optical properties
Broadly tunable
Restrained


Light absorption capacity
Stronger
Weaker


Energy transfer efficiency
Lower
Higher


Fluorescence emission
Usually, no high-energy photon emission
High-energy photons delay fluorescence




Conclusions
In summary, a plasmonic photocatalyst was developed which can efficiently harvest continuous visible-infrared solar radiation. Its ECE can reach extreme value up to 1.53% in the 500–750 nm region, which represents a vital breakthrough for solar water splitting. The energy is only lost via thermalization and is determined by incident power, instead of wavelength. This dequantization property gives it a better practical significance. Most importantly, the energy library effect of the PDA passivated-layer can greatly extend the plasmon-generated charge lifetime, thus addressing the most difficult concern, that is, the time mismatch between the plasmon and the numerous physical/chemical processes. As a result, hot electrons at high plasmon vibrational levels can be excited by long-wavelength photons. This is the excitation that originates from the plasmonic quasi-particle resonating with the absorbed photon under the coupling of the interfacial electric field, rather than with the phonon coupled by thermal vibration. Therefore, this is an upconversion process. In particular, the long-lived plasmon charge promotes the reaction to enter the Marcus inverted region, which kinetically satisfies the multi-electron transfer in one step condition for HER and OER. This work demonstrates a valuable visible-infrared solar radiation application that is of great significance and shows promise for addressing the energy crisis and environmental problems.
Methods
Preparation of the Ag-PDA/ZnO nanocomposite materials
The in situ photoreduction of Ag was controlled by adding ammonia to adjust the standard redox potential of the Ag+/Ag, and the polymerization of the dopamine was controlled by temperature. Firstly, a certain ratio of dopamine hydrochloride and ZnO powder was added to Tris–HCL buffer solution (pH = 8.5), and the mixture was ultrasonically dispersed for 30 min and then stirred for 2 h at 50 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. The suspension was then suction-filtered and set aside, and 100 mL of AgNO3 solution (6 mmol L−1) and 6 mL of dilute ammonia water (2.5%) were dripped into the solution and the reactions oscillated evenly. The prepared PDA/ZnO was dispersed into the solution. Then, the suspension was placed into a photocatalytic device made in the laboratory, and reacted under UV light for 4 h. Finally, the suspension was suction-filtered with distilled water and anhydrous ethanol, and then dried in a drying box at 50 °C. After 12 h, the sample was obtained. Samples with PDA/ZnO mass ratios of 1%, 2%, 5%, and 10% were prepared.
Characterization
The TEM measurements together with the EDS element mappings were carried out on a JSM 2100F (Jeol) (testing provided by ‘eceshi’). The EPR signals were detected with a JES-FA200 (Bruker) spectrometer. The chemical composition of the samples was determined by XPS on a ESCALAB 250Xi (ThermoFisher Scientific) with monochromatized Al Kα excitation. The fluorescence emission and time-resolved spectra were determined a PL spectrometer on a FLS1000 (Edinburgh Instruments). The Stokes and anti-Stokes signals were obtained from the Raman spectra measured using an inVia Reflex spectrometer (Renishaw). The concentration of gases was determined with gas chromatography (GC) on an Agilent 8890 (Agilent).
Overall water splitting reaction
The catalyst powder (50 mg) was dispersed in 50 mL ultrapure water and the reaction solution was stirred with a magnetic stirrer. The reaction tube was u-shaped with a quartz outer wall, and condensed water was added to the middle section and the reaction temperature was maintained at 300 ± 1 K. The pH value was adjusted to 6.8. An extended custom CEL-PECX2000 xenon lamp light source, with specific band pass filters and truncation filters was used to determine the band pass central excitation wavelength: 325, 365, 420, 532, 633, 785, 908 nm, with a wavelength band width of ≈20 nm, and AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight. Before the reaction, high purity argon gas was used to remove impurities in the pipeline for 30 min. Then, the light source was turned on, the gas passed through an ice water bath, the steam was condensed, and the mixed gas passed through a six-way valve prior to sample injection. The gas mixture was separated in a 5A molecular sieve packed column (2 m × 3 mm) and then entered into a thermal concentration detector (TCD). Tests were conducted every 10 min to avoid excessive pressure in the device. The results are an average of 20 tests. The AQY, STH and ECE ratios were calculated using eqn (3)–(5), respectively: (3)where n(H2) and n(photons) denote the number of H2 molecules and the number of incident photons produced, respectively. (4)where R(H2), ΔGr, P, and S denote the rate of hydrogen evolution during the water-splitting reaction, the Gibbs energy of the water-splitting reaction (237 kJ mol−1), the energy intensity of the AM 1.5 G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2), and the irradiated sample area (4 cm2), respectively. (5)where R(H2), ΔGr, and S are the same as STH. P is the actual power controlled by the specific band pass filters or truncation filters, which were measured by an optical power meter.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the International Cooperation Foundation of Sichuan (No. 20GJHZ0167). The authors are grateful for all the testing provided by the Analytical and Testing Center of Southwest Jiaotong University, and eceshi (www.eceshi.cn).
References
F. A. L. Laskowski, M. R. Nellist, R. Venkatkarthick and S. W. Boettcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 570–579 RSC .
D. V. Dao, L. A. Cipriano, G. D. Liberto, T. D. Nguyen, S. Ki, H. Son, G. Kim, K. H. Lee, J. Yang, Y. Yu, G. Pacchioni and I. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22810–22819 RSC .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
K. Fujii, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 107101–107104 CrossRef .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber, S. Ardo, A. Berger, Y. Chen, R. H. Coridan, K. T. Fountaine, S. Haussener, S. Hu and R. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2016, 55, 12974–12988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu and B. Ge, Nat. Energy, 2019, 1 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, E. Cao, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2697–2705 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, C. Li, K. Domen and F. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2260–2288 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata and K. Domen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 542–549 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi and N. Shibata, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, Y. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Li, Z. Li, F. Zhang and C. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 2393–2402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2017, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Shi, Y. Cao, Y. Bao, Y. Zhao, G. Waterhouse, Z. Fang, L. Wu, C. Tung, Y. Yin and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700803.1–1700803.7 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Li, B. Wu, X. Luo, S. Ouyang, S. Luo, A. Kheraif and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19173–19186 RSC .
W. Zhou, Y. Shang, F. Arquer, K. Xu, R. Wang, S. Luo, X. Xiao, X. Zhou, R. Huang, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 251 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, G. Shi, Y. Zhao, X. Chen, H. Sun, F. Liu, F. Cheng and W. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9605–9612 RSC .
A. Tanaka, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa, H. Kominami and T. Tanaka, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2574–2580 RSC .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, F. Wang and S. Meng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2017, 674, 1–52 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Han, S. Huang, A. Hirata and M. Chen, Nano energy, 2019, 56, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Wang, F. Tang, H. Zhang, Y. Fu, D. Liu and X. Song, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, D. F. Swearer, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, H. Zhao, L. Henderson, L. Dong, P. Christopher, E. A. Carter and P. Nordlander, Science, 2018, 362, 69–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Boerigter, R. Campana, M. Morabito and S. Linic, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Rao, U. Aslam and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 141, 643–647 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Marin, S. W. Hsu, L. Chen, A. Lo, D. W. Zwissler, Z. Liu and A. R. Tao, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 526–531 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, Z. M. Wong, T. Deng, G. Wu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007438 CrossRef CAS .
N. Isabelle, K. V. Rao, O. Deborah, S. Liang, B. Mourad, T. Xiao and W. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 40067–40077 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Khurgin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 2–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, B. C. Sweeny, A. C. Johnston-Peck, D. Su, E. A. Stach and W. D. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7887–7891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines: Concepts and Perspectives for the Nanoworld, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Ding, K. M. Gao, L. Wang, P. Zhou and K. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Yi, J. Zhong, S. Hu, B. Liu, J. Liu, C. Zong, Z. Lei, X. Wang and J. Aizpurua, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Umar, V. G. Rao, C. Steven and L. Suljo, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 656–665 CrossRef .
Y. Dai, Z. Zhou, A. Ghosh, R. S. K. Mong and H. Petek, Nature, 2020, 588, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Parada, Z. K. Goldsmith, S. S. Kolmar, B. P. Rimgard, B. Q. Mercado, L. Hammarstrom, S. Hammesschiffer and J. M. Mayer, Science, 2019, 364, 471–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. G. Smith and P. K. Jain, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 763–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, L. Yan, J. Huang, X. Liu, L. Tao and Q. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 760 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Ravetz, A. B. Pun, E. M. Churchill, D. N. Congreve, T. Rovis and L. M. Campos, Nature, 2019, 565, 343–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09151dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Rational design for an Ag-PDA/ZnO ternary plasmonic photocatalyst by adding a passivation layer. (a) Power spectra of the direct and circumsolar irradiation. (b) The experimental system and schematic illustration of Ag-PDA/ZnO for water splitting in the visible-infrared solar irradiation. When the PDA passivation layer is present, the reverse transfer process by thermal vibration lasts much longer than the LSPR excitation process, so that the hot electrons and holes can keep accumulating separately and then participate in the subsequent HER and OER reactions. (c) The schematic illustration of the plasmonic upconversion process. The dipole–dipole interaction between Ag and PDA prolongs the thermalization time of the plasmon, so that the plasmonic wave formed by resonant coupling of the surface plasmon with a photon has the potential to absorb an addition photon during its dephasing process, and thus excites the electron to a higher energy level. The high vibrational energy level is the intermediate energy level of the upconversion.	 

 	Fig. 2  The morphology, structure and element characteristics of the composite with a PDA mass ratio of 5%. (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image. (c) The EDS elemental mapping image. (d–f) The XPS spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO. The characteristic C 1s peaks of Ag-PDA/ZnO are ascribed to carbon impurities (284.6 eV) and indole carbon in the PDA (287.2 eV). The N 1s characteristic peak binding energy is 399.5 eV.	 
ΔG≠ = (ΔG0 + λ)2/4λ
ket = Aexp(−ΔG≠/RT)2	(1)

 	Fig. 3  The passivation layer prevents the recombination of electrons and holes, and the reaction can enter the Marcus inverted region. (a) A schematic illustration of electrons entering the Marcus inverted region. (b) The double integral results of the EPR signals of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO. The irradiation wavelengths are 325, 532, and 785 nm. (c–e) Time-dependent full EPR spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO, where T = 298 K, the irradiation times are 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 min (excitation wavelength: (c) 325 nm, (d) 532 nm, (e) 785 nm).	 

 	Fig. 4  The plasmonic upconversion scheme constructed using the results of the Raman spectroscopy research. The powder samples were pressed into a slide to obtain a smooth plane for testing. The laser attenuation parameters were all 5%. The plasmonic quasi-particle and photons are resonating at the femtosecond scale or less,45 and the information was obtained from the intensity, position and number of Raman peak. (a) The schematic illustration for plasmonic upconversion and direct excitation. The high vibrational state of the plasmon overlaps with the Raman virtual state of ZnO and becomes the upconversion intermediate energy level. (b–d) The Raman spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO (excitation wavelength: (b) 325 nm, (c) 532 nm, (d) 785 nm).	 
p(x) = (μx/x!) × e−μ	(2)

 	Fig. 5  The water splitting experiments and stability testing of Ag-PDA/ZnO. (a) The H2 and O2 yields, and the calculated results of AQY for light sources with different wavelengths. For each wavelength, the system operates for 1 h, and then data collection begins. The result is an average of 20 tests, and the yield of H2 is close to twice that of O2. (b and c) The ECE corresponding to different wavelengths and its variation with incident power: (b) total solar spectrum, λ > 500 nm, 750 > λ > 500 nm, λ > 750 nm (by adding the appropriate filter). (c) λ = 325, 532, 633, 785 nm. The dashed lines are calculated by the Poisson distribution. (d and e) The Ag 3d XPS spectra of Ag/ZnO and Ag-PDA/ZnO before and after working for 10000 min. (f) The stability test of Ag-PDA/ZnO. Under the 532 nm light source, the deactivation rate of the carrier was balanced with the generation rate at about 60 min, under 785 nm it was about 170 min, and under AM 1.5G it was about 70 min. The performance of the material remained stable after continuous catalysis for 10000 min. The black dashed lines are to guide the eye.	 

Intermediate excited state	Plasmon vibrational energy level (diversification)	Triplet (single)
Spin selection	Always permitted	Only T1(↑↑) + T1(↓↓) is permitted
Reaction conditions	The charge must be transferred to an adsorbent with a certain band gap (more complex)	Triplet initiators are usually required (simpler)
Optical properties	Broadly tunable	Restrained
Light absorption capacity	Stronger	Weaker
Energy transfer efficiency	Lower	Higher
Fluorescence emission	Usually, no high-energy photon emission	High-energy photons delay fluorescence
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09151d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
