An evidence for an organic N-doped multiwall carbon nanotube heterostructure and its superior electrocatalytic properties for promising dye-sensitized ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA00535D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00535D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8307-8322An evidence for an organic N-doped multiwall carbon nanotube heterostructure and its superior electrocatalytic properties for promising dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Alvira Ayoub 
            Arbab
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Anam Ali 
            Memon
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Iftikhar Ali 
            Sahito
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Naveed 
            Mengal
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kyung Chul 
            Sun
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Mumtaz 
            Ali
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sung Hoon 
            Jeong
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Organic and Nano Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea
bMehran University of Engineering and Technology, Jamshoro 76062, Pakistan. E-mail: shjeong@hanyang.ac.kr
cDepartment of Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Technology, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, South Korea
dTechnical Textile & Materials R&D Group, Korea Institute of Industrial Technology, South Korea
Received 
      17th January 2018
    , Accepted 20th March 2018First published on 21st March 2018AbstractA novel organic heteroatom doping technique is proposed for the synthesis of N-doped multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) heterostructures. The approach involves the effective doping of MWCNTs with nitrogen via a cationised bovine serum albumin (cBSA) protein complex. The cationization of BSA releases an exceptional number of activated nitrogen species present in localized amino groups, which are further embedded into the MWCNT framework. The amino groups present in BSA act as nitrogen donors and surface stabilizing agents to generate a highly conductive and functionalized carbon heterostructure. The doped nitrogen was present in the form of pyridinic and pyrrolic states, as evidenced by XPS analysis. Organic N-doped MWCNTs with predominant pyridinic N atoms displayed superior charge transfer (RCT = 0.06 Ω) owing to their superior electrocatalytic activity. A DSSC fabricated with organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures exhibited a high conversion efficiency of 9.55%, which was similar to that of a Pt cathode, with an efficiency of 9.89%. The superior electrochemical performance of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures is due to the high charge polarization arising from the difference in electronegativity between nitrogen and carbon as well as the structural strain caused by the cationic BSA protein complex. Our proposed system provides new routes for the synthesis of organic heteroatom-doped nanomaterials for promising energy storage devices.
1. Introduction
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are widely used in the field of science and technology, such as in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, catalysis, energy storage/conversion devices and solar cells, because of their high chemical inertness, thermal stability, and electronic conductivity.1–5 Many efforts have been focused on the synthesis of desired carbon nanotube structures with a highly graphitic framework, greater catalytic activity, large surface areas and heteroatom doping with functional groups to satisfy the requirements of potential applications.6–9 The sp2-hybridized graphitic framework has unique electronic properties; however, electronics applications of CNTs are handicapped by the absence of a band gap. The band gap of CNTs largely depends on additional holes and defect-rich heteroatom-doped sites.10–14 Doping of CNTs with heteroatoms significantly enhances the performance of catalysts and provides high electrical conductivity, oxidation stability, and catalytic activity. Previously, functionalization with a variety of dopants such as boron, phosphorus, iodine, and fluorine has been intensively studied.15–18 More recent investigations have shifted to doping carbon structures with nitrogen atoms owing to promising results in a variety of electrochemical applications.19–22
Among various heteroatom dopants, nitrogen is an effective functional dopant as it tunes the surface chemistry by inducing structural deformations due to local strains in the tubular carbon framework. The cationisation of a nitrogen donor can also induce a positive charge with respect to the delocalized sp2-hybridized carbon framework, which boosts electron transfer and catalytic reactions. The effective tailoring of N+ ions in the tubular CNT morphology can enhance electrocatalytic activity without compromising the conjugation length and can maintain the higher conductivity of the carbon sheet.23–25 Previously, doping of CNTs with N was efficiently achieved via pyrolysis, irradiation, annealing in ammonia and CVD approaches.26–29 Several groups have demonstrated irradiation and annealing in ammonia, melamine, cyanamide, urea and various other N-containing sources to introduce nitrogen functionalities into carbon materials. Table 1 gives a compilation of various research works into similar state-of-the-art materials used in DSSCs. Most of the listed works used irradiation or annealing with nitrogen in a nitrogen atmosphere to produce carbon vacancies and fill those vacancies with N atoms, because extensive annealing and irradiation can create abundant defects on the surface, which reduce the conductivity and cycling stability of carbon materials. Moreover, many N-doped CNTs contain a number of metal species owing to the metal precursors used in synthesis techniques. Here, we introduce an organic bioprocess to introduce N dopants into MWCNTs without any irradiation, annealing or ammonia treatment. We present an organic low-temperature synthesis technique for fabricating N-doped MWCNT heterostructures via a cationic bovine serum albumin protein dopant. The in situ doping of MWCNTs with N+ heteroatoms using a suitable H2O-soluble N+ ion-containing protein provides an organic route for fabricating metal-free organic N-doped MWCNT electrocatalysts. In this respect, commonly available inexpensive proteins are interesting nitrogen sources for N doping. The proteins can act as effective nitrogen sources, as they contain nitrogen-rich amino acids present in the protein complex structure. These amino acid groups act as nitrogen donors and surface stabilizing agents when activated at an acidic pH. In this way, globular proteins, e.g., bovine serum albumin (BSA), contain a large number of active nitrogen species present in amino acid groups. Under perfect acidic pH conditions, BSA releases and disperses a large number of N+ ions together with amino acid moieties, which start to accumulate over the tubular carbon framework. In this system N dopants in BSA will not induce any defect vacancies; only functional N-containing groups will overlap and be introduced into the carbon framework. Therefore, this system for encapsulating organic N dopants will fabricate an N-doped MWCNT heterostructure with a low band gap and maintain a high level of electrical conductivity and catalytic activity. The intensity of doping with N heteroatoms can be specified via the number of amino acids present in the active sites of BSA that are capable of binding to the CNT substrate. The amino acids that are not involved in binding to the substrate do not make any contribution towards the N doping mechanism; only a small part of the total protein is accessible to the carbon substrate. Therefore, to attain maximum binding of the active N sites containing amino acids, an acid catalyst such as nitric acid is required to activate the protein dopant. This method of doping with organic heteroatoms provides new ways for the incorporation of a principal homogeneous N+ dopant into the surface and bulk structure of CNTs. In this work, we compare BSA with two other dopants, namely, the surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate and biotin.
Table 1 Comparison of different nitrogen-doped carbon materials used for dye-sensitized solar cellsa




Cathode material
Doping agent/doping technique
Nitrogen content [%]

R
CT [Ω cm−2]
Efficiency [%]
Ref.





a N/A = value not available.





Carbon nanotube
Polydopamine (PDA)/carbonization
3.80
6.15
7.30

38



Carbon nanotube
NH3 treatment
3.73
N/A
7.04

39



Carbon nanotube
Pyrolysis
4.1
2.18
8.82

40



Graphene
Thermal treatment in NH3 gas
6.5
12.7
5.07

41



Graphene
N2 thermal treatment/pyrolysis
7.4
35
5.4

42



Graphene
Ammonia treatment
2.02
2.82
7.42

43



Carbon microspheres
Microwave
N/A
6.1
6.20

44



Carbon/carbide
Cyanamide/thermal reduction
0.53
6.78
7.36

45



Carbon nanoparticles
Detonation-thermal annealing
N/A
1.96
2.67

46



CNT/graphene
Melamine/thermal treatment
2.5
1.78
6.74

47



Graphene nanosheets
Cyanamide/thermal annealing
N/A
1.31
7.18

48



Graphene nanoribbons
Urea/thermal annealing
2.80
2.58
8.57

49



MWCNT
Cationised bovine serum albumin
4.17
0.60
9.55
This work




Our suggested organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure was further tested as the cathode material to successfully replace the Pt catalyst in promising metal-free dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). A conventional DSSC is assembled from electrodes based on fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) glass, which are named as the photoanode and cathode.30–33 The photoanode is fabricated by pasting a mesoporous titania film with adsorbed N719 dye. The cathode is fabricated from platinized FTO glass. Both electrodes are separated by a liquid electrolyte. In DSSCs, 30–60% of the cost is associated with the high-temperature (∼400 °C) thermal annealing and deposition of the Pt layer on the cathode.34 In order to replace Pt, a substitute must be highly conductive and electrocatalytically active and have adequate porosity. Various carbon materials such as carbon nanotubes, activated carbon, carbon fiber fabric, graphite, and graphene have been utilized to fabricate Pt-free cathode materials for DSSCs.35–37 However, the achievement of high efficiency and stability of carbon-based cathodes still requires research. Our proposed system of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures can replace a Pt electrocatalyst owing to its high electrocatalytic activity and electrical conductivity. The combined characteristics of high conductivity and functionalization with an N+ heteroatom dopant can enhance the interfacial reaction with iodide ions (I−) present in an iodide-based electrolyte. Furthermore, positively charged N+ ions produced by cationization can attract large numbers of negatively charged iodide ions and enhance the reduction of tri-iodide ions. Cells assembled with organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures exhibited a high conversion efficiency of 9.55%, which was higher than those of DSSCs with counter electrodes fabricated using conventional N-doped carbon structures. This result was due to the synergistic effect of the high conductivity and functionality of the carbon nanotubes.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Materials
All chemicals used were of analytical grade. Three different dispersants, namely, sodium dodecyl sulphate (≥98.5%), biotin (≥99%, lyophilized powder), and bovine serum albumin (BSA, lyophilized powder, ≥96%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. MWCNT powder had a carbon content of ≥98%, an outer diameter of 10 nm ± 1 nm, an inner diameter of 4.5 nm ± 0.5 nm, and a length of 3–6 μm. To alter the pH of the dispersants, nitric acid and sodium hydroxide of laboratory grade were used. Carboxymethyl cellulose (sodium salt, MW of 250000 g) was used as a binding agent. A conductive transparent glass (FTO, TEC 8, Pilkington Co.) substrate was used. The dye sensitizer D719, i.e., cis-di-isothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), was purchased from Ever Light Co. For the preparation of photoanodes, P25 (25 nm size, Degussa Co.), G2 (Showa Denko Co.), ethyl cellulose, terpineol, and acetic acid (99.7%) were used as received for the preparation of different types of TiO2 photoelectrode paste. Surlyn ionomer with a thickness of 60 μm was purchased from Solaronix. Other laboratory grade reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co.
2.2 Synthesis of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure

Fig. 1 illustrates the synthesis technique for the fabrication of an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure for DSSCs. The doping of CNTs with organic heteroatoms via BSA was achieved by the ultrasound-assisted dispersion of MWCNTs with cationized BSA. Firstly, a solution of cationized bovine serum albumin (BSA) was prepared by dissolving 2 mg mL−1 BSA in water. In order to activate the nitrogen species present in the amino groups of the BSA complex structure, a small amount of nitric acid was gradually dropped into the protein solution until the solution pH was in the region of 3 (acidic). The intensity of the dispersion of N+ ions from amino groups can be controlled by means of the pH. Therefore, different solutions of BSA were prepared with pH values ranging from 3 to 11. A 0.4 g sample of MWCNT powder was stirred in a 50 mL aqueous solution of cationized BSA for 12 hours. In order to reduce aggregation, the MWCNT solution was ultrasonicated for three hours at room temperature. In this way, nitrogen species dispersed from amino centers will start to overlap and be encapsulated into the tubular framework of carbon nanotubes. Many amino group-containing nitrogen species will be embedded in the inner sidewalls of the CNTs and enhance the charge transfer mechanism. The carbon solution was vacuum-filtered and washed consecutively twice to remove any undoped amino acid moieties not attached to the carbon substrate. The filter cake was dried in a vacuum oven and mixed with a 2% solution of carboxymethyl cellulose. The solution was ground sufficiently in an agate mortar to produce a thick paste. The paste was again stored in the vacuum oven to introduce more nitrogen into the MWCNT paste. As a result, a porous organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure was successfully synthesized. The nitrogen doping was confirmed by TEM, XPS, UV-vis spectroscopy and photoluminescence analysis. For comparison, a surfactant and a biotin dispersant were also used to compare the dispersion ability of BSA. Fluorinated tin oxide glass (FTO, with a sheet resistance of 8 Ω sq−1) was thoroughly cleaned with acetone, distilled water, and ethanol, respectively. The paste with a thick consistency was deposited on clean dry FTO glass via a simple doctor blade method. An air dryer was set at a temperature of 50 °C during application of the paste to the FTO substrate. The thickness of the deposited layer was controlled using 3M tape. The FTO electrodes coated with the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure were dried at room temperature, followed by drying at 150 °C for 30 minutes in an air furnace. The dried electrodes were sintered at 300 °C for 30 minutes in a high-temperature air furnace. For reference, a Pt electrode and MWCNTs with different structures were synthesized for optimization of the performance of the cathode. The Pt electrode was prepared by dissolving a 10 mM solution of chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6) in isopropanol and drop-cast on FTO glass, followed by annealing at 400 °C for 20 minutes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure for DSSCs. 
2.3 Fabrication of DSSC based on organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure
For the fabrication of a DSSC, photoanodes were fabricated. FTO glass was cut into squares with dimensions of 15 × 15 mm and cleaned with acetone, water, and ethanol, respectively. The cleaned and dried FTO samples were pretreated with a 40 mM solution of TiCl4. The immersed glass samples were kept in a vacuum at 70 °C for 30 minutes. The samples were thoroughly washed with ethanol, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 minutes. In this way, stronger adhesion of the titania paste to FTO was achieved. For the fabrication of photoanodes, mesoporous titania paste was synthesized according to a previous work. Two types of titania paste were synthesized using P25 and G2 nanoparticles. A double layer of P25 with a thickness of 12 μm was deposited carefully on TiCl4-treated FTO glass with dimensions of 15 × 15 mm. The titania-coated glass was treated by consecutive steps of drying followed by sintering at 70, 325, 375, 450, and 500 °C for 30, 5, 5, 15, and 15 minutes, respectively, in a high-temperature furnace. Afterwards, the P25-coated FTO electrodes were coated with a 6 μm G2 scattering layer, followed by the same pattern of drying and sintering treatments. The sintered titania-coated electrodes were again post-treated with TiCl4 (40 mM) so as to enhance the porous morphology of the titania paste. The electrodes were immersed in TiCl4 at 70 °C for 30 minutes, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 minutes. The sintered and dried photoanodes were dipped in a 0.5 mM solution of N719 dye for 18 hours. The photoanodes with the adsorbed dye were washed to remove non-adsorbed dye molecules using ethanol and dried under a nitrogen flow. Owing to the high functionality of the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, we preferred to use a polymer electrolyte, as these are more stable in the presence of a carbon layer. For this purpose, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII), 0.05 M iodine (I2), 0.1 M lithium iodide (LiI), 0.1 M guanidine thiocyanate (GuNCS), 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and 3 wt% of polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer were dissolved in an acetonitrile solution. The electrolyte was stirred sufficiently to achieve the required degree of gelation and thickness. Two different types of cell structure were fabricated: (a) a reference Pt-based DSSC and (b) a DSSC based on the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. Cells were assembled with a photoanode and an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure CE separated by the polymer electrolyte in a sandwich-type arrangement using a 60 μm thermoplastic hot-melt ionomer spacer. The cells were hot-pressed at 80 °C. The polymer electrolyte was then introduced into the cells using vacuum filling. The cells were then sealed with Surlyn ionomer topped with a cover glass. Conductive silver paste was used to coat the sides of the cell to ensure better contact with the current collector. A mask aperture of 0.2 cm2 was placed over the top of the photoanodes so as to avoid light scattering phenomena and for better estimation of the photovoltaic efficiency. Reference Pt-based DSSCs were also fabricated in the same manner. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows a schematic illustration of our proposed Pt-free DSSC. To measure the electrochemical characteristics of the CEs, identical dummy cells were assembled with two symmetrical CEs separated by a gel electrolyte similar to that used in the DSSCs.
2.4 Characterization
In order to find evidence of doping by N heteroatoms in MWCNTs, different characterization techniques were used. In order to assess the surface morphology, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL JSM-6700F) at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV was performed. A Pt coating was also applied to the carbon samples to ensure clear images. The doping of nitrogen into MWCNTs was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F). The TEM test was performed at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The porous and defect-rich morphology formed by doping with organic nitrogen was investigated using Raman spectrometry (Jasco NRS-3100) with a green laser with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The crystal structure of the proposed N-doped MWCNT heterostructure was investigated by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) using a Rigaku Denki X-ray generator (Rigaku D/Max-2500) equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54181 Å) at 40 kV and 60 mA. WAXD data were collected with a step size of 0.02° at a measurement speed of 5° min−1 in the 2θ range of 10° to 80°. UV-vis spectroscopy was performed to analyze the dispersion of MWCNTs in the cBSA protein agent. UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained using a UV-1650PC spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Co.) in the wavelength range of 200 nm to 800 nm for the pristine and organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures. The attachment of functionalized nitrogen dopants was confirmed by photoluminescence spectra. PL was measured with a fluorescence spectrometer (SCINCO). For this test, the maximum excitation and emission spectra of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure were analyzed. Furthermore, pyridinic and pyrrolic states of nitrogen were confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis using a VG MultiLab ESCA 2000 system from Thermo Scientific (USA). For XPS, monochromatized Al Kα radiation with an energy step size of 0.05 eV was used. In order to investigate the electrocatalytic properties of our synthesized N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were carried out using a three-electrode system in an argon-purged electrolyte (0.01 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 1 mM I2 prepared in an acetonitrile solution). The test was performed at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with an ultimate electrochemical workstation (Bio Logic Co.). In order to measure the charge transfer resistance (RCT) between the electrocatalyst and electrolyte, a symmetrical cell was prepared using CEs and the electrolyte. In this way, impedance losses caused by the photoanodes can be avoided and a clear idea of the interfacial charge transfer resistance between the CE and electrolyte can be obtained. For this purpose, an ultimate electrochemical workstation (Bio Logic Co.) was used for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis of CEs. The photovoltaic performance of DSSCs fabricated with different CEs was evaluated using a K101-Lab 20 source measuring unit (Mac Science Co.). A solar simulator with a 160 W xenon arc lamp was used as the light source (spectral match: 0.75–1.25, non-uniformity of irradiance: ≤±2%, temporal instability: ≤±2%). The light intensity was calibrated with a KIER-calibrated Si solar cell (Mac Science Co.). Photovoltaic parameters of the cells were measured under a masked frame. DSSCs with an active area of 4 × 5 mm measured by an electronic microscope (Camscope, ICS-305B, Sometech Co.) were used for the photovoltaic performance tests.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Novel scheme for doping of MWCNTs with N heteroatoms
Carbon nanotubes are composed of nearly perfect atomically smooth basal planes, which may not be suitable for favorable electrocatalytic reactions in various energy storage devices. However, heteroatom doping techniques involve a method for creating defect vacancies in the carbon framework and then filling those vacancies with nitrogen dopants. Our proposed organic technique avoids the creation of defect vacancies in the carbon framework and involves a moderate amount of overlapping and encapsulation of nitrogen species present in the amino groups of BSA into the surface and sidewalls of MWCNTs. This protein contains an excess number of amino group-containing nitrogen species. During the cationization of BSA, all hydroxyl groups were capped by positively charged amines containing an excess number of N+ ions. The active centers of BSA catalyzed by the acid were dispersed and covered the inner walls and surface of the CNTs. The result is that a highly positively charged protein is attached to the MWCNT matrix and increases its band gap and electrocatalytic activity. In addition, the increased number of primary N+ dopants enables the greater interfacial reaction of iodide ions present in the polymer electrolyte. The dopant concentration can be controlled by tuning the concentration of BSA and the pH of the BSA solution. Fig. 2 illustrates the mechanism of doping N+ ions into an MWCNT via cationized BSA. In order to examine the potential of other dispersants to act as dopants, biotin and sodium dodecyl sulfate were also utilized. However, both dispersants act as cationic agents, rather than nitrogen dopants. Therefore, they provide limited electrocatalytic activity in comparison to the BSA dispersant.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the doping of MWCNTs with nitrogen via a cationised BSA protein precursor. 
3.2 Evidence of doping of MWCNTs with nitrogen via cationised BSA
Nitrogen is a perfect heteroelement for doping carbon, as it has the same atomic size as carbon. The length of C–N bonds is shorter than that of C–C bonds, which may result in curving of the basal planes of carbon nanotubes to form a porous bamboo-like matrix surface. The influence of nitrogen doping on the morphology and structure of MWCNTs can be analyzed via surface characterization techniques. For evidence of doping of the CNT surface with nitrogen, samples were critically observed by transmission electron microscopy. MWCNT solutions were transferred onto a TEM grid for structural characterization. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), a flat tubular MWCNT structure was observed for the bare MWCNT substrate and those treated with SDS and biotin. It was visibly confirmed that the MWCNTs were well dispersed by the biotin dispersant without apparent agglomeration. However, slight aggregation was observed in MWCNTs dispersed by SDS owing to the complex structure of the surfactant. However, for more concrete results, a solution of MWCNTs treated with cBSA was observed. As shown in Fig. 3, a more wrinkled structure with clear black spots was observed in the MWCNT structure treated with cBSA, which was not visible in the samples treated with SDS and biotin. The wrinkled surface morphology observed in the TEM images (5 nm) provides evidence of nitrogen doping by means of cBSA, which facilitated the formation of the porous tubular morphology. The prominent black blotches on the tubular wrinkled surface of the MWCNTs demonstrated the attachment of functional pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen species present in amino groups of cBSA. These results indicate that the embedding of pyridine-like N units (doubly bonded N) within the “bamboo-type” structures achieved by means of treatment with organic cBSA provided higher electrical conductivity and cycling stability and a fast charge transfer mechanism in the CNT framework. The walls of the “bamboo” sections exhibited nearly negligible disorder on the atomic scale. It is remarkable that the straight sections of the nanotubes appeared crystalline in TEM micrographs with some wrinkles and slight distortions along the outer layers. This result indicates that our proposed system of doping with organic N will not create any defect vacancies but will encapsulate N within the atomic structure of the MWCNT framework. Such a nitrogen-doped carbon structure displayed high electrocatalytic activity and cycling stability when fabricated as a cathode material for DSSCs.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure synthesized using cationised bovine serum albumin. 
FE-SEM images of MWCNTs treated with different dispersants and at different pH values were further investigated. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) image shows a three-dimensional network of bamboo-like amorphous carbon nanotube structures. Samples treated with SDS and biotin displayed an aggregated nanotube morphology. However, an even dispersed bamboo-like structure was observed in MWCNTs treated with BSA. MWCNTs were further dispersed with BSA at different pH values (3–11), and the effect on the surface morphology was investigated (Fig. 4). Among five different samples, MWCNT dispersed with BSA at a pH of 3 displayed a highly dispersed and even tubular interconnected matrix of carbon nanotubes. At high magnifications, tubular bamboo-like CNTs were evenly distributed. This mesoporous tubular cationised MWCNT surface provides fast electrolyte diffusion owing to the distribution of positive surface charge caused by the cationisation of BSA. Furthermore, it is clearly observed that MWCNTs exhibited a highly aggregated and amalgamated structure when dispersed with BSA at pH values of 9 and 11, respectively. A highly alkaline pH distorted the configuration of BSA molecules and reduced their ability to attach to the CNT substrate, as biomolecules specifically bind to substrates at specific pH values and temperatures. Therefore, treatment with BSA at a highly alkaline pH caused aggregation of MWCNTs. As a result, it is clear that BSA generated nitrogen dopants at a pH of less than 7 and enhanced their ability to disperse in acidic conditions. The uniformly spread porous tubular CNT surface consequently provided a fast charge transport mechanism and higher electrocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 4  FE-SEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure treated with bovine serum albumin at different pH values (3–11). 
An in-depth morphological and structural analysis of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure can be observed in Fig. 5. A continuous interconnected hierarchical nanonetwork of carbon nanotubes is shown on a substrate. An even and highly dispersed bamboo-like matrix of carbon nanotubes is observed. No aggregation or amalgamation of the surfaces is seen (Fig. 5a–c). In addition, nitrogen doping is also observed in high-resolution TEM images. The pristine MWCNT substrate displayed a bare exterior surface (Fig. 5d). Concentrated encapsulation and overlapping of the BSA agent over the MWCNT structure are observed in Fig. 5e–g. Nitrogen doping due to the amino groups present in cBSA caused the adsorption of nitrogen on the surface of the MWCNT substrate, enabled extensive surface diffusion, and supported the bulk diffusion of electrolyte species into the carbon nanotube framework. A layer with a thickness of 3 μm was deposited on FTO to provide an effective conductive and electrocatalytically active carbon layer (Fig. 5h). A digital photograph (Fig. 5i) demonstrates the even coating of the carbon layer on FTO glass and confirms the strong adhesion of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure to the glass substrate.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) FE-SEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (d–g) TEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (h) cross-sectional FE-SEM image of organic N-doped MWCNT coating on FTO glass, (i) digital image of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure coated on FTO glass. 
The Raman spectrum of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure is shown in Fig. 6a. A relatively stronger D band was revealed for the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure than for the bare MWCNTs, which was due to the wrinkled surface and distortion caused in the sidewalls of the MWCNTs during the ultrasonication-assisted doping process. Slight disorder originated from the attachment of dense amino-based species to the MWCNT surface. The ratio of the intensities of the crystal G band and defect D band (ID/IG) in the Raman spectra is related to the sizes of sp2 carbon clusters in the structure and is nearly proportional to the defect density. The organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure exhibited a slightly higher intensity ratio (ID/IG = 1.11). This was due to the strain caused by the tubular framework during doping and sonication. However, bare MWCNTs exhibited a lower intensity ratio (ID/IG = 0.99) owing to their smooth basal plane structure. This result established that the system for doping with organic N provided suitable N+ functional moieties with no defect vacancies. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure displays a diffraction peak centered at 25.29°, which can be indexed to the (002) lattice planes of graphite (Fig. 6b). In addition, the XRD pattern also displayed small peaks at 43.44° and 53.69°, which were indexed to the diffractions of the (100) and (004) planes and confirmed the presence of the wrinkled carbon surface in the heterostructure. These measurements confirmed that the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure consists of a tubular graphite-like ordered structure with a wrinkled amorphous carbon exterior surface. Doping with organic N heteroatoms by means of a protein caused less damage to the tubular graphite planes while anchoring functional nitrogen moieties to the basal CNT structure. This method can control the electrical conductivity and enhance the electron transfer ability of the MWCNT heterostructure. UV-vis spectra confirmed the surface doping of MWCNTs by the organic cationised BSA agent. Fig. 6c shows the UV-vis spectra of pristine MWCNTs and organic N-doped MWCNTs. In the case of pristine MWCNTs, a distorted peak at 279 nm was observed. A defined peak at 276 nm showed the even dispersion of MWCNTs by the cationised BSA agent at a pH of 3. Upon doping with nitrogen the absorption peak of MWCNTs at 279 nm gradually decreased. This was probably due to a reduction in the optical volume of the basal plane structure of the MWCNTs brought about by π–π interactions. The reduction in the absorption wavelength was due to a reduction in the number of p-electrons caused by the addition of amino group-containing nitrogen dopants. Moreover, the absorption edge shifted slightly towards lower wavelengths (276 nm). This slight peak shift occurred because there was no change in the effective conjugation length of the MWCNTs in the presence of organic nitrogen dopants. Furthermore, the inset in Fig. 6c demonstrates the effectiveness of dispersing MWCNTs with cationised BSA. It can be clearly seen that the MWCNTs were dispersed well by BSA when treated at a pH of 3. Precipitated CNTs are clearly visible in the solution treated with BSA at a pH of 11. The organic N-doped MWCNTs exhibited higher solubility and nitrogen doping at an acidic pH. The photoluminescence spectra of the pristine and organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures are shown in Fig. 6d. The PL spectra can be divided into two phases, namely, 300 nm to 350 nm and 350 nm to 500 nm, respectively. The PL intensity in the first phase was due to the defect vacancies formed in the sample, whereas that in the latter phase was due to the band edge emission caused by the functionalized surface groups. The latter emission was observed upon excitation at 288 nm. It was observed that for the organic N-doped MWCNT electrocatalyst the relative intensity of the peaks was remarkably enhanced in comparison with those of the pristine MWCNTs (inset in Fig. 6d). There was no difference in the full width of the spectra, which confirms that there was no alteration in the lattice structure and size distribution of nanotubes in the pristine and organic N-doped MWCNTs. This demonstrates that the formation of nitrogen caps in the tubular MWCNT morphology did not limit the length of the CNTs. In the second phase from 350 nm to 500 nm a blue shift was observed for the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. When we compare the band edge emission regions in the spectra in the phase from 350 nm to 500 nm, it is observed that the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure had the highest emission, which is indicative of doping with NH2 functional groups. The blue shift in the PL of organic N-doped MWCNTs in this region indicates the high radiative recombination of lone pairs of electrons. It is observed that the main emission peak is shifted to lower energies for the nitrogen-doped samples, which indicates that holes were created in the substrate. Abundant nitrogen cavities acted as recombination centers and created many defect vacancies owing to high nitrogen doping levels. From the results, it is clear that cBSA created a wrinkled layer of nitrogen-rich vacancies over the MWCNT surface, which increased the recombination of electrons. This recombination phenomenon may affect the value of the peak-to-peak distance (EPP) for our organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure.
 Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra of pristine and organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures, (b) XRD pattern of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure (inset: digital microscopy image of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, ×40), (c) UV-vis spectra of pristine and organic MWCNT heterostructures (inset: solutions of MWCNTs treated with BSA at a pH of 7, 3 and 11, respectively, from left to right), (d) PL spectra of pristine and organic MWCNT heterostructures. 
To measure the atomic percentage of nitrogen and examine chemical changes caused by doping with nitrogen in the carbon heterostructure, we carried out X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. As expected, the XPS survey spectra (Fig. S4a†) of the MWCNTs treated with SDS and biotin display only C 1s and O 1s peaks at about 285 and 534 eV, respectively. After treatment with BSA (at a pH of 7), the MWCNTs displayed additional nitrogen doping, and an N 1s peak appeared at about 400 eV (1.67% N). As shown in Table 2, for the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure synthesized in highly acidic conditions (pH 3) a significant increase in the N 1s peak at about 400.47 eV (4.17% N) occurred, accompanied by a significant decrease in the oxygen content because of the reduction in surface oxygen groups induced by doping with nitrogen (Fig. 7a). The high-resolution N 1s spectrum of the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure displays two peaks at 400.4 and 400.7 eV (Fig. 7d), which correspond to pyridinic nitrogen and pyrrolic nitrogen, respectively. In addition, the C 1s core-level spectrum (Fig. 7b) of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure could be fitted to four component peaks with binding energies of 284.2, 285.0, 286.4 and 288.0 eV, which were due to sp2 hybridized carbon (CC), CN, C–N, and O–CO interactions, respectively. Moreover, the O 1s spectrum (Fig. 7c) could be fitted to three component peaks with binding energies of 534.0, 533.0 and 532.0 eV, which were due to the contributions of C–O–H/C–O–C, OC–O and CO bonds, respectively. Oxygenated carbon atoms were also detected in the XPS spectrum of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. The sample treated with BSA at an alkaline pH showed no sign of an N 1s peak (Fig. S4b, ESI†). The atomic percentages of each component are given in Table 2.
Table 2 Atomic percentages of organic N-doped MWCNTs treated at different pH values




Electrode
Atomic% of C
Atomic% of O
Atomic% of N




BSA (pH 7)
72.9
27.99
1.6


cBSA (pH 5)
72.2
25.5
2.38


cBSA (pH 3)
72.1
23.0
4.17




 Fig. 7  XPS spectra of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures. (a) Survey spectra of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures synthesized at different acidic pH values, (b) C 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure synthesized at a pH of 3, (c) O 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (d) N 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. For a detailed analysis, the original spectra (black dotted lines) were fitted to simulated spectra (navy blue lines), which were then deconvolved (red lines). 
3.3 Electrocatalytic activity
The basic role of an electrocatalytic layer is to effectively reduce tri-iodide species and effectively regenerate reduced species (e.g., I2) in the electrolyte. Moreover, an electrocatalyst provides pathways for the photocurrent to complete the circuit. Carbon nanotubes have recently displayed better electrocatalytic activity than conventional carbon electrodes. The catalytic activity of pristine MWCNTs can be increased twofold by doping with N heteroatoms. Our proposed method of doping with organic N can increase the binding energy of electrolyte ions at the CNT surface, with the result that the N-doped surfaces are able to host more iodide ions and thus enable a more effective reduction reaction. A cyclic voltammetry (CV) test was carried out to determine the electrocatalytic activity of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures synthesized using different controlled parameters. For better catalytic performance, the electrocatalytic activity and electrical conductivity of the CE are essential for the performance of the CE. To investigate the catalytic activity, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system.50
CV curves recorded for different CEs using a three-electrode method are presented in Fig. 8. Two distinct sets of oxidation and reduction peaks were observed for different synthesized MWCNT structures. The negative pair of peaks was assigned to the reduction reaction and the positive pair was assigned to the oxidation reaction. The electrocatalytic activity of the cathodes was investigated in terms of their cathodic peak potential (ECP), cathodic current density (IPC), and peak-to-peak separation (EPP), or potential difference between the reduction and oxidation peaks, for the I−3/I− couple. Low EPP values are associated with a fast catalytic reduction reaction and are inversely proportional to the current density IPC.51 The calculated values are given in Table S1 (ESI†). It was observed that a variation in the pH can modify the percentage of the N dopant and directly affect the electrocatalytic activity. Fig. 8a illustrates the electrocatalytic activity of MWCNT electrodes prepared with different dispersing agents, namely, the surfactant SDS, biotin, and bovine serum albumin (BSA). It can be seen that the MWCNT electrodes prepared with SDS, biotin and BSA exhibited cathodic peak potentials of −0.05, −0.04, and −0.03 V, respectively. This result shows the lower overpotential value of the MWCNT electrode treated with BSA. Furthermore, the MWCNT electrode treated with the BSA dispersant possessed a higher reduction current density in comparison with its counterparts treated with SDS and biotin. These results were attributed to the high dispersion ability of the BSA dopant, which increased the surface area and porosity of the MWCNT electrocatalyst. The high cathodic current density (−1.45 mA cm−2) and lower overpotential of the MWCNT electrode synthesized with BSA indicated a lower EPP value (0.41 V). The values that were obtained proved that the catalytic activity of the MWCNT electrode treated with the BSA dispersant for the reduction of I−3 ions was superior.
 Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants, (b) organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) a Pt catalyst and an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. 

Fig. 8b shows CV curves for the MWCNT electrodes synthesized with the BSA dispersant at different pH values. It was interesting to find that by decreasing the pH from 7 (neutral) to 3 (acidic), the cathodic current density was increased from −1.45 mA cm−2 to −3.83 mA cm−2. Therefore, we conclude that at a lower pH BSA efficiently releases a large volume of nitrogen dopants from the amino complex and cationised MWCNTs at the same time, which in turn creates an exceptional amount of interactions between the electrolyte and electrocatalyst, as more tri-iodide ions will be attracted towards the nitrogen-doped cationised carbon surface and enhance the reduction reaction. Nitrogen doping can increase the chemical reactivity of MWCNTs as a result of additional electrons from the nitrogen atoms. Moreover, the nitrogen doping sites may have stronger interactions with electrophilic species such as iodide molecules. Therefore, more electrophilic iodide species would be adsorbed onto the sidewalls of nitrogen-doped MWCNTs. It was also observed that by lowering the pH the absolute value of the cathodic current density was increased. However, EPP (0.44 V) increased slightly owing to the high value of the overpotential. The results are tabulated in Table S2 (ESI†). However, a higher alkaline pH (∼11) gave rise to a lower peak cathodic current density (−0.75 mA cm−2), as at a basic pH anodic charges will be created over the MWCNT surface, which repel abundant amounts of iodide ions and lead to less catalytic reduction of tri-iodide ions. It is reported that the exposure of BSA to hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) or to a combination of ˙OH and superoxide anion radicals (˙OH + ˙O2−) causes extensive structural modifications. Such modified proteins can undergo spontaneous fragmentation and are therefore unable to release localized N species.52
We compared the CV parameters of our optimized organic N-doped MWCNT electrode with those of a Pt CE. It was found that the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures displayed a higher ECA than the conventional Pt CE (Fig. 8c) and can replace a Pt electrocatalyst in DSSCs. The cathodic peak potential (−0.10 V) was lower and the cathodic current density (−3.83 mA cm−2) was higher than those for the Pt catalyst; the organic N-doped MWCNTs doubled the reduction current and demonstrated high electrocatalytic activity. It is clear that our suggested system of organic N-doped MWCNTs has a large surface area, a cationised porous morphology, and high conductivity with nitrogen-rich dopants, which triggered the fast reduction of tri-iodide ions. The results are tabulated in Table S3 (ESI†). It can be observed that higher EPP values were obtained with the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures. This may be because overlapping defect N vacancies over the MWCNTs caused charge recombination and increased the EPP value.
The long-term stability of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures in DSSCs can be determined from the cycling stability of the electrocatalyst in the iodide/tri-iodide reduction reaction. A comparison of cyclic voltammetry data (redox peak current density vs. no. of cycles) for the organic N-doped MWCNTs was performed. The cycling stability of the electrocatalyst based on the strong adhesion of the coating film to FTO glass and its high electrocatalytic activity over 20 consecutive cycles was measured at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. It was observed that (Fig. S5, ESI†) no peak distortion or decrease in the reduction peak was observed even after 20 cycles. The reduction current density did not change after continuous cycling, which showed stable redox activity and consistent electrochemical stability. This result shows that our proposed system of nitrogen doping provides a stable MWCNT structure with high cycling stability. Furthermore, the effect of the electrocatalytic activity was calculated from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).
3.4 Electrochemical properties
The porous organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures with predominant pyridinic N atoms displayed greatly enhanced electrocatalytic activity and cycling stability in comparison with pristine MWCNTs. An alternative way to study the catalytic performance comprises employing a symmetrical cell (i.e., a sandwich structure of CE/electrolyte/CE), which resembles the usual DSSC device structure but without the effect of the dye-loaded TiO2 anode and thus provides a practical environment for testing the CE. In order to investigate the effect of the nitrogen dopant on the electron transfer mechanism of the CE, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used. In these measurements, a symmetrical cell configuration was used to calculate the electrochemical reaction rates of the redox couple. A symmetrical cell comprising two identical cathodes was fabricated and filled with an electrolyte (shown in inset of Fig. 9a) and was used to determine the charge transfer reaction processes at the interface between the CE and the electrolyte so as to avoid the recombination and electron drift effects on the photoanode side.53 Typical Nyquist plots for symmetrical cells are shown in Fig. 9. The Nyquist plots were fitted using a Randles-type circuit as shown in the inset of Fig. 9a. The semicircle in the intermediate-frequency region is related to the charge transfer resistance (RCT) and the corresponding constant phase element (CPE) of the counter electrode–electrolyte interface reaction, whereas the other small semicircle in the low-frequency region represents the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZW) of the I−3/I− couple in the electrolyte.40 However, the sheet resistance (RS) of the electrocatalyst remains the same. Therefore, we mainly focused on the RCT values of the counter electrodes.
 Fig. 9  Nyquist plots for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants (inset shown the symmetrical cell and Randles type circuit used to measure RCT) (b) MWCNT synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) a Pt catalyst and an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. 
According to the results presented in Fig. 9a, the MWCNT electrode treated with BSA had a lower charge transfer resistance (RCT = 2.41 Ω) in comparison with its counterparts treated with SDS and biotin, respectively. These results are compatible with the CV results. The RCT value of the MWCNT electrode treated with SDS was relatively high (RCT = 2.70 Ω). The CNTs treated with SDS aggregated during dispersion owing to the oil-based complex structure of the surfactant.54 However, biotin has insufficient dispersion capacity to disintegrate MWCNTs and is therefore unable to provide sufficient catalytic efficiency and subsequently a high charge transfer resistance. The BSA protein complex structure disperses CNTs to a significant extent and provides a less aggregated surface, as demonstrated by FE-SEM results. The sheet resistance of the three electrodes varied negligibly, which reveals that the bonding strength of the sheet with the FTO glass substrate was high. These results demonstrate that the carbon sheet prepared with a BSA dispersant possessed high catalytic activity and a fast electron transport system. The results are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Results for EIS and photovoltaic performance of cells fabricated with MWCNT cathodes synthesized with different dispersants




Type of dispersant
Symmetrical cell
Complete DSSC



R
S (Ω)

R
CT (Ω)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Surfactant
7.30
4.87
14.354
0.661
54.87
5.21


Biotin
7.22
4.64
14.552
0.649
68.33
6.45


BSA
7.09
2.41
14.581
0.695
77.01
7.81




To optimize the electrochemical performance of MWCNTs dispersed with BSA at different pH values, dummy symmetrical cells were fabricated with an MWCNT electrocatalyst synthesized with BSA at pH values of 3–11 (acidic to alkaline). The results that were obtained, which are given in Table 4, demonstrated the influence of the pH of BSA on the performance of the MWCNTs. The electrochemical performance of the MWCNTs gradually decreased with an increase in the pH from 7 to 11 because at a highly alkaline pH many nitrogen species are damaged by oxygen radicals present in an NaOH solution and therefore large amounts of protein will be damaged and degraded by oxygen radicals, which will reduce the functionality of MWCNTs and thus their electrocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the negative-charge-rich CNT surface repels iodide ions and blocks the electrocatalyst layer/electrolyte interface. Therefore, at a highly alkaline pH a high RCT of 6.00 Ω was achieved. On the other hand, an MWCNT electrocatalyst attained a striking reduction in RCT to 0.06 Ω when synthesized with BSA at a low pH (∼3), as shown in Fig. 9b. This result proves that the pH has a great influence on the ability of BSA to release a large number of N+ species from an amino-rich complex. Moreover, at a low pH BSA disperses a large number of nitrogen species over the CNT surface that carry positive charges and also encapsulates a large number of iodide ions. The cationised N-doped MWCNT surface decreases the diffusion resistance of the polymeric electrolyte within the inner carbon sheet and creates diffusion fields within the centrifugal symmetry of the N-doped MWCNT heterostructures. This confirmed that cationised BSA (cBSA) provides an organic route for fabricating nitrogen-doped MWCNT heterostructures, which are very suitable for replacing the Pt catalyst for promising DSSCs.
Table 4 Results for EIS and photovoltaic performance of cells fabricated with MWCNT cathodes synthesized with bovine serum albumin dispersant at different acidic and alkaline pH values




pH of BSA solution
Symmetrical cell
Complete DSSC



R
S (Ω)

R
CT (Ω)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




3
6.55
0.06
15.681
0.753
80.84
9.55


5
6.79
1.85
14.937
0.732
80.67
8.82


7
7.09
2.41
14.581
0.695
77.01
7.81


9
7.31
5.10
13.948
0.629
69.91
6.13


11
7.54
6.00
11.701
0.599
63.64
4.46




Our cBSA-assisted organic N-doped MWCNT electrocatalyst can successfully replace the expensive Pt catalyst in DSSCs. As shown in Fig. 9c, a Pt catalyst exhibited a high charge transfer resistance (RCT = 1.85 Ω) in comparison with our suggested system of CEs. This result proved that the organic N-doped MWCNT electrocatalyst has sufficient conductivity and electrocatalytic activity to replace the Pt catalyst. The faster electron transfer mechanism assisted by the cationised N-doped MWCNT heterostructure helped to maintain the maximum current density and open-circuit voltage in DSSCs. The results are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Results for EIS and photovoltaic performance of cells fabricated with Pt and organic N-doped MWCNT cathodes




Cathode
Symmetrical cell
Complete DSSC



R
S (Ω)

R
CT (Ω)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Pt
6.80
1.85
16.279
0.734
84.34
9.89


Organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure
6.55
0.60
15.681
0.753
80.84
9.55




3.5 Photovoltaic performance
The organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure was fabricated as cathodes and assembled in Pt-free DSSCs. The electrocatalytic effect of the N-doped MWCNT heterostructure on the photovoltaic performance of quasi-solid-state DSSCs was examined via photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curves for different CEs recorded under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2) and subsequently compared with the performance of Pt cells. The photocurrent density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) of various types of cathode are listed in Tables 3–5.
The introduction of nitrogen into the carbon network may change the electron density distribution in MWCNTs and therefore affect their surface properties. Here, we studied the electrocatalytic effect of the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure and investigated its ability to act as the cathode in DSSCs. A fabricated DSSC based on an MWCNT cathode treated with BSA exhibited high performance in comparison with MWCNT cathodes treated with the surfactant SDS and biotin, respectively. Upon dispersion, the solution fraction separated into dispersed nanotubes in the supernatant and precipitated into a phase of carbonaceous impurities and dispersants. From Fig. 10a, it can be seen that a DSSC based on MWCNT CEs dispersed by SDS exhibited lower photovoltaic performance, with low values of VOC (0.661 V), JSC (14.354 mA cm−2) and FF (54.87%) and a low efficiency of 5.21%. As for the CEs treated with biotin, an increase in performance was observed, with corresponding values of VOC (0.649 V), JSC (14.552 mA cm−2) and FF (68.33%) and an enhanced conversion efficiency of 6.45%. However, the efficiency of the CEs in the cell treated with BSA improved, with high values of VOC (0.695 V), JSC (14.581 mA cm−2) and the fill factor (77.01%) and an efficiency of 7.81%. This remarkable performance of the device may be due to the exceptionally low charge transfer resistance (2.41 Ω) and higher electrocatalytic activity due to the combined presence of oxygen and nitrogen vacancies that accumulated on the MWCNT surface. The lower performance of the MWCNTs treated with SDS was due to the nature of the complex configuration of SDS, which created extensive aggregation owing to its structure. The binding of the hydrophilic SO4 head group of SDS to CNT molecules creates a smaller interface when iodide ions are present in the gel electrolyte. Furthermore, on comparing the dispersion power of biotin and BSA, BSA performed better, gave rise to less aggregation and was responsible for the high electrocatalytic performance of the cathode materials.
 Fig. 10  
I–V curves for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants, (b) MWCNT synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) Pt and organic N-doped MWCNT cathodes. 
It is well known that proteins and enzymes increase the rates of reactions in accordance with the pH or temperature. In this research work, we optimized the pH of the BSA solution to increase the rate of deposition of nitrogen species onto CNTs. It was observed from the results that carbon nanotube CEs possessed small surface areas and exhibited low electrocatalytic activity upon dispersion with BSA at a neutral pH. To increase the rate of dispersion, different BSA solutions were prepared with pH values in the range of 3–11. Fig. 10b shows I–V curves for DSSCs based on MWCNT CEs treated with BSA at different pH values. It is shown by the results presented in Table 4 that upon reducing the pH of the BSA dopant the MWCNTs had exceptional effects on the photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs. It was discovered that at a low pH of ∼3 BSA released an effective amount of nitrogen dopants on the surface of CNTs and increased the electrocatalytic activity of MWCNTs. DSSCs fabricated with MWCNT CEs treated with BSA at a highly acidic pH (∼3) exhibited an outstanding increase in photovoltaic performance, with high values of VOC (0.753 V), JSC (15.681 mA cm−2) and FF (80.84%) and a high efficiency of 9.55%. The higher VOC and FF values correspond to a greater interfacial reaction between the electrolyte and CE, which was due to the development of a large number of nitrogen-containing features from amino groups, with an enormous cationized surface capable of attracting more iodide ions present in the polymer electrolyte. The high photovoltaic performance that was observed was due to the high catalytic activity of the cationized nitrogen-doped MWCNT heterostructure in the reduction of tri-iodide ions. Owing to the high electron affinity of nitrogen atoms and the significantly high density of positive charge on the adjacent carbon atoms, the MWCNTs processed with cBSA provide favorable sites for the adsorption of tri-iodide ions on the cathode surface and facilitate oxidation and reduction. Furthermore, the unique organic composition of our proposed organic N-doped MWCNTs also contributes to the high catalytic activity. Conventional techniques of nitrogen doping disturb the basal plane framework of MWCNTs by creating vacancies for nitrogen doping. Our proposed system will avoid the need for defect nitrogen vacancies and carry out doping in a staggered manner instead. The amino groups present in BSA diffuse large amounts of nitrogen species over the MWCNT substrate owing to its cationised phase. In this way, the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure provides higher conductivity and high electrocatalytic activity. In addition, it was observed that on an increase in pH from neutral to alkaline the cells exhibited a decrease in performance, because fewer catalytic sites were produced on the MWCNT surface. At an alkaline pH, the reduction in the amount of oxygen and the excess of anionic species on the MWCNT surface repelled iodide species in the polymer electrolyte and hindered the interfacial reaction of the electrolyte and counter electrode. In this way, lower photovoltaic performance was observed at an alkaline pH (9–11). DSSCs fabricated with MWCNT CEs treated with BSA at a highly alkaline pH (∼11) displayed lower performance, with lower values of VOC (0.599 V), JSC (11.701 mA cm−2) and FF (63.64%) and a low efficiency of 4.46%. On the other hand, a BSA solution with a low pH of ∼3 incorporates the nitrogen dopant and provides an established cationized MWCNT surface. From this analysis it is clear that MWCNTs can be doped with nitrogen using BSA when treated at lower pH values.
The photovoltaic performance of our suggested CE system was further compared with that of a system using a Pt electrode. Fig. 10c presents the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs with CEs based on Pt and the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. The results are tabulated in Table 5. The cell fabricated with a conventional Pt CE exhibited an efficiency of 9.89%, which was virtually the same as the efficiency of the system with our proposed N-doped MWCNT cathode, which displayed an efficiency of 9.55%. This is the highest efficiency recorded for an N-doped carbon-based DSSC.55 More specifically, a higher VOC was observed in the results for the DSSC based on organic N-doped MWCNTs. The higher VOC of the carbon CE corresponds to its high porosity and the absorption of the polymer electrolyte in the nitrogen-enriched porous carbon surface. These results indicated that high electrolyte mobility and fast reduction of tri-iodide ions at the cathode resulted in a high photovoltage and FF. However, the lower current density in our suggested DSSC system indicated a difference in the light-harvesting process in the case of the organic N-doped MWCNT CEs. Regarding the stability of the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs fabricated with the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, from Fig. S6 (ESI†) and Table S4† stable photovoltaic performance was observed when a DSSC was fabricated with a counter electrode based on the organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. A variation in the range of ±0.01 was observed (Fig. S7†). The results confirmed that owing to their consistent electrical conductivity and high electrocatalytic activity the DSSCs provided consistent photovoltaic performance.
4. Conclusions
A facile organic route has been established for creating metal-free N-doped MWCNT heterostructures for promising Pt-free DSSCs. In the suggested method, N+-containing heteroatomic functional moieties are developed from a protein precursor such as cationized bovine serum albumin, which provides a higher nitrogen content with little damage to the tubular morphology of MWCNTs. The amino acid binding sites will release a large number of nitrogen species and will overlap over the MWCNTs via the cationization of BSA molecules. This organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure can successfully replace the Pt electrocatalyst in a dye-sensitized solar cell. Our suggested system comprising an organic electrocatalyst displayed higher electron mobility and substantial catalytic reduction of tri-iodide ions owing to its cationic surface chemistry. High efficiency, e.g., 9.55%, was achieved when our system was used as the cathode in DSSCs, which can be compared with that of Pt, which had an efficiency of 9.89%. The environment-friendly, metal-free and organic nature of our proposed system demonstrated that the method of doping with organic functions provides new ways for the sustainable fabrication of carbon nanomaterials.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Research Fellowship Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (2017H1D3A1A01055133).
References
C. Kim, K. Kim and J. H. Moon, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14400 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi and T. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3735–3758 CAS .
Y. Hu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10712–10738 CAS .
L. Qie, W. M. Chen, Z. H. Wang, Q. G. Shao, X. Li, L. X. Yuan, X. L. Hu, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, P. Zhu, D. Lv, Y.-B. Jiang, Y. Chen, Y. Duan and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, C.-M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao, C. R. Cabrera and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Memon, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1495–1505 CAS .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, H.-L. Gao and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5104–5111 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Sun, A. A. Arbab, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir, B. J. Choi, S. C. Kwon, S. Y. Yeo, S. C. Yi and S. H. Jeong, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 20908–20918 RSC .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir and S. H. Jeong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12957–12969 RSC .
I. A. Sahito, K. C. Sun, A. A. Arbab, M. B. Qadir and S. H. Jeong, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Tsuzuki, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1302–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Jin, J. Wang, R. Cui, H. Sun, F. Peng, L. Wei, Z. Wang, X. Liang, L. Peng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 986–992 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, K. Das, M. Ghosh and P. K. Das, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65913–65921 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Guo, W. Shen, Q. Xu, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5511–5521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 872–882 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Zhao, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2189–2201 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Wood, R. O'Hayre and S. Pylypenko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1212–1249 CAS .

Nanostructured Carbon Materials for Catalysis, ed. P. Serp and B. Machado, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2015, pp. 268–311,  10.1039/9781782622567-00268.
L. He, F. Weniger, H. Neumann and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12582–12594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, D. Zhou, Z. Sun, Y. Deng, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2322–2328 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Lin, Y.-H. Lu and H.-T. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12093–12100 RSC .
Y. Deng, Y. Xie, K. Zou and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1144–1173 CAS .
J. Ortiz-Medina, M. L. García-Betancourt, X. Jia, R. Martínez-Gordillo, M. A. Pelagio-Flores, D. Swanson, A. L. Elías, H. R. Gutiérrez, E. Gracia-Espino, V. Meunier, J. Owens, B. G. Sumpter, E. Cruz-Silva, F. J. Rodríguez-Macías, F. López-Urías, E. Muñoz-Sandoval, M. S. Dresselhaus, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3755–3762 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maldonado, S. Morin and K. J. Stevenson, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1429–1437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yokoyama, S. Yokoyama, Y. Sato, K. Hirano, S. Hashiguchi, K. Motomiya, H. Ohta, H. Takahashi, K. Tohji and Y. Sato, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9184–9195 CAS .
L. H. Kumar, C. V. Rao and B. Viswanathan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3355–3361 CAS .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, J. W. Noh, S. Y. Yeo, J. N. Im, S. C. Yi, Y. S. Kim and S. H. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 458–465 CAS .
I. A. Sahito, K. C. Sun, A. A. Arbab, M. B. Qadir, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7471–7482 CAS .
N. Mengal, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, M. B. Qadir, A. A. Memon and S. H. Jeong, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 152, 19–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir and S. H. Jeong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Arbab, M. H. Peerzada, I. A. Sahito and S. H. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 412–423 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mengal, A. A. Arbab, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Memon, K. C. Sun and S. H. Jeong, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 110–120 CrossRef CAS .
C. Biswas and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3806–3826 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shrestha, M. Batmunkh, C. J. Shearer, Y. Yin, G. G. Andersson, J. G. Shapter, S. Qiao and S. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
K. S. Lee, W. J. Lee, N.-G. Park, S. O. Kim and J. H. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4264–4266 RSC .
X. Zheng, J. Deng, N. Wang, D. Deng, W. H. Zhang, X. Bao and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7023–7027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. M. Baek, H. Chen, J. Qu and L. Dai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7078–7083 RSC .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, X. Yu, M. Peng, K. Yan and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3356–3362 CAS .
A. G. Kannan, J. Zhao, S. G. Jo, Y. S. Kang and D.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12232–12239 CAS .
G. Zhu, H. Xu, H. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang and H. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 13433–13437 RSC .
H. Xu, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Pang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhang and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4676–4681 CAS .
J. Dong, S. Jia, J. Chen, B. Li, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, Z. Wang and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9745–9750 RSC .
J. Ma, C. Li, F. Yu and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, T. C. Wei, Y. H. Chang, Y. T. Huang, W. T. Yeh, H. Su and S. P. Feng, Small, 2014, 10, 3347–3353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, C. Yu, X. Song, Y. Liu, S. Liang, Z. Liu, C. Hao and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. Wu, Q. Tang, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and L. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1299–1302 CrossRef CAS .
K. Davies, M. Delsignore and S. Lin, J. Biol. Chem., 1987, 262, 9902–9907 CAS .
F. Gong, X. Xu, Z. Li, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1437–1439 RSC .
R. Rastogi, R. Kaushal, S. Tripathi, A. L. Sharma, I. Kaur and L. M. Bharadwaj, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 328, 421–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, D. Li, J. Qu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00535dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:


Carbon nanotube	Polydopamine (PDA)/carbonization	3.80	6.15	7.30	
38

Carbon nanotube	NH3 treatment	3.73	N/A	7.04	
39

Carbon nanotube	Pyrolysis	4.1	2.18	8.82	
40

Graphene	Thermal treatment in NH3 gas	6.5	12.7	5.07	
41

Graphene	N2 thermal treatment/pyrolysis	7.4	35	5.4	
42

Graphene	Ammonia treatment	2.02	2.82	7.42	
43

Carbon microspheres	Microwave	N/A	6.1	6.20	
44

Carbon/carbide	Cyanamide/thermal reduction	0.53	6.78	7.36	
45

Carbon nanoparticles	Detonation-thermal annealing	N/A	1.96	2.67	
46

CNT/graphene	Melamine/thermal treatment	2.5	1.78	6.74	
47

Graphene nanosheets	Cyanamide/thermal annealing	N/A	1.31	7.18	
48

Graphene nanoribbons	Urea/thermal annealing	2.80	2.58	8.57	
49

MWCNT	Cationised bovine serum albumin	4.17	0.60	9.55	This work

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure for DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the doping of MWCNTs with nitrogen via a cationised BSA protein precursor.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure synthesized using cationised bovine serum albumin.	 

 	Fig. 4  FE-SEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure treated with bovine serum albumin at different pH values (3–11).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) FE-SEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (d–g) TEM images of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (h) cross-sectional FE-SEM image of organic N-doped MWCNT coating on FTO glass, (i) digital image of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure coated on FTO glass.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra of pristine and organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures, (b) XRD pattern of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure (inset: digital microscopy image of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, ×40), (c) UV-vis spectra of pristine and organic MWCNT heterostructures (inset: solutions of MWCNTs treated with BSA at a pH of 7, 3 and 11, respectively, from left to right), (d) PL spectra of pristine and organic MWCNT heterostructures.	 

BSA (pH 7)	72.9	27.99	1.6
cBSA (pH 5)	72.2	25.5	2.38
cBSA (pH 3)	72.1	23.0	4.17

 	Fig. 7  XPS spectra of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures. (a) Survey spectra of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures synthesized at different acidic pH values, (b) C 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure synthesized at a pH of 3, (c) O 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure, (d) N 1s spectrum of organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure. For a detailed analysis, the original spectra (black dotted lines) were fitted to simulated spectra (navy blue lines), which were then deconvolved (red lines).	 

 	Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants, (b) organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructures synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) a Pt catalyst and an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 9  Nyquist plots for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants (inset shown the symmetrical cell and Randles type circuit used to measure RCT) (b) MWCNT synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) a Pt catalyst and an organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure.	 


Surfactant	7.30	4.87	14.354	0.661	54.87	5.21
Biotin	7.22	4.64	14.552	0.649	68.33	6.45
BSA	7.09	2.41	14.581	0.695	77.01	7.81


3	6.55	0.06	15.681	0.753	80.84	9.55
5	6.79	1.85	14.937	0.732	80.67	8.82
7	7.09	2.41	14.581	0.695	77.01	7.81
9	7.31	5.10	13.948	0.629	69.91	6.13
11	7.54	6.00	11.701	0.599	63.64	4.46


Pt	6.80	1.85	16.279	0.734	84.34	9.89
Organic N-doped MWCNT heterostructure	6.55	0.60	15.681	0.753	80.84	9.55

 	Fig. 10  
I–V curves for (a) MWCNT electrocatalysts synthesized with different dispersants, (b) MWCNT synthesized with bovine serum albumin at different pH values, (c) Pt and organic N-doped MWCNT cathodes.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00535d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
