Preparation of Bi-based photocatalysts in the form of powdered particles and thin films: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA01180K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA01180K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15302-15318Preparation of Bi-based photocatalysts in the form of powdered particles and thin films: a review

        
          
            Xuelian 
            Wu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Cui Ying 
            Toe
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chenliang 
            Su
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yun Hau 
            Ng
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jason 
            Scott
          
        
      *b
aInternational Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Institute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: chmsuc@szu.edu.cn
bParticles and Catalysis Research Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW, Sydney 2032, Australia. E-mail: jason.scott@unsw.edu.au
cSchool of Energy and Environment, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. E-mail: yunhau.ng@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      31st January 2020
    , Accepted 16th March 2020First published on 23rd March 2020AbstractBismuth-based semiconductors, as an emerging group of photocatalysts possessing a layered-structure, have been widely demonstrated to show excellent photo-oxidation capability in water oxidation and pollutant decomposition. Deriving from the suitable band gap and well-dispersed valence band, Bi-based materials are generally visible-light-responsive and consequently have received considerable interest in photocatalysis. Different from conventional binary metal oxide semiconductors, the synthesis of Bi-based materials needs to be carefully controlled as most of them are prepared as ternary oxide materials that comprise multiple elements and are sensitive to the synthesis conditions. Specifically, different methods need to be employed to obtain suspended particles and electrodes for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical reactions, respectively. Given that the synthesis process for photoelectrodes usually involves more than one step, fabricating the desired ternary Bi-based photoelectrodes can be more challenging when compared to powdered photocatalysts. With the significant emergence of Bi-based materials, understanding the effect of different synthesis methods on the catalyst properties is crucial to ensure great performance. This review summarizes recent developments in Bi-based photocatalysts by comparing and discussing various synthesis approaches for powdered photocatalysts and thin film photoelectrodes.
Introduction
Photocatalysis offers great potential for converting solar energy into chemical energy and for remediating environmental issues. Over recent years, photocatalysts containing heavy p-block metals, such as bismuth (Bi), have attracted the attention of the photo(electro)catalysis research community due to their good photooxidation performance and capacity for absorbing visible light. Different from other metal oxides, the valence band (VB) of Bi-based materials comprises the sp hybridization of O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals. Consequently, the smaller band gap of bismuth-based semiconductors (typically less than 3.0 eV) originates from the weak bonding between heavy metals and oxygen atoms that favors the establishment of a dispersive band structure, uplifting the VB maximum. Bismuth-based semiconductors, such as BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I),1–4 BiVO4,5,6 Bi2WO6,7,8 and BiPO4,9 have displayed effective photocatalytic activity for pollutant degradation as well as water splitting under visible light irradiation, due to their unique layered structure and suitable band structure. The layered configuration of Bi-based materials induces an internal electric field within the layers that promotes photogenerated electron and hole separation as well as accelerates charge carrier transfer, in turn facilitating photocatalytic performance.10,11 In this regard, bismuth-based photocatalysts are a very promising group of visible-light-driven semiconducting materials, useful for diverse chemical reactions.
There exist various distinct methods for synthesizing both powdered particles and thin films of bismuth-based semiconductors, whereby tuning and designing their properties are possible so as to further enhance their performance for a specific application. Solid-state reaction, which is a simple one-step method, is one of the earliest methods used to synthesize bismuth-based materials. However, the approach gives an undesirably large particle size with a low surface area that has led to low photoactivity. To date, the most commonly used technique is the hydrothermal/solvothermal method, which enables flexible design of the photocatalyst by controlling the synthesis conditions. Good control of the synthesis environment is essential due to its strong influence on crystal phase, morphology, size, surface area and crystallinity which are all important in defining photocatalytic reactivity. An appropriate synthesis method can bring about desirable characteristics in the material, such as useful physiochemistry, morphology, and surface science.
As well as photocatalytic (PC) systems, bismuth-based photocatalysts have been widely employed in photoelectrochemical (PEC) arrays. While the thermodynamic feasibility of photoredox reactions in a PC system is highly dependent on the CB and VB potentials of the photocatalyst, an externally applied potential in a PEC system aids in driving the electrons from the anode to the cathode for respective chemical reactions.12–16 For instance, hydrogen cannot be generated from a photocatalytic BiVO4 suspension due to the CB potential being less energetic than the water reduction potential. Applying an external bias in a PEC system enables the generation of hydrogen from the counter electrode when BiVO4 is used as the working electrode.17 Despite the difference in PC and PEC systems, preparing suitable Bi-based particles or thin film electrodes is the first step to realizing solar-to-energy conversion in both systems. To obtain favorable properties (e.g. being a good photoabsorber with efficient charge separation and transfer), synthesis techniques to produce powdered particles (for PC) or thin films (for PEC) remain distinct from one another. Generally, the preparation of powered particles is performed via a one-pot process. In contrast, the fabrication of high-performing thin films usually involves more than one step with the requirement of specific equipment (e.g. spin coater, high-pressure spray nozzle, anodization unit or potentiostat), particularly for materials with multiple components, such as Bi-based ternary oxides or oxyhalides. In some cases, bismuth-based powders are physically deposited onto a thin film substrate, however, these strategies (i.e. drop-casting, dip/spin coating) often resulted in peeling off of the photocatalyst due to a weak attachment at the photocatalyst–substrate interface.
Several reviews on Bi-based photocatalysts have been published within the past few years, with most reviews placing emphasis on the structural–property–activity relationships or strategies to enhance the overall performances.10,18–20 In contrast, reports focusing on synthesis methods remain scarce. A comprehensive survey on the preparation methods of powdered or thin-film Bi-based photocatalysts is therefore of significance and can assist with paving the way for developing innovative approaches to improve homogeneity and reproducibility of Bi-based materials. In this review, we consider recent advances in preparing Bi-based photocatalysts in the form of powdered particles or thin films, as presented in Scheme 1. A comprehensive review on each method, the synthesis parameters, equipment involved, formation mechanisms and product properties are provided whereby the advantages and limitations of the corresponding process are disclosed. Finally, the key challenges in current progress and perspectives on developing novel synthesis methods are addressed.
 Scheme 1  Summary of the preparation methods for Bi-based powdered photocatalysts and thin film photoelectrodes. 
Properties of Bi-based photocatalysts
Most photocatalysis-related Bi-based materials possess a unique layered configuration with a bandgap of less than 3.0 eV. The materials, which possess a layered structure, are bound by strong chemical interactions within layers, whereas weak van der Waals connections exist between layers. Different from the conventional metal oxide, such as TiO2, where the VB comprises only the O 2p orbital, the electronic structure of Bi-based oxide materials comprises the hybridization of O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals in the VB. The Bi 6s orbital can accelerate the mobility of photogenerated charges and narrow the band gap. Additionally, the hybrid orbitals provide good dispersion of the charge carriers which decreases the band gap of the semiconductor (<3.0 eV), as is shown in Fig. 1.10
 Fig. 1  Energy diagram of selected Bi-based semiconductors and redox potentials of selected reduction reactions. 
Benefiting from the unique layered structure, an internal electric field is formed between the layers of Bi-based materials, which can significantly promote photoinduced electron–hole separation as well as accelerate the transfer of charge carriers. The effective photocatalytic capacity of Bi-based materials for pollutant remediation, water splitting, and volatile organic compounds removal has been demonstrated in many studies. As shown in Fig. 1, the much more positive VB potential of Bi-based materials relative to the water oxidation potential (0.82 V versus NHE at pH 7) gives Bi-based photocatalysts strong oxidative capabilities. Unfortunately, most reduction reactions, such as H2 generation, CO2 reduction and N2 fixation, are not achievable using Bi-based materials due to their insufficient CB energy. Only a few Bi-based semiconductors, such as Bi2S3, possess a more negative CB potential that is capable of driving reduction reactions. However, in the case of Bi2S3, ultrafast electron–hole recombination restricts its activity in a practical system. Very recently, either H2 generation or CO2 reduction were achieved on ultrathin Bi-based photocatalysts which were obtained by carefully controlling the synthesis method. For instance, a hydrothermal approach was employed to synthesize single-unit-cell Bi2WO6, which gave 3-times higher CO2 adsorption and increased light absorption compared to Bi2WO6 prepared by a solid-state reaction. The improved properties were reflected in photocatalytic performance whereby a 75 μmol g−1 h−1 rate of methanol formation was achieved, which was 125-times faster than for the bulk Bi2WO6. The reduction in dimensionality was proposed to lead to a strong confinement effect and an enlarged band gap energy where an up-shift of the CB and down-shift of VB were observed.21 Consequently, it is apparent that the electronic structure of Bi-based semiconductor can be tuned by the preparation technique.
Most Bi-based semiconductors have been found to possess n-type characteristics with electrons as the majority carrier, particularly for oxide semiconductors such as Bi2O3, BiVO4, and Bi2WO6. However, more recent studies have suggested that the synthesis approach can alter the conductivity type of Bi-based materials. For instance, initial investigation on BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) electrodes disclosed p-type semiconductor properties, where the thin films were fabricated by anodization of a bismuth film in potassium halide solutions.22 In contrast, a n-type BiOI photoelectrode was obtained by a spray pyrolysis deposition method at various temperature. The presence of anion vacancies was reported as contributing to the origin of the n-type conductivity.23 Additionally, Kwolek et al. employed a microwave-assisted hydrothermal routine to prepare a highly crystalline BiOI powder for the first time, which also exhibited n-type conductivity.24 The reliance of conductivity type on synthesis technique has also been reported for Bi2S3. Chemical bath deposition and spray pyrolysis have been used to produce n-type Bi2S3 thin films due to the presence of sulfur vacancies, whereas p-type conductivity has been affirmed for films obtained by atomic layer deposition.25–27 Considering the link between the conductivity type and synthesis method for Bi-based semiconductors, exploring and developing preparation techniques is significant as it could be an additional means to regulate the intrinsic properties of Bi-based photocatalysts.
Particle preparation methods
To prepare Bi-based particulate semiconductor materials, a suite of synthesis methods have been developed, such as solid-state reaction (SSR),28–30 co-precipitation,31–33 sol–gel,34,35 and hydrothermal or solvothermal approaches.36–39 The commonly used Bi precursors for Bi-based particle synthesis include Bi(NO3)3·5H2O, BiCl3, NBiO3·2H2O, and Bi2O3.
Solid-state reaction (SSR)
SSR is a one-step synthesis approach to obtain heterogeneous catalysts with high crystallinity, and is often used for preparing Bi-based ternary oxide materials, such as BiVO4,40 Bi2WO6,7,41 bismuth molybdates (α-Bi2Mo3O12, β-Bi2Mo2O9, γ-Bi2MoO6)29,42 and bismuth titanates (Bi2Ti2O7, Bi4Ti3O12, Bi12TiO20).43,44 These multi-component oxides are composed of Bi2O3 and metal oxides at a stoichiometric ratio and exhibit a layered Aurivillius structure with [Bi2O2]2+ slabs interleaved by metal oxide layers. SSR synthesis for Bi-based ternary oxides utilizes a mixture of precursor materials – Bi2O3 and a second metal oxide at the desired ratio – which is subject to a high temperature calcination process.
For instance, monoclinic BiVO4 has been prepared by both the SSR method and a melting reaction method at high temperatures. Iwase et al., used a solid–liquid state reaction to synthesize BiVO4 at room temperature under ambient condition. Monoclinic BiVO4 was obtained using a 1:1 molar ratio of Bi2O3 and V2O5 as the starting materials in an aqueous nitric acid solution, whereas a molar ratio of 4:3 resulted in the formation of tetragonal BiVO4. The work demonstrated a better photocatalytic O2 evolution performance by the monoclinic BiVO4 than the tetragonal BiVO4.40 Kudo and co-workers also utilized the SSR method to synthesize BiVO4 by calcining a mixture of Bi2O3 and NH4VO3 at 970 K or 1170 K in air for 5 h. The particles were large in size (1–10 μm) with a surface area of 0.70 m2 g−1.45 Tan et al., prepared- and {110}-dominant monoclinic BiVO4 following the same method by simply tuning the nitric acid concentration to 0.5 M and 1.0 M, respectively.46 Their photo-oxidation results indicated that greater exposure of the {010} facet was beneficial for the oxidation reaction. Bi2WO6 has also been prepared via the SSR at high temperature (1173 K for 12 h in air), where Bi2O3 and WO3 were mixed at a 1:1 molar ratio in an ethanol solution. The resulting samples possessed a large particle size and low surface area.7 Other than ternary oxides, BiOI single-crystal nanosheets have also been fabricated via an annealing treatment of BiI3. By varying the annealing temperature, the thickness as well as the percentage of exposed {001} facets were adjustable.47
Owing to its simplicity, SSR has been a widely utilized method to synthesize Bi-based materials. However, the method is not suitable for preparing nanosized materials as a high temperature, ca. 400–700 °C, is essential, leading to the formation of samples with large particle size and small surface area. In addition, it is difficult to control the purity, morphology and grain shape of the material under such a high treatment temperature. Furthermore, it has been reported that Bi-based materials are easily sintered at elevated temperature, which may invoke phase transformations, such as for Bi2MoO6 (from γ phase to γ′ phase), influencing the photocatalytic performance of the material.
Chemical precipitation
Chemical precipitation from a homogeneous aqueous solution has been recently developed for Bi-based material synthesis. Compared to solid-state reaction, co-precipitation is a more facile, cost-effective, and less energy intensive (reaction occurs at low temperature) approach, whereby the obtained particles generally show smaller size with larger surface area.
Two bismuth-based oxides particles, Bi2O3 and BiVO4 were synthesized by a similar precipitation approach.48 Bi(NO3)3·5H2O dissolved in nitric acid was used as a Bi source for both materials, followed by the addition of concentrated sodium hydroxide to tune the pH to 11.5. Bi2O3 precipitates were collected after the mixture was kept for 24 h under continuous stirring. For the synthesis of BiVO4, V2O5 powder was used as the V precursor with a molar ratio of 1:1. It was added into the Bi precursor and kept for three days at room temperature. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the as-synthesized Bi2O3 particles comprised agglomerated thin fibers with a total surface area of 14.6 m2 g−1, whereas agglomerated BiVO4 with a flat surface possessed a surface area of 3.0 m2 g−1. Noticeably, the small specific surface area resulting from particle agglomeration is the main drawback in using this method to synthesize Bi-based oxides materials. Hence, chemical precipitation is not the best fabrication method to obtain a photocatalyst with sufficient active sites for photocatalytic reactions.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of (a) Bi2O3, and (b) BiVO4 particles prepared via a chemical precipitation method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Chemical precipitation has also been widely applied to prepare bismuth oxyhalides.49,50 For instance, plate-like BiOBr was prepared by a chemical co-precipitation method. Typically, Bi(NO3)3 and CTAB were used as the Bi and Br precursors, in which they were dissolved in HCl and NaOH aqueous solutions, respectively. A white BiOBr precipitate was formed after mixing the two solutions. In this study, plate-like BiOBr with either a {001} or {010} dominant facet was obtained by simply adjusting the acidity of the final suspension. Furthermore, their photo-oxidative capability was compared for oxygen evolution and formic acid degradation performance, where BiOBr-010 exhibited a much better activity than BiOBr-001, due to a suppression of photoinduced electron–hole recombination, improved charge transfer and reduced charge resistance.51 Such a precipitation method was also employed to synthesize Bi24O31Br10 photocatalyst in the presence of CTAB.52 The collected yellow-green Bi24O31Br10 particles displayed reasonable photocatalytic reduction activity for Cr(VI) removal and H2 production.
Although the advantages of chemical precipitation in Bi-based material synthesis have been emphasized, the drawbacks cannot be neglected. Such a method remains difficult to finely manipulate the structure and morphology of the photocatalysts.
Sol–gel
The sol–gel process has been demonstrated as a powerful method for nanostructured inorganic material synthesis. The approach involves the hydrolysis of a monomer precursor into a colloidal solution (sol), and subsequent formation of an integrated network (gel) of either discrete particles or networked polymers. This is followed by thermal treatment to yield the desired material.53 The sol–gel method is a relatively simple technique that allows control of the products chemical composition at low temperature.
As compared to solid-state reaction, sol–gel synthesis enables the fabrication of smaller and fine particles. For instance, uniform Bi2WO6 nanoplates with a laminar structure were successfully prepared via the sol–gel method in the presence of EDTA (Fig. 3a).54 Firstly, the sol was prepared by mixing a Bi-CA aqueous solution (Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and citric acid) with EDTA ammonia solution at a molar ratio of 3:2. A transparent solution was obtained upon the addition of (NH4)6W7O24·6H2O. After slow evaporation of the solution at 80 °C, dark amorphous citrate gels and polymeric precursors were formed. This was followed by calcining at 350 °C for 4 h to decompose the organics. The obtained Bi2WO6 was found to possess a smaller particle size and larger surface area when compared to Bi2WO6 prepared by the SSR.
 Fig. 3  Sol–gel synthesized (a) Bi2WO6 nanoplates, reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2010) Elsevier. (b) BiOBr microspheres, reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society and (c) BiOCl nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright (2010) Elsevier. 
Moreover, the sol–gel method is also an effective way to manipulate the morphology of Bi-based particles. As shown in Fig. 3b, hierarchical BiOBr microspheres composed of numerous nanoplates were successfully fabricated via a non-aqueous sol–gel method with CTAB as the Br precursor.55 The as-prepared flower-like microspheres exhibited outstanding photocatalytic performance for NO oxidation relative to a counterpart BiOBr powder synthesized by chemical precipitation. The better performance of the flower-like microspheres was ascribed to favorable intermediate and product diffusion throughout the hierarchical structure. Wu et al. also reported a sol–gel method to synthesize BiOCl nanowires using anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) as the template, as shown in Fig. 3c.56 Typically, an as-prepared BiOCl powder was initially dissolved in ethanol by adjusting the pH to 1 under continuous stirring at 60 °C for 3 h to form a sol solution. AAO templates were then placed in a vessel containing a certain amount of BiOCl sol. The sol was permeated through the membrane for 30 min under vacuum to allow for it to be crystalized. After drying the precursor at 100 °C for 10 h, the AAO templates were removed by dissolving the samples in 5% NaOH and rinsing with distilled water. The average diameter of the obtained BiOBr nanowires was 100 nm with a length of 2–6 μm.
In addition to the aforementioned advantages of sol–gel synthesis (significantly smaller particle size and larger surface area), temperature control for evaporation and follow-up treatments, such as calcination, are inevitable to remove the organic residues. Additionally, the relatively higher cost of the precursors, such as EDTA and AAO, can further limit its application.
Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis is a commonly used method for preparing Bi oxyhalides and is based on the reaction between Bi salts (Bi(NO3)3 or BiX3) and oxyhalides or water. For instance, a series of BiOBr nanosheets, with morphologies varying from square nanoplates to thin lamellas, were synthesized via a facile hydrolysis method without any surfactants, as illustrated in Fig. 4. The thickness of the nanosheets, which enabled exposure ratios of the (001) facet to be regulated, was controllable by tuning the reaction temperature and solvent type. For the synthesis process, NaBr was dissolved in deionized water and heated to 60 °C or 90 °C, followed by the dropwise-addition of Bi(NO3)3 solution (in ethanol or water). After 3 h of reaction, a precipitate was formed. As observed from Fig. 4, uniform quadrilateral nanoplates with a thickness of ∼32 nm and a length of ∼319 nm were obtained with pure water as the solvent at 60 °C. In contrast, a reaction temperature of 90 °C and pure water as the solvent led to the formation of incomplete quadrilateral nanoplates with the thickness decreasing to 28 nm. Further, when a mixture of ethanol and water (4:3, volume ratio) was used as the solvent, the synthesized BiOBr lamellas were ∼9 nm in thickness.57
 Fig. 4  SEM and TEM images of the as-synthesized BiOBr samples (a and b) in water at 60 °C; (c and d) in water at 90 °C; (e and f) in a water and ethanol mixture at 90 °C. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ultrafine Bi5O7Br nanotubes with a diameter of 5 nm were firstly reported by Wang et al. using a hydrolysis approach, with a schematic illustration of the fabrication process and mechanism given in Fig. 5.58 Typically, bismuth–bromine–oleylamine (Bi–Br–OA) complexes were formed via Bi and Br ion mixing in oleylamine as a first step. After the gradual addition of water, hydrolysis of the complexes occurred and ultrafine nanotubes self-assembled. The two factors found to be critical in defining the morphology of the final products were: (1) stirring time; and (2) rate of water addition. Given the material was transformed from nanoparticles to nanosheets and then into nanotubes, a sufficient stirring time was required to form ultrafine nanotubes. In contrast, an adequate amount of water was crucial to provide a mild hydrolysis condition for gradual self-assembly. This was verified by the formation of short and aggregated nanotubes as a result of a high rate of water addition, which could damage the nanotube structure. The as-obtained ultrafine nanotubes were demonstrated to be favorable for providing sufficient surface oxygen vacancies to boost photocatalytic N2 fixation under visible light illumination. In addition, Zhang et al. prepared BiOCl powder using a hydrolysis process, in which a BiCl3–HCl system was formed by dissolving Bi2O3 in excessive concentrated HCl acid followed by adjusting the pH value to 2–3 with ammonia. After 30 min of heat treatment, a BiOCl powder with small plate-like crystals was obtained.59 The hydrolysis method was also used to synthesize BiOCl sub-microcrystals with various morphologies, including nanoflakes, nanoplates, nest-like or flower-like and hollow microspheres.60 In that study, it was found that the morphology of the BiOCl was highly dependent on the concentration of citric acid and PVP added to the solution. Citric acid was used to tune the relative activity of Bi3+ and prevent the grain growth of BiOCl, while PVP played a key role in assembling the materials into hierarchical BiOCl nest-like and hollow structures.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the hydrolysis-based preparation of ultrafine Bi5O7Br nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons. 
Bi-based photocatalysts with various sizes and morphologies can be fabricated via the hydrolysis approach, although the flexibility leads to the formation of materials with poor dispersion and uncontrollable morphology. To overcome these shortcomings, strategies, such as surfactant addition, microwaves, and ultrasound may need to be employed to assist in the hydrolysis.
Hydrothermal synthesis
In recent years, the hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis method has been employed as a method to obtain Bi-based materials with high crystallinity, various morphologies and controllable particle size at relatively low temperature. Hydrothermal reaction parameters, including reaction duration, temperature, surfactant, precursor concentration and pH value, are critical for defining the physicochemical properties of the materials, thus further affecting their photocatalytic performance.51,61–63 Wang and co-workers used the hydrothermal approach to prepare BiOCl plates with Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and NaCl as precursors at 170 °C for 16 h. Furthermore, BiOCl with oxygen vacancies was then synthesized followed by a second hydrothermal treatment with the assistance of cyclohexane to boost the photocatalytic NO removal capability of BiOCl under visible light irradiation.64
The role of the solvent in the hydrothermal synthesis of Bi-based materials is not trivial and has been systematically investigated in many cases. The most commonly-used solvents include water,65,66 ethylene glycol,67,68 and various alcohols. For instance, the effects of different n-alcohols, including methanol, n-butanol and n-hexanol, on BiOBr morphology and photoreactivity were studied by Xiong et al.69 The results indicated that the particle size and thickness were highly dependent on the solvent used during the synthesis, where the longer carbon-chain solvent led to a decrease in nanosheet thickness and an increase in particle size with a higher exposure of active {010} facets. An ionic liquid-assisted hydrothermal synthesis was used to prepare a BiOCl/BiOBr flower-like microsphere in an ethylene glycol solvent. In that work, ionic liquids 1-hexadecyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([C16min]Cl) and 1-hexadecyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([C16min]Br) were not only used as the solvents, they also acted as reactants for the formation of BiOCl/BiOBr composites.70 Ultrathin Bi4O5Br2 nanosheets have also been obtained with the assistance of [C16min]Br.71
The importance of the hydrothermal reaction duration has also been demonstrated, where in situ and operando techniques have been utilized to gain insight into the true nature of the formation process. For example, Kongmark et al.72–74 combined Raman spectroscopy with high-resolution powder diffraction and in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) to elucidate the crystal growth and layered structure formation of γ-Bi2MoO6. They confirmed that the crystal formation occurred in two steps: (i) the formation of an intermediate with a fluorite structure, spherical (Bi,Mo)2O3, occurred after 30 min; followed by (ii) the growth of anisotropic Bi2MoO6 platelets over a longer duration. In situ energy dispersive X-ray diffraction (EDXRD) is another powerful characterization technique to disclose crystallization kinetics and to identify phase intermediates.75 Beale et al. performed a detailed EDXRD study on hydrothermal synthesis of Bi2MoO6, which revealed that the crystals formed directly from the initial amorphous precursors without intermediate formation or phase transformation. Along with X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra of the Mo K-edge, the result indicated that Mo(VI) coordination changed from MoO4 tetrahedra in the initial stages to distorted MoO6 octahedra in the final phase.76 An in situ EDXRD investigation on Bi2WO6 indicated that evolution of orthorhombic phase began at ∼8 min and the reaction completed at ∼70 min, where the crystallinity increased with the hydrothermal reaction time and no intermediate phase were observed.77 Considering the complex synthesis parameters during hydrothermal treatment, optimizing the reaction conditions is critical to obtain the desired materials, such that in situ and operando characterization are indispensable.
The treatment temperature is another predominant hydrothermal parameter that affects nuclei growth, crystallinity and morphology of the γ-Bi2MoO6. Generally, to obtain Bi2MoO6 particles with good crystallinity, appropriate particle size, as well as different morphologies, the synthesis temperature is mostly set below 200 °C.78,79 Li and co-workers prepared a series of Bi2MoO6 nanoplates using a range of temperatures from 100 to 240 °C and subsequently put forward a formation mechanism.80 They found that the crystallinity was improved when the hydrothermal temperature increased from 100 to 180 °C, whereas any further increase the temperature (up to 240 °C) diminished the crystalline structure of the as-obtained Bi2MoO6 nanoplates. They concluded that Bi2MoO6 nanoplate formation occurred via a typical Ostwald ripening process during the hydrothermal synthesis. They found it was hard to form the nuclei if the temperature was too low, while an excessive temperature led to fast growth of the nuclei, which was not advantageous for assembling bigger particles or nanoplates.
The pH value of the reactant plays a key role in controlling the morphology of Bi-based crystals.38,81 The surface free energy can be controlled by adjusting the precursor pH, thereby modulating the kinetics of crystal nucleation and growth. The difference in pH values has a significant effect on the selective adsorption of H+ ions on different crystal planes with different surface free energies. Given that a higher surface energy is expected to promote the growth of the crystal planes, different suspension pH values will lead to preferential crystal growth in a certain crystallographic direction. For instance, Zhang has successfully prepared Bi2MoO6 with nanosheet or micro-rod structures by tuning the pH of the growth solution over the range of 1–13.37 Bi2MoO6 particles evolved from nanosheets to nanoplates, and further to nanorods with increasing pH (Fig. 6). As H+ ions will preferentially adsorb on (010) faces, which contain a higher density of oxygen atoms, the surface energy of (010) will be significantly reduced under a low pH (acidic) condition. The relatively higher surface energies of the (100) and (001) planes inhibited crystal growth along the [010] direction whereby nanosheets with a predominance of the {010} facet were formed. In contrast, under alkaline conditions, preferential OH− adsorption on the (100) and (001) planes which have comparatively less oxygen atom exposure, resulted in the surface energies of these two faces being reduced. Subsequently, the crystals grew in the [010] direction and micro-rod structures were obtained. A similar phenomenon was also observed by Zhou et al.82 It was believed that the enhanced photocatalytic activity was a consequence of more Bi2MoO6 {010} exposed facets. Facet control has also been established for other Bi-based materials via pH tuning of the hydrothermal method, including BiOX, BiVO4 and Bi2WO6.65,83–87
 Fig. 6  TEM micrographs of hydrothermally obtained Bi2MoO6 particles at different pH values ((a–f): pH 1, pH 3, pH 5, pH 7, pH 9, pH 11). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2010) Elsevier. 
Both the macrostructure and the local structure of monoclinic BiVO4 have been reported as highly dependent on the hydrothermal pH value. It was demonstrated that a lower pH could induce greater lone-pair distortions in the local structure as compared to higher pH. Due to the hybridization of Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals in the valence band of Bi-based materials, a greater degree of distortion implied more overlap of the two orbitals, which could facilitate photogenerated hole migration. Consequently, the amount of O2 photocatalytically evolved increased with decreasing pH during hydrothermal synthesis.88
Interestingly, it was found that forming bismuth molybdates with different could also be readily controlled by adjusting the solution pH value. It was demonstrated that the acidic condition was favorable for forming Bi2Mo3O12, while an alkaline condition led to Bi2MoO6 formation.89 Phuruangrat et al. reported that samples prepared over a pH range of 2–12 could be assigned to three compositions: (i) Bi2MoO6 (pH 2–6); (ii) Bi2MoO6/Bi4MoO9 (pH 8–10) composites; and (iii) Bi4MoO9 (pH 12).81 They concluded that the low pH contributed to the formation of orthorhombic Bi2MoO6 and the high pH favored the formation of cubic Bi4MoO9. Our previous work found that a Bi2MoO6/Bi2Mo3O12 heterojunction could be constructed via a one-pot hydrothermal method, where different bismuth molybdates, including Bi2MoO6 and/or Bi2Mo3O12 were produced on varying the mole ratio of Bi and Mo precursors. Characterization on the resulting materials indicated that a low pH and high Mo precursor concentration promoted Bi2Mo3O12 formation, whereas a high pH and high Bi concentration were essential for Bi2MoO6 generation.90
Apart from carefully tuning the pH values, another common method used to control the acidity of the solution is by adding a certain amount of acidic (e.g. HNO3) or alkaline (NaOH) solution under particular circumstances when the pH value is difficult to examine. For instance, very recently, BiOIO3 (which was also synthesized by a one-pot hydrothermal approach), was reported to be highly efficient for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. During the synthesis, different amounts of HNO3 and a fixed volume of NaOH were added to obtain nanoplates with varied thicknesses, whereby decreased in acidity reduced the particle thickness.91
It is known that the addition of surfactants or capping agents can stabilize a particular crystal facet to alter the growth rates in different directions. To date, different kinds of surfactants have been used to prepare Bi-based materials, such as cetyl-trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB),36,51,68,92,93 polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), oleylamine and sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS).36,94–97 Guo and co-workers prepared Bi2MoO6 by introducing different kinds of surfactants, including SDBS, PVP and CTAB and found that the particle size and morphology of Bi2MoO6 was greatly affected by the surfactant. They demonstrated that Bi2MoO6 possessed a large aggregated morphology without any surfactant, whereas the addition of SDS led to the formation of irregular and big branch-like particles. In contrast, when PVP or CTAB were added, a sheet-like structure was obtained. With more regular and smaller nanocrystals prepared in the presence of CTAB, this sample exhibited the best photocatalytic performance due to its higher surface area and greater number of exposed active sites.97 Zheng et al., also successfully prepared ultrathin 2D Bi2MoO6 nanosheets using the hydrothermal method in ethylene glycol with the assistance of CTAB.98 A similar process was also conducted to fabricate a carbon-doped ultrathin Bi2MoO6 in the presence of oleylamine and oleic acid, where enhanced oxygen activation was obtained and excellent nitric oxide removal efficiency was achieved.99 The uniform discoid-like BiVO4 particles (Fig. 7) were hydrothermally formed with the addition of PVP surfactant. This was then transformed into a hollow discoid BiVO4/Bi2S3 heterojunction in a Na2S solution by a second-step hydrothermal treatment of the as-prepared BiVO4. Such Bi-based composites exhibited superior Cr(VI) photoreduction as well as enhanced photocurrent response under visible light irradiation.100
 Fig. 7  SEM micrographs of (a and b) discoid-like BiVO4 particles, and (c and d) mesoporous hollow discoid particles prepared hydrothermally with the assistance of PVP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. 
Zhou et al., utilized a hydrothermal bottom-up route assisted by CTAB to prepare novel monolayer Bi2WO6 plates.101 In their study, the authors disclosed that the Br− ions from CTAB were strongly adsorbed on the layers, making them negatively charged. Then CTA+ ions were adsorbed on the surface by bonding with the Br−, which would prevent stacking of the monolayers due to the extra Coulomb repulsion forces (Fig. 8). A high-quality monolayer was obtained with CTAB assistance compared to the sample synthesized using KBr as the Br− source. More significantly, the method was used to fabricate other Aurivillius phase layered oxide materials (Bi2An−1BnO3n+3; A = Ca, Sr, Ba etc., B = Mo, W, Fe etc.), such as Bi2O2CO3 that was also reported in this work.
 Fig. 8  Formation mechanism of the monolayer Bi2WO6 with (a) KBr assistance, and (b) CTAB assistance using a hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2015) Springer Nature. 
As most Bi-based materials share a similar crystal structure, whereby the [Bi2O2]2+ layers are interleaved by slabs of anion groups, the topochemical transformation between various Bi-based material is possible. Due to the difference in solubility of anion groups, the transformation is thermodynamically favoured through an anion exchange strategy, which mainly occurs in a hydrothermal environment. More importantly, the morphology and structure of starting material can also be well-preserved. For instance, Bi2WO6 was evolved by dissolving as-prepared BiOI in an aqueous solution containing sodium tungstate, followed by hydrothermal treatment. The lower solubility of Bi2WO6 compared to BiOI, meant that I− could be easily substituted by WO42−via the anion exchange process, whereby the ultrathin layered configuration of BiOI was maintained. Additionally, a vertical heterojunction of Bi2WO6/BiOI was formed and the ratio between the two components was readily adjusted by controlling the amount of tungstate precursor added. The authors also employed similar procedure for the preparation of a Bi2MoO6/BiOCl vertical heterojunction.102 Consequently, ion exchange has been developed as an effective synthesis strategy for producing Bi-based heterostructures, such as Bi2S3/Bi2WO6 and BiVO4/Bi2S3.100,103
Other methods
A chemical bath method was used to synthesise a BiOBr–g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst, where g-C3N4 was prepared by initially annealing thiourea at 550 °C followed by suspension in CTAB solution. After as-prepared Bi(NO3)3·5H2O solution was added dropwise to the C3N4–CTAB suspension, the mixture was heated in a water bath at 80 °C for 3 h under continuous stirring.104 Enhanced visible-light-driven performance on RhB degradation was observed upon coupling the BiOBr-{001} and g-C3N4-{002} facets in this study.
Furthermore, Gao and coworkers reported a facile and fast combustion method to fabricate BiOBr nanosheets with a high exposure ratio of the {001} crystal facet for the first time.105 Bi precursor was dissolved in nitric acid, while bromide ammonium and urea were dissolved in water. Then the mixture of the two solutions was transferred to an electric jacket at 300 °C in air to remove the solvent. Finally, a combustion reaction occurred as a result of the exothermic redox reaction of nitrates and urea. Here, the exposure extent of {001} facet could be manipulated by controlling the amount of ammonia bromide added during the synthesis. Although a wider band gap was observed with a higher extent of {001} facet exposure, higher photocatalytic degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation was observed. Additionally, BiOBr/Bi24O31Br10 and BiOCl/Bi24O31Cl10 heterojunctions were also successfully constructed through the one-step self-combustion of ionic liquids.106,107
So far, various synthesis techniques have been employed for Bi-based photocatalysts preparation with each method possessing its own advantages and disadvantages, as is summarized in Table 1. Strateies are still urgent to obtain desired materials by overcoming the shortcomings, as well as optimizing the synthesis condition.
Table 1 Summary of the synthesis methods for the preparing of Bi-based particles




Methods
Advantages
Limits




Solid-state reaction
Simple operation, high crystallinity
High temperature, large grain particle, small surface area, phase transformation


Chemical precipitation
Facile synthesis condition, cost-effective, less-energy intensive
Particle agglomeration, small surface area, impurity formation, uncontrollable morphology


Sol–gel
Nanostructure, small and fine particles, controllable morphology
Organic residues, high cost, follow-up treatment


Hydrolysis
Various particle sizes, facile synthesis condition, simple equipment
Solvent dependent, poor dispersion, uncontrollable morphology


Hydrothermal synthesis
Simple operation, high crystallinity, various morphologies, controllable particle size
High pressure, various reaction parameters




Thin film preparation methods
Unlike particulate photocatalytic systems as discussed above, photoelectrochemical oxidation and reduction reactions occur on a photoanode and photocathode, respectively, that are connected through an external circuit. Photogenerated charge separation efficiency can be further facilitated when an external bias is applied to a semiconductor electrode in a photoelectrochemical system compared to the particulate photocatalyst. More importantly, the potential applied to the photoelectrode can account for the insufficient band potential energy of the semiconductor in executing the redox reaction. Particularly, due to the low CB level of Bi-based semiconductors, the photogenerated electrons are not sufficiently energetic to be effectively consumed by the electron acceptors, leading to high possibility of charge recombination. Therefore, the fabrication of Bi-based photoelectrodes was developed to improve the solar energy conversion efficiency. However, it is generally difficult to fabricate Bi-based ternary oxide electrodes via a one-step preparation process due to the presence of multiple components. A common method for preparing Bi-based thin films is to use powdered materials synthesized in advance, whereby the particles are dissolved in a solvent and deposited on a conductive substrate. Additionally, similar one-pot approaches for particulate synthesis, such as hydrolysis and hydrothermal techniques, can be employed to produce a Bi-based electrode by placing a conductive substrate in the suspension during the synthesis. Other advanced techniques including electrodeposition and anodization that usually involve multiple steps have also been developed. The advantages and limits of each method for fabricating Bi-based thin films are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the synthesis methods for the preparing of Bi-based thin films




Methods
Advantages
Limits




Drop-casting
Simple operation, facile preparation condition
Time-consuming process, uncontrollable thickness and uniformity, poor attachment


Spin/dip-coating
Quick and easy operation, controllable thickness, uniform film
Poor attachment, specific equipment


Spray pyrolysis
Simple operation, low cost, scalable approach, controllable thickness, complex composites formation
High temperature, high cost, undesired precipitates formation, high resistance


Hydrothermal coating
Facile synthesis condition, good conductivity, high durability, controllable morphology
Low yield, high pressure, complex parameters, poor dispersion


Chemical vapor deposition
Uniform thickness, low porosity, various materials, high crystallinity
High temperature, specific equipment


Anodization
Large scale synthesis, high surface area, controllable morphology
Complex synthesis parameters, applied bias


Electrodeposition
Controllable thickness, uniform film
Specific equipment, applied bias, follow-up treatment




Drop-casting
To study the photoelectrochemical properties of particulate semiconductors, drop-casting is a simple approach used to prepare the electrodes. The as-prepared material is mixed with a suitable solvent under ultrasonication without changing its intrinsic properties, and the film is fabricated by gradually dropping the suspension onto a conductive substrate, as illustrated in Fig. 9. This method has been widely used in our previous studies for preparing Bi-based material thin films. For instance, BiOBr thin film was made from a suspension of 0.75 g L−1 BiOBr–ethanol which was dropcast on FTO glass with an area of 1.5 × 2 cm2.51 The procedure was also used to obtain a BiVO4 working electrode.46
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the drop-casting procedure. 
Despite the simplicity of drop-casting, there are three shortcomings associated with this method: (1) the thickness and uniformity of the film is difficult to control; (2) the poor attachment of the particles on the substrate leads to the film peeling off once immersed in an electrolyte; and (3) it is a time-consuming process that typically takes up to few days to complete. To overcome these drawbacks, selected strategies can be adopted. For instance, a more diluted suspension and well dispersed particles could result in the generation of a more uniform film. Post-deposition heat-treatment could also be useful to improve the particle-substrate attachment. The temperature should be carefully controlled though as a high temperature may alter the properties of the as-obtained materials. Finally, acceleration of the solvent evaporation and drying process can be achieved by placing the substrate on a hotplate (set to a mild temperature, approx. 40 °C) as this will significantly reduce the overall duration of the method.
Spin-coating/dip-coating
Dip-coating, spin-coating or electrostatic self-assembly deposition are commonly employed methods for preparing thin film electrodes. The methods involve the deposition of precursors on a conducting substrate, such as fluoride doped thin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO) glass, followed by a calcination process to give the desired film. As illustrated in Fig. 10, in a typical spin-coating procedure, the precursor is coated on the substrate via high speed rotation of the substrate to evenly spread the material by centrifugal force.108 For instance, Cao et al. synthesized high-quality BiFeO3 films on ITO using a spin-coating approach.109 They dissolved 0.2 M Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O in 2-methoxyethanol as the precursor solution. Citric acid was added to the solution as the chelating agent under continuous stirring for 1 h. The BiFeO3 films were obtained by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by calcining at 400 °C for 10 min in air. Bi2O3, BiVO4, Bi2WO6 thin films have also been attained by spin-coating to deposit the as-prepared particles on a glass substrate.48,110
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the spin-coating procedure. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dip-coating is a popular alternative to spin-coating and is employed to fabricate thin films from sol–gel precursors, which is simple, low-cost, reliable and reproducible. The process involves a sequence of steps: (i) substrate immersion into the solution; (ii) deposition of the precursor on the substrate; (iii) drainage of excess liquid from the surface of the substrate; and (iv) evaporation of the solvent to form the thin film. The process is depicted in Fig. 11.111 The thickness of the film can be readily controlled by many factors, such as submersion time, withdrawal speed and dipping cycles. For instance, Bi2MoO6 and Bi2WO6 films have been fabricated via the dip-coating process on a number of occassions.112,113 By adopting the dip-coating method, various bismuth molybdate films (α-Bi2Mo3O12, β-Bi2Mo2O9, γ-Bi2MoO6, and γ′-Bi2MoO6) have been produced. The crystal phases of the product were controlled by the post-calcination process, whereby different temperatures and durations were employed.114 Overall, both spin-coating and dip-coating are quick and easy techniques to produce uniform films with a controllable thickness ranging from nanometers to microns. However, it is worth noting that the poor attachment of particles on the FTO/ITO substrate remains the main drawback when using such coating techniques. This manifests itself as film instability during photoelectrochemical measurements.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the sequential steps in the dip-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Spray pyrolysis
Spray pyrolysis is a thin film preparation process which involves spraying a precursor solution on a heated substrate (typically more than 400 °C), whereby the desired material is formed from the reaction of the precursors.115 The method is considered to be a very simple and relatively low-cost approach, is scalable and allows the fabrication of films with a wide variety of compositions and controllable thickness.116 A typical spray pyrolysis system is presented in Fig. 12, whereby the precursor solution is loaded into a syringe and sprayed through a nozzle positioned above a hot plate.117 The nozzle height and spray parameters (flow rate, pulse volume, spray cycles, etc.) can be controlled to adjust the thickness and other properties of the produced films. The process has been employed for the deposition of Bi-based thin films. For instance, for the first time, Hahn and co-workers reported a spray pyrolysis method to deposit BiOI nanoplatelets on FTO substrates as a photoelectrode.23 They found that the particle size, crystallographic properties, chemical composition and optical properties were highly dependent on the deposition temperature. Bi(NO3)3 and NH4I dissolved in ethylene glycol were used as the precursor solutions and sprayed onto heated FTO substrates at various temperatures. Ethylene glycol was employed as the solvent to both dissolve the Bi precursor and to prevent premature reaction between the Bi3+ and I− ions to form BiOI precipitate. Abdi et al. have also fabricated a BiVO4 photoanode via the spray pyrolysis process.118
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of a spray pyrolysis system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2008) Elsevier. 
The primary disadvantage of spray pyrolysis is that the chemical reactants need to be carefully selected such that products other than the desired compound are volatile at the deposition temperature. Premature reaction between the precursor solutions may also occur due to the presence of trace amounts of water, leading to the formation of undesired precipitates. Consequently, organic solvents are essential during the preparation of precursor mixtures. Generally, establishing good contact between the semiconductor and the substrate is important to minimize the resistance. However, similar to the aforementioned methods, spray pyrolysis can also give low PEC performance and poor mechanical strength due to the high resistance between the catalyst material and the substrate. Therefore, the development of alternate photoelectrode synthesis strategies is of significance.
Hydrothermal coating
Due to the poor attachment of thin films fabricated from the two-step (deposition and heating) preparation methods discussed above, it has been desirable to develop direct growth techniques for fabricating Bi-based thin films. The hydrothermal method has been developed as a one-pot synthesis routine for the preparation of Bi-based photoanodes. For instance, a one-pot solvothermal process was employed to fabricate a Bi2WO6 film, which was firstly reported by Sun et al.119 Pretreated FTO glass was vertically placed into a Teflon tube where it was immersed in a mixed solution of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and Na2WO4. The FTO glass/solution was then treated hydrothermally at 180 °C for 16 h. He and coworkers have reported on a novel and facile hydrothermal method to synthesize flower-like monoclinic BiVO4, which was converted from a solvothermally fabricated BiOBr film. The preparation details are depicted in Fig. 13.120 In the first step, Bi and Br precursors, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and CTAB, were dissolved in ethylene glycol and ethanol, respectively. The mixture was poured into an autoclave with the conductive side of the FTO glass facing down 45°. The BiOBr electrode was then obtained after treatment at 140 °C for 2 h. A subsequent hydrothermal step (180 °C, 24 h) was conducted to convert the as-prepared BiOBr film into a BiVO4 film by using NH4VO3 as the vanadium source. The hydrothermal method is an efficient and facile approach to fabricate Bi-based photoanodes with good conductivity, high durability and controllable morphology.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of BiOBr and BiVO4 films by the solvothermal-and-hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Chemical vapor deposition is a process designed to produce a thin film by exposing the substrate to volatile precursors. The desired solid material is deposited on a heated substrate surface by a chemical reaction from vapor. The CVD technique enables the production of coatings with a uniform thickness and low porosity.121 Another characteristic feature of the CVD method is that it can be widely employed to fabricate a broad range of thin films. The method has been used to prepare Bi-based semiconductor electrodes. For instance, a series of BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) thin films were fabricated via an aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition (AACVD) method by Bhachu et al.122 As depicted in Fig. 14, the precursors (1 mmol BiX3 dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide) were placed in glass bubbler and a piezoelectric device was used to generate an aerosol mist. FTO glass comprised the substrate where a top plate was suspended 0.5 cm above the heater to ensure laminar flow. The precursor flow rate was maintained at 1 L min−1. The deposition was performed at 300 °C for 1 h and the substrates were cooled under a flow of air. The as-obtained BiOCl and BiOI possessed nanoplatelet morphologies, while a nanoflower-like structure was observed for BiOBr. The AACVD process was also used to synthesize a pure Bi2Ti2O7 electrode at 600 °C.123 Archana et al. developed a direct liquid injection CVD technique to grow high quality epitaxial and polycrystalline BiVO4 film on a FTO substrate. The resulting films delivered a high photocurrent due to low surface defects and high crystallinity of the as-prepared BiVO4 photoanode.124
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of AACVD process for depositing BiOX films on FTO substrates. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Anodization
The anodization technique is generally used to prepare metal oxide films, such as titanium oxide, aluminum oxide, and tungsten oxide. Electrochemical anodization is one of the simplest methods to fabricate large scale electrodes with a high surface to volume ratio. Additionally, the electro-optical properties and morphology can be easily manipulated by altering the potential, electrolyte, duration, and temperature during the anodization process. A typical anodization cell is a two-electrode configuration with a cathode (e.g. Pt, graphite) and the corresponding metal foil (e.g. Ti, Al, W, Mo) as the anode. The anodization process is usually conducted in an acidic solution with high applied potential to pass a direct current through the electrolyte. However, anodization is usually used to prepare simple metal oxide electrodes (binary oxide), whereas the fabrication of complex oxide, such as Bi-based ternary oxides, requires subsequent treatment after anodization. For instance, Ng and co-workers prepared a Bi2WO6 film via the anodization of tungsten metal and subsequent hydrothermal treatment.125 As depicted in Fig. 15a, the generation of a flower-structured WO3 film on the tungsten foil involves: (i) anodic formation of an oxide layer; (ii) formation of a nanoporous structure in the presence of fluoride ions; (iii) precipitation and growth of sparingly soluble WO3·2H2O.126 After successful synthesis of the WO3 films, hydrothermal treatment was performed at 160 °C for 24 h, where Bi(NO3)·5H2O was added as the Bi source (see Fig. 15b). The authors proposed that the formation of orthorhombic Bi2WO6 resulted from substitution of the H2O molecules in WO3·2H2O with [Bi2O2]2+ layers due to its layered structure. The same preparation routine was also successfully employed to fabricate Bi2MoO6 thin films in our group.127
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of flower-structured WO3 thin film via the anodization process, reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (b) Bi2WO6 synthesis involving the anodization of tungsten metal and subsequent hydrothermal treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
In contrast, bismuth oxyhalide (BiOCl, BiOBr, BiOI) electrodes were obtained directly by anodic oxidation of bismuth films on a platinum substrate.22 The anodization was conducted in a potassium halide neutral solution with a linearly increasing potential (8 mV s−1) to 0.6 V in KCl and KBr, and 0.2 V in BiOI. The electrode was maintained at the corresponding potential until the bismuth film was completely oxidized. The study revealed that the optimum thickness of the films was 0.15–0.17 μm. When the thickness increased to over 0.3 μm, the film adhesion decreased, and electrical conductivity deteriorated. However, the authors also pointed out that the main disadvantage of this method was the depolarizing action of the Pt substrate, which could contribute to the low quantum efficiency during the PEC test.
Electrodeposition
Electrodeposition is an emerging method for the preparation of semiconductor thin films, especially oxide and chalcogenide materials. It is a single-step process at room-temperature to produce in situ metallic coatings, whereby a conductive substrate is immersed in a solution containing a salt of the metal to be deposited and an electric current is applied. A typical electrodeposition cell comprises three electrodes, including a working electrode (a conductive substrate on which to deposit the desired materials), a reference electrode and a counter electrode, as illustrated in Fig. 16.128
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the main components of a simple electrodeposition cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. 
For the fabrication of Bi-based ternary oxide thin films, electrodeposition has been used to fabricate Bi electrodes at the first step followed by other methods (e.g. chemical and thermal treatment, anodization). Our group developed a pulse electrodeposition method for preparing Bi thin films. Typically, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O dissolved in ethylene glycol was used as the electrolyte, and the electrodeposition was conducted in a three-electrode system where FTO, Pt, and Ag/AgCl were the working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. Bi particles were deposited on FTO substrate by applying a continuous cathodic pulse of −1.2 V, 0.5 s and a relaxation voltage pulse of 0 V, 2 s alternatively for 7200 cycles. The relaxation time in the process allowed for the replenishment of Bi3+ ions to increase the nucleation density on the substrate, leading to a better Bi deposit coverage.129 Electrodeposition has been used by others to prepare Bi-based films. For instance, a dendritic Bi film was firstly electrodeposited on FTO glass after which a series of Bi-based ternary oxides (BiVO4, Bi2WO6, and Bi2Mo3O12) were synthesized by chemical and thermal treatments of the as-obtained Bi electrodes. A detailed preparation process is provided in Fig. 17.130 VO(acac)2 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), (NH4)2WS4 DMSO and (NH4)2MoS4 DMSO solutions were used for the conversion of Bi electrodes to BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2Mo3O12, respectively. After being annealed at different temperature and washed with NaOH, high-quality polycrystalline Bi-based electrodes with good coverage, adhesion and electrical continuity were obtained. The study provided a facile strategy to fabricate Bi-based ternary oxide electrodes through producing a Bi metallic electrode followed by the introduction of a second metal precursor during the oxidation process.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration for the conversion of dendritic Bi metal electrodes to Bi-based ternary metal oxide electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
A nanoporous BiVO4 photoanode with a high-surface-area was fabricated by an electrodeposition–annealing process.17 As illustrated, a BiOI electrode was electrochemically deposited on a FTO substrate in the first step, where a typical three-electrode cell (FTO as working electrode, Ag/AgCl as reference electrode, and Pt as counter electrode) was used. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving Bi(NO3)3·5H2O in KI solution (pH adjusted to 1.7 using HNO3), and mixed with absolute ethanol containing p-benzoquinone under vigorous stirring. A potentiostat was used to apply a cathodic potential of −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl at room temperature for 1–30 min. In this study, the optimum deposition time was 3–5 min. After successful synthesis of the BiOI electrode, a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution containing vanadyl acetylacetonate (VO(acac)2) was placed on the electrode and annealed in air at a temperature of 350–650 °C for 2–5 h to transform the BiOI to BiVO4. The highest photo-responsive current was obtained when the electrode was annealed at 450 °C for 2 h, which exhibited effectively suppressed bulk electron–hole recombination. The same preparation routine was applied for the fabrication of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 photoanodes and further modification was conducted by other groups.131,132
Although electrodeposition offers a simple and viable alternative to other electrode preparation methods, there remains the limitation in that the fabrication of the Bi-based materials necessitates multiple steps, in which a following treatment is still essential after the electrodeposition process.
Summary and outlook
Benefiting from a unique electronic structure, crystal structure and physicochemical properties, and in particular its visible-light-driven capability, considerable effort has been dedicated to bismuth-based photocatalyst development, including establishing various synthesis methods, studying its intrinsic properties, and exploring modification strategies. To date, although a database for synthesis, physicochemical properties, modifications and applications of Bi-based photocatalysts has been established, further efforts are still crucial. Currently available reviews on Bi-based photocatalysts primarily concentrate on strategies to enhance their performance. In contrast, the review provided here compiles and compares the synthesis methods available for Bi-based materials in the form of powders or thin films. The intent of the review is to aid the research community in choosing the most suitable approach for providing a Bi-based photocatalyst system with desired properties for improved overall performance. Key findings and insights from the review are:
(i) Among the various synthesis approaches, the hydrothermal method is the most applicable to preparing nanoscale materials with controllable morphology and particle size. Based on a detailed consideration of this method, it is apparent that layered Bi-based semiconductors are very sensitive to synthesis conditions such as pH value, reaction time, reaction temperature, surfactant presence and type etc. However, it remains a difficult task to verify the influence of these parameters on the particle formation mechanism. Further systematic and more comprehensive studies which elucidate the Bi particle formation process are indispensable. To this end, state-of-the-art in situ analyses, which could provide new perceptions and understanding on the formation and transformation processes under actual hydrothermal conditions need to be devised. Furthermore, beyond the synthesis methods addressed by the review, continuous efforts are still needed to develop alternate robust and reliable processing methods that will enable closer control over desirable Bi-based crystal properties as well as deliver better product reproducibility;
(ii) When prepared in a powdered form, greater influence can be exerted over Bi particle characteristics such as morphology, size, crystal structure, facet predominance and surface defects than when preparing a Bi-based thin film originating from the substrate. Consequently, preparing particles is a more desirable option as film properties generated from the obtained particles will be more controllable and there is greater flexibility available in particle characteristics which can potentially give a more efficient conversion efficiency. However, transferring the properties of synthesized powdered particles to the thin film is impeded by aspects such as the poor conductivity of the resulting thin film. Advanced technologies and new approaches are urgently needed to address this shortcoming. For instance, to facilitate charge transfer and lower resistance between the photocatalyst film and the conductive substrate, a thin metal layer could be introduced at the interface to act as a contact layer. The thin metallic layer may be introduced via a sputtering method and would be applicable to a suite of photoelectrodes originating from powered semiconductors. To achieve this, the powder could initially place on a glass substrate, whereby a thin conducting metal layer would then be deposited on the thin film surface via sputtering. Next, the metal film could be relocated to another substrate using a resin while the glass substrate is peeled off. Excess powder would then be removed by ultrasonication in water. The method will give better electrical contact between the photocatalyst and conductive substrate in the presence of a metal buffer layer;
(iii) Recently, the unique properties of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) materials has seen them receive substantial research interest, arising from their large specific surface area, intrinsic quantum-confined electrons and fast charge carrier transportation. Different from other popular ultrathin 2D materials that are stacked by van der Waals forces, such as graphene-based nanosheets or transition metal dichalcogenides, Aurivillius phase oxides that comprise the alternate stacking of [Bi2O2]2+ layers and perovskite-type slabs with oxygen atom bridging between the layers are of considerable and increasing interest. However, fabricating Aurivillius phase ultrathin 2D materials by widely used mechanical exfoliation or chemical vapor deposition methods is extremely difficult. Recently, an efficient bottom-up route was developed to keep the layers from stacking together. Such an ultrathin layered structure can expose a substantial number of active sites and enable ultrafast charge separation, leading to superior photocatalytic performance. Inspired by this approach, developing synthesis methods so as to fabricate ultrathin 2D Bi-based nanosheets represents a promising research field for future developments in Bi-based photocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21972094), Guangdong Special Support Program, Pengcheng Scholar program, Shenzhen Peacock Plan (KQJSCX20170727100802505 and KQTD2016053112042971).
References
G. Li, F. Qin, R. Wang, S. Xiao, H. Sun and R. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 409, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chang, J. Huang, C. Cheng, Q. Sui, W. Sha, G. Ji, S. Deng and G. Yu, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 460–464 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Fan, Z. Liang and P. Han, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 3364–3370 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, Y. Du, T. Wang, C. Wang, W. Hao and J. Zhang, Rare Met., 2008, 27, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459–11467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. Zou and J. Ye, Catal. Lett., 2004, 92, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3537–3545 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 5570–5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, P. Zhou and J. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 989–1007 CrossRef .
K. Xu, L. Wang, X. Xu, S. X. Dou, W. Hao and Y. Du, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 19, 446–463 CrossRef .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 694–706 RSC .
S. S. M. Bhat and H. W. Jang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3001–3018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun and W. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47136–47152 RSC .
L. Liang, F. Lei, S. Gao, Y. Sun, X. Jiao, J. Wu, S. Qamar and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13971–13974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Poznyak and A. Kulak, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1941–1947 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Hahn, S. Hoang, J. L. Self and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7712–7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kwolek and K. Szaciłowski, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 104, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Desai and C. D. Lokhande, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1993, 34, 313–316 CrossRef CAS .
M. Medles, N. Benramdane, A. Bouzidi, A. Nakrela, H. Tabet-Derraz, Z. Kebbab, C. Mathieu, B. Khelifa and R. Desfeux, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 497, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahuli, D. Saha and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8136–8144 CrossRef .
H. Kodama, F. Izumi and A. Watanabe, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 36, 349–355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimodaira, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17790–17797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9405–9411 RSC .
G. W. Keulks, J. L. Hall, C. Daniel and K. Suzuki, J. Catal., 1974, 34, 79–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Jung, H. Kim, A. S. Choi, Y.-M. Chung, T. J. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-H. Oh and I. K. Song, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 625–628 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Jung, H. Kim, Y. S. Kim, Y.-M. Chung, T. J. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-H. Oh and I. K. Song, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 317, 244–249 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Le, L. H. Bac, I. Van Driessche, S. Hoste and W. J. Van Well, Catal. Today, 2008, 131, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Le, W. J. M. Van Well, I. Van Driessche and S. Hoste, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 267, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1528–1529 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Xu, X. Zhao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 98, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schuh, W. Kleist, M. Høj, V. Trouillet, P. Beato, A. D. Jensen and J.-D. Grunwaldt, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 1554–1573 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, J. Xu, S. Wang, L. Li, Y. Zhang and X. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3602–3608 RSC .
A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2010, 132, 021106 CrossRef .
A. Finlayson, E. Ward, V. Tsaneva and B. Glowacki, J. Power Sources, 2005, 145, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rastogi, A. Singh and C. Shukla, J. Solid State Chem., 1982, 42, 136–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Buscaglia, M. Sennour, V. Buscaglia, C. Bottino, V. Kalyani and P. Nanni, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 1394–1401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Ma, Y. Fang, Y. Zhang, M. Jia, R. Li and Y. Huang, Procedia Environ. Sci., 2013, 18, 547–558 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229–230 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, X. Wen, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, L. Tian, T. Peng and L. Zan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12479–12484 RSC .
T. Saison, N. Chemin, C. Chanéac, O. Durupthy, V. Ruaux, L. Mariey, F. o. Maugé, P. Beaunier and J.-P. Jolivet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5657–5666 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, M. Gondal, A. Al-Saadi, M. Ali, H. Shen, Q. Zhou, J. Zhang, M. Du, Y. Liu and G. Ji, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ren, J. Liu, J. Liang, K. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Luo, Y. Huang, P. Liu and X. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9706–9712 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. H. Ng, L. Wang, Y. Du, S. X. Dou, R. Amal and J. Scott, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8117–8124 RSC .
J. Shang, W. Hao, X. Lv, T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Du, S. Dou, T. Xie, D. Wang and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 954–961 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, P. K. Dorhout and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, F. Lü, M. Li, J. Yang, X. Zhang and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2010, 71, 579–582 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ai, W. Ho, S. Lee and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4143–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Cui, T. Wang, B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin and P. Brault, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 115–118 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Wang and Q. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8622–8629 RSC .
S. Wang, X. Hai, X. Ding, K. Chang, Y. Xiang, X. Meng, Z. Yang, H. Chen and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701774 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-L. Zhang, C.-M. Liu, F.-Q. Huang, C. Zheng and W.-D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 68, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, J. Liang, S. Wang, J. Liu, K. Ren, X. Zheng, H. Luo, Y. Peng, X. Zou and X. Bo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 793–803 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880–2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Yu, S. Liu and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4327–4334 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Lv, F. Dong, X. Wu, N. Cheng, J. Scott, X. Xu, W. Hao and Y. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(3), 3010–3017 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, T. Hu, N. Du, R. Zhang, J. Liu and W. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 342–349 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Sun, D. Jiang and E. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 470–474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Li, W. He and J. J. Yin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10573–10581 RSC .
Z. Ai, W. Ho and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25330–25337 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, L. Ding, Q. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Jiang and J. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Xia, S. Yin, H. Li, H. Xu, M. He, L. Huang and Q. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 420, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, S. Yin, H. Li, H. Xu, Q. Zhang and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15108–15118 RSC .
C. Kongmark, V. Martis, C. Pirovano, A. Löfberg, W. Van Beek, G. Sankar, A. Rubbens, S. Cristol, R.-N. Vannier and E. Bordes-Richard, Catal. Today, 2010, 157, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kongmark, R. Coulter, S. Cristol, A. Rubbens, C. Pirovano, A. Löfberg, G. Sankar, W. Van Beek, E. Bordes-Richard and R.-N. l. Vannier, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 5994–6003 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kongmark, V. Martis, A. Rubbens, C. Pirovano, A. Löfberg, G. Sankar, E. Bordes-Richard, R.-N. Vannier and W. Van Beek, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4850–4852 RSC .
P. Sprenger, W. Kleist and J.-D. Grunwaldt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5628–5642 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sankar and A. M. Beale, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 504–508 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, E. Antonova, W. Bensch and G. R. Patzke, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2412–2417 RSC .
A. M. Beale and G. Sankar, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, D. Shen, X. Wang and G. Shen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Liu, K. Li and H. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 7026–7034 CrossRef CAS .
A. Phuruangrat, P. Jitrou, P. Dumrongrojthanath, N. Ekthammathat, B. Kuntalue, S. Thongtem and T. Thongtem, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 8 Search PubMed .
T. Zhou, J. Hu and J. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 221–230 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Jiang, X. Zong, Q. Xu, Y. Ma, G. Li and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1275–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893–1895 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Z. Tian, Z. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Kou, X. Chen, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3594–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Shang, H. Zhu, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8276–8285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Xiao and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu and A. Kudo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 116, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen, H. Y. Chung, R. J. Wong, Y. Du, S. X. Dou, R. Amal and J. Scott, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 636–644 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Ye, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Han and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804284 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao and L. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14662–14669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, J. Hart, X. Wen, L. Wang, Y. Du, S. Dou, Y. Ng, R. Amal and J. Scott, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(11), 9342–9352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Gu, L. Li, G. Fang and X. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3761–3765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Long, S. Wang, H. Chang, B. Zhao, B. Liu, Y. Zhou, W. Wei, X. Wang, L. Huang and W. Huang, Small, 2014, 10, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, D. Zou, L. Wang, H. Luo and T. Ying, Ceram. Int., 2009, 35, 2099–2102 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, H. Li, H. Ma and W. Teng, J. Chem., 2014, 2014, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, T. Zhou, X. Zhao, W. K. Pang, H. Gao, S. Li, Z. Zhou, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700396 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Ding, X. Zhang, H. Pang, X. Hai, G. Zhan, W. Zhou, H. Song, L. Zhang and H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703923 CrossRef .
X. Gao, H. B. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Zhong, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 6027–6031 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, M. Lin, J. Long, Z. Zhang, H. Lin, J. C.-S. Wu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8340 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Xu, W. Cui, D. Lv, L. Wang, L. Ren, X. Xu, F. Dong, S. X. Dou and W. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1808084 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Wang and S. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2012, 4, 593–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, J. Liu, Z. Jiang, T. Peng and L. Zan, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. Gao, D. Zhang, X. Pu, H. Li, J. Li, X. Shao and K. Ding, Mater. Lett., 2015, 140, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Q. Wang, J. Ran, Y. Hao, X. Wang, D. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1116–1126 RSC .
F. Li, Q. Wang, X. Wang, B. Li, Y. Hao, R. Liu and D. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 574–584 CrossRef .
K. Norrman, A. Ghanbari-Siahkali and N. Larsen, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2005, 101, 174–201 RSC .
D. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11027–11031 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Ai, F. Jia, L. Zhang and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6832–6836 CrossRef CAS .

          I. A. Neacşu, A. I. Nicoară, O. R. Vasile and B. Ş. Vasile, in Nanobiomaterials in Hard Tissue Engineering, Elsevier,  2016, pp. 271–295 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. Qu, H. Liu and C. Hu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6802–6807 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Wu, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 4753–4757 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, T. Xu, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5813–5818 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Mooney and S. B. Radding, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1982, 12, 81–101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Perednis and L. J. Gauckler, J. Electroceram., 2005, 14, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. Hinchliffe, C. Johnston, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 151, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, N. Firet and R. van de Krol, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 490–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, W. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19413–19418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, L. Li, W. Fan, C. Zhang and M. K. Leung, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 593–602 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. Martin, Handbook of Deposition Technologies for Films and Coatings: Science, Applications and Technology, William Andrew,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. S. Bhachu, S. J. Moniz, S. Sathasivam, D. O. Scanlon, A. Walsh, S. M. Bawaked, M. Mokhtar, A. Y. Obaid, I. P. Parkin and J. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4832–4841 RSC .
A. McInnes, J. S. Sagu and K. Wijayantha, Mater. Lett., 2014, 137, 214–217 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Archana, Z. Shan, S. Pan and A. Gupta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 8475–8485 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ng, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 913–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ng, C. Ye, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 3794–3801 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Lou, J. Scott, A. Iwase, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6964–6971 RSC .
S.-I. Park, Y.-J. Quan, S.-H. Kim, H. Kim, S. Kim, D.-M. Chun, C. S. Lee, M. Taya, W.-S. Chu and S.-H. Ahn, International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 2016, 3, 397–421 CrossRef .
H. Y. Chung, W. Chen, X. Wen, J. N. Hart, H. Wu, Y. Lai, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 990–996 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, Y. Park, J. C. Hill and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2994–2999 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8356–8359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Chang, A. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6381–6386 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Summary of the preparation methods for Bi-based powdered photocatalysts and thin film photoelectrodes.	 

 	Fig. 1  Energy diagram of selected Bi-based semiconductors and redox potentials of selected reduction reactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of (a) Bi2O3, and (b) BiVO4 particles prepared via a chemical precipitation method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Sol–gel synthesized (a) Bi2WO6 nanoplates, reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2010) Elsevier. (b) BiOBr microspheres, reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society and (c) BiOCl nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright (2010) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM and TEM images of the as-synthesized BiOBr samples (a and b) in water at 60 °C; (c and d) in water at 90 °C; (e and f) in a water and ethanol mixture at 90 °C. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the hydrolysis-based preparation of ultrafine Bi5O7Br nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM micrographs of hydrothermally obtained Bi2MoO6 particles at different pH values ((a–f): pH 1, pH 3, pH 5, pH 7, pH 9, pH 11). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2010) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM micrographs of (a and b) discoid-like BiVO4 particles, and (c and d) mesoporous hollow discoid particles prepared hydrothermally with the assistance of PVP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Formation mechanism of the monolayer Bi2WO6 with (a) KBr assistance, and (b) CTAB assistance using a hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2015) Springer Nature.	 

Solid-state reaction	Simple operation, high crystallinity	High temperature, large grain particle, small surface area, phase transformation
Chemical precipitation	Facile synthesis condition, cost-effective, less-energy intensive	Particle agglomeration, small surface area, impurity formation, uncontrollable morphology
Sol–gel	Nanostructure, small and fine particles, controllable morphology	Organic residues, high cost, follow-up treatment
Hydrolysis	Various particle sizes, facile synthesis condition, simple equipment	Solvent dependent, poor dispersion, uncontrollable morphology
Hydrothermal synthesis	Simple operation, high crystallinity, various morphologies, controllable particle size	High pressure, various reaction parameters

Drop-casting	Simple operation, facile preparation condition	Time-consuming process, uncontrollable thickness and uniformity, poor attachment
Spin/dip-coating	Quick and easy operation, controllable thickness, uniform film	Poor attachment, specific equipment
Spray pyrolysis	Simple operation, low cost, scalable approach, controllable thickness, complex composites formation	High temperature, high cost, undesired precipitates formation, high resistance
Hydrothermal coating	Facile synthesis condition, good conductivity, high durability, controllable morphology	Low yield, high pressure, complex parameters, poor dispersion
Chemical vapor deposition	Uniform thickness, low porosity, various materials, high crystallinity	High temperature, specific equipment
Anodization	Large scale synthesis, high surface area, controllable morphology	Complex synthesis parameters, applied bias
Electrodeposition	Controllable thickness, uniform film	Specific equipment, applied bias, follow-up treatment

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the drop-casting procedure.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the spin-coating procedure. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the sequential steps in the dip-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of a spray pyrolysis system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2008) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of BiOBr and BiVO4 films by the solvothermal-and-hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of AACVD process for depositing BiOX films on FTO substrates. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of flower-structured WO3 thin film via the anodization process, reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (b) Bi2WO6 synthesis involving the anodization of tungsten metal and subsequent hydrothermal treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the main components of a simple electrodeposition cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration for the conversion of dendritic Bi metal electrodes to Bi-based ternary metal oxide electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
